  Yannis Stournaras: The impact of the Greek sovereign crisis on the 
banking sector – challenges to financial stability and policy responses 
by the Bank of Greece 
Keynote speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the London 
Business  School  Greek  Alumni  Association  and  Stanford  Club  of  Greece  event  titled 
“Breaking  the  Bottlenecks  –  Steps  towards  Sustainable  Growth”,  American  School  of 
Classical Studies, Athens, 8 June 2016. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here today and have the chance to share with you my thoughts on 
the  impact  of  the  Greek  sovereign  crisis  on  the  Greek  banking  sector,  outlining  the 
challenges to financial stability and the policy initiatives taken primarily, but not only, by the 
Bank of Greece. At the outset, it is important to highlight that financial stability is a necessary 
condition for achieving the goals of prosperity and sustainable growth. That these goals are 
shared by all is amply reflected in the current mandates of central banks with their emphasis 
on  price  stability,  support  for  the  general  economic  environment  and,  more  recently,  the 
safeguarding of financial stability. 
I will begin by briefly outlining the global landscape on which the effort to safeguard financial 
stability  has  been  taking  place.  Then,  I  will  discuss  developments  in  the  Greek  banking 
sector.  In  particular,  emphasis  will  be  placed  on:  (i)  first,  the  significant  worsening  of  the 
macroeconomic  environment  and 
the  subsequent  deterioration  of  Greek  banks’ 
fundamentals,  in  general,  and  their  asset  quality,  in  particular;  (ii)  second,  euro  area 
monetary policy initiatives and their limited impact on Greece; (iii) third, the new role for the 
Bank of Greece that stems from its mandate that has been revised to address the current 
challenges.  Finally,  I  conclude  by  outlining  the  challenges  ahead  and  providing  some 
thoughts on the way forward. 
The setting – a broader context 
A. 
Over  the  last  seven  years,  the  European  Union  has  faced  a  series  of  unprecedented 
challenges; challenges that have tested the international financial system and the coherence 
and stability of the Union. The response to these challenges has shown that the EU is built 
upon solid ground as the bonds among Member States have become ever stronger. 
The global financial crisis, triggered in 2008, provided a first challenge to stability and raised 
major  issues  related  to  “too-big–to-fail”,  “too-big-to-save”  or  “too-complex-to-resolve”.  The 
euro  area  sovereign  debt  crisis  rapidly  followed  and  real  economic  activity  deteriorated 
considerably in certain parts of the euro area. A key lesson of that crisis has been that the 
establishment  of  a  banking  union  is  a  vital  prerequisite  to  make  a  monetary  union 
sustainable. 
More recently, with the recovery in the euro area still fragile, new geopolitical tensions have 
led to an unprecedented refugee crisis and increased uncertainty. Finally, matters such as 
the  probability  of  Brexit,  different  approaches  among  Member  States  regarding  banking 
union  and  the  slow  progress  in  establishing  a  single  European  deposit  insurance  scheme, 
have  been  hindering  further  progress  towards  securing  a  financial  system  architecture 
appropriate to ensure stability. 
The sovereign crisis in Greece caused the Greek banking sector crisis 
B. 
Unlike other recent experience with financial instability, the origins of the Greek crisis were 
not  to  be  found  in  the  banking  sector.  In  the  context  of  the  unfavorable  international 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in 
In 
the  banking  sector  grew. 
tough  austerity  measures.  The  rapid  deterioration 
economic  and  financial  landscape  that  I  outlined  above,  Greece  has  been  undergoing  a 
serious sovereign crisis that has required three adjustment programmes, including, inter alia, 
substantial  reforms  and 
the 
macroeconomic environment, reflected in a cumulative loss of more than 25% of the GDP, 
has  shown  that  the  crisis  facing  Greece  is  both  deeper  and  more  protracted  than  initially 
expected.  In  terms  of  the  overall  deterioration  of  key  macroeconomic  aggregates  and  the 
duration of the crisis, one could say that the Greek crisis has proved to be more severe than 
even the Great Depression. 
At  the  outset,  the  deterioration  in  the  macroeconomic  environment,  sovereign  debt 
downgrades  and  rising  sovereign  spreads  rendered  access  to  international  capital  and 
money  markets  impossible  for  both  the  banks  and  the  sovereign.  Extremely  tight  liquidity 
conditions  ensued  and  pressures  on 
this  adverse 
macroeconomic  landscape,  unemployment  increased  to  historic  (post-war)  levels,  and 
disposable income dropped substantially. 
As a consequence, the adverse developments in the banking sector were unprecedented; in 
particular, Greek banks’ fundamentals and asset quality ratios deteriorated substantially. The 
extent  of  the  deterioration  may  be  described  in  terms  of  the  impact  of  the  restructuring  of 
Greek  government  bonds  held  by  the  private  sector  (the  so-called  Private  Sector 
Involvement or PSI): Greek banks suffered losses of about €38 billion in 2011, about 170% 
of their total Core Tier I (CT1) capital at that time. 
Due to the liquidity squeeze, the intermediary role of banks has been undermined and the 
channels for financing the real economy have been restricted. In addition, deposits declined 
by €117 billion (i.e. a drop of –44%) between September 2009 and December 2015. Mainly, 
this decline reflected depositor uncertainty regarding the prospects of Greece within the euro 
area. But additionally, the decline in deposits reflects the negative loan growth throughout the 
period. In normal times, deposits do not just create loans, but loans also create deposits via 
the money multiplier; declines in loans analogously lead to endogenous declines in deposits. 
The  significant  deleveraging  that  Greek  banks  have  undertaken  –  between  end-2010  and 
end-2015,  loans  to  the  private  sector  fell  by  €54  billion  –  was  partly  a  response  to  tight 
funding conditions and partly a consequence of the need to set aside more capital since the 
potential  for  unexpected  risks  rose  considerably.  As  a  consequence  it  became  ever  more 
difficult for banks to play their natural role, that of financing the real economy. 
The considerable decline in household disposable income, a consequence of both wage cuts 
and the rise in unemployment, resulted in a significant increase of non-performing loans and 
impairments,  thus  undermining  the  prospects  for  bank  profits.  Banks  from  2010  onwards 
began  to  experience  losses,  which  eroded  their  capital  base.  Despite  efforts  to  support 
profitability  by  reducing  costs,  the  high  level  of  loan  loss  provisions  resulted  in  a  series of 
loss-making results right up until the first quarter of 2016. 
European policy initiatives 
C. 
The  response  of  Europe  to  the  global  and  European  financial  crisis  has  been  effective 
despite  the  initial  lack  of  crisis  mechanisms  and  the  unfavorable  and  challenging 
environment  –  an  environment  in  which  fires  were  often  being fought  simultaneously  on  a 
number of fronts. The initial response came in the form of monetary policy and a significant 
easing  of  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Indeed,  in  October  2008,  six  major  central  banks, 
including  the  ECB,  implemented  a  coordinated  and  simultaneous  cut  in  interest  rates. 
Additionally,  at  that  time  euro  area  Member  States  set  out  an  action  plan  of  coordinated 
measures (including, inter alia, the granting of government guarantees to bank debt issuance 
and  the  recapitalization  of  banks)  to  restore  confidence  and  improve  financial  conditions. 
With the eruption of the euro area sovereign debt crisis the malfunctioning of the monetary 
transmission mechanism led the ECB to resort increasingly to nonstandard monetary tools. 
Additionally,  Europe  set  up  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  to  provide 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  financial  assistance  to  distressed  Member  States.  The  EFSF  was  replaced  by  the  more 
powerful European Stability Mechanism (ESM) in October 2012. 
The sovereign debt crisis also revealed strong negative feedback loops between banks and 
sovereigns, irrespective of whether the crisis originated with the sovereign or the banks, as 
well as contagion among national financial markets. In response to these developments, in 
2012, European leaders initiated the creation of a banking union – which is a complementary 
and integral part of a genuine Economic and Financial Union. Its three pillars are: the Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  and  the  still-to-be  completed 
common deposit guarantee system. Apart from the elements of the banking union, a number 
of important regulatory initiatives have been taken, covering almost all aspects of financial 
sector and activities (namely the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive – BRRD, Capital 
requirements regulation and directive – CRR/CRD IV for the banking sector, Solvency II for 
Insurance,  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  –  EMIR  for  financial  markets  and 
infrastructure and so on). 
Turning  to  monetary  policy  initiatives,  the  ECB  has  been  addressing  the  severe  and 
persistent  disinflationary  forces  in  the  euro  area  economy  with  a  broad  set  of  measures. 
Initially,  it  moved  to  refinancing  operations  at  a  fixed  rate  and  with  full  allotment.  It  also 
extended the time horizon of refinancing operations, providing for 3-year maturities instead of 
the  usual  3-month.  More  recently,  with  the  so-called  Targeted  Long-Term  Refinancing 
Operations  (TLTROs),  it  seeks  to  incentivize  banks  to  on-lend  to  the  private  sector  by 
providing finance for up to 4 years. Finally there are the various asset purchase programmes 
where  the  Eurosystem  purchases  marketable  assets  including  public  sector/government 
bonds, corporate bonds, ABSs, uncovered bank bonds, etc. 
These  non-standard  measures  are  being  implemented  to meet  a  variety  of  goals.  First, to 
support financial markets which are malfunctioning. Second, to provide liquidity to banks for 
longer periods. It should be recalled that in the wake of the international financial crisis, the 
interbank market dried up completely as counterparty risk rose; to this day, it remains fragile. 
Third, to kick-start lending to the real economy. Ultimately, of course, the goal is to prevent 
deflation and raise inflation in the euro area to target. 
To a great extent, these measures have helped to improve financial conditions in the euro 
area.  Work  done  at  the  Bank  of  Greece  shows  that  financial  conditions  have  responded 
positively to the non-standard measures, even if the measures have not yet restored inflation 
to  its  target  of  below,  but  close  to,  2  per  cent.  However,  with  respect  to  Greece,  the 
anticipated  positive  effects  of  the  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  have  yet  to  be 
realized. Financial conditions in Greece, whilst not at their lows of 2012, are still extremely 
tight by historical standards. Moreover, conditions have been virtually unchanged since the 
beginning of 2013, despite all the non-standard measures employed by the ECB. 
What factors might account for this outcome? The Eurosystem lends to commercial banks 
against collateral. The collateral framework defines what is eligible and this is related to an 
asset’s  rating.  Greek  banks  have  often  found  themselves  constrained  by  the  amount  of 
eligible collateral. Moreover, haircuts are applied to eligible collateral. That is, a €100 bond 
will not necessarily give a bank access to €100 of refinancing. Greek assets are now rated 
much lower than they were before the crisis. Thus some assets have become ineligible and, 
for  those  assets  that  are  still  eligible,  the  haircuts  have  increased.  This  has,  on  occasion, 
restricted access to refinancing operations. Since February 2015, Greek banks were unable 
to use Greek government bonds in refinancing operations, since they have a rating that is 
lower than the minimum acceptable under the collateral framework. A waiver was introduced 
for  countries  that  are  in  an  adjustment  programme  and  completing the associated  reviews 
successfully.  In  February  2015,  the  Governing  Council  decided  that  Greece  did  not  meet 
these criteria and hence the waiver was withdrawn. 
Furthermore, Greek banks have at various times been suspended as eligible counterparties 
with the Eurosystem. This occurred after the PSI and before the banks were recapitalized. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Under  such  circumstances,  banks  turn  to  the  Emergency  Liquidity  Assistance  provided  by 
the Bank of Greece. But ELA carries a stigma, is more expensive and banks, through what 
are known as funding plans, have to explain how they plan to reduce their recourse to ELA 
over  a  reasonably  short  period.  Suspension,  for  example,  prevented  Greek  banks  from 
participating in the second LTRO. 
Finally,  Greece  does  not  benefit from  the  asset purchase  programmes. The  covered  bond 
and ABS programmes are aimed at banks. But Greek banks cannot issue covered bonds or 
ABSs  that  meet  the  rating  criterion.  Similarly  Greek  corporates  issue  limited  bonds  which 
again  do  not  meet  the  rating  criterion.  With  respect  to  the  public  sector  asset  purchase 
programme, Greek government bonds have been ineligible since the country was not “in a 
programme”. 
Thus  financial  conditions  in  Greece  have  not  benefited  significantly  from  the  raft  of  non-
standard measures that have been introduced during the crisis. Conditions, however, can be 
expected to improve with the passing of the 1st review and the reinstatement of the waiver. 
The response of the Greek authorities, including the Bank of Greece 
D. 
I now turn to the response of the Greek authorities. The role of central banks throughout the 
EU has been considerably increased due to the challenges faced by banking systems in the 
wake  of  the  Lehman  Brothers’  failure.  One  manifestation  of  this  increased  role  is  that 
mandates have been amended to explicitly refer to financial stability as a core central bank 
task. At the same time, the toolbox available has been expanded to include macro-prudential 
policy  tools  and  enhanced  micro-prudential  policy  tools  both  for  the  SSM  and  the  national 
authorities. 
The  Greek  authorities  are  no  exception  to  this  trend.  Throughout  the  crisis,  the  Bank  of 
Greece has been the guardian of financial stability, protecting fully all depositors (regardless 
of  type  and  size)  and  supporting  the  economy  and  the  public  interest.  Initially,  this  was 
accomplished  through  the  2008  Law  which  provided  capital  support  to  Greek  banks  and 
allowed  banks  to  issue  government  guaranteed  bonds  which  could  be  used  in  refinancing 
operations. Similar laws were enacted throughout the EU. With the onset of the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  however,  the  situation  intensified  requiring  continuous  action  by  the  Bank  of 
Greece  on  two  broad  fronts:  ensuring  adequate  provision  of  liquidity  and  managing 
recapitalization, resolution and restructuring. 
With respect to liquidity provision, the Bank has been critical in ensuring continuous liquidity 
provision to banks using one of the oldest macro-prudential tools available, that of the lender 
of last resort. On various occasions, the Bank of Greece has extended ELA to the banking 
system. This has helped preserve financial stability by ensuring that liquidity problems do not 
turn into solvency problems. 
With respect to managing recapitalization, resolution and restructuring, the Bank’s strategy, 
in the context of the adjustment programmes, aimed at strengthening viable institutions and 
winding  down  non-viable  institutions  whilst  safeguarding  financial  stability.  To  this  end, 
viability  assessments  and  capital  needs  assessments  were  undertaken.  Those  banks 
deemed  viable  were  recapitalized.  The  first  round  of  recapitalization,  following  the  losses 
incurred from PSI, was completed in June 2013. A combination of both private capital and 
resources from the Hellenic Financial Stability Fund were used. The second recapitalization 
took place in 2014, following a macro-prudential stress test, but involved only private equity 
capital injections. 
A further  recapitalization  took  place  at  the  end of  2015, mainly  due  to  the  uncertainty  that 
prevailed in the first half of that year, which had a negative impact on macroeconomic and 
financial fundamentals. Following agreement on the third adjustment programme, a financial 
envelope  of  €25  billion  was  provided  for  the  banking  system.  In  August  2015,  the  ECB 
launched  an  Asset  Quality  Review  and  stress-test  exercise  for  the  four  systemic  Greek 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  banks.  The  ECB  was  the  appropriate  authority  because,  since  November  2014,  the  four 
systemic  banks  have  been  supervised  by  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  The 
Bank of Greece undertook a similar exercise for the smaller banks. The result of this exercise 
was  identification  of  capital  needs  under  both  a  baseline  and  an  adverse  macroeconomic 
scenario. The actual amount of capital raised was that identified under the adverse scenario, 
namely €14.4 billion. Thanks to the coordinated efforts of the Greek authorities and the Bank 
of Greece, successful rights issues resulted in the full coverage of the shortfall by December 
2015,  with  private  investors  subscribing  about  €9  billion.  These  efforts  minimized  HFSF 
participation and helped to restore confidence in the longer-term viability of Greek banks. As 
a consequence, Greek banks now have among the highest capital ratios of banks in the euro 
area. 
Those deemed non-viable were resolved with their ‘good’ part absorbed by systemic banks. 
The resolution tool used had to meet two main criteria. First, resolution had to be done in 
such a way as to ensure continued stability of the financial system. To that end, all deposits 
from  resolved  banks  were  transferred  to  systemic  banks.  This  process  also  ensured  a 
minimum  of  disruption  for  customers  of  resolved  banks.  The  second  criterion  was  to 
minimize  the  costs  of  restructuring  for  tax-payers.  The  Bank  of  Greece  assessed  that  the 
costs of using the purchase and assumption resolution tool were lower than any alternative. 
With 14 such resolutions having successfully taken place since 2011, this process has also 
facilitated  considerable  restructuring  of  the  banking  system,  eliminating  excess  market 
capacity. 
Challenges ahead, the way forward and concluding remarks 
E. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
With the successful completion of the first review, a number of positive benefits are likely to 
ensue for the banking system. The reinstatement of the waiver will allow Greek government 
bonds to once again be eligible collateral in Eurosystem refinancing operations. Greek banks 
are  expected  to  participate  in  the  coming  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operation.  These 
developments  will  considerably  reduce  funding  costs  for  Greek  banks.  At  the  same  time, 
later  this  year,  Greek  government  bonds  could  also  become  eligible  for  the  public  sector 
asset  purchase  programme.  Falling  spreads  will  impact  positively  on  the  banking  system 
since  the  sovereign  effectively  acts  as  a floor  on  the  interest rates  at  which  banks  can  do 
business and on their ratings. However, there is no room for complacency. The system still 
faces challenges. 
The  SSM  has  identified  banks’  business  model  and  profitability  as  a  top  priority  for  its 
supervisory action plan for 2016. Yet the background against which this priority takes place is 
a  challenging  one.  The  macroeconomic  environment  is  still  fragile,  market  sentiment  is 
volatile and capital controls are still in force. 
A large part of the challenge in addressing a new business model relates to the increasing 
stock  of  Non-Performing  Exposures  (NPEs)  and  their  management.  These  exposures  are 
acting  as  a  significant  impediment  to  banks’  reorienting  their  business  model  as  well  as, 
more broadly, to growth and financial stability, particularly in the countries of the European 
South.  It  should  be  highlighted,  however,  that  we  are  in  a  good  position  to  deal  with  this 
challenging issue. Thanks to the work that has been done over the past few years, we are 
fully aware of problems’ analytics and important knowledge has been accumulated both for 
the  monitoring  and  managing  of  troubled  assets.  Moreover,  as  a  recent  Bank  of  Greece 
study indicates, domestic NPEs are primarily driven by recession. This finding leads us to the 
inevitable  conclusion  that  pro-active  loan  restructuring  and  immediate  involvement  of  loan 
servicers and private equity funds (gaining from the upside in the EBITDA) may add value. 
The Bank of Greece’s key priority at present is to contribute towards a sustainable solution 
for the management of NPEs. A number of initiatives are underway with the goal of setting 
up  an  accelerated  and  efficient  framework  of  private  debt  resolution.  These  elements, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  the  gap  between 
amongst others, include: (a) the recently voted amendment of Law 4354/2015 which paved 
the  way  for  the  development  of  a  secondary  market  for  non-performing  loans;  (b)  the 
establishment of an enhanced framework for out-of-court workouts and the pre-bankruptcy 
process; (c) the elimination of a series of taxation driven obstacles both for borrowers and 
lenders; (d) the re-drafting of the Code of Conduct to address issues identified in the early 
implementation phase; (e) amendments in legislation, which would ensure the cooperation of 
old shareholders in the restructuring of the underlying businesses; and, finally, (f) the launch 
of  a  comprehensive  monitoring  framework  in  relation  to  banks’  non-performing  exposure 
resolution activities. 
The ultimate aim in meeting these challenges is to shape a banking system which will be in a 
position to undertake efficiently its main task, namely the financing of the real economy. To 
this end, the Bank of Greece and the SSM have to ensure an appropriate policy mix. Central 
banks  today  undertake  monetary  policy,  macro-prudential  policy  and  micro-prudential 
supervision.  Macro-prudential  policy  bridges 
the  micro-prudential 
supervision of individual banks and monetary policy. It is imperative that all these different 
policy areas are adequately coordinated. In the same context, it is important that the macro-
prudential toolbox be further enhanced with innovative tools beyond those focused on capital 
requirements. For instance, cyclical systemic risk can arise not only as a result of excessive 
credit expansion (an issue that can be addressed with the countercyclical capital buffer) but 
also due to inadequate channeling of credit that keeps the real economy under-financed for 
significant periods. 
I  have  focused  in  my  remarks  today  on  the  banking  system  and  the  policy  role  of  central 
banks.  Other  policy-makers,  however,  also  have  to  recognize  their  responsibilities.  I  could 
refer  to  the  completion  of  the  banking  union,  the  proposal  for  shared  fiscal  responsibility 
outlined  in  the  Five  Presidents’  Report  and  the  continued  implementation  of  structural 
reforms  to  enhance  product  market  competition,  improve  educational  systems,  raise  the 
efficiency of the judicial system, promote financial literacy and so on. 
The  objective  to  restore  confidence  and  enhance  the  resilience  of  credit  institutions  to 
withstand shocks in an uncertain economic environment has always been a challenging task. 
Yet we should not forget that this is a prerequisite to fulfill the ultimate objective of financing 
the  real  economy  to  promote  sustainable  economic  growth,  create  jobs  and  ensure  better 
standards of living for all citizens. Financial stability is a prerequisite for sustainable growth; it 
is  also  true,  however,  that  financial  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis  cannot  be  achieved 
without growth. Failure to maintain strong growth has been the biggest threat to long-term 
stability in the EU. The appropriate balance between managing risk and enabling investment 
needs to be struck and it is crucial that the regulatory framework does not impede growth. 
The  key  to  a  sustainable  recovery  is  higher  investment,  yet  a  significant  investment  gap 
exists. The financial system and its stability have a crucial role to play in closing this gap, and 
central  bankers  and  supervisory  authorities  have  a  catalytic  responsibility  in  shaping  a 
system that can deliver future prosperity. 
Sources 
1. Angelopoulou, E. Balfoussia, H. and Gibson, H. D. (2014) “Building a Financial Conditions 
Index  for  the  Euro  Area  and  Selected  Euro  Area  Countries:  what  does  it  tell  us  about  the 
crisis?”, Economic Modelling, vol. 38, pp.392–403, 2014. Also available as a Bank of Greece 
Working Paper: http://www.bankofgreece.gr/BogEkdoseis/Paper2012147.pdf. 
2.  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (2015)  “Making  supervisory  stress  tests  more 
macroprudential:  Considering  liquidity  and  solvency  interactions  and  systemic  risk”,  BCBS 
Working Papers No 29, https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/wp29.htm , November 2015. 
3. Banque de France and Bank for International Settlements (2016) “Ultra-low interest rates 
&  challenges 
for  Christian  Noyer,  Paris, 
https://www.banque-france.fr/en/economics-statistics/research/seminars-and-symposiums/ 
for  central  banks”,  Farewell  Symposium 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  symposium-a-loccasion-du-depart-de-christian-noyer-banque-de-france-et-banque-des-
reglements-internationaux.html, January 2016. 
4. Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2015), Finalising post-crisis reforms: an update, 
A report to G20 Leaders, http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d344.pdf, November 2015. 
5. Carney, M. (2015) “Fortune favours the bold”, Speech given to honour the memory of The 
Honourable  J.  M.  Flaherty,  P.C.,  Iveagh  House,  Dublin,  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/Documents/speeches/2015/speech794.pdf, January 2015. 
6.  Cœuré,  B.  (2016)  “Time  for  a  new  Lamfalussy  moment”,  Speech  at  the  Professor 
Lamfalussy  Commemorative  Conference,  Budapest,  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/ 
date/2016/html/sp160201.en.html , February 2016. 
7. Cœuré, B. (2016) “From Challenges to Opportunities: Rebooting the European Financial 
Sector”, Süddeutsche Zeitung, Finance Day, Frankfurt, March 2016. 
8.  Constâncio,  V.  (2015)  Interview  with  Börsen-Zeitung,  “We  need  more  integration  in 
Europe”, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151230.en.html, December 
2015. 
9. Constâncio V. (2016), International headwinds and the effectiveness of Monetary Policy, 
ECB Vice-President Speech at the 25th Annual Hyman P. Minsky Conference on the State of 
the U.S. and World Economies at the Levy Economics Institute of Bard College, Blithewood, 
Annandale-on-Hudson,  New  York,  April  2016,  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/ 
2016/html/sp160413.en.html. 
10. Draghi, M. (2015) Monetary policy and structural reforms in the euro area, Prometeia40, 
Bologna, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2015/html/sp151214.en.html , December 
2015. 
11.  Draghi,  M.  (2016)  Introductory  statement  during  the  Hearing  at  the  European 
Parliament’s 
Brussels, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160215.en.html, February 2016. 
12.  Draghi  M.  (2016),  Statement  by  the  ECB  President  at  the  thirty-third  meeting  of  the 
International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee,  Washington  DC,  April  2016, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2016/html/sp160415.en.html. 
13.  EBA  (2015)  Risk  Assessment  of  European  Banking  System,  https://eba.europa.eu/ 
documents/10180/1315397/EBA+Risk+Assessment+Report.pdf, December 2015. 
14.  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review 
financialstabilityreview201605.en.pdf?b7c4d8d8e66d1c7c4851d64c37c72f38 , May 2016. 
15.  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review 
(2015),  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ 
financialstabilityreview201511.en.pdf?24cc5509b94b997f161b841fa57d5eca, November 2015. 
16. Five Presidents’ Report sets out plan for strengthening Europe’s Economic and Monetary 
Union  as  of  1  July  2015  (2015),  Press  release,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_IP-15–5240_en.htm, June 2015. 
17.  Hill,  J. 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–5380_en.htm, July 2015. 
18. Hill, J. (2015) Keynote speech at European Banking Federation, “A Brave New World for 
Banks”,  2015  Annual  High  Level  Conference,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5624_en.htm, September 2015. 
19.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Speech  at  the  European  Central  Bank  Forum  on  Banking  Supervision, 
“Bank  Supervision:  Europe  in  global  context”,  Frankfurt,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–5985_en.htm, November 2015. 
(2016),  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/ 
investment”,  London, 
financial  sector 
that  promotes 
Committee, 
Economic 
Monetary 
“For  a 
(2015) 
Affairs 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  of 
IV 
London, 
Brussels, 
Financing 
on  Bank 
and  CRD 
20.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Press  Conference  on  the  EDIS  Proposal  at  the  European  Parliament, 
Strasbourg, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6154_en.htm, November 2015. 
21.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Opening  statement  on  Structured  Dialogue  –  European  Parliament: 
Economic  &  Monetary  Affairs  Committee,  Brussels,  http://europa.eu/rapid/press-
release_SPEECH-15–6206_en.htm, November 2015. 
22.  Hill,  J.  (2015)  Speech  at  the  launch  of  the  Commission’s  Green  Paper  on  Consumer 
Finance, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6293_en.htm, 
December 2015. 
23. Hill, J. (2015) Speech at the CRR Review Conference, DG FISMA, “The Impact of the 
CRR 
the  Economy”,  Brussels, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-15–6310_en.htm, December 2015. 
24.  Hill,  J.  (2016)  Keynote  speech  at  the  European  Banking  Authority’s  5th  Anniversary 
Conference, 
http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_SPEECH-16–250_en.htm, 
February 2016. 
25.  King,  M.  (2016)  “The  End  of  Alchemy:  Money,  Banking  and  the  Future  of  the  Global 
Economy” Little, Brown. 
26.  Praet,  P.  (2016) 
Interview  with  Público,  “Monetary  policy  can’t  do 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2016/html/sp160523.en.html, May 2016. 
27.  Praet,  P.  (2015)  Interview  with  La  Libre  Belgique,  “Europe  must  show  it  can  bring 
prosperity”, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/inter/date/2015/html/sp151221.en.html, 
December 2015 
28.  Stournaras,  Y.  (2016)  “Financial  stability  and  policy  intervention  by  Central  Banks  in 
Europe: where do we stand and what challenges lie ahead”, Speech at the Croatian National 
Bank in Zagreb http://www.bankofgreece.gr/Pages/en/Bank/News/Speeches/DispItem.aspx? 
Item_ID=345&List_ID=b2e9402e-db05–4166-9f09-e1b26a1c6f1b, March 2016. 
29. Vickers, J. (2016) “Equity buffers are in the public interest” Letter to the Editor, Financial 
Times, 18 February 2016. 
it  alone”, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
