   Robert Ophèle: Diversity and harmonisation of deposit insurance 
Closing  speech  by  Mr  Robert  Ophèle,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the 
International  Association  of  Deposit  Insurers  (IADI)  International  ERC  Conference,  Paris, 
26 May 2016. 
 I wish to thank the IADI and the FGDR for inviting me to deliver this closing speech. Bruno 
Bezard opened the conference for the French Treasury, and a central banker will close it. This 
is a perfect arrangement.  
Deposit  insurance  or  deposit  guaranty  is  a  fascinating  tool.  History  and  geography  have 
demonstrated  the  variety  of  schemes  and  how  they  are  a  powerful  force  for  the  better,  or 
perhaps for the worse.  
I can’t indeed refrain from quoting the American Bankers Association, in 1933, i.e. more than 
100 years after the introduction in the US of the first deposit insurance scheme, by the State 
of New York in 1829: “these historical experiences show that the guaranty plan is inherently 
fallacious and based on erroneous premises and assumptions. It has proved to be one of those 
plausible, but deceptive, human plans that in actual application only serve to render worse the 
very evils they seek to cure.”  
Today 113 Deposit Insurance Funds are in place, but I should stress that the jury is still out as 
to their effectiveness. Indeed, recent history shows how tricky deposit insurance can be. Just 
remember  a  few  years  ago,  when  schemes  avoiding  moral  hazard  by  not  providing  a 
100 percent  coverage  of  even  the  smallest  deposits  were  favoured.  Along  this  perfectly 
understandable  line  of  reasoning,  avoiding  moral  hazard,  the  UK  Financial  Services 
Compensation Scheme, in accordance with the European directive then in force, covered in 
full the first £2,000 deposit but only 90pc of the next £33,000. The Northern Rock crisis showed 
in a dramatic way that such a scheme was totally ineffective in preventing a bank run.  
Almost at the other end of the spectrum of possibilities, the Irish decision, in September 2008, 
to increase its deposit insurance to an unlimited amount, triggered a transfer of savings from 
other countries, especially from the UK, and from branches of non-Irish banks operating in 
Ireland to Irish banks. It contributed to Ireland's financial debacle and illustrated the need for 
an international cooperative stance with regard to deposit insurance. 
Since then we have introduced in Europe a resolution scheme that changes dramatically the 
hierarchy of creditors and modifies profoundly the risks for small depositors and the purpose 
of a deposit insurance regime.  
There  is  no  crisis-proof  deposit  insurance  scheme  and  this  conference  has  been  a  very 
welcome opportunity to discuss the various models, share experiences, compare principles, 
governance and operating methods. Thank you all for your useful testimonies today. We all 
share ambitious objectives: to address crisis situations, manage the multicultural framework in 
times  of  crisis,  handle  cross-border  resolution  cases,  and  structure  Deposit  Insurance 
Schemes  to  deal  with  such  events  and  ensure  payouts.  To  achieve  these  objectives, 
international  cooperation,  even  though  it  may  sometimes  be  difficult  to  implement,  can  be 
highly beneficial.  
International  cooperation  is  indeed  of  great  importance  to  supervisory  and  resolution 
authorities and deposit insurance systems (DISs).Globalisation has prompted us to decide and 
act jointly to address the financial crisis and to prevent new ones. We now know that a financial 
crisis cannot be resolved by countries and/or authorities acting independently.  
It is not only a matter for DISs but also for all other bodies involved in financial stability: central 
banks, supervisors, capital markets authorities, accounting standards setters, etc. The FSB 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   has taken the lead in initiating reforms and in helping to implementing common principles at 
the local level.  
As regards deposit insurance, the International Association of Deposit Insurers was created in 
2002 as a direct result of the early understanding of the importance of international discussion 
and practice-sharing between DISs. Progress made in this field has been tremendous.  
The momentum created by international authorities and standards-setters has actually 
been crucial 
International common standards are key because they embody common understanding and 
analysis. They are safeguards of the level playing field and of orderly problem solving. The 
Core Principles for Effective Deposit Insurance Systems drawn up by the IADI in cooperation 
with the BCBS, regularly updated and supplemented for instance by the guidance on ex-ante 
funding, are a perfect example in this respect.  
In Europe, we have gone further with our second Directive on DGS (Directive 2014/49/EU) that 
harmonises the reimbursement of covered deposits within 7 working days and with the on-
going  negotiations  for  the  establishment  of  a  Single  DGS  for  European  Member  States 
participating in the Banking Union. Is a single DGS a prerequisite for a genuine Banking Union 
or is it the final stage to be implemented when everything else has been harmonised? In all 
events, the European stance will be prudent, favouring the establishment a European Scheme 
based on a re-insurance approach.  
It is not only standards that matter but practices too  
Common  standards  alone  are  not  sufficient  because  day-to-day  work  on  financial  stability 
requires practical solutions that cannot be implemented in isolation by a single jurisdiction.  
This  does  not  mean  that  everything  must  be  unified  but  bridges  must  be  built  between 
stakeholders, in accordance with their legal remits and constraints.  
At the European level, we pushed forward this approach through European agencies such as 
the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority 
(ESMA) and the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) to help 
implement the standards consistently and ultimately by the creation of the Banking Union. The 
latter  is  wholly  dedicated  to  the  practical  exercise  of  supervision,  resolution  and,  at  a  later 
stage, deposit insurance.  
More  specifically,  we  welcome  the  completion  of  the  cooperation  agreement  guidelines 
prepared by the EBA and mentioned in the last panel today. I stress their importance because 
they promote a multilateral cooperation framework agreement and set minimum requirements 
for  achieving  the  rapid  and  consistent  conclusion  of  the  cooperation  agreements  between 
deposit guarantee schemes (DGS). These cooperation agreements will address operational 
cross-border  challenges,1  such  as  ensuring  that  depositors  in  EU  branches  of  institutions 
headquartered in other Member States are treated similarly to depositors in the home Member 
State.  
The H2C (home-host cooperation) project, which has just been extensively presented is also 
a remarkable new step towards finding and experimenting with solutions to shared problems, 
and this must be encouraged. It is an example of the constructive cooperation between DIS 
operators or authorities despite their diverse regulatory or operational approaches.  
                                                
1   These  guidelines  concern  (i)  the  modalities  for  repaying  depositors  by  local  DGS  at  branches  of  banks 
established in other European Member states, (ii) the modalities for the transfer of contributions from one DGS 
to another in the event of a credit institution ceasing to be a member of a DGS and joining another DGS, and 
(iii) modalities for mutual lending between DGSs 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   From a regulatory perspective, there is the example of the FSB Key Attributes that have been 
applied through the Crisis Management Groups, with relevant authorities holding discussions 
to find ways to tackle the recovery and resolution of GSIBs.  
Practice and model diversity is a challenge, but not an obstacle for implementing 
efficient resolution strategies  
We have heard today that DGSs may still be very diverse in terms of their status, functions, 
design, size, etc.  
This  is  also  the  case for  supervisory  and  resolution  regimes  even  though  the  international 
standards-setters have made considerable progress in terms of harmonisation.  
Let me take the example of banking resolution: one of the (many) remaining challenges is to 
make sure that the adopted resolution strategies will be recognised and applied cross-border. 
Under the aegis of the FSB, several initiatives have been taken (e.g. ISDA protocol for financial 
contracts) but this is not the end of the story and many further discussions will be necessary 
to remove all the obstacles to implementing, inter alia, a single point of entry resolution of a 
GSIB.  
In the EU we have now a common legal resolution regime and even a common resolution 
authority for the Banking Union but resolution measures continue to be implemented at the 
national level because insolvency regimes within Europe are not unified. Being optimistic, I 
would  say  that  these  difficulties  are  not  an  impediment  to  resolution,  because  the  most 
important thing is to be mindful of such a difficulty and to deal with it.  
Each of us constitute a vital link for building the proper international regulatory 
framework  
The presence of so many different institutions at this conference demonstrates the need and 
interest  to  talk  and  work  together  because  we  share  a  lot  of  similar  concerns  and  goals 
concerning depositor protection and financial stability.  
We  are  united  by  a  common  goal:  to  strongly  mitigate  contagion  and  make  liquidation 
operationally possible. Depositors must perceive the DIS as a well-funded and reliable partner 
able to satisfy their claims in a timely manner.  
But  continuous  efforts  are  required.  I  know  for  instance  in  France  the  permanent  working 
relationship between the ACPR, the FGDR and the Treasury to make the French DIS ever 
more effective with regard to these goals.  
I am wholeheartedly convinced that working together, especially at the international level, is a 
key factor of success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
