  Luis M Linde: Macro vulnerabilities, regulatory reforms and financial 
stability issues 
Speech by Mr Luis M Linde, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the International Institute of 
Finance (IIF) Spring Membership Meeting, Madrid, 25 May 2016. 
 I would like to thank Tim Adams, President and Chief Executive Officer of the International 
Institute of Finance, for his kind invitation to participate in your Annual Spring meeting. In my 
speech  I  will  try  to  cover  three  topics:  macro  developments  and  challenges  both  in  the 
international context and in the euro area; the stance of monetary policy in different areas; 
and regulatory changes. 
The international context 
Today, the recovery of the world economy remains disappointingly uneven and weak. Global 
GDP growth in 2015 was 3.1 %, the lowest figure since 2009, and projections by most of the 
international institutions have been revised downwards again. 
In spite of that, financial markets have experienced a favourable trend in recent months. The 
more  accommodative  tone  of  monetary  policy  in  most  of  the  world,  some  macroeconomic 
data that, although not too buoyant, moved away expectations of a new recession and, in a 
number of cases, corporate profits, better than expected, helped reverse the worrying trends 
that markets showed at the beginning of the year. However, serious risks remain. 
Many developed economies have recovered the level of activity prior to the crisis, but their 
growth rates have been low by historical standards. Something similar happens with inflation, 
which in most cases remains below the central banks’ targets. In the United States, recent 
indicators suggest a moderate rebound of activity in the second quarter, although for the year 
as  a  whole  analyst´s  projections  point  to  a  growth  rate  below  2  %.  Underlying  inflation  is 
below  the  Fed’s  target  but  it  shows  slight  upward  trend.  These  new  data,  jointly  with  the 
improvement  in  financial  and  external  conditions,  the  publication  of  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) minutes and statements of some of its member have changed market 
expectations. An increase in the Federal Funds rate during this year is now fully priced in and 
markets allocate a probability of 20 % to a second increase. 
Because of its systemic importance, China is indeed attracting a great deal of attention. The 
management  of  the  structural  reforms  pointing  to  change  its  model  of  development  is 
complex. A key element of this process is the reform of the financial sector. 
As  for  the  situation  in  Latin  America,  although  there  is  considerable  heterogeneity  by 
countries, these economies have been experiencing a slowdown in recent years due to their 
high dependence on the exports of raw materials, their trade integration with China and their 
financial  integration  with  the  US.  In  addition,  there  are  also  internal  factors,  such  as  the 
modest productivity growth. But the recent improvement in financial markets has especially 
benefited  countries  in  that  region,  as  their  sovereign  risk  premiums  have  diminished,  their 
exchange rates are now appreciating and capital inflows have returned. This could provide 
scope for macroeconomic policies to support growth by implementing structural reforms. 
All  in  all,  the  current  situation  of  the  world  economy  is  characterized  by  a  high  degree  of 
uncertainty.  Downward  risks  are  more  evident  in  emerging  economies  insofar  markets 
maintain  doubts  about  the  strength  of  the  Chinese  economy,  the  behaviour  of  commodity 
prices and the course of monetary policy in the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Euro area: recent developments and challenges ahead 
In the euro area, the prolonged period of subdued economic activity has taken its toll on the 
welfare  of  our  societies  as  well  as  on  confidence  and  the  capabilities  to  recover  soon  a 
higher growth rate. 
Some rough numbers may help to illustrate the dimension of the challenges ahead. According 
to  the  Spring-2016  Economic  Forecast  by  the  European  Commission  (EC),  the  level  of 
employment will reach that recorded in 2008 only by next year, and a similar comparison could 
be  made  in  terms  of  the  real  GDP  per  capita.  Long-term  forecasts  have  been  revised 
downwards in recent years – being potential growth now most likely closer to 1 % rather than 
to 2 % –, on account not only of demographic factors, but also the legacies of the crisis. 
Macroeconomic developments started to turn more positive in the second half of 2013 and in 
2014, and accelerated in 2015, although only up to a modest rate of 1.5 %, supported by an 
expansionary  monetary  policy,  reforms  of  the  institutional  framework  of  the  EMU,  reduced 
financial stress, and, more recently, lower oil prices. 
The first weeks of 2016 came with a significant deterioration of global financial indicators, like 
stock market valuations or debt spreads. In the case of the euro area, aggregate financial 
conditions  fell  back  to  their  prevailing  levels  of  one  year  before,  just  when  the  ECB  had 
announced an expansion of its already very ambitious QE program. 
Preliminary GDP data for first quarter 2016 Q1 posted a higher number (+0.5 % compared 
with +0,3 % in the last two quarters of 2015). 
Uncertainty and a weak global economy keep the balance of risks to the downside, posing 
important challenges for policy makers that require the contribution of all areas of economic 
policy at both the national and the euro levels. 
Challenges and the way forward in the euro area 
In the current circumstances, synergies among economic policies should be better exploited 
with a view to maximizing the stimulus to aggregate demand and to accelerate the recovery. 
There has been progress on structural reforms in recent years, particularly in those countries 
most  affected  by  the  crisis.  On  the  fiscal  front,  the  consolidation  process  has  paused 
somewhat and, according to the Spring-2016 European Commission’s forecasts “fiscal policy 
is expected to be slightly supportive to growth this year”. 
There  are  also  important  political  challenges  ahead.  The  management  of  the  flow  of 
refugees,  the  referendum  that  the  United  Kingdom  will  hold  next  month  on  its  EU 
membership,  and,  more  recently,  the  negotiations  with  the  United  States  to  sign  the 
Transatlantic  Trade  and  Investment  Partnership  (TTIP)  are  leading  sometimes  to  heated 
debates on the institutional framework of the EU. 
In connection with these, and other, challenges, I would like to recall the roadmap drawn up in 
the  Five  Presidents’  Report  published  last  year,  which  delineates  steps  for  further  economic 
integration within the euro area through both real convergence and some mutualisation of risks. 
Making  progress  along  the  lines  suggested  in  the  Five  President’s  Report  would  not  only 
improve  the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  to  future  shocks,  but  would  help  building  up  the 
necessary confidence to create employment and lifting growth potential. 
Monetary policy 
I  would  like  now  to  make  a  few  comments  on  the  main  features  of  our  monetary  policy 
scenario. 
Since the beginning of the crisis weak domestic demand in the euro area has pushed down 
core  inflation  well  below  the  medium-term  objective.  The  subsequent  fall  in  oil  prices  has 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  aggravated this situation and core prices have grown in the last years at very moderate rates, 
around 1 % or less. 
The  extent  and  scale  of  the  actions  taken  in  the  euro  area  since  the  spring  of  2014  to 
address the risks of too low inflation have been unprecedented, covering four strategic lines: 
negative  remuneration  in  the  deposit facility;  communication  policy  and  the  use  of forward 
guidance;  several  programs  aimed  at  restoring  the  bank  lending  channel  of  monetary 
transmission;  and  the  program  of  quantitative  easing  that  entails  large  scale  purchases  of 
private and public assets. 
Since October 2014, the size of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet has increased by 50 % up 
to  €3tn  with  the  implementation  of  the  Extended  Asset  Purchase  Program,  whereas  the 
deposit facility rate, which is a key money market reference in the current context of excess 
liquidity, has remained in negative territory, reaching its lowest record at –0.40 % in March. 
The ECB has not been alone in the use of unconventional monetary tools once interest rates 
reached its effective floor. 
The  Federal  Reserve  engaged  in  successive  rounds  of  quantitative  easing  through  asset 
purchase programs. All in all, the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve increased from 870 
billion in September 2008 to more than 4.4 trillion, holding now more than 30 percent of the 
stock of outstanding Mortgage Backed Securities and nearly 25 % of outstanding Treasuries. 
The  Bank  of  England  also  embarked  in  quantitative  easing  through  purchases  of  public 
sector assets, and holds now almost 25 % of the total outstanding UK public debt. 
The Bank of Japan is implementing an intensive quantitative easing program and, similarly to 
the  ECB,  they  include  both  public  and  private  issues,  but  with  a  very  important  weight  of 
public debt, which amounts now to more than 80 % of Bank of Japan’s total assets. The size 
of the Bank of Japan balance sheet represents now more than 75 % of the Japanese GDP. 
The provision of ample liquidity by Central Banks has contributed to restore financial market 
functioning in situations of severe stress and so, to support the economy. In the euro area, 
the effects of ECB actions are estimated to have contributed to reduce financial stress and 
fragmentation,  easing  financing  conditions  and  helping  to  restore  the  credit  channel. 
According to available estimates, all these developments have added significantly to inflation 
and  GDP  growth  over  the  last  two  years.  And,  although  quantitative  estimates  are 
surrounded by some uncertainty, it is clear by now that this battery of monetary policy actions 
have reduced the likelihood of very adverse scenarios. 
In  due  course,  a  need  to  restore  more  normal  monetary  conditions  will  arise,  although  its 
precise  timing  is  impossible  to  predict  and  will  depend  on  the  cyclical  situation  of  each 
economy or monetary area. 
This normalization process may create a scenario of monetary policy divergences, in which 
there maybe unexpected exchange rate movements and communication is very relevant. 
The combination of macro challenges and regulatory reforms: The current and 
forthcoming financial landscape for banks 
I will comment now on the financial landscape for banks and the regulatory reforms. 
The  prevailing  low-interest  rate  environment  may  pressure  banks’  interest  rate  margins 
downwards  when  the  negative  impact  on  the  interest  rate  differential  exceeds  the  positive 
effect of low interest rates on banks’ activity. 
This potential unintended consequence of monetary policy lies in parallel with other factors 
that  are  putting  pressure  on  banks’  profitability,  in  particular,  regulatory  reforms  aimed  at 
addressing vulnerabilities in the global banking system as well as deficiencies in the current 
framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Some  of  these  reforms  have  already  been  implemented  and  banks  have  improved  their 
resilience. Solvency ratios have been reinforced with a new calibration of the requirements 
and  the  definition  of  the  eligible  capital  instruments  for  the  numerator  of  these  ratios. 
However,  different  problems  in  the  denominator  related  to  the  measurement  of  risk  still 
persist and should also be addressed. 
In this regard, I would say that the major general outstanding issue to finalize the Basel post-
crisis reforms is how to mitigate the unwarranted variability in the risk weighted assets that 
are  calculated  by  banks  when  using  internal  models.  This  revision  should  be  feasible  by 
striking a right balance between sensitivity, simplicity and comparability. 
There  is  a  special  focus  also  on  avoiding  significant  increases  for  overall  capital 
requirements. This means that, given that we have already reinforced the level and quality of 
capital  for  the  overall  banking  industry,  the  impact  on  requirements  of  the  current  revision 
should  be  borne  by  those  parts  of  the  banking  system  where  the  major  unwarranted  low 
asset densities are located. 
This  objective  of  reducing  the  unwarranted  variability  in  risk-weighted  assets  could  be 
achieved  through  the  implementation  of  a  combined  set  of  measures  that  ensure  risk- 
sensitivity and comparability. Internal models are being revised with that objective in mind. 
First,  there  are  some  portfolios  which  should  be  defined  as  non-modelable,  due  to  the 
scarcity of reliable data (i.e. low default portfolios). Second, among those exposures or risks 
that  are  considered  as  modelable,  there  are  reasons  that  justify  the  revision  being 
undertaken  on  definitions  and  methodologies.  And,  third,  consideration  should  be  given  to 
the inclusion of restrictions to model parameters as a means to facilitate the supervisory task, 
so avoiding abnormally low values for individual parameters. 
In order to limit unwarranted variability in risk-weighted assets, a common backstop that has 
enough  granularity  to  ensure  risk-sensitivity  is  also  needed.  In  this  regard,  capital  floors 
based  on  the  standardized  approaches  and  designed  as  a  limit  to  the  output  of  internal 
models may be considered. In this regard, the revision of standardized approaches is also 
relevant. This revision seeks to incorporate the lessons learned in order to increase their risk 
sensitivity avoiding undue complexity. 
And  last,  but  not  least,  the  leverage  ratio  could  also  play  an  additional  role  in  mitigating 
bank’s  and  supervisor’s  model  risk  and  measurement  error,  providing  a  backstop  to  risk- 
based capital measures. Indeed, it could also play a role by itself by constraining leverage in 
the banking system. 
But a really crucial challenge is good calibration. Furthermore, there are difficult questions to be 
addressed regarding impact assessments: What is the meaning of “significant” when referring 
to the increase of the capital requirements? What is the best approach to capture outlier banks 
which are making savings through the use of aggressive modelling techniques? Is the impact 
going to be measured by categories of banks with similar profiles and business models? 
In  this  sense,  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  analysis  is  based  on  the  best  quality  data,  the 
engagement  of  the  industry  is  crucial,  both  through  sharing  its  views  by  responding  to 
consultation processes, and also by contributing with the best quality data to the quantitative 
impact study being conducted by the Basel Committee. 
To conclude, it is essential that the final design of the whole framework is consistent and that 
any potential interactions between different measures are properly evaluated. 
To conclude, I will say that it will be possible to design a framework that keeps the incentives 
for  sound  risk  management  and  that  eliminates  unwarranted  differences  in  risk  weighted 
assets among banks, while avoiding any significant increase in the capital requirements for 
the global banking system. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
