  Fabio Panetta: Central banking in the XXI century – never say never 
Remarks by Mr Fabio Panetta, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the SUERF/BAFFI 
CAREFIN Centre Conference “Central banking and monetary policy: Which will be the new 
normal?”, Milan, 14 April 2016. 
Accompanying figures and the table can be found at the end of the speech. 
 Introduction 
1. 
At first glance, today’s global economic outlook gives plenty of ammunition to the critics of 
central banks. Take the euro area – though its problems are by no means unique – where 
notwithstanding a strongly expansionary monetary stance, inflation is persistently low, growth 
is weak, and the recovery far more fragile than one would hope. It is unsurprising that in this 
environment we have got caught in a crossfire of questions on the nature of monetary policy. 
Is the ECB pursuing the right objectives? Is it doing so effectively? Zero or negative rates 
and  intrusive  asset  purchase  programmes  could  cause  all  sorts  of  distortions,  including 
financial bubbles or inequalities? Is the ECB fully aware of this? And if so, does it care? 
These are important and intellectually challenging questions, and I will refer to them below to 
structure my remarks on “what (I think) we learned” about monetary policy from or after the 
financial  crisis.  However,  they  also  raise  a  key  point  that  to  my  mind  is  by  far  the  most 
important lesson we can take from the last eight years: when it comes to monetary policy, 
“never say never”. 
When H.G. Hawtrey wrote about central banking being an “art” in 1932, he could not possibly 
have  foreseen  the  policy  palette  that  central  bankers  would  have  at  their  disposal  in  the 
21st century. For that matter, central bankers in the early 2000s could hardly have imagined 
it either. When put to the test they proved braver and more creative than anyone – including 
those within their own ranks  – could have expected. Two factors forced them to push the 
envelope: the end of the Great Moderation and their determination to do “whatever it takes” 
to keep the economy stable. Pablo Picasso – admittedly a far better artist than your average 
central banker! – notoriously gave this piece of advice to his students: “Learn the rules like a 
pro, so you can break them like an artist.” Central bankers learned and followed the (Taylor) 
rules for many years, but were quick to break them when they seemed out of step with the 
times. This is to their credit, irrespective of the many questions that can be raised about their 
specific choices, and of the uncertainty that continues to surround their ultimate success. 
But the fact remains that the woes of the euro area do raise interesting questions about the 
nature and conduct of monetary policy. In the remainder of this talk, I will focus on four of 
them.  First,  its  objectives:  should  monetary  policy  continue  to  focus  on  price  stability? 
Second, its effectiveness: does it have sufficient tools to fight deflation or lowflation? Third, 
its interaction with financial stability: should exceptional monetary expansions be avoided, so 
as not to trigger excessive risk-taking? Fourth, its distributional implications: does it increase 
income or wealth inequality? I will address each of these questions in turn. 
Is the pursuit of price stability still warranted? (Yes!) 
2. 
The popularity of inflation targets is at one of its all-time lows. Some remain sceptical of the 
need to use monetary policy to fight low inflation if or when the latter is mainly due to swings 
in the price of oil. Others, such as Issing (2016), argue that central banks should be more 
“patient”  and  focus  on  longer-term  horizons.  Still  others  have  suggested  that  the  potential 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
costs  of  ultra-expansionary  monetary  policies  are  likely  to  outweigh  their  benefits  (Borio, 
2015), particularly in cases where low inflation mostly reflects positive supply shocks.1 
In principle it is true that there are times when monetary policy should simply “look through” a 
few consecutive observations of low, or even negative, inflation. Reacting to the short-term 
vagaries of the price level can be counterproductive. However, this argument can easily lead 
to an underestimation of the costs and risks of deflation that arise when inflation expectations 
become de-anchored, when nominal rates are at their lower bound, and when debt (public 
and private) is high. 
Deflationary pressures pose a serious problem when they become entrenched in firms’ and 
households’ behaviour. Research at the Bank of Italy shows that adaptive learning can play 
an important role in this sense (Busetti et al., 2014). If agents have incomplete knowledge of 
the behaviour of their central bank and learn from inflation outturns (bounded rationality), the 
effects of negative surprises may become extremely persistent. In particular, the shocks that 
hit the euro area over the last two years would reduce inflation by at least 1 percentage point 
more than in a standard rational expectation model (see Figure 2). Besides being a problem 
in  its  own  right,  this  would  also  imply  that  the  (standard)  models  central  banks  use  for 
forecasting may become inaccurate and provide poor guidance for policy decisions. 
Our research also shows that there is a concrete risk of an outright de-anchoring of inflation 
expectations (Cecchetti et al., 2015). As long as expectations are well anchored, changes in 
relative prices or supply shocks should affect the price level in the short- but not in the long-
run. Hence, the correlation between short-term and long-term expectations provides a gauge 
of  de-anchoring  risk.  In  the  euro  area  this  correlation  has  risen  in  recent  months.  In 
particular,  the  probability  of  downward  changes  in  short-term  expectations  becoming 
associated with variations in longer-term expectations has increased substantially (Figure 3). 
Technicalities aside, it is clear that even declines in inflation due to favourable supply shocks 
may have adverse consequences when nominal interest rates are at the zero lower bound 
and  debt  levels  are  high.2  To  cut  a  long  story  short,  it  is  crucial  that  central  banks  keep 
pursuing their price stability target. 
Is monetary policy approaching its limits? (No!) 
3. 
The next question is whether central banks can achieve their goals when interest rates are at 
the zero lower bound. Are their tools up to the task? This debate has intensified since the 
ECB  Governing  Council’s  decision  of  last  March,  but  it  is  hardly  new:  doubts  about  the 
effectiveness of monetary policy, as well as claims that it has now “really” reached its limit 
have been  voiced after each round of monetary expansion in the last eight years on both 
sides of the Atlantic. The effectiveness of monetary policy might be hindered because of the 
ZLB; because “you cannot push on a string”; or because monetary stimulus is necessarily 
weaker after a financial crisis, when firms and households want to deleverage and the bank 
transmission channel is broken (Masciandaro, 2016). 
My initial response to this question is contained in the title of this speech: “never say never”. 
There  are  no  obvious  limits  to  what  central  banks  can  do.  The  suspicion  that  they  might 
really run out of tools and ideas is understandable, but it is backward-looking and has proved 
groundless more than once already. My considered response is that we now have enough 
information to reject the conclusion that the recent monetary policy initiatives did not work. 
There is an apparently technical but actually crucial point that I would like to make before 
getting to the crux of the matter. To assess a policy intervention (monetary or otherwise), one 
                                                
1   From  this  perspective  the  Great  Depression  is  considered  an  outlier,  a  unique  historical  event  with  limited 
general lessons on the cost of deflation. 
2   See, inter alia, Neri and Notarpietro (2015). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
needs  to  look  at  the  counterfactual  and  not,  or  not  only,  at  the  data.  The  question  is  not 
whether we are happy with the current levels of growth and inflation, but whether we would 
be happier if the interventions had not taken place at all. This complicates the issue, making 
it more dependent on the assumptions one makes to get an answer, but it is the only serious 
way to perform a policy assessment.3 
The  unconventional  measures  adopted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  England 
have proven effective in supporting asset prices and in narrowing inflation and output gaps 
(Williams,  2014;  see  Table  1).  Casiraghi  et  al.  (2016a)  offer  a  similar  assessment  for  the 
Italian  economy.  The  measures  introduced  by  the  Eurosystem  lifted  GDP  by  almost 
3 percentage  points  from  2011–13.  Looking  forward,  our  estimates  suggest  that  the 
Expanded  Asset  Purchase  Programme  (EAPP)  could  boost  GDP  in  Italy  by  more  than 
2 points over a three-year horizon, and sustain prices by more than 1 percentage point. 
The EAPP is not a beggar-thy-neighbour policy: it may imply a depreciation of the exchange 
rate, but this is not the only, or for that matter indispensable, transmission channel. The fall in 
the medium- and long-term yields of a broad set of financial assets puts downward pressure 
on bank lending rates and supports investment. Wealth effects from financial prices may give 
an  additional  boost to  household  consumption  in  the medium term (our  estimates for Italy 
suggest  that  a  10  per  cent  increase  in  financial  wealth  would  raise  consumption  by 
0.5 percentage points in the medium term). Increases in residential house prices, together 
with the decline in long term rates, support residential investment. 
The  evidence  we  have  so  far  on  the  effects  of  the  programme  is  consistent  with  those 
predictions. The cost of new loans to households and firms in the euro area has fallen by 
60 and 70 basis points, respectively, since mid-2014. For Italian firms, the cost of borrowing 
has come down by 120 basis points (Figure 4). The performance of Italian GDP last year 
was  broadly  consistent  with  our  estimates,  as  we  reported  in  our  last  Economic  Bulletin 
(Figure  5).  Of  course,  monetary  policy  cannot  work  alone.  Its  positive  impact  on  the 
performance of the Italian economy was possible in light of the reforms implemented at the 
national level, such as the reform of the labour market, the emphasis on the spending review, 
the gradual reduction of the tax burden. 
Inflation  responded  positively  to  the  programme  in  the  first  three  quarters  of  2015.  It 
subsequently weakened, but that has much to do with a worsening of global conditions. At 
any rate, without the programme the inflation forecast for 2016 would have been about half a 
percentage point lower. 
It is clear that the challenges to price stability remain significant. However, these estimates 
suggest that there is little ground for arguing that monetary policy is powerless, or that central 
banks  are  now  approaching  the  limits  of  what  they  can  deliver.  I  would  therefore  caution 
against listening to the siren song of those who claim the opposite. We should never forget 
that  inflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon. This  is  no mere theoretical  statement. 
The success of the Bundesbank in the 1970s depended directly on this view, on the fact that 
central banks should not give up on price stability, and that they had the means to achieve it. 
That this view was quite unpopular at the time, when many wanted central banks to forgo 
controlling prices, should ring a cautionary bell today. 
Of  course,  we  cannot  fine-tune  the  economy  with  monetary  policy  alone.  Its  transmission 
mechanism entails “long and variable” lags and it can be stronger or weaker depending on 
the state of the economy, which in turn is influenced by a broad range of policies. Hence, it 
can be dangerous to let monetary policy be the only game in town. This takes us straight to 
                                                
3   The  long  debate  on  the  causes  of  the  Great  Moderation  clearly  demonstrates  that  it  is  impossible  to 
distinguish ‘good luck’ from ‘good policy’ by just looking at the data: you need a model. The moderation has 
long since gone, but that principle applies equally to the problem we are discussing today. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
the next question I would like to discuss, namely the relation between monetary and fiscal 
policy. 
The policy mix 
4. 
Many  have  advocated  a  key  role  for  expansionary  fiscal  policy  in  lifting  activity  and 
employment (among others, Krugman, 2008). Bernanke argued that the poor performance of 
the euro area compared to the US after 2009 may have reflected the fact that fiscal policy 
was  tighter than  warranted  by  economic  conditions.4  In  his  Jackson  Hole  speech  in  2014, 
President Draghi also signalled that fiscal policy was “less available and effective” in the EA, 
that it “could play a greater role” and that “the existing flexibility within the rules could be used 
to  better  address  the  weak  recovery  and  to  make  room  for  the  cost  of  needed  structural 
reforms” (Draghi, 2014). By and large, the data seem to support these views. Indeed, looking 
at  the  cyclically  adjusted  primary  balance,  the  fiscal  stance  in  the  euro  area  was  less 
expansionary, if not contractionary, than in other advanced economies following the onset of 
the financial crisis (Figure 6). 
The case of the euro area is, of course, peculiar in this respect. Not only is there no single 
fiscal  policy,  but  many  countries  are  also  constrained  in  their  ability  to  use  fiscal  policy 
countercyclically  on  account  of  high  debt  levels  and/or  political  pressures.  This  issue  has 
been  important  in  the  unfolding  of  the  crisis  and  remains  critical  today.  Nevertheless, 
maintaining  a  contractionary  fiscal  stance  is  clearly  problematic  in  the  current  context. 
Furthermore,  significant  heterogeneity  among  European  countries  means  that  some 
economies have the leeway for an expansion that might prove beneficial for them and for the 
rest of the area. 
The  complementarity  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  also  lies  at  the  root  of  the  debate  on 
“helicopter  money”,  i.e.  the  direct  financing  of  consumption  or  public  investment.  As 
President  Draghi  has  remarked,  the  concept  is  an  interesting  one  and  is  currently  being 
discussed by academic economists, though interpretations of what it means vary widely. It 
also  presents  a  number  of  complexities,  both  in  accounting  terms  and  legally.  It  is  an 
important debate, which should not be dismissed lightly, but the fundamental message we 
can take from that discussion is perhaps not for central banks, but for fiscal authorities. 
To  paraphrase  the  title  of  an  old  article  by  Franco  Modigliani,  we  should  not  forsake 
stabilisation  polices  (Modigliani,  1977).  The  importance  of  fiscal  discipline  is  indubitable, 
particularly in the light of the recent tensions in euro-area sovereign bond markets; but overly 
restrictive or otherwise misguided fiscal strategies might mean that, in this stabilization effort, 
fiscal policy becomes part of the problem instead of part of the solution. 
Monetary policy and financial stability 
5. 
Should  financial  stability  considerations  interfere  with  the  determination  with  which  central 
banks pursue their primary target? I would start by emphasizing the strong link between price 
and financial stability in the medium run. It is hard to maintain a sound financial system in a 
(persistently) depressed economy. All measures aimed at closing output and price gaps after 
a  long  recession  are  therefore  compatible  with  the  financial  stability  objective  of  reducing 
systemic risk. 
True, this link may be loose in the short run (as Masciandaro recently restated). A large body 
of evidence suggests that risk appetite is endogenous and is affected by monetary policy. 
                                                
4   Bernanke (2015). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
Investors take on risk, potentially up to undesirable levels, when monetary conditions are too 
loose. This is by now well documented for both bank lending and market finance.5 
The first issue is how to identify this phenomenon. In order to spot changes in investors’ risk 
attitude, policymakers need to look at a broad set of information. Monetary policy decisions 
must  be  taken  on  the  basis  of  indicators  such  as  credit  developments,  bank  lending 
conditions and asset prices.6 
In my view, the data speak quite clearly as of today. The Italian credit cycle, measured by a 
detrended credit-to-GDP ratio, turned negative around 2010 and has remained so ever since 
(Figure 7). The same is true of the euro area overall. Figure 8 shows a cyclical indicator that 
combines information on housing and financial prices and on credit aggregates. The indicator 
shows that the euro area is lagging behind the United States in terms of financial recovery, 
and that cyclical conditions in Europe are still mildly negative. This does not mean that risks 
may  not  be rising  in  individual  countries  or  sectors, but  nor  does  it  signal  “excessive  risk-
taking” in the aggregate. 
The second issue is what to do if and when the indicators signal an increase in systemic risk. 
My  answer  is  that  macroprudential  policy  should  be  used  as  the  first  line  of  defence.  Of 
course, monetary policy can also play a role, but the debate on what exactly this role should 
be is far from over. Monetary policy has the advantage that “it gets in all of the cracks” of the 
financial system (Stein 2013), but it might also be a blunt instrument, as the benefits of fixing 
sectorial  imbalances  through  it  may  be  offset  by  large  macroeconomic  costs  (Svensson, 
2015). Macroprudential policies instead can rely on a broad set of instruments (such as time-
varying  capital  requirements,  caps  on  LTVs,  DTIs,  risk  weights,  etc.)  targeted  at  specific 
financial  imbalances.  National  macroprudential  authorities  can  address  local  risks,  as  has 
recently been done in a number of countries, without altering the monetary stance. 
Against this background, let me emphasize that the key question is not whether monetary 
authorities should take financial stability issues into consideration – the answer is “yes” and 
they  already  do.  The  issue  is  rather  whether  the  micro-  as  well  as  the  macroprudential 
authorities take the macroeconomic implications of their policies fully into account. I recently 
argued  that  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and  micro-  and  macroprudential 
supervision is indeed an issue, and one that matters for two reasons.7 First, even from the 
microprudential perspective (and a fortiori from the macroprudential one) there is a clear link 
between  capital  requirements,  credit,  and  economic  activity.  This  link  is  likely  to  be 
particularly important in bank-based financial systems such as the euro area. Second, in and 
of itself slow growth poses a major medium-term risk for financial intermediaries. This implies 
that as long as there are no signs of generalized excessive risk-taking, it would be wise not 
to tighten the supervisory stance too much: this would guarantee that other stability-oriented 
policies do not undermine the efforts of monetary policy, delaying a recovery that banks need 
as much as firms and households. 
Furthermore, when calibrating their interventions, supervisors should take into account the 
complementarity of micro- and macrosupervision, which rely on the same set of tools and 
similar transmission mechanisms. The overlap between micro- and macroprudential policies 
is particularly strong in economies with concentrated banking sectors, where the separation 
between  “micro”  and  “macro”  is  tenuous.  At  a  minimum,  this  complementarity  gives 
macroprudential authorities in the euro area another reason not to be too restrictive (micro 
requirements are already high). Beyond that, it suggests that microprudential authorities may 
                                                
5   Borio and Zhu (2012); Jimenez et al. (2014), for bank lending. Bekaert et al. (2013), for market finance. 
6   Alessandri et al. (2015). 
7   See Alessandri and Panetta (2015). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  
 
also want to reconsider their choices and ask themselves whether micro requirements are 
being tightened too much, or too abruptly, given the state of the economy. 
The distributional effects of monetary policy 
6. 
Another important concern is that the current monetary policy stance may disproportionately 
favour the rich (those who own more financial assets and benefit from large capital gains) 
while “expropriating” pensioners’ savings  via  very low  interest rates. Moreover, refinancing 
and open market operations are directed at favouring banks, rather than the average person. 
This  issue  clearly  deserves  our  attention.8  Rising  inequality  poses  delicate  ethical  issues. 
History  suggests  that  it  might  also  hinder  growth  and  make  our  economies  less  stable. 
Furthermore, although inequality lies squarely outside the mandate of central banks, if their 
decisions were to affect income distribution systematically, some might think that they should 
be  overseen  more  closely  by  the  government.  Hence,  the  very  independence  of  central 
banks might be at stake. 
As a general point, let me stress that it would be a mistake to deviate from a policy that is 
welfare-improving for the economy as a whole purely on the basis of distributional concerns. 
If we agree that monetary stimulus is necessary to improve the conditions of the Eurozone, 
we should pursue it without hesitation. The distributional spillovers of a socially optimal policy 
(if  any)  should  be  kept  in  check  by  other  means,  and  not  by  giving  up  on  the  policy 
altogether. In other words, monetary policy should increase the size of the cake and leave 
the distributional choices to other policies. 
Second,  it  is  crucial  to  think  about  this  problem  from  a  general  equilibrium  perspective.  A 
monetary expansion can affect income and wealth through a number of channels. It boosts 
financial assets that are held by the rich, but it also makes debt less onerous, thus helping 
the poor. It stimulates profits and capital markets, but it also raises employment, which is the 
main  source  of  income  for  the  poorest.  We  do  not  yet  have  a  full  formal  model  of  these 
mechanisms,  but  this  is  no  justification  for  not  giving  them  serious  consideration,  or  for 
focusing on one of them in isolation while ignoring the rest. 
Ongoing research at the Bank of Italy tries to build up this “general equilibrium” view from 
micro  data.  The  project  examines  the  impact  of  unconventional  monetary  measures  on  a 
large number of variables in individual Italian households’ balance sheets.9 The main finding 
is that the traditional effects of monetary policy via activity and employment have prevailed 
even during the global crisis. By far the most relevant short-term distributional implication of 
expansionary monetary policy remains that, by stimulating the economy, it positively affects 
the  incomes  of  the  less  well-off,  whose  jobs  and  wages  are  more  sensitive  to  cyclical 
fluctuations. Financial benefits for wealthy households due to capital gains do emerge, but 
they  are  smaller  than  the  advantages  for  the  low-income  population  stemming  from  the 
improvement of labour market conditions and from the lower cost of debt. Overall, inequality 
decreases. (Figure 9). 
To those who are sceptical of this particular result, or of model-based estimates in general, I 
would ask Bernanke’s simple question: “If the average working person were given the choice 
of the status quo (current Fed policies) and a situation with both a weaker labor market and 
lower  stock  prices  (tighter  Fed  policies),  which  would  he  or  she  choose?”.10  I  believe  the 
average person, or median voter, would be in favour of the current stance, both in the US 
and in Europe. 
                                                
8   These themes are developed further in Panetta (2015). 
9   Casiraghi et al. (2016b). 
10   “Monetary policy and inequality”, Ben S. Bernanke’s blog, June 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions 
7. 
The  crisis  has  taught  us  many  lessons  about  central  banking.  The  most  important  is  that 
monetary  policy  is  not  a  mechanical  exercise  carried  out  by  wooden  technocrats:  central 
banking remains as much of an art today as it was in the 1930s. It is thanks to their creativity, 
coupled with their determination to do “whatever it takes”, that central banks have avoided a 
meltdown of the financial system and another Great Depression. But the mission has not yet 
been accomplished. Although the euro area is giving encouraging signs, its recovery from 
the worst crisis in its history cannot be taken for granted and, as of today, remains subject to 
significant  risks.  In  such  an  uncertain  and  fast-changing  environment,  central  bankers’ 
proven willingness to be bold, decisive and innovative gives much ground for optimism. 
References 
Alessandri Piergiorgio, Pierluigi Bologna, Roberta Fiori and Enrico Sette, 2015, “A note on 
the  implementation  of  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer  in  Italy”,  Bank  of  Italy  Occasional 
Paper, No. 278. 
Alessandri Piergiorgio and Fabio Panetta, 2015, “Prudential policy at times of stagnation: a 
view from the trenches”, Bank of Italy Occasional Paper, No. 300. 
Bayoumi, T., G. Dell’Ariccia, K.Habermeier, T. Mancini-Griffoli, F. Valencia (2014), “Monetary 
policy in the new normal”, IMF staff discussion note, April. 
Bekaert Geert, Marie Hoerova, and Marco Lo Duca, 2013, “Risk, uncertainty and monetary 
policy”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 60(7): 771–788. 
Bernanke, Ben S., 2015, The Courage to Act: A Memoir of a Crisis and its Aftermath, WW 
Norton & Company, New York. 
Borio Claudio and Haibin Zhu, 2012, “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A 
missing link in the transmission mechanism?”, Journal of Financial Stability, 8(4): 236–251. 
Borio Claudio, 2015, “Revisiting three intellectual pillars of monetary policy received wisdom”, 
Speech at Cato Institute, November 12. 
Busetti  Fabio,  Giuseppe  Ferrero,  Andrea  Gerali,  and  Alberto  Locarno,  2014,  “Deflationary 
shocks and de-anchoring of inflation expectations”, Bank of Italy Occasional Paper, No. 252. 
Casiraghi Marco, Eugenio Gaiotti, Lisa Rodano, and Alessandro Secchi, 2016a, “The impact 
of unconventional monetary policy on the Italian economy during the sovereign debt crisis”, 
International Journal of Central Banking, forthcoming. 
Casiraghi Marco, Eugenio Gaiotti, Lisa Rodano, and Alessandro Secchi, 2016b, “A ‘reverse 
Robin  Hood’?  The  distributional  implications  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  for  Italian 
households”, mimeo. 
Cecchetti Sara, Filippo Natoli, and Laura Sigalotti, 2015, “Tail comovement in option-implied 
inflation expectations as an indicator of anchoring”, Bank of Italy Working Paper, No. 1025. 
Correia, 
Isabel,  Emmanuel  Farhi,  Juan  Pablo  Nicolini,  and  Pedro  Teles,  2013, 
“Unconventional  Fiscal  Policy  at  the  Zero  Bound”, American  Economic  Review,  103(4): 
1172–1211. 
Cova Pietro and Giuseppe Ferrero, 2015,  “The Eurosystem’s asset purchase programmes 
for monetary policy purposes”, Bank of Italy Occasional Paper, No. 270. 
Draghi Mario, 2014,  “Unemployment in the euro area”, Speech at the annual  central bank 
symposium in Jackson Hole, August 22. 
Gabriel Jiménez, Steven Ongena, José-Luis Peydró, and Jesús Saurina, 2014, “Hazardous 
Times for Monetary Policy: What Do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say About the Effects 
of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk-Taking?”, Econometrica 82(2), 464–505 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  
 
Gomes Pedro and Hernán Seoane, 2015, “Made in Europe: monetary-fiscal policy mix with 
financial frictions”, mimeo. 
Friedman,  Milton,  1972.  “Have  Monetary  Policies  Failed?”,  American  Economic  Review 
62(2), 11–18. 
Issing Otmar, 2016, “Nothing is written in stone”, interview with the financial daily Boersen-
Zeitung, January 21. 
Krugman Paul, 2008, “Optimal fiscal policy in a liquidity trap”, mimeo. 
Mankiw  Gregory  and Matthew  Weinzierl,  2011,  “An  Exploration  of  Optimal  Stabilization 
Policy”, NBER Working Paper No. 17029. 
Masciandaro  Donato,  2016,  “Le  banche  centrali  e  la  maledizione  dei  vincitori”,  article  in 
Il Sole 24 ore, January 10. 
Modigliani  Franco,  1977,  “The  monetarist  controversy,  or,  should  we  forsake  stabilisation 
policies?”, American Economic Review, No. 2, pp.1–17. 
Neri  Stefano  and  Alessandro  Notarpietro,  2015,  “The  macroeconomic  effects  of  low  and 
falling inflation at the zero lower bound”, Bank of Italy Working Paper, No. 1040. 
Panetta Fabio, 2014, “The Distributional Consequences of Monetary Policy”, Speech at De 
Nederlandsche Bank, November 20. 
Stein  Jeremy  C.,  2013,  “Overheating  in  Credit Markets:  Origins,  Measurement,  and  Policy 
Responses”, Speech at Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, February 7. 
Svensson  Lars  E.O.,  2015,  “Monetary  Policy  and  Macroprudential  Policy:  Different  and 
Separate”, FRB of Boston’s 59th Econonomic Conference, October 2–3. 
Williams John C. (2014), “Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound: Putting Theory into 
Practice”,  Hutchins  Center  for  Fiscal  and  Monetary  Policy  at  the  Brookings  Institution, 
Washington, D.C. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    11 
      12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
