  Malcolm Edey: The card payments review 
Speech by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Cards & Payments Australia Conference, Melbourne, 12 May 2016. 
 Thank you once again for the opportunity to address this event. 
In some ways this is an awkward time to be giving a speech on card payments. As you know, 
the Reserve Bank Payments System Board has been conducting a comprehensive review of 
its  regulation  in  this  area.  That  review  is  now  nearing  completion.  It  is  expected  to  be 
finalised at the Board’s next meeting, which will take place next week. 
Obviously I can’t pre-empt any decisions that might come out of that meeting. Instead what I 
would like to do is offer a kind of curtain-raiser, by summarising the history of the review and 
the way it has unfolded to date. I plan to do that under three headings: the background, the 
issues and the process. 
 The background 
Let me begin with some brief background. 
The current arrangements for payments system regulation date back to the Wallis reforms 
that were enacted in 1998. Those reforms: 
• 
established a separate Payments System Board of the Reserve Bank with a majority 
of independent directors, 
gave  the  Board  the  power  to  designate  payment  systems,  and  to  set  regulatory 
standards for designated systems in relation to such matters as access and pricing, 
set the policy objectives of the Board as efficiency, competition and stability. 
A weighted average cap on interchange fees of 50 basis points 
An access regime for credit card schemes, and 
Removal of no-surcharge rules imposed by the schemes. 
• 
The Wallis Report recommended an initial focus on credit cards, and accordingly this was the 
first area of regulatory action taken by the new Board. The four-party credit card schemes 
were  designated  in  2001  and,  after  a  period  of  consultation,  a  package  of  reforms  was 
implemented from 2003 onwards. 
The key elements of that package are well known and are still in place. They included: 
• 
• 
• 
Subsequently a package of reforms for debit cards was introduced in 2006. 
The thinking behind these regulatory measures was heavily focused on the efficiency of price 
signals to consumers. Interchange fees and surcharging rules were at the heart of this, and it 
is not surprising that they remain central to the current review. 
The Board’s early work recognised that interchange fees play an important role in influencing 
the incentives to use particular payment instruments. In commercial terms, interchange fees 
serve the purpose of rebalancing incentives between issuers and acquirers and, to the extent 
that the fees are passed on to end users, between cardholders and merchants. In mature 
systems with wide coverage, merchants may have little power to decline cards, regardless of 
cost. If so, the main decision-making power over the choice of payment instrument rests with 
the  consumer,  who  typically  benefits  from  reward  points  funded  by  interchange  revenues. 
The higher cost cards (from the point of view of the merchant) are also those that tend to 
offer  the  highest  rewards  to  the  cardholder.  This  configuration  of  incentives  creates  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  misalignment  between  the  incidence  of  fees  (mainly  with  the  merchant)  and  the  decision 
making power (which rests mainly with the cardholder). In formulating its early reforms, the 
Board  took  the  view  that  this  was  inefficiently  favouring  the  use  of  higher  cost  payment 
instruments and hence pushing up merchants’ costs. 
Closely related to this was the role of surcharging. In the Board’s view, no-surcharge rules 
reinforced  the  problem  of  inefficient  price  signals  by  preventing  relative  costs  from  flowing 
through to the person making the decision of which payment method to use. Hence on both 
these issues the Board concluded that there was a case for regulatory intervention. 
These core issues of pricing, access and surcharging rules have since been taken up by a 
number  of  other  regulators  around  the  world.  And  they  have  continued  to  be  a  focus  of 
attention and debate domestically, both for policymakers and for a wide range of interested 
stakeholders. 
It was always intended at the time of the initial reforms that they would be subject to periodic 
review. The Board conducted the first such review  in 2007/08. That review concluded that 
the  reforms  had  improved  the  efficiency  of  card  payment  systems  in  some  important 
respects:  they  had  improved  access,  increased  transparency  and  led  to  more  appropriate 
price  signals  to  consumers.  One  important  element  of  that  was  a  significant  reduction  in 
average merchant service fees for card payments. In the five years following the initial credit 
card reforms, for example, average merchant service fees for the regulated card schemes 
fell  by  60 basis  points.  Competitive  pressures  generated  similar  reductions  for  the 
unregulated three-party card systems. 
As  part  of  its  review  at  that  time,  the  Board  considered  some  alternative  regulatory 
approaches.  For  example,  it  gave  serious  consideration  to  reducing  the  credit  card 
interchange benchmark from 50 to 30 basis points. It decided not to do so at that time, but 
left the option on the table for subsequent review. The Board also considered stepping back 
from  formal  regulation  and  relying  instead  on  undertakings  from  industry,  including  an 
undertaking  that  average  interchange  fees  would  not  rise  in  the  absence  of  regulation. 
However, the industry was unable to arrive at suitable undertakings, and that approach was 
not adopted. 
Another  important  part  of  the  background  to  the  current  review  was  the  Financial  System 
Inquiry  (the  Murray  Inquiry)  announced  by  the  government  in  November  2013  –  the  first 
major  system-wide  review  since  Wallis.  The  Murray  Report,  released  in  December  2014, 
endorsed the overall approach to reform undertaken by the Board since it was established. 
But  it  also  recommended  that  the  Board  undertake  a  further  review  in  some  areas, 
particularly in relation to interchange fees, surcharging and competitive neutrality (including 
the competition between companion cards and the four party schemes). The Reserve Bank 
had itself flagged some of those issues in its submission to the Inquiry. 
Following on from the Murray Report, the Bank launched its own review of card payments 
regulation in March 2015, with the publication of an issues paper and the commencement of 
public consultations. Preliminary conclusions were published in December 2015, and these 
have been the subject of a further round of consultations in the period since then. I will have 
more to say about the consultation process a bit later. 
The issues 
With this background, the Bank’s current review process has focused on three main areas of 
card  payments,  namely  companion  cards,  interchange  fees  and  surcharging.  Let  me 
elaborate on each of those. 
Companion cards 
I will start with companion cards. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  It  has  been  just  over  a  decade  since  the  Bank  first  considered  the  case  for  regulating 
interchange-like payments made by American Express to its partner banks under companion 
card arrangements. 
Since  then,  issuance  of  companion  cards  has  grown  faster  than  that  for  the  four-party 
schemes, and the combined share of credit and charge card transactions accounted for by 
Diners Club and American Express has noticeably increased. The change largely occurred in 
two  steps  coinciding  with  the  introduction  of  companion  cards  by  the  major  banks.  At  the 
same  time,  evidence  cited  in  our  consultation  paper  points  to  a  steady  increase  in  the 
importance  of  companion  cards  within  the  overall  American  Express  card  business  in 
Australia. Some merchants have indicated that an increased cardholder base as a result of 
companion  card  arrangements  has  increased  the  pressure  for  them  to  accept  American 
Express cards. 
For reasons that I have already outlined, differentials in interchange-like payments can have 
an  important  influence  on  the  incentives  to  use  particular  payment  methods,  and  these 
developments in companion card usage suggest that the different regulatory treatments for 
the two arrangements may have been a factor in shaping the development of the market. In 
the  Bank’s  view,  an  efficient  payments  system  is  promoted  where  the  relative  prices  of 
different payment methods consistently reflect their relative resource costs. 
In  reviewing  this  area,  the  Bank  has  indicated  that  three  options  have  been  under 
consideration. Those options are to retain the current arrangements, to remove regulation of 
the four-party schemes, and to regulate interchange-like payments for companion cards so 
that  they  would  be  subject  to  the  same  cap  as  the  four-party  schemes.  In  its  consultation 
paper released in December last year, the Bank indicated that it favoured the third of those 
options, and this has formed the basis for further consultation in the period since then. 
Interchange fees 
The  second  main  area  under  review  relates  to  a  range  of  issues  around  interchange 
standards. 
The  interchange  benchmarks  set  by  the  Board  are  the  primary  instrument  for  the  Bank  to 
anchor credit and debit card interchange fees at a desired level. The current benchmarks of 
50 basis points for credit cards and 12 cents for debit have been in place since 2006. As I 
mentioned earlier, reductions in those benchmarks were considered, but not adopted, at the 
time of the 2007/08 review. 
In the period since then, the Board has remained concerned that interchange benchmarks 
may  still  be  higher  in  Australia  than  is  desirable  for  payments  system  efficiency.  Another 
concern  has  been  the  proliferation  of  interchange  categories  over  time  and  the  widening 
dispersion of interchange fees. Often these work to the disadvantage of smaller merchants 
who do not benefit from preferential strategic rates. As at September last year, the average 
credit  card  interchange  rate  faced  by  non-preferred  merchants  was  55 basis  points  higher 
than  the  rate  faced  by  preferred  merchants;  for  debit  cards  the  difference  was  around 
13 cents. At the individual merchant level, these differences can be much bigger. 
In  its  December  consultation  paper  the  Bank  set  out  a  series  of  regulatory  options  in  this 
area. They  included  retaining  the  status  quo,  reducing  the  weighted  average  benchmarks, 
and  supplementing  those  benchmarks  with  hard  caps  on  individual  transactions.  A  fourth 
option of removing interchange regulations, while strengthening transparency of these fees 
to merchants, was also included. The Board’s preliminary assessment was in favour of a mix 
of  the  second  and  third  options  I  just  described.  This  would  involve  retaining  the  existing 
weighted  average  of  50 basis  points  for  credit  cards,  supplementing  it  with  a  hard  cap  of 
80 basis  points  on  individual  transactions,  and  reducing  the  debit  benchmark  to  8 cents. 
Once again, this was not a final decision but was announced as a basis for the subsequent 
phase of consultation that is now being completed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  is 
in  Australia.  Here  a  key  consideration 
As well as looking at the overall level of interchange fees, the Review is also considering a 
number of related issues concerning coverage and compliance. 
On  coverage,  the  issues  discussed  in  the  December  paper  concern  commercial  cards, 
foreign-issued cards and pre-paid cards. Currently commercial cards are included within the 
scope  of  the  Bank’s  interchange  standards  and  hence  form  part  of  the  calculation  for  the 
purposes  of  compliance  with  the  weighted  average  benchmark.  A  number  of  interested 
parties  have  argued  that  these  cards  should  be  exempted,  especially  in  the  event  that 
interchange  caps  were  lowered.  They  argue,  for  example,  that  commercial  cards  typically 
provide  a  higher  value  of  associated  services  than  other  card  types,  with  fewer  non-
interchange revenue streams, and that these features could justify higher fees. On the other 
hand, consultations also suggest that these cards provide significant benefits to both sides of 
the market, and hence it is not clear that higher interchange fees are needed to promote their 
use. The Bank has also noted that, since commercial cards typically carry higher interchange 
fees  than  consumer  cards,  their  exemption  would  amount  to  a  de  facto  loosening  of  the 
weighted average cap. 
Foreign-issued  cards  are  currently  excluded  from  the  benchmark  calculations,  and  the 
question  is  whether  these  should  be  brought  within  the  scope  of  domestic  regulation  for 
transactions  acquired 
the  possibility  of 
circumvention.  Foreign-issued  cards  used  in  Australia  typically  carry  a  much  higher 
interchange  fee  than  the  domestic  benchmark,  and  under  current  arrangements  could  be 
used  to  circumvent  the  domestic  cap.  At  this  stage,  however,  the  market  share  of  foreign 
issued  cards  in  Australian  card  transactions  is  still  relatively  small  –  around  3 per  cent.  In 
response  to  the  December  consultation  document,  Mastercard  and  Visa  (among  others) 
have  made  a  number  of  arguments  for  retaining  the  existing  treatment  of  foreign-issued 
cards, and these are being carefully considered. 
For  domestic  pre-paid  cards,  the  Board  is  similarly  considering  whether  these  should  be 
brought within the scope of the existing standard. 
The issue concerning the compliance mechanism can be stated fairly simply. The current 
mechanism  operates  on  a  three-year  compliance  cycle,  such  that  the  weighted  average 
benchmark has to be met in November of every third year. Since the mix of card transactions 
within  any  system  tends  to  shift  towards  the  higher  cost  cards  over  time,  average 
interchange fees have tended to rise during each three-year period. This in turn has had the 
paradoxical effect that the actual weighted averages for the Visa and Mastercard schemes 
have been almost always above the cap. The Board’s intent, however, is that average fees 
should  be  below  the  cap,  not  above  it.  That  is  what  a  cap  means.  The  review  process  is 
consulting on options to tighten the compliance mechanism in keeping with that intent. 
A related question on compliance concerns the possible regulation of scheme payments to 
issuers. These marketing and incentive payments are bilaterally negotiated and can be quite 
material in value, and the flexibility of such payments means that they can be structured in 
ways  to  circumvent  interchange  regulation.  Internationally,  regulators  have  moved  to  limit 
these types of payments. Under European regulation, for example, they are treated as if they 
were interchange payments. As part of its Review, the Board is considering whether a similar 
treatment should be adopted here. The preliminary position announced in December was in 
favour of that option. 
Surcharging 
The third main area under review by the Board is surcharging. 
As I have already mentioned, the Board has long held the view that the ability to surcharge 
for more expensive payment methods is part of an efficient payment system. The ability to 
surcharge expands the options available to merchants beyond a binary decision to accept or 
reject a card, and it allows price signals to pass through to the consumer who decides which 
payment method to use. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Nonetheless, efficient surcharging should reflect the cost to the merchant. When the Board’s 
initial surcharging reforms were put in place in 2003 it was expected that market forces would 
provide  a  sufficient  discipline  on  surcharging  behaviour.  Since  then,  however,  evidence  of 
excessive surcharging in some industries has accumulated. 
The Board revised its regulation in 2013 to give schemes greater power to prevent excessive 
surcharging, but those arrangements proved difficult to enforce. This has prompted a further 
review by the Board as part of its current process. As well as consulting with the full range of 
interested stakeholders, the Bank has had discussions with the ACCC and Treasury about 
possible  policy  approaches.  The  Board’s  proposed  response  builds  on  the  recent 
Government measures to strengthen ACCC enforcement powers in this area. 
The main elements of the coordinated approach were set out in the December consultation 
paper. These are, that: 
• 
Government  legislation  bans  excessive  surcharging,  defined  as  surcharging  in 
excess of the Reserve Bank standard 
The  Bank’s  standard  is  based  on  a  simple  and  verifiable  measure  of  the  cost  of 
acceptance, with appropriate transparency of costs to merchants 
The  ACCC  has  enforcement  powers  in  cases  of  excessive  surcharging  by 
merchants, and 
The  Bank’s  standard  continues  to  stipulate  that  schemes  may  not  have  no-
surcharge rules. 
   Under the Bank’s preferred approach, acquirers would be required to provide merchants with 
regular  statements  of  the  cost  of  acceptance  for  each  payment  method.  The  cost  of 
acceptance  would  have  to  be  expressed  in  percentage  terms  unless  the  acquirer  fees  for 
that payment method were fixed across all transaction values. As a result, surcharging would 
normally  also  have  to  be  percentage  based.  Among  other  things,  this  would  rule  out  the 
current system of fixed-dollar surcharges in the airline industry, which would appear to result 
in significant over-recovery of payment costs on low-value fares. 
Again I stress that this is still a preliminary assessment, and decisions will be finalised next 
week in light of the consultations that have taken place in the interim. 
I  have  had  to  skate  over  a  lot  of  detail  today.  But,  taking  all  these  elements  together,  the 
current review can be seen as a continuation of the approach adopted by the Board since its 
inception  and  endorsed  by  the  Murray  Report.  It  maintains  a  focus  on  efficiency  of  price 
signals  and  competitive  neutrality,  which  have  been  core  principles  in  the  reform  strategy 
from the start. 
The process 
So far I have described the background to the card payments review and the main issues 
that are being covered. I would like to conclude now with some comments about the process. 
Under  the  Payment  Systems  (REGULATION)  Act  1998,  any  standards  or  access  regimes 
that  the  Bank  might  propose  to  apply  cannot  be  implemented  without  appropriate  public 
consultation. In the case of the current review, the process of consultation and debate has 
been particularly extensive. This has been partly because of the comprehensive nature of the 
review  itself, and also because of the complementary role played by the  Murray Inquiry in 
examining many of the same issues. 
The Bank first publicly indicated its intention to hold a review of this nature in its March 2014 
submission to the Murray Inquiry. That Inquiry, conducted through the course of 2014, itself 
undertook extensive consultations and made a number of recommendations to be followed 
up by the Payments System Board and the Australian Government. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Board launched its review with an issues paper in March 2015. In response to that, the 
Bank  received  more  than  40 written  submissions  from  interested  parties,  conducted 
meetings with 28 parties (some more than once) and hosted a roundtable with participants 
from  33 organisations.  These  included  card  schemes,  banks,  other  financial  service 
providers, consumer groups and government agencies. The Board’s preliminary assessment, 
taking  all  of  that  into  account,  was  presented  in  a  second  consultation  paper  that  was 
published  in  December,  including  a  set  of  draft  standards  for  further  comment.  The  Bank 
received over 40 substantive submissions in this second round and held more than 50 further 
stakeholder meetings, all of which will be considered in the Board’s final assessment. As I 
said at the outset, I expect the Board will decide on a final set of standards at its meeting 
next week, with an announcement to follow soon afterwards. 
All up, it will have taken a bit over two years from the time when the Bank first signalled its 
intent to undertake this review until its completion. I sometimes hear comments to the effect 
that an even longer time should have been allowed for stakeholders to present their views, 
but the more common concern that I have heard has been from those who would prefer a 
faster process – consumers who would like to see faster action on excessive surcharging, or 
businesses who want greater regulatory certainty. I can only say in response that the Bank is 
bound to follow due processes and takes its responsibility to consult very seriously. But for 
those keen to see the final result, there is not long to wait. 
Once again, I thank all those who have taken part in the consultation process and I thank you 
for the opportunity to talk to you today. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
