  Raghuram Rajan: The changing paradigm for financial inclusion 
Speech  by  Dr  Raghuram  Rajan,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  National 
Seminar  on  “Equity,  Access,  and  Inclusion  –  Transforming  Rural  India  through  Financial 
Inclusion”,  organised  by  the  National  Institute  of  Rural  Development  and  Panchayat  Raj, 
Hyderabad, 18 July 2016. 
 Thank you for inviting me to address this seminar on equity, access, and inclusion. Financial 
inclusion  is  about  (a)  the  broadening  of financial  services  to  those  people  and  enterprises 
who do not have access to financial services sector; (b) the deepening of financial services 
for those who have minimal financial services; and (c) greater financial literacy and consumer 
protection  so  that those  who  are  offered financial  products  can  make  appropriate  choices. 
The imperative for financial inclusion is both a moral one as well as one based on economic 
efficiency. After all, should we not give everyone access to the services we all in this room 
enjoy? Moreover, if everyone had the tools and resources to better themselves, would this 
not increase output, growth, and economic prosperity? 
It would be fair to say that while we have made tremendous advances since independence, 
we  have  still  some  way  to  go  to  ensure  widespread  financial  inclusion.  What  are  the 
economic impediments to greater financial inclusion? 
Perhaps the most important is the economic condition of the excluded. World over, the poor, 
the  small,  and  the  remote  are  excluded.  It  is  not  just  because  the  financial  system  is 
underdeveloped, but because they are hard to service profitably. Nevertheless, this is not a 
reason to abandon hope, but to ask how we can overcome the impediments in the way of 
inclusion.  The  best  way  to  characterise  the  impediments  are  through  the  acronym  IIT: 
Information, Incentives, and Transaction Costs. 
IIT 
The excluded may live in remote areas or may belong to communities or segments of society 
that  undertake  economic  activity  informally  –  they  do  not  maintain  records  or  have  signed 
contracts  or  documentation.  They  often  do  not  own  property  or  have  regular  established 
sources of income. As a result, a banker, especially if as is typical, he is not from the local 
region, will have difficulty getting sufficient information to offer financial products. 
A  second  concern  is  incentives.  For  example,  loans  are  easily  available  only  if  the  lender 
thinks  he  will  be  repaid.  When  the  legal  system  does  not  enforce  repayment  quickly  or 
cheaply,  and  when  the  borrower  does  not  have  any  collateral  to  pledge,  the  lender  might 
believe that he will find it difficult to get repaid. 
The third impediment is transactions costs. Since the size of transactions by the poor, or by 
micro farmers or enterprises is small, the fixed costs in transacting are relatively high. It takes 
as much time helping a client fill out the forms and to provide the necessary documentation if 
he is applying for a loan for Rs. 10000 as it takes to help another one borrow Rs. 10 lakhs. A 
banker  who  is  conscious  of  the  bottom  line  would  naturally  focus  on  the  large  client  in 
preference to the tiny one. 
How does the moneylender manage? 
One  of  the  primary  motivations  for  the  country  to  push  financial  inclusion  is  to  free  the 
excluded  from  the  clutches  of  the  moneylender.  How  does  the  moneylender  boldly  lend 
where no banker dares to lend? Because he does not suffer the same impediments! Coming 
from  the  local  community,  the  sahukar  is  well  informed  on  what  everyone’s  sources  of 
income and wealth are, and how much they can repay. He is quite capable of using ruthless 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  methods  to  enforce  repayment.  Moreover,  the  borrower  knows  that  if  he  defaults  on  the 
sahukar,  he  loses  his  lender  of  last  resort.  So  the  borrower  has  strong  incentives  to  pay. 
Finally, because the sahukar lives nearby and uses minimal documentation – after all, he is 
not going to use the courts to force repayment  –  loans are easily and quickly obtained. In an 
emergency  or  if  the  poor  need  to  borrow  on  a  daily  basis,  there  are  few  more  readily 
available alternatives than the moneylender. No wonder he has so many in his clutches. 
How then should public policy approach this problem? I will now describe three approaches: 
mandates and subventions, transforming institutions, and moving away from credit. 
Approach 1: mandates and subventions 
One  approach  is  to  push  formal  institutions  into  reaching  out  to  the  excluded,  even  if  it  is 
unprofitable. This is why, for example, we mandate that banks allocate a certain fraction of 
their  loans  to  the  “priority  sector”  and  that  they  open  25  percent  of  their  branches  in 
unbanked  areas.  There  are  also  interest  subventions  that  are  made  available  for  loans  to 
particular sectors. Furthermore, banks have been urged to open bank accounts for all under 
the Pradhan Mantri Jan Dhan Yojana (PMJDY), while today they are being exhorted to make 
loans to small businesses under the Mudra Scheme. 
Because there are positive social benefits to financial inclusion that are not captured by the 
service provider (what economists call “externalities”), such mandates are reasonable from a 
societal  perspective.  For  instance,  the  higher familial  and  community  status  a farm  worker 
gets from starting her own poultry farm and contributing to the family income may, on net, 
outweigh the costs the bank incurs on making the loan. The bank cannot monetise the status 
benefits,  but  a  government  can  decide  those  benefits  are  worth  generating  and  mandate 
them. 
In a similar vein, there may be network benefits from universal access – for instance, direct 
transfer  of  benefits  is  easier  when  the  vast  majority  of  beneficiaries  have  a  bank  account, 
and  the  accounts  themselves  will  be  used  heavily  when  account  to  account  transfers  are 
made easier through mobile phones via the soon-to-be-introduced Unified Payment Interface 
(UPI).  Mandated  account  opening  essentially  creates  the  universal  network  with  its 
associated positive network externalities. 
There are, however, a number of risks emanating from mandates. The first is that there is no 
market test of usefulness, and indeed, these may not be possible – how does one measure 
the value of the enhanced social status of the poultry farmer? So mandates are driven by the 
beliefs of the political leadership, and may persist a long time even if they are not effective. 
Furthermore, some vested interests may benefit from specific mandates and push for their 
perpetuation  long  after  they  have  ceased  being  useful.  Bankers  themselves,  seeing  little 
profit  in  obeying  the  mandate,  will  try  and  “achieve”  it  at  least  cost  by  targeting  the  most 
accessible  and  least  risky  in  the  eligible  category,  and  even  mislabeling  normal  activity  so 
that it fits in the eligible list. Finally, some mandates fall primarily on the public sector banks. 
As competition reduces their profitability, their capacity to carry out mandates and still earn 
enough to survive diminishes. 
So while acknowledging the value of mandates at the RBI, we have tried to make them more 
effective.  For  example,  the  list  of  sectors  eligible  for  priority  sector  treatment  has  been 
revised, with an emphasis on targeting the truly excluded. Specifically, the share of adjusted 
net  bank  credit  (ANBC)  that  has  to  go  to  small  and  marginal  farmers  (including  share 
croppers)  is  set  at  8  percent  for  March  2017,  and  that  for  micro  enterprises  set  at 
7.5 percent.  At  the  same  time,  the  scope  for  banks  to  meet  priority  sector  norms  without 
lending to the truly excluded has been reduced. For example, large loans to firms producing 
agricultural products no longer qualify. Also, banks are now required to meet their targets at 
the  end  of  every  quarter,  rather  than  at  the  end  of  the  year,  which  reduces  the  scope  for 
window-dressing  with  short-term  end-of-year  credit.  Finally,  Priority  Sector  Lending 
Certificates, which allow a lender to “sell” any over-achievement in particular categories to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  others who are deficient, are now being traded, thus encouraging those who have a better 
capacity to make such loans to do so. All in all, the priority sector mandate is now not only 
better targeted at the truly excluded, but will be delivered more efficiently. 
Mandates  are  not  costless.  Rather  than  forcing  banks  to  recover  costs  by  overcharging 
ordinary customers, or by demanding recapitalisation by the government, better to bring the 
costs into the open by paying for the mandate wherever possible. So, for instance, accounts 
or cash machines opened in remote areas could attract a fixed subsidy, which would be paid 
to anyone who delivers them. Not only will the cost of the mandate become transparent and 
will  be  borne  by  the  authorities,  thus  incentivising  them  to  make  sensible  decisions  about 
how long to impose the mandate, the mandate can be delivered by the most efficient service 
providers,  attracted  by  the  subsidy.  This  is  why  the  RBI  today  explicitly  subsidises  cash 
recyclers set up in underserved areas, and why central and state governments are paying 
banks for maintaining and servicing specified accounts. Going forward, narrow targeting of 
mandates to the truly underserved and explicit payment for fulfilling the mandate so that they 
are delivered by the most efficient should be the norm. 
Approach 2: creating the right institutions 
As  I  argued  earlier,  the  moneylender  is  particularly  effective  because  he  knows  the 
neighbourhood and its people, and can make a good assessment of who is credit worthy. A 
large national bank with a local branch suffers from two infirmities. First, the branch manager 
has typically been recruited through an all-India exam, is from a different state, and typically 
is not intimately familiar with the local people. While many good branch managers do indeed 
learn about the community, some do not. The higher socio-economic status of bank officers 
also  creates  a  distance  with  the  poorer  segments  of  the  community,  and  their  high  salary 
makes  many  branches  in  remote  areas  economically  unviable  even  if  they  could  solicit 
business intelligently. Finally, given that the excluded do not have formal documents, bank 
managers  in  large  banks  with  bureaucratic  centralised  procedures  find  it  hard  to  provide 
effective  service  –  how  does  one  convey  to  head  office  the  rationale  for  a  loan  to  an 
intelligent  enthusiastic  tribal  who  wants  to  set  up  a  small  shop,  but  who  has  no  formal 
education or track record? 
Local  financial  institutions,  with  local  control  and  staffed  by  knowledgeable  local  people, 
could  be  more  effective  at  providing  financial  services  to  the  excluded.  HDFC  Bank,  for 
example, has been very successful growing its loan portfolio in Kashmir by recruiting local 
youth as loan officers. Certainly, this is also the obvious lesson to be drawn from the success 
of micro finance institutions, who combine their local knowledge with stronger incentives for 
repayment  through  peer  pressure  and  frequent  collection  of  repayments.  Indeed,  this  was 
also the rationale for local area banks, regional rural banks, and is a strong feature in the 
cooperative movement. 
Yet, while there have been some grand successes among these institutions, each form has 
some  deficiencies.  Micro  finance  institutions  do  not  have  access  to  low  cost  deposit 
financing, though securitisation of loans has been a growing avenue of finance. Local area 
banks  could  not  expand  out  of  their  local  area,  exposing  them  to  the  geographical 
concentration risks. Regional rural banks agitated for parity in salary structures with parent 
scheduled  commercial  banks,  and  having  achieved  parity,  find  that  their  costs  are  not 
optimally  suited  for  the  clientele  they  need  to  service.  There  are  some  very  successful 
cooperative banks, on par with any universal bank, but far too many suffer from governance 
problems. The RBI has been engaged in bringing stronger governance to urban cooperative 
banks, but split supervision with state authorities limits how much it can do. 
To provide an alternative institutional avenue for these categories of institutions to fulfil their 
mission, the RBI has created a new institution called the small finance bank, where “small” 
refers  to  the  kind  of  customer  the  bank  deals  with,  not  its  size.  With  75%  of  the  loans 
mandated to be below 25 lakhs, the small finance bank is intended to provide services to the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  excluded. Thus far, the licenses have been largely given to micro-finance institutions and one 
local area bank, but there is no reason why these cannot be given to regional rural banks 
and co-operatives in the future. The hope is that these institutions will  maintain a low cost 
structure, augmented by technology, to provide a menu of financial services to the excluded. 
New  institutions  can  also  help  ease  the  flow  of  credit.  For  instance,  credit  information 
bureaus have helped tremendously in solving both the information and incentive problem in 
retail credit. When an individual knows that a default will spoil their credit rating and cut off 
future access to credit, they have strong incentives to make timely payments. In rural India, 
we need to expand the reach of credit bureaus, including by bringing borrowing under Self 
Help  Groups  into  their  ambit.  The  use  of  Aadhaar  in  identifying  individuals  will  also  help 
eliminate duplicate records, while making existing records more accurate. Going forward, by 
the end of the year, the Credit Information Bureau of India will start providing individuals with 
one free credit report a year, so that they can check their credit rating and petition if they see 
possible discrepancies. An important proposal by the government is to give small businesses 
“Udhyog  Aadhaar”  numbers,  which  are  unique  IDs  tied  to  both  the  entity  as  well  as  the 
promoter.  Such  IDs  could  allow  small  firms  to  build  credit  histories  with  credit  bureaus, 
especially as the histories are tied to specific promoters. 
Land is often the single most valuable source of wealth in rural areas. The digitisation of land 
records,  accompanied  by  a  guarantee  of  certificates  of  final  ownership  by  the  state 
government, as proposed in Rajasthan, will ease the use of land as collateral against which 
funds can be borrowed. Even a formal recognition of share cropping agreements, as in the 
pattas registered by the state government in Andhra Pradesh, could ease access to credit for 
share croppers. 
As a final example, MSMEs get squeezed all the time by their large buyers, who pay after 
long delays. All would be better off if the MSME could sell its claim on the large buyer in the 
market. The MSME would get its money quickly, while the market would get a claim on the 
better rated large buyer instead of holding a claim on the MSME. All this will happen as the 
three  Trade-Receivables  Discounting  Systems  (TReDS)  which  the  RBI  has  licensed,  start 
later this financial year. The key is to reduce transaction costs by automating almost every 
aspect of the transaction so that even the smallest MSMEs can benefit. 
Approach 3: don’t start with credit 
We have been trying for decades to expand credit. We have focused much less on easing 
payments  and  remittances,  on  expanding  remunerative  savings  vehicles,  or  on  providing 
easy-to-obtain insurance against crop failures. In the emerging financial inclusion paradigm, 
the  Government  and  the  RBI  are  trying  to  expand  inclusion  by  encouraging  these  other 
products,  allowing  credit  to  follow  them  rather  than  lead.  Indeed,  many  successful 
organisations working with the poorest of the poor try to get them to put aside some money 
as  savings,  no  matter  how  little,  before  giving  them  loans.  Some  of  our  self-help  groups 
(SHGs) work on this principle. Not only does the savings habit, once inculcated, allow the 
customer  to  handle  the  burden  of  repayment  better,  it  may  also  lead  to  better  credit 
allocation. 
Easy payments and cash out will make formal savings more attractive. Today, a villager who 
puts money into a bank has to either trudge the “last miles” to the bank branch to take out 
her money, or wait for an itinerant banking correspondent to come by. We are engaged in 
strengthening  the  network  of  banking  correspondents;  by  creating  a  registry  of  banking 
correspondents, giving them the ability to take and give cash on behalf of any bank through 
the Aadhaar Enabled Payment System (which will also give them adequate remuneration), 
and requiring that they are adequately trained in providing financial services. Cash-in-cash-
out  points  will  expand  soon  as  the  Postal  Payment  Bank  and  telecom  affiliated  payment 
banks make post offices and telephone kiosks entry points into the financial system. Perhaps 
most interestingly, transfers from bank account to bank account will become easier in a few 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  weeks  via  mobile  through  the  Unified  Payment  Interface.  A  villager  needing  to  pay  a 
shopkeeper  only  needs  to  know  the  latter’s  alias  –  say  Ram@xyzbank.psp.  He feeds  that 
into his mobile app, writes the payment amount, puts in his password, and presses “send” 
and the payment is made, with both getting messages to that effect. Neither needs to visit 
the bank to take out or deposit money, no point of sale machine is needed. With the price of 
smartphones falling sharply, we are on the verge of solving the last mile problem. 
With the power of information technology, perhaps the analysis of the savings and payment 
patterns  of  a  client  can  indicate  which  one  of  them  is  ready  to  use  credit  well.  Small 
businesses,  which  use  the  services  of  an  on-line  internet  platform  to  sell,  can  establish  a 
verifiable record of revenues that can form the basis for loans. Indeed, we are encouraged by 
the  emergence  of  full  service  entities  that  help  the  small  business  with  marketing  and 
logistics, while tying up with a finance company to provide the business with credit. This will 
help the carpet seller from Srinagar advertise his wares to the world, even while expanding 
his business. We also propose to encourage peer-to-peer lending platforms with light-touch 
regulation,  anticipating  that  they  may  have  innovative  approaches  to  gathering  the 
information necessary to lend. 
Some issues 
Having highlighted the various approaches to expand inclusion, let me now focus on some 
important  issues  that  arise  in  managing  the  process.  These  are  1)  Know  your  customer 
requirements 2) Encouraging competition to prevent exploitation 3) Ensuring some flexibility 
and 
for  skilling  and  support 
5) Encouraging financial literacy and ensuring consumer protection. 
financial  arrangements  4)  The  need 
forgiveness 
in 
Know your customer 
Missing basic documentation is often an impediment to obtaining financial services. Knowing 
this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  steadily  eased  the  required  documentation  for  basic  financial 
services.  For  instance,  recognising  that  proof  of  address  is  difficult,  especially  for  those 
moving location, RBI requires only one document showing permanent address be presented. 
Current  address  can  be  self-certified  by  the  account  owner,  preventing  the  considerable 
problems  customers  face  when  they  migrate  inside  the  country.  Unfortunately,  the  RBI’s 
instructions sometimes do not percolate to every bank branch – which leads to unnecessary 
harassment for consumers, as vividly described by a columnist recently. Going forward, we 
have asked the Indian Banks’ Association to devise common account forms, where minimum 
RBI requirements will be printed on the back of the form. It will, for instance, become clear, 
that  a  very  basic  account  with  some  restrictions  on  amounts  and  transactions  can  be 
obtained with no official documents whatsoever. 
Competition to prevent exploitation 
As I have argued, the excluded are typically risky, as well as costly to service. At the same 
time, they are also liable to exploitation because they have so little access. Exploitation may 
come  from  a  moneylender  who  charges  usurious  rates,  or  a  banker  demanding  personal 
gratification  for  giving  a  government-subsidised  loan.  The  fundamental  way  to  deal  with 
exploitation  is  to  increase  competition  amongst  suppliers  of  financial  services.  Regulation 
can  help,  but  we  should  be  careful  that  regulation  does  not  shut  out  competition,  thus 
enhancing exploitation. 
Consider two examples: 
Politicians  are  rightfully  concerned  about  the  poor  being  charged  usurious  rates.  So  they 
often  ask  regulators  to  set  interest  rate  ceilings.  Of  course,  a  clever  regulated  lender  can 
avoid interest rate ceilings through hidden and not-so-hidden fees for making the loan. But let 
us  assume  the  even  cleverer  regulator  can  ferret  out  such  practices  (not  always  a  valid 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  assumption).  Nevertheless,  there  is  still  a  problem.  The  lender  has  to  recoup  not  just  the 
credit risk margin which compensates him for the higher default risk of lending to those on 
the  economic  edge,  but  also  the  fixed  costs  of  making,  monitoring,  and  recovering  small 
loans. If the interest rate ceiling is set too low, the regulated lender will not bother to lend 
since it is not worth his while. With competition from the regulated stifled, the poor borrower 
is  left  to  the  tender  mercies  of  the  rapacious  unregulated  moneylender.  So  interest  rate 
ceilings have to have a Goldilocks quality – not so high that they allow the uninformed poor 
to be exploited, and not so low that they kill any incentive the regulated might have to lend. 
This is the very thin line that the RBI has been following in setting interest rate ceilings for 
micro  finance  firms.  As  institutional  frameworks  develop  to  reduce  risk  in  lending,  and  as 
competition amongst lenders increases, we can lower the maximum chargeable rate. 
In a similar vein, our regulations sometime prohibit the taking of collateral for loans below a 
certain size to certain borrowers such as students or small businesses. However, if lenders 
are  not  forced  to  lend,  the  prohibition  on  taking  collateral  may  lead  to  borrowers  who  can 
indeed offer collateral being denied a loan. The impossible trinity suggests that you cannot 
limit interest rates, prohibit the taking of collateral, and still expect the borrower to have the 
same level of access to loans. Put differently, unless a regulation mandates lending, which 
they rarely do, there is always a risk that ceilings on interest rates or prohibitions on taking 
collateral will cut off institutional lending to some of the eligible. Our regulations must be set 
bearing this in mind. 
One reasonable compromise between protecting the poor and ensuring they have access is 
to  allow  only  unsecured  or  collateral-free  loans  to  qualify  for  priority  sector  treatment  or 
interest  subventions,  but  to  also  allow  institutions  to  take  collateral  if  offered  on  ordinary 
loans, provided they have a policy of charging lower rates on such secured loans. While this 
may force some who have collateral to pledge it even if they would not have to do so under 
current  regulations  (albeit  with  some  compensation  in  terms  of  a  lower  borrowing  rate),  it 
mitigates the greater evil of those who have collateral to offer being denied credit altogether. 
This is certainly an issue we have to reflect on. 
Flexibility and forgiveness 
When people complain about the high cost of credit to small businesses, they do not realise 
the biggest component of interest costs is the credit risk margin, not the real policy rate. The 
credit risk margin is not under the control of the central bank, it has to be brought down by 
focusing  on  improving  the  lending  institutional  infrastructure,  as  I  have  argued  earlier. 
However,  even  though  a  system  that  allows  for  strong  enforcement  of repayment  reduces 
the credit risk margin lenders charge, it also imposes larger costs on unfortunate borrowers. 
So, for example, should a student who chose the wrong college for studies and ended up 
having to pay back huge loans with only a mediocre job be penalised for life? We need a 
system that has some flexibility in repayment, so that those who make bad choices or have 
bad luck can get some relief. At the same time, they should not escape all responsibility, else 
we will see people borrowing excessively and misusing the proceeds, knowing they can get 
away scot free. 
Keeping  this  in  mind,  our  master circular  on  natural  calamities  allows  banks to  restructure 
agricultural loans without classifying them NPA, provided there are widespread crop losses in 
the  local  area.  This  prevents  individuals  from  exploiting  the  system,  while  giving  collective 
relief when the area is hit. Similarly, we have advocated that student loans be structured with 
an  optional  moratorium  period,  so  that  a  borrower  can  survive  periods  of  unemployment 
without  being  permanently  labeled  a  defaulter.  Going  forward,  we  should  accept  the 
possibility of individuals, including farmers, declaring bankruptcy and being relieved of their 
debts, provided this remedy is used sparingly, and the individual chooses bankruptcy as a 
last choice, knowing he will lose assets and be excluded from borrowing for a period. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Skilling and support 
There is a widely perpetuated myth that access to financial services is all that is necessary to 
set  a  poor  farm  worker  on  her  way  to  riches.  This  is  simply  not  true.  Clearly,  access  to 
institutional  credit  can  help  her  pay  back  a  money  lender,  and  thus  give  her  some  relief. 
Access to a bank account can allow her to put aside some savings, which protects them from 
the  demands  of  needy  relatives.  But  to  generate  income  in  a  sustainable  way,  she  needs 
help – in acquiring the skills necessary to raise chicken or cows or grow flowers, in marketing 
that product, and in learning how to manage funds. Often, credit offered without such support 
simply drives her further into debt. 
Sometimes,  people  learn  from  neighbours  as  clusters  start  undertaking  an  activity. 
Sometimes people already know a marketable skill and only lack credit to buy the necessary 
raw material to produce or expand. More commonly, however, those who want to encourage 
micro-entrepreneurship have to work on a variety of supporting actions other than just credit, 
especially  skilling.  Fortunately,  in  India  we  have  a  flourishing  NGO  movement  that  often 
works  with  the  government  to  provide  the  necessary  support  –  as  in  the  Jivika  rural 
livelihoods program in Bihar. Increasingly, some banks have adopted a holistic approach to 
support as they encourage micro-entrepreneurship. As the Government’s Skill India program 
expands, it will produce more people who can use credit well. Stronger linkages between the 
program and financial institutions will have to be built. 
Financial literacy and consumer protection 
Finally,  as  the  excluded  are  drawn  into  formal  financial  services,  they  will  encounter 
aggressive  selling  and  in  some  cases,  outright  mis-selling.  At  the  Reserve  Bank,  we  are 
conscious of our need to expand financial literacy so that the consumer is more aware. In the 
coming  weeks,  we  will  be  launching  a  nationwide  campaign  trying  to  impart  some  basic 
messages  on  sound  financial  practice.  We  are  also  looking  to  have  financial  education 
included  in  the  school  curriculum  across the  country. We  need to  make  a  special  effort  in 
rural areas. RBI, in June 2012, advised banks to set up Financial Literacy centres (FLC) in all 
the  districts  of  the  country.  Banks  have  been  further  advised  to  scale  up  financial  literacy 
efforts through conduct of outdoor Financial Literacy Camps, at least once a month, both by 
the FLCs and also by all the rural branches. Banks have so far set up 1,329 FLCs as at the 
end of December 2015. 
In 2015, RBI came out with 5 principles that banks had to follow in dealing with customers. 
We asked banks to implement this Charter of Consumer Rights, and asked them to appoint 
an  internal  ombudsman  to  monitor  the  grievance  redressal  process. We now  will  examine 
how banks are faring, and whether further regulations are needed to strengthen consumer 
protection. We will especially focus on mis-selling of third party products such as insurance, 
as  well  as  the  extension  of  adequate grievance redressal to rural  areas,  including through 
RBI’s ombudsman scheme. 
Conclusion 
The country has come a long way in the process of financial inclusion, but still has a way to 
go.  We  are  steadily  moving  from  mandates,  subsidies,  and  reliance  on  the  public  sector 
banks  for  inclusion  to  creating  enabling  frameworks  that  make  it  attractive  for  all  financial 
institutions  to  target  the  excluded,  even  while  the  interests  of  the  excluded  are  protected 
through education, competition and regulation. I am confident that in the foreseeable future, 
we will bring formal financial services to every Indian who wants them. Financial inclusion will 
be  an  important  element  in  ensuring  access  and  equity,  necessary  building  blocks  for  the 
sustainable growth of our country. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
