  Peter Praet: The European Central Bank’s monetary policy response to 
disinflationary pressures 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the  conference  “The  ECB  and  Its  Watchers  XVII”,  organised  by  the  Center  for  Financial 
Studies, Frankfurt am Main, 7 April 2016. 
 Since June 2014, the ECB has adopted a series of monetary policy measures to ward off the 
risk of a too prolonged period of low inflation. There is a strong rationale for why we have 
acted to lift inflation back towards our objective, which I laid out in a recent speech in Rome.1 
What  I  would  like  to  discuss  in  my  remarks  this  morning  is  how  our  measures  work  in 
achieving this. 
The ECB’s crisis response 
It  is  useful  to  briefly  recall  what  led  us  to  our  current  monetary  policy  stance  and  the 
particular measures the ECB has adopted to articulate it. Since autumn 2008, the ECB has 
been confronted with various episodes of downside risks to price stability. 
In the months following the Lehman demise, those risks arose principally from the threat that 
the  liquidity  crunch  in  the  interbank  market  would  lead  to  a  disorderly  deleveraging  of  the 
banking  sector,  which  would  have  had  serious  consequences  for  real  activity  and  price 
stability.  The  ECB  provided  liquidity  elastically  to  the  banking  sector  and  with  increasingly 
long  durations,  which  restored  confidence  in  the  financial  system.  Our  balance  sheet 
expanded  to  unprecedented  levels,  but  it  was  temporary  and  non-discretionary.  As  banks 
started  actively  contracting  their  exposures  to  a  worsening  economy,  they  reimbursed  the 
loans from the ECB. 
A next set of risks to price stability surrounded the sovereign debt crisis. Unwarranted fears 
about future of the euro area led to a dramatic widening of sovereign spreads, interrupting 
monetary  transmission  and  posing  severe  risks  for  inflation  dynamics.  The  ECB  acted  to 
preserve price stability through its Outright Monetary Transactions programme. This proved 
to  be  a  powerful  circuit  breaker,  successfully  truncating  the  worst  tail  of  the  distribution  of 
possible  macroeconomic  outcomes.  But  the  confidence  crisis  nonetheless  left  a  harmful 
heritage on transmission. 
Banks  in  a  vast  portion  of  the  euro  area  lost  their  willingness  and  capacity  to  keep  credit 
flowing  to  the real  economy.  Credit  conditions  tightened, feeding  back  into  weak  domestic 
demand and threatening the economy with persistent disinflationary forces. 
By summer 2014, the ECB was confronting a further set of risks to price stability linked to a 
too prolonged period of low inflation. The economic recovery had lost momentum, removing 
a key driver of the reflation scenario we had anticipated. As Mario Draghi underlined in his 
speech  in  Jackson  Hole  in  August  of  that  year2,  this  situation  required  a  comprehensive 
policy response by euro area authorities of structural reform policies and policies to support 
aggregate demand, of which stronger monetary policy accommodation was one element. 
                                                
1  See Praet, P. (2016), “The ECB’s fight against low inflation: reasons and consequences”, speech by at LUISS 
School of European Political Economy, Rome, 4 April 2016. 
2  Draghi,  M.  (2014),  “Unemployment  in  the  euro  area”,  annual  central  bank  symposium  in  Jackson  Hole,  22 
August 2014. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  By this point our ability to provide that additional accommodation through standard measures 
was constrained as policy interest rates approached zero. Like other central banks3, we had 
learned that the likelihood of hitting zero interest rates had been severely under-estimated in 
our  previous  analysis4.  We  therefore  achieved  the  expansion  of  our  stance  through  three 
new,  non-standard  instruments:  a  series  of  targeted  long-term  refinancing  operations 
(TLTROs); a negative deposit facility rate (DFR); and an asset purchase programme (APP) 
including private and public securities. 
As new shocks have rattled the economy since 2014, our policy package has been rescaled 
by the Governing Council, notably at its meetings in January 2015, December 2015 and most 
recently  in  March  2016.  At  this  March  meeting  we  also  rebalanced  our  package  across 
instruments,  placing  greater  emphasis  on  the  credit  easing  dimension  by  increasing  the 
intensity of our asset purchases and strengthening the incentives embedded in the TLTROs. 
Augmenting these  instruments  is  our forward guidance. This  began  in  July  2013  when  we 
provided guidance on the likely path of policy rates looking forward, although at this time the 
measure  was  intended  more  to  insulate  our  money  market  conditions  from  the  volatility 
imported from the US “taper tantrum” than to act as an active instrument of accommodation. 
In  the  event,  the  policy  helped  decoupling  the  risk-free  curve  from  outside  influences  and 
made it more appropriate to the underlying conditions we were facing. Econometric analysis 
supports  the  conclusion  that  our  forward  guidance  has  helped  stabilise  money  market 
conditions  –  that  is,  making  the  term  structure  of  forward  rates  less  responsive  to 
macroeconomic surprises5. 
We  later  complemented  this  interest  rate  guidance  with  a  new  form  of  forward  guidance 
intended  to  link  our  asset  purchases to  our  objective.  Today  –  after those  three  rounds  of 
recalibrations  –  we  say  that  the  APP  is  intended  to  run  until  the  end  of  March  2017,  or 
beyond,  if  necessary,  and  in  any  case  until  the  Governing  Council  sees  a  sustained 
adjustment in the path of inflation consistent with our objective. At our last monetary policy 
meeting  in  March  we  also  clarified  the  interaction  between  our  rate  and  asset  purchase 
guidance, namely that we expect the key ECB interest rates to remain at present or lower 
levels well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. 
Transmission channels of the credit easing package 
Our decision to respond to emerging shocks by rescaling our existing measures – rather than 
adopting  new  ones  –  has  hinged  on  our  confidence  that  those  measures  are  effective  in 
lifting  inflation  back  towards  our  objective.  This  is  based  on  two  assumptions  about  the 
monetary transmission process: first, that our policy package has led to improved financial 
and  borrowing  conditions;  and  second,  that  improved  financial  and  borrowing  conditions 
have led and will lead to higher real activity, reduced economic slack and upward pressure 
on inflation. 
How  justified  are  we  in  making  these  assumptions?  In  principle,  the  mechanisms  through 
which our policy measures should boost the economy are clear. They are designed to work 
as  a  package,  easing  financial  conditions  through  a  combination  of  mutually  reinforcing 
                                                
3  Chung, H., J.-P., Laforte, D. Reifschneider and J. Williams (2011), “Have We Underestimated the Likelihood 
and Severity of Zero Lower Bound Events?”, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series, 
January 2011. 
4  Coenen, G. (2003), “Zero lower bound: is it a problem in the euro area?”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 269, 
September 2003. 
5  ECB analysis looking at time-varying sensitivity of forward rates to surprises, using daily rolling regressions, 
finds that since the introduction of forward guidance forward rates with maturity up to 3-year have been less 
sensitive to macroeconomic surprises. This has been important to keep markets focused on levels – i.e. the 
degree of slack in the economy – and not on rates of change – i.e. the latest conjunctural indicator. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  channels. This contributes to a lower cost of debt finance, a lower cost of equity and a lower 
exchange rate, all of which contribute to raising consumption and investment. 
First,  via  the  portfolio  rebalancing  channel,  the  measures  lower  yields  on  a  wide  array  of 
financial  assets,  implying  a  broad-based  easing  of  financial  conditions.  The  primary 
instrument  in  this  regard  is  the  APP,  which  compresses  the  term  premia  which  are 
incorporated in risk-free interest rates and thereby encourages investors to move up in the 
maturity and risk ladder and shift to other, non-targeted asset classes. The negative DFR in 
turn  discourages  selling  agents  from  hoarding  the  additional  liquidity,  speeding  up  the 
process of asset reallocation and reinforcing the downside pressure on the long end of the 
term structure of interest rates. 
Second, via the direct pass-through channel, our package eases borrowing conditions in the 
real  economy  by  easing  banks’  refinancing  conditions  and  supporting  non-financial 
corporates  directly.  This  channel  is  perhaps  most  prominent  in  the  case  of  the  TLTROs, 
which through built-in incentive mechanisms ensures that the funding cost benefit is passed 
on  to  borrowers.  It  also  applies  to  our  purchases  of  ABS  and  covered  bonds,  which 
encourage banks to increase their supply of loans that can be securitised, and more recently 
our decision to start a corporate bond purchase programme. In addition, substitution effects 
induced  by  the  TLTROs  can  result  in  a  reduction  in  the  supply  of  bank  bonds,  which 
translates into lower yield on bank bonds for the financial sector as a whole. 
In  parallel,  portfolio  rebalancing  supports  this  direct  pass-through  channel,  as  lower  term 
spreads on public securities encourage a shift in the composition of banks’ portfolios toward 
other types of exposures with a higher risk-adjusted return, especially loans. The resulting 
increase in credit supply lowers its cost. 
Third, via the signalling channel, the policy package triggers a downward revision of market 
expectations for future short-term interest rates, which aids portfolio rebalancing and direct 
pass-through  effects  by  further  flattening  the  risk-free  curve.  In  the  case  of  the  DFR,  our 
forward guidance that rates will stay at present or lower levels for an extended period of time 
–  and  beyond  our  net  asset  purchases  –  tilts  downwards  the  probability  distribution  of the 
expected  path  of  future  rates.  The  signalling  channel  also  helps  stabilise  inflation 
expectations,  thereby  preventing  an  unwarranted  tightening  in  real  long-term  rates  with 
negative effects on investment and consumption. 
Impact on financial conditions 
How do we know that these positive effects of our policy package are indeed occurring and 
that  they  are  sufficiently  powerful  to  achieve  the  desired  outcomes?  In  terms  of  financial 
conditions, the evidence so far suggests that the impact of our policy has been substantial. 
Since  June  2014,  we  have  seen  a  broad-based  easing  in  money  market  conditions,  long-
term government bond yields, corporate and bank bond yields, bank lending rates to firms 
and households, and the growth of money and credit. 
Using  a  number  of  econometric  techniques,  we  find  that  without  our  policy  measures, 
financial conditions would be considerably tighter today. Events studies conducted by ECB 
staff  give  evidence  about  the  central  role  of  our  policy  package  in  the  broader  easing  of 
financial conditions since June 2014.6 A sizeable impact is estimated for long-term sovereign 
bonds – around 90% of the total fall in euro area yields. The spillovers to yields of other asset 
classes  are  significant,  too,  in  the  case  of  euro  area  financial  and  non-financial  corporate 
bonds. While the stock market has overall underperformed in the period since June 2014, we 
estimate that without our measures stock prices would be notably lower. 
                                                
6  For  more  on  the  methodology  behind  these  estimations  see  ECB  (2015),  “The  transmission  of  the  ECB’s 
recent non-standard monetary policy measures”, Box 2, Economic Bulletin, Issue 7/2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On top of this, ECB analysis finds that our policy package has had a substantial direct effect 
on  bank  lending  rates,  as  well  as  an  indirect  effect  on  lending  conditions  through  their 
marked impact on long-term government bond yields.7 This effect has been further reinforced 
by the beneficial impact of lower long-term yields on the macroeconomic outlook and hence 
on  the  macroeconomic  risk  embedded  in  lending  rates.  Counterfactual  simulations  by  our 
staff  attribute  40–60bps  in  the  decline  in  bank  lending  rates  to  the  indirect  impact  of  the 
TLTROs and APP through this channel.8 
We  have  also  tested  the  effectiveness  of  our  measures  using  more  micro  analysis,  for 
instance by gauging how they have affected the behaviour of TLTRO borrowers relative to 
non-borrowers. This analysis shows that TLTRO borrowers have reduced their recourse to 
wholesale funding more than for other banks, allowing them to lower their funding costs. This 
has in turn raised bank bond prices and, in combination with spillover effects from the APP, 
helped suppress the cost of financing for banks across euro area countries, benefiting banks 
regardless of their recourse to Eurosystem’s lending operations. The role of our measures as 
a  driver  of  these  developments  is  confirmed  by  banks’  responses  to  the  Bank  Lending 
Survey (BLS). 
This  funding  improvement  can  in  turn  be  seen  in  bank  lending  conditions:  analysis  of  the 
bidding  of  banks  in  TLTROs  shows  that  there  has  been  a  close  relationship  between 
participation  in  these  operations  and  lending  behaviour,  especially  in  vulnerable  countries. 
We find  that  banks  located  in  vulnerable  countries  that  have  participated  in  TLTROs  have 
lowered their lending rates by more than non-participants. This has resulted both from the 
lower financing costs elicited by the TLTRO, which has created scope for banks to reduce 
lending  rates,  and  the  increased  lender  competition  for  good  credit  it  has  spurred.  These 
patterns are again confirmed by the responses to the BLS9. 
Micro evidence confirms that the negative DFR has empowered the APP, too.10 ECB staff 
research  finds  that  bank  balance  sheet  reactions  to  holdings  of  excess  liquidity  have 
changed as a result of this policy: for example, banks in less vulnerable euro area countries 
were found to have granted more loans to the real economy than would have been the case 
without negative rates. In addition, banks with large holdings of excess liquidity, in particular 
in less-vulnerable Member States, were found to have rebalanced significantly more towards 
non-domestic euro area government bonds than absent the negative DFR. This behaviour is 
likely  to  have  contributed  to  the  fall  a  reduction  in  fragmentation  and  a  more  uniform 
transmission of monetary policy, in the past year or so. 
In  sum,  relative  to  the  counterfactual  scenario,  our  policy  package  has  had  a  tangible 
improvement in financial and borrowing conditions. 
Impact on output and inflation 
This improvement is a sign that our measures have cleared important hurdles on their way to 
supporting  the  macroeconomy.  What  we  have  not  seen  yet,  however,  is  a  significant 
recovery  in  the  path  of  either  headline  or  core  inflation.  This  has  led  some  observers  to 
                                                
7  Altavilla C., G. Carboni, R. Motto (2015), “Asset purchase programmes and financial markets: lessons from 
the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No. 1864. 
8  These estimates are based on a counterfactual simulation of lending rates using a panel BVAR of euro area 
banks  and  the  long-run  effect  of  lower  government  bond  yields  on  NFC  lending  rates  using  a  panel-error 
correction model, also estimated at bank level. 
9  ECB  (2015),  “The  transmission  of  the  ECB’s  recent  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures”,  Economic 
Bulletin, Issue 7/2015. 
10  S.  Demiralp,  J.  Eisenschmidt  and  T.  Vlassopoulos,  (2016),  “The  impact  of  negative  interest  rates  on  bank 
balance sheets: Evidence from the euro area”, ECB mimeo. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  question  whether  the  second  leg  of  the  transmission  –  from  financial  conditions  to  real 
activity and inflation – is still intact. 
Of  course,  the  fact  that  this  easing  has  occurred  concurrently  with  the  economy  receiving 
new shocks poses a fundamental identification problem. Or put another way, we have to be 
careful to avoid assessing monetary policy by “looking out the window”.11 This describes the 
process of eyeing where certain key variables are today compared with the beginning of the 
policy,  and  then  concluding  that  the  policy  has  succeeded  or  failed.  But  this  is  not  how 
rigorous economic analysis is conducted. Given that the economy is never static, one always 
needs  to  assess  a  counterfactual  scenario;  what  would  have  transpired  without  the  policy 
action. 
In  that  context  counterfactual  analysis  has  also  helped  us  to  measure  the  impact  of  our 
measures along another dimension: their macroeconomic propagation. 
Our  impact  assessment  on  GDP  and  inflation  spans  a  large  and  diverse  suite  of  models, 
reflecting  alternative  modelling  traditions,  and  capturing  different  transmission  channels,  in 
particular  in  relation  to  the  impact  of  asset  purchases.  Some  models  mainly  draw  on 
empirical  time-series methodologies,  while  others  draw  on  (semi-)structural  macro  models, 
with an important role for financial frictions, and on macro-finance term structure models. 
Intuitively,  the  various  model  assessments  share  the  idea  that  the  relevant  variable  in 
modelling the impact of the APP is the expected future path of central bank asset holdings 
(i.e. the evolution of the “stock” of assets) under the programme. In some models, the full 
path  of  the  central  bank  portfolio  enters  the  decision  problem  of  economic  agents  upon 
announcement  of  the  programme.  This  is  consistent  with  empirical  evidence  from  event 
studies  which  supports  the  view  that  financial  markets  respond  on  impact  to  the 
announcement of asset purchases, and even prior to the announcement when expectations 
of a programme build up. 
At  the  same  time,  for  robustness  considerations  some  models  have  entertained  the 
alternative  assumption  that  asset  purchase  programmes  affect  the  behaviour  of  economic 
agents only gradually. Such effects are compatible with a situation in which financial markets 
learn  over  time  the  implications  of  the  central  bank’s  asset  purchases,  or  in  which  such 
purchases  trigger  changes  in  local  liquidity  conditions.  A  related  distinction  across  those 
model assessments is how this expected future path of asset purchases is mapped into the 
macroeconomy.  Many  of  these  models  include  directly  the  quantity  of  central  bank  asset 
purchases,  and  embed  mechanisms  that  allow  the  transmission  of  purchases  to  the 
economy and inflation. The remainder of the models indirectly back out the effect of asset 
purchases on the economy on the basis of a two-step approach. 
The  results  from  this  comprehensive  exercise  suggest  that,  relative  to  the  counterfactual 
scenario,  our  measures  (excluding  the  March  2016  decisions)  have  provided  significant 
support  to  output  and  inflation.  In  the  absence  of  our  policy  package  inflation  would  have 
been negative in 2015. In 2016 it would have been at least half a percentage point lower than 
we forecast currently and around half a percentage point lower in 2017. The impact of the 
policy  measures  on  euro  area  GDP  is  also  sizeable  (again  excluding  the  March  2016 
decisions).  According to  the  staff  assessment,  our  policy  is  contributing to  raise  euro  area 
GDP by around 1.5% in the period 2015–18. 
In  sum,  while  this  staff  assessment  must  be  qualified,  the  results  of  our  counterfactual 
simulations show that the expected return of inflation to levels closer to our objective relies to 
a significant extent on continued monetary accommodation. If inflation has remained weak, it 
is  not  because  policy  has  been  ineffective,  but  rather  because  new  shocks  have  hit  the 
economy  in  the  meantime.  The  scaling-up  of  our  policy  measures  has  hence  been  the 
                                                
11  Blinder, A. (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, Cambridge: MIT Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  appropriate response in the face of intensifying headwinds; indeed, had it not been for these 
measures, the economic environment would likely be considerably more troubling today. 
If further adverse shocks were to materialise, our measures could be recalibrated once more 
commensurate  with  the  strength  of  the  headwind,  also  taking  into  account  possible  side-
effects. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
The monetary policy package the ECB has adopted since June 2014 has been effective. It 
has  led  to  a  substantial  easing  of  financial  conditions,  and  this  has  in  turn  led  to  an 
improvement in both output and inflation relative to counterfactual scenarios. Arguments that 
our policy has not worked because inflation has remained subdued are misguided, since they 
do not take into account the series of shocks we have faced between mid-2014 and today. 
That  being  said,  we  have  consistently  maintained  since  summer  2014  that  a  strong  and 
sustainable  recovery  the  crisis  requires  a  comprehensive  response  that  involves  all 
economic policies. A return to higher structural growth and employment cannot depend on 
monetary policy. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
