  Ignazio Visco: Asset quality and the new framework for managing 
banking crises in Europe 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  “Workshop  on 
Stability of the Banking System”, organised by the European University Institute (EUI) on the 
occasion of the annual conference “The State of the Union”, Florence, 5 May 2016. 
 The sharp adjustment recorded in a number of financial market segments over the last few 
months  somewhat  reflects  both  worldwide  and  EU  factors.  Rising  uncertainty  on  world 
growth  prospects,  the  commodity  price  drops,  persistent  low  levels  of  inflation  and 
geopolitical risks may all have played a role. Italian and other European banks were hit hard, 
due  also  to  concerns  on  asset  quality  and  regulatory  uncertainty,  the  latter  in  part,  if  not 
exclusively,  related  to  the  implementation  of  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution  Directive 
(BRRD), the new European bank resolution framework fully in place since the start of this 
year. 
I will focus today on these two issues: asset quality and the new framework for managing 
banking crises in Europe. 
Asset quality 
Concerns about asset quality seem to focus on the valuation of the still large amount of non- 
performing loans (NPLs) in banks’ banking books and of Level 2/3 assets in trading books, 
whose “fair value” is at least partly determined by banks’ internal models and, then, regarded 
as relatively opaque by the markets. 
In the case of Italian banks, market concerns about asset quality are to be taken seriously 
and should not be casually dismissed, even if there are good reasons to believe that they are 
somewhat overstated. 
First, at 18 per cent of total loans on a gross basis as of December 2015, Italian banks’ NPLs 
–  whose  value,  net  of  provisions,  is  around  €200bn  –  are  certainly  sizeable.  It  should 
however be observed that banks have on average a high level of guarantees against NPLs; 
real  estate  collateral,  in  particular,  amounts  to  approximately  €160bn.  Bad  loans  (or 
“sofferenze”, i.e. those to debtors in de jure or de facto state of insolvency, whose current net 
value amounts to €87bn) are more than fully covered by real estate collateral (€85bn) and 
other personal guarantees (€37bn). Provisions for NPLs have steadily increased since mid-
2012; at 45 per cent, coverage ratios are now in line with the average for the main EU banks 
(44 per cent); they are at about 60 per cent for bad loans. 
Second, the deterioration in credit quality, a legacy of the deep and prolonged recession, has 
been recently abating. In the fourth quarter of 2015 the flow of new NPLs fell, as a ratio to 
outstanding loans, to the lowest level since 2008 (3.3 per cent, compared with a peak of 6.0 
per cent at the end of 2013). The rate of new bad loans is projected to decline further this 
year. The NPL ratio is finally peaking; a slight decline was actually observed in Q4-2015 for 
each of the top 5 banking groups. 
Third, in recent months there has been a perception in the market (and in the press) that the 
Supervisory Board of the SSM (the single supervisor in the euro area) is pushing banks to 
rapidly  dispose  of  their  NPLs.  Such  perception  might  also  have  been  among  the  drivers 
behind the significant fall of euro-area (and Italian in particular) bank stock prices. However, 
the perception is wrong, as the President of the ECB and the Chair of the Supervisory Board 
have  recently,  publicly,  clarified.  Indeed,  an  accurate  and  effective  supervisory  policy  on 
NPLs must assess the situation at each specific bank. A policy that, instead, pushes banks 
across the board to rapidly dispose of NPLs in the market would result in a massive transfer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  of wealth from banks to private (speculative) investors that base their choices upon very high 
risk premiums and related returns. 
I  am  convinced  that  dealing  with  systemic  NPL  issues  in  Italy  necessarily  requires  a 
comprehensive  strategy:  improving  banks’  operational  environment  to  manage  NPLs; 
removing  inefficiencies  in  the  judicial  and  extra-judicial  procedures  that  make  the  “time  to 
recovery” longer than in the rest of Europe; kick-starting the NPL market, which is currently 
very  thin  and  hence  plays  little  role  in  resolving  the  NPL  issue.  On  their  side,  supervisory 
authorities (both national and European) for some time have been strongly pushing banks to 
further improve their on-balance sheet management of NPLs. 
In the course of last year it became clear that the establishment of a “bad bank” (or, more 
properly, an “asset management company” dedicated to the system-wide disposal of NPLs) 
with  public  support  and/or  participation  would  have  been  in  contrast  with  the  interpretation 
now given by the European Commission to rules on state aid. I had long been advocating the 
need  for  measures  meant  not  to  alleviate  the  difficulties  of  some  specific  bank  but  rather 
designed to reduce the impact of the deep and protracted recession that has hit the Italian 
economy  since  the  global  financial  crisis:  a  solution  that  had  been  importantly  adopted  in 
other countries, evidently under a different regime and interpretation of the role of state aid 
rules. 
As a consequence, last January the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance has reached an 
agreement  with  the  European  Commission  on  a  government  guarantee  scheme for  senior 
tranches of securitised bad loans (the so called GACS). These guarantees comply with state 
aid rules as they are set up so not to be in contrast with what could be considered as market 
prices for NPLs, even if in Italy a deep and well established secondary market for NPLs does 
not exist. Therefore, the agreement marks a step toward the establishment of such a market, 
and also helps by ending the uncertainty accumulated over previous months. 
Other measures recently adopted by the Italian authorities are also meant to address the root 
causes of the high stock of NPLs. Those on fiscal deductibility of provisioning have removed 
a  penalising  tax  treatment  of  Italian  banks.  Last  summer  a  first  set  of  measures  on 
bankruptcy  and  foreclosure  proceedings  were  adopted  to  speed  up  credit  recovery.  The 
delays and widespread obstacles to court and out-of-court settlement of disputes are in fact a 
very important reason for the very high stock of NPLs in banks’ balance sheets: a reduction 
of two years in credit recovery times could even lead to halving the level of bad debts as a 
share of the total. Feedback from market operators indicates that some effects are beginning 
to be seen. 
In the last weeks, a private alternative investment fund (Atlante, managed by an independent 
Italian asset management company) has been first set up and then formally launched, with a 
twofold purpose. First, it is meant to support rights issues of Italian banks to reduce the risk 
that  in  the  light  of  the  current  difficult  market  environment  such  issues  would  fail,  with 
potential  spillover  effects  to  other  Italian  banks  and  ultimately  to  the  entire  economy  (and 
there  has  already  been  a  case  where  substantial  support  has  been  provided).  Second,  it 
could invest in bad loans (mainly junior and possibly also mezzanine tranches of securitised 
bad loans) at prices that may benefit from the organisation, expertise and servicing available 
within the banking system. 
The fund has raised resources (more than €4bn) from Italian and foreign investors (banks, 
insurance companies and other institutional investors). Even if the resources available so far 
are  somewhat  limited,  the  setting  up  of  the  fund  might  well  help  to  unlock  the  market  for 
NPLs,  therefore  contributing  –  from  its  very  start  –  to  the  solution  of  the  NPL  issue,  a 
solution,  however,  that  cannot  but  take  a  non-negligible  amount  of  time.  Being  a 
private/market  operation,  it  will  be  compliant  with  the  current  European  regulation  and 
consistent with the competition framework. 
An important contribution to solving the NPL issue should also come from the new measures 
to speed up the recovery procedures just announced by the Government, which I very much 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  welcome  and  on  which  a  thorough  evaluation  of  its  likely  quantitative  impact  is  presently 
under way. 
The new European framework for managing banking crises 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  challenges  we  are  currently  facing,  in  Italy  like  in  other  European 
countries, in dealing with weak banks, as a result of the financial and economic crisis. 
The  legislation  on  banking  crises  has  two  potentially  conflicting  objectives:  maintaining 
financial  stability  –  which  leads  to  interventions  in  support  of  troubled  banks  to  avoid 
systemic  repercussions  –  and  preventing  banks  from  behaving  opportunistically  in  the 
expectation of public intervention. Following the global financial crisis, the prevailing position 
at an international level has leaned towards the latter objective, far more so than in the past. 
This change in direction has certainly been influenced by the massive public interventions for 
rescuing banks that have weighed heavily on the state finances of many countries, in some 
cases jeopardising their fiscal sustainability. 
In  the  European  legislation  there  have  been  rapid,  sweeping  changes.  In  2013  a 
Communication  from  the  DG  Competition  of  the  European  Commission  provided  for  the 
immediate application of a new burden-sharing scheme which, in the event of a bank crisis, 
would impose losses not only on shares but also on subordinated bonds as a prerequisite for 
public  intervention.  In  2014  the  BRRD,  approved  by  the  Council  and  the  European 
Parliament, extended that scheme, starting from this year, to include also ordinary bonds and 
deposits of over €100,000 (i.e., the bail-in). 
I have recently emphasised, also in the light of the (bad) experience we have gained in Italy 
with the resolution of four small banks last November, the importance of reconsidering the 
adequacy of the new legislative framework for managing banking crises. Just as the crisis 
has impaired the quality of bank credit, the legislative response on crisis management has 
engendered  uncertainty  about  investing  in  bank  liabilities.  An  instrument  –  the  bail-in  – 
devised  to  reduce  the  impact  of  a  crisis  must  not  create  the  premises  to  make  one  more 
likely:  if  this  is the  case,  its  design  and/or  its  implementation must  be rethought. We must 
strike the right balance: indeed, investors who have been hit by a bail-in will find no comfort 
in  the  fact  that  they  have  been  protected  as  taxpayers.  And  we  should  not  rule  out  the 
possibility of temporary public support in the event of systemic bank crises, when the use of 
a bail-in is not sufficient to achieve the resolution objectives but instead risks compromising 
financial stability. 
I have not been alone in advocating such reconsideration. The need to assess the degree of 
flexibility  of  the  BRRD  during  the  review  of  the  directive  scheduled  to  take  place  by  June 
2018  was  recalled,  among  others,  by  the  IMF  in  its  Global  Financial  Stability  Report 
published a few weeks ago. It highlighted the necessity of applying the new rules (including 
those on state aid) with flexibility and caution during the changeover to the new regime, when 
public intervention is no longer admissible but the banks have not yet put in place sufficient 
buffers to absorb losses without undesired effects on systemic stability. A very recent CEPS 
paper by Micossi, Bruzzone and Cassella is a welcome contribution on these issues. 
Indeed,  in  March  2013,  during  the  BRRD  negotiations  at  the  EU  Council  of  Ministers,  the 
Bank of Italy and the Ministry of Economy and Finance presented a technical “non-paper” to 
all  the  other  country  delegations  in  order  to  illustrate  the  reasons  for  our  preference  for 
contractual  (or  targeted)  bail-ins,  to  be  applied  only  to  newly-issued  securities  (i.e.  not 
applied retroactively to securities issued under a different regulatory regime) that contain a 
specific  clause  in  the  contract  recognising  the  power  of  the  authorities  to  write  down  or 
convert the securities if the conditions for starting a resolution procedure were met. 
We were – and remain – convinced that this approach would have given the authorities a 
credible  tool  to  be  used  to  resolve  a  bank  crisis  effectively,  with  no  undesired  effects  on 
financial  stability  and  at  no  extra  cost  to  the  taxpayer.  On  the  contrary,  according  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  approach that has prevailed, a wide range of liabilities are subject to bail-ins, with very few 
exceptions, large corporate sight deposits included and a rather short learning time provided 
to creditors – especially retail ones. All this, in a world of asymmetric information, can indeed 
be a source of serious liquidity risk and financial instability. 
The specific nature of the banking sector and the objective of financial stability should also 
be treated in a more structured way in the European Commission’s approach to competition 
and state aid. Adopted in 2013 – and based on the unfortunately premature conviction that 
the difficulties of European banks had by then been dealt with – the current approach greatly 
limits  government  intervention  to  support  banks  that  are  fundamentally  viable  in  order  to 
remedy  market  failures  or  negative  externalities  that  are  not  originated  by  managerial 
shortcomings. 
Indeed, according to the BRRD, any public intervention that counts as state aid (and is not 
among the very few exceptions allowed by the directive) automatically triggers the resolution 
procedure.  This,  in  turn,  determines  an  overlap  and,  as  a  result,  the  prevalence  of 
competition  and  state  aid  policy  objectives  over  the  objective  of  safeguarding  financial 
stability. In other words, sufficient account is not taken of the fact that financial stability is of 
vital importance to the real economy. 
 To  conclude,  in  the  financial  sector  there  are  certainly  risks  of  moral  hazard  as  well  as 
abuses  and  frauds,  which  the  authorities,  including  banking  supervisors,  must  prevent  as 
effectively  as  possible.  But  prevention  is  not  always  possible  and  in  periods  of  poor 
macroeconomic conditions risks of malpractice inevitably rise. This is why we need an overall 
resilient  system,  with  banks  well  capitalised,  better  managed  and  more  transparent, 
costumers  with  higher  levels  of financial  education  and  authorities  with  severe  sanctioning 
powers. This notwithstanding, we have learned that market failures are not infrequent, and 
information  asymmetries  and  expectations’  coordination  problems  may  trigger  sudden  and 
possibly long waves of euphoria or panic. 
It  is  by  now  clear  that  markets  are  not  always  self-equilibrating  and  when  they  fail  the 
consequences may be rather serious. On the other hand, markets should operate as much 
as  possible  without  their  force  being  bridled.  There  is  no  foolproof  formula  for  striking  this 
balance.  Clear  rules,  impartially  applied,  are  essential,  but  so  is  the  ability  to  make  sound 
and  timely  decisions  in  the  light  of  circumstances.  In  the  case  of  banks,  this  calls  for  the 
possibility to recur to public backstops, and in a Union like ours also a supranational one, in 
the  presence  of  systemic  risks  and  risks  of  contagion.  This  is  something  that  still 
differentiates,  contrary  to  a  new  apparently  established  belief,  banks  from  enterprises 
operating in different industrial sectors. 
To  repeat  something  that  I  said  a  year  ago,  before  the  start  of  the  current  debate  on  the 
consequences of the new regulatory set-up, substantial observance of the rules on market 
protection  and  competition  remain  indispensable.  However,  in  assessing  the  public  role  in 
the prevention and resolution of crises, and not only financial crises, I believe that greater 
consideration  should  be  given  to  the  characteristics  that  distinguish  policies  designed  to 
activate market mechanisms from state aid that distorts competition. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
