   John Iannis Mourmouras: A post-Brexit assessment of risks to debt 
sustainability in the euro area 
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 
third OMFIF Main Meeting in North America, St. Louis, 14 July 2016. 
 Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the institutions I am 
affiliated with. 
This is an abridged version. 
The 2008 global financial crisis has led to a rapid accumulation of government debt in most 
countries  of  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  the  euro  area  government  gross  debt-to-GDP  ratio  is 
estimated to have risen by 28 percentage points from its pre-crisis level in 2007 to stand at 
93% in 2015. However, financing concerns are currently mitigated by low sovereign funding 
costs  for  almost  all  sovereign  rating  categories  and  solid  demand  for  government  bonds 
against  the  backdrop  of  the  Eurosystem’s  ongoing  asset  purchase  programme (QE). Total 
debt service of euro area governments for the next 12 months is around 16% of GDP (around 
€1.6 trillion), a figure which comprises 13.9% of principal and 2.1% of interest expenditure. It 
is true, however, that despite the fact that debt servicing is much easier today given that lower 
nominal  interest  rates  worldwide  are  reflected  in  reduced  coupon  payments,  risks  to  debt 
sustainability are on the downside, as reminded in the latest (pre-Brexit) ECB Financial Stability 
Review (May 2016). Our objective here is to examine if and how, after the Brexit vote, these 
risks are indeed heightened. I identify below three such downside risks to debt sustainability 
in the short- to medium-term, in the aftermath of the British referendum.   
1. 
A low interest rate environment, the new global norm, due to persistently low inflation, 
increases the disincentive to fiscal consolidation and structural reforms.  For instance, negative 
nominal yields, if applied too long, may act as an anaesthetic to euro area governments. The 
fiscal space gained from lower debt service costs may slow enactment of necessary fiscal and 
structural reforms. Brexit could well amplify the above downside risk. The initial market reaction 
to the Brexit vote was a typical risk-off mode – lower curves, wider spreads, flatter curves. The 
UK 10-year gilt yield fell under 1% for the first time in records, while German Bunds yields fell 
to  all-time  lows  over  the  period,  currently  trading  in  negative  territory  out  to  a  maturity  of 
15 years  with  the  10-year  German  Bund  trades  around  -0.10%.  In  addition  to  the  flight  to 
safety, the first reaction by major central banks, in an attempt to calm financial markets, has 
been  rather  dovish  and  more  accommodative  monetary  policies  are  expected  in  the  near 
future. So, the Bank of England is widely predicted to cut by a quarter point its base interest 
rate in the August MPC meeting – while a new round of QE is also likely. The ECB may also 
ease further and its QE programme may be extended beyond March 2017. In Japan, there is 
even talk of ‘helicopter money’, while in the US, as a result of the Brexit shock a July hike is 
not on the table, and the market implied probability of a Fed rate hike in 2016 has declined 
from about 50% on the eve of the UK vote to roughly 10% today. As a result, the 4 major 
central banks’ divergent monetary paths, which have been the dominant theme in the financial 
markets since the start of the year, seem to be off the table for now. Indeed, at present, there 
is a shift from “monetary policy divergence” to “financial markets divergence” through stock-
bond markets. It is worth reminding a relevant comment made by ECB President Mario Draghi 
in a recent speech: “[low interest rates]… are not the problem. They are the symptom of an 
underlying problem, which is insufficient investment demand, across the world, to absorb all 
the savings available in the economy” (see also right below).  
2. 
Of course the problem in the euro area is that inflation is persistently low, but so too 
is nominal demand (1% annual increase over the last seven years compared with 3.7% before 
the  2008  global  financial  crisis).  Clearly,  the  denominator  effect  is  a  risk  to  public  debt 
sustainability, while anaemic growth and/or a very low inflation are far from helpful. According 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   to the latest ECB forecasts, inflation is now projected to be at a very low level of 0.2% on an 
annual basis in 2016. Real GDP growth is also expected to be lower than projected in June at 
1.6% for 2016 and follow an even more downward trend due to the Brexit effect (the hit to the 
European economy is a real GDP decrease of around 0.5% over the next three years, but this 
is a very early forecast).  
3. 
Last  but  not  least,  political  risks  have  increased,  posing  a  challenge  to  fiscal  and 
structural  reform  implementation.  Rising  political  uncertainty  (especially  in  Spain,  Portugal, 
Greece, Italy and France) and increasing support for populist political parties which seem to 
be less reform-oriented and with eurosceptic credentials contribute to the downside risks to 
debt sustainability in the euro area. Of course, in the aftermath of the British referendum the 
biggest  political  risk  to  the  whole  of  Europe  is  Brexit.  Brexit  represents  a  shock  to  the 
institutions and norms that underpin markets. Thus, Brexit is different from the euro break-up 
fears of 2012, the global financial crisis of 2008 or the bursting of the high-tech bubble of 2001. 
It is not financial contagion, as in 1998, or this February. Instead, it represents a contagious 
political development. No matter whether we have a full-blown or a light Brexit, the political risk 
for the rest of the continent is that the referendums will mushroom across Europe in a tug-of-
war between populist forces and the political establishment and elites. This risk is particularly 
heightened  for  countries  with  strong  anti-European  sentiment  such  as  Hungary,  the 
Netherlands, Denmark, even France.  
There is an old saying in Brussels that Europe’s leaders are known to have a tried-and-tested 
method for coming up with policy fixes when forced to cope with emergency situations. Post-
Brexit Europe has the potential to become an emergency in the not-too-distant future. I only 
hope that this time is not different. Times will tell. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
