  Christopher Kent: The economic transition in China 
Speech  by  Mr  Christopher  Kent,  Assistant  Governor  (Economic)  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia,  at  the  Economic  Society  of  Australia  (QLD)  Business  Lunch,  Brisbane,  16  June 
2016. 
 I thank Arianna Cowling, Patrick D’Arcy, Iris Day, Chris Read, Ivan Roberts and Andrew Zurawski for invaluable 
assistance in preparing these remarks. 
Introduction 
I would like to thank the Queensland branch of the Economic Society of Australia for hosting 
this event. It is a pleasure to be back here to discuss the economic transition in China. 
This  topic  is  important  for  the  Australian  economy,  where  economic  activity  is  rebalancing 
toward  non-mining  sectors  following  the  end  of  the  commodity  price  boom.  Indeed,  this 
process is well advanced. The latest data suggest that non-mining activity is growing a little 
faster than GDP. 
Much  of  the  original  impetus  for  the  commodity  price  boom  came  from  the  rapid  rise  in 
China’s demand for raw materials. Eventually, the global supply of commodities increased, 
including supply from the resource-rich states of Queensland and Western Australia. In turn, 
rising supply led to an inevitable decline in commodity prices. Although prices are still well 
above where they were before the boom, the extent of the decline over the past few years 
has been larger than most people expected. 
In part, that reflects an easing in China’s demand for commodities over the past year or two. 
This has occurred against the backdrop of a moderation in Chinese economic growth more 
broadly.  The  slowing  in  growth  had  been  widely  anticipated  within  China  and  by  outside 
observers. It is a natural consequence of China moving beyond the rapid phase of growth 
associated with industrialisation. 
There  is,  however,  considerable  uncertainty  and  debate  around  the  extent  to  which 
imbalances  that  have  become  increasingly  evident  will  affect  the  sustainability  of  China’s 
growth over the coming decade. Key concerns are the economy’s reliance on investment as 
a source of demand and on debt as a source of funding for that investment. 
Our  central  forecast,  which  is  similar  to  those  of  many  observers,  is  that  the  Chinese 
economy  will  experience  a  further  gradual  moderation  in  growth  over  the  next  few  years.1 
The  Chinese  authorities  intend  to  keep  overall  growth  close  to  its  current  level  for  the 
remainder  of  the  decade.  However,  there  appear  to  be  increasing  tensions  between  the 
goals of shoring-up short-term growth and pursuing institutional reforms that would help to 
sustain  growth  over  the  longer  term  and  assist  with  the  rebalancing  of  demand  from 
investment to consumption. 
The Chinese authorities have an expansive agenda of reforms necessary for this transition 
and progress has been made on a number of fronts. Even so, major reforms to the financial 
system  needed  to  improve  the  allocation  of  capital  and  social  reforms  that  would  bolster 
consumption demand remain incomplete. The reform process will take time – as it does in 
most countries. 
                                                
1  Note that our forecasts are similar to those of both the International Monetary Fund and Consensus. See, IMF 
(2016), World Economic Outlook, April 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  China  will  continue  to  provide  Australia  with  significant  economic  opportunities  over  the 
longer term, including in sectors such as agriculture, education, tourism and a wide range of 
business  services.  Along  the  way  though,  we  should  be  alert  to  the  risk  of  adverse 
developments that could lead to a sharp economic slowdown in China. I thought it would be 
useful  to  share  our  thoughts  about  some  of  these  downside  risks.  I  should  stress  at  the 
outset that the Chinese authorities are attentive to these risks and have the scope to respond 
if the economy turns out to be much weaker than expected. How the authorities will respond 
if those risks come to pass is beyond the scope of my presentation today. But I’ll ask you to 
keep in mind that the authorities will respond so as to help promote strong and stable growth 
in China. 
Let me start with a brief review of China’s development up till now. 
China’s pattern of development 
China experienced GDP growth of almost 10 per cent per annum on average over the past 
20 years. This resulted in a seven-fold increase in real GDP per capita (Graph 1). Growth of 
that magnitude is impressive, particularly for such a large economy. Even so, incomes are 
still  well  below  the  levels  of  advanced  economies,  including  those  in  the  Asian  region.  So 
there is substantial room for further development. 
Graph 1 
 Key  drivers  of  China’s  growth  over  the  past  few  decades  have  included  industrialisation, 
urbanisation  and  favourable  demographic  trends.  A  range  of  other  factors  have  also 
contributed, including: 
• 
entry  into  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO)  in  2001,  underpinning  China’s 
emergence as the largest exporter of manufactured goods 
a wave of privatisations for many inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs) in the 
late 1990s 
the emergence of private housing markets in the 1990s 
and,  more  recently,  policy  stimulus  undertaken  in  response  to  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
  The  Chinese  economy  has  changed  significantly,  from  one  primarily  dominated  by 
agriculture,  to  one  driven  by  the  industrial  and  service  sectors.  The  rapid  emergence  of 
China’s  industrial  economy  has  been  associated  with  strong  investment  growth  in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  manufacturing and infrastructure (Graph 2). Even by emerging market economy standards, 
China’s development has been characterised by very high levels of investment, underpinned 
by a high and rising rate of household saving (Graph 3). 
Graph 2 
Graph 3 
  Against  this  background,  the  Chinese  Government’s  stimulus  policies  adopted  amid  the 
global financial crisis led to a boom in debt-funded infrastructure investment and construction 
of residential and commercial properties. While these policies supported China’s economic 
activity  and  promoted  urbanisation,  they  also  exacerbated  what  was  arguably  an  already 
“unbalanced”  pattern  of  growth  and  the  rise  in  debt  contributed  to  the  emergence  of 
substantial financial risks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Moderating growth in China 
Despite  the  stimulus  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  annual  growth  peaked  in  2007 
(Graph 4). As an aside, it is worth remembering that while China’s growth is slower than it 
was  10  years  ago,  its  contribution  to  global  output  growth  is  greater  now  because  the 
Chinese economy is so much larger than it was. 
In  terms  of  output,  the  moderation  in  growth  has  been  reflected  in  a  slowdown  in  the 
industrial  sector,  while  growth  in  the  services  sector  has  been more resilient.  At the  same 
time,  on  the  expenditure  side  of  the  ledger,  investment  growth  has  declined  while 
consumption growth has been relatively persistent. 
Graph 4 
 The  moderation  in  the  growth  of  overall  activity  reflects  a  combination  of  longer-term  and 
shorter-term  factors.  One  prominent  long-term  factor  has  been  the  reversal  of  China’s 
“demographic dividend”. The working-age population has reached its peak and is in decline.2 A 
second  persistent  factor  is  the  decline  in  the  growth  of  productivity.3  Both  labour  and  total 
factor productivity experienced periods of rapid growth in the 1980s, 1990s and early 2000s 
following market-oriented reforms and increased openness to trade and investment (Graph 5). 
Urbanisation  also  underpinned  high  rates  of  productivity  growth  as  people  moved  from 
relatively unproductive jobs in agriculture to more productive jobs in cities. However, since the 
late 2000s productivity growth has declined, as the positive effect of earlier reforms faded. 
 
                                                 
2  The relaxation of the one-child policy is unlikely to have a substantive effect on population ageing, at least not 
in  the  short-to-medium  term  (Lim  J  and  A  Cowling  (2016),  “China’s  Demographic  Outlook”,  RBA  Bulletin, 
June, pp 35–42.) 
3  Some  weakness  in  productivity  growth  may  relate  to  a  cyclical  slowing  in  the  industrial  sector,  whereby 
producers (particularly SOEs) have held on to labour even though production has declined. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 5 
 As  in  many  other  economies,  housing  demand  has  been  an  important  driver  of  China’s 
growth.  Earlier  development  of  private  housing  markets  led  to  a  sharp  rise  in  residential 
investment (as a share of GDP) from the early 2000s (Graph 6).4 But the pace of growth in 
housing investment has declined and has made a relatively modest contribution to Chinese 
growth of late. 
 Graph 6 
                                                 
4  The combined direct and indirect share of GDP growth accounted for by housing investment is estimated to 
have  been  as  high  as  30 per  cent  or  so  in  recent  years.  See,  Ma  G,  I  Roberts  and  G  Kelly  (2016),  ‘A 
Rebalancing  Chinese  Economy:  Challenges  and  International  Implications’,  Paper  presented  at  the  RBA 
Conference ‘Structural Change in China: Implications for Australia and the World’, Sydney, 17–18 March. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  One long-term factor affecting housing demand is the slowdown in the growth of the working-
age population, which means that China is also passing its peak in household formation.5 A 
shorter-term  influence  is  the  substantial  rise  in  the  stock  of  unsold  housing  in  a  range  of 
smaller cities, as developers built in anticipation of urbanisation that did not materialise as 
rapidly  as  expected.  It  will  take  time  for  these  inventories  to  be  reduced  and  for  market 
signals  to  direct  investment  to  locations  with  the  best  prospects  for  urbanisation.  Further 
urbanisation, and demand for larger and higher-quality housing as Chinese incomes grow, 
will continue to underpin residential housing demand for some time. But as markets become 
saturated, housing is likely to become a less powerful engine of Chinese growth. 
The slowdown in residential property investment over the past few years has affected heavy 
industries that produce construction materials, including steel. The weakness in demand of 
late, combined with earlier strength of investment, has led to a rise in excess capacity in a 
range of manufacturing and mining industries, and widespread deflation in industrial prices. 
Growth  of  profits  in  the  industrial  sector  is  now  the  weakest  it  has  been  since  the  non-
performing loan “crisis” of the late 1990s (Graph 7). 
Excess  capacity  in  the  industrial  sector  has  been  associated  with  the  phenomenon  of  so-
called  “zombie  firms”  –  enterprises  that  are  making  losses  but  still  attracting  financial 
resources.6 In many cases, these are local government SOEs with substantial social welfare 
obligations,  which  leads  to  understandable  resistance  to  closure.  The  “supply-side”  reform 
initiative  announced  by  central  government  authorities  late  last  year  has  set  goals  for  the 
closure of excess capacity in coal and steel over the next few years. 
Graph 7 
                                                
5  The working-age population for urban centres has not yet peaked (given ongoing urbanisation), although its 
growth  rate  is  gradually  declining.  Also,  earlier  rapid  growth  in  housing  demand  was  partly  a  response  to 
unmet  demand  for  private  housing  that  had  built  up  under  the  old  state-dominated  housing  system.  This 
source of growth was always going to wane, as the backlog has been progressively satisfied. 
 6  The  term  has  been  used  publicly  by  the  Premier,  Li  Keqiang,  to  describe  such  firms.  For  example,  see: 
at 
the  Fourth 
Keqiang 
<http://english.gov.cn/premier/news/2016/03/17/content_281475309417987.htm>,  delivered  at 
Session of the 12th National People’s Congress of the People’s Republic of China, 5 March. 
Government’ 
the  Work 
available 
(2016), 
Report 
the 
on 
of 
L 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Evidence of poor returns in manufacturing is mirrored in declining returns to investment for 
the Chinese economy overall. Rough estimates suggest that the return on capital in China 
has  fallen  relative  to  the  average  cost  of finance,  largely  reflecting  a  rapid  increase  in  the 
capital-output ratio since the late 2000s (Graph 8).7  
Graph 8 
 Prospects for rebalancing 
In contrast to the weakness in profits, the share of income going to labour now appears to be 
rising,  reversing  the  decline  seen  over  the  past  decade.8  Accordingly,  it  is  reasonable  to 
expect  that,  over  time,  the  composition  of  demand  will  tilt  towards  consumption  and  away 
from investment. Indeed, there are tentative signs that this ‘rebalancing’ may have started in 
the past few years. 
However, Chinese consumption growth is already very strong and, historically, it has been 
rare  for  economies  to  experience  stable  and  strong  consumption  growth  during  such  a 
rebalancing. In China, as in many economies, investment tends to create sizeable demand 
for industrial goods, while consumption demand is increasingly focused on services. Thus, a 
shift  in  the  composition  of  demand  from  investment  to  consumption  is  likely  to  be 
accompanied  by  resources  moving  from  the  capital-intensive  industrial  sector  towards  the 
more labour-intensive services sector. Achieving that in a smooth manner will be a significant 
challenge. In particular, the move of workers from industry to the services sector is unlikely to 
be seamless and could pose risks for employment and household income. 
Any decline in the growth rate of household incomes is likely to pose a risk to consumption. 
This is because Chinese households are likely to maintain their high rates of saving.9 In part, 
that desire reflects the significant gaps in public pension and health insurance systems and 
incomplete access of many migrant workers to social security. 
                                                
7  See Ma, Roberts and Kelly (2016). 
8  This  shift  in  factor  income  shares  towards  labour  is  a  sign  that  price  signals  in  the  Chinese  economy  are 
increasingly reflecting the investment-heavy pattern of expenditure mentioned earlier. 
9  See Ma, Roberts and Kelly (2016). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  In short, the limited prospects for stronger consumption growth and the declining returns to 
investment  suggest  that  the  bulk  of  the  rebalancing  over  coming  years  is  likely  to  be 
accomplished through slower investment growth. Other things being equal, this would entail 
a further easing in growth of activity overall. 
Competing objectives and rising risks 
The Chinese authorities acknowledge the challenges posed by the various objectives they 
have set themselves. A key objective is to double 2010 income levels by 2020. This would 
require annual average growth of 6.5 per cent over the next few years.10  
By itself, this might prove challenging in the face of unfavourable developments affecting the 
longer-run  determinants  of  growth.  In  particular,  the  prospects  for  a  rapid  turnaround  in 
productivity  growth  would  appear  to  be  rather  limited  given  the  gradual  pace  of  economic 
reforms in recent years. But the government has ambitious reform plans, including: 
• 
• 
• 
increasing the transparency of local government finances 
staged reform of the household registration (hukou) system 
increasing  the  coverage  and  sustainability  of  pension  schemes  and  developing  a 
national health insurance safety net 
and reforming SOEs, in part through consolidation, to create efficiencies. 
• 
Some early, but gradual, progress has been evident in these areas. 
At the same time, the authorities would like to encourage the rebalancing of demand growth 
away  from  investment  and  to  slow  the  accumulation  of  debt,  at  least  within  the  heavily 
indebted  corporate  sector.  However,  over  recent  years  meeting  short-term  growth  targets 
appears  to  have  taken  precedence  over  plans  to  place  growth  and  financing  on  a  more 
sustainable footing.11  
 
                                                 
10  This goal was first stated at the 18th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC) and reiterated 
at  the  National  People’s  Congress  in  March  2016.  See  Jintao,  H,  ‘Report  of  Hu  Jintao  to  the  18th  CPC 
<http://www.china.org.cn/china/18th_cpc_congress/2012–
National  Congress’ 
11/16/content_27137540.htm> and Keqiang, L, ‘Report on the Work of the Government’ (2016) available at 
<http://online.wsj.com/public/resources/documents/NPC2016_WorkReport_English.pdf>. 
available 
(2012) 
at 
11  A  recent  article  in  the  People’s  Daily,  the  most  authoritative  official  media  source,  has  highlighted  that  the 
government faces a dilemma in managing the economy; the article itself can be seen as an attempt by the 
authorities  to  manage  expectations.  See,  People’s  Daily  (2016),  ‘An  Authoritative  Person  Discusses  the 
Current  Chinese  Economy’,  9  May,  p  1.  Available  at  <http://paper.people.com.cn/rmrb/html/2016–
05/09/nw.D110000renmrb_20160509_6-01.htm>. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Graph 9 
  Over the past year, meeting the government’s short-term growth goals required policymakers 
to pursue more stimulatory macroeconomic policies. This has been achieved through cuts to 
benchmark  interest  rates,  an  easing  in  fiscal  policy  and  a  relaxation  of  housing  market 
restrictions – all while accommodating a faster pace of debt accumulation.12 Overall, these 
measures have tended to stimulate investment – in housing and public infrastructure – more 
so  than  consumption  or  private  investment.  Indeed,  there  has  been  a  return  to  growth  in 
housing prices, a pick-up in housing sales and a recovery in residential investment.13  
The  trend  rise  in  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP  since  the  global  financial  crisis  has  continued. 
Although estimates vary somewhat, this has led China’s total (public and private) debt to rise 
to  around  250 per cent  of  GDP  (Graph 9).14  This  is  still  below  that  of  several  advanced 
economies,  but  it  stands  out  among  emerging  market  economies  given  China’s  relatively 
modest stage of economic development. 
The  high  level  and  rapid  growth  of  debt  in  China  increases  its  vulnerability  to  adverse 
shocks. Reflecting the investment-driven nature of the expansion since 2008, the rise in debt 
has  been  concentrated  in  the  corporate  sector  and  local  governments’  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles that have been responsible for funding substantial infrastructure investment. There 
is a risk that defaults on these debts could impose significant losses on financial institutions 
and  could  lead  to  a  general  loss  of  confidence and  a  tendency  for  liquidity  to  recede  in  a 
range of funding markets. 
To date, efforts by policymakers to address risks associated with the build-up in debt have 
focused on restructuring local government debt. High-interest off-balance sheet funding has 
been  swapped  with  the  issuance  of  low-interest  local  government  bonds;  that  is  good  for 
local  governments  but  comes  at  the  cost  of  putting  more  pressure  on  banks  and  other 
lenders  by  reducing  their  interest  income.  With  regard  to  addressing  financial  risks  in  the 
corporate sector, so far, the central government appears to have taken a relatively hands-off 
                                                
12  The rate of growth of financing has picked up noticeably (to around 17 per cent in year-ended terms, once the 
swapping of local government off-balance sheet borrowing for local government bonds has been taken into 
account). 
13  For  a  few  of  the  largest  cities,  conditions  have  strengthened  so  much  that  the  local  authorities  have  been 
tightening up measures designed to restrict demand, most notably in Shenzhen and Shanghai. 
14  For example, see <http://www.bis.org/statistics/totcredit/tables_f.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  approach,  leaving  it  to  banks  and  local governments  to  address  issues as  they  arise. The 
authorities  also  appear  more  willing  tolerate  some  defaults  in  the  bond  market,  which  has 
grown rapidly as a source of funding in the past couple of years. This will help improve the 
allocation of credit overtime, but this funding channel remains vulnerable to the possibility of 
a sharp reassessment of risks by lenders. 
So  far,  there  are  no  outward  signs  of  distress  in  the  banking  system,  despite  falling  profit 
growth and rising non-performing loans (Graph 10). But the structure of the financial system 
continues to evolve rapidly, raising concerns about the robustness of the funding position of 
some  of  the  faster-growing  segments  of  the  industry,  particularly  smaller  banks  and  non-
bank  financial  intermediaries.  One  concern  is  that  some  smaller  lenders  have  large 
exposures  to  regions  and  industries  currently  experiencing  economic  hardship.  Likewise, 
institutions involved in complex ‘shadow banking’ transactions could experience problems if a 
shift of sentiment in funding markets forces these types of activities to be unwound. 
Graph 10 
 It  is  worth  noting,  however,  that  compared  with  many  cases  of  heavily  indebted  emerging 
economies that have faced financial problems in the past, China’s debt is largely domestic. A 
considerable  portion  of  that  has  arisen  from  state-owned  or  controlled  financial  institutions 
lending  to  state-owned  or  state-controlled  enterprises,  which  to  some  extent  allows  the 
problem  to  be  handled  within  the  official  “family”.15  Moreover,  the  debt  has  largely  been 
funded by the household sector, which has sustained a very high rate of saving. Although 
this does not preclude the possibility of substantial disruption in the financial system, it does 
provide some leeway for authorities attempting to ensure that the financial system remains 
liquid.  The  extent  of  that  leeway  will  potentially  depend  on  the  effectiveness  of  capital 
controls. But that is a topic for another time. 
                                                
15  There is a tension between the government maintaining the smooth functioning of financial markets through 
implicit  guarantees  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  problems  of  moral  hazard  and  inefficient  resource 
allocation that can result. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Conclusions 
China’s  economy  has  grown  at  an  impressive  rate  over  the  past  20–25  years  or  so. 
However, growth has moderated over recent years and is projected to ease further as the 
longer-term drivers of that growth recede. Moreover, the pattern of development has given 
rise to significant imbalances. High and rising levels of corporate debt in the face of excess 
capacity and declining profitability suggests a greater risk of corporate defaults, which could 
ultimately lead to disruption in the financial system. 
There  have  been  many  positive  signals  from  the  leadership  about  improving  the 
sustainability of growth, including recent calls to implement so-called ‘supply-side’ reforms, 
with a view to facilitating deleveraging in the corporate sector and reducing excess capacity 
in key industries. Nonetheless, the direction of policy so far has tended towards more, rather 
than less, accommodative monetary and fiscal settings. To the extent that this represents a 
re-prioritisation  of  short-term  objectives  over  longer-term  sustainability,  it  may  increase  the 
likelihood of a future disruptive adjustment. Even so, the authorities will no doubt respond if 
the economy experiences shocks that might otherwise lead to a so called ‘hard landing’ for 
the economy as a whole. In other words, they are aware of the challenges and have scope to 
respond if the economy turns out to be much weaker than expected. 
For Australia, the primary risk posed by the uncertain outlook in China is to commodity prices 
and  the  exports  of  goods  (particularly  resources)  and  services.  A  depreciation  of  the 
Australian  dollar  in  response  to  negative  developments  in  external  conditions  could  be 
expected to act as a buffer in the way that it has in the past. 
While I have focused today on a number of the downside risks, we should not lose sight of 
the  fact  that  the  central  scenario  over  the  next  few  years  is  for  a  gradual  moderation  of 
growth in China. And over the longer term, there is a lot of room for further development of 
the Chinese economy, which will provide Australia with many economic opportunities. While 
the value of non-rural exports to China have declined with the fall in commodity prices, the 
value of other exports to China have been rising strongly of late (Graph 11). We are likely to 
continue  to  benefit  from  rising  incomes  and  the  associated  demand  for  high-quality  food, 
goods and a wide array of household and business services from China and the region more 
broadly. 
Graph 11 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11 
