   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Raising standards in Malaysia’s financial services 
industry 
Remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara 
Malaysia),  at the  Centre  of  Excellence  (ACE)  Ground  Breaking  Ceremony,  Kuala  Lumpur, 
22 February 2016. 
 It is my very great pleasure to be here on the occasion of the ground breaking ceremony to the 
ACE – A Centre of Excellence. ACE is a very much welcomed industry led initiative to raise 
the level of capability and professionalism for the work force in the Malaysian financial services 
industry. Our financial services industry continues to be reshaped and transformed by several 
major forces of change that range from the new demands of consumers and businesses to the 
rapid  advancement  in  technology,  the  global  regulatory  reforms  and  the  continued 
globalisation  of  finance.  On  the  domestic  front  we  are  also  seeing  the  continued  rapid 
expansion of the domestic financial services industry, and the deepening of regional economic 
and financial integration. 
Given the paramount role of the financial system in supporting our real economy we require a 
financial system that will best serve our economy. It not only needs to be effective and efficient 
and  thus  competitive  but  also  robust  and  resilient.  Going  forward,  operating  in  this  highly 
dynamic  environment  will  become  increasingly  more  challenging.  Today  the  Malaysian 
financial industry employs more than 150,000 people, and requires approximately 73,000 new 
hires over the next 10 years. With the changes that are reshaping the financial system, skills 
requirements  in  the  financial  industry  will  also  change.  Today  new  careers  are  also  being 
created in more diverse areas including in areas of finance that have leveraged on technology 
such  as  in  internet  based  services.  Further  challenges  will  arise from the  intensification of 
competition for talent in a more borderless workplace. 
Given the importance of talent to performance greater attention needs to be accorded to talent 
development. There also continues to be an acute talent shortage of such skilled talent in our 
financial services industry. If left unresolved it will impede future growth and performance of 
the industry. This existing significant skills gap is already becoming a constraint on industry 
growth.  Indicators  from  the  AIF  Skills  Gap  Index,  which  measures  skills  gaps  within  the 
workforce, point to a significant deficit in several skill sets that are considered important in the 
financial  services  industry.  The  creation  of  ACE  represents  an  important  step  in  efforts  to 
provide a comprehensive and integrated solution for such skills and talent development for the 
industry. 
At  the  executive  level,  leadership,  corporate  governance  and  ethics  are  issues  that  have 
dominated  attention  in  global  finance  given  the  need  to  recognise  the  importance  of 
sustainable outcomes. There are high expectations of the financial industry to demonstrate 
responsible  leadership  that  will  also  embrace  a  strong  moral  compass  in  its  operations. 
Education and professional development have a key role in bringing to the forefront these 
important issues for the industry. 
The establishment of ACE will support and indeed, further propel efforts to raise the calibre 
and dynamism of talent across all levels in the industry. ACE will provide a range of facilities 
for professional development and skills development including learning and training for all the 
different levels of financial specialisation. The institutions that are to be housed within ACE 
have  all  embarked  on  measures  to  deliver  programmes  and  qualifications  that  are 
benchmarked against leading education and training standards. The high quality talent that 
ACE  will  develop  will  contribute  to  the  vibrancy  and  progress  of  the  Malaysian  financial 
industry. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
ACE  is  an  initiative  spearheaded  by  the  financial  services  industry  and  it  will  house 
10 institutions, involved in education, training and standard setting. With its strategic location 
in  Kuala  Lumpur,  ACE  has  close  proximity  to  the  headquarters  of  financial  institutions.  Its 
integrated facilities will foster and facilitate collaboration amongst banking, insurance, capital 
market and Islamic finance industries to share intellectual capital, expert resources as well as 
benefit from economies of scale by the sharing of common infrastructure and facilities. 
Today’s ground breaking ceremony marks the official start of the construction for the ACE 
project. Let me take this opportunity to congratulate those involved in the Project to bring it to 
this stage of development. In particular, I would like to recognise the pivotal role played by the 
Asian  Institute  of  Finance,  the  Asian Institute  of  Chartered  Bankers,  and  the  heads  of  the 
affiliate institutions, for their commitment and dedication in taking this ACE project forward as 
part of key infrastructure in skills and professional development and standards in the financial 
services industry. It is a significant milestone in transforming the financial education landscape 
for the financial services industry. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
