   Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Growth and development of the world economy 
Welcoming remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the official opening of the World Bank Group Knowledge and Research 
Hub in Malaysia, Sasana Kijang, Kuala Lumpur, 28 March 2016. 
 It is my great honour to welcome the distinguished Senior leadership of the World Bank Group, 
Dr Axel van Trotsenburg, Vice President of Development Finance; and Dr Kaushik Basu, Chief 
Economist  and  Senior  Vice  President,  to  the  Master  Lecture  on  'Shared  Prosperity'  by  Dr 
Kaushik Basu. The Lecture is held in conjunction with the Official Opening of the World Bank 
Group Knowledge and Research Hub in Sasana Kijang later this afternoon. 
As  we  meet  today,  the  global  economy  is  confronted  with  an  immensely  challenging 
environment. A slower than anticipated growth in several major economies, the sharp decline 
in commodity and energy prices, the significant shifts in global liquidity, and the heightened 
geopolitical tensions are having far reaching and widespread implications. Going forward, the 
challenge for  both the  advanced  and  emerging economies  is to  lift growth  trajectories  and 
search  for  sustainable  growth  factors  that  can  rebuild  economic  fundamentals,  address 
structural vulnerabilities and forge new sources of growth.  
Key  is  the  "sustainability"  and  strengthening  of  the  growth  and  development  of  the  world 
economy. An important aspect in this process is that economic growth and development, no 
matter  how  stellar,  will  begin  to  fade  when  inequality  sets  in  and  when  income  disparities 
widen. Experience has also shown that financial crisis and economic recession entrenches the 
cycle of poverty. During a financial crisis, the poor lose their income by several times more 
compared with the average household. We saw this happen during the recent Global Financial 
Crisis,  and  we  also  saw  how  many  that  were  displaced  suffered "hysteresis"  thus  deeply 
affecting  their  income  prospects. We  also risk facing  a  severe  setback  in  our fight  against 
poverty. In the more recent years, the international community has accorded greater attention 
to addressing this agenda and to achieving more balanced and inclusive growth. 
Malaysia, while achieving growth and progress since the 1960s has always given attention for 
it to be a shared prosperity. Given the role of the financial system in facilitating this, Bank 
Negara Malaysia has always given priority to the financial inclusion agenda to not only bring 
the  underserved  segments  of  society  into  the financial  mainstream  but to  promote  a more 
effective  participation  in  the  financial  system  which  will  in  turn  strengthen  the  potential  for 
enhancing economic well-being.  
Before I conclude my remarks, allow me to congratulate the World Bank Group on its many 
achievements realised in the Asian Region. Bank Negara Malaysia is pleased to partner the 
World Bank Group in its initiatives in the region. By the response received, this initiative will 
inspire the many talents within the Malaysian research community to be more engaged to think 
and delve into greater research on Malaysian economic and development issues that have 
great importance to the country and the region that is expected to persist in our prevailing and 
future environment. 
With the official opening of the World Bank Group Knowledge and Research Hub, I believe the 
Hub  is  well-positioned  to  become  a  regional  centre  of  excellence  that  promotes  learning 
opportunities, thought leadership and innovation. Being located in Sasana Kijang, which in 
Sanskrit means a meeting place, it is hoped that the Hub would benefit from synergies with the 
institutional cluster of intellectual excellence that are also located right here in Sasana Kijang, 
including the Alliance for Financial Inclusion, the SEACEN Centre, and the Islamic Financial 
Services Board. On behalf of Bank Negara Malaysia, allow me to express our great optimism 
of  this  partnership  in  bringing  knowledge,  expertise  and  best  practices  to  realise  greater 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   regional and international collaboration. Today, the winner of the Young Malaysian Researcher 
Prize 2016 will be announced. 
With  this,  let  me  conclude  my  remarks  and  invite  Dr  Axel  Van  Trotsenburg,  to  deliver  his 
remarks. I also look forward to the address on 'Shared Prosperity' by Dr Kaushik Basu. 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
