  Andreas Dombret: How to meet Asia’s needs for infrastructure financing 
– could the European capital markets union be a blueprint? 
Keynote remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Asian  Development  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
3 May 2016. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Distinguished board members of the ADB 
Dear panellists 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is my pleasure to be here with you today – not least because by attending this panel, I am 
redeeming  the  promise  I  gave  my  fellow  Bundesbank  board  member,  Joachim  Nagel,  to 
stand in for him here at the Host Country Seminar. He has accepted a leading position at 
KfW  Group  –  whose  history  as  a  development  bank  is  closely  interwoven  with  economic 
prosperity in Germany. 
Aside from this particular crossover, the tasks of central banks and development banks have 
other  meaningful  overlaps  as  well.  At  the  very  least,  both  kinds  of  institution  have  a  keen 
interest in funding issues. For example, as part of their financial stability mandates, central 
banks monitor the financial system – be it bank-based or market-based – to see if it provides 
sufficiently  stable  funding  for  real  economic  activities.  And  much  like  central  banks, 
development banks also reflect on the appropriate balance between funding via banks and 
funding via the capital markets. 
Asia in need of more infrastructure 
2. 
Harnessing  stable  and  reliable  funding  sources  for  economic  development  is  particularly 
important for emerging economies like the Asian countries. Infrastructure financing plays a 
key role here, because infrastructure is crucial for sustainable economic growth. Given the 
socio-economic trends in Asia, the countries’ need for more and better infrastructure is plain 
to see. 
The  numbers  involved  are  utterly  breathtaking.  According  to  a  recent  ADB  study,  120,000 
people  move  to  Asia’s  urban  centres  –  every  single  day.  As  a  consequence,  the  motor 
vehicle fleet doubles every 5 to 7 years. Traffic jams are an inevitable outcome. This leads 
the ADB study to estimate that road congestion costs the Asian economies between 2 and 
5% of GDP every year, not to mention the damage done to the environment. 
This  led  a  Japanese  research  institute  to  project  that  Asia  will  need  USD  6,500  billion  in 
infrastructure investment until 2020. The crucial question, then, is how this immense volume 
can be raised. 
To  begin  with,  I  will  argue  that  infrastructure  financing  benefits  from  stable  and  reliable 
financial infrastructure. Indeed, the numerous development banks play an important role in 
this respect. The World Bank and the ADB, for instance, granted a total of roughly USD 25 
billion  for  infrastructure-related  projects  in  2014.  In  addition,  the  Asian  Infrastructure 
Investment  Bank  and  the  New  Development  Bank  can  contribute  significantly  to  satisfy 
Asia’s  need  for  infrastructure  funding.  And  in  many  Asian  countries  –  in  particular  those 
where capital markets are less developed – governments still cover a significant fraction of 
infrastructure-related costs. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Still, many observers have their doubts whether Asian economies can meet all their funding 
needs  –  in  particular  as  banks  in  some  countries  ran  up  huge  volumes  of  non-performing 
loans and seem to be constrained when it comes to financing new projects. I see a number 
of  similarities  here  to  the  euro  area  and  its  bank-based  financial  system.  Real  economic 
activity in some euro-area countries is being stifled by the non-performing loans which are 
still weighing on banks’ balance sheets and making banks reluctant to grant new loans. This 
is acting as a drag on economic recovery. 
3. 
Diversifying funding sources and risk: the goals of the European capital 
markets union 
Allow me to illustrate why the euro area’s banking system plays such a consistently important 
role in financing the real economy. For one thing, bank credit today makes up around 30% of 
borrowing  by  euro-area  enterprises.  And  business  loans  still  play  a  key  role  for  domestic 
banks and savings banks as well. At just over 23%, loans to enterprises alone constitute a 
significant portion of the consolidated total assets of the entire euro-area banking system. 
However, the global financial crisis has made us painfully aware that it is rarely a good idea 
to place all your eggs in one basket. A system in which enterprises can rely on just a single 
source of funding will run into difficulties if that source dries up. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  European  Commission  presented  an  action  plan  in  September 
2015 for the establishment of a European capital markets union. Its idea is not to suppress 
funding through banks and savings banks. The optimal funding structure is not an “either/or” 
question.  Instead,  the  European  capital  markets  union  aims  to  complement  bank-based 
funding with capital market products. 
Ultimately, then, it’s all about diversifying the sources of corporate financing. If we give the 
capital markets a more prominent role in funding the real economy, that will give businesses 
broader and better access to funding. What it will also do is create a more efficient financial 
system that can better support sustained economic growth. 
The second objective of the European capital markets union is to deepen the integration of 
the capital markets in order to improve risk sharing. Experience from the USA tells us that 
integrated markets for capital cushion around 40% of total cyclical fluctuations between the 
US federal states. Together with credit markets and fiscal buffers, this cushions almost 80% 
of an economic shock in the US. 
The situation in Europe is slightly different: here, it is primarily the credit markets which act as 
buffers – and not particularly effectively at that. All told, just 40% of a shock is cushioned in 
this way. So boosting the role of the capital markets and integrating them more effectively 
across national borders would indeed help to improve risk sharing in Europe. 
Together,  improving  both  funding  of  the  real  economy  and  risk  sharing  will  make  the 
European capital markets union a worthwhile project – and I believe that the experiences we 
gather from this initiative may also be of interest for the Asian economic area. 
The European capital markets union – a blueprint for Asia? 
4. 
Of course, I am not calling for an Asian capital markets union. The situation in the EU is quite 
different  to  that  in  Asia,  of  course.  Nevertheless,  cross-border  transactions  among  Asian 
countries gain in importance when it comes to infrastructure projects. And I do believe that 
Asia’s infrastructure-related funding needs will require financing from non-Asian investors as 
well. This leaves me in no doubt that the renminbi clearing hub here in Frankfurt will prove to 
be particularly beneficial going forward in attracting European funds for Asian projects. But in 
general, more deeply integrated global financial markets – accompanied by sound regulation 
to avoid negative spillover effects and financial contagion when the going gets tough – might 
be an answer to the challenges which Asian economies are currently facing. This is because, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  at the end of the day, the European capital markets union is implementing the well-known 
principles of good financial sector governance. 
Simple  though  this  may  sound,  the  European  capital  markets  union  shows  us  that  putting 
these principles into practice will be far from easy. The capital markets are a complex beast, 
and capital market funding comes in many shapes and sizes. Corporate bonds, private and 
listed equity capital, venture capital and peer-to-peer loans are just some of the instruments 
in  the  market.  And  deeper  integration  affects  not  just  the financial  instruments themselves 
but  also  integral  components  of  the  respective  markets,  like  exchanges  and  central 
counterparties. 
Let me stay with that last point for a moment, because the importance of effective and robust 
financial market infrastructures cannot be overstated. In Europe, the regulatory framework, 
especially  for  CCPs,  has  been  significantly  strengthened.  The  internationally  accepted 
principles for financial market infrastructures have formed the basis for national or regional 
legislation  –  known  in  the  EU  as  EMIR  –  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation. 
Currently, additional work is underway to improve the recovery planning and resolvability of 
CCPs. This is necessary, since the regulatory move towards central clearing goes hand in 
hand with the risk of CCPs becoming too big to fail. 
Stress tests are another tool we can use to identify both the potential vulnerabilities of CCPs 
and the need for appropriate regulatory action. Last week, ESMA, the European Securities 
and Markets Authority, published the results of the first EU-wide central counterparties stress 
test exercise. The results of the test show that the system of EU CCPs can be regarded as 
resilient  overall.  Taking  all 
financial  market 
infrastructures are on the right path to foster the implementation of a capital markets union in 
Europe. 
Besides, a raft of different measures are also needed in a wide variety of other areas. For 
instance, equity financing would particularly benefit from abolishing the unequal tax treatment 
of equity and debt capital in Europe. Reforming the corporate taxation regime is naturally a 
difficult task, and strong political will would be needed to push it through. But: introducing a 
neutral  tax  regime  for  equity  and  debt  capital  would  not  only  reduce  the  temptation  to  be 
highly leveraged, but also boost efficiency levels across the board. 
Last but not least, there have been a handful of initiatives aimed at rekindling the continent’s 
markets  in  securitised  products.  These  include  the  European  Commission’s  efforts  to 
establish  a  framework  for  simple,  transparent  and  standardised  (STS)  securitisation. 
Emphasising these three qualities is crucial, given the lessons learned from the crisis. The 
securitised products which fanned the flames of the crisis were neither simple, transparent 
nor standardised. In fact, there was a proliferation of complex and opaque products that led 
to the problems we are all too familiar with. So in my eyes, the Commission’s initiative is a 
sensible move that will revitalise the securitisation market and promote the flow of funding to 
the real economy. 
into  account,  European 
these  points 
Conclusion 
5. 
Esteemed colleagues 
Emerging Asia is facing significant challenges as regards financing its additional demand for 
infrastructure.  Indeed,  the  numerous  development  banks  will  play  an  important  role  in  this 
respect.  However,  it  is  likely  that  additional  funding  from  Asia  and  elsewhere  might  be 
needed to ensure that the region’s economic expansion is not unnecessarily hampered. 
In  Europe,  we  are  currently  pushing  towards  a  capital  markets  union  that  aims  at  both 
diversifying funding sources for the real economy and boosting risk sharing among investors. 
Is  it  thus  a  blueprint  for  Asia?  I  don’t  think  so,  at  least  not  one  on  one.  However,  I  firmly 
believe that the lessons we learn from this project may be of interest for the Asian economies 
as well. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  I  have  highlighted  some  components  of  the  capital  markets  union  which  I  think  are 
particularly important. In a nutshell, the capital markets union is about fostering stable and 
reliable  financial  markets  by  establishing  an  appropriate  level  of  transparency  for  financial 
products and comparable legal standards. That kind of environment will help attract investors 
to  invest  in  the  European  real  economy  and  help  European  corporations  diversify  their 
funding sources. The same should hold true for the Asian real economy in general, and for 
infrastructure projects in particular. 
Indeed, there is a long way to go until we have achieved an optimal funding structure. But as 
Confucius once said, “a journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step”. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  take  these  steps  together  to  build  a  sustainable  financial 
system that is fit for the 21st century. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
