  Andreas Dombret: More painkillers, please? Why more finance is the 
wrong medicine or our growth problem 
Keynote remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Harvard Law School Symposium on “Building the Financial System of 
the 21st Century: An Agenda for Europe and the US”, Armonk, New York, 8 April 2016. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Dear Professor Scott, 
Dear Ladies and Gentlemen 
2016 marks the 30th anniversary of the Program on International Financial Systems. That’s 
about the age when young people begin to realise that smoking, drinking and working late 
hours won’t leave their physique unscathed. Bad habits, happily ignored in younger years, 
catch up with them eventually. Some of us probably know what I am talking about. 
You could say that today’s global economy has reached a similar point in its life. But it would 
be 38 today, having turned 30 back in 2008 when the financial crisis was raging. At that time, 
the global economy did realise that excess was detrimental to its long-term health. Now the 
world economy is eight years older – but is it also eight years wiser? In other words, have we 
cut back enough on our bad habits to thrive for another four or five decades? Or are we still 
leading a life of excess that will prove costly for tomorrow’s financial health? 
In my remarks today, I will argue that we have not yet done enough to adapt. For the global 
economy  to  become  healthy  and  prosperous  again  –  and  to  stay  that  way  –  we  need  to 
adapt our policy habits. We have to move towards a more sustainable mix: fewer painkillers, 
less wine, more healing and greater abstinence. 
Stricken by two illnesses at once 
2. 
Our  subject,  the  world  economy,  is  still  struggling  to  adapt  to  the  new  realities  of  being 
“thirtysomething”. It is stricken by two illnesses simultaneously. 
The  first  is  the  result  of  the  excessive  lifestyle  it  led  before  the  crisis.  I’m  referring  to  the 
overblown financial system and the extreme leveraging, which created a lasting liability in the 
shape  of mountains  of debt.  It  was  this  excessive  leveraging  which  paved  the  way  to  the 
financial crisis. During the crisis itself, it was plain to see that leverage levels needed to be 
lowered, especially in the financial sector. But precious little headway has been made in this 
regard, leaving us with an unstable financial system.1  
The second ailment is that global economic growth has been stubbornly stagnant over the 
past seven years.2 Most policy responses to the crisis have sought to put output levels and 
growth  back  on  track.  Yet  growth  has  been  stuck  in  the  doldrums  in  most  advanced 
countries. 
Thus, the global economy has been stricken by both stagnating growth and excessive levels 
of  debt.  These  twin  illnesses  are  very  difficult  to  treat  –  especially  so  given  that  it  is  not 
entirely  clear  what  exactly  is  behind  the  growth  problem.3  Is  it  the  unhealthy  lifestyle  of 
                                                
1   See also McKinsey (2015) Debt and (not much) deleveraging. 
2  
3   S  Lo  and  K  Rogoff  (2015)  Secular  stagnation,  debt  overhang  and  other  rationales  for  sluggish  growth,  six 
IMF World Economic Outlook, Update January 2016. 
years on. BIS Working Papers No 482. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
excessive  finance,  or  is  it  another,  more  fundamental  condition?  Or  could  it  be  a  more 
complex complaint in which stifling debt and low growth fuel each other in a vicious circle? 
Financial painkillers aren’t the cure 
3. 
How  are  we  supposed  to  treat  these  twin  illnesses?  Finance-led  growth  emerged  as  the 
dominant political strategy in the 1980s. That meant financial deregulation was high on the 
agenda to foster financial development, and monetary policy was used to counter financial 
turmoil. 
In  fact,  monetary  policy  created  a  high  degree  of  stability  during  the  spell  known  as  the 
“Great Moderation”, which ran from the 1980s until 2007. This episode was characterised by 
gratifyingly low volatility in growth and inflation rates. That outcome can still be regarded as a 
good thing. And many attribute it, at least in part, to systematic monetary policymaking by 
central  banks.  This,  however,  came  at  a  price.  Monetary  expansion  drove  liquidity  levels 
higher, which in turn facilitated balance sheet expansion and excessive risk-taking.4  
In the words of Ben Bernanke, “for the most part, financial stability did not figure prominently 
in monetary policy discussions during [the Great Moderation].”5  
Given  this  experience,  a  doctor  treating  a  patient  with  these  symptoms  would  stop 
prescribing painkillers. But as it turned out, the monetary “medication” actually started to be 
expanded  in  2008.  First  via  ultra-low  interest  rates,  then  through  quantitative  easing, 
followed,  more  recently,  by  even  more  monetary  measures  aimed  at  kick-starting  inflation 
and the economy. 
The liquidity provided stabilised the financial system, but it also inflated asset prices.6 The 
aftermath  of  the  expansionary  monetary  policymaking  before  the  crisis  should  serve  as  a 
reminder not to make the same mistake twice. Providing an endless flow of liquidity as a kind 
of painkiller does nothing to tackle the root cause of the economic challenges we are facing. 
The  second  painkiller  frequently  administered  to  support financial  development  in  the  pre-
crisis era was deregulation and a “light touch” in regulation and supervision. The idea behind 
this  approach  was  that  lenience  would  fuel  increased  investment.  Unfortunately,  it  inflated 
the credit bubble. 
Solid regulation and responsible supervision is the key to limiting future bubbles. Yes, we’ve 
already achieved a great deal since the crisis – Basel III and TLAC at the global level; Dodd-
Frank in the US; the banking union in the euro area. And some are saying  we’ve already 
gone  too  far.  The  evidence,  however,  tells  a  different  story:  it  is  higher  standards  that 
strengthen  credit  intermediation  and  economic  development.  That’s  something  worth 
remembering in the face of what are, intuitively, compelling claims about capital costs. These 
claims  have  been  discredited  by  the  experience  gained  during  the  crisis  and  by  empirical 
evidence.7  
                                                
4   European Systemic Risk Board (2014) Is Europe Overbanked? Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee 
No 4/June 2014. 
5   B S Bernanke (2013) A Century of U.S. Central Banking: Goals, Frameworks, Accountability. Speech given at 
the  Conference  ‘The  First  100  Years  of  the  Federal  Reserve:  The  Policy  Record,  Lessons  Learned,  and 
Prospects for the Future’, on 10 July 2013. 
6   M Bordo and J Landon-Lane (2013) Does Expansionary Monetary Policy Cause Asset Price Booms; Some 
Historical and Empirical Evidence. NBER Working Paper No. 19585. 
7   A Admati and M Hellwig (2013) The Bankers’ New Clothes: What’s Wrong with Banking and What to Do about 
It, Princeton University Press; C M Reinhart and K S Rogoff (2008) This Time is Different. Eight Centuries of 
Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
In  sum,  these  policies  did  not  constitute  a  sustainable  lifestyle,  nor  did  they  deliver  a 
systematic  cure.  Rather,  they  turned  out  to  be  painkillers.  So  the  big  question  I’m  asking 
myself is this: should we carry on treating the symptoms by taking more and more painkillers 
–  or  should  we  look  for  a  fundamental  change  of  lifestyle  that  might  cure  the  underlying 
problems? 
Finance is no panacea for growth 
4. 
Put  differently,  do  we  need  to  treat  the  global  economy  with  more  monetary  and  financial 
stimulus? And, more fundamentally, do we need more finance to fix our economy? 
For  over  three  decades,  the  simple  answer  was  “the  more,  the  better”.  And  scientific 
evidence supported this intuition. Studies showed that financial development corresponded 
strongly  with  economic  growth.8  Politically,  there  was  a  clear  preference  for  finance-led 
growth. Thus, deregulation was high on the agenda. 
I won’t remind you where all this led. We just need to remember the tremendous costs for 
banks and for society at large that followed the burst of the last credit bubble.9  
Moreover,  recent  scientific  evidence  based  on  historical  data  reveals  that  there  is  indeed 
such a thing as too much finance.10 Financial depth starts having a negative effect on output 
growth  when  credit  to  the  private  sector  reaches  100  per  cent  of  GDP.  Most  advanced 
countries far exceeded this level prior to the financial crisis – and continue to do so. 
Thus,  the  diagnosis  for  advanced  economies  like  the  EU  und  the  US  is  that  increasing 
financial intermediation is beneficial, but only up to a point. This point has been exceeded in 
most developed economies. 
What’s the right medicine? Fewer painkillers, a better cure 
5. 
What’s the takeaway from all this? It’s that more finance is not the solution to our current 
problems. 
Sticking to the simple “more finance, more growth” trajectory isn’t a sustainable solution. That 
would run the risk of focusing on what is currently our most pressing problem – lifting growth 
expectations  –  at  the  expense  of  our  long-term  –  and  fundamental  –  goal  of  achieving  a 
stable financial system. And by doing that, we would also sacrifice sustainable growth. 
Most  doctors  would  probably  agree  that  a  sophisticated  course  of  treatment  aimed  at  the 
patient’s  long-term  wellbeing  is  better  than  a  box  of  painkillers  every  week.  But  ask  them 
what exactly they would prescribe, and the result will probably be rather like asking several 
economists for macroeconomic policy advice. You might end up with more treatment plans 
than you have doctors – or patients for that matter. 
What  we  need  is  less,  and  better  finance  –  finance  that  serves  the  real  economy  and 
sustainable  development.  How  do  we  achieve  that?  There  are  several  angles  to  that 
question, but the ones I would like to emphasise are financial regulation and supervision, and 
monetary policy. 
As I said earlier, providing a flow of liquidity as a monetary painkiller does nothing to tackle 
the  root  causes  of  the  economic  challenges  we  are  facing.  In  the  absence  of  economic 
                                                
8   R Levine (2005) Finance and Growth: Theory and Evidence, in: Handbook of Economic Growth. 
9   C  M  Reinhart  and  K  S  Rogoff  (2008)  This  Time  is  Different.  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly,  Princeton 
University Press. 
10   J L Arcand, E Berkes and U Panizza (2015) Too much finance? Journal of Economic Growth, 20(2): 105–148; 
European Systemic Risk Board (2014) Is Europe Overbanked? Report of the Advisory Scientific Committee 
No 4/June 2014. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
progress on the structural front, monetary easing is not the key to a sustainable economy. It 
does, however, affect financial stability, given that it can fuel bubbles. Therefore, we need to 
look for an exit strategy. It is important for central banks to think hard about how they intend 
to achieve an exit as soon as economic conditions make it viable to do so. 
From a more general angle, integrating financial stability considerations into monetary policy 
while maintaining the primacy of the price stability goal will be a key challenge for the future. I 
welcome the fact that central banks are moving in that direction. 
Rock-solid  regulation  and  responsible  supervision  is  likewise  indispensable  for  a  stable 
financial system. Over and above the progress we have made since the crisis erupted, there 
are three more steps we need to take. First, we must credibly implement the agreed reforms 
– for example, the new bail-in instruments need to be credible so that politicians do not pre-
empt  the  bail-in  during  times  of  crisis.  Zombie  banks  should  not  be  kept  alive  for  political 
reasons. Uncertainty over the bail-in instruments will only exacerbate market uncertainty. 
Second,  supervision  must  be  steadfast.  Either  banks  are  capable  of  managing  their  risks 
adequately,  or  supervisors  must  force  them  to  do  so  –  or,  ultimately,  they  must  take 
disciplinary measures. As such, it is up to a supervisor to increase an individual institution’s 
capital requirements, if need be. At the same time, however, we must be careful that risky 
activities do not move to unregulated areas. 
Finally, we must not discontinue our reform efforts prematurely. We need to put an end to the 
privileged  treatment  of  sovereign  exposures.  We  must  regulate  shadow  banking.  And  we 
must finalise Basel III in a sound manner. Yes, there has been a commitment to not raise 
capital  requirements  significantly  on  average,  as  the  Basel  Committee  and  the  G20  have 
clarified. But several German banks, for example, have already lifted their regulatory equity 
by  more  than  100  per  cent  between  December  2010  and  June  2015  –  that’s  an  increase 
from 58 billion to 118 billion euros. So we have already achieved a substantial increase in 
capital.  But  make  no  mistake:  high-risk  portfolios  will  end  up  with  higher  requirements. 
Moreover, a pledge to not significantly increase capital requirements certainly doesn’t mean 
that requirements will fall back to their low pre-crisis levels. 
The  bottom  line  is  this: we  must  not  lapse  back  into  bad  old  habits  when  we’re  finalising, 
implementing  and  enforcing  the  reforms  aimed  at  restoring  financial  stability.  Financial 
intermediation  is  important  for  our  advanced  economies.  But  if  it’s  not  or  insufficiently 
regulated, it can do more harm than good. That should be borne in mind in each and every 
decision we take. 
But  talking  about  rules  and  their  enforcement  is  one  thing  –  they  will  only  lead  to  better 
finance  if  banks  and  investors  change  their  behaviour  accordingly.  Banks,  especially 
European  ones,  have  to  adapt  their  business  models.  They  need  to  set  themselves 
sustainable profit targets which do not undermine ethical behaviour. 
Without a doubt, such financial policies need to be complemented by fundamental economic 
policy reforms. But I’m certain that sound financial and monetary policy will be a cornerstone 
of a stable financial system that serves the development of the real economy over the long 
term. 
6. 
Conclusion 
Esteemed colleagues 
We are facing two challenges simultaneously: to reanimate economic growth, and to build a 
sustainable financial system that is fit for the 21st century. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
I am convinced that our policies need to set their sights on a long-term solution – a lasting 
cure, if you will, not an endless supply of painkillers. We should not turn a blind eye to the 
short-term challenges we face, of course. But what we must do is refrain from solutions that 
encourage excessive indebtedness. Finance will be an important ingredient in the cure for 
growth – but it will need to be of a better quality, not a greater quantity. 
And now that I have preached abstinence, let us enjoy a delightful lunch! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
