  William C Dudley: The role of the Federal Reserve – lessons from 
financial crises 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Annual Meeting of the Virginia Association of Economists, 
Virginia Military Institute, Lexington, Virginia, 31 March 2016. 
 Kenneth  Garbade,  Jack  Gutt,  Joyce  Hansen,  Michael  Held  and  Joseph  Tracy  assisted  in  preparing  these 
remarks. 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  here  today  as  part  of  the  Virginia 
Association of Economists annual meeting at Virginia Military Institute and Washington and 
Lee University. This is an appropriate setting for the topic I will be addressing – the role of 
the Federal Reserve as the central bank of the United States. When the Federal Reserve Act 
was  enacted  in  1913,  H.  Parker Willis,  who  had  been  a  professor  at Washington  and  Lee 
University,  played  a  critical  role.  He  worked  closely  with  Representative  Carter  Glass  of 
Virginia in crafting the legislative proposal that established the Federal Reserve, and Willis 
became the first Secretary of the Federal Reserve Board in 1914. 
Of course, I’m tackling this subject today not just because H. Parker Willis was a professor 
here in Lexington. Instead, I’m addressing this issue because of the ongoing debate about 
the role of the Federal Reserve and its structure and governance. My purpose is to demystify 
the nation’s central bank and to respond to some of the critiques that we continue to face. I 
see this as necessary because there is a risk that the Federal Reserve could be changed in 
ways  that  might  impair  our  ability  to  achieve  our  primary  objectives  –  namely,  full 
employment and price stability. As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views 
and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or the  Federal  Reserve 
System.  
The current debate surrounding this nation’s central bank is not new, but rather dates back to 
our  nation’s  independence  from  Great  Britain.  The  notion  of  a  central  bank  in  the  United 
States has nearly always been controversial – in concept, design and practice. So much so 
that the charters of the first two U.S. central banks, the First and Second Banks of the United 
States, were allowed to lapse. 
The United States, in contrast to many of our European counterparts, had no central bank 
from 1836 to 1913. During this period, the economy was prone to financial panics. The rapid 
development  of  the  19th  century  American  economy,  including  the  westward  expansion 
made possible by railroads, outstripped the ability of the private banking system to satisfy the 
nation’s needs for an elastic currency and a stable supply of credit. Ultimately, the Panic of 
1907  –  in  which  J.P.  Morgan,  the  leading  financier  of  the  day,  played  an  outsized  role  in 
responding to the crisis – was the catalyst that turned the tide back in favor of establishing a 
central bank. 
The debate preceding the passage of the Federal Reserve Act in 1913 was protracted and 
intense. Early drafts of reform proposals were careful not to even mention a “central bank” – 
the 75-year-old scars from the Second Bank’s failed reauthorization battle had still not fully 
healed. Although there was a strong recognition that the country needed a central bank to 
forestall  and  mitigate  financial  panics,  there  was  considerable  disagreement  about  how  it 
should  be  structured.  Important  considerations  included  what  role  should  be  played  by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  private bankers versus government officials, how centralized the new bank should be and the 
extent of its powers.1  
During this period, the U.S. economy was susceptible to financial panics. Lacking a central 
bank, the country had no reliable lender of last resort that could provide currency and credit 
on  demand  against  high-quality  assets.  Banks  had  to  self-insure  against  bank  runs  by 
holding a high fraction of deposits as cash, and by entering into private liquidity agreements 
with  other  banks.  Self-insurance  was  not  only  expensive  relative  to  the  cost  of  a  public 
backstop provided by a  central bank, but it was also limited in its effectiveness. When the 
business cycle turned down and financial stress intensified, bank runs often ensued as bank 
customers  rushed  to  convert  their  deposits  into  cash.  Without  a  true  lender  of  last  resort, 
cash that banks individually and collectively kept in reserve often proved inadequate to meet 
demand.  At  that  point,  a  bank  under  duress  had  to  either  close  its  doors  or  quickly  sell 
assets. Of course, either action worked to intensify the panic and to increase the stress on 
the economy. 
The Federal Reserve was established so that there would be a lender of last resort that could 
lend  against  high-quality  collateral  and  provide  a  reliable  and  elastic  currency.2  The 
knowledge that such a lender of last resort existed reduced considerably the incentives for 
depositors to race to their banks to make withdrawals at the first sign of trouble.3 At that time, 
the provision of an elastic currency was especially important because the agricultural sector 
represented a significant proportion of the U.S. economy. As a result, the demand for credit 
increased significantly each fall when farmers incurred the costs associated with harvesting 
their crops. Prior to the establishment of the Federal Reserve, accommodating this seasonal 
demand necessitated a flow of currency and credit from the major financial markets such as 
New York and Chicago that put upward pressure on interest rates. With its ability to provide 
an elastic currency, the Federal Reserve would be able to dampen such seasonal swings in 
interest rates. 
At  its  inception,  the  Federal  Reserve  differed  from  central  banks  in  Europe  in  that  it  was 
decentralized.  The  design  reflected  long-standing  concerns  in  our  country  about  the 
concentration of power in a single authority. These concerns are reflected in the federated 
system established by the Constitution in 1787. Similarly, the design adopted for the central 
bank in 1913 was also federated, with twelve independent Reserve Banks, each with its own 
capital  and  board  of  directors,  overseen  by  a  seven  member  Federal  Reserve  Board  in 
Washington,  with  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  serving  as  chair  of  the  Board.  This 
decentralized structure allayed the prevailing fear of concentrating power in either New York 
or Washington and, especially within the banking community, of ceding too much power to 
the federal government. 
Paul  Warburg  was  an  American  banker  who  had  emigrated  to  the  United  States  from 
Europe. He was deeply involved in the debate about the appropriate structure of the central 
bank and described the concern as follows: 
                                                
1  See America’s Bank: The Epic Struggle to Create the Federal Reserve, Roger Lowenstein, 2015. 
2  President Wilson, who signed the Federal Reserve Act, described this new feature for the currency. “Suffice it 
here to say that it provides a currency which expands as it is needed and contracts when it is not needed: a 
currency which comes into existence in response to the call of every man who can show a going business and 
a concrete basis for extending credit to him, however obscure or prominent he may be, however big or little his 
business transactions.” Letter to Congressman Oscar Underwood, October 17, 1914, Wilson Papers, vol. 31. 
In addition, the Federal Reserve was given the authority to clear checks on a nationwide basis. This helped 
knit  the  country’s  commerce  together  better  and  ensured  that  checks  would  be  payable  at  par  rather  than 
discounted by differing amounts depending on how far one was from the bank of issue and how little one knew 
about a particular bank’s financial condition and viability. 
3 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  The view was generally held that centralization of banking would inevitably result 
in  one  of  two  alternatives:  either  complete  governmental  control,  which  meant 
politics in banking, or control by “Wall Street,” which meant banking in politics.4  
Importantly,  the  Federal  Reserve  was  designed  to  have  budgetary  independence from the 
federal  government.  The  System  funds  itself  through  its  business  operations,  and  not 
through Congressional appropriations.5 This formed an important foundation in ensuring that 
the conduct of monetary policy would be independent from political influence. A wide range 
of  research  has  shown  that  central  banks  achieve  better  outcomes  with  respect  to 
employment and inflation when they are insulated from short-term political pressures in their 
conduct of monetary policy.6  
The Federal Reserve System was soon tested, first by the Depression of 1920–21, and then 
by  the  Great  Depression.  The  searing  experience  of  the  Great  Depression,  including  the 
1933  Banking  Holiday  and  thousands  of  bank  failures,  revealed  significant  shortcomings. 
This  led  to  the  Banking  Act  of  1935,  which  made  two  important  changes  –  establishing  a 
federal deposit insurance system and making the Federal Reserve System more centralized. 
The Great Depression made it clear that having a lender of last resort was not sufficient for 
preventing  bank  runs.  Deposit  insurance,  which  had  been  debated  but  not  adopted  during 
the  drafting  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act,  was  instituted  with  the  creation  of  the  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
A second lesson was that monetary policy would be more effective if it were coordinated at 
the national level, rather than conducted individually by the Reserve Banks.7 To accomplish 
this, the Banking Act replaced the Federal Reserve Board with the Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, and established the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) to 
oversee the conduct of monetary policy. The governors in Washington were made dominant 
because  they  were  given  the  majority  of  votes  on  the  FOMC.8  Over  time,  the  role  of  the 
executive branch and the U.S. Treasury was reduced. Beginning in 1936, the Secretary of 
the Treasury no longer served on the FOMC. The Federal Reserve Board moved to its own 
building in 1937, and the Federal Reserve gained independence in the setting of monetary 
policy with the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord in 1951. 
A century following the Panic of 1907, another financial crisis led to the Great Recession. As 
was  the  case  following  the  Great  Depression,  weaknesses  exposed  by  the  crisis  led  to 
further  changes  to  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  Some  of  these  changes  were  legislated 
while others were initiated by the Federal Reserve itself. 
Before discussing the lessons learned from the financial crisis and the changes that ensued, 
I  think  it  is  important  to  recount  the  Fed’s  efforts  to  support  the  U.S.  economy  during  this 
recent  period  of  severe  economic  and  financial  distress.  As  you  may  recall,  the  Federal 
                                                
4  Paul Warburg, The Federal Reserve System: Its Origins and Growth, vol. 1, 1930. 
5  The  Federal  Reserve  Banks are  funded  through  their  respective  operations.  The  Federal  Reserve  Board  – 
and later, the Board of Governors – is funded through semiannual assessments on the Banks [Section 10(3) 
of the Federal Reserve Act]. The Board’s financial independence was strengthened in the 1933 Banking Act 
[Section  6(b)]  which  stipulated  that  these  semiannual  assessments  “[…]  shall  not  be  construed  to  be 
Government funds or appropriated moneys.” 
6  For  example,  see  Alesina  and  Summers,  “Central  Bank  Independence  and  Macroeconomic  Performance.” 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 25, no. 2 pg. 157–62, 1993. 
7  H. Parker Willis described this independence given to the Reserve Banks in the conduct of policy. “There is 
nothing, either in the Federal Reserve Act or in the regulations of the Federal Reserve Board, to indicate that 
the reserve banks are to be operated in groups or through communications with one another, resulting in the 
establishment of a single policy as to detail.” H. Parker Willis, The Federal Reserve, pg. 128, 1915. 
8  This assumes no vacancies on the seven-member Board of Governors. Currently, with five members of the 
Board of Governors and five votes among the Reserve Banks, the balance is split equally. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Reserve  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  in  two  ways.  First,  it  intervened  to  prevent  the 
failure of several systemically important institutions, including firms that it did not supervise – 
namely Bear Stearns and AIG.9 Second, it established a number of special liquidity facilities 
to ensure that domestic banks, securities dealers, commercial paper issuers, money market 
mutual funds and foreign banks had sufficient access to dollar liquidity so they could sustain 
their lending and investment activities, and thereby continue to supply credit to households 
and businesses. 
I strongly believe that these interventions were necessary to prevent a systemic collapse of 
the  global  financial  system.  If  such  a  collapse  had  occurred,  I  am  convinced  that  the 
consequences  would  have  been  a  global  depression.  If  the  Federal  Reserve  hadn’t  done 
everything in its authority to prevent a collapse, we would have been derelict in our duty to 
the country. 
Let me be clear: The interventions by the Federal Reserve during the crisis were designed to 
safeguard the economy, for the benefit of all Americans, while protecting the taxpayer. I am 
proud  of  our  record  on  both  accounts.  In  the  end,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  extraordinary 
interventions achieved their intended purposes to support economic activity and, incidentally, 
taxpayers  were  compensated  for  the  risks  undertaken  in  these  interventions.  Total  profits 
from these interventions were more than $30 billion.10 One important condition for lending in 
these  programs  was  that  the  loan  needed to  be  secured  to  the satisfaction  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank extending the loan. Despite the degree of dislocation in the financial system at 
the time and the severity of the Great Recession, there were no losses for any of the Fed’s 
programs. 
At  the  same  time,  I  agree  with  those  critics  who  argue  that  there  was  something 
fundamentally  unfair  about  the  disparity  in  treatment  between  the  few  large  financial 
institutions that were saved  versus the millions of individuals  who lost their homes or their 
jobs.  My  response  is  not  particularly  satisfying.  Recessions  inflict  considerable  pain  on 
innocent  bystanders  in  the  economy.  Depressions  greatly  compound  this  pain.  Given  the 
Federal Reserve’s role and authority, what we  knew at the time and the powers and tools 
that  were  available  to  us,  I  think  we  made  good  choices.  If  the  large  systemic  banking 
organizations  had  failed,  the  hardships  inflicted  on  households  and  small  business  would 
have been far worse.11  
From  my  perspective,  I  believe  that  any  critique  of  the  Fed  or  other  agencies  should  be 
focused more on the regulatory and supervisory shortcomings – some of which, I admit, were 
ours  –  that  created  the  economic  and  financial  market  circumstances  in  which  the  Fed’s 
extraordinary interventions proved necessary. This leads me back to some of those lessons 
learned and the changes that have resulted. 
The crisis showed that the regulatory community did not fully grasp the vulnerability of the 
financial system. In particular, critical financial institutions were not resilient enough to cope 
with  large  scale  disruptions  without  assistance,  and  problems  in  one  institution  quickly 
spread to others. In response, the Federal Reserve has made significant changes in how we 
regulate  and  supervise 
liquidity 
requirements,  put  banks  through  annual  stress  tests,  established  the  Large  Institution 
Supervision  Coordination  Committee  (LISCC)  to  enable  us  to  evaluate  the  largest  firms 
collectively and relative to one another, and set up the Office of Financial Stability to enable 
institutions.  We  have  raised  capital  and 
financial 
                                                
9  The Federal Reserve was unable to prevent the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers. 
10  For example, see “Federal Reserve: Emergency Lending,” Marc Labonte, Congressional Research Service, 
January 6, 2016. 
11  In  retrospect,  I  believe  more  government  support  could  have  been  provided  to  homeowners.  Although  the 
Federal  Reserve  did  not  have  the  authority  to  implement  a  mortgage  modification  loan  program,  we  did 
implement a mortgage-backed securities purchase program to lower mortgage interest rates. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  us  to  look  at  the  financial  system  more  holistically.  Financial  stability  now  receives  the 
attention  it  deserves.  For  example,  there  are  now  regular  briefings  and  discussions  on 
financial stability at FOMC meetings. 
As  discussed  earlier,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  the  responsibility  to  be  the  lender  of  last 
resort.  In  normal  times,  this  occurs  through  discount  window  lending  to  depository 
institutions.  During  the  financial  crisis,  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  enabled 
extensions of credit in “unusual and exigent” circumstances to individuals, partnerships and 
corporations.12  The  extraordinary  interventions  that  were  undertaken  using  our  emergency 
powers  under  Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  were  warranted  and  within  our 
authority.  However,  I  suspect  that  the  scale  and  scope  of  these  interventions  went 
considerably further than envisioned by the public and Congress prior to the crisis. 
In  response,  Congress  narrowed  the  scope  of  Section  13(3)  with  the  Dodd-Frank  Act.  In 
particular,  Dodd-Frank  limits  the  Federal  Reserve’s  authority  to  extend  credit  through 
facilities with broad-based eligibility, and constrains the Federal Reserve’s authority to extend 
credit  to  a  single  company.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act  also  modified  the  governance  that  would 
apply to any future intervention in an effort to increase public accountability. 
In  addition,  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  addressed  the  broader  issue  exposed  by  the  crisis  –  that 
some large financial institutions had become “too-big-to-fail” (TBTF). To end TBTF, Title II of 
the Dodd-Frank Act established a process to ensure that any financial firm could be resolved 
without threatening the viability of the financial system and without putting taxpayer funds at 
risk.13  In  addition,  financial  intermediaries  designated  as  systemically  important  by  the 
Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  are  subject  to  tougher  prudential  standards  and 
enhanced  supervision  by  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  intent  behind  these  measures  is  to 
reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  failure  of  a  large  financial  firm,  and  the  consequence  of  such  a 
failure for the financial system, should one occur. 
The Dodd-Frank Act left intact the decentralized structure of the original federated Federal 
Reserve  System  – the twelve  Reserve  Banks  and  the  Board  of Governors  in Washington. 
Each Reserve Bank continues to operate as a separately capitalized corporation with its own 
Board of Directors.14 But, to limit the role of bankers on the Federal Reserve Bank boards, 
the Dodd-Frank Act prohibited the bankers on each board from participating in the selection 
of its Reserve Bank president.15  
Even prior to the Dodd-Frank Act, it is important to emphasize that the directors played no 
significant role in setting policy.16 Instead, their role has been to advise the Reserve Bank 
                                                
12  Several other conditions had to be satisfied as well. 
13  Although  considerable  progress  has  been  made  in  ending  TBTF,  I  think  it  is  premature  to  declare  victory. 
Some banks still have work to do to make their resolution plans credible, and there needs to be more work on 
cross-border issues to ensure that such a resolution would proceed smoothly. 
14  Each  Board  is  made  up  of  nine  members  divided  evenly  into  Class  A,  B,  and  C  directors.  The  Class  A 
directors  represent  the  banks  of  the  District  that  are  Federal  Reserve  member  banks,  the  Class  B  and  C 
directors represent the broader public interest. Only eligible Class B and Class C directors can participate in 
the process for selecting Reserve Bank presidents. 
15  The selection of the President consists of two steps: Appointment of the Reserve Bank president by the Board 
the  Board  of  Governors.  For  details  see: 
of  Directors,  and  approval  of 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/faqs/how-is-a-federal-reserve-bank-president-selected.htm. 
the  appointment  by 
16  There  is  one  exception,  but  it  has  little  actual  significance.  Boards  of  Directors  do  make  recommendations 
concerning changes in the primary credit (discount) rate. However, these recommendations only go into effect 
by  an  affirmative  vote  by  the  Board  of  Governors.  Also,  if  the  Board  of  Governors  wanted  to  change  the 
primary  credit  rate  and  no  recommendations  were  available  to  act  upon,  the  Board  legally  could  move 
unilaterally. In fact, what would likely happen in this unlikely circumstance would be a phone call to one or 
more  Reserve  Banks  to  ask  for  the  desired  recommendation  and  rapid  compliance  with  the  Board  of 
Governors’ request. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  In 
facilities. 
for  participation 
in  Federal  Reserve 
president  about  economic,  community  and  business  developments  in  the  District,  and  to 
ensure  that  the  Bank  is  a  well-governed  and  well-managed  institution.17  And,  although 
member banks hold capital in the Federal Reserve and receive a dividend set by law against 
this  capital,  member  banks  do  not  influence  the  Fed’s  monetary  and  regulatory  policy 
decisions, how policy is implemented or the supervisory oversight of banks. 
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  also  addressed  the  need  for  enhanced  transparency  by  establishing 
disclosure  requirements 
terms  of 
transparency,  I  do  think  it  is  a  fair  critique  that,  in  the  past,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  not 
always  been  sufficiently  transparent.  For  example,  prior  to  1994,  we  typically  didn’t  even 
announce changes that were being implemented in monetary policy. Market participants had 
to  infer  what  we  were  doing from  our  daily  open  market  operations  and  where  the federal 
funds rate was trading. During the crisis, I also believe we could have done more to explain 
the  motivations  for  our  extraordinary  interventions.  At  times,  while  the  motivations  and 
objectives  might  have  been  obvious  to  us,  they  weren’t  always  as  readily  apparent  to 
Congress  or  to  the  public.  I  think  this  created  uncertainty  about  what  we  were  trying  to 
accomplish, and made it more difficult for outside observers to assess the appropriateness of 
our actions and our motives. 
Today the situation is quite different. We have made significant enhancements with respect 
to  transparency.  After  each  meeting,  the  FOMC  issues  a  statement  that  sets  the  current 
target range for the federal funds rate and explains its monetary policy decision. Four times a 
year, the chair holds a press conference explaining the decision and the FOMC releases its 
Summary  of  Economic  Projections  (SEP).  The  SEP  provides  the  FOMC  participants’ 
forecasts for key economic variables and the federal funds rate over the next few years. In 
addition, the FOMC participants give numerous speeches explaining their views on monetary 
policy  and  other  issues,  and  the  chair  regularly  testifies  about  monetary  policy  and  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  other  activities  before  Congress.  Overall,  I  have  found  that  this  move 
towards greater transparency has held us in good stead. 
Nearly six years since the enactment of the Dodd-Frank Act, there still remains considerable 
debate  about  whether  further  changes  to  the  role  and  structure  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System are warranted. Some of the issues being debated include how much discretion the 
Federal  Reserve  should  have  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  whether  the  Federal 
Reserve is sufficiently transparent in how it operates, and the role of the New York Fed. I 
would caution that any further changes to the Federal Reserve System should be grounded 
on  what  we  learned  from  the  crisis  and  based  on  the  needs  of  our  evolving  economy. 
Changes should be undertaken if they would make the Federal Reserve more effective in its 
mission.  In  contrast,  changes  based  on  an  emotional,  unreasoned  response  in  reaction  to 
the pain associated with the financial crisis and the Great Recession would likely be counter-
productive. 
Some  argue  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  too  much  discretion  in  its  implementation  of 
monetary policy and, consequently, would have the Fed stick to a formal rule in its conduct of 
monetary policy. This is a poor idea because adherence to a simple rule would undoubtedly 
lead to significant policy errors. The world is simply too complex to put monetary policy on 
autopilot.18  
Concerns  over  the  FOMC’s  degree  of  discretion  in  monetary  policy  likely  reflect,  in  part, 
innovations in monetary policy enacted in recent years that added accommodation at a time 
                                                
17  The  Board  of  Governors  plays  an  important  role  in  the  oversight  of  the  Reserve  Banks.  The  Board  of 
Governors regularly evaluates Reserve Bank operations and each Bank’s budget The Reserve Banks conduct 
supervision under delegated authority from the Board of Governors. Reserve Bank directors continue to have 
no role in bank supervision. 
18  See The Fed at a crossroads, Where to go next? Brookings Institution panel remarks, October 15, 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  when short-term interest rates were stuck very close to the zero lower bound. In particular, 
the Federal Reserve’s balance sheet grew substantially as the Federal Reserve enacted a 
series of large-scale asset purchase programs designed to support economic activity. With 
respect to the argument that these programs have distorted financial markets, I would simply 
respond that monetary policy always affects financial markets and financial asset valuations. 
The  expected  path  of  the  federal  funds  rate  is  an  important  factor  influencing  the  level  of 
bond  yields,  and  the  level  of  bond  yields  and  bond  term  premia  have  implications  for  the 
valuations  of  other  financial  assets,  such  as  equities,  and  influence  the  foreign  exchange 
value of the dollar. 
Of course, the impact of monetary policy may have been greater this time. But this is mainly 
because more monetary policy stimulus has been required during the current economic cycle 
in order to push the U.S. economy towards the Fed’s dual mandate objectives. I believe that 
if  we  had  not  responded  as  forcefully,  the  recovery  would  have  been  slower,  the 
unemployment  rate  would  have  been  higher  and  there  would  have  been  a  greater  risk  of 
deflation. 
While it is much too soon to claim success, the U.S. economy today is in a relatively good 
place compared to most other countries. The economic expansion is in its seventh year and 
we  have  made  considerable  progress  relative  to  our  employment  and  inflation  objectives. 
Also, the tools that we designed to control monetary policy even with a very large balance 
sheet have been shown to be effective. In December, when we raised our target range for 
the federal funds rate to 25 to 50 basis points, we also raised the interest rate we pay on 
bank reserves to 50 basis points and the rate we pay on our overnight reverse repo facility to 
25 basis points. Not only have these new tools been effective in moving the federal funds 
rate up into the middle of its new target range, but the entire complex of money market rates 
has moved up as well. 
Also,  the  fears  expressed  by  some  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s  very  large  balance  sheet 
would  lead  to  runaway  inflation  have  proven  to  be  unwarranted.  Now  that  we  have 
demonstrated that we have monetary control even with a very large balance sheet, I would 
hope that this issue has been put to rest. 
As I noted earlier, I am a committed advocate for enhanced transparency and we are always 
looking for ways to improve. But, of course, there are limits. One could argue, for example, 
that  a  live  broadcast  of  a  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  meeting  would  be  more 
transparent. But, such a broadcast would do considerable harm by constraining candor and 
debate  over  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  decision.  I  believe  it  would  likely  lead  to  less 
informed  decisions  and,  consequently,  poorer  execution  of  our  monetary  policy 
responsibilities.  Similarly,  disclosing  in  real  time  who  was  borrowing  from  the  Federal 
Reserve’s Discount Window would likely undercut the efficacy of the window. Banks might be 
reluctant  to  borrow  if  it  were  immediately  made  public  because  such  borrowing  might  be 
construed  in  the  market  as  a  sign  of  weakness.19  Stigmatizing  Discount  Window  use  by 
banks would make this tool less effective as a lender of last resort backstop for bank liquidity 
needs.  While  there  obviously  is  a  point  of  diminishing  returns  in  terms  of  increased 
transparency, I think it’s reasonable to evaluate what further steps the Federal Reserve could 
make in this direction, judging whether additional steps would enhance versus diminish the 
effectiveness of our tools and policies, and our ability to achieve our objectives. 
With  regard  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  which  I  have  the  responsibility  of 
leading, I’d observe that the New York Fed, like the other eleven reserve banks, serves to 
                                                
19  A historical example was the disclosure of Reconstruction Finance Corporation loans to banks in the Great 
Depression.  This  disclosure  often  created  runs  at  the  respective  banks.  See  James  Butkiewicz,  “The 
Reconstruction Finance Corporation, the Gold Standard, and the Banking Panic of 1933,” Southern Economic 
Journal, vol. 66, no. 2, October 1999, pg. 271. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  support the overall mission of the Federal Reserve System. But, by virtue of its location, the 
New York Fed has a unique responsibility on behalf of the System – namely to serve as the 
operational arm of the Federal Open Market Committee with respect to the implementation of 
monetary  policy.  This  separation  of  the  policy  arm  and  the  operational  arm  of  monetary 
policy in two distinct institutions is a very unusual setup among central banks.20  
There are good reasons why these important functions are assigned to the New York Fed. 
Monetary  policy  works  by  affecting  financial  market  conditions  in  order  to  promote  the 
economic outcomes consistent with the Fed’s dual mandate. As such, effective and efficient 
monetary  policy  execution  requires  a  practical  and  thorough  understanding  of  the  broad 
range of the financial markets through which monetary policy operates. 
New York City is the nation’s principal financial center. By locating the duties related to the 
execution of monetary policy at the New York Fed, the System gains a number of benefits. 
These include the New York Fed’s ability to develop expertise in and understanding of the 
broad  spectrum  of  financial  markets  and  institutions,  and  its  access  to  a  deep  pool  of 
specialized financial talent in the place where it is most concentrated. 
The  New  York  Fed’s  institutional  knowledge  and  experience  in  financial  markets  and  its 
related disciplines are a critical input at all times, but never more so than during periods of 
duress.  This  was  evidenced  during  the  financial  crisis,  when  the  New  York  Fed’s  unique 
insights  and  expertise  helped  the  Federal  Reserve  respond  quickly  and  effectively  to 
unfolding events. 
The  authors  who  crafted  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  such  as  Carter  Glass  –  assisted  by  H. 
Parker Willis – deliberately created a central bank structure that fits the U.S. political system, 
with a series of important checks and balances – between Washington and the rest of the 
country,  between  Washington  and  New  York,  and  with  respect  to  the  role  of  the  federal 
government versus the private sector. These checks and balances exist to ensure that the 
central bank acts in the broadest interests of the nation, and is appropriately insulated from 
short-term political pressures and considerations. In this construction, New York does have a 
special  role,  but  one  that  stems  from  where  it  sits,  in  New  York  City,  the  nation’s  most 
important financial center. 
The  Federal  Reserve  exists  to  serve  Main  Street,  not  Wall  Street.  The  dual  mandate 
objectives established by Congress – full employment and price stability – are clear on this 
point.  There  is  no  mention  of  Wall  Street.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  broadly  recognized  that 
without  a  well-functioning  financial  system  it  would  be  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  for  the 
Federal Reserve to achieve those objectives. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  evolved  considerably  since  its  inception  in  1913.  This  evolution 
has  been  informed  by  lessons  from  past  financial  crises.  The  goal  has  been  to  make  the 
Federal  Reserve  even  more  effective  in  carrying  out  its  mission.  This  process  of  learning 
from  experience  is  as  critical  for  institutions  as  it  as  individuals.  To  paraphrase  Winston 
Churchill: People always make mistakes, but only wise ones learn from their mistakes. 
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
                                                
20  In  the  case  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  member  national  central  banks  are  involved  in  policy 
implementation. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
