  Agus D W Martowardojo: Growth diagnostic for Indonesia – focusing on 
human capital and infrastructure 
Keynote speech by Mr Agus D W Martowardojo, Governor of Bank Indonesia, at the Bank 
Indonesia-Asian  Development  Bank  International  Seminar  “Structural  Reform  in  Emerging 
Asia”, Jakarta, 23 March 2016. 
 Distinguished speakers, seminar participants, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good Morning. 
1. 
It  is  such  a  pleasure  for  Bank  Indonesia  to  host  this  international  seminar  jointly 
organized with Asian Development Bank, and I am very delighted to welcome you all to this 
event. 
I  find  the  theme  of  this  seminar  “Structural  Reform  in  Emerging  Asia”  both 
2. 
relevant and important for all of us today, with the global economy still in a state of growth 
deficit, and the future path seems to look bleak if not uncertain. 
3. 
I believe that the seminar will provide a great opportunity to discuss how structural 
reform can provide a breakthrough which accelerates growth, and make it more sustainable 
and inclusive. The discussion will also be a good platform for sharing of experiences on the 
implementation of structural reforms in various countries, and from that we can draw valuable 
lessons. 
4. 
I  am  also  excited  to  know  that  the  seminar  has  been  preceded  by  a  technical 
workshop on issues surrounding the similar topic, particularly the use of Growth Diagnostic 
method and relevant economic models to identify the growth most binding constraints and 
the needed policy reforms. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Global and Indonesia’s recent economic development and challenges 
5. 
Entering  2016,  the  global  economy  continues  its  period  of  uncertainty  that  has 
lingered since the global financial crises in 2008. With global growth declining and inflation 
remaining  low,  another  sign  of  ambiguity  in  the  global  economy  emerged,  which  is 
divergence of economy and monetary policies among major economies. 
6. 
Pressures in the financial market in the beginning of 2016, in the middle of uncertain 
bottoming-up  of  oil  prices,  have  added  to  concerns  about  global  growth.  Conversely,  the 
deteriorating  macroeconomic  outlook  and  worries  about  medium-term  vulnerabilities  in  the 
global economy have unsettled financial markets. With financial institutions under renewed 
pressure,  adverse  feedback  effects  between  finance  and  the  real  economy  could  become 
significant. 
7. 
The emerging economies have once withstood the recent global economic turmoil 
by taking advantage of credit-fuelled growth as a spillover effect from large accommodative 
monetary policy in advanced economy. What may happen next after the recent normalization 
of  US  monetary  policy  and  China’s  current  economic  rebalancing  process  could  be  a 
heightened pressure in emerging economies’ growth and financial market. We may simply 
face a period of emerging market-originating spillbacks, from the previous emerging market-
receiving spillovers. 
Despite  tangible  results  from  efforts  to  increase  resilience  to  external  shocks,  the 
8. 
vulnerability  of  emerging  economies  remain,  due  to  their  rather  weak  economic  structure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  
 
Indonesia’s economy in particular, has managed to pick up its growth in 2015 with the help of 
increased government consumption on goods and investment in infrastructure projects. 
9. 
In the meantime, dissipating global economic uncertainty and improved confidence 
on Indonesia’s economy have led to a surplus in capital and financial account during the last 
quarter  of  2015,  bolstered  by  increase  in  foreign  capital  inflows,  mainly  to  government 
securities. 
10. 
The confidence on Indonesia’s economy also contributed to a more stable Rupiah 
with  an  upward  trend  and  less  volatility,  while  foreign  exchange  reserves  still  hover  well 
above the international standards. Moreover, the low global prices amid weakened domestic 
demand also brought domestic CPI inflation to slow down. 
Against 
Inflation is expected to be at around of the 4±1% inflation target, with the current 
Outlook, risks and policies 
11. 
the  background  of  maintained  stability  with  carefully  monitored 
vulnerabilities, we are still optimistic that domestic economic growth is going to be slightly 
higher in 2016, supported by the acceleration of infrastructure projects on the fiscal side, and 
increased  private  investment  as  a  result  of  government  policy  packages  and  measurable 
monetary easing while maintaining macroeconomic stability. 
12. 
account deficit projected to be below 3% of GDP. 
13. 
However, this outlook is presented with some overshadowing risks in the horizon, 
both external and domestic, including another FFR increase expected in the second half of 
2016,  the  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy,  the  continuing  decline  in  commodity  prices, 
and domestically, rising volatile food inflation. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
14. 
The  recent  economic  dynamics  show  us  the  significance  impact  of  external 
economic  conditions  on  Indonesia’s  economy,  and  emerging  economies  in  general. While 
Indonesia is still optimistic toward rising growth, risks are weighing down, especially those 
from  the  external  sector,  normally  uncontrollable  to  a  small  open  economy  or  emerging 
markets in general. 
15. 
In this juncture, we are arriving at the point why domestic economic strength needs 
to be increased, and the effective way to do it is by rising its own growth potential. Monetary 
and  fiscal  policies  are  mainly  aimed  at  supporting  demand,  but  demand  cannot  be 
optimized if structural problems are not addressed well. Therefore, I believe it is timely 
for policymakers in emerging economies, Indonesia included, to focus on structural reform to 
boost economic growth in a sustainable manner. 
Growth dynamic analysis 
16. 
On that note, it is important to point out that reform needs will differ from one country 
to  another.  History  reveals  that  reform  packages  commonly  prescribed  only  provide  small 
benefits for countries that tried to adopt it. On the other hand,  countries that implemented 
well-focused  reforms  in  key  areas  have  accelerated  their  growth.  Having  that  said,  we 
certainly need growth strategy that cater to domestic opportunities and constraints. 
17. 
Economists have concluded that growth accelerations materialize when binding 
constraints  on  growth  are  removed.  Many  countries  including  Indonesia,  have  keen 
interest  in  a  growth  diagnostic  approach,  which  aims  at  identifying  the  most  binding 
constraints on economic activity, and the respective set of policies that should be prioritized 
and implemented to allow for accelerated and sustainable growth. 
18. 
Growth diagnostic method has been profound and used by a number of countries as 
well as international organizations such as the IMF, the World Bank and the ADB itself for 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
 
their country analysis. A number of donor agencies has also used this approach as part of 
their toolkit when formulating their operational strategies in developing countries. 
Growth diagnostic analysis for Indonesia 
19. 
Bank  Indonesia  has  also  conducted  research  using  growth  diagnostic  analysis, 
which takes into account the view that development priorities should not only put emphasis 
on factor-driven aspects, but also efficiency-driven and innovation-driven areas, all combined 
to avoid middle-income trap. 
20. 
BI’s  growth  diagnostic  research  is  unique  since  it  takes  into  account  different 
characteristics of Indonesia’s regional economies and brings up quantified analysis for policy 
response. The result reveals that the low level of return from economic activities is the main 
factor that hinders Indonesia’s economic growth. 
21. 
Further  analysis  shows  that  the  root  of  the  problem,  which  is  the  most  binding 
constraints  hindering  the  country’s  economic  growth,  are  in  the  area  of  human  capital 
enhancement and infrastructure development, particularly in relation to connectivity and 
logistics. 
22. 
Human  capital  issues  is  indeed  a  classical  problem  for  middle  income  countries. 
Human development is certainly important for inclusive growth. Currently, Indonesia is in the 
period of demographic bonus for up to 30 years ahead, where the period of 2015–2045 will 
be marked by 70% working class out of the total population. 
23. 
However,  having  large  population  without  appropriately  large  proportion  of  highly 
skilled and educated people would make it difficult to exit the middle income trap. Labor force 
with high education is crucial to shift the existing majority of labor-intensive/low-technology 
and resource-based industry up to the middle or high technology industry. 
The development of human capital would lift up the productivity level of the labor 
24. 
force, which would in turn enhance Indonesia’s competitive advantage, which is an important 
prerequisite to excel within the current ASEAN Economic Community Era. 
25. 
Infrastructure  problem  also  poses  as  Indonesia’s  major  constraint  for  accelerated 
growth.  Connectivity  issues  among  regions,  including  the  need  for  high  quality  and  high 
capacity  harbors,  airports,  roads  and  railways  in  Indonesia  have  spurred  logistical  costs. 
Manufacturing activities related to exports and imports are especially in need of appropriate 
harbors, even for Java region which contribute the largest part to the national economy. 
26. 
In addition, energy particularly electricity, also becomes a crucial issue and serves 
as  important  prerequisite  for  domestic  industry’s  development.  A  reliable  and  adequate 
supply  of  electricity  would  attract  investors’  interest  to  build  manufacturing  facilities  in 
Indonesia. The increased foreign direct investment will enhance Indonesia’s role within the 
global value chain. 
27. 
Policy  simulation  in  our  growth  diagnostic  research  indicates  the  importance  of 
resolving  these  human  capital  and  infrastructure  issues  for  growth  acceleration 
process.  Bank  Indonesia  found  that  modest  increase  in  electricity  capacity  and  human 
development will each enhance growth of around 0.25% per year, while enhancement in the 
quality human capital will contribute to an increase in employment of around 0.50%. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Policy priorities 
To  address  the  existing  challenges,  I  believe  we  have  come  to  a  common 
28. 
understanding  that  reforms  to  improve  the  economic  structure  should  be  underlined 
and  properly  implemented.  Cyclical  policies  from  monetary  and  fiscal  domains  remain 
indispensable indeed, but not sufficient as it only responds to short term recurrent symptoms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 to  ease  monetary  policy  became  apparent  on 
 
 
29. 
Thus  far,  Bank  Indonesia’s  monetary  and  macroprudential  policies  have  been 
among the key factors in safeguarding macroeconomic stability, which support the structural 
reforms pursued by both central and regional government. 
30. 
Bank  Indonesia  has  lowered  BI  Rate  and  Primary  Reserve  Requirement  as 
available  room 
the  back  of  solid 
macroeconomic  stability,  including  lower  inflationary  pressures  going  forward.  However, 
stability remains the priority. 
31. 
In this regards, Bank Indonesia will also continue to strengthen coordination with 
the  Government.  In  addition,  by  cooperating  in  harmony  with  other  authorities  such  as 
Indonesia Financial Service Authority (OJK), Bank Indonesia also strives to maintain financial 
stability,  which  together  with  macroeconomic  stability,  will  provide  strong  ground  for  the 
country’s accelerated and sustainable growth. 
32. 
The needed structural reforms itself should be targeted to address the most binding 
constraints.  For  Indonesia  in  particular,  it  may  include  building  more  education  facilities, 
providing  highly  competent  teaching  resources,  as  well  as  increasing  funds  for  education 
both from government and private sector. 
33. 
To  address  infrastructure  problem,  providing  sufficient  land  for  power  plants, 
improving  business  climate  for  investment  in  infrastructure,  and  enhancing  regional  tax 
collection, as well as public private partnership to raise funds for infrastructure projects can 
become priority policies to implement. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Going forward 
34. 
Let me reiterate that a good balance of monetary policy, fiscal policy and structural 
reform  will  altogether  bring  out  a  policy  mix  that  will  take  the  country  many  steps  forward 
toward  faster  and  more sustainable  growth.  Lessons from  countries that  are  successful  in 
implementing structural reforms to boost their economic growth such as China and India, will 
be especially valuable. 
35. 
Let  me  also  express  my  special  appreciation  for  the  successful  collaboration 
between ADB and BI in producing a joint book entitled “Growth Diagnostic of Indonesia.” I 
am  looking  forward  to  the  launching  of  the  book,  which  I  am  certain  will  provide  valuable 
insight to all of us. 
36. 
As a final note, I would like to wish you a pleasant and fruitful experience during this 
one day seminar. I believe that ideas, insights, and experiences shared among international 
and domestic experts as well as the audiences during the sessions will contribute to better 
understanding  on  the  important  topic  of  Growth  Diagnostic,  and  bring  refreshed  ideas  for 
policy formulation and priorities. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
