 Mark Carney: The New Fiver 
 Opening remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England and Chairman of the 
Financial Stability Board, at the £5 note launch, Blenheim Palace, Oxfordshire, 2 June 2016. 
 I would like to express my gratitude to his grace, the Duke of Marlborough, for his generosity 
in hosting this historic event at one of the nation’s greatest architectural treasures. 
On September 3rd 1939, with The Gathering Storm about to break, a new First Lord of the 
Admiralty  was  appointed.  He  was  so  familiar  to  the  Navy  that  the  signal  to  the  Fleet  said 
simply: “Winston is Back.” 
In the years that followed, Britain’s resolve, tenacity and spirit would all be tested. The nation 
proved more than equal to the task. 
Britain  stood  steadfast  through  its  Finest  Hour.  In  North  Africa,  Asia  and  the  Balkans,  the 
United Kingdom helped turn the Hinge of Fate. It would forge The Grand Alliance to liberate 
Europe from tyranny, and then with victory, set the vision for the reconstruction of the post-
war era. 
The “bulldog spirit” of those years was embodied and emboldened by Winston Churchill. This 
spirit is just one of his many contributions that the Bank commemorates with The New Fiver. 
Churchill was not just a martial leader – though he was an exceptional one – he was also 
one of the greatest statesmen of all time. 
Blenheim 
Great statesmen know their history, and Churchill knew more than most. Indeed, the author 
of the Life and Times of Marlborough would likely have approved of this choice of venue for 
today’s launch. 
After all, Blenheim Palace was built as a gift to the first Duke of Marlborough, John Churchill, 
in  recognition  for  his  leadership  of  the  Allied  forces  to  victory  in  the  Battle  of  Blenheim  in 
1704 – a victory that would decisively turn the War of Spanish Succession. Winston Churchill 
was  born  here  in  1874  and  proposed  to  his  wife,  Clementine  Hozier,  on  these  grounds  in 
1908. 
Banknote character 
Winston  Churchill  will  replace  Elizabeth  Fry,  the  prison  reformer,  on  the  Fiver  from 
September of this year. The new £5 note will in due course sit alongside the new £10, which 
will feature Jane Austen, the new £20, which celebrates JMW Turner, and the existing £50 
which profiles Boulton and Watt. 
Individuals  who  symbolise  the  breadth  and  depth  of  British  achievement  across  statecraft, 
social reform, literature, visual arts, science and commerce. 
This demonstrates that our banknotes do not just have economic value – the classic roles of 
money to facilitate trade, store value, and provide a unit of account. Banknotes have cultural 
value as well. 
By  depicting  characters on  our  banknotes,  we  celebrate  those  who  have  advanced  British 
thought, spurred innovation, shown exceptional leadership, shaped this diverse society and 
forged its common values. 
In these regards, money is memory for a country and its people. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  I have already alluded to why Churchill is a worthy choice. Were that in doubt, consider that, 
in 2002, Churchill was voted “the greatest ever Briton” in a BBC poll. Or that he continues to 
command vast international recognition as a hero of the free world. 
Churchill’s contributions extended beyond his pivotal roles in the nation’s martial and political 
histories. He is the only British Prime Minister to have won the Nobel Prize in literature. He 
was a prodigious painter, and, perhaps thankfully, the only Prime Minister to enter the music 
charts. 
The wisdom of his witticisms is legion, extending as far as the dismal science. Central bank 
forecasters can identify closely with his advice that, “it is a much better policy to prophesy 
after the event has already taken place.” 
Polymer 
But in some prophesies we can be confident: for example that our new polymer banknotes, 
of which The New Fiver is the first, will stand the test of time. 
Polymer marks a major innovation. It is cleaner, safer, and stronger. 
It is resistant to dirt and moisture, so the note won’t wear out as quickly as the current fivers 
but will stay in good condition for longer. 
It  is  stronger  than  paper  and  can  better  withstand  being  repeatedly  folded  into  wallets  or 
scrunched up inside pockets. Polymer notes can survive a splash of Claret, a flick of cigar 
ash, the nip of a bulldog, and even a spin in the washing machine afterwards to boot. 
This  added  strength  means  we  expect  polymer  notes  to  last  at  least  two-and-a-half  times 
longer than the current generation of £5 banknotes, generating cost savings over time. 
Polymer notes are also better for the environment. Because they will last longer, we will have 
to print fewer. That means less energy in production and transportation. And when a polymer 
banknote has reached the end of its useful life, it will be recycled. 
Importantly, using polymer means we can incorporate better security features. It allows for 
see-through  panels,  coloured  foils,  detailed  metallic  images,  and  a  new  advance:  tactile 
features. In fact, I can announce today that tactile features will be present on all the other 
denomination  polymer  notes,  leaving  The  New  Fiver  identifiable  by  their  absence.  This  all 
means safer banknotes, with the tactile feature helping the visually impaired to recognise our 
different notes, ensuring the nation’s money is as inclusive as possible. 
By adopting polymer, we’re aligning with international best practice, alongside Australia, New 
Zealand, and Canada. As Churchill did, we may have to wait a while for the Americans to join 
up. 
We have exploited polymer’s possibilities in The New Fiver’s design. It features Churchill’s 
portrait,  captured  in  Ottawa  by  Yousuf  Karsh.  The  famous  glower  of  the  war-time  hero 
prompted,  in  this  case, by  the  photographer’s  decision  to  take  Churchill’s  cigar  away  from 
him.1 
Behind  the  portrait  is  an  illustration  of  the  Houses  of  Parliament  by  Abigail  Daker,  viewed 
from the South Bank, looking across Westminster Bridge. The hands on the Great Clock on 
Big Ben are set to the time on 13 May 1940 when Churchill made his inaugural speech to the 
House of Commons as Prime Minister. 
                                                
1  Karsh  described  taking  the  photograph  thus:  “I stepped  toward  him  and  without  premeditation,  but  ever  so 
respectfully,  I  said,  ‘Forgive  me,  Sir’  and  plucked  the  cigar  out  of  his  mouth.  By  the  time  I  got  back  to  my 
camera, he looked so belligerent he could have devoured me. It was at that instant I took the photograph. The 
silence  was  deafening.  Then  Mr  Churchill,  smiling  benignly,  said,  ‘You  may  take  another  one.’  He  walked 
toward me, shook my hand and said, ‘You can even make a roaring lion stand still to be photographed.’” 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  His declaration then – “I have nothing to offer but blood, toil, tears and sweat” – is quoted 
beneath the portrait. 
Let’s take a look at some of these features with a video. 
Conclusion 
“A  gigantic  historical  figure  during  his  own  lifetime,  superhumanly  bold,  strong,  and 
imaginative,  one  of  the  two  greatest  men  of  action  his  nation  has  produced,  an  orator  of 
prodigious  powers,  the  saviour  of  his  country,  a  legendary  hero  who  belongs  to  myth  as 
much  as  to  reality,  the  largest  human  being  of  our  time.”  This  was  the  judgment  of  his 
contemporary, the philosopher and historian Isaiah Berlin. 
Churchill himself said that “a nation that forgets its past has no future.” 
Our  banknotes  are  testaments  to  the  outstanding  achievements  of  the  nation’s  greatest 
individuals;  they  are  repositories  of  the  United  Kingdom’s  collective  memory.  That 
contribution  will  continue  with  the  new  £5,  which  brings  together  the  future,  in  the  form  of 
polymer  and  the  most  advanced  security features  yet,  and  Britain’s glorious  history,  in  the 
achievements of Sir Winston Leonard Spencer Churchill. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
