  Ravi Menon: FinTech – harnessing its power, managing its risks 
Panel  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the Singapore Forum, Singapore, 2 April 2016. 
 The smartphone is becoming our bank. 
Computer programmes are offering investment advice. 
People can now lend directly to one another online. 
FinTech is fundamentally transforming the financial industry. 
• 
• 
• 
Technology will replace many jobs in finance but will also create exciting new jobs. 
• 
Calls for new and different skill sets – understanding technology and the ability to 
work with and harness the power of machines and algorithms 
As someone in Silicon Valley put it, “the geek shall inherit the earth”. 
• 
Unregulated  FinTech  companies  are  now  providing  many  financial  services.  They  will 
challenge traditional financial institutions (FIs), disrupt and even displace some of them but 
will not replace them. 
• 
Banks  and  insurance  companies  have  something  that  unregulated  entities  do  not 
have – trust. Trust based on a track record of performance. 
FIs are not sitting still. 
– 
 They  are  actively  harnessing  technology  to  enhance  product  offerings  and 
improve efficiency. 
They are setting up in-house FinTech units to replicate the start-up mentality. 
Many  global  banks  have  set  up  “innovation  labs”  in  S’pore:  Citibank, 
StanChart, UBS, HSBC, to name a few. And insurance companies too: Aviva, 
Aon, AXA, MetLife. 
They are also collaborating with or buying over FinTech companies to tap their 
technologies. 
  Financial technology, or FinTech, may well be the best hope for the future of finance. 
• 
The financial industry is facing many headwinds 
– 
slower  economic  growth,  narrower  margins,  tighter  regulation,  and  greater 
competition from outside. 
 FinTech can potentially help the financial industry regain its dynamism and at the 
same time purposefully serve the economy and the people. 
But the FinTech phenomenon is not without risk. 
• 
The rapid pace of innovation and adoption throw up many questions for the industry 
and financial regulators. 
What should be the policy approach? Will speak from the perspective of MAS. 
 First – take a differentiated approach to different technologies and their applications. 
FinTech  encompasses  a  wide  range  of  technologies:  we  cannot  take  a  “one-size-fits-all” 
approach. 
The nature of technologies, their benefits, and risks are very different. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
     Digital payments, digital currencies – they pose issues of authentication, identity 
P2P  lending  platforms,  crowdfunding  –  there  are  implications  for  consumer 
protection and fraud risk 
Cloud computing, big data – there is the issue of cyber security 
E-trading  platforms,  algorithmic  trading  –  there  are  implications  for  market 
functioning, both good and bad. 
Blockchains  and  distributed  ledgers  systems  (DLS)  –  this  is  potentially  the  most 
transformative  innovation,  at  least  until  artificial  intelligence  comes  along  in  a  big 
way. 
Many new technologies intelligently used can help to reduce risk. Take for example DLS. 
• 
Decentralisation reduces concentration risk. A cyber attack cannot bring down the 
entire system because every player has a copy of the ledger. 
Speed  of  transaction  verification  reduces  counterparty  risk.  This  could  potentially 
translate to lower collateral requirements, better capital optimisation. 
Imagine clearing and settlement in seconds rather than days. 
But  mind  you,  these  are  still  at  proof-of-concept  stage.  There  is  still  no  scalable 
market-wide solution in place. 
  But contrary to what DLS advocates proclaim, it is not without risk and may even introduce 
new ones. 
• 
The  public  DLS  is  susceptible  to  malwares  being  uploaded  into  the  system. 
Blockchains are not hack-proof. 
And  as  all  data  are  replicated  to  very  node  in  the  system,  there  is  a  risk  of 
compromise of privacy. 
 So, each technology must be evaluated on its own merits. 
• 
And we must also consider which financial activity it is being applied to 
– 
blockchains  in  clearing  and  settlement  systems  are  very  different  from 
blockchains in trade finance or e-KYC. 
Second – adopt a risk-based approach to FinTech innovation in the unregulated 
sector. 
Regulation must not front-run innovation. 
• 
Introducing  regulation  prematurely  may  stifle  innovation  and  potentially  derail  the 
adoption of useful technology 
MAS applies a materiality and proportionality test. 
• 
This  means  when  the  risk  posed  by  new  technology  becomes  material,  then 
regulation comes in. 
And the regulation must be proportionate to the risk posed. 
• 
Take for example internet-based payments or P2P lending that takes place outside regulated 
banks. 
• 
We regulate banks chiefly because they take deposits. 
–  When they get into trouble, they have systemic consequences. 
– 
So, we supervise their lending activity and their payments systems. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   We do not regulate P2P lending platforms – as long as they do not take deposits. 
– 
But if they get very large and pose macroprudential concerns, then we may 
consider regulation. 
 Likewise,  a  payment  service  through  the  Internet  will  not  automatically  attract 
regulation 
– 
– 
These are typically small payments, often in connection with e-commerce. 
Only  larger,  more  significant  players  that  cross  the  materiality  and  other 
thresholds are regulated. 
Even then, we do not regulate them as banks and throw at them the whole 
kitchen sink of capital and liquidity requirements under the Banking Act. 
 –  We  regulate  them  under  the  Payment  Systems  Oversight  Act  or  the 
Remittance  Agents  Act  –  modular  regulation  customised  to  address  the 
specific risks or concerns they pose. 
But I must acknowledge we do not have ready-made regulations for all new 
technology solutions; often we must improvise the use of existing legislation, 
even as we draw up new ones. 
 We must know what’s going on and be ready: either to promote or to restrain. 
Third – actively promote the FinTech ecosystem and seek to harness its potential for 
good. 
While regulation must not front-run innovation, regulators must run alongside innovation 
• 
There are three ways in which MAS does this. 
One, we actively engage FinTech firms to better understand emerging innovations and 
help them design their solutions for financial services. 
Take for example cloud computing. 
• 
Our  traditional  approach  was  to  deal  only  with  regulated  FIs,  not  their  service 
providers 
– 
– 
But with cloud solutions proliferating, we changed tack 
Many of these solutions offered strong efficiencies and cost savings but not all 
models met our regulatory requirements for data integrity and protection. 
 So  we  engaged  in  dialogue  directly  with  cloud  service  providers  to  explain  our 
concerns and at the same time understand the technology 
– 
– 
The service providers then came up with solutions that met our concerns 
And  we modified our requirements to take account of new business models 
and technological capabilities. 
Two, we allow our FIs to experiment with new technologies in a safe environment. 
FIs do not have to seek MAS’ permission to try new things. 
• 
Responsibility lies with boards and management to assess the risks and put in place 
adequate safeguards 
But with many innovations, it is not always possible to anticipate every vulnerability 
or whether there is a risk of breaching regulation. 
Sometimes, as Nike puts it, you have to “just do it”. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  
 
MAS  will  therefore  introduce  a  “regulatory  sandbox”  approach  that  aims  to  give  FIs  more 
confidence to experiment and launch their innovative products or services within controlled 
boundaries. 
• 
• 
The idea is not to remove all risk. Failure is an inherent part of innovation. 
Rather, we want to create an environment where if an experiment fails, it fails safely 
and cheaply, without larger adverse consequences. 
MAS  will  soon  issue  guidelines  for  public  consultation  on  how  the  regulatory 
sandbox will work. 
 Three,  we  promote  greater  inter-operability  within  the  industry  to  harness  the  full 
potential of technology. 
An innovative environment proliferates a wide range of technologies and solutions. 
• 
But  if  the  solutions  cannot  interact  with  one  another,  we  sub-optimise  efficiency 
gains or customer experience. 
While  we  should  allow  a  hundred flowers  to  bloom,  we  should  also  take  care  we 
create a garden. 
 Greater  inter-operability  across  data  systems  is  therefore  a  key  priority.  Let  me  give  two 
examples of what MAS is doing together with the industry. 
• 
One, common standards for payments systems to realise more seamless payments 
across a range of platforms. 
–  We  are  working  towards  a  unified  Point  of  Sales  (POS)  terminal  –  a  single 
terminal that can read all kinds of cards at retail and hospitality outlets. 
–  We are also exploring an “all-in-one” addressing system, that will enable us to 
pay someone electronically using the payee’s mobile number, email address, 
social network account, or other proxies. No need to know the payee’s bank 
account number. 
 Two, seamless data sharing through publication of open Application Programming 
Interfaces, or APIs. 
–  We  just  had  a  two-day  API  conference  earlier  this  week,  where  industry 
players shared their views on how we can take the API strategy forward. 
MAS is working with FIs to leverage on new technologies to share aggregated 
data to improve market and risk analyses, forecasts and projections. 
 We are committed to building a Smart Financial Centre, where innovation is pervasive and 
technology is used widely to: 
Increase efficiency 
• 
• 
Manage risks better 
Create new opportunities 
• 
• 
Improve people’s lives. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
