  Karnit Flug: Increasing competition in the financial system 
Remarks  by  Dr  Karnit  Flug,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  at  the  cabinet  meeting  on 
increasing competition in the financial system, Tel Aviv, 13 June 2016. 
 I would like to express appreciation for the serious work done by the committee led by Dror 
Strum. 
The  financial  system  is  a  complex  system,  and  has  unique  characteristics  that  require  in-
depth through regarding how reforms and changes are to be carried out. I am happy that in 
the  end,  after  tremendous  effort  by  all  those  involved,  we  have  succeeded  in  formulating 
recommendations that will benefit consumers and maintain the stability of the system. 
The  changes  that  we  have  agreed  upon  are  very  significant,  particularly  when  taken  as  a 
whole.  These  changes,  alongside  initiatives  led  by  the  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  Banking 
Supervision Department-such as building a credit register, promoting greater efficiency in the 
banking  system,  and  promoting  technology  and  innovation  in  banking-will  in  the  coming 
years  create  an  advanced  banking  system that is  more  competitive  in  the  retail  and  small 
business areas. 
It is very important, and we have agreed to this with the Minister of Finance and his team, 
that we now focus on the implementation of the reforms, and in general avoid promoting new 
legislative initiatives in the field of banking or support such initiatives. The change that we are 
proposing here is a sizable change, joining changes that have already been made, and it is 
important  that  we  manage  these  changes  responsibly  and  enable  the  system  to  get 
accustomed to them and prepare for them. 
It is important to emphasize that Israel’s professional and stable banking system is an asset 
to the economy, and is essential in order to support the financing of the economic activity of 
households and small businesses. In contrast with banks in the US and Europe, the Israeli 
banks withstood the Global Financial Crisis very successfully, remained stable, continued to 
function during the crisis, and saved the Israeli economy from having to pay the high price 
paid by many other countries around the world in terms of loss of output, unemployment, and 
a  heavy  burden  on  taxpayers  in  rescuing  failed  banks.  Therefore,  it  is  important  that  the 
changes be made in an intelligent and measured manner, while maintaining the stability of 
the banks and the financial system. 
The agreement that the supervision of the credit card companies will remain at the Bank of 
Israel is very important, in order to prevent a regulatory gap between banks and credit card 
companies  in  the  provision  of  credit.  As  the  credit  card  companies  have  the  potential  to 
become a significant factor in the provision of credit to households, such a gap could have 
created pressure for lowering the standards for providing credit in the entire financial system. 
I  attributed  tremendous  importance  to  the  fact  that  alongside  the  implementation  of  the 
reform being presented here today, we will soon complete the legislation for establishing a 
financial  stability  committee,  which  will  firmly  establish  the  cooperation  and  coordination 
among  the  various  financial  system  regulators.  The  committee  will  monitor,  provide  early 
identification, and handle risks to the financial system before they are realized. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
