  Vítor Constâncio: In defence of monetary policy 
Opinion  piece  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
11 March 2016. 
 This  week  the  ECB  adopted  new  measures  to  reinforce  its  monetary  policy  in  the  face  of 
recent  headwinds.  That  decision  was  taken  against  a  backdrop  of  vocal  scepticism  in  the 
media and markets. The sceptics’ reasoning is two-pronged. First, that monetary policy is not 
sufficient  to  address  the  present  low  growth  trend;  and  second,  that  monetary  policy  is 
increasingly ineffective in any case. 
The  notion  that  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  raise  trend  growth  is  mostly  true  but  trivial, 
especially if the challenges of secular stagnation highlighted by Robert Gordon in his brilliant 
new book are considered. 
The  G20  has  appealed  for  the  use  of  other  policies,  notably  fiscal  and  structural  reforms. 
While other policies would certainly be welcome, one can have justified doubts about their 
implementation. For a start, active stabilising fiscal policy is restricted by law in the EU and 
by politics in the US. More generally, countries that could use fiscal space, won’t; and many 
that would use it, shouldn’t. 
That leaves us with structural reforms. Some, like upgrading education and judicial efficiency, 
are  important  but  take  a  long  time  to  implement  and  to  produce  results.  The  structural 
reforms economists often have in mind (i.e. liberalization and deregulation of markets) lead 
to lower wages and prices in the short-term, which does not help inflation normalisation. And 
concerning unemployment, higher productivity often initially implies labour saving. Structural 
reforms are essential for long-term potential growth, but it is difficult to see how they could 
spur growth significantly in the next two years, especially when the current problem is lack of 
global demand. 
And as regards their delivery by governments, we should recall the embarrassing results of 
the  G20  plan  agreed  in  Brisbane  to  generate  an  additional  2%  in  world  growth  via  a  long 
concrete list of reforms put forward by the IMF and the OECD. In fact, the world economy 
now risks not even attaining what was then considered the baseline scenario. 
So if these other policies either can’t or won’t contribute to a significant degree, then not only 
is  it  wrong  to  start  talking  down  monetary  policy  –  it’s  actually  dangerous.  The  second 
criticism of monetary policy is mostly based on a crude comparison between where inflation 
(or growth) is now and where it was at the beginning of the policy. The conclusion: inflation 
didn’t change much, so the policy isn’t working. However, what is rational and essential is to 
examine what would have happened had the policy not been adopted in the first place. Using 
several models, ECB staff estimated that, without our policies, inflation would have been a 
third of a percent negative in 2015 and would have stayed significantly negative throughout 
2016, which  would mean that we would have been in permanent deflation since last year. 
This  is  a  significant  result.  Recall  that  the  final  outcome  was  affected  by  the  unexpected 
decline in the price of oil by 30% from September to December. 
We estimate that two thirds of one percent of the registered growth in the past two years was 
due  to  our monetary  policy.  However,  what  we  achieved  in  fostering  internal  demand  was 
undone by the subsequent decrease of net exports in a decelerating world economy. These 
developments did not make our policy less effective, only ex-post insufficient for the desired 
outcome. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Naturally,  all  policies  have  limits.  In  the  case  of  the  instruments  we  are  now  using,  this  is 
particularly  true  of  negative  interest  rates  on  our  deposit  facility.  The  reasons  are  more 
fundamental than just the effect on banks1. 
Despite negative rates throughout last year, the net interest income (NII) of euro area banks 
increased in percentage of assets, and their return on equity went up from 3.5% in 2014 to 
5.7% in 2015 – which corresponds to a real return as inflation was zero. Our policies also 
produced  capital  gains  for  banks,  as  securities’  prices  went  up  (and  yields  down),  and 
impairment costs came down as the recovery reduced the amount of NPLs. More broadly, 
negative  deposit  facility  rates  have  contributed  to  negative  rates  in  the  money  market, 
reducing funding costs for banks. The whole yield curve has been lowered, which is the sole 
objective of using this particular monetary policy instrument. 
To  normalise  inflation  in  the  euro  area  we  urgently  need  higher  growth  that  can  reduce 
negative output and unemployment gaps, using all really available policies. If not monetary 
policy, then what? 
                                                 
1  See Cecchetti & Schoenholtz (2016) How Low Can They Go? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
