   Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Endorsing price stability and financial 
sector soundness in the Ugandan economy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Official  Opening  of  the  Standard  Chartered  Bank,  Bugolobi  Village  Mall  Branch,  Bugolobi, 
12 February 2016. 
 Members of the Board of Directors of Standard Chartered Bank Uganda,  
Chief Executive Officer,  
Regional Head, Retail Banking for Africa and Middle East,  
Senior Management and Staff of Standard Chartered Bank,  
Invited Guests,  
Ladies and gentlemen.  
IT is an honour to be invited to officiate as Guest of Honour at the official opening of this new 
branch of Standard Chartered Bank at the Village Mall in Bugolobi. The wisdom behind the 
opening of a new Stanchart branch in Bugolobi is self-evident.  
This prime location and its immediate neighbourhood, is not only home this outstanding mall, 
but also hosts a number of small and medium sized enterprises. Here you find a university, 
government departments, industrial establishments, a market, health service providers, major 
retailers,  schools,  hotels,  restaurants;  not  to  mention  the  large  number  of  residents.  The 
bustling local economy here will thank you for bringing banking services closer.  
The opening of this new bank branch is a very strong endorsement of the stability of Uganda’s 
financial sector. It indicates that the prospects for the sector as well as the economy as a whole 
remain good.  
Indeed, only last month, Standard and Poor’s Ratings Services affirmed its “B/B” long and 
short term foreign and local currency sovereign credit ratings on the Republic of Uganda; with 
a stable outlook.  
I am reminded of the words of Alan Greenspan – a former head of the central Bank of the 
United States of America – who described “price stability”, in the perspective of central bankers 
as, “When economic agents no longer take account of the prospective change in the general 
price level in their economic decision-making”.  
As you are aware, in their latest Press Release, the Uganda Bureau of Statistics reported that 
both  annual  and  monthly  inflation  declined  from  December  2015  to  January  2016.  On  an 
annual basis, overall inflation declined to 7.6 percent in January 2016 from 8.4 percent in the 
previous month. Over the same period, core inflation reduced to 7.1 percent from 7.6 percent. 
Similarly,  overall  monthly  inflation  declined  to  0.1  percent  in  January  from  0.2 percent 
previously.  
What  is  more,  our  latest  Financial  Stability  soundness  indicators  for  the  period  ended 
December 2015, indicate that Uganda’s banking sector continues to be resilient and financially 
sound. The  supportive financial  infrastructure  also  remains  safe  and  efficient. The  banking 
sector registered a strong asset and capital base with the capital adequacy ratio of 18.6 percent 
as of December 2015, far higher than the statutory minimum of 8 percent. The sector’s asset 
quality  remains  good  with  the  ratio  of  non-performing  loans  to  total  loans  recorded  at  5.3 
percent during the period under review.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Just like the bustling economic activity of the Bugolobi area established the right context for a 
new Stanchart branch here; the timing of this branch opening is a resounding endorsement of 
the durability of price stability and financial sector soundness in the Ugandan economy.  
It is the synergetic combination of forward-looking and pre-emptive monetary policy, through 
our inflation targeting lite monetary policy framework, together with risk-based regulation and 
supervision  of  banks  as  well  as  macroprudential  financial  stability  management  that  have 
enabled the Bank of Uganda to foster the evident price and financial sector stability. In this 
effort, we acknowledge the supportive fiscal environment that has been established through 
implementation of the Public Finance Management Act.  
The institutional framework exists, to ensure long-term macroeconomic stability in Uganda. 
The public has good grounds to have confidence in the economy; just like Standard Chartered 
is demonstrating by expanding its branch network today. This is the sort of stability that Alan 
Greenspan advocated.  
With  these  few  remarks,  let  me  conclude  by  congratulating  the  Shareholders,  Board  of 
Directors, Management, and Staff of Standard Chartered Bank Uganda for opening a branch 
in this Village Mall of Bugolobi.  
I encourage you to use your growing branch network as well as technological innovation to 
boost financial inclusion and take advantage of the imminent introduction of bancassurance, 
agency banking, and Islamic finance.  
It is now my honour to officially open the Bugolobi branch of Standard Chartered at the Village 
Mall. I wish you great success at this new location.  
Thank you for listening to me. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
