  Andréa M Maechler: Investment policy in times of high foreign exchange 
reserves 
Speech by Ms Andréa M Maechler, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 31 March 2016. 
The accompanying charts can also be found on the Swiss National Bank’ website. 
 The speaker would like to thank Dirk Faltin and Marco Huwiler for their support in drafting this speech. She also 
extends  thanks  to  Sophie  Faber,  Peter  Kuster,  Sandro  Streit,  Jonas  Stulz  and  Martin  Weder  for  helpful 
comments, to the SNB Language Services, and to Adrian Avdyli for preparing the data. 
Welcome to the SNB’s traditional Money Market Event in Zurich. I am delighted that so many 
of  you  have  responded  to  our  invitation.  A  year  ago,  you  were  welcomed  here  by  Fritz 
Zurbrügg, my colleague in the Governing Board and predecessor as the Head of Department 
III. It was only a few  weeks after the minimum exchange rate had been discontinued, and 
monetary policy was the hottest topic in town. 
This year, I will focus on the Swiss National Bank’s investment policy. In the past few years, 
the SNB has become a big asset manager. Consequently, I want to look at two questions 
today.  First,  what  are  the  reasons  for  the  significant  increase  in  our  foreign  currency 
investments?  Second,  how  does  the  SNB  handle  these  foreign  currency  investments? 
However, I can’t leave  monetary policy out completely. I will thus comment on our current 
monetary policy at the end of my speech. 
Balance sheet expands due to measures against strong Swiss franc 
In the past few years, the SNB’s balance sheet total has risen sharply. Since the onset of the 
global financial crisis in 2008, it has multiplied by a factor of six. At the end of last year, it 
came to around CHF 640 billion, or almost exactly the value added by the Swiss economy in 
2015. The growth in the balance sheet total is attributable to a rise in Swiss franc liquidity 
and an expansion of our foreign currency investments. 
This  brings  me  to  my  first  question:  how  did  the  increase  in  foreign  currency  investments 
come about? The short answer is that it is the result of monetary policy measures which the 
SNB  takes  to  maintain  appropriate  monetary  conditions  in  Switzerland.  Thus,  foreign 
exchange market interventions, which the SNB has been using to counter the appreciation of 
the Swiss franc since spring 2009, have led to the increase in foreign currency investments 
and, in turn, the SNB’s balance sheet total. Thus a high level of foreign currency investments 
is not an objective in itself. On the contrary. It forms an integral part of monetary policy. 
As observers of our monetary policy, you will be familiar with the reasons why we are active 
in foreign exchange markets. In the wake of the crisis which encompassed global markets 
eight  years  ago,  demand for  safe  investments,  including  Swiss  francs, rose  rapidly.  At the 
end of 2008, this led to a first significant appreciation in the Swiss franc. The SNB took a 
series  of  measures  to  increase  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  and  prevent  a  further 
strengthening of the Swiss franc against the euro, including, from spring 2009, interventions 
in the foreign exchange market. 
A certain stabilisation of the Swiss franc exchange rate took place in 2009. Slide 1 shows 
that, at the time, the exchange rate was about CHF 1.50 against the euro. As you know, this 
situation  did  not  last.  In  spring  2010,  tensions  on  the  financial  markets  increased  rapidly 
again as a result of the debt crisis in Greece, and this was followed by another global flight 
into safe investments. In this environment, the Swiss franc came under substantial upward 
pressure against all major currencies, even reaching parity against the euro for a brief period 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  in summer 2011. In this extreme situation, the SNB introduced the minimum exchange rate 
of CHF 1.20 against the euro at the beginning of September 2011, enforcing it consistently 
by means of foreign currency purchases. For more than three years, the minimum exchange 
rate proved its value as an exceptional and temporary instrument to counter a broad-based 
and  extreme  Swiss  franc  strength.  It  stabilised  the  situation  and  gave  the  Swiss  economy 
time to adjust. 
However, in 2014, exchange rate conditions began to shift once again. Expectations that the 
US  central  bank  would  soon  lift  interest  rates  had  been  increasing  since  mid-2014.  The 
European  Central  Bank,  meanwhile,  indicated  towards  the  end  of  the  year  that  further 
extensive monetary policy easing measures would be necessary in the euro area. Against 
this  background,  the  US  dollar  began  to  appreciate  and  the  euro  came  under  strong 
downward  pressure.  Because  of  the  minimum  exchange  rate,  the  Swiss  franc  also 
depreciated  against  the  US  dollar.  This  caused  pressure  on  the  minimum  exchange  rate 
against  the  euro  to  rise  very  substantially  and  made  increasingly  large  interventions 
necessary. Instead of broad-based Swiss franc strength, we were faced – to an ever greater 
degree – with pronounced euro weakness. 
In  this  fundamentally  changed  environment,  the  minimum  exchange  rate  was  no  longer 
sustainable. Had the SNB attempted to maintain the minimum exchange rate, it would have 
lost control of its balance sheet and, with it, monetary conditions in Switzerland, because of 
the increasing magnitude of the interventions. Consequently, on 15 January 2015, the SNB 
discontinued  the  minimum  exchange  rate.  To  cushion  the  upward  pressure,  the  SNB 
simultaneously lowered the interest rate on sight deposits to –0.75%. It also stressed that it 
was willing to intervene in the foreign exchange market as necessary. 
These  were  no  empty  words,  as  can  be seen from  our foreign currency  purchases,  which 
amounted to more than CHF 86 billion last year. A large portion of these occurred during the 
period immediately before and after the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate. The 
Swiss franc initially shot up after the discontinuation, but then stabilised. Since May 2015, it 
has weakened again slightly. More recently, the Swiss franc exchange rate to the euro was 
about  10%  above  what  it  had  been  shortly  before  the  discontinuation  of  the  minimum 
exchange  rate.  Our  willingness  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  as  necessary 
was – and remains – an important element in countering the excessive strength of the Swiss 
franc  and  the  associated  negative  impact  on  both  the  economy  and  price  stability  in 
Switzerland. 
How are our foreign currency purchases and the Swiss franc exchange rate related to the 
expansion  of  the  SNB  balance  sheet?  I  will  explain  this  using  the  financial  account  and 
current  account. The  current  account  covers, first  and foremost, goods and  services  trade 
with  other  countries  and  cross-border  income  flows.  For  half  a  century,  the  Swiss  current 
account  has  regularly  shown  a  surplus.1  There  are  two  main  reasons  for  this  structural 
surplus. First, Switzerland is a net exporter; it produces more goods and services than are 
demanded in the domestic market. Second, the Swiss hold substantial assets abroad, upon 
which they earn interest and dividend income. 
Earnings from foreign trade as well as interest and dividend income from foreign assets are 
generated abroad and are usually reinvested abroad. These investments are recorded under 
capital exports by the private sector in the financial account and are shown as red bars in 
slide 2.  Until  2007,  private  sector  capital  exports  made  up  almost  the  entire  financial 
account. 
                                                
1  Jordan,  Thomas.  2013.  Reconciling  Switzerland’s  minimum  exchange  rate  and  current  account  surplus, 
speech held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C., 8 October 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  changed  fundamentally  after  the  beginning  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008. 
Uncertainty increased noticeably. Swiss companies were no longer investing their earnings 
from export business abroad to the same extent, and were instead increasingly repatriating 
them. Moreover, a growing number of investors, including institutional investors and private 
banks,  sought  the  security  of  Switzerland.  Consequently,  demand  for  Swiss  francs  rose 
rapidly so that the Swiss franc, at times, was overvalued to an extreme degree. 
To  counter  the  strength  of  the  Swiss  franc,  the  SNB  began  purchasing  foreign  currency 
against Swiss francs in the foreign exchange market. In statistical terms, this meant it was 
exporting  capital,  with  the  result  that  public  sector  capital  exports  increased.  This  can  be 
seen from the blue bars in the chart. Without these interventions, the Swiss franc would have 
appreciated even more, with correspondingly negative consequences for the economy and 
for price stability in Switzerland. This also means that, with its foreign currency purchases, 
the SNB has, for some time now, taken onto its own balance sheet the currency risk which 
the private sector is no longer willing to bear. 
When we purchase foreign currency against Swiss francs, it is shown on the assets side of 
the balance sheet as the most important element in the foreign currency investments item. In 
slide 3, it is denoted by the light blue area.2 Our foreign currency purchases also lead to an 
increase in Swiss franc liquidity, i.e. a rise in the monetary base, which is reflected on the 
liabilities side of the balance sheet in the bank sight deposits item. In the chart this can be 
seen as a red area. 
Thus,  the  SNB’s foreign  exchange  reserves  do  not  represent  equity,  or ‘true’  assets since 
they  are  offset  by  liabilities.  They  have  come  about  through  money  creation  as  part  of 
measures  required  for  monetary  policy  purposes.  Consequently,  they  should  be  at  the 
disposal  of  monetary  policy  at  all  times.  For  instance,  when  capital  flows  normalise 
sustainably, we can assume that the SNB balance sheet total can be reduced again in the 
long term. 
However,  the  level  of  SNB  foreign  currency  investments  will  remain  high  for  as  long  as 
required  by  monetary  policy.  If  necessary  and  reasonable  from  a  monetary  policy  point  of 
view and if the benefits exceed the costs, the SNB will further expand its balance sheet in 
future and accept the associated risks. 
Modern and professional asset management at the SNB 
This  brings  me  to  my  second  question:  how  does  the  SNB  handle  its  foreign  currency 
investments? The  short answer  is  that  the  SNB  manages  its foreign  currency  investments 
professionally and cost effectively. The SNB began to set up its modern asset management 
structure relatively early. Since the revision of the National Bank Act in 2004, hardly any legal 
constraints have been set on the SNB’s leeway for investment. The SNB uses this leeway to 
achieve the optimum possible portfolio structure. Corporate bonds, for instance, were already 
introduced as an asset class in 2004, and equities in 2005. 
With  the  marked  expansion  of  the  balance  sheet  in  the  past few  years,  diversification  has 
become  increasingly  important.  In  this  respect,  the  SNB  goes  further  than  is  common 
practice for central banks. For reasons of diversification, it is constantly evaluating new asset 
classes, currencies and investment opportunities in both advanced economies and emerging 
markets. Last year, for instance, the SNB expanded its investment universe to take in both 
Chinese government bonds and emerging market corporate equities. 
The  SNB’s  investment  and  risk  control  process  is  constructed  using  principles  similar  to 
those applied by large institutional asset managers. As you will see in slide 4, it can be split 
                                                
2  Foreign  exchange  reserves  consist  of  foreign  currency  investments  minus  repo  transactions  conducted  for 
investment policy purposes and other foreign currency liabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  up  into  roughly  five  steps  –  investment  policy,  investment  strategy,  definition  of  guidelines 
and  benchmarks,  implementation  (including  tactical  allocation  of  assets  and  portfolio 
management), and risk control. 
The  SNB’s  investment  policy  provides  the  framework  for  the  management  of  assets  and 
defines the overriding investment objectives. It sets out the requirements with regard to the 
security  and  liquidity  of  the  investments  and  also  defines  the  eligible  currencies,  asset 
classes, instruments and borrowers. On this foundation, the investment policy establishes a 
long-term allocation for the foreign exchange reserves. 
Based  on  this  long-term  allocation,  the  Governing  Board  determines  a  specific  investment 
strategy.  This  sets  out  the  allocation  of  individual  asset  classes  over  the  next  year  and 
defines the freedom of action at operational level. A valuation assessment of the individual 
asset  classes  is  also  taken  into  account  in  the  investment  strategy.  Depending  upon  the 
assessment,  this  allows  for  certain  deviations  from  the  long-term  allocation  with  regard  to 
currency allocation, equity share or bond duration. 
In the third step, prior to the investment strategy implementation, the Risk Management unit 
sets  out  the  necessary  investment  guidelines,  limits  and  benchmarks.  It  also  defines  the 
permissible  margin  of  deviation  from  the  investment  strategy  at  the  tactical  level.  These 
parameters are very important for the fourth step, implementation of the investment strategy. 
Decisions on tactical allocation are made by an internal investment committee which makes 
periodic  adjustments  of  given  variables  such  as  currency  shares,  maturity  and  shares  of 
different asset classes to changes in market conditions, within the strategic range. 
The majority of investments are managed by internal portfolio managers, but external asset 
managers also play an important role. These external managers are used to obtain efficient 
access to certain asset classes or for benchmarking against internal portfolio management. 
These benchmarks have always shown that the SNB’s portfolio management achieves good 
results in the long term and works cost effectively. 
The investment process is concluded with the fifth step, risk control. The risk control function 
checks  compliance  with  guidelines  and  limits,  and  conducts  a  performance  measurement. 
Furthermore, the  relevant financial  risks  are  identified,  assessed  and monitored  on  a  daily 
basis. In addition, regular sensitivity analyses and stress tests are conducted and the results 
are  reported 
the  Bank  Council’s  Risk  Committee. 
Organisationally, the investment process and risk control are separated from one another to 
the greatest possible extent. In this way, we ensure effective risk control. 
the  Governing  Board  and 
to 
Monetary policy takes precedence over investment policy 
It is true that the structure of the SNB’s investment and risk processes is similar to that of 
large commercial asset managers. And yet there are also enormous differences. After all, the 
SNB  is  a  central  bank;  for  us,  monetary  policy  objectives  always  take  precedence  over 
investment policy. When investing our foreign exchange reserves, we base our decisions on 
the criteria of security, liquidity and return. The weightings given to these criteria are derived 
from  the  monetary  policy  function  of  the  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Ensuring  room  for 
manoeuvre in the implementation of monetary policy requires, in particular, a high weighting 
for the liquidity criterion. As is common practice for a central bank, we invest a substantial 
share  of  our foreign  exchange  reserves  in  very  liquid  and  highly  rated foreign government 
bonds.  As  you  will  see  in slide 5, the  share  of these  investments  amounted to more  than 
70% at the end of 2015. 
The SNB has a very long investment horizon. In view of this, the criterion of security is taken 
into account by structuring investments so that at least the real value is preserved over the 
long  term.  Thus,  after  liquidity  and  security,  the  criterion  of  return  is  also  taken  into 
consideration.  In  order  to  improve  the  long-term  risk/return  profile,  certain  interest  rate, 
equity, credit and liquidity risks are intentionally  entered into, based on the associated risk 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  premia. These  risks  are  spread  as  widely  as  possible  by  diversifying  the  investments.  For 
instance,  government  bonds  in  the  main  currencies  are  supplemented  by  additional  asset 
classes  including  corporate  bonds  and  equities.  In  particular,  the  share  of  equities,  which 
currently amounts to 18%, increases the expected return in our portfolio. 
Challenges when investing high foreign exchange reserves 
The  SNB  is  one  of  the  world’s  major  investors.  At  the  end  of  2015,  our  foreign  exchange 
reserves  amounted to  around  CHF  560  billion.  The management of  large foreign  currency 
investments  comes  with  its  own  set  of  challenges.  I  would  like  to  focus  on  three  of  these 
challenges  in  particular,  and  explain  briefly  how  we  address  them:  first,  the  widening  of 
fluctuations  in  absolute  investment  returns;  second,  non-financial  aspects,  which  have 
become much more  important  in  our globally  diversified  equity  portfolio; and  third,  liquidity 
conditions, which have deteriorated in some markets. 
The size of the SNB’s foreign exchange reserves means that investment returns, in absolute 
terms, can fluctuate sharply from year to year. This has been particularly evident in recent 
years:  in  2015,  the  SNB  reported  an  annual  loss  of  over  CHF  23  billion.  In  2014,  it  had 
recorded a profit of more than CHF 38 billion. 
A  look  at  the  breakdown  of  investment  performance  shows  clearly  that  the  volatility  in  our 
investment  returns  is  mainly  the  result  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  This  is  illustrated  by 
slide 6. The red bars show that, when converted to domestic currency, investment returns 
have  always  been  positive  over  the  last  15  years.  By  contrast,  the  foreign  currency 
contribution – which is denoted by the blue bars – has mostly been negative. In individual 
years,  the  strong  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  has  even  led  to  the total  return  in  Swiss 
francs being negative. This is denoted in the chart by the yellow triangles. 
Slide 7 shows that, over the last 35 years, currency risk has accounted for more than 80% of 
the  total  risk  in  our  portfolio.  We  cannot  hedge  against  currency  risk,  since  this  would 
increase  the  upward  pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc.  Hedging  would  thus  undermine  our 
monetary policy objectives. We must accept currency risk as an inherent component of our 
foreign exchange reserves. Gains or losses in the double-digit billions could thus also occur 
in the future. It is therefore all the more important to set aside sufficient reserves in the years 
in which we record a profit. 
The  second  challenge  relates  to  equity  investments.  The  SNB’s  equity  portfolio  currently 
amounts  to  some  CHF  100  billion.  This  comparatively  high  equity  share  gives  rise  to 
questions  on  ethics  and  corporate  governance  –  as  it  does  for  other  investors.  The  SNB 
takes its responsibility as a large equity investor very seriously. It tries to avoid conflicts of 
interest where possible and has devoted particular attention to questions such as exclusion 
criteria and the exercise of voting rights, introducing corresponding regulations. 
In its equity investments, the SNB adopts a passive approach. This means, in particular, that 
we do not actively engage in equity selection. Otherwise, we could rapidly find ourselves with 
large  corporate  shareholdings  which,  owing  to  the  size  of  our  foreign  exchange  reserves, 
might be misconstrued as a strategic participation by the SNB. Our approach ensures that 
our holdings in individual companies remain as small as possible. 
We  do  not  invest  in  equities  of  international  mid-cap  and  large-cap  banks  and  bank-like 
institutions  in  advanced  economies.  In  addition,  the  SNB  does  not  purchase  equities  in 
companies  which  produce  internationally  banned  weapons,  seriously  violate  fundamental 
human rights or systematically cause severe environmental damage. 
Last year, the SNB exercised its voting rights at annual general meetings for the first time, 
focusing on mid-cap and large-cap companies in the euro area. When casting its vote, the 
SNB  confines  itself  to  aspects  of  good  corporate  governance. When  voting  and  excluding 
individual equities, the SNB works together with external proxies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  That brings me to the third challenge – market liquidity. In some markets, liquidity conditions 
have deteriorated. Yet it is difficult to gauge how liquid the various financial markets really 
are, because there is no single measure that can fully capture all aspects of market liquidity. 
For example, we are seeing a worsening of liquidity conditions in corporate bond markets. 
The  blue  curve  in  slide  8,  for  instance,  shows  that  trading  volumes  at  traditional  market-
makers  in  the  US  have  more  than  halved  since  2007,  whereas  the  market  has  grown 
considerably over the same period. 
However, both for market participants and as regards financial stability, it is not only the level 
of market liquidity but also its resilience that is important. In recent years, we have repeatedly 
seen how market liquidity can fall sharply in times of stress.3 
There have, in particular, been a few days on which – for no apparent reason – there was a 
sudden surge in volatility. This was the case in October 2014 in the US, when ten-year yields 
dropped  by  37  basis  points  in  a  single  day.  Japanese  government  bonds  experienced 
something similar a few weeks ago, falling by 26 basis points in one day. The two charts in 
slide 9 use histograms to illustrate how unusual the price movements were on these days. 
They  show  the  observed  intraday  frequency  of  certain  fluctuations  in  yield  on  US  or 
Japanese  government  bonds  for  the  period  since  2001.  Fluctuations  of  the  magnitude 
described  here  are  extremely  rare  events.  Such  episodes  prompted  fears  that  market 
distortions of this kind could recur at any time. 
What  do  these  changes  in  market  liquidity  mean  for  the  SNB?  At  the  operational  portfolio 
management  level,  we  are  affected  by  the  deterioration  in  corporate  bond  liquidity.  The 
greatest difficulty stems from the fact that trading is increasingly focused on a comparatively 
small  section  of the  corporate  bonds  outstanding.  This  has  meant  that  large  purchases  or 
sales are more difficult, and more expensive, than before the financial crisis. 
This,  in  turn,  has  necessitated  some  adjustments  in  the  way  corporate bond  portfolios  are 
managed. The SNB is now more active in the primary sales market than before, and has also 
expanded its counterparty base. In addition, depending on the liquidity situation, transactions 
are having to be split into smaller tranches. Overall, therefore, the management of corporate 
bond portfolios has become more complex and more demanding. 
By contrast, the markets for highly rated government bonds continue to be very liquid. Short-
term price fluctuations do not place any limitations on the management of the government 
bonds in our portfolio. As I have already mentioned, we have a very long investment horizon. 
We hold our investments for at least one full economic cycle and we are not obliged to sell, 
even  in  periods  of  stress.  In  contrast  to,  say,  investment funds,  we  are  not faced  with  the 
prospect of investors demanding the return of their shares when market turbulence sets in, 
and forcing a quick asset sale. 
On  the  contrary,  when  volatility  increases,  our  investment  activity  can  exert  a  certain 
stabilising influence on prices in these markets. This is due to rebalancing: when large price 
declines in individual asset classes cause their share within our portfolio to fall substantially 
below the strategic weighting for that asset class, we purchase assets in order to re-establish 
the desired share. 
Foreign exchange reserve investment and monetary policy in a low interest rate 
environment 
In  addition  to  the  specific  challenges  posed  by  investing  high  foreign  exchange  reserves, 
there are also challenges that affect virtually all investors. I am thinking first and foremost of 
the  globally  low  interest  rate  environment.  As  slide  10  shows,  the  market  volume  of 
                                                
3 
IMF. 2015. Market Liquidity – Resilient or Fleeting? Global Financial Stability Report, October 2015. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  negative-yielding  government  bonds  has  risen  substantially  since  2014.  It  now  amounts  to 
around USD 7 trillion, representing nearly 25% of the global market.4 
Today’s  environment  of  low,  or  even  negative,  interest  rates  has  historical  antecedents. 
Since as far back as the 1980s, we have been observing a decline in the level of interest 
rates,  as  we  can  see  from  slide  11.5  This  decline  in  interest  rates  is  due  to  a  number  of 
structural  factors,  such  as  demographic  changes  and  lower  productivity  growth.  Moreover, 
the  low  interest  rate  environment,  which  has  been  particularly  pronounced for  some  years 
now, is part of the fallout from the global financial and economic crisis. Driven by supply and 
demand, high savings and weak global investment activity put additional downward pressure 
on interest rates. Moreover, monetary policy measures – taken by central banks to combat 
the financial crisis and the low inflation level – have themselves contributed to the decline in 
interest rates, and continue to do so. 
This is also true of the measures taken by the SNB. After all, we cannot remain untouched by 
international developments. Interest rates in Switzerland have traditionally been lower than 
abroad. This is due to Switzerland’s status as a safe haven: investors are willing to accept 
comparatively low yield in return for more security. During the financial crisis, the decline in 
interest  rates  abroad  was  generally  more  marked  than  in  Switzerland.  The  interest  rate 
differential to other countries narrowed and the Swiss franc became even more attractive. 
Negative interest helps to restore the interest rate differential between Switzerland and other 
countries,  by  making  investments  in  Swiss  francs  less  attractive  and  thereby  reducing  the 
pressure  on  the  Swiss  franc  exchange  rate.  We  are  aware  that  the  costs  associated  with 
negative interest are not inconsiderable. Yet without negative interest, the Swiss franc would 
be even stronger, which would weigh even more heavily on the economy. The SNB is thus 
faced with difficult trade-offs when making its monetary policy decisions. I am convinced that, 
under  the  circumstances,  the  SNB’s  monetary  policy  is  currently  the  approach  that  best 
serves Switzerland’s overall interests in the long term. 
At our most recent quarterly monetary policy assessment, we therefore decided to maintain 
our  expansionary  monetary  policy.  The  interest  rate  on  sight  deposits  at  the  SNB  is 
unchanged at –0.75%. At the same time, the SNB will remain active in the foreign exchange 
market, in order to influence exchange rate developments where necessary. Despite a slight 
depreciation, the Swiss franc is still significantly overvalued and this is reflected in economic 
activity. Last year, the Swiss economy only recorded year-on-year growth of just under 1%. 
For this year, we expect growth of between 1% and 1.5%. Uncertainty is high, however, and 
conditions remain difficult. 
Last year, inflation was very low, at –1.1%, due in large part to the slump in oil prices and the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc following the discontinuation of the minimum exchange rate. 
The impact of both variables is temporary. For this year, we expect an inflation rate of –0.8%. 
In  the  SNB’s  view,  it  is  essential  that,  in  the  medium  term,  inflation  returns  to  the  range 
compatible with price stability. And, according to our current inflation forecast, that is what 
will happen. As you can see from slide 12, we are expecting that, given an unchanged three-
month Libor of –0.75%, the inflation rate will return to positive territory next year. 
This  brings  me to  the  end  of my  speech.  I  would  like  to  thank  you  for your  attention,  and 
hand over to my colleague Dewet Moser. He will be discussing the challenges for monetary 
policy implementation in turbulent times. 
                                                
4  Figures refer to the World Sovereign Bond Index from Bank of America Merrill Lynch. The index contains over 
2,000 government bonds with residual maturities of at least one year and minimum requirements on the size 
of individual issues. 
5  The G7 nominal interest rate is derived from the nominal GDP-weighted yields on ten-year government bonds 
of the following countries: the US, Japan, Germany, the UK, France, Italy and Canada. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
     10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
