Tharman  Shanmugaratnam: Financial  technology  (FinTech)  -
transforming financial services in Singapore
Speech by Mr Tharman Shanmugaratnam, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at
the Launch of LATTICE80, Singapore, 10 November 2016.
Introduction
 1   Good morning. Thank you for inviting me to join all of you. Let me begin by congratulating
Marvelstone on the launch of LATTICE80.
2   It is the first innovation space in Singapore dedicated to and designed specifically to support
FinTech.  LATTICE80  is  also  the  first  not-for-profit  private  sector  initiative  in  this  business  of
nurturing start-ups.
The FinTech Phenomenon
3      FinTech  –  or  financial  technology  –  is  transforming  financial  services,  both  from  within
established  financial  institutions  and  from  outside  the  regulated  sector  through  new,  FinTech
players.
4      When  FinTechs  first  came  to  global  prominence,  it  was  tempting  to  cast  this  as  a  battle
between  new,  innovative  and  responsive  players  and  lumbering,  flat-footed  banks  and  other
financial institutions.
5   The real picture is more nuanced, mainly because the incumbents have not been sitting still:
Many of them are investing heavily in technology to streamline and optimise entire swathes
of operations.
For  example,  several  initiatives  are  underway  among  banks  to  tap  on  distributed  ledger
technology to achieve swift, seamless and secure trade settlement.
Several  financial  institutions  have  set  up  in-house  FinTech  units  to  replicate  the  start-up
culture.
They  are  also  collaborating  with  and,  in  some  instances,  buying  over  promising  FinTech
companies.
6   And not many technology companies aspire to become financial institutions. Complying with
regulations, submitting to supervision, and churning out disclosure documents for the markets is
not always an appealing prospect.
7   In short, the Goliaths of the financial world have become more nimble-footed, and are both
competing with and partnering the Davids.  
8   That said, we are still at an early stage of FinTech, globally. It has spurred greater competition
in every segment of the value chain of finance. It is too early to say who the winners will be.
9   The traditional financial institutions have the advantage of scale and a reputation amongst
customers. But those that fail to keep up with technology will see part or all of their business
models disrupted. Consumers are cautious about shifting their wallets to new players, but they
are also looking out for services that offer the best value. 
10   But many FinTech start-ups will also fail. It is in the nature of innovation that few new ideas
and technologies will develop scale, sustain funding and end up as winners in the market. The
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
collapse of many peer-to-peer lending platforms in the US, UK, and China is a reminder that it will
not be plain sailing for FinTech companies.
A growing FinTech ecosystem in Singapore
11   Singapore’s strategy is not to choose between financial institutions and new FinTech players
but to provide the conditions for both to innovate, compete, and collaborate. Our aim is to create
a FinTech ecosystem where innovation thrives.  This is an ecosystem comprising the innovation
centres of our financial institutions, the mushrooming FinTech start-up scene, our institutes of
research  and  higher  learning,  the  VC/PE  community  of  investors,  and  connectivity  to  regional
markets.
12   We are making good progress:
Singapore is home to more than 300 FinTech start-ups, focused on each segment of the
value  chain  –  from  providing  consumers  more  seamless  payments  services  to  offering
institutions enhanced,   automated fraud monitoring.
More  than  20  global  banks  and  insurance  companies  have  set  up  innovation  labs  and
research  centres  in  Singapore.  Several  will  be  opening  their  labs  next  week  during  the
FinTech Festival, to showcase their experiments.
MAS  is  working  with  the  industry  to  facilitate  greater  collaboration.  For  example,  MAS  is
encouraging the development of open APIs among Financial institutions to enable efficient
data sharing.
Our A-STAR’s research institutes are partnering financial institutions on data analytics and
mobile  technology  projects.  Our  universities  and  polytechnics  have  also  updated  their
curriculum and internship programmes to help their students get the hang of FinTech.
Venture  capital  interest  is  growing,  with  some  of  the  most  active  VC  investors  in Asian
FinTech being based here.
We  have  a  growing  network  of  co-operation  agreements  connecting  Singapore  to  other
FinTech centres in Australia, India, Korea and the UK.  Indeed, FinTech offers an effective
way  for  players  in  Singapore  –  both  financial  institutions  and  start-ups  –  to  meet  the
burgeoning demand for financial services in the wider Asia-Pacific region.
Nurturing promising FinTech start-ups
13   LATTICE80 is an important addition to this ecosystem for FinTech.
14   It offers a conducive physical space dedicated to the infrastructural needs of FinTech start-
ups, here in the heart of Singapore’s financial district.  It reduces costs for start-ups, gives them
convenient access to data centre and other services, and even has a nursing room. 
15   Let me cite two FinTechs starting up residence here in LATTICE80:
Percipient, a local start-up, has successfully developed a customised digital solution for the
State Bank of India. Percipient’s big data technology allows for efficient management of the
bank’s  database  of  over  500  million  accounts,  and  translating  into  large  potential  cost
savings.
Sparks Systems builds new generation trading platforms for hedge funds, banks, financial
institutions and other high volume institutional participants in the foreign exchange market.  It
aims is to develop an efficient market place for emerging market FX.
16      This  innovation  village  also  promotes  collaboration  and  co-creation.  Even  in  an  age  of
Tweets and Snapchats, face-to-face interaction remains a source of new ideas, and a way to
suss out potential partners.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
R3 LRC, a specialist in distributed ledger research supported by a consortium of more than
70 financial institutions, will set up its first physical presence here. R3 Asia Lab will promote
the cross-pollination of ideas between Singapore FinTechs and leading technologists around
the world.
The  Fintech Association  Singapore,  another  resident  here,  is  a  cross-industry  initiative  to
facilitate collaboration among all stakeholders in the FinTech ecosystem.
17   There is another feature to this collaboration here, which is to bring start-ups together with
venture capital and other investors.
tryb  is  an  investor  in  promising  technology  start-ups  that  are  building  the  financial
infrastructure platforms of the future for ASEAN. tryb is currently in the process of raising
US$100 million in long-term funding.
The Marvelstone Group too, has been investing in FinTech start-ups and linking them up with
their network of business and specialist expertise.
Further MAS initiatives to grow VC activity
18   MAS is working with the VC industry to grow the funding landscape for start-ups in Singapore
and  the  region.  The  role  VCs  play  in  stimulating  economic  dynamism  has  been  a  recurring
theme in discussions of the Committee on the Future Economy (CFE). 
19   There are two key prongs in MAS’ approach.
20   First, MAS is reviewing its regulatory regime for VC managers. 
Specifically, MAS is looking to significantly simplify and shorten the authorisation process for
new VC managers.
Further, to the extent that there are contractual safeguards to provide sufficient protection to
a  VC’s  sophisticated  investor  base,  MAS  is  also  looking  to  exempt  VC  managers  from
business conduct requirements that are currently applied to asset managers in general.
MAS  will  be  doing  a  public  consultation  on  its  proposals  in  January  next  year,  and  targets  to
introduce changes by July 2017.
21   Second, MAS is studying whether existing incentives for funds and fund managers, which
have been successful in attracting traditional asset managers to set up in Singapore and to grow
over time, are suitable to anchor VC funds and VC fund managers here too.
We recognise that VC funds and fund managers are typically smaller in size and headcount
than  traditional  asset  managers.  But  they  contribute  in  a  different  way,  by  supporting
entrepreneurship and innovation in Singapore and the region. 
We  will  take  this  into  account  in  assessing  the  requirements  for  VC  funds  and  fund
managers to qualify for our incentives.
Conclusion
22   Innovation will drive Singapore’s economic future. It will disrupt existing business models, but
it is how consumers get better value, how new firms can scale up and grow internationally, and
how we create quality jobs for our people. 
23      This  innovation  village  is  part  of  this  ongoing  journey.  It  will,  I  am  sure,  nurture  a  new
generation of technology entrepreneurs in the FinTech space. I congratulate Marvelstone once
again for the successful launch of LATTICE80.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
