  04.10.2016 
 Finalising Basel III 
VII Expansión-KPMG Financial Meeting: “Transformation of the banking 
business model” 
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Allow me to begin by expressing my gratitude for the invitation to inaugurate this VII edition 
of the Expansión-KPMG Financial Meeting.  
Last year we met, around these same dates, to analyse the move from “restructuring” to 
“transformation”  of  the  banking  sector.  Today,  the  focus  of  the  discussion  is  on 
“transformation”;  and  this  is  positive,  as  it  shows  that  banks  are  already  immersed  in  a 
process of change, enabling them to face the new landscape in the wake of the crisis.  
The  conference  programme  identifies  three  areas  that  are  key  to  the  complex  setting  in 
which banks are now pursuing their activity.  
First, the search for profitability, which in a context of very low interest rates is a fundamental 
challenge for European and Spanish banks alike.  
Second,  how  to  address  the  challenges  and  opportunities  arising  from  growing 
technological innovation, a question to which the banking sector cannot remain immune.  
Third,  adaptation  to  the  regulatory  changes  that  have  come  about  as  a  response  to  the 
weaknesses identified in the wake of the international crisis that began in 2008.  
Regarding this latter area, I shall devote my address to the changes in the global solvency 
framework, not only because of their significance but also because of the timeliness of the 
matter.  
The  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  comprising  the  body  overseeing  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision met on 11 September. At that meeting we reiterated our 
aim to conclude by the end of this year the reforms outstanding and thereby finalise the new 
capital framework known as Basel III.  
 Basel III: lessons from the crisis and regulatory response 
The  fundamental  aim  of  the  Basel  framework  is  to  offer,  at  the  global  level,  minimum 
regulatory  capital  rules  that  ensure  the  solvency  of  internationally  active  banks.  This  is 
essential to preserve financial stability and to provide security to investors and depositors 
as to banks’ capacity to withstand risks, such as those arising, for example, from adverse 
economic  scenarios,  from  inappropriate  management  decisions  or,  in  general,  from 
unexpected circumstances.  
The international financial crisis in 2008 highlighted the fact that these objectives have not 
been met, or not to the extent necessary. Although there were various causes behind the 
crisis, in the banking sector a series of grave weaknesses came to light. These included 
most  notably  excessive  leveraging  and  credit  growth;  banks’  high  exposure  to  systemic 
risks; and the absence of sufficient tools to properly address liquidity and funding problems.  
The Basel Committee’s response to these vulnerabilities was the approval, in 2010, of the 
new framework known as Basel III. Focusing initially on the numerator of the solvency ratio 
and its value, the framework substantially increased the minimum capital levels required and 
the quality of this capital.  
 3/7 
 But there is more to Basel III than this: there has been a move from a framework turning on 
a single metric, the risk-based capital ratio, to another comprising a set of requirements that 
should interact in a complementary fashion. As a result, a leverage ratio has been introduced 
which  not  only  limits  indebtedness,  but  also  constitutes  a  non-risk-based  capital 
requirement; two liquidity ratios have been incorporated (one short-term, and another that 
seeks to ensure a more stable funding structure); limits on large exposures have been set 
in place; and, finally, macroprudential capital surcharges have been included to prevent and 
mitigate both the risks derived from globally systemic institutions and those associated with 
excessive credit growth at the aggregate level.  
 Risk sensitivity, complexity and comparability 
Given all these changes and regulatory innovations, was there anything left to do?   
The  answer  is  yes,  since  following  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2008,  the 
soundness of the Basel framework was called into question, as was – more specifically – its 
risk measurement methodology.  
Almost  30  years  ago,  in  1988,  the  Basel  regulations  introduced  the  concept  of  risk 
sensitivity, assigning greater capital consumption to those exposures deemed to be of most 
risk.  Under  Basel  I,  this  risk  measurement  was  very  simple,  such  that  very  few  asset 
categories (those considered to be of least risk) had weightings lower than 100%. 
In 2004, the Basel II accord established a new capital framework aimed at improving risk 
measurement, enabling banks to use their own models while providing a more detailed and 
risk-sensitive method than that of Basel I. The in-house measurement models, which were 
assumed to be more advanced, were under supervisory authorisation, available to the banks 
with the greatest internal risk management capacity. These models were deemed to reflect 
best market practices and the shared objective was to promote their use. The search for 
risk sensitivity prevailed over other considerations of simplicity and comparability.  
That said, following the international financial crisis that broke in 2008 and the lessons drawn 
from it, shortcomings have been identified in the Basel II framework relating to the ability of 
the  models  to  correctly  measure  risks.  Moreover,  questions  have  been  raised  about  the 
actions of banks, which might have been able to benefit from incentives to develop new 
models that tended to reduce the risk calculated and, therefore, the capital consumed. And 
this not to mention the doubts raised about supervisors’ capacity to validate increasingly 
more complex models. In sum, the validity of risk-adjusted capital ratios as a measure of 
banks’  solvency  has,  in  some  cases,  been  questioned,  along  with  the  usefulness  of  this 
metric to compare the relative position of each bank.  
To illustrate this problem we can cite certain analyses published in 2012 which concluded 
that around half of all investors did not believe banks’ RWA figures, while 80% considered 
that the risk measurement framework should be simplified in order to be more credible.  
The  Basel  Committee  conducted  various  studies  attempting  to  cast  light  on  this  matter. 
Work on the credit and market risk areas was carried out. While this type of study should 
be viewed with all due caution, it is worth recalling some of the conclusions reached.  
4/7 
  For instance, according to a study by the Committee published in July 2013, when different 
banks applied their own internal models to a single portfolio selected for the purposes of 
the study, there was seen to be high variation among the resulting RWAs. Only a portion of 
this  variation  was  due  to  genuine  factors,  i.e.  to  risk  factors,  and  to  methodological 
differences permitted by the supervisors (and which were, therefore, in principle, acceptable 
or  relevant  differences).  What  was  most  interesting,  or  worrying,  depending  on  one’s 
standpoint, was the fact that 25% of the variation could not be explained by either of the 
factors I have just mentioned.  
Market  criticism  and  doubts,  combined  with  the  findings  of  the  studies,  led  the  Basel 
Committee to launch a far-reaching internal debate.  
At the risk of excessive simplification, at one extreme are those who have lost confidence 
in  banks’  capacity  to  properly  use  their  own  models,  and  also  in  supervisors’  ability  to 
validate and oversee increasingly complex models. And at the other extreme are those who 
consider that the evidence available is not sufficiently conclusive as to do away with internal 
models,  since,  from  their  standpoint,  the  differences  in  RWAs  would  essentially  be  in 
response to the different levels of risk assumed under different business models.  
In our view at the Banco de España, risk sensitivity should continue to be at the heart of the 
capital framework: if a bank assumes more risk, more regulatory capital should be required 
of it. If this nexus were to disappear, there would then be a disconnect between the bank’s 
internal risk management and regulatory requirements; and perverse incentives might arise, 
potentially leading banks to take on greater risks than they could properly manage.  
That said, internal risk management models undoubtedly pose problems that need to be 
analysed and resolved.  
First,  their  growing  complexity  means  there  is  a  risk  they  may  ultimately  become  black 
boxes accessible to only a handful of experts. Second, the elements integrated into models 
(such as probability of default or loss given default) are difficult to estimate, especially in 
certain cases characterised, for example, by the absence of sufficient data. And finally, given 
that the higher the risk calculated by the model, the greater the capital required, banks might 
be tempted to underestimate the risks in order to save on capital.  
To sum up, we believe it is necessary to continue to use the internal models, insofar as they 
provide for credible and consistent risk measurement. But we also believe that the quality 
and credibility of the regulations would be reinforced by the possibility of including certain 
limits, such as those currently being considered by the Basel Committee, to overcome the 
shortcomings and doubts mentioned. 
Arguably, the best way to achieve this aim is by converging the estimation methodologies 
used  by  institutions  and  supervisory  practices  in  respect  of  model  validation.  However, 
under the Basel framework, considering the significant national differences, this is a  very 
difficult  task.  Accordingly,  we  believe  that  setting  certain  explicit,  verifiable  and  uniform 
limits on the models, without this resulting in excessive standardisation, would be a realistic 
and desirable goal. 
Striking  a  good  balance  between  risk  sensitivity  on  the  one  hand  and  simplicity  and 
comparability on the other is the aim of the negotiations and reconciliation of positions under 
 5/7 
 way on the Basel Committee so as to shape the final design, thus bringing the reform of 
Basel III to a close.  
 Issues outstanding for conclusion of the reform of the capital framework 
In January this year, the Basel Committee’s Group of Governors and Heads of Supervision 
formulated the two objectives of the reform: to address the issue of unjustified variation in 
risk-weighted  assets,  avoiding  any  significant  across-the-board  increase  in  capital 
requirements. 
The Committee has already published for public consultation a first proposal on ending the 
use  of  internal  models  to  calculate  operational  risk,  which  henceforth  would  have  to  be 
measured using only the standardised approach.  
The  Committee  has  also  published  for  consultation  a  proposal  on  the  setting  of  further 
restrictions on the use of internal models to measure credit risk. These restrictions would 
consist in limiting modelling of the so-called “low-default portfolios” for which there is an 
insufficient history of default to be able to use advanced models. This would be the case, 
for example, of portfolios of banks, specialised lending or large corporations.  
In  addition,  in  portfolios  deemed  suitable  for  modelling,  minimum  levels  would  be 
established for parameters (for example, probability of default and loss given default) so as 
to rule out abnormally low estimated values. 
Lastly, the Basel Committee has also published for consultation the possibility of setting a 
floor or minimum values for RWAs resulting from internal models. Not only the advisability 
of this is being discussed, but also, if approved, the design and calibration of these minimum 
values. Essentially, it would be a question of limiting to a certain percentage the maximum 
capital saving that institutions may obtain by modelling risk  on their own account, rather 
than measuring it using the standardised approach. 
Conceptually, and provided it is correctly designed and calibrated, a floor of this kind can 
be a useful tool in the aim to reduce unwarranted and unwanted variation in RWAs: it would 
set for all institutions the same maximum level of saving obtainable using models, and it 
would help to ensure a minimum desired level of capital for a specific level of risk, and all 
without relinquishing risk sensitivity. 
In  the  process  of  finalisation  of  Basel  III,  the  Committee  has  also  stated  its  intention  to 
improve the standardised approaches for credit and operational risk. Broadly speaking, the 
aim is also to make them more risk-sensitive.  
The standardised approaches are important per se, since they are used by a great number 
of banks worldwide; but as restrictions on the use of internal models are introduced they 
will become even more important. 
Thus, discontinuing the use of internal models to measure operational risk would mean that 
all institutions, irrespective of size, business model or type of business, would have to use 
the  same  standardised  approach  to  measure  operational  risk.  Measuring  such  a 
heterogeneous risk using a standardised approach clearly presents considerable difficulties. 
6/7 
  The  proposal  published  for  public  consultation  by  the  Basel  Committee  has  a  series  of 
limitations that must be remedied before it is approved. 
Regarding the use of the standardised approach to measure credit risk, the Committee is 
striving  to  make  it  more  risk-sensitive  and,  at  the  same  time,  to  reduce  its  excessively 
automatic  reliance  on  external  credit  ratings.  This  is  no  easy  task  either,  and  the  final 
outcome may possibly be less ambitious than was initially intended. It is important, however, 
that  the  approach  be  robust  and  correctly  calibrated.  The  impact  assessments  being 
performed by the Basel Committee will provide more information in this respect. 
In accordance with the guidelines we all subscribe to, as I mentioned earlier, this package 
of reforms should not produce a significant widespread increase in capital requirements.  
Nevertheless, with the aim of reducing unwanted variation in risk-weighted assets, it is likely 
that capital requirements will indeed increase for banks that are using internal models in a 
more aggressive or inappropriate manner. 
In other words, given the aim of the reform, any resultant increase in capital requirements 
would be confined to the review of internal credit risk models, or to the possible limits on 
savings arising from their use. In general, the review of the standardised approaches should 
not result in increases in capital, as applied either to credit or operational risk. 
Conclusion 
To conclude, following our meeting in Basel, the challenge ahead for the Central Banks and 
Supervisors is to reach an agreement on a new capital framework that maintains a balance 
between risk sensitivity, simplicity and comparability.  
Reaching this agreement before the end of the year will be no mean task, and will require 
each of us to cede some ground. But a non-agreement scenario is not an option. Basel is a 
most valuable edifice that we must preserve so as to maintain a global banking system.  
A delay in the agreement is not desirable either. It is not a matter of merely patching up 
Basel III. I believe banks and supervisors would benefit from finalising the new framework, 
and allowing ourselves a regulatory breather.  
Thank you for your attention.  
  7/7 
