Philip R Lane: The European financial system after Brexit
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at Reuters Newsmaker
Event, London, 28 October 2016.
 Good morning!  I can think of no better location to speak about the implications of Brexit for the
European financial system than here in Canary Wharf. 
Before I turn to my main topic, let me briefly mention a few points in relation to the near-term
implications of Brexit.  First, while the economic and market reaction to Brexit has been relatively
orderly  so  far  in  the  UK  and  the  rest  of  the  EU  (in  part  due  to  the  monetary  accommodation
provided by the Bank of England and the easing of yields across Europe), the transition towards
the  phase  of  active  UK-EU  negotiations  that  will  begin  in  Spring  2017  may  trigger  a  more
substantial re-assessment of post-Brexit economic prospects. In particular, if the momentum in
the negotiations is in the direction of a more severe form of Brexit, this may damage consumer
and investor confidence.  While the effects might be qualitatively similar in both the UK and the
wider EU, it is likely that the impact will be asymmetric, in view of the relative size of the UK and
EU economies. 
Second,  the  large  movement  in  the  Sterling-euro  exchange  rate  represents  an  important
stabilising mechanism by which the equilibrium real exchange rate depreciation associated with
the downward shift in the relative economic prospects for the UK is partly attained through a step
adjustment in the currency. It also shifts the financial terms of trade, with UK owners of foreign-
currency assets enjoying a valuation gain.  While incumbent foreign holders of Sterling assets
have suffered a valuation loss, the decline in Sterling may entice new foreign investors attracted
by the decline in the relative price of UK assets. Finally, in relation to the exchange rate, it is
important to keep in mind that the recent depreciation of Sterling against the euro is in the wake
of a sustained appreciation phase between early 2013 and the middle of 2015.
Third, the extensive linkages between the UK and Ireland mean that Irish economic performance
is  especially  sensitive  to  shifts  in  UK  output  levels  and  the  Sterling-euro  exchange  rate. 
Accordingly, the Central Bank of Ireland has adjusted its 2017 growth forecast from 4.2 percent
to  3.6  percent.  The  scale  of  this  revision  shows  the  material  impact  of  Brexit  on  the  Irish
economy; at the same time, the Irish economy is far more diversified today than in the past, so
that Brexit is just one factor among many in determining overall economic performance. Still, we
view  Brexit  as  a  major  downside  risk  for  the  Irish  economy  and  will  be  closely  monitoring
developments in the UK economy as the full impact of Brexit takes hold.
Let me now turn to the primary goal of my speech, which is to discuss the potential implications
of Brexit for the configuration of the European financial system, with a primary focus on the euro
area.    If  the  UK-EU  negotiations  deliver  an  agreement  that  effectively  preserves  the  single
passport for UK-resident entities selling into the EU, the net impact of Brexit on the structure of
the European financial system might be quite minor.  However, in scenarios in which UK-resident
firms  are  no  longer  treated  as  equivalent  to  EU  firms  for  regulatory  purposes,  it  is  likely  that
significant migration of financial activity from the UK to the EU will occur.
In  particular,  it  is  plausible  that  a  larger  fraction  of  trade  in  euro-denominated  financial
instruments  will  take  place  inside  the  euro  area,  with  ancillary  implications  for  the  location  of
financial  lawyers,  professional  services  firms,  central  counterparties,  clearing  services  and
settlement services. In order to more easily meet regulatory requirements, there may also be
shifts in the organisation of the banking groups. In addition, we may expect to see non-EU banks
looking to set up subsidiaries in the EU and EU-resident banks possibly converting UK branches
into subsidiaries.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In the post-Brexit environment, it is unlikely that financial activity will cluster in a single location in
the euro area, since no individual location offers a close substitute to London.  An open question
is whether the decentralisation of the European financial system will impose significant efficiency
costs.    Once  a  location  is  established  as  a  dominant  financial  centre,  there  are  many  self-
reinforcing factors that help it to maintain a hegemonic position.  Most obviously, a deep labour
market for financial-sector workers and a localised stock of intangible financial knowledge are
highly attractive both for new financial firms and new entrants to the labour market.
However, if a shock fundamentally disrupts this equilibrium configuration, it does not follow that a
new dominant location will inevitably emerge, since there also countervailing factors that work
against the concentration of activity in a single location. This point is especially relevant in the
context  of  the  euro  area,  given  the  diverse  characteristics  of  its  main  financial  centres. 
Moreover, the decentralised nature of the eurosystem, with monetary operations largely executed
through the national central banks, may also facilitate a multi-polar financial system in the euro
area.
The  capacity  of  a  decentralised  financial  system  to  deliver  the  potential  gains  from  a  single
market  in  financial  services  can  be  supported  in  several  ways.    First,  the  Single  Supervisory
Mechanism is an important pillar for an area-wide banking union, with a common supervisory
regime led by the ECB, with local implementation in partnership with national regulators. A robust
banking union also ultimately requires a common European deposit insurance system and the
full financing of the Single Resolution Fund.
Second,  the  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU)  agenda  now  takes  on  greater  urgency,  in  order  to
enable deeper and more liquid markets in euro-denominated instruments. This is essential if the
euro area is to reap the benefits from a more balanced financial system, in which equity and
bond markets offer an alternative to banks in intermediating funds between savers and investors.
The CMU agenda is quite demanding in terms of the range of the individual components, such
that it will require considerable commitment among policymakers to make sustained progress.
Third, in any new long-term relationship between the UK and the EU, it is quite likely that there will
be  very  extensive  ongoing  UK-EU  trade  in  financial  services,  with  associated  high  levels  of
bilateral  financial  flows.    Moreover,  a  substantial  proportion  will  take  the  form  of  intra-firm
transactions,  through  the  internal  markets  of  globally-significant  financial  institutions.    Internal
trade within these institutions can be highly valuable as a mechanism to deliver international risk
sharing. However, effective regulation of these firms will require continued collaboration between
UK and EU regulators (in partnership with other global regulators). Similarly, the role of large,
complex financial institutions in the international financial system calls for ongoing cooperation
among the major central banks in underpinning the liquidity of international markets.
Finally,  let  me  emphasise  that  the  locational  decisions  of  financial  firms  within  the  euro  area
should not be driven by regulatory considerations.  Rather, a common regulatory system and a
genuine  single  EU-wide  market  in  financial  services  should  allow  firms  to  concentrate  on  the
relative merits of alternative locations in relation to the standard factors identified in the economic
geography literature. In the coming years, the analysis of these locational decisions promises to
be a major research field for economists and financial geographers.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
