William C Dudley: Opening remarks at the Economic Press Briefing
on the Survey of Consumer Expectations
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Economic  Press  Briefing  on  the  Survey  of  Consumer
Expectations, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City, 18 November 2016.
 Good morning, and welcome to the New York Fed’s Economic Press Briefing.  I am pleased to
have the opportunity to speak with you today about our Survey of Consumer Expectations.  This
is an important source of information that we use in our analysis of current and future economic
conditions to help inform our monetary policy decisions.  As always, what I have to say reflects
my own views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal
1
Reserve System.
In pursuing its monetary policy objectives, the Federal Reserve relies on a large number of data
sources  that  provide  information  about  recent  developments  and  the  current  state  of  the
economy.  Most of these data sources are backward looking.  That is, they provide data about
past  decisions  and  outcomes.    In  contrast,  we  know  relatively  little  about  the  forward-looking
subjective  expectations  and  intentions  of  economic  agents,  which  are  a  key  determinant  of
current and future outcomes.  This information, though, is essential for formulating policy and
evaluating its effectiveness.  The macroeconomic outcomes we observe reflect preferences and
constraints,  as  well  as  beliefs  of  individual  consumers  and  firms.    Therefore,  a  fuller
understanding  of  such  outcomes  requires  reliable  data  on  the  beliefs  and  intentions  held  by
economic agents and how they evolve over time.  In particular, consumer expectations influence
a variety of considerations, including spending and saving behavior, wage dynamics, job search,
housing  demand  and  the  demand  for  credit.    Given  their  importance  in  determining  U.S.
economic  activity,  consumer  expectations  are  of  particular  value  in  assessing  the  economic
outlook and the related risks.
Over the last decade, we have devoted significant resources to improving the measurement of
the economic expectations of households.  This work culminated in the creation of the Survey of
Consumer Expectations, or SCE, in 2013.  The expectations data collected in our survey give us
direct insight into households’ decision-making and consumers’ financial and economic outlooks.
 While we monitor expectations on a number of topics, of particular importance are households’
medium-term inflation expectations.  Having reliable measures of inflation expectations is crucial
to  assess  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  and  central  bank  communications.    Such  an
assessment focuses on analyzing the extent to which longer-run inflation expectations remain
well-anchored, and on learning more about how agents update and revise their expectations in
response to new information. The SCE allows us to carry out this sort of analysis.
Besides their obvious policy relevance, the SCE data are also highly valuable for research.  Our
economists  have  shown  that  the  SCE’s  expectations  data  are  informative  and  predictive  of
respondents’  current  and  future  behavior.    They  have  also  documented  the  substantial
heterogeneity  in  the  formation  and  updating  of  expectations  across  demographic  groups.    To
facilitate further research, we make the survey data available in the Center for Microeconomic
Data section of our website.  Each month we also illustrate the trends in our expectations series
through easy-to-use, interactive charts.  Further, a number of our Liberty Street Economics blog
posts describe the data and the analysis we have conducted.  We do this because we want
researchers, policymakers, commentators and the general public to understand the data and to
follow our updates.
Let me now describe our Survey of Consumer Expectations in more detail.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Survey of Consumer Expectations
Following extensive design and testing, we launched the Survey of Consumer Expectations in
June 2013.  The survey has a number of innovative and unique features, three of which I would
like  to  highlight  today.    First  and  foremost,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  it  collects  households’
subjective expectations and intentions on a wide range of economic outcomes and behaviors.  In
addition  to  short-  and  medium-term  inflation  expectations,  it  collects  data  on  households’
expectations regarding the housing, labor and credit markets, as well as households’ financial
situations and a host of other macroeconomic variables of interest.  For example, the survey
elicits beliefs about future wage growth, house price appreciation, job search and labor market
transitions, households’ spending and income growth, and credit applications.  By collecting data
on a broad range of expectations, it is possible to analyze how they interact with each other and
jointly influence households’ decisions.  We also study how expectations vary with demographics
and other household characteristics.
The broad scope of the SCE allows us to study many questions relevant to economic policy—
such  as  understanding  housing  market  decisions,  disentangling  credit  demand  from  supply,
analyzing job search behavior and measuring wage growth as people transition between jobs.  In
addition, the survey has been used to help answer other policy-relevant questions as they have
come up in our discussions.  Two examples are households’ spending response to the decrease
in gas prices in early 2014, and households’ early experiences and perceptions of the Affordable
Care Act following its enactment.  Some of this analysis relies on the ability of our survey to shed
light on whether consumers expect a specific change in economic conditions to be temporary or
permanent.
A second important feature of the survey is that—in addition to simple point forecasts—for some
variables, such as inflation, we get respondents’ entire forecast distributions by asking them to
assign probabilities to various ranges of future outcomes.  These so-called density forecasts in
turn allow us to measure households’ uncertainty about future events by looking at the spread in
their subjective distributions.  Density forecasts also allow us to monitor the perceived likelihood
that respondents assign to specific events, such as deflation or a large increase in earnings.
A third important characteristic of the SCE is that it is a rotating panel.  Each month about 1,300
household  heads  participate  in  our  survey.    This  is  a  nationally  representative  sample.
Respondents  remain  on  the  panel  for  up  to  12  months,  with  a  constant  fraction  entering  and
rotating out each month.  This allows us to monitor the expectations of the same respondents
over time, which provides important benefits.  First, it gives us greater confidence that month-to-
month changes in our headline numbers reflect true changes in beliefs, and not just changes in
the sample composition.  Second, observing repeated responses by the same individuals allows
us to examine how expectations are formed and revised over time.  Third, by following the same
people over time, we are able to study how expectations are related to contemporaneous and
future economic decisions and outcomes for these respondents.
Today the SCE team will provide further background about the survey, discuss newly released
findings for October and recent trends in some of its main indicators.  The team will then present
findings  from  two  special  components  of  the  SCE:  one  that  covers  households’  credit
experiences and expectations, and one that deals with labor market behavior and expectations. 
Before  I  pass  this  on  to  my  colleagues,  I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  these  two  special
surveys.
New findings on Credit Access
The SCE Credit Access Survey supplements the information collected in the Federal Reserve
Board’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, also known as SLOOS. 
The  SLOOS  is  a  primary  source  of  information  on  credit  standards  and  credit  demand as
perceived and reported by banks.  In contrast, the SCE Credit Access Survey, which has been
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
conducted  at  a  four-month  frequency  since  October  2013,  measures  experiences  in  credit
markets as perceived by households.  The combination of the two data sources provides a more
complete picture of household credit access and demand.  Today, we are releasing the October
2016 findings as well as introducing new data from the survey.
A unique feature of the SCE is its measure of latent credit demand—that is, demand that does
not lead to an application for credit.  We measure this latent credit demand as the proportion of
households who report that, while needing credit, they did not apply because they expected their
application to be rejected.  In addition to current credit experiences, we also elicit households’
expectations  of  their  future  credit  applications  and  the  likelihood  of  these  applications  being
approved.  As we will show later, the survey provides useful insights into the extent and variation
in  met  and  unmet  credit  needs  across  households.    Moreover,  our  analysis  indicates  that
reported expectations are indeed predictive of credit outcomes reported four months later.
New Findings on Job Search
While  the  SCE  Credit  Access  Survey  allows  us  to  track  credit  market  experiences  and
expectations, the SCE Labor Market Survey gathers information on the job search behavior and
expectations of employed and unemployed respondents.  Aggregate labor market statistics on
earnings,  employment  and  labor  market  transitions  are  readily  available,  yet  relatively  little  is
known about the expectations and search behaviors of labor market participants and how these
change  over  time.    Our  SCE  Labor  Market  Survey  collects  rich  information  on  respondents’
actual and expected wage offers, as well as their reservation wage, which is the lowest wage or
salary they say they would accept for a new job.  We also elicit expectations about future labor
market  transitions,  such  as  the  likelihood  of  staying  with  the  same  employer,  switching
employers, finding a job or being laid off.
Over  time,  changes  in  responses  to  these  questions  can  shed  light  on  how  workers’
expectations  evolve,  and  how  these  changes  relate  to  observed  trends  in  aggregate  earnings
and  employment  dynamics.  Our  preliminary  analyses  of  the  data  suggest  that  these
expectations  measures  are  predictive  of  respondents’  subsequent  labor  market  outcomes.  In
coming years, as we generate a longer time series for the survey, we will be able to explore
whether  the  expectations  we  collect  can  be  used  to  construct  leading  indicators  of  the  job
market.
Now,  I’d  like  to  turn  things  over  to  our  economists,  beginning  with  Olivier Armantier,  who  will
provide further background and specifics about our survey.
1
Olivier Armantier, Giorgio Topa, Joseph Tracy, Wilbert van der Klaauw and Basit Zafar assisted in preparing
these remarks.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
