Andreas Dombret: German unity and European integration – where
are we heading?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the ceremony marking the Day of German Unity, Münster, 2 October 2016.
 1. Introduction
Mayor Lewe
ladies and gentlemen
It is a great joy and honour for me to be here in my hometown of Münster to deliver the address
at this ceremony marking the Day of German Unity because, in a certain sense, it was here in
Münster that the foundation of what we are celebrating today, namely German unity, was laid.
I am thinking, of course, of the Peace of Westphalia, which was signed in Münster in 1648. It put
an end to the Thirty Years’ War, in which soldiers from almost all of the European powers had
fought against each other since 1618, claiming millions of lives. I don’t intend to delve too deeply
into the history of it, but here today I wish to highlight an important lesson from the Peace of
Westphalia. It marked the first time that the countries of Europe occupied themselves with the
continent as a whole – they desired to take responsibility for Europe together. The negotiations at
Münster were, if you will, somewhat like a CSCE, a "Conference on Security and Co-operation in
Europe".
At the same time, the Peace of Westphalia also paved the way for our federal system: the rights
of  German  territorial  princes  were  strengthened,  thereby  making  the  German  regional  states
independent players that could help shape European politics.
In  the  Peace  of  Westphalia,  all  the  European  partners  committed  to  guaranteeing  security  in
Europe. We also experienced something similar in 1990 when Germany was reunified: without
European integration, German unity certainly would not have come about.
 2. Heading in the right direction: German unity
We are able to celebrate the 26th anniversary of German unity this year thanks not only to the
courage of the people living under communist dictatorships but also to our partners in Europe
and  the  United  States.  Because  they,  and  Michail  Gorbachev  with  them,  trusted  that  German
unity also serves the goal of European unity, they agreed to reunification – a gift that should serve
as a reminder of our duty.
"Unity is a little like democracy: it is never finished.” This phrase was uttered by former German
President Horst Köhler, and it is no less true after 26 years of German unity. Despite facing many
challenges,  Germany  has  continued  to  grow  since  1990  and  it  is  today  hailed  as  a  reliable
partner, perhaps even a role model, for many people in Europe and beyond.
Saying that, I certainly do not wish to ignore the fact that the past few years have been difficult for
many people and that challenges still lie ahead of us today. Even though Germany did not bear
the brunt of the euro crisis, it has nevertheless clearly left its mark here, too. Many people are
looking to the future with an acute sense of concern and uncertainty. Quo vadis Europe, quo
vadis euro? How will we manage to cope with the large influx of refugees to our country and find
good ways of living together? These are all questions that people in Germany, in Münster, are
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
asking. And they deserve honest answers.
But one thing is very important to me: for all the challenges we face, the path we have taken over
the  past  26  years  is  a  clear  path,  the  right  path.  Germany  is  moving  towards  unity,  towards
integration. We are certainly not glossing over matters when we say that Germany has grown
ever closer over the last 26 years. That’s something we can be grateful for and we must press
ahead on this path, with all the energy and commitment we can muster.
 3. Sliding back into crisis?: European integration
Looking beyond Germany’s borders to Europe gives me much greater cause for concern, for
there I see a continent, our continent, facing a crucial test. For me, matters came to a head when
the UK recently decided to no longer be a member of the European Union.
In my eyes, Brexit is more than just a manifestation of euroscepticism in the UK – it is primarily a
sign of deep uncertainty surrounding the European project – and that’s certainly not confined to
the UK.  “Europe does not grow out of treaties, it grows out of the hearts of its citizens, or not at
all.” This is how former German Foreign Minister, Klaus Kinkel, put it back in 1992. He was right
then and he is right now.
The European Union may well have made important projects such as the euro, the Schengen
zone or the common foreign and security policy a reality, but today there is deep mistrust of “the
elites in Brussels", unfortunately. In all these years, Europe hasn’t managed to reach people’s
hearts.
Besides  the  current  challenges  –  besides  Brexit,  I’m  thinking  of  topics  such  as  the  influx  of
refugees or the still unresolved sovereign debt crisis in the euro area – it has never been a better
time, then, to start the conversation on the future direction of the European Union and to counter
the Brexit shock with substantive and necessary reforms.
A wide variety of future scenarios for the EU will be debated, ranging from a return to the nation
state to a political union. Between these two extremities, one idea is to establish an asymmetrical
union – with a political union, a core consisting of Germany and France as trailblazers. This idea
of a kind of multi-speed Europe, if you like, was most recently discussed by German Foreign
Minister Franz-Walter Steinmeier, who called on the EU to become more flexible and “to make it
possible for groups of member states to go ahead in certain areas, to experiment and to be open
to  others  joining  later.”  Another  idea,  recently  suggested  by  Banque  de  France  President
François Villeroy de Galhau, was to create a “financing and investment union” in which all the
surpluses in the EU would be pooled and transferred to investment projects. As you can see: the
options and ideas are out there. I don’t wish to delve any deeper into these debates or give my
backing to any particular idea – such far-reaching decisions are a matter for politicians and for
citizens, certainly not for a central bank.
But Brexit drove home the point that, whatever kind of future Europe the peoples of Europe opt
for, simply carrying on as before will not move the European project forward, but most likely do it
lasting damage.
4. Quo vadis Europe?
This is mainly down to dissatisfaction with the EU, which, as we know, is not a uniquely British
phenomenon, but has become significantly more widespread in many member states. Domestic
political  motives  go  some  way  towards  explaining  this  dissatisfaction,  of  course,  but  the
  2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
European Union’s specific actions also play their part. Examples include how it has dealt with
refugees or the sovereign debt crisis, or the general “value for money” offered by harmonised
rules and “ever closer union” – I won’t go into detail on individual topics at this juncture, as that,
too, would overstretch my mandate as a central banker.
But there’s one question that crops up time and again: how capable is the European Union of
taking  effective  and  efficient  decisions?  The  EU  has  yet  to  demonstrate  its  ability  to  handle
diversity – be it cultural or economic – and to channel it in the right directions.
This  becomes  very  plain  to  see  when  we  take  a  look  at  the  euro  area,  say.  What  we  have
experienced in monetary union shows just how difficult it is to handle diversity. Needless to say,
the  individual  constituent  countries  of  an  economic  area  that  is  as  large  as  the  EU  develop
differently  and  won’t  respond  in  the  same  way  to  changes  on  account  of  their  economic  and
societal structures. So the underlying question is this: how can monetary union be made more
crisis-resilient in spite of its diverse structure?
One  challenge  we  have  to  come  to  terms  with  on  a  daily  basis  is  the  fact  that  there  are  19
different economic and fiscal policies and just a single monetary policy in the euro area. This set-
up  makes  it  more  attractive  for  member  states  to  run  up  debt,  because  it  lets  them  pass  on
some of the negative effects of higher debt levels to all the other participating countries. They can
socialise  their  debts,  so  to  speak.  In  concrete  terms,  this  means  that  individual  states  bear
liability  for  unwelcome  developments  in  other  countries  without  having  a  say  in  decisions.
However, as Walter Eucken once put it: "Whoever reaps the benefits must also bear the liability."
The founding fathers of monetary union endeavoured to bear this regulatory principle in mind, not
only  by  enshrining  the  no-bail-out  clause  in  the  EU  Treaty  but  also  by  setting  ceilings  for
government debt and new borrowing. They knew full well that unwelcome developments in the
fiscal policy of one member state could jeopardise the stability of the entire structure.
And that is precisely what happened when the sovereign debt crisis hit. The safeguards in place
were no longer able to stem the member states’ ever-rising debt levels, with the end result that
doubts  about  the  financial  soundness  of  individual  member  states  led  to  doubts  about  the
cohesion  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  These  doubts  could  only  be  appeased  with  the  aid  of
government bailout programmes and Eurosystem measures. In the case of the latter, the first
thing  that  comes  to  mind  is  the  disputed  purchase  of  government  bonds  from  crisis-stricken
countries.
The emergency measures rolled out over the past few years have undoubtedly helped to restore
stability in our monetary union in the short term. Yet these measures increasingly introduced the
element of joint liability without monitoring powers being transferred to the Community level to the
same extent. But that, taken by itself, undermines the Maastricht framework and its core principle
of national fiscal responsibility.
So what’s the next step now? Essentially, I see two possible paths.
First, we can achieve a permanently stable governance framework if we push back the element
of joint liability. For example, mechanisms could be put in place to ensure that member states
themselves really are liable for unwelcome developments in their countries. This would give the
no-bail-out  clause  renewed  credibility  and  ensure  that  member  states  with  less  sound  public
finances also have to pay higher interest.
Second – and this would undeniably be a bold step forward – a fiscal union could be created.
This would shift much of the responsibility for fiscal and economic policies to the supranational
level, thus restoring the balance between action and liability.
A  fiscal  union  such  as  this  would  be  the  biggest  step  in  the  integration  process  since  the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
introduction of the euro. However, the transfer of sovereign rights to the European level which
this  would  entail  would  prove  impossible  without  extensive  changes  to  primary  law  and  votes
throughout the member states.
Politicians alone – not a central bank – can decide how action and liability can be brought back
into alignment in the euro area. And if politicians opt for the path that leads to more centralised
fiscal policy, appointing a  European  finance  minister  or  establishing  a  joint  ministry  of  finance
would be two possible ways of effectively establishing control over European fiscal policy at the
European level.
Politicians’  unwillingness  hitherto  to  embrace  further  steps  towards  a  more  centralised  fiscal
policy might have something to do with the major political obstacles I mentioned earlier on. For
my  part,  I  sense  there  is  little  political  enthusiasm  to  push  for  “more  Europe”  in  fiscal  policy
matters  at  the  moment,  because  it  is  naturally  extremely  difficult  for  a  country  to  renounce
sovereignty over its own budgetary policy.
If  things  stay  as  they  are,  the  only  way  forward  is  to  tackle  and  rectify  the  flaws  and
contradictions of the Maastricht framework – a regime that remains in force as hitherto and is
built around the idea of individual national responsibility. What this means, above all, is preventing
unwelcome developments in the economic and fiscal policies of individual countries from posing
a threat to financial stability in the currency area as a whole. After all, this was the reason why the
European partners had to throw a financial lifeline to Cyprus, Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain
during the sovereign debt crisis and are still having to do so to a certain extent today. It was also
the  reason  why  the  Eurosystem  launched  purchase  programmes  for  crisis  countries’
government bonds.
 5. Disentangling the Gordian knot: the sovereign-bank nexus
A no-bail-out clause will only ever be credible if it is possible to restructure government bonds
without jeopardising financial stability. But by the same token, this means putting an end, once
and for all, to the tight sovereign-bank nexus that still persists in many euro-area countries. This
nexus primarily comes about when a country’s banks hold huge amounts of government bonds
in their books.
The  Bundesbank  was  quick  to  point  out  that  the  preferential  regulatory  treatment  afforded  to
government bonds plays a major role in this regard. Under the current regime, banks are not
required  to  set  aside  any  capital  against  exposures  to  euro-area  sovereigns,  but  they  are  for
loans to enterprises or households. Nor are there any caps or ceilings on their lending to these
borrowers.
Banks, therefore, have a huge incentive to invest in government bonds, at least in the short term.
Sovereigns likewise stand to benefit in the short run since they can raise funding relatively easily
thanks  to  the  artificially  inflated  demand  for  government  bonds  –  yet  at  the  same  time  this
lessens the pressure on them to consolidate government finances and to reduce their debt to
sensible levels.
However, the crisis made it more than clear that even euro-area countries’ government bonds
can be exposed to risk. This is why, in my view, capital requirements need to be extended to
cover banks’ on-balance-sheet lending to sovereigns according to their risks.
Also, I still think it makes sense to cap banks’ exposures to individual sovereigns – much like the
large exposure limits that exist for private sector borrowers. That way, even if those sovereigns
were to default, banks would still be sufficiently capitalised.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
If the preferential regulatory treatment afforded to sovereign debt were done away with, this would
also  increase  investors’  incentives  to  take  greater  account  of  the  differing  risk  profiles  of  the
individual  states,  which  in  turn  would  strengthen  the  disciplinary  function  of  capital  markets.
Countries that pursue unsustainable fiscal policies would then have to pay higher interest rates
on their debts. So the area where political action is needed has been staked out – now it’s up to
the EU to demonstrate that it is, in fact, willing to act.
 6. Conclusion
Ladies  and  gentleman,  “Europe  is  like  a  bicycle.  If  it  stops,  it  will  fall  over.”  This  phrase  was
coined by former President of the European Commission Jacques Delors, and it aptly describes
the  dynamics  that  we  have  seen  so  far  in  the  storyline  of  the  European  Union.  Since  it  was
founded, the EU has steadily continued to develop, constantly taken over new tasks and policy
areas  and  created  new  institutions.  But  the  UK’s  sudden  decision  to  dismount  has  made  the
bicycle lose its balance.
So now it is high time that we stop the European bicycle for a moment and take stock of where
our journey is taking us. We might even have to change direction. Aimlessly pedalling on cannot
and will not be the solution.
What will be decisive over the medium to long term is that we find good solutions to counter the
near-chronic sense of dissatisfaction with Europe’s institutions. Any deficiencies we identify must
be tackled in a decisive manner. Europe needs to demonstrate its ability to embrace credible
political reform. We Germans, especially, need to be aware of our responsibility for making the
European  project  a  success,  just  as  our  partners  in  Europe  contributed  to  the  success  of
German  unity,  which  we  are  celebrating  here  today. And  I  firmly  believe  that  European  unity
deserves to be celebrated and defended as proudly as Germany’s. The unification of Europe is a
wonderful peace project – it was not for nothing that the EU was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize
in 2012 – and there could not be a more appropriate location for this celebration than Münster, a
City of Peace.
Thank you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
