Mojmír  Hampl:  Monetary  policy  and  the  current  macroeconomic
environment in the developed world
Speech by Mr Mojmír Hampl, Vice Governor of the Czech National Bank, at the Deutsche Bank
Prague Client Conference, Prague, 25 October 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Good afternoon. Thank you very much for inviting me again to your flagship event. It is my utmost
pleasure to be here. Actually, this is the third time in a row I have had the chance to speak here.
In 2014 my topic was, quite expectedly, the exchange rate commitment and its introduction in
November 2013. I recently looked at my slides from 2014, and I would not change anything about
them. Only the timing of the exit has changed – quite radically, I have to admit.
The following year, 2015, the obvious topic was a comparison of the Czech and Swiss cases.
This was especially interesting given the abrupt and completely surprising Swiss exit from their
exchange rate commitment in January 2015.
I thought to myself: “What would be a natural candidate for this year?” I put my mind to work and
suddenly a topic appeared: our own Czech exit, our own way of abandoning the exchange rate
commitment, which is almost three years old now.
However, I somehow feel that the exit will be a key topic for your questions and comments. So, I
eventually decided to speak about something else, something more abstract and may be a bit
more general: the constraints on monetary policy in the developed world. As I see the Czech
Republic  a  part  of  the  developed  world,  I  believe  this  is  a  topic  that  is  relevant  to  the  Czech
National Bank.
The  key  constraint  or  dilemma  –  or  even  puzzle,  if  you  will  –  for  us  in  the  central  banking
community  has  been  one  key real variable  which  we  believe  is  beyond  the  reach  of  central
bankers. That variable is the real equilibrium, or natural, interest rate.
We believe that this variable is absolutely key for the economy and that it is exogenous (i.e. not in
hands of anybody, or at least not central bankers). At the same time, it critically influences both
the financial sector and the real economy.
I have tried to depict what I want to say on this very stylised chart (Chart 1).
Chart 1: The role of the equilibrium interest rate
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
 It basically shows that if you have got the natural real equilibrium interest rate at a certain level –
and,  of  course,  it  is  not  directly  observable,  we  can  only  estimate  it,  like  the  output  gap,  for
instance – monetary policy must take this variable into account and must in fact respect it. Given
the inflation outlook, the movements of nominal interest rates or policy rates should, in an ideal
world,  imitate  those  of  the  equilibrium  rate.  Or  at  least  they  should  not  deviate  much  from
equilibrium.
Why? Because this interest rate interconnects the future, the present and the past. It puts all
three into equilibrium, in terms of savings and investment, current and future labour employed,
current and future preferred leisure, etc.
If monetary policy does not in broad terms “respect” the evolution of the real interest rate, it can
create imbalances one way or the other.
If you go too high above the real interest rate and the actual real interest rate is above the natural
one, you create recessions, unemployment, falling investment and declining asset prices. And if
you  go  lower  or  substantially  below  the  equilibrium  interest  rate,  you  create  overheating,
excessive debt and rapidly increasing asset prices.
Even  more  importantly,  moving  the  statutory  interest  rate  has  fundamental  effects  on  the
financial  sector.  The  financial  sector  is  a  time-transforming  sector –  every  second,  it
transforms the present into the future (short-term liabilities into long-term assets – typically done
by banks) or vice versa (long-term liabilities into short-term assets – typically done by insurance
or pension companies). Whenever you take the policy rate above the equilibrium interest rate,
you create a problem out of what happened in the financial sector in the past. Whenever you go
substantially below, you create problems in the future.
I have chosen non-performing loans as an example that is, I believe, quite easy to understand. If
you substantially increase rates now, many projects from the past become unviable and non-
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
performing.  If  you  go  substantially  below,  many  of  the  currently  new  projects  will  become
unviable in the future when rates return to equilibrium.
In other words, the financial sector as a time-transforming sector is especially sensitive to the
movement of real rates and to discrepancies between the actual real rate and the natural rate.
To make all this even more complicated, try to imagine that the equilibrium or natural real rate of
interest is not constant, but is itself moving in one direction. Then, as a central banker, you have
to go down even more than you thought conceivable.
This is exactly what we believe has been happening in the developed world for quite some time
now (Chart 2). Here are some famous estimates made by John Williams at the San Francisco
Fed, but you can find similar estimates elsewhere.
Chart 2: Real equilibrium rates in the developed world have been falling steadily (Holston et al.,
2016)
 Why  is  that?  Nobody  knows  for  sure.  But  I  tend  to  explain  it  using  a  famous  quote  from  the
French poet Paul Valéry – “The future is not what it used to be”. Probably due to factors such as
demography, we are tending to look differently at the future. We have a different “discount factor”,
if you will, which is leading us on average to prefer future consumption to current consumption
(on average, of course, not individually).
This basically changes everything for monetary policy, which is a policy based on the relationship
between real interest rates and demand.
Once central banks in the developed world hit the zero lower bound on nominal statutory interest
rates, they tried – and have been trying ever since – to respond to this perceived or detected
decline  in  the  natural  interest  rate  by  doing  other  things,  such  as  QE,  forward  guidance  and
exchange rate commitments. Some have even tried negative nominal interest rates.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
If this whole story is realistic, and central bankers tend to believe it is, what they did – or have
been doing – is nothing other than keeping their economies in equilibrium by other means. This
might have side-effects, of course, and there are trade-offs, but the main story is this.
In broader terms, it is still a fight to keep the value of money stable, but this time around not by
fighting  inflation,  but  by  combating  the  deflationary  tendencies  stemming  from  weak  current
demand, as demand is tending to move further and further into the future – which is just another
way of expressing the decline in the equilibrium natural interest rate.
Let me make a small detour to the financial sector. Many are arguing that low nominal interest
rates are killing the financial sector and are calling for higher rates as soon as possible. But if this
model is right, higher rates would not help either, as rates substantially above equilibrium would
mean  that  demand  for  loans  from  banks  would  decline  sharply  and  the  riskiness  of  future
projects  would  increase,  and  even  currently  viable  projects  might  turn  into  unviable,  non-
performing ones.
But let’s go back. What is a real problem, and take it as a criticism of our own club, is that we are
unable to explain this story, this narrative. I have long pondered why this is the case. Recently, I
caught a glimpse of an answer in the work of the young German economist Benjamin Braun.
Like him, I feel that people have simply stopped understanding us. After 2008 we started to tell a
different  “monetary  story”  –  a  different  narrative  about  money  and  central  banks  –  to  the  one
people  were  used  to.  Public  confidence  in  the  monetary  system  was  and  is  grounded  in  the
previous narrative, which in turn is based on three building blocks. One, the central bank is the
sole  creator  of  money  and  thus  has  perfect  control  over  the  quantity  of  money;  money  is
therefore exogenous, to use the language of economics. Two, commercial banks do not create
money but merely convert existing deposits passively into loans. And three, the lower the growth
in the price level, the better. This narrative, which some would term imprecisely “monetarist”, did
a very good job of reconciling public preferences and central bank decisions when bankers were
fighting inflation and subsequently working successfully to stabilise it, i.e. generally before 2008.
Unfortunately, though, this simplified story stopped working as a bridge between the public and
central banks when central bankers started to combat weak demand and the risk of deflation. It is
hard for us to explain that the building blocks of our former widely communicated narrative are
not working in practice. In fact, they never did work. They were merely part of a myth that no one
wanted  to  bust  for  fear  of  throwing  a  spanner  in  the  works.  In  a  fractional  reserve  system,
commercial banks – not just the central bank – create a large part of the money in circulation.
Commercial banks therefore do not merely convert loanable funds passively into loans, but in
reality  create  new  deposits.  The  central  bank  does  not  and  cannot  have  full  control  over  the
quantity of money in the system. That quantity varies. Indeed, it has to vary if the purchasing
power of money is to be kept broadly constant over the cycle.
What is more, deep an persistent deflation is just as disruptive to the economy as high inflation,
often even more so. All this is undermining the previous widely communicated story of “good
money” and giving rise to a growing lack of understanding and a widening communication gap
between bankers and the public. Most of all, they are stoking fears of a fall in the purchasing
power  of  money,  paradoxically  at  a  time  when  inflation  (the  key  measure  of  the  purchasing
power) in developed countries is lower on average than it has been for years!
Put simply, we have been warning about the risk of flooding for so long that we are now unable to
explain that drought can be just as big a problem and that at times of drought you have to water
the garden, not keep draining it dry. If the hosepipes are blocked, moreover, you have to use
other means to supply the plants with water.
If  we  do  not  succeed  here,  we  central  bankers  will  have  great  difficulty  being  credible  in  the
future.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Literature:
Holston,  K.,  Laubach,  T.,  &  Williams,  John  C.  (2016):  “Measuring  the  natural  rate  of  interest:
International trends and determinants,” Working Paper Series 2016–11, Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
