   Peter Praet: Turn cyclical recovery into a structural recovery 
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Morgan Stanley Roundtable “What next for Europe”, Washington DC, 6 October 2016. 
 I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her contributions to this speech 
Today I will give you an assessment of the euro area economy and share some thoughts on 
where I see us heading and on what is needed to ensure long-run sustainable growth. 
Starting  with  the  positive  news,  we  have  good  indications  that  the  euro  area  economy  is 
heading  for  a  continued,  though  moderate,  recovery,  which  seems  to  have  become  more 
resistant to negative outside influences and especially to the heightened uncertainty caused 
by  the  outcome  of  the  UK  referendum.  Real  GDP  growth  has  expanded  for  the 
13th consecutive quarter, growing by 0.3%, quarter-on-quarter, during the second quarter. The 
latest incoming economic indicators point to similar growth rates for the coming quarters. 
While it is true that the uncertainty following the UK vote will significantly weaken the outlook 
for foreign demand and thereby dampen export growth, robust domestic demand should partly 
counteract the negative impact on growth stemming from the external environment.  
Solid  domestic  demand is  anticipated to remain the  driving force  behind  real  GDP growth. 
Consumption  expenditure  is  expected  to  grow  strongly  this  year  and  to  remain  buoyant 
thereafter. Most notably, consumption is boosted by improving labour market conditions, with 
unemployment falling steadily despite a rise in participation. Moreover, euro area consumers 
are still benefitting from higher real disposable incomes, reflecting past declines in oil prices. 
Business investment is also expected to continue recovering amid support from a number of 
factors,  such  as  improved  expectations  of  improving  business  conditions  and  a  need  to 
modernise the capital stock after years of low investment and physical depreciation.  
All  these  developments,  of  course,  are  gaining  significant  support  from  the  effective  pass-
through of our accommodative monetary policy measures. Taken together, our measures have 
led  to  a  significant  and broad-based  easing  in financing  conditions through  both  price  and 
quantity channels, which bolters consumption and investment expenditure.  
In terms of financing costs, since the beginning of June 2014, bank lending rates for euro area 
households and NFCs have fallen sharply, with even more pronounced declines for small and 
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).1  The  Corporate  Sector  Purchase  Programme  (CSPP), 
which began in June of this year, has led to a significant decline in corporate bond yields, not 
only  for  those  bonds  eligible  for  purchase  under  the  programme  but  also  for  other  bonds, 
including bank bonds. The new series of targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTRO-
II) are also providing additional stimulus by allowing banks to secure long-term funding under 
very attractive conditions.  
In terms of quantities, bank lending to the private sector has been gradually recovering since 
early  2014,  and  survey  data  show  improvements  in  loan  supply  conditions  for  firms  and 
households, as well as in the availability of external sources of financing for SMEs.2 Corporate 
bond issuance has also picked up since the announcement of the CSPP in March, while the 
TLTRO-II should help to support bank lending volumes to the non-financial private sector.  
                                                
1   For additional information on the effectiveness of the ECB’s non-standard monetary policy measures, see ECB, 
“The transmission of the ECB’s recent non-standard monetary policy measures”, Article, Economic Bulletin, 
Issue 7/2015 
2   ECB Bank Lending Survey, July 2016 and ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro 
area, October 2015 to March 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   So our policy measures are clearly effective and are trickling down to the funding rates that 
matter most for the real economy, such as the ones faced by SMEs, which provide jobs for 
around two-thirds of those in employment in the euro area.3 
Favourable  financing  conditions,  along  with  other  factors  such  as  employment  gains  and 
improvements  in  the  demand  outlook  and  in  corporate  profitability,  are  expected  to  further 
support private consumption and investment expenditure going forward. Investment however 
remains well below its pre-crisis levels and its sensitivity to the borrowing conditions faced by 
companies  is  lower  than  historical  norms.  According  to  the  September  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic  projections,  annual  real GDP growth  is  expected  to  increase  by  1.7%  this 
year, and by 1.6% in each of the next two years.  
Turning to price developments, inflation remains at low levels – far below the level which we 
consider consistent with our price stability objective – reflecting past declines in oil prices and 
weak wage growth. Underlying inflation in particular has yet to show clear signs of a more 
dynamic upward movement. The annual rate of HICP inflation excluding food and energy has 
continued to hover around 1% as domestic cost pressures remain fundamentally weak. Yet, 
as the effect of past oil price declines fades, annual HICP inflation is expected to pick up from 
0.2%  this  year  to  1.2%  in  2017.  Moreover,  we  expect  that  as  the  recovery  continues  and 
economic slack falls, inflation will gradually accelerate further to 1.6% in 2018. 
Although the euro area recovery is showing signs of resilience, material downside risks remain, 
mainly  stemming  from  the  external  environment  and  significant  uncertainties  following  the 
outcome of the UK referendum. Moreover, our baseline scenario for growth and inflation in the 
euro area remains crucially dependent on the current supportive financing conditions staying 
in place.  
Monetary policy will continue to play its role in facilitating the cyclical recovery. By ensuring 
accommodative financing conditions that buoy demand, monetary policy is helping to raise 
output  back  to  its  potential  level.  We  therefore  remain  committed  to  preserving  the  very 
substantial amount of monetary support that is embedded in our staff projections and that – 
barring  a  fundamental  change  in  sentiment  and  in  the  underlying  momentum  driving  the 
recovery – remains necessary to secure a return of inflation to levels below, but close to, 2% 
over the medium term.  
Nevertheless, potential growth in the euro area is low after years of decline, while structural 
unemployment remains high. The European Commission estimates that the potential growth 
rate of the euro area economy this year is just 1%, less than half that of the United States.4 
Low potential growth casts a shadow over the long-run economic prospects for the euro area, 
creating a negative feedback loop. Because low potential growth dampens expectations of 
future  income,  it  curbs  consumption  and  investment  today,  which  further  lowers  rates  of 
potential growth tomorrow. This can lead to a permanent destruction of productive capacity, 
including jobs.5 
Low potential growth also has important implications for monetary policy in that it lowers what 
is known as the “natural” rate of interest. This is the interest rate around which the policy rate 
should oscillate in the long-run to support a full utilisation of resources and a rate of inflation 
steady  around  target.  A  lower  natural  rate  of  interest  implies  less  scope  for  conventional 
monetary easing in the future. 
                                                
3   See  ECB,  “Small  and  Medium-sized  enterprises  in  the  euro  area:  economic  importance  and  financing 
conditions”, Box 6, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2013. 
4   European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Spring 2016. 
5   For  further  discussion,  see  Praet,  P.,  “Lifting  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area”,  Speech  at  the  Welt-
Währungskonferenz, 23 April 2015. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   It  is  therefore  imperative  that  decisive  action  is  taken  now  in  order  to  propel  the  on-going 
cyclical recovery into a structural recovery. Long-run growth depends on the efficiency with 
which resources are allocated, the ease of doing business, the incentives for investment and 
confidence  in  public  institutions.  Making  strides  in  these  areas  requires  structural  reforms 
aimed at supporting investment, enhancing productivity and increasing flexibility in the markets 
for labour, goods and services. Structural reforms will go a long way, not only in bolstering the 
trend of long-run growth but also in reducing the fluctuations around that trend.6 
Such reforms are the means of addressing the ongoing adjustment difficulties faced by the 
economy and of preventing secular stagnation – which is not inevitable. However, such reforms 
are  outside  of  the  scope  of  monetary  policy  and  fall  under  the  remit  of  other  national  and 
European policymakers. 
Just as persistently low potential growth can create a negative circle, structural reforms and 
the ensuing increase in the economy’s growth potential and in its adjustment capacity – or 
flexibility to respond to shocks – can create a virtuous circle. Higher potential growth feeds into 
expectations of higher incomes and also of higher tax revenues, increasing the resilience of 
public finances. At the same time, higher potential growth raises the natural rate of interest. 
Together,  this  means  that  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  have  more  space  to  stabilise  the 
economy  when  needed.  Furthermore,  increased  flexibility  of  labour  and  product  markets 
means that the private sector can adjust more quickly to shocks through relative price changes 
and a more efficient reallocation of resources. 
As the benefits of structural reforms can take time to materialise, they must be implemented 
without undue delay and are needed in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy 
measures. The highly accommodative stance of monetary policy creates ideal conditions for 
the  implementation  of  structural  policies,  as  it  can  help  to  cushion  the  potential  short-term 
adjustment costs of such policies by supporting current demand conditions. 
To  conclude,  the  euro  area  economic  recovery  remains  resilient  despite  the  continued 
headwinds  stemming  from  global  and  political  uncertainties.  Nevertheless,  in  order  to 
transform the cyclical recovery into a structural one, and thereby ensure resilience of growth 
in the long-run, other policymakers must play their part. The support to demand from monetary 
policy must be complemented with supply policies that bolster the potential growth, productivity 
and flexibility of the euro area economy.  
                                                
6   For further details, see Praet, P. “Structural reforms and long-run growth in the euro area”, Intervention on panel 
at 43rd Economics Conference of Oesterreichische Nationalbank, 15 June 2015. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
