R  Gandhi:  Evolution  of  payment  systems  in  India  -  or  is  it  a
revolution?
Speech by Mr R Gandhi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Banaras Hindu
University, Varanasi, 22 October 2016.
 1.  It  gives  me  great  pleasure  and  pride  to  be  addressing  at  the  Banaras  Hindu  University,  an
institution  which  has  been  in  the  service  of  the  nation  for  100  years;  more  so  because  this
institution has been deeply intertwined with freedom movement and freedom leaders like Pandit
Madanmohan  Malaviya.  I  am  thankful  to  the  Vice  Chancellor  Prof  Tripathi  for  giving  me  this
opportunity.
2. Today, I intend to discuss with you all about a silent revolution that has been sweeping the
country. It is about the payment systems in India. I said ‘silent revolution’. That is because, the
payment systems has been evolving and changes have been continuous over the last 35 years,
it has rarely got noticed as a revolutionary change. Let us see how it evolved and beneficially
impacted settlement of economic transactions of common persons and businesses and how it
is now poised for still larger impact. I will narrate how the Reserve Bank brought in the evolution,
or  rather  the  silent  revolution,  of  the  payment  systems  and  will  also  answer  certain  critique
relating to our role.
What is a payment? What is a payment system?
3.  When  people  or  businesses  enter  into  economic  transactions,  i.e.  buy  and  sell  goods  and
services,  the  value  thereof  needs  to  be  settled.  Before  the  concept  of  money  came  in,  the
settlement was through exchange of goods and / or services and it was called the barter system.
With the concept of money, the sale and purchase of goods and services are being effected or
settled by payment of money.
4. The ‘money’ was in early days the precious metals like gold and silver. Later, the governments
issued coins made of these precious metals as money; still later, the paper money, the currency,
became the norm as the money. Thus people settled their economic transactions by paying in
currency notes and coins.
5. As the banking system evolved, it became easier, safe and even remunerative to keep one’s
money in a bank account and it became still more easier and safe to use ‘transfer of money in
bank accounts’ for making payments for the economic transactions. This was more so for large
value transactions. Actually, it is now used equally for effecting low value transactions also.
6. For effecting this transfer of money in bank accounts, a payment instrument was needed to
instruct the bank to effect that transfer. This instrument was the cheque for a very long period.
Thus  a  system  consisting  of  the  cheque  as  the  payment  instruments  and  an  infrastructure
around the cheques consisting of the drawee bank, the drawer bank and the cheque clearing
houses came on the scene and were known as the payment systems.
7. With the developments in the information and communication technology, world over, different
kinds  of  payment  instruments  and  innovations  in  the  instruments  and  the  payment  systems
evolved. It happened in India too and that’s the story I will be narrating now.
8. Today we can boast of a strong retail payments framework in the country comparable to that
of any advanced country, and perhaps even better than some of them in terms of the variety and
efficiency.  Various  types  of  payment  instruments  exist  to  meet  the  requirements  of  different
users  in  different  circumstances  –  bank  accounts,  cheques,  debit  and  credit  cards,  prepaid
payment instruments, etc. There are various systems to meet the remittance requirements of
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
users  depending  upon  their  time  criticality  and  cost  sensitivity  –  National  Electronic  Funds
Transfer  (NEFT),  Immediate  Payment  Service  (IMPS),  Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  System
(AEPS)  and  recently  Unified  Payments  Interface.  The  need  for  making  bulk  and  repetitive
payments is met by systems such as Electronic Clearing Service (ECS), National Automated
Clearing House (NACH) and Aadhaar Payment Bridge System (APBS).
9. Let us take a look at the path of “evolution” of payment and settlement systems in the country:
10. The Reserve Bank took a studied stance with reference to ushering in changes to and in the
payment systems. Periodically, it constituted various committees like the Rangarajan Committee
I & II, Saraf Committee, Patil Committee, Burwan Working Group, etc. to guide use of ICT for the
benefit of banking in general and particularly the payment systems. Further, from 1998 onwards,
the Reserve Bank has been continuously bringing out a Payment System Vision document for
every  three  years,  enlisting  the  road  map  for  implementation.  The  latest  one  is  for  the  period
2015 –18.
11. For a long time the main payment instrument and payment system that existed in the country
was  cheque  and  cheque  clearing  systems.  Even  the  cheque  clearing  systems  have  evolved
from manual clearing system to MICR (Magnetic Ink Character Recognition) clearing systems in
mid  1980s  which  brought  in  great  level  of  automation  in  cheque  clearing  process  besides
standardising the cheque in terms of its physical dimensions.
12. After nearly twenty odd years of MICR clearing, the cheque truncation system (CTS) was
introduced  first  in  New  Delhi  in  2008  and  now  all  the  erstwhile  66  MICR  centres  have  been
subsumed into three grid-CTS systems. With this, a very large share of cheque clearing in the
country  takes  place  on  T+1  basis  as  if  they  were  being  cleared  as  ‘local’  cheques.  Further,
standardisation  of  cheque  features  with  built-in  fraud  prevention  measures  have  also  been
brought in the form of CTS-2010 cheque standards. Apart from CTS, there are over 1200 smaller
clearing houses mainly catering to local requirements of clearing small number of cheques and
in most of these centres, depending upon the time of depositing the cheques at the branch for
collection, the funds could be realised within the same day. For a country of our size, this is no
mean achievement of having T or T+1 clearing of cheques and that too with certainty as funds
are generally released to customers after the associated ‘return clearing’. Not many countries
can boast of this.
13. Though cheque clearing was made efficient through MICR clearing, the inherent issues with
cheques  posed  challenges  especially  when  they  were  being  used  for  bulk  and  repetitive
payments  such  as  collection  of  utility  payments,  payment  of  dividends,  etc.  To  address  this
growing need and also to reduce the use of cheques for such payments, the Electronic Clearing
Service(ECS)  was  introduced  in  early  1990s,  ECS  Credit  to  facilitate  one-to-many  payments
such  as  dividend,  salary,  interest  payments,  etc.  and  ECS  Debit  to  facilitate  many-to-one
payments such as utility payments. ECS in itself has undergone many changes from being a
local system to a regional system and then a national level system. These changes have been
facilitated  by  the  adoption  of  CBS  in  banks  which  has  enabled  straight-through-processing  of
payments. Further efficiency has been brought in this sphere with the operationalisation of the
National Automated Clearing House (NACH) by National Payments Corporation of India (NPCI).
This is a pan-India system for processing bulk and repetitive payments and the ECS is gradually
being subsumed into NACH.
14. Moving further along the path of non-cash, non-paper payments, over a period of time various
systems have been put in place to meet the remittance requirements of different segments of
users. The National Electronic Funds Transfer or NEFT as it is popularly known, is a pan-India
system today. Though it began its journey a decade ago as a local EFT system, it later expanded
to cover larger areas. There are not too many systems of comparison even in other countries.
Our Vision –2018 envisages further efficiency enhancements in NEFT.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
15. Apart from NEFT, the Immediate Payment Service (IMPS) and Real Time Gross Settlement
System (RTGS) also facilitate funds transfer requirements of users. While the former is a 24x7
immediate funds transfer system the latter is essentially a Financial Market Infrastructure which
processes  large  payments  including  customer  payment  transaction  where  value  is  above    2
lakh. In all these systems, a system of positive confirmation has been put in place whereby the
sender is also advised or intimated about the credit accorded to the beneficiary.
16. With improvements in IT systems of banks and their core banking systems, integration of
various delivery channels has been made possible. The banking facilities are now easily available
online  including  for  payment  purposes.  The  ubiquity  of  mobile  phones,  combined  with  cost
efficiency  in  their  usage,  has  led  to  an  increase  in  number  of  mobile  internet  users.  Taking
advantage of this, an increasing number of payment facilities are being integrated through the
mobile  channel.  For  instance,  customers  can  use  their  net  banking  application  on  their
smartphone and send money on-the-go using IMPS or NEFT.
17. While all these changes have been taking place from the perspective of customer initiated
transactions,  a  whole  set  of  changes  have  also  been  introduced  from  the  perspective  of
government  payments.  From  financial  inclusion  perspective  as  well  as  digitising  government
payments  thus  enhancing  efficiency  and  transparency,  the  use  of  Aadhaar  for  beneficiary
identification and authentication in payments has played an important role.
18.  Accordingly,  to  facilitate  bulk  and  repetitive  government  benefit  payments  and  subsidy
payments to Aadhaar-seeded bank accounts of identified beneficiaries, the APBS i.e. Aadhaar
Payments  Bridge  System  has  been  put  in  place.  NPCI  manages  this  system  with  linkage  to
PFMS through accredited government banks and sponsor banks of NACH.
19.  Similarly,  the  Aadhaar  Enabled  Payments  System  (AEPS)  facilitates  operations  from
Aadhaar  seeded  bank  accounts  using  biometric  authentication  of  customers.  Today AEPS  is
being increasingly used for BC operations not only of own-bank customers but also customers of
other banks, in an interoperable manner.
20. One other significant segment of retail electronic payments is that of cards. With addition of
nearly 200 million RuPay cards issued under Jan Dhan accounts, with its associated benefits
dependent upon usage of the card, this payment area gains further importance.
21. Over last 3-4 years many regulatory changes have been introduced to ensure safety and
security both in terms of form factor as well as at transaction level of card payments. Some of
these are briefly indicated below:
- Introduction of online alerts (through SMS mostly)
- use of PIN for successive ATM transactions
-  use  of  additional  factor  of  authentication  for  proximity  (card  present)  in  the  form  of
PIN@POS for debit cards and online transactions (card not present) in the form of static
passwords or dynamic passwords like OTP, etc
- mandate for securing the card processing infrastructure
- mandate for phased migration to EMV chip and PIN card issuance
22. Another important development has been the entry of non-bank players into the space
of payments which has generally been considered as the impregnable domain of banks.
We  have  actively  introduced  non-bank  players  in  the  issuance  of  prepaid  payment
instruments  (PPI),  including  mobile  and  digital  wallets,  besides  the  setting  up  of  White
Label ATMs (WLA) to bridge the gap in ATM infrastructure particularly in rural and semi
urban areas. While there are fewer players in the WLA space, the PPI space has seen an
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
explosion with a large number of players (over 45) offering their stored valued services to
customers. Non-bank PPI issuers are allowed to issue semi-closed PPIs which can be
used  for  purchase  of  goods  and  services  besides  remittance  requirements  to  some
extent. However, given the nature of this instrument, there are certain restrictions that are
placed  for  ring-fencing  the  risks  while  at  the  same  time  relaxing  certain  regulatory
requirements  in  terms  of  their  operations.  In  addition  to  these  two  segments,  non-bank
players are also playing a significant role in payment gateway and aggregation services,
which is presently regulated only indirectly.
Recent & Current Initiatives
23. As stated earlier, apart from the traditional providers of payment services such as banks,
increasingly the payment space is being influenced by the presence of non-bank players who are
bringing 
technological
developments.
innovation  and  convenience 
to  customers  by 
leveraging  on 
in 
24. The increasing mobile density is being leveraged upon by payment service providers, both
banks  and  non-banks,  to  offer  the  services  using  mobile  as  an  access  device  as  well  as  an
access  channel.  In  particular,  banks  are  offering  mobile  banking  services  through  all  three
channels  –  SMS,  USSD  (Unstructured  Supplementary  Services  Data)  and  application.  At
present, there are over 67 banks actually offering mobile banking services to over 120 million
registered customers, and these numbers are increasing.
25. The regulatory focus in this area has also been to ensure safety of transactions while at the
same time facilitate convenience of transacting. Transaction limits are applied only where the
channel used does not facilitate end-to-end encryption (such as SMS and USSD).
26. Mpesa from Kenya has become the ‘poster instrument’ for mobile payments. However, do
you know that mpesa is offered through a single mobile service provider in Kenya while the *99#
(which is based on USSD channel just like mpesa) National Unified USSD Platform (NUUP) for
USSD  based  payments  introduced  in  India  offers  the  services  by  linking  all  the  11  telecom
providers in the country with over 50 banks participating in the system and services being offered
in 11 regional languages, besides English. Financial and non-financial transactions are supported
on *99#.
27.  With  growing  use  of  internet  over  the  mobile  phone,  this  medium  is  becoming  a  natural
channel  of  choice  for  both  customers  as  well  as  service  providers.  Hence,  application-based
mobile banking services as well as net banking services for mobile users are being offered by
almost all banks. A large number of bank and non-bank PPI issuers (mobile wallet issuers) also
leverage on this channel and have introduced their own mobile applications.
28. Till recently, the mobile banking applications were largely operating in silos, particularly for
merchant  payments  (which  had  to  be  routed  as  P2B  push  payments),  and  generally  not
interoperable  across  merchants  and  customers  of  different  banks.  With  the  introduction  of
Unified  Payments  Interface  (UPI),  twin  benefits  have  come  into  place  for  mobile  banking  –
convenience of operations for customers (can provide just a registered virtual address instead of
details of bank accounts etc. for making / receiving payments) and merchant ‘pull’ payments.
The UPI, which is application-based and usable on smartphones with internet access, when fully
operational across banks, has the potential to revolutionalise the mobile payments arena.
29.  There  are  many  systems  in  the  pipe-line  which  again  have  the  potential  to  influence
significantly the payment habits of diverse segments of users. The Bharat Bill Payments System,
launched  two  months  ago,  caters  to  the  requirements  of  ‘anytime  anywhere  anyhow’  bill
payments in the country. The system, which operates under a set of standards will provide a
platform  for  users  to  have  a  common  experience  in  bill  payments  and  supports  all  forms  of
electronic payments. Banks and authorised non-banks will operate as operating units under this
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
system bringing interoperability in bill payments eco-system.
30.  Segmental  needs  of  the  MSME  sector  for  faster  financing  and  liquidity  is  being  facilitated
through the setting up of the Trade Receivables Discounting System (TReDS) which will enable
financing of invoices of MSME sellers drawn corporate buyers through multiple financiers.
31. Besides, our policy is also geared to ensure widening the infrastructure availability for card
payments, for which we are proposing the setting up of an Acceptance Development Fund at
industry level which can subsidise the cost of setting up the infrastructure.
32. Lastly, the large scale coverage of Aadhaar biometric identification and its increasing use in
government payments (G2P) has also encouraged us to consider using it as a potential tool for
payment authentication. Towards this end, banks have been advised to enable the infrastructure
to use Aadhaar biometric also as a means of payment authentication.
33. Thus, the retail payments ecosystem has not only evolved over the last twenty five years but
has  also  taken  a  revolutionary  trajectory  in  many  areas.  Whether  it  is  fast  payments  (IMPS)
offered through multiple access channels (mobile, net banking, ATM, branch, IVR, BC, etc) or
mobile banking / payments, cheque clearing or card payments security aspects, our systems
are comparable with the best in the world, which is no mean achievement for a country like ours
despite challenges in the form of migrating large segments of cash transactions to electronic,
financial inclusion, awareness and financial literacy, customer protection, etc.
34. Further, in comparison to other countries, the changes in our payments eco-system have
been  fast-forwarded  to  reach  the  present  stage  in  the  shortest  possible  time.  Innovations  in
technology are pushing the boundaries of payment processes and the players are keen to adopt
newer systems and adapt the older payment mechanisms in new avatars.
Some Concerns
35.  Of  course,  we  cannot  rest  on  our  laurels.  Even  as  we  pat  ourselves  on  the  back  for  our
achievements, there are certain areas which demand urgent attention to ensure that we do not
slip anywhere lest it harms the delicate balance of trust of users in the payment systems. A few
issues are highlighted here along with certain policy challenges:
Cyber security – media reports have indicated cyber security attacks in few banks’ systems,
including  in  ATM  transaction  processing  systems.  With  growing  dependence  on  online
delivery  of  services,  this  becomes  a  serious  concern  and  an  area  that  has  to  be
strengthened immediately and continuously as it also has the greatest potential to diminish
the trust in electronic payments.
Frauds  –  while  we  have  secured  the  safety  of  transactions  through  use  of  additional
authentication factors, fraudsters have been exploiting other weaknesses in customers to
defraud them. For instance, there have been increasing number of social engineering and
vishing frauds luring customers to part with their confidential bank account / card particulars.
Combined  with  use  of  duplicate  prepaid  SIMs,  the  fraudsters  have  been  able  to  build  a
conduit between cards / bank accounts and mobile wallets to dupe the users. It is ironical
that the efficiency of interlinked payments also enable the fraudsters to make their getaway
faster!
Customer awareness – even as we strengthen the systems and processes, perhaps the
greatest tool to fight the menace of frauds is building customer awareness. In addition, an
‘aware’  customer  is  able  to  make  the  right  choices  in  using  different  systems  taking  into
account the time criticality of the payment, the cost aspects and the risk aspects of exposing
the underlying payment instrument. This is particularly important to ensure that the digital
divide in payments doesn’t further widen with faster adoption of technology and leap-frogging
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
(for instance, leap frog from plastic cards to contactless payments through mobile phones;
leap frog from financial exclusion to use mobile banking, etc.).
Customer protection – hand-in-hand with customer awareness goes the aspect of customer
protection and efficiency in dealing with customer complaints / grievances. Earlier, generally
end-to-end payment services used to be offered by banks. Today’s electronic payments are,
however, made more complex (though not necessarily at customer level) with participation
of other non-bank entities whose services may be used by banks in the form of outsourcing
arrangements  or  through  entities  that  offer  specialised  services  integral  to  payment
completion. Greater the number of players involved, more complex the process to address
customer  grievances  within  the  shortest  span  of  time.  As  a  result,  either  customer
complaints take a long time to resolve or remain unresolved, both of which situations needs
to addressed in right earnest.
Some Criticism
36. We have been ahead of many countries world-wide, including even advanced countries, in
the  introduction  of  many  efficiencies  and  safeguards  in  payment  systems.  Two  Factor
Authentication  is  a  good  example.  The  recent  UPI,  USSD  and  NUUP  are  further  examples.
Similar measures are being introduced by these countries now and we are being asked to share
our experiences increasingly in international forums.
37.  Despite  this,  we  are  said  to  be  over-protective  in  some  aspects  as  a  payments  system
regulator. We are asked as to why there is a regulatory arbitrage in favour of banks and why non-
bank entities cannot be given an equal footing in terms of access as well as activities they are
permitted to undertake. There is a feeling that opening up the system to private players will bring
in  the  payments  revolution  faster,  similar  to  the  telecom  revolution  which  happened  with  the
opening up of the sector to private players and giving a level playing field to all entities.
38. Let me first answer why there is primacy for banks in payment systems. As I mentioned right
in the beginning, payments can be effected only in either of two ways – one you use cash to
make  payments  and  the  other  you  transfer  money  in  your  bank  account.  There  is  no  third
method.  Thus  for  the  non-cash  payments,  the  origination  and  ending  places  are  banks  only.
Therefore, minus the banks, there is no non-cash payment instrument or system. Critics do not
seem to have understood this.
39. As regards the opening up of access to various systems and activities for non-bank entities,
we  have  been  opening  up  the  space  and  gradually  allowing  entry  to  non-bank  entities.  At
origination, in between originating bank and destination bank and at the receiving end, there is no
restriction for a non-bank entity to be present. Examples include the PPI issuers, BBPS operating
units, TReDS, WLAs, payment aggregators, etc.
40.  Critics  ask  why  a  non-bank  cannot  be  allowed  to  keep  bank  accounts.  They  quote  the
success of mPesa, a non-bank entity in Kenya in ushering payment revolution in that country.
Our  answer  is  simple.  If  you  maintain  a  bank  account,  then  you  are  a  bank  and  you  need  a
banking licence. When you keep the money of the public in account, you are a financial entity
taking  deposits  and  you  must  be  public  trustworthy  and  so  be  regulated  as  a  deposit  taking
financial entity. Just because one country in the world failed to recognise such an entity as a
bank and allowed it to function as a nonbank, we cannot follow such a wrong model.
41.  Another  criticism  is  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  too  conservative  in  granting  licences  or
registrations for payment systems and payment entities. It is said that this sector needs to be
freed of licensing mechanism and once a set of criteria are fixed, any number of entities meeting
those criteria should be allowed to function. We differ from this idea. Such a free entry may be
appropriate for any other segment of goods and services, not for ‘banking’. Every other good or
service  is  primarily  a  one-off  transaction,  whereas  banking  is  a  continuing  relationship,  and
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
therefore “fit and proper” criterion is of utmost importance and consequently, “free entry” based
on tick-box exercise is totally anti public safety.
Conclusion
42. To conclude, India has been enjoying a very healthy evolution of payment systems over the
past thirty years. In looking back, we can easily admit that it had been a revolution, without being
so realising. This has been the result of the measured road maps periodically adopted by the
Reserve Bank, in the initial years as a developer and in later years as a catalyst and facilitator.
Today our systems are not only comparable to any systems, anywhere in the world, our systems
also do set standards and good practices for the world to follow. We remain vigilant for ensuring
safety  and  soundness  of  the  payment  systems  and  are  committed  to  customer  safety  and
convenience.
43. Thank you for your patient attention.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
