Sharon Donnery: NPL workout and resolution in the euro area
Address by Ms Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the Peterson
Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 6 October 2016.
Introduction
 Good morning, it is pleasure to be here at the Peterson Institute to discuss the topic of Non-
1
Performing Loans (NPLs).
The effective workout and resolution of NPLs is central to both bank viability and macroeconomic
performance. On 12 September 2016, ECB Banking Supervision published its Draft Guidance to
banks on NPLs, for consultation. In addition, it also published a Stocktake of national supervisory
2
practices and legal frameworks relating to non-performing loans.
Given Ireland’s recent experience in addressing the high level of non-performing loans, as well as
my role as Chair of the ECB’s High Level Group, in my remarks today, I would first like to discuss
some macro-financial aspects of high levels of NPLs. I will then provide a brief overview of how
we in Ireland progressed to put the trend on a sustainable downward trajectory.
Drawing on some of those lessons, I will then give you an overview of the recent publication of
ECB  Banking  Supervision’s  Draft  Guidance.  I  will  conclude  by  discussing  the  accompanying
stocktake  which  highlights  some  of  the  impediments  to  NPL  resolution  in  certain  euro  area
Member States. This report highlights the multifaceted nature of the resolution of non-performing
loans;  how  supervisory  powers  alone  cannot  solve  this  issue,  and  how  concerted  action  is
required from all stakeholders to address this problem over the coming years. 
Macro-financial and micro prudential aspects to NPLs
To frame this issue at a macroeconomic level, it is useful to think about the two way linkages
between macroeconomic developments and the financial sector.
The  link  between  macroeconomic  indicators  and  NPLs  has  been  well  established.  GDP
developments have been one of the main drivers of NPLs over the last decade.  In addition to
being  a  driver  of  NPLs,  macroeconomic  conditions  can  also  inhibit  speedy  NPL  workout  and
resolution.
3
This is because sharp increases in NPLs can weaken macroeconomic performance, and can
activate a spiral that exacerbates macro-financial vulnerabilities leading to reinforcing downward
4
effects between banking system distress and deteriorating economic activity.
Economic growth in some parts of the euro area, including Ireland, continues to be hindered by
the debt undertow resulting from the recent crisis. While the stresses have abated, household
and non-financial sector deleveraging strengthens the headwinds faced by some Member States’
5
banking sectors.  
6
In  this  context,  high  levels  of  NPLs  can  constrain  both  credit  growth  and  economic
activity.  NPLs tie up bank capital and can restrict banks’ ability to undertake new lending to the
economy. Banks also need to hold additional provisions against NPLs, which lower net income
and can reduce profitability.
In addition high levels of NPLs also cause uncertainty as to banks’ actual financial position given
the  inherent  judgemental  nature  of  provisioning.  This  may  create  profit  and  loss  volatility  and
vulnerability, as provisions are typically connected to the value of the underlying collateral which
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
can fluctuate. These factors can also contribute to higher cost of funding and negative or volatile
investor sentiment.
The capitalisation of banks across the euro area has increased considerably over recent years.
However  the  structure  of  profit  and  loss  accounts  across  banks  is  quite  heterogeneous.  For
some banks, impairment charges continue to be a drag on profitability. Coupled with continued
pressure from the low interest rate environment, and squeezed lending margins, these dynamics
can threaten long-term viability. Therefore banks potentially need to adapt their business models
7
to the changing environment and risks.
A  fully  functioning  euro  area  banking  sector  is  needed  to  support  investment,  growth,  and
employment.  Removing impediments to this critical economic function underpins the rationale
for reducing NPLs and supervisory actions to accomplish this.
Moreover  addressing  this  issue  should  also  support  the  expansion  of  credit,  in  line  with  the
objectives of monetary policy.
Given these challenges, high levels of NPLs require deliberate and sustained action. Aggregate
figures mask considerable heterogeneity across Member States and across banks.
In Ireland, for example, in the corporate sector the overall NPL rate has fallen to 13 per cent, the
lowest rate since end-2010. For some of the banks which hold these non-performing loans, there
is substantial variation in NPL rates within this category. The construction sector has by far the
highest rate of NPLs with almost one half of all loans classified as non-performing. The hotel and
restaurant  sector  also  has  a  relatively  high  rate  of  NPLs  at  about  20  per  cent.  Loans  to  the
8
manufacturing sector have a relatively lower NPL rate at 7 per cent.
Therefore, a bank by bank, portfolio by portfolio strategy is needed to see a sustained reduction in
non-performing loans across the board.
The Irish experience
In some ways, NPL resolution is similar to endurance running. Both require defining clear goals,
ensuring the correct strategy and processes are in place, and effective preparation. However,
plans  and  processes  alone  are  not  sufficient  for  success.  Achieving  the  required  distance
requires  continued  resolve  over  an  extended  period  of  time  and  developing  endurance  on  the
‘hard road’.  
In Ireland, our first step was to diagnose the scale of the problem, and ensure the deployment of
appropriate resources commensurate with the challenge. An important milestone was the work
conducted by the Central Bank of Ireland during the Financial Measures Programme (FMP), in
particular  the  loan  loss  forecasting  exercises  and  the  stress  tests  conducted  as  part  of
Prudential Capital Assessment Review (PCAR) in 2010/2011.
More recently, similar exercises have been undertaken by the Central Bank of Ireland, or jointly
with  the  ECB,  including  the  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  in  2013,  the  Comprehensive
Assessment in 2014, and the IMF FSAP and EBA stress tests in 2016. These types of exercises
will continue to be a key component in our supervisory toolkit going forward.
Banks  must  have  credible  portfolio-specific  resolution  strategies  and  appropriate  governance
structures.  These  must  be  married  with  operational  capabilities  (including  distressed  debt
workout  skills),  appropriate  IT  infrastructure  and  decision  analytics,  and  well-developed
restructure types appropriate to the portfolios being restructured.
In the following years, the Central Bank of Ireland therefore changed emphasis to ensure these
elements were adequate to deal with the rising level of NPLs. A major milestone in this regard in
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
2012 was undertaking Distressed Credit Operations Reviews (DCOR). The output of this was a
benchmarking of actual operational capacity to execute NPL strategies. 
Supervisory  follow-up  in  2012/2013  monitored  the  effectiveness  of  banks’  operations  through
regular on-site inspections. Loan file reviews and interviews with bank staff were an important
supervisory  tool  in  understanding  if  a  bank’s  strategy  was  actually  being  implemented  on  the
ground. Deficiencies in both strategies and operations were required to be remediated.
All  of  these  steps  were  important  preconditions  for  success.  However,  the  willingness  of
institutions to resolve NPLs in a sustainable fashion can be lacking, on occasion.
In my view, successful debt restructuring means sustainable debt restructuring. Over-reliance on
short-term forbearance such as interest-only arrangements and rising levels of mortgage arrears
was one of the reasons why we imposed Mortgage Arrears Resolution Targets (MART) in Ireland
in 2013.
The  mortgage  arrears  targets  forced  lenders  to  move  from  short-term  forbearance  towards
sustainable solutions. Although the targets were not made public, we also had a similar strategy
for SMEs. Supervisors could then benchmark progress against these targets. Combined with an
established economic recovery, it resulted in significant reductions in the level of arrears.
In terms of measuring progress, retail (primarily residential mortgages) NPLs reduced by 21% in
2015,  continuing  their  downward  trend.  In  terms  of  Irish  mortgage  restructuring  activity,  about
120,000 owner occupier residential mortgages have been restructured.  Of these restructured
loans, 88% of these loans are meeting the terms of the restructure, up from 81% two years ago.
This suggests restructures performance is improving. Non-retail non-performing loans (to SMEs,
corporates, etc.) reduced by 44% in 2015 – falling by €16.5bn.
10
9
Economic recovery, and determined action have meant that progress is clearly established and
moving in the right direction.  It’s important to recognise this, to note the distance travelled on the
journey, and to maintain progress. Why? It’s worth remembering the road that lies ahead.
In Ireland eight years after the financial crisis, €45 billion of NPLs remain on Irish retail banks’
balance  sheets  and  represent  19%  of  their  combined  loan  books.
  This  remains  the  case
following the transfer of €74 billion of loans to the State Asset Management Company-NAMA, the
restructuring of billions of debt, and the sale of dozens of portfolios. 
11
While macro and micro-financial risks have been reduced due to these efforts, it is clear that
vulnerabilities remain and the domestic challenge in Ireland is still significant.
ECB Banking Supervision draft guidance on NPLs 
Ireland  has  not  been  alone  in  the  euro  area.  Many  other  Member  States  also  took  significant
steps to addressing such issues in their respective banking sectors. Moreover, addressing asset
quality  issues  has  also  been  one  of  the  key  priorities  for  ECB  Banking  Supervision  since  its
inception. 
In 2014 a Comprehensive Assessment encompassing an asset quality review (AQR) assessed
the  appropriateness  of  the  valuation  of  NPLs  under  existing  accounting  standards,  using  a
sampling  approach.  Shortcomings  in  bank  accounting  practices  and  policies  identified  in  that
exercise  led  to  additional  provisioning  needs.  Banks’  balance  sheet  valuations  were  then
corrected to fully assure the values of NPLs were accurate, at that point in time. Over the last
two years the Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs) have continued to address these issues through
ongoing supervisory engagement with firms. 
While we recognise that the workout of NPLs will take some time, a harmonised and transparent
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
supervisory  approach  is  necessary.  Therefore  in  2015  the  High  Level  Group  on  NPLs  was
mandated by the Supervisory Board of the ECB to develop a consistent supervisory approach to
dealing with this problem.
 In September 2016 we published, for consultation, the Draft Guidance on NPLs, accompanied by
a stocktake of national practices and legal frameworks related to NPLs. These measures are
important milestones on the journey towards the sustainable reduction of NPLs across the euro
area.  
The  draft  guidance  sets  out  ECB  Banking  Supervision’s  expectations  on  NPL  workout  and
resolution  and  is  focussed  on  addressing  the  issues  surrounding  the  stock  of  NPLs  that  has
piled up in the balance sheets of a number of euro area banks.
The  structure  of  the  guidance  follows  the  life  cycle  of  NPL  management.  This  begins  with  a
strategy for the effective management and ultimate reduction of NPL stocks in a clear, credible,
and feasible manner for each relevant portfolio. 
The primary responsibility for the reduction of NPLs stands with the Boards and management of
banks.  The  guidance  requests  banks  to  implement  clear  NPL  strategies  including  operational
plans. Gaps in the strategies and deviations from the stated objectives can then be identified by
supervisors who can also benchmark accordingly.
Core building blocks of a strategy should include an assessment of the operating environment,
including  internal  NPL  capabilities,  external  conditions  impacting  NPL  workout,  and  capital
implications.
Clear bank-defined targets for both the development of operational capabilities and projected NPL
reductions  over  the  short,  medium,  and  long-term  time  horizons  must  also  be  put  in  place.
Strategies should include any necessary changes in the organisational structure of the bank and
be fully embedded in management.
Closely linked to the strategy is the governance structure and operational set-up – without which
banks  will  not  be  able  to  address  their  NPL  issues  in  an  efficient  and  sustainable  way.  Key
elements  in  the  guidance  relate  to  steering  and  decision-making,  ensuring  an  effective  NPL
operating model, internal control frameworks, and monitoring and early warning processes.
The  promotion  of  appropriate  recognition  and  classification  criteria  and  practices  that  are
consistent  across  banks  is  an  important  goal  for  banking  supervisors.  Adequate  processes
facilitate the timely and effective management of problem loans, thereby reducing their negative
effects. The proper classification of loans is also essential for the correct representation of the
banks’ situation to stakeholders including external investors and market analysts. It is desirable
therefore that banks adopt and apply common prudential principles.
In this context, the guidance focuses on clarifying further NPL classification issues which have
been identified during ongoing supervisory work, for example triggers for ‘Unlikely To Pay’, ‘Days
Past Due’ counting, and links to forbearance.
The ECB does not have explicit accounting powers. Moreover, existing standards do not contain
specific rules regarding the modalities of write-offs. Some supervisors have issued NPL write-off
guidelines with a view to promoting timelier NPL disposal and, more generally, the development
of  a  market  for  distressed  debt.  They  are  –  with  few  exceptions  –  principles-based,  in
accordance  with  the  recovery  expectations.  The  guidance  is  that  when  loans  are  deemed
uncollectable or unrecoverable, they should be written off in a timely manner.
The  guidance  also  addresses  qualitative  aspects  with  regard  to  approaches  to  assessing
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
provisions on an individual and collective basis. Furthermore, it puts emphasis on the quality of
internal documentation, reporting and disclosures for the processes surrounding this.
The use of robust and accurate collateral valuation methods is essential for the proper valuation
of NPLs and for their effective management. It also contributes to the promotion of an active NPL
market by reducing uncertainty relating to asset values. Moreover, a conservative approach to
the valuation of collateral ensures that the NPLs are adequately provisioned, is a key element for
the soundness of institutions.
In  most  (in-scope)  Member  States,  specific  rules  govern  collateral  valuation  for  the  financial
sector,  especially  for  real  estate  collateral.  Typically,  these  rules  are  related  to  professional
requirements,  but  in  some  cases  other  specific  rules  have  been  drafted  pertaining  to,  for
example, appraiser independence, performance and limits on institutions’ reliance on individual
appraisers. In some cases, appraisers are also subject to the supervision of banking or financial
market authorities.
In  this  context,  the  guidance  addresses  qualitative  aspects  with  regard  to  governance  and
procedures linked to valuing collateral, the frequency of valuation updates for NPLs as well as
use  of  market  values  plus  adequate  discounts  (e.g.  for  liquidation  costs).  The  valuation  of
foreclosed assets is also covered.
Banks  should  be  given  incentives  to  identify  problematic  cases  in  a  timely  manner  such  that
loans which are considered viable can be restructured promptly and recovery steps can be taken
for  non-viable  exposures.  Supervisory  guidance  can  increase  the  priority  given  to  NPL
management and governance within banks.
The SSM has started to address in a consistent way a number of important qualitative aspects
with regards to supervising NPLs. The guidance forms a solid foundation and clearly indicates
the  direction  of  travel  for  euro  area  banks  on  NPLs.  Supervisors,  will  of  course,  monitor  the
implementation of that guidance once consultation is final, and take appropriate and proportionate
steps should banks fail to comply.
A multifaceted problem 
Peer analysis is a critical component of any micro or macro-financial risk assessment and a key
strength  of  ECB  Banking  Supervision.  The  guidance  builds  on  best  practice  across  Member
States. Furthermore, the stocktake report, which was published alongside the guidance, provides
a  comparative  review  of  the  existing  national  practices  regarding  NPL  resolution  in  the  eight
countries where banks have significant levels of NPLs.  
The stocktake was a judgement-based exercise largely completed by the National Competent
Authorities (NCAs) on behalf of the ECB. It also built upon work conducted in a similar exercise
by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the first half of 2015.
The stocktake provides information on the impediments to NPL resolution within several Member
States. For example, banks are seldom encouraged to implement a write-off policy because of
either  country-related  external  impediments  such  as  legal  and  tax  issues,  or  idiosyncratic
impediments linked to institutions’ governance.
Tax  deductibility  of  losses  arising  from  write-offs  is,  in  many  countries,  bound  by  strict
constraints aimed at ensuring the definitive extinction of all legal claims against the debtor. These
impediments often prevent banks from making write-offs even if NPLs are fully provisioned.
The stocktake also provides information on the types of NPL resolution actions which have been
undertaken  by  the  respective  NCAs.  These  include,  for  example,  the  intensification  of  on-site
inspections  and  thematic  reviews  on  NPL  management,  to  the  issuance  or  publication  of
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
additional supervisory guidance and requirements.
Information on the legal, judicial, and extra-judicial framework as they relate to NPL resolutionis
also contained in the stocktake. No doubt, this will be of interest to those analysing the underlying
differences in financial structures and performance across the euro area.
These  examples  highlight  how  supervisory  actions  alone  in  the  euro  area  cannot  solve  this
problem. Recognising this interdependence and working together remains one of Europe’s and
European  Institutions’  greatest  strengths.  Concerted  action  on  this  issue  is  needed  from  all
stakeholders in the euro area over the coming years. 
Conclusion 
As the recovery in the euro area growth continues at a moderate but steady pace, this should
assist  the  capacity  to  address  the  problem  of  non-performing  loans.  Nonetheless,  concerted
action is needed by all stakeholders to ensure the sustained and determined reduction of the
NPLs across the euro area. While the road may be hard, we must have the patience and resolve
to do what is necessary. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
 I would like to thank Trevor Fitzpatrick and Mícheál O’Keeffe for their contributions to this speech. The opinions
expressed are personal and do not reflect the views of the European Central Bank.
 Both the draft guidance and the stock take can be found here.
 See for example Beck, Roland, Petr Jakubik and Anamaria Piloiu (2015). Non-performing loans: what matters
in addition to the economy cycle. ECB Working Paper Series No 1515. February 2015.
 Nkuzu, Mwanza (2011). Nonperforming Loans and Macrofinancial Vulnerabilities in Advanced Economies. IMF
Working Paper Series WP/11/161.
 See ECB. (2016). Financial Stability Review. May 2016. European Central Bank. Available here.
 See IMF (2015). A Strategy for Resolving Europe’s Problem Loans. IMF Staff Discussion Note. September 2015.
 Other papers include Espinoza, Raphael A. and Ananthakrishnan Prasad. (2010).Nonperforming Loans in the
GCC Banking System and their Macroeconomic Effects. IMF Working Paper Series WP/10/224. Also see Hou,
Yixin  and  David  Dickinson  (2007).  The  Non-Performing  Loans:  Some  Bank-level  Evidences.  Research
Conference on Safety and Efficiency of the Financial System, August 2007.  Klein, Nir (2013), ‘Non-Performing
Loans in CESEE: Determinants and Impact on Macroeconomic Performance, IMF Working Paper WP/13/72,
International Monetary Fund.
 See ‘Risks and resilience – the European banking sector in 2016’, Speech by Danièle Nouy, Chair of the ECB’s
Supervisory Board, Deutsche Bank – Bank Capital Forum, London, 23 February 2016. Available here.
 See Central Bank of Ireland, “Macro-Financial Review 2016:1”, available here
  See  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  Statistical  Release  13  September  2016,  Residential  Mortgage  Arrears  and
Repossessions Statistics: Q2 2016. Available here.
 Central Bank of Ireland regulatory returns using EBA’s harmonised definition of non-performing
 Q2 2016 regulatory returns using EBA’s harmonised definition of non-performing.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
