Carl-Ludwig Thiele: Internationalization of the renminbi – prospects
and challenges
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Carl-Ludwig  Thiele,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the 3rd European-Chinese Banking Day, Frankfurt am Main, 16 November 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen
 I am delighted to have this opportunity to deliver the keynote speech at Euro Finance Week's
European-Chinese Banking Day, which is already in its third year. In September 2015, I had the
privilege of giving the opening speech at the opening ceremony of the Sino-German Center for
Finance  and  Economics  in  Beijing.  Although  this  event  was  not  a  long  time  ago,  the
internationalisation of the renminbi has progressed rapidly since then.
 
1. Where does the renminbi currently stand from an international perspective?
The timing of our meeting and the subject of my speech - the internationalisation of the renminbi
(RMB) and the opportunities and challenges that this presents - could not be more topical. It was
only  weeks  ago,  on  1  October  2016,  that  the  Chinese  currency  was  officially  added  to  the
International Monetary Fund's basket of currencies. It has therefore joined the ranks of the US
dollar, Japanese yen, pound sterling and, last but not least, the euro as one of the five most-used
currencies in the world. This is a major political triumph for the People's Republic of China, as
well as for the IMF, as China is the world's second largest economy, with growth of more than 6
per cent per year.
The Chinese government had been resolutely pressing ahead with the process of including the
renminbi in the Special Drawing Right Basket since the year 2009. In doing so, it had more than
just the prestige of being included in the IMF's basket of currencies in its sights - in actual fact,
the internationalisation of the renminbi is closely linked to the opening-up of the capital markets in
China as a whole and to the advancement of the Chinese economy. China's objective here is to
morph  from  "the  world's  workshop"  into  a  modern,  service-oriented  economy,  with  the
international financial markets and the renminbi both having an important role to play: the former
as  a  source  of  financing  for  economic  activities  and  the  latter  as  a  lubricant  for  imports  and
exports.
 
2. Has the renminbi already established itself as an international key currency?
Three criteria come into play when assessing a currency's significance at the international level.
The currency's use
in the settlement of transactions, ie as a trading currency;
in the capital markets, ie as an investment currency;
and as an investment vehicle for central banks, ie as a reserve currency.
Let's examine the individual criteria in a little more detail now.
The  renminbi  has  already  firmly  established  itself  as  one  of  the  world's  most-used  trading
currencies.  While  the  share  of  global  payments  made  in  renminbi  was  no  more  than  0.25
percent in January 2012, making it the world's 20th most-used trading currency, this share had
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
climbed to 1.86 percent by August 2016 - an increase of more than sixfold. Behind the US dollar,
which remains the undisputed  number-one  trading  currency  in  the  world,  the  euro,  the  pound
sterling and the Japanese yen comes the Chinese currency in fifth place - and there are signs
that it will rise through the ranks.
The second step towards securing the renminbi's position as an international key currency is to
strengthen  its  role  as  an  investment  currency.  The  greater  the  number  of  liquid,  renminbi-
denominated  securities  that  are  issued,  the  more  foreign  investors  will  also  be  interested  in
investing in renminbi. The prerequisite for this is that the Chinese capital markets are sufficiently
deep and receptive to foreign capital. What's more, the Chinese markets need to be opened up
to foreign investors. The Chinese government has recently made several efforts in this direction.
Various programmes enable investors to make investments with fixed quota restrictions on the
onshore bond market. Another option open to foreign central banks, sovereign wealth funds and
offshore renminbi clearing banks is the China Interbank Bond Market (CIBM). Since mid-2015,
the only prerequisite for access to this market has been prior registration with the People's Bank
of China (PBoC), eliminating the need for the quota system.
Nowadays, the Chinese bond market is the third-largest in the world after the US and Japanese
bond markets. However, only 2 percent of bonds are currently held by foreign investors. Holding
a  share  of  around  70  percent,  the  largest  investors  remain  the  Chinese  commercial  banks.
Consequently, it is vital that further reforms are implemented in the future to open up the financial
markets  for  foreign  investors  so  that  the  renminbi  can  gain  a  foothold  among  the  flexible  and
internationally used investment currency elite. One example of such necessary reforms would be
to  eliminate  obstacles  hindering  access  to  the  capital  market,  such  as  the  quota  model  for
investment in the bond market.
The final step towards becoming a globally recognised key currency is for a currency to be used
as  an  international  reserve  currency.  The  renminbi's  inclusion  in  the  IMF's  Special  Drawing
Rights  basket  has  provided  the  framework  for  this.  It  is  now  expected  that  a  wider  range  of
market participants will invest capital in renminbi-denominated securities. These participants will
likely be joined by an increasing number of central banks that will, in the future, invest parts of
their reserve assets in corresponding securities, mostly government bonds.
 
3.  What  is  the  role  of  the  Frankfurt  financial  centre  in  the  internationalisation  of  the
renminbi?
The renminbi's internationalisation strategy does not culminate with the currency's inclusion in
the IMF's basket of currencies, however. On the contrary, the Chinese government is currently
focusing  on  a  whole  raft  of  measures.  One  of  these  is  the  Cross-border  Interbank  Payment
System (CIPS). It was launched in October 2015 and is the sole provider of settlement services
for  offshore  renminbi  payments.  The  People's  Bank  of  China  designed  CIPS  to  provide  an
infrastructural  buffer  for  the  expected  growth  in  renminbi  transactions  and  to  stem  the
disadvantages with regard to settlement efficiency vis-à-vis other currencies (particularly the US
dollar).
Other measures include bilateral cooperation agreements that aim to further promote use of the
renminbi  as  a  trading  and  investment  currency.  The  potential  for  efficient  renminbi  clearing  is
significant to enterprises that operate internationally. As China's largest European trading partner,
Germany is of crucial importance in this context.
It was not for nothing that the first renminbi clearing hub located outside Asia was established in
Frankfurt.  Since  2014,  it  has  been  possible  to  settle  renminbi-denominated  payments  via  the
Frankfurt branch of the People's Bank of China. This service provides attractive opportunities for
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises,  for  instance,  to  establish  and  expand  business
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
relationships  with  Chinese  enterprises  while  at  the  same  time  settling  payments  with  China
within their own local time zone and jurisdiction.
The China Europe International Exchange, or CEINEX, is another collaborative initiative. This joint
venture of the Deutsche Börse Group, the Shanghai Stock Exchange and the China Financial
Futures Exchange was opened exactly one year ago and is the first trading venue outside China
for Chinese investment products in renminbi. CEINEX uses the Deutsche Börse's infrastructure
and provides investors with the enticing option of gaining access to the Chinese capital market
during European and US trading hours.
In addition to the formation and expansion of close and dynamic economic ties, activities that
promote  mutual  understanding  are  another  integral  part  of  the  renminbi's  internationalisation
strategy. Mutual trust is established by regularly exchanging information in the fields of politics,
business and academia, and this is an important factor for successful cooperation with Chinese
partners.
In mid-October this year, for example, a delegation of members of the Renminbi Initiative Group
Frankfurt headed by the Deutsche Bundesbank and the Hessian Ministry of Economics travelled
to Beijing and Shanghai for talks. This was in connection with a workshop in Beijing organised by
the  Sino-German  Center  of  Finance  and  Economics,  which  boasted  high-ranking  participants
from the People's Bank of China, academia and the financial sector. The Sino-German Center,
which  is  part  of  the  Goethe  University  in  Frankfurt,  is  a  research  centre  that  conducts
independent research and promotes interaction and improved mutual understanding by means of
education and training. The Sino-German Center opened in September 2015 and I am proud of
the fact that the Bundesbank, as a member of its Board of Trustees, is actively contributing to its
success.
 
4. What conclusions can be drawn?
Ladies and gentlemen
The inclusion of the renminbi in the IMF's Special Drawing Rights basket marks a milestone in
the  internationalisation  of  the  Chinese  currency.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  this  is  a  great
political and economic triumph for China as well as an endorsement of the path to openness that
the country has been treading with great determination since the end of the 1970s.
However, there is still some way to go if the renminbi is to become as important as the other four
key currencies. Foreign investors' access to the onshore capital markets in China, which is still
restricted, is a case in point and underscores the necessity for Chinese policymakers to continue
to resolutely press ahead with the opening-up and liberalisation of the Chinese markets.
Thank you very much for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
