  John A Rolle: The threat of de-risking in the Bahamas 
Remarks by Mr John A Rolle, Governor of the Central Bank of The Bahamas, at the Grand 
Bahama Chamber of Commerce Luncheon, Freeport, Grand Bahama, 9 September 2016. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to thank the executives of the Grand Bahama Chamber of Commerce for inviting 
me to speak. You have been very patient, as we first arranged this presentation two weeks 
ago,  but  had  to  reschedule  because  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  weather  and  what 
eventually turned out to be Hurricane Hermine. 
Today,  I  am  going  to  speak  on  the  topic  of  de-risking.  I  will  focus  on  the  origins  of  this 
phenomenon, the impacts and implications for our financial system and on how we can all 
act to mitigate its effects. 
As to the outline of the presentation, first I will  give you an overview of the correspondent 
banking model – integral to this topic – and then discuss key international drivers behind the 
current trends. I will also look at the implications for our jurisdiction, give some insights on 
how the Central Bank has been engaged in various international forums on this issue, and 
then  discuss  both  what  we  are  doing  to  tackle  matters  from  a  strategic  and  policy 
perspective. You will hear me raise in this regard, the importance of reforms to achieve more 
formal  integration  of  all  economic  actors  into  our  financial  sector  –  with  appropriate  risk-
based safeguards – as well as touch on the importance of strengthening the information trust 
bonds between banks and their customers. 
I  hope  that my  remarks  will  inform  even  more  constructive  national  dialogue  on  this  topic. 
This  is  an  emerging  and  evolving  issue  that  affects  us  all.  If  we  react  appropriately,  there 
would be no cause for panic. 
Defining de-risking 
When  we  speak  of  de-risking  in  a  banking  context,  it  means  that  the  institutions  have 
purposely  stopped  providing  certain  services  to  subsets  of  their  clients,  because  they 
determine that the risk or potential costs of providing such services outweigh the returns, or 
the  benefits  of  providing  the  services.  In  the  case  of  correspondent  banking  it  has  taken 
many forms: 
• 
• 
Some banks have exited the business all together 
Some have ceased to offer the service in either in some sectors, some countries or 
certain regions 
Some have terminated the services on a client by client basis 
Some have modified or restricted the terms of services that they continue to provide 
 The role of the correspondent bank 
What purpose do correspondent banks serve? 
Correspondent  banks  accept  deposits  from  other  banks,  called  respondent  banks.  The 
respondent  banks  write  checks  or  make  wire  payments  against  these  deposits  to  settle 
international  or  other  payments  –  which  could  include  payments  on  behalf  of  ultimate 
customers. The flows includes those for international goods and services, foreign investment 
financing, or transfers of deposits from one location to another. Even a credit and debit card 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  payment  settlements  could  be  involved  if  they  have  to  be  routed  through  intermediate 
channels before they reach their intended payee. 
Ordinarily, correspondent banks would deploy any idle deposits of the respondent banks to 
earn short-term returns either in the money markets or other settings. They could also earn 
fees from processing flow-through payments. These all speak to the returns or rewards from 
this business model. 
The  risks  in  the  correspondent  relationships  are  in  part  of  a  regulatory  and  compliance 
nature. These entities have to guard against being used as channels for illicit activities such 
as  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  When  there  are  regulatory  violations,  and 
depending on the severity, banks can face sanctions of varying degrees, some civil in nature 
and  others  criminal.  Convictions  for  criminal  offenses  can  even  result  in  imprisonment  for 
bank officers. There is also the potential damage to the reputation of banks from having any 
such violations publicised. 
These risks are made more acute because of the intermediary role that correspondents play, 
relative to the downstream clients of respondent. 
Origins and consequences of “de-risking” 
Now  we  can  begin  to  discuss  how  the  risk  and  reward  in  the  correspondent  banking 
environment have changed, with seemingly disproportionate impacts on certain jurisdictions 
such as in the Caribbean, Africa, parts of Latin America and the Pacific. 
De-risking has been a response to regulatory compliance factors, as well as the state of the 
global economic environment. 
First on the return side, the correspondent banking model has become less profitable given 
the  generally  low  and  often  negative  interest  rate  environment,  in  which  holding  excess 
deposits offer limited or no prospect for positive returns. Returns have also been squeezed 
from  more  demanding  capital  and  liquidity  standards  for  large  bank  –  otherwise  justified 
prudential enhancements to make the financial system less vulnerable to future crises. 
Next,  more  stringent  anti-money  laundering  (AML)  and  combating  the financing  of  terrorist 
(CFT)  initiatives,  which  stress  the  concerted  global  effort  to  deter  the  use  of  the  financial 
system  for  criminal  purposes  have  added  significant  compliance  costs.  Moreover,  the 
penalties tied to AML/CFT breaches or deficiencies are often assessed as being excessive 
when measured against the return prospects generated in certain markets. 
It is in the case of AML/CFT risks that The Bahamas and the region have been particularly 
impacted. 
to  preserve 
correspondent relationships,  even  with  voluntary  offers to  pay  higher fees for  the facilities. 
Such incidences have affected both indigenous and international banks. 
In the Caribbean region, we continue to believe that the assessment of the risks which our 
jurisdiction  pose  to  the  outside  world  is  based  on  exaggerated  perceptions  about 
weaknesses in the standards being observed. Also, being labeled as “offshore” centre has 
been  judgmentally  damaging,  as  regard  perceptions  about  the  transparency  of  regulatory 
systems in place.  
instances  respondent  banks  have  not  been  able 
In  some 
The Bahamas’ experience 
The evidence on de-risking that is being accumulated is shedding more light on the contours 
of  the  problem.  In  the  summer  of  2015,  the  Central  Bank  obtained  survey  feedback  from 
53 banks and trust companies on how they were being affected. Here are some highlights: 
• 
Impacts were felt mainly within standalone banks (local and international) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    At  least  6  banks  had  lost  a  relationship  –  even  though  they  were  able  to  find 
replacements under heightened scrutiny and additional reporting requirements 
Four banks confirmed impacts on some aspect of their remittance services 
Relationships were primarily terminated by US and Canadian correspondent banks 
Most respondents operated with less than 3 correspondent banks 
Formal  contingency  planning  around  how  to  address  the  loss  of  a  correspondent 
banking relationships was not widely in place 
These  trends  mirror  what  is  happening  in  other  affected  jurisdictions,  although  not  on  the 
same  level  of  severity  in  some  such  territories.  Still  the  pattern  is  often  one  in  which 
respondent  banks  have  only  managed  to  preserve  their  correspondent  relationships  at 
significant  added  costs.  Among  other  outcomes,  some  have  faced  new  minimum  activity 
thresholds  (below  which  the  account  is  closed),  higher  due  customer  diligence  costs,  and 
sometimes pressures to limit their exposure to certain categories of customers. 
The Central Bank is now compiling the results from a follow-up survey, conducted in July and 
August  of  2016  to  assess  how  the  landscape  has  changed.  More  specific  information  is 
being  requested  on  the adjustments  that  have  been  made  within  financial  institutions,  and 
more feedback is being solicited on contingency planning. 
Why de-risking is a concern 
The concerns about de-risking arise on a number of levels. 
First,  as  an  international  financial  centre,  we  want  to  ensure  that  stand  alone  operations 
remain viable as business structures, so that The Bahamas can continue to earn economic 
benefits  from  this  sector.  To  deflect  the  threats  to  the  sector  we  have  to  tackle  the 
misperceptions about the regulatory quality and transparency of our regime. The Bahamas’ 
has a documented record of increasing regulatory cooperation and transparency, including 
under a significant number of tax information exchange agreements. This jurisdiction is also 
committed to implementing enhanced information sharing arrangements under the common 
reporting standards of the OECD’s Global Forum and the regulators are continuing to deploy 
strategies to improve the AML/CFT regime. 
The  concerns  about  potential  adverse  effects  on  our  domestic  financial  system  and  the 
economy are also noteworthy. Similar to the stand alone international banks, our indigenous 
banks  are  also  more  vulnerable,  because  they  start  out  by  having  less  access  to 
independent  global  banking  networks.  Indigenous  banks  often  serve  niche  markets 
overlooked by foreign banks. Their viability impacts the access of such niche customers to 
financial products and services. 
Limited  or  encumbered  international  banking  arrangements  could  undermine  the  ease  of 
doing business. Such encumbrances would impede foreign currency payments for a variety 
of  external  transactions.  Our  economy  also  depends  on  a  large  community  of  expatriate 
labour, for whom the cost and ease of repatriating their income could be called into question. 
Response from the Global Regulatory Community 
It is fair to say that global attention to such threats is increasing, even though the countries 
and regions that are at risk have rallied for much swifter action. The force of the advocacy 
has increased, thanks to the work of multilateral organisations such as the IMF, World Bank 
and  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat  that  have  drawn  more  attention  to  the  unintended 
negative consequences particularly on the poor in developing countries. 
From the international regulatory perspective, there is now increased emphasis on clarifying 
guidance provided on the global standards that should apply for AML/CFT systems, which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  ought to stress risk-based deterrence. There is, however, still some gap that has to be closed 
in terms of how financial institutions interpret what needs to be done to adjust their risk and 
compliance systems, given very punitive sanctions and enforcement regimes. 
Regulatory bodies that are active in trying to respond include the following: 
• 
• 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) 
The Basel Committee for Banking Supervision (BCBS), which is a body connected 
with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) 
The  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  (CPMI),  also  connected 
with the BIS 
The Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the principal global body overseeing the 
development and implementation of AML/CFT standards 
(and the less heard of ) Legal Entity Identifier Regulatory Oversight Committee (LEI 
ROC),  which  focuses  on  developing  common  international  standards  for  uniquely 
identifying business enterprises 
   Among these bodies the work is centred on providing clearer guidance in areas such as the 
following: 
• 
The kinds of due-diligence systems that financial institutions should have in place to 
gauge their exposure risk to illicit financial flows 
How  risk  quantification  could  vary  according  to  the  jurisdiction  where  the  flows 
originate or terminate 
How risk quantification could relate to the nature of information on the identity and 
character of the parties involved in the transactions 
  These and other factors distil in large measure the “know-your customer” (KYC) systems that 
banks  must  have  in  place.  They  also  more  recently  stress  knowing  the  customers  of  the 
clients, or “KYCC”. 
This process has been iterative, particularly in terms of the consultative framework used by 
the FATF and the committees connected with the BIS. There has also increasing input and 
response  from  national  regulatory  agencies,  such  as  the  US  Treasury  Department  and 
Justice Departments. 
None  of  these  agencies  advocate  termination  of  banking  arrangements  as  the  first  line  of 
defense  against  possible  risk  exposures.  They  stress  risk  mitigation.  But  the  risk-based 
approach can lead to precisely some of the outcomes that are occurring – not just enhanced 
due diligence but also the severing of relationships. 
The regional reponses 
Jurisdictions, banks, individuals and firms that are on the receiving end of these processes, 
effectively have to adapt and be able to demonstrate that they do not pose unmanageable 
risks to their correspondent or other banking relationships. That is the position in which we 
are now. 
The advice we receive from the international community is that we should improve safeguard 
and  enforcement  systems;  make  them  more  transparent  and  take  advantage  of  technical 
assistance,  where  possible,  to  make  improvements.  While  there  is  always  room  for 
improvement, we have rightly pushed back, because of false perceptions that also feed into 
the  profiling  of  our  risks.  There  is  indeed  a  documented  track  record  throughout  the 
Caribbean of improvement in our systems of deterrence, transparency and cooperation.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Accepting that there is a perception issue as well, The Bahamas along with the rest of the 
Caribbean have also been vocal in asking our global counterparts to be more forthcoming in 
identifying  where  counterparts  still  see  gaps  that  need  to  be  closed  in  our  AML/CFT 
systems.1 
Aside  from  the  concerted  interventions  at  the  political  level  in  the  Caribbean,  regulators, 
starting  with  the  group  of  central  bank  governors  and  senior  bank  supervisors  have  been 
engaged in broad stakeholder dialogue which have brought together in the same forum the 
members  from  the  Regional  Consultative  Group  of  the  FSB,  US  Regulators  (including  the 
Treasury and Justice Department), Canadian and US correspondent banks, and Bahamian 
regional  commercial  banks.  These  have  helped  to  promote  common  understanding  and, 
particularly, to spotlight the compliance challenges which correspondent banks face, relative 
to scrutiny received from their own regulators. 
Regionally, it has also meant exploring what feasible alternatives exist. It is fair to say that 
pooling  our  transactions  through  an  alternative  regionally  established  correspondent  bank 
would have limited success, if the actual or perceived risks are not directly addressed. Hence 
there has to be direct inward attention to raising our AML/CFT systems to uniformly higher 
standards.  From  a  distance,  relative  deficiencies  in  any  single  jurisdiction  could  still 
generalise to being associated with the jurisdictions as a group. 
Policy responses and imperative for The Bahamas 
Inside  the  Bahamas  the  Central  Bank  has  been  active  providing  AML/CFT guidance to  its 
licensees.  In  2015,  the  Bank  issued  amended  guidance  notes,  stressing  the  risk-based 
mechanisms which licensees ought to continue to perfect. These include the necessary due 
diligence  in  documenting  the  ultimate  beneficiaries  behind  financial  transactions  and 
corporate  vehicles,  and  further  stress  in  client  relationships  on  identifying  the  source  of 
income and wealth of clients. 
In terms of other reputation enhancing initiatives at the national level, there is an opportunity 
for further gains  in  terms  of  how  we  leverage  strengths  already  identified  in  our  AML/CFT 
regime coming out of the latest mutual evaluation that has been done by our regional peers. 
This assessment of The Bahamas is expected to be unveiled later in 2016. It will provide a 
yardstick against which further improvements can be made. 
The Bahamas’ national risk assessment (NRA) on money laundering and terrorist financing 
exposure will dove-tail with the regional peer assessment. The NRA will unveil a sector by 
sector  approach  to  improving  our  AML/CFT  system,  and  underscore  the  work-streams  of 
each  of  the  regulatory  and  enforcement  agencies.  Those  agencies  include  the  Royal 
Bahamas Police Force, the Office of the Attorney General, the Gaming Board, the Financial 
Intelligence Unit, Securities Commission, Compliance Commission, Insurance Commission, 
and the Central Bank. 
The Central Bank’s policy agenda 
We  will  also  have  to  promote  changes  in  other  areas  of  our  society  and  economy.  This 
includes policies to reduce the prevalence of cash-based activities; as such transactions are 
harder to trace, and more susceptive to being infiltrated by criminal elements. We also need 
to regularize un-banked activities and un-banked persons, having them more integrated into 
the financial sector. 
                                                
1  The US Treasury Department has actively been providing TA to requesting countries. The IMF, IDB and other 
multilateral organizations are also preparing to play some role in proving TA. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The Central Bank is equipped to play a role in these respects, and has already incorporated 
such targets into its policy work agenda. 
We have identified accelerated development of the payment systems as a priority. Work is 
underway to finalize the regulations for e-payments and mobile money, which would contain 
risks from external disruptions to domestic e-payments and promote more non-cash forms of 
transactions. 
We  are  also  putting  more  emphasis  on  the  promotion  of  financial  inclusion,  through 
appropriate  reforms  either  already  within  the  scope  of  our  regulatory  mandate  or  through 
appropriate  recommendations  to  the  Government.  We  can  promote  financial  inclusion  by 
striving  for  more  universal  access  to  banking  and  banking  services.  This  is  true  for 
documented  and  improperly  documented  persons  within  our  borders.  It  is  also  true  of 
licensed web-shop based or licensed web-shop linked operations. 
In the case of web-shop activities, the Central Bank will work closely with the Gaming Board 
to promote comprehensive understanding of the adequacy of AML and compliance systems 
within the sector, and provide this exposure to the compliance units within local licensees. 
While  the  decision  of  who  should  be  provided  with  services  is  still  up  to  each  bank,  the 
Central Bank can ensure that the mutual exposure that is needed for both our licenses and 
gaming industry is facilitated, so that such outcomes can be driven by facts as opposed to 
anecdotes. 
Embracing change within the KYC environment 
Up  to  this  point  I  have  not  said  much  about  how  enhanced  AML/CFT  regimes  affect 
businesses that are already integrated into the formal financial system. For these enterprises 
it is the oft dreaded enhanced KYC due diligence procedures that bankers follow that cause 
angst. Understand that these are risk-based and that the gauging of risk is often related to 
the amount of disclosure that the proprietor/establishment might voluntarily or otherwise be 
able  to  share  with  their  banker.  Depending  on  the  line  of  business  undertaken  by  the 
proprietor/establishment  the  banker  may  also  be  curious  on  the  profile  of  establishment’s 
clients. Also depending on the size, frequency, currency denomination, origin or destination 
of funds passing through the account, the banker may periodically be compelled to undertake 
enhanced diligence of the proprietor or establishment. 
Our  system  is  designed  to  protect  confidentiality  in  the  context  of  legal  and  legitimate 
business transactions. Even within the confines of such privileges, reliable information about 
transactions and the customer profiles may need to be shared with intermediary institutions. 
Trust  and  openness  in such  exchanges  is  important. The  banker might seem to  be  overly 
inquisitive,  but  it  is  precisely  to  safeguard  the  legitimate  financial  channels  through  which 
commercial transactions must be conducted. 
Conclusion 
It  is  not  expected  that  the  regulatory  policies  that  drive  the  de-risking  phenomenon  will 
dissipate.  Instead  we  are  headed  towards  fostering  better  understanding  among  global 
regulators and stakeholders; towards adapted and more informed compliance mechanisms 
and  likely  towards  a  permanently  reduced  footprint  for  correspondent  banking  operations. 
Once the perception gap is closed, our institutions will remain under intense scrutiny. While 
this is may be a new reality, there are strategies that The Bahamas can implement to reduce 
uncertainty and, in the process, make our regulatory system more robust. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
