Jacqueline Loh: Strengthening Asia's bond markets
Keynote address by Ms Jacqueline Loh, Deputy Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of
Singapore, at the Asia Securities Industry & Financial Markets Association's Annual Conference,
Singapore, 17 November 2016.
Andrew Ng – Chairman, ASIFMA
Mark Austen – CEO, ASIFMA
 Greg Medcraft – Chairman, Australian Securities and Investments Commission, and my fellow
keynote speaker
Fellow regulators and central bankers
Distinguished guests
Ladies and gentlemen 
1     It is my pleasure to join you this afternoon at the 10th ASIFMA Annual Conference.
2     When I last spoke here two years ago, the global economy was confronted by what the IMF
described as “legacies, clouds and uncertainties”, and was forecast to grow at just 3.3% .  Two
years on, in 2016, the IMF has lowered its forecast for the current year further to 3.1%, reflecting
a more subdued outlook for advanced economies, before recovering to 3.4% in 2017 .  This is
below the immediate pre-GFC average of 4.2% over 1998–2007, though more aligned with its
long-term average of 3.1% over 1980–1998.
1
2
3     The medium-term growth story for Asia is bright.  The IMF’s outlook for the next five years is
for emerging and developing Asia to grow by a robust 6.3%, well above the forecast for the US
(1.9%), Europe (1.5%) and Japan (0.5%), and will underpin the higher investment returns in this
part of the world.  
4     Asia’s bond markets have softened in recent years but has much potential alongside its
relatively strong economic growth outlook.  Total debt issuance last year was USD 1.25 trillion,
about 30% lower compared to 2013 .  Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman estimate that industry
balance sheets committed to bonds, foreign exchange and commodities contracted 25% over
the past five years owing to tighter post-crisis regulations, and could decline another 10% in the
next three to four years, with banks looking to trim capacity to improve returns on risk-weighted
4
assets as regulatory costs and challenging markets continue to drag on returns .
3
6
5     However, the story going forward is more upbeat. Infrastructure and sustainable financing
offer  opportunities  for  investors.   Asia  will  need  USD  8  trillion  of  infrastructure  by  2020 ,  and
within  that,  ASEAN  will  need  USD  110  billion  a  year  in  infrastructure  investment  through
2025 . The World Bank Group has pledged to support climate-friendly development with USD 16
billion per annum in direct funding and mobilised USD 13 billion in external private sector capital
annually by 2020.  Technology and innovation will underpin and drive such growth opportunities. 
The  inaugural  Singapore  FinTech  Festival  running  this  week  demonstrates  the  tremendous
potential that technology holds for capital markets to seize these opportunities and helps us cope
with the market challenges.
5
6     The ASIFMA conference programme reflects these trends, opportunities and challenges.
Tomorrow’s concurrent panels will cover macro and market developments in China, India and
ASEAN, as well as opportunities in infrastructure financing, sustainable financing, big data and
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
cyber security. I hope to touch on some of the topics, and leave you with some thoughts as you
go about today’s and tomorrow’s sessions. 
The last decade
7     As we celebrate ASIFMA’s 10th anniversary this year, let us reflect on how far Asia’s capital
markets have grown over the past decade: 
a. Ten years ago, only two Asian stock exchanges ranked in the world’s
top  ten  by  market  capitalisation.    Today,  four  out  of  the  ten  largest
exchanges are in Asia .  Asia contributes nearly half of the total number
of IPOs globally, compared to 28% a decade ago .  The value of share
trading  in Asia  grew  80%  over  the  past  ten  years,  almost  double  the
9
pace worldwide (41%) .
7
8
b. Asia’s bond markets grew to USD 4.7 trillion in 2015 from about USD
700  billion  ten  years  ago,  representing  an  annualised  growth  rate  of
24%.  As a result, Asia’s share of the global bond market has increased
10
significantly, from just 2% in 2006 to 9% in 2015 .
8     The developments are being supported by two trends:
a.  On  the  demand  side,  Asia’s  middle  class  is  growing,  per-capita
incomes  are  rising,  and  saving  rates  remain  high.    The  Asian
Development  Bank  estimates  that  64%  of ASEAN,  79%  of  China  and
69%  of  India  populations  will  move  into  the  middle-income  bracket
between  2010  and  2030 .    This  reflects  a  more  than  three-fold
increase  to  3.6  billion  persons  in  2030,  and  will  continue  to  drive  the
need for long-term investment for retirement.  
11
b. On the supply side, the major markets China, India and ASEAN have
made  good  progress 
reforms  and  cross-border
connectivity. Allow me to elaborate on some recent measures.  
in  market 
9     China has facilitated greater cross-border investment flows and allowed for more cross-
border market activities.  In the past year alone, China liberalised access to the interbank bond
market to foreign financial institutions and institutional investors. Offshore corporates can now
tap the onshore market for Panda bond issuances, while Chinese corporates in certain parts of
China  –  such  as  Chongqing,  Suzhou  and  Tianjin  –  can  issue  bonds  in  offshore  markets  and
repatriate the proceeds to support onshore economic activities.
10          India  has  likewise  liberalised  cross-border  capital  market  activities.  Indian  banks  and
corporates  are  now  allowed  to  issue  Rupee-denominated  bonds  overseas  as  part  of  their
external commercial borrowings which enables Indian issuers to diversify their funding base and
achieve more efficient cost of funding. 
11     In ASEAN, capital market development and integration efforts are underway.  The ASEAN
Trading  Link  provides  investors  with  a  single  screen  to  access  stock  exchanges  in  Malaysia,
Thailand  and  Singapore.    These  three  jurisdictions  have  also  adopted  fully  harmonised
prospectus disclosure requirements known as the ASEAN Disclosure Standards, which facilitate
the  multi-jurisdictional  offering  of  equity  as  well  as  debt.  The  ASEAN  Collective  Investment
Framework  (CIS)  was  launched  in  2014  to  facilitate  cross-border  offering  of  CIS  to  retail
investors  in  Malaysia,  Singapore  and  Thailand,  under  a  streamlined  authorisation  process.   A
total of 12 funds are now available under the Framework. Together, these initiatives benefit both
issuers and investors by streamlining and lowering the cost of access to capital and investment,
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and help to recycle capital within the region.
12     Singapore’s capital markets have likewise developed well on the back of Asia’s growth and
capital market liberalisation:
a. Bonds.  The size of the corporate bond market grew 2% year-on-
year  to  reach  SGD  315  billion  in  2015  comprising  SGD  140  billion  in
Singapore  Dollar  bonds  and  SGD  175  billion  in  non-Singapore  Dollar
bonds. This represents an annualised growth rate of 12% over the past
five years.  The market serves a diverse range of issuers, raising funds
in various currencies and instruments, including:
12
(i)    One, Covered Bonds:    DBS  issued  the  first  covered
bond of USD 1 billion in July 2015.  UOB is the first global
issuer  to  publish  its  Harmonised  Transparency  Template
(HTT)
  which  was  developed  by  the  European  Covered
Bond Council, and aims to promote an enhanced  level  of
transparency  and  comparability 
for  covered  bond
investors.  
(ii) Two, Masala Bonds:  Following India’s liberalisation, as
I  mentioned  earlier,  three  Masala  bonds  were  issued  in
Singapore and listed on SGX this year: Adani Transmission,
NTPC Limited and Indiabulls Housing Finance.  They also
represent the world’s first green corporate Masala bond and
first privately-owned enterprise Masala bonds.
(iii)  Lastly, Green  Bonds:    To  meet  the  demands  of  an
expanding  pool  of  socially 
investors,  a
Singapore property company is set to roll out the first green
bond in Singapore.
responsible 
b.  Foreign Exchange.  A well-functioning bond market serving a broad
spectrum of international issuers and investors needs to be supported
by a deep foreign exchange market, and Singapore is the largest foreign
exchange market in Asia and the third largest globally.  Based on the
triennial survey by the Bank for International Settlements, average daily
turnover  reached  USD  517  billion  in April  2016,  a  35%  increase  from
three years ago. Our share of global market has increased from 6% to
8%.  Singapore exchanges offer a suite of 21 Asian FX currency futures
and  option  contracts.  The  Singapore  Exchange’s  Indian  Rupee  and
Renminbi futures contracts are amongst the most liquid globally.
The next decade
13     As we chart our next lap in developing Asia’s capital markets, we need to take into account
trends and driving forces that will shape capital markets in the years ahead.  Let me highlight
three of them:
14     First, technology is transforming capital markets in significant ways. 
a.  This  is  most  obvious  in  foreign  exchange,  which  is  the  most
advanced  in  contract  standardisation  and  market  practices.  New
electronic  trading  platforms  are  blooming  alongside  mature  systems,
and  are  beginning  to  enter  emerging  markets.  Technology  is  also
enabling  OTC  platforms  to  clear  on  exchanges,  and  for  exchange-
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
traded futures to be distributed on OTC platforms. 
transparency  by  pulling  price 
b.  Even  in  bond  markets,  technology  is  being  used  to  improve  pre-
market  price 
traders
directly.  To  ameliorate  the  impact  of  bank  balance  sheets  shrinking,
companies  are  using  technology  to  experiment  with  bringing  buy-side
liquidity  into  secondary  markets.    The  challenge,  as  many  have
observed, is how these solutions can help to maintain liquidity in times
of market volatility.
feeds 
from 
15     Second, companies are staying private for longer. According to McKinsey, in the US which
drove the dot-com boom and is driving the “unicorn” and “decacorn” phenomenon, the average
age of technology companies going public in 2014 was 11 years, up from 4 years in 1999 . This
has been enabled by the prolonged period of low yields, which has driven institutional investors to
seek higher returns from liquidity and credit risk in private markets.  McKinsey also found that 150
software companies were able to reach USD 10 billion in value through private financing in 2015,
compared to just 10 in 2011. In Singapore, private equity assets under management grew 24%
per annum on average for the last five years to over USD 100 billion in 2015. This creates a role
for industry bodies like ASIFMA, which are set up around public markets like credit and equity, to
support  companies  on  their  longer  journey  in  private  markets,  and  introduce  the  benefits  of
market transparency and market discipline while the companies remain private.
13
16          Third,  underlying  macro  trends  are  supportive  of  investment  continuing  to  flow  from
Developed Markets to Emerging Markets.  On the one hand, accommodative monetary policies
in  developed  economies  will  drive  an  ongoing  search  for  relative  yield  in  emerging  markets,
including in Asia.  On the other hand, emerging and developing Asia are expected to grow more
14
than three times as quickly as advanced economies . 
17     In order for Asia to fully reap the fruits of these favourable macro trends, it will need to raise
the needed long-term capital for sustainable growth, including by further strengthening its bond
markets.  Today, I will touch on three areas: first, a new Asian Bond Grant to support a broader
base  of  Asian  issuers;  second,  efforts  to  encourage  rated  issuances;  and  lastly,  supporting
secondary market liquidity. Let me start first with the Asian Bond Grant initiative.
Measures to strengthen Asia’s bond markets
Introducing the Asian Bond Grant
18     In many ways, Singapore has always been a bridge between Asia and the rest of the world,
whether  as  an  entry  point  for  global  investors  looking  into Asia  or  as  a  launchpad  for Asian
companies seeking to regionalise and globalise.  We have had some success in developing the
Asian G3 bond market, but Asian local currency issuances have room to grow.  When I spoke
here  two  years  ago  on  integrating Asia’s  capital  markets,  it  was  against  the  context  that  the
markets were fragmented on several dimensions: laws, currencies, market practices as well as
market infrastructure.  Investors need to understand each market and each set of laws before
investing.  Likewise, Asian companies seeking to raise international capital, on top of domestic
capital,  may  need  to  obtain  international  ratings  and  international  documentation,  and  these
require international lawyers and accountants, and international roadshows.  
19          Singapore  already  offers  an  excellent  ecosystem  of  financial  institutions,  professional
services  like  legal  and  accounting,  credit  rating  agencies,  and  market  infrastructure  for Asian
companies  to  issue,  market,  list  and  trade  their  bonds.    To  make  it  more  attractive  for Asian
issuers to raise international capital in Singapore and benefit from the ecosystem here, we will
introduce an Asian Bond Grant scheme next year.  The scheme aims to broaden the base of
issuers in our bond market, which will add to the breadth and diversity of debt instruments for the
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
investing community.  Qualifying Asian issuances will be able to offset up to 50% of one-time
issuance costs such as international legal fees, arranger fees and credit rating fees.  We have
consulted with local market participants on various aspects of the scheme to ensure a smooth
implementation.    I  am  glad  to  say  that  the  industry  has  been  supportive  of  this  initiative,  and
together we are confident that this will enhance Singapore’s value proposition.
Encouraging rated issuances
20     Even as we draw Asian issuers to Singapore, we want to encourage these issuers to be
rated.    Credit  ratings  improve  general  market  transparency  by  providing  independent  and
comparable  assessments  of  the  credit  worthiness  of  issuers.    Together  with  business  and
financial  information  provided  in  the  offering  documents  or  company  announcements,  credit
ratings  can  assist  investors  to  better  understand  the  issuer’s  business  and  financial  health. 
Issuers that are rated, in comparison, also gain access to a broader investor base, as many
institutional mandates invest only in rated bonds.  To encourage rated issuances, rated issuers
will be eligible for a larger grant quantum under the Asian Bond Grant.
21     Ratings can also benefit bond issuers.  In the Singapore Dollar bond market, we have been
encouraging frequent bond issuers to obtain credit ratings. The Housing and Development Board
(HDB) is an example of a frequent domestic issuer that recently obtained a rating and benefited
15
from tighter issuance spreads.  About 40% of outstanding Singapore Dollar bonds are rated ,
and we would like to see this share go up.  To give this another boost, we are considering ways
to nurture a healthy and sustainable credit rating culture in our bond market.  For instance, under
the  Asian  Bond  Grant  scheme,  for  Singapore  Dollar  bonds,  only  rated  issuances  would  be
eligible.   Another  possibility  we  are  considering  is  to  help  existing  issuers  offset  the  costs  in
obtaining a credit rating.
22     Even as we encourage more rated issuances, I must caution against basing investment
decisions  solely  on  ratings.    Regardless  of  whether  a  bond  is  rated  or  not,  investors  need  to
make their own credit assessments.  Perhaps more importantly, and as the saying “do not put all
our  eggs  in  one  basket”  goes,  the  key  to  long-term  investing  is  diversification  and  avoiding
concentrated exposures to any one security.  This approach is inherent in the way institutional
investors  manage  portfolios  –  broad  diversification  across  asset  classes,  sectors  and
securities. 
23          Individual  investors  building  their  own  investment  portfolios  should  take  special  care  to
diversify  and  avoid  concentrated  exposure  to  any  one  investment  or  issuer.    One  way  for
individual investors to gain exposure to a diversified portfolio of bonds in a cost-efficient manner
is to invest through bond funds.  MAS has for many years promoted the development of index
bond  funds  in  the  regional  markets,  through  the Asian  Bond  Fund  (ABF)  initiative  led  by  the
EMEAP Group.  Today, there are many such offerings, some of which can be bought and sold
through  the  exchange  as  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs).    We  encourage  fund  managers  to
increase the number and variety of bond funds and ETFs available to individual investors.
Supporting secondary market liquidity
24          Let  me  now  turn  from  our  efforts  in  the  primary  market  to  secondary  market  liquidity. 
Market  participants  generally  agree  that  bond  market  liquidity  has  become  more  challenging. 
This is the case globally but also in Singapore. Banks continue to provide prices for a majority of
bonds  issued  here,  although  the  amounts  they  are  willing  to  transact  in,  may  be  smaller  for
weaker credits and smaller issuances.
25     A functioning secondary market is critical for the sustainable growth of the bond market.  To
deepen the secondary market, MAS has been working with the industry on several initiatives over
the years.  For example, to improve price transparency, we collaborated with banks and service
providers, such as Bloomberg and Markit, to make available end-of-day corporate bond prices on
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
their platforms.  Last year, MAS launched the Securities Repo Facility, under which eligible banks
can  borrow  certain  Singapore  Dollar  corporate  bonds  via  repo  transactions  to  facilitate  their
market  making  activities.    These  efforts  will  take  time  to  bear  fruit.    We  are  also  engaging
investors, issuers and intermediaries to assess if more can be done to facilitate an active repo
market and whether this will help deepen liquidity in bond markets.
26     Before I conclude, I should address the issue of defaults and restructuring exercises in the
domestic bond market recently.  These have so far mostly been from the oil and gas sector, and
reflects the protracted weakness in the sector arising from a slump in energy prices.  Rising
defaults  over  the  late  part  of  the  credit  cycle  and  difficulties  in  particular  sectors  are  to  be
expected, but MAS’ stress test suggests that most corporates in Singapore remain fairly resilient,
and banks’ exposures to weaker issuers are likely to be manageable.  The key here again is to
ensure that one has a diversified portfolio. Following the recent restructurings and defaults, we
have also received feedback calling for a review of the regulations and market practices around
the  Singapore  bond  market.    Some  ideas  include  enhancing  sales  practices,  recourse  for
investors  when  a  bond  defaults,  and  the  need  for  credit  ratings.  We  are  considering  these
feedback and will respond soon.
Conclusion
27     To sum up, Asia’s capital markets have enjoyed a very good run, owing to a confluence of
macroeconomic fundamentals and policy liberalisation. ASIFMA has supported that journey over
the  past  ten  years  by  improving  transparency  through  market  surveys,  advocating  innovative
solutions through white papers and roadmaps, and building consensus on best practices through
events like these and collaboration with other industry bodies.
28     The economic opportunities in Asia are immense, and despite the cyclical slowdown, the
region’s financing needs will continue to grow.  Asia needs to continue strengthening its capital
markets, especially its bond markets.  Singapore will support Asia’s bond market by introducing a
new Asian Bond Grant scheme, encouraging rated issuances, and supporting secondary market
liquidity.
29     Please enjoy the rest of the conference. Thank you.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2014
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2016
Dealogic data
“Learning to Live with Less Liquidity”, Morgan Stanley and Oliver Wyman, 13 March 2016
“Infrastructure for a seamless Asia”, Asian Development Bank, 2009 
"The ASEAN Investment Report 2015 Infrastructure Investment and Connectivity”, the ASEAN Secretariat and
UNCTAD, November 2015 
World Federation of Exchanges 2015 and 2006 data
“EY Global IPO Trends”, Ernst & Young, 2006–2015 and “IPO Watch, Asia”, PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2007–
2014
World Federation of Exchanges 2015 and 2006 data
Dealogic data
“ASEAN, PRC and India”, Asian Development Bank, 2014
“United  Overseas  Bank  (UOB)  publishes  the  first  global  Covered  Bond  Label  Harmonised  Transparency
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Template”, Covered Bond Label, 19 January 2013 
“Grow fast or die slow: why unicorns are staying private”, Mckinsey & Company, May 2016 
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2016 
MAS estimates as at 30 September 2016
13
14
15
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
