  Yutaka Harada: Economic activity, prices and monetary policy in Japan 
Speech  by  Mr  Yutaka  Harada,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Nagano, 12 October 2016. 
 Accompanying charts can be found at the end of the speech or on the Bank of Japan’s website 
Introduction 
Thank  you  for  giving  me  this  opportunity  to  exchange  views  with  people  representing 
Nagano, who have taken time to be here despite their busy schedules. It is indeed a great 
honor to be here today. Please allow me to express my gratitude for your great cooperation 
with business operations of the Bank of Japan, particularly of the Matsumoto Branch and the 
local office in Nagano. 
Three and a half years have passed since the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative 
monetary  easing  (QQE)  in  April  2013.  Most  recently,  in  September  2016,  it  released 
“Comprehensive  Assessment:  Developments  in  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  as  well  as 
Policy Effects since the Introduction of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE),” 
and  at  the  same  time  decided  on  a  new  framework  for  strengthening  its  monetary  easing 
policy. 
Today, I would like to offer my assessment of the Bank’s monetary policy to date. First, from 
a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  I  would  like  to  discuss  developments  in  Japan’s 
economy since the 1980s in order to examine why the economy, which had experienced high 
growth among advanced economies, became stagnant from the 1990s. Then, I will elaborate 
on the recent economic developments and monetary policy in Japan. 
Following my speech, I look forward to hearing your views on the economic situation, and to 
your candid opinions on the Bank’s monetary policy. 
Economic developments in Japan and monetary policy since the 1980s 
I. 
Until  1990,  Japan  had  been  considered  the  country  that  could  achieve  the  highest growth 
among advanced economies. However, it is well known that its economy then stagnated over 
the long term and simultaneously fell into deflation. 
Let  us  first  look  at  Chart  1,  which  shows  Japan’s  nominal  GDP,  real  GDP,  and  the  GDP 
deflator since the 1980s. Japan’s economy, in terms of the real GDP growth rate, had seen 
steady growth until the beginning of the 1990s, but shifted to low growth thereafter. At the 
same time, prices became sluggish and began to decline. The GDP deflator then flattened, 
and when excluding the effects of the consumption tax hikes in 1997 and 2014, it declined 
almost consistently from 1995 (Chart 1 excludes the effects of the consumption tax; for the 
method of adjustment, see the Note to this chart). Naturally, the growth rate in nominal GDP 
also had been sluggish. Nevertheless, since the 2013 introduction of a bold monetary easing 
policy – namely, QQE – nominal GDP and the GDP deflator have seen recovery. Note that 
the GDP deflator is an index that shows the underlying trend in prices and does not reflect 
effects  of  global  price  fluctuations,  such  as  crude  oil  price  movements.  Since  the  2013 
introduction of QQE, the GDP deflator has been rising stably at an annual rate of 0.9 percent, 
having bounced back from an annual rate of minus 1.2 percent for the ten years prior to the 
introduction (for this past year, however, the rate of increase has been at 0.6 percent). For 
the past ten years, the rate of change in the GDP deflator was 0.8 percent lower on average 
than  that  in the  consumer  price  index  (CPI). Thus,  simply  put,  if the rate  of  change  in  the 
GDP deflator becomes 1.2 percent, that in the CPI will be calculated as 2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Let  me  now  examine  the  economic  stagnation  in  Japan  by  comparing  its  economic 
developments with those in other advanced economies. 
Chart  2  shows  real GDP  of  Japan,  the  United States,  the  United  Kingdom, Germany,  and 
France, with the level in 1990 set as 100. We can see from this chart that Japan’s economic 
growth rate – which had been high among these five advanced economies until the 1980s – 
has fallen to the lowest since the 1990s. 
Some argue that a low growth rate in Japan is unavoidable because the country has been 
facing  a  decline  in  its  population,  and  more  importantly,  a  decline  in  its  working-age 
population of those between 15 and 64 years of age. Taking this argument into account, let 
us look at Charts 3 and 4, which show real GDP per capita and real GDP per working-age 
person,  respectively.  In  terms  of  real  GDP  per  capita,  Japan’s  growth  rate  has  been  the 
lowest  among  five  countries  –  namely,  Japan,  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom, 
Germany, and France. Nevertheless, in terms of real GDP per working-age person, Japan 
does not appear to be as bad off among these economies since 2000. 
Let us now turn to developments in nominal GDP, as shown in Chart 5. Since the 1990s, the 
nominal GDP growth rate in Japan has been decelerating while the rates in the other four 
advanced economies have been rising steadily. This also applies in terms of nominal GDP 
per capita and nominal GDP per working-age person (not shown in the chart). This is natural 
because the change in nominal GDP growth is larger than that in population growth. 
Did deflation cause the decline in the real GDP growth rate? 
II. 
So far, I have referred to the fact that Japan’s economy fell into deflation and its real GDP 
growth rate became low compared to other advanced economies. So, is there a connection 
between the two factors? In other words, did deflation push down the real GDP growth rate? 
Economists within academia say that there is basically no connection between the two. Here 
is the logic, using two examples. First, the levels of both real wages and real consumption 
will  remain  the  same  for  the  two  cases  where  there  is  no  change  in  those  of  prices  and 
wages, and where nominal prices and wages increase by 1 percent. Second, for both cases 
where the inflation rate and nominal interest rate are 0 percent, and where these rates are 
1 percent, the levels of real interest rates and firms’ investment also should remain the same. 
As a result, with the levels of real consumption and real investment staying the same in these 
examples, real GDP growth rates also should stay at the same level. 
However,  does  this  logic  hold?  Firms’  profits  in  terms  of  accounting  and  return  on  equity 
(ROE)  –  which  shows  how  efficiently  stockholders’  funds  are  invested  –  are  concepts  in 
nominal  terms.  ROE  calculated  for  the  purpose  of  accounting  is  not  a  ratio  in  real  terms. 
Recently,  in  Japan,  firms  are  encouraged  to  aim  at  achieving  ROE  at  a  certain  level;  for 
example, 8 percent. This 8 percent is in nominal terms, and the higher the inflation rate, the 
easier  it  is  to  achieve.  A  1  percent  rise  in  the  inflation  rate  will  bring  the  same  margin  of 
increase in ROE.1 It seems that there is no actual effect in achieving ROE of 8 percent, but 
many corporate managers consider this as crucial and that may bring about some changes 
in firms’ behavior.2 
                                                
1  Assume  that  an  investment  of  100  will  be  made  using  30  of  equity  and  70  of  debts.  If  the  inflation  rate  is 
0 percent, investment returns will be 3 percent and the interest rate will be 1 percent. If the inflation rate is 
1 percent, investment returns will be 4 percent and the interest rate will be 2 percent. In the first instance, ROE 
will  be  (100  ×  0.03  –  70  ×  0.01)  /  30  =  2.3  /  30  =  7.7  percent.  In  the  second  instance,  it  will  be 
(100 × 0.04 – 70 × 0.02) / 30 = 2.6 / 30 = 8.7 percent. Thus, ROE of 8 percent can be achieved. Hence, an 
inflation of 1 percent causes ROE to rise accordingly. 
2  See the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) final report on the project chaired by Professor Kunio 
Ito  “Competitiveness  and  Incentives  for  Sustainable  Growth:  Building  Favorable  Relationships  between 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Nonperforming  loans  are  also  an  issue  discussed  in  nominal  terms.  Losses  incurred  from 
past  investment  failures  will  decline  in  real  terms  if  sales  and  profits  increase  owing  to 
inflation.  Nonperforming  loans  were  a  major  problem  for  Japan’s  economy  in  the  1990s.3 
Based  on  what  I  have  just  mentioned,  deflation  and  the  consequent  reduction  in  sales 
represent a failure. 
The government budget is another issue discussed in nominal terms. An increase in nominal 
GDP means a decrease in past fiscal deficits in real terms. It seems strange that economists 
within  academia  who  claim fiscal  deficits  as  an  issue  do  not  emphasize  the  importance of 
nominal  figures.  If  the  argument  holds  true  that  people  do  not  increase  their  consumption 
based on the assumption that the government will increase taxes due to fiscal deficits, the 
decline in the ratio of government debt to nominal GDP should increase consumption.4 This 
means that the sluggishness in nominal GDP will restrain real consumption. 
Stock  prices  and  exchange  rates  are  also  nominal  figures.  Profits  in  nominal  terms  affect 
stock  prices  and  exchange  rates  influence  firms’  profits.  I  believe  that  nominal  figures  do 
affect real figures. 
In addition, there is a problem that the economic growth rate has declined and the natural 
rate of interest has fallen to close to zero. The natural rate of interest refers to an optimal 
interest rate that will neither depress nor overheat the economy. If the natural rate of interest 
is close to zero, it is difficult to stimulate the economy through lowering interest rates. In this 
situation,  if  the  inflation  rate  is  in  positive  territory,  economic  activity  can  be  stimulated  by 
lowering interest rates to zero and reducing real interest rates to negative territory. However, 
if  the  inflation  rate  is  in  negative  territory,  it  is  difficult  to  lower  real  interest  rates.  Then, 
bringing economic conditions to normal by stimulating economic activity will become difficult. 
I think this is the channel recognized by many economists within academia as a reason why 
deflation causes economic stagnation.5 
Many argue in Japan that, rather than pushing down interest rates forcibly through monetary 
policy, the natural rate of interest should be raised by increasing the real GDP growth rate 
through  growth  strategies  and  structural  reforms.  However,  of  those  making  such  an 
argument, few have yet provided specific indicators in terms of defining what kind of growth 
strategy  could  be  used  and  to  what  extent  such  strategy  could  raise  the  natural  rate  of 
interest. However, an exception here is the effects of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) on 
Japan’s economy; some analyses suggest that, if Japan participates in the TPP, real GDP 
will increase by 0.66 to 2 percent.6 This does not mean that the economic growth rate could 
                                                                                                                                                   
Companies and Investors,” August 6, 2014, pp. 40–41. In this report, it is stated that ROE targets should be 
set at 8 to 10 percent for firms in general and around 15 percent for firms with global operations. 
3  There are many documents that refer to the point that nonperforming loans cause stagnation in the economy 
through  (1)  the  bank’s  reluctance  to  lend  and  the  consequent  sluggish  investment  or  (2)  an  extension  of 
additional loans to inefficient firms and a decline in macroeconomic productivity. See Ryuzo Miyao, “Ginkou 
Kinou  no  Teika  to  90  Nendai  Ikou  no  Defure  Teitai  (Deterioration  in  Bank’s  Functioning  and  Continued 
Deflation  since  the  1990s)”  in  Koichi  Hamada,  Akiyoshi  Horiuchi,  and  the  Economic  and  Social  Research 
Institute (ESRI), eds. Ronsou Nihon no Keizai Kiki (Debates on the Economic Crisis in Contemporary Japan), 
Nikkei Publishing Inc., May 2004 (available only in Japanese). 
4  The possibility of people not increasing their consumption based on the assumption that the government will 
increase  taxes  due  to  fiscal  deficits  is  analyzed  in  Masumi  Kawade,  Arata  Ito,  and  Toru  Nakazato,  “1990 
Nendai Ikou no Zaisei Seisaku no Kouka to Sono Henka (The Effects and Changes in Fiscal Policy since the 
1990s),”  Chapter  5  of  Toshihiro  Ihori,  ed.  Nihon  no  Zaisei  Akaji  (Japan’s  Fiscal  Deficit),  Iwanami  Shoten, 
December 2004 (available only in Japanese). 
5  Ben S. Bernanke, “Deflation: Making Sure ‘It’ Doesn’t Happen Here,” remarks before the National Economists 
Club, Washington D.C., November 21, 2002.  
6  Cabinet Secretariat of Japan, “Kanzei Teppai Shita Baai no Keizai Kouka ni Tsuite no Seifu Touitsu Shisan 
(The  Government  Estimate  on  the  Economic  Impact  of  Tariff  Elimination)”  and  “PECC  Shisan  no  Gaiyou 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  be  increased  by  up  to  2  percent,  but  that  the  size  of  the  economy  could  be  increased  by 
2 percent over, for example, a decade. An increase of 2 percent in a decade suggests that 
the economic growth rate will rise merely by 0.2 percent on an annual basis. This tells us 
how difficult it is to produce effects from a growth strategy. 
Meanwhile, monetary easing and a growth strategy do not conflict with each other. Hence, it 
would  be  effective  if  they  are  implemented  together.  The  primary  purpose  of  a  growth 
strategy is to improve efficiency – or to raise labor productivity by eliminating wasteful areas 
– and therefore, in the process of pursuing a growth strategy, employment problems could 
arise.  In  the  meantime,  if  the  economic  conditions  become  favorable  through  monetary 
easing and the employment situation improves, it will become easier to implement structural 
reforms. 
Furthermore, rather than not seeing any rise in nominal wages during the course in which 
deflation  affects  economic  activity,  I  think  that  people’s  sentiment  will  be  more  upbeat  if 
prices and wages rise at the same level, though I am not certain that this will be the case. 
Developments in indicators in nominal terms 
Let us now look at movements in indicators in nominal terms. 
Chart  6  shows  the  local  currency-denominated  stock  prices  and  the  ratios  obtained  by 
dividing these prices by nominal GDP of each country. They are both converted into indices 
with  the  level  in  1990  set  as  100.  Compared  with  the  level  in  1990,  stock  prices  in  Japan 
have  fallen  to  70  percent  while  those  in  the  other  four  advanced  countries  have  risen  by 
seven times for the United States and Germany and three times for the United Kingdom and 
France.  However,  relative  to  nominal  GDP,  stock  prices  in  these  countries  compared  with 
those  in  1990  have  increased  only  by  three  times  for  Germany,  two  times  for  the  United 
States,  and  1.3  times  for  France,  stayed  at  the  same  level  in  the  United  Kingdom,  and 
dropped to 60 percent of the 1990 level in Japan. Hence, differences in the extent of change 
in  stock  prices  between  Japan  and  these  other  advanced  countries  narrow  significantly.  It 
can be said that one factor behind the sluggish stock prices in Japan was that nominal GDP 
did not grow due to deflation. 
Chart  7  shows  the  exchange  rate  movements  of  major  currencies  against  the  U.S.  dollar. 
The yen and the U.S. dollar, which is represented in terms of the nominal effective exchange 
rate, are on an appreciating trend (in the chart, drops in the lines indicate the appreciation of 
currencies), but the British pound sterling and the euro do not show such a trend. If the yen 
did  not  depreciate  after  the  introduction  of  QQE,  its  appreciating  trend  would  have  been 
clearer.  The  yen’s  appreciation  causes  sluggish  sales  of  exporting  firms  and  import-
competing firms, leading them to inevitably reduce their prices, and this consequently lowers 
prices  in  the  overall  economy.  Price  declines  eventually  may  lead  to  a  recovery  in  the 
competitiveness of firms, but adjustments until then impose serious difficulties. For example, 
firms  that  had  been  making  fixed  investment  based  on  the  assumed  exchange  rate  of 
120 yen against the U.S. dollar would incur substantial losses if the yen were to appreciate to 
80 yen against the dollar. In view of such a painful experience, firms may refrain from making 
investments, and this will result in a prolonged decline in investment. 
One  reason  for  the  appreciating  trend  in  the  U.S.  dollar  in  terms  of  the  nominal  effective 
exchange rate is that major trading partners of the United States – namely, the countries in 
Central  and  South  America  –  have  been  under  rampant  inflation.  If  such  an  appreciating 
trend did not exist, the United States might also be in an inflation situation similar to that in 
Central and South America. 
                                                                                                                                                   
(Outline of the Estimate of the Pacific Economic Cooperation Council [PECC]),” both published on March 15, 
2013 and available only in Japanese. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart  8  shows  fiscal  deficits  relative  to  nominal  GDP.  While  Japan  has  been  facing  a 
massive  fiscal  deficit  compared  with  the  other  four  advanced  countries,  it  has  narrowed 
during the period of monetary easing and increase in nominal GDP. That is, the narrowing of 
the  deficit  owes  to  improvement  in  the  economy  led  by  monetary  easing  and  the  ensuing 
increase in tax revenue and the expansion in nominal GDP, the denominator in calculating 
the  figures  in  this  chart.  As  I  have  mentioned,  if  people  truly  do  not  increase  their 
consumption based on the assumption that the government will increase taxes due to fiscal 
deficits,  the  decline  in  the  ratio  of  government  debt  to  nominal  GDP  should  increase 
consumption. However, this is not the real case. 
Meaning of the rise in the unemployment rate 
Although it has no direct connection to discussions of nominal indicators, let us now look at 
the  unemployment  rate,  my  last  choice  of  indicator  for  international  comparison.  The 
unemployment rates shown in Chart 9 are different from those normally seen, in that they are 
compared to the level in 1990 set as 100. The chart indicates that the unemployment rate in 
Japan has risen from 1990. The rates in the other four countries, meanwhile, have fluctuated 
in line with economic cycles and eventually returned to around their original levels. The high 
unemployment rate in Japan must have meant that production had been sluggish, and that 
tax revenues and social insurance revenues had been low. Since the middle of the 1990s, 
Japan has suffered many losses. 
These  losses go  beyond  economic  matters  and  social  issues.  Not  being  employed  makes 
individuals  feel  unwanted  in  society  and  creates  stress  for  them.  In  fact,  there  is  a  study 
indicating  that  the  number  of  suicides  increases  in  line  with  the  rise  in  the  unemployment 
rate.7 Today, with the fall in the unemployment rate, the number of suicides has declined by 
more than 10,000 from its peak of around 34,000 in 2003. 
During  the  first  decade  of  the  2000s,  the  acronym  NEET  –  which  stands  for  “Not  in 
Education, Employment, or Training” – was commonly used in Japan. This acronym was first 
used  in  the  United  Kingdom  amid  increased  awareness  of  how  to  socially  include  young 
people facing various difficulties such as coping with poverty, having a low level of education, 
and  being  racial  minorities.  Meanwhile,  in  Japan,  NEET  began  to  convey  the  image  of  a 
weak mentality among young people who have grown up in a wealthy society and either do 
not have the will or are unable to work for some reason. Nevertheless, the number of young 
people in Japan who were categorized as NEETs – while the category in Japan is broadly 
interpreted,  as  I just  noted  –  gradually  increased  during the  economic  recession  since  the 
1990s. If they are the product of economic recession, the number of NEETs should decline 
with  the  fall  in  the  unemployment  rate.8  Currently,  the  acronym  NEET  is  hardly  used  in 
Japan. Searching through articles in The Nikkei, it appeared 138 times at its peak in 2006 but 
19 times for this past year – that is, from September 2015 through August 2016. 
In recent years, on the other hand, the term black companies (burakku kigyou) has become 
widespread.  This  refers  to  firms  that  force  employees  to  work  at  low  wages  for  an 
exceedingly  long  period  of  time,  without  receiving  any  corresponding  rewards  that  these 
firms promised. A question then arises as to why people choose to work at such firms. This is 
because, amid considerable disparities in employment conditions between regular and non-
                                                
7  Yasuyuki Sawada, Michiko Ueda, and Tetsuya Matsubayashi, Jisatsu no Nai Shakai e: Keizaigaku Seijigaku 
Kara  no  Ebidensu  ni  Motozuku  Apurochi  (Towards  Evidence-Based  Suicide  Prevention:  Perspectives  from 
Economics and Political Science), Yuhikaku Publishing Co., Ltd., June 2013 (available only in Japanese). 
8  Yutaka  Harada  and  Kazutomo  Abe,  “Nito,  Furita,  Jakunen  Shitsugyou  to  Makuroteki  na  Keizai  Kankyou 
(NEET,  Non-Regular  Employees,  Unemployment  among  Young-Age  Group,  and  Macroeconomic 
Environment),”  Chapter  3  of  Yoshio  Higuchi,  ed.  Tenkanki  no  Koyou  Nouryoku  Kaihatsu  Shien  no  Keizai 
Seisaku (Economic Policy to Support Employment and Capacity Development at a Critical Juncture), Nippon 
Hyoron Sha Co., Ltd., December 2006 (available only in Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  regular  employees  in  Japan,  it  became  difficult  for  many  young  people  to  work  as  regular 
employees. In this circumstance, burakku kigyou won over anxious young people by hiring 
them  as  regular  employees.  This  situation  occurred  largely  because  of  the  prolonged 
economic recession, in which the employment situation had deteriorated. Recently, firms that 
have been labeled burakku kigyou have been struggling to secure employees as the rise in 
the ratio of non-regular employees to regular employees has leveled off after the end of 2013 
in a situation where labor market conditions have eased with a fall in the unemployment rate. 
In line with the fall in the unemployment rate, the numbers of suicides and NEETs also have 
declined, and it has become difficult for the harsh working conditions under burakku kigyou to 
continue. 
Based on the observations made so far, I would like to assert that Japan’s deflation and the 
decline in its real economic growth rate are connected. There is a powerful argument against 
this, which runs as follows: even if prices decline, nothing will change as long as the levels of 
wages  and  interest  rates  fall  by  the  same  margin,  and  therefore  deflation  cannot  cause  a 
decline in the real GDP growth rate or a rise in the unemployment rate. However, I think that 
the actual economy is more complex, in that there is a channel in which deflation causes a 
decline in real GDP. Almost all economists within academia recognize the channel in which 
deflation affects economic growth when there is a low natural interest rate. 
In  my  view,  the  loss  of  employment  due  to  the  deflation  since  the  1990s  led  to  the 
deterioration of human capital, and this might have caused a decline in labor productivity, as 
well as a decrease in the economy’s growth rate for an extended period. 
I  believe  that  we  must  learn  from  the  failures  experienced  during  the  1990s  and  conduct 
monetary policy so as to overcome deflation. 
III. 
Japan’s economic developments after the Introduction of QQE and the Bank’s 
comprehensive assessment of September 2016 
Now, I would like to elaborate on economic developments in Japan after the introduction of 
QQE.  I  believe  that  QQE  has  been  conducted  to  improve  the  situation  that  I  explained 
earlier. So, was it effective in overcoming failures experienced in the past? 
To illustrate, let us look at the GDP deflator in Chart 1. Following the introduction of QQE, it 
started to rise stably (please note that the GDP deflator excludes the effects of the crude oil 
price movements). QQE has worked to change deflationary mindset of the past. However, as 
described  earlier,  the  deflator  has  been  increasing  merely  by  0.9  percent,  which  is  not 
enough to reach the Bank’s target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the CPI (all items less fresh food). In order to achieve that target, a 1.2 percent increase in 
the  GDP  deflator  is  necessary,  based  on  the  relationship  between  the  CPI  and  the  GDP 
deflator mentioned earlier. 
Next, let us look at the CPI. Chart 10 shows developments in the CPI in terms of all items 
less fresh food and that for all items less fresh food and energy, both of which exclude the 
effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hike.  After  the  introduction  of  QQE  that  followed  the 
inauguration of the second Abe Cabinet, the inflation rate – which had been negative until 
then – turned positive. Specifically, the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI for all items 
less fresh food and energy, excluding the effects of the crude oil price movements, rose to 
0.9 percent in February 2014, from minus 0.8 percent immediately before the introduction of 
QQE. The 0.9 percent figure includes the effects of the front-loaded increase in demand prior 
to  the  consumption  tax  hike  in  April  2014.  After  the  hike,  however,  the  pace  of  increase 
slowed.  Accordingly,  the  Bank  decided  to  expand  QQE  in  October  2014,  and  with  this 
expansion, the increase in the CPI for all items less fresh food and energy accelerated again. 
Nevertheless, since around the end of 2015, the rate of increase has continued to slow. The 
Bank  introduced  QQE  with  a  Negative  Interest  Rate  in  January  2016  and  enhanced 
monetary  easing  in  July,  almost  doubling  the  amount  of  the  Bank’s  exchange-traded  fund 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (ETF) purchases. However, the price stability target of 2 percent has not yet been achieved, 
although at least the economy is no longer in deflation. 
Moreover, the growth rate of Japan’s real GDP does not appear to have accelerated even 
after  the  introduction  of  QQE.  However,  as  shown  in  Chart  4,  the  rate  of  real  GDP  per 
working-age person – excluding that for 2014, which  was affected by the consumption tax 
hike  –  seems  to  have  been  realizing  an  acceleration  in  its  growth,  albeit  slightly. 
Improvement in the employment situation – which I already have explained – is not only seen 
in  major  cities  but  is  spreading  across  Japan.  In  June  2016,  the  active  job  openings-to-
applicants ratio marked a figure above 1 in all prefectures. Needless to say, the active job 
openings-to-applicants ratio for “All Japan” has risen, registering 1.37 times in August 2016 – 
the  highest  level  since  August  1991.  The  ratio  also  has  risen  here  in  Nagano,  registering 
1.42 times. 
The Bank’s comprehensive assessment 
On the basis of the fact that the price stability target has not yet been achieved, the Bank 
conducted  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  developments  in  economic  activity  and 
prices,  as  well  as  on  policy  effects,  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  at  the  Monetary  Policy 
Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  September  20  and  21,  2016.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  also 
decided on a new framework for strengthening its monetary easing policy. In what follows, I 
will explain these two topics. 
The  Bank’s  comprehensive  assessment  is  divided  into  the  following  five  aspects:  (1)  the 
transmission  mechanism  in  which  QQE  affects  the  real  economy;  (2)  factors  that  have 
hampered  achieving  the  2  percent  price  stability  target;  (3)  the  mechanism  of  inflation 
expectation formation; (4) pushing down of the yield curve; and (5) the effects and impact of 
the decline in the yield curve. I will explain each of these. 
First of all, the transmission mechanism of QQE functioned efficiently and lowered interest 
rates  for  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs)  for  all  durations,  as  evident  from  the  yield 
curve that I will touch upon later. Many indicators reveal that inflation expectations have been 
in positive territory. Thus, real interest rates have declined to levels  well below the natural 
rate of interest, and have stimulated the economy. As a result, economic activity improved, 
and Japan’s economy is no longer in deflation, which is commonly defined as a sustained 
decline in prices. 
Second,  I  would  like  to  describe  factors  that  have  hampered  the  achievement  of  the 
2 percent  target.  In  terms  of  the  mechanism  that  I  have  just  described,  a  rise  in  inflation 
expectations is crucial. However, the rate of increase in the observed inflation rate – i.e., the 
CPI – continued to decline due to (1) the fall in crude oil prices, (2) the weakness in demand 
following the consumption tax hike in April 2014, and (3) the slowdown in the global economy 
and volatility in global financial markets. The decline in the observed inflation rate weakened 
inflation expectations adaptively, and this decline then pushed down actual prices. 
Here,  understanding  the  mechanism  of  inflation  expectation formation  – the  third  aspect  – 
becomes important. Since the observed inflation rate is likely to remain subdued for the time 
being, it seems that a further rise in inflation expectations through the adaptive mechanism is 
uncertain and may take time. This highlights the important role played by the forward-looking 
expectation  formation  mechanism. The  expansion  of  the monetary  base,  together  with  the 
commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability  target,  by  bringing  about  a  regime  change  in 
monetary  policy,  has  led  to  a  rise  in  inflation  expectations.  The  relationship  between  the 
monetary base and inflation expectations seems to be of a long-run nature. Therefore, what 
is important is the Bank’s commitment to expanding the monetary base in the long run. 
Fourth, the combination of the negative interest rate policy and JGB purchases proved to be 
an effective means for the central bank to push down the entire yield curve. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  As for the fifth aspect, the decline in the yield curve and the change in its shape affect the 
economy as a  whole in  various  ways. Let me note three points. First, short- and medium-
term interest rates have a larger impact on economic activity than longer-term rates. At least 
until now, the stimulative effects on the economy of the decline in short- and medium-term 
interest rates were larger than those of the decline in super-long-term interest rates. Second, 
however, the link between the impact of interest rates and the shape of the yield curve may 
change as firms are now exploring new ways of raising funds, such as issuing super-long-
term  corporate  bonds.  And  third,  an  excessive  flattening  of  the  yield  curve  may  have  a 
negative impact on economic activity by leading to a deterioration in people’s sentiment, as it 
can cause uncertainty about the sustainability of financial functioning. 
The  first  and  second  points  can  be  understood  as  common  sense.  Most  firms  make 
investment  decisions  based  on  a  strategy  for  the  next  several  years.  Thus,  a  decline  in 
interest rates on 20-year JGBs does not immediately cause a large increase in investment. 
Firms  that  consider  profitability  over  20  years  have  mainly  been  those  engaged  in 
infrastructure business so far. Such firms tend to be not much affected by recent short-term 
developments in interest rates, because they conduct investment in line with their medium-to 
long-term  business  plans.  Firms  including  those  engaged  in  other  than  infrastructure 
business, however, are experiencing positive developments through issuing super-long-term 
corporate bonds. 
Financial institutions’ business conditions and flattening of the yield curve 
I would like to talk further about business conditions of financial institutions and the flattening 
of the yield curve. Namely, long-term interest rates are higher than short-term ones, but the 
differential between the two rates has become smaller. The reason behind this flattening is 
that short-term interest rates tend not to decline due to difficulty in lowering deposit rates into 
negative  territory.  Also,  since  interest  rates  have  become  negative,  long-term  bonds  have 
been bought by many investors in search of a positive yield. 
The  profits  of  financial  institutions  decrease  with  the  flattening  of  the  yield  curve  because 
they make long-term investment by raising short-term funds. Thus, after the introduction of 
the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  financial  institutions’  profits  in  terms  of  those  from  the 
differential between long- and short-term interest rates have been decreasing. 
However,  financial  institutions  gain  profits  only  after  they  get  their  loans  paid  back,  and 
therefore this does not mean that they can earn more simply with the steepening of the yield 
curve. Financial institutions’ profits have been stable at high levels since the introduction of 
QQE. This is because the upturn in the economy has improved the business conditions of 
borrowing  firms  and  thereby  has  reduced  default  costs  and  credit  costs.  A  decrease  in 
default costs is desirable, but what matters is to ensure sustainable profits. That seems to be 
the reason why there might have been considerable concern that the flattening of the yield 
curve  could  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  sustainable  increase  in  financial  institutions’ 
profits, and could decrease their future profits. 
However, from a long-term perspective, financial institutions can gain profits only when they 
have borrowers. Firms are hoarding their surplus and not making investment mainly because 
the prolonged deflation has reduced their incentive to do so. When Japan’s economy moves 
out  of  deflation,  firms  are  expected  to  regain  such  incentive,  and  this  in  turn  will  increase 
demand for borrowing funds from financial institutions. That is to say, financial institutions are 
expected to increase their lending and their profits will eventually rise. 
Furthermore,  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  has  been  brought  about  by  the 
prolonged low economic growth and deflation since the bursting of the bubble in 1990. Thus, 
it is not necessarily the case that the Bank’s current policy has caused such an environment. 
Looking  at  the  saving-investment  balance  of  the  corporate  sector,  saving  has  been 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  exceeding investment on the whole recently, and thus there is no need for firms to borrow 
money. This inevitably will cause a declining trend in interest rates and profit margins.9 After 
the  introduction  of  the  negative  interest  rate  policy,  however,  the  extent  of  the  decline  in 
interest  rates  and  profit  margins  became  larger  than  before.  This  seems  to  be  the  reason 
why there has been considerable concern over the effects of the negative interest rate policy 
on financial institutions’ profits. 
Chart  11  shows  developments  in  the  JGB  yield  curve  since  the  Bank’s  introduction  of 
quantitative  easing  (QE)  policy.  The  chart  indicates  that,  comparing  the  yield  curve  of 
December 30, 2000 – just before the introduction of QE on March 21, 2001 – and those just 
after the introduction on March 21, 2001, the curve has declined on the whole, but the extent 
of the flattening is very marginal. Comparing interest rates for the two dates, while those on 
one-year  JGBs  declined  by  0.4  percentage  point,  those  on  20-year  JGBs  declined  by 
0.7 percentage point. However, comparing interest rates just before the introduction of QQE 
on  December  28,  2012  and  just  before  the  enhancement  of  monetary  easing  on  July  28, 
2016,  while  those  on  one-year  JGBs  declined  by  0.5  percentage  point,  those  on  20-year 
JGBs declined by a wider margin of 1.6 percentage points.10 
Interest rates on 20-year JGBs temporarily declined to around 0.1 percent. Many economists 
say that it is difficult to achieve the 2 percent price stability target. However, even they predict 
that the inflation rate will be around 1 percent over the medium to long term.11 I think that, 
even if the natural rate of interest is 0 percent, interest rates on 20-year JGBs at the time had 
been too low. Interest rates on 20-year JGBs have gradually risen, and I consider this to be 
healthy growth. 
Monetary policy and business conditions of financial institutions 
Of course, maintaining sound business conditions is crucial for financial institutions. What is 
important in conducting monetary policy  is how  business conditions of financial institutions 
affect  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  we  must  consider  the  overall  transmission 
channels of monetary policy. 
Monetary policy affects the economy through two channels: bank lending and asset markets. 
When  interest  rates  decline,  demand  for  loans  increases,  and  financial  institutions  expand 
their lending accordingly. If their business conditions are not favorable, they may not be able 
to  meet  such  demand,  and  this  will  suppress  the  monetary  policy  effects.  However,  even 
when business conditions of one financial institution are not favorable, the policy effects on 
the economy will not be suppressed if other financial institutions can conduct lending instead. 
As for the channel of asset markets, the rise in stock and land prices or a depreciation of the 
yen  can  stimulate  consumption  and/or  investment.  The  issue  then  is  how  large  the 
stimulative effects that permeate through these channels could be on the overall economy.12 
                                                
9  Yutaka Harada, “Naze Nihon no Kinri wa Hikuinoka (Why Are Interest Rates Low in Japan?),” Keiki to Saikuru 
(The business and the cycle), No.62, Japan Association of Business Cycle studies (JABC), November 2016 
(forthcoming; available only in Japanese). 
10  At the MPM held on July 28 and 29, 2016, the Bank decided to conduct a comprehensive assessment of the 
developments in economic activity and prices under QQE and QQE with a Negative Interest Rate, as well as 
their policy effects, at the September MPM. Since July 29, mainly due to market speculation over a rise in the 
JGB yield curve, super-long-term interest rates have increased. 
11  See Chart 39 (2) of the July 2016 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices. 
12  See  Frederic  S.  Mishkin,  The  Economics  of  Money,  Banking,  and  Financial  Markets,  Global  Edition,  Tenth 
Edition, Pearson, 2013, Chapter 26. It explains the channels through which monetary policy effects permeate 
the  economy,  dividing  them  into  nine  including  bank  lending  and  asset  prices.  Channels  in  which  financial 
institutions’ business conditions affect the economy as a whole are limited. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
  After  the  bubble  period,  it  often  was  argued  that,  when  financial  institutions  are  burdened 
with  massive  nonperforming  loans,  this  could  constrain  their  lending  and  thus  distort  the 
recovery  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  However,  many  empirical  analyses  show  that 
throughout the 1990s it was only at the time of the financial crisis in 1997 and 1998 when 
financial institutions’ nonperforming loans impaired their lending and negatively affected the 
economy  as  a  whole.13  It  is  unlikely  that  in  the  current  situation  the  negative  interest  rate 
policy would affect financial institutions’ business conditions and deteriorate the economy as 
a whole. 
QQE with yield curve control 
IV. 
Based on the comprehensive assessment that I have discussed so far, the Bank announced 
its decision to introduce QQE with Yield Curve Control after the MPM held on September 20 
and 21, 2016. The findings of the comprehensive assessment are as follows. First, QQE has 
brought  about  improvements  in  economic  activity  and  prices  mainly  through  the  decline  in 
real  interest  rates.  Notably,  it  was  short-  and  medium-term  interest  rates  that  declined.  In 
other  words,  it  proved  that the  central  bank  can  exert  a  large  influence  on the  entire  yield 
curve.  Second,  the forward-looking formation mechanism  is  important. And  third,  reflecting 
my  personal  view,  it  is  necessary  to  make  clear  possible  options for  the  Bank’s  additional 
monetary policy measures given that markets’ awareness over a limit to monetary policy – 
that is, there is no room for further monetary easing – will weaken monetary policy effects. 
With respect to the first point, in order to control both the short-term policy interest rate and 
the long-term interest rate, the Bank decided to continue to apply a negative interest rate of 
minus  0.1  percent  to  current  accounts  held  by  financial  institutions  at  the  Bank  and  to 
purchase JGBs so that 10-year JGB yields will remain more or less at the current level of 
around 0 percent. Since the Bank will conduct purchases more or less in line with the current 
pace, the annual pace of increase in the amount outstanding of its JGB holdings is likely to 
be about 80 trillion yen. As for the second point, the Bank decided to introduce an inflation-
overshooting  commitment.  This  commitment  means  that  the  Bank  will  continue  expanding 
the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in the observed CPI (all items less 
fresh  food)  exceeds  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  and  stays  above  the  target  in  a 
stable manner. In other words, the Bank will continue the expansion even if the year-on-year 
rate of increase in the CPI temporarily exceeds 2 percent, as shown in Chart 12. I think it is 
necessary to make this commitment to the public, because at the time the Bank terminated 
QE  in  March  2006,  there  might  have  been  a  misunderstanding  that  it  would  terminate the 
policy as soon as the rate of increase in the CPI became even slightly above 0 percent. 
As shown in Chart 13, the ratio of the monetary base to nominal GDP in Japan is expected to 
exceed 100 percent – marking over 500 trillion yen – in slightly over one year. At present, the 
ratio is about 80 percent in Japan compared with about 20 percent in the United States and 
the  euro  area.  I  believe  that  this  is  a  strong  commitment  denying  that  there  is  a  limit  to 
monetary policy. Aside from the monetary base relative to nominal GDP shown in Chart 13, I 
think that the limit to monetary easing should be considered in terms of the monetary base, 
which is almost the same size as the accumulated amount of JGBs purchased by the Bank, 
relative to the amount outstanding of government debt. The ratio is over 30 percent in Japan 
and  about  20  percent  in  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  euro  area.  This 
means that Japan remains far from reaching a limit to monetary easing policy. Regarding the 
third  point,  the  Bank  decided  to  continue  monetary  easing  through  measures  such  as 
reductions in the short-term policy interest rate and the long-term interest rate, expansion in 
                                                
13  See  Ryuzo  Miyao,  “Ginkou  Kinou  no  Teika  to  90  Nendai  Ikou  no  Defure  Teitai  (Deterioration  in  Bank’s 
Functioning and Continued Deflation since the 1990s)” cited in Footnote 3. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  asset purchases in terms of quality, and an acceleration of expansion of the monetary base. 
This is also another strong commitment denying that there is a limit to monetary policy. 
Concluding remarks 
Japan – which used to take pride in its high economic growth – has become the country with 
the lowest GDP growth rate among advanced economies since 1990 while  simultaneously 
falling into deflation. The question addressed here is whether deflation caused the stagnation 
in Japan’s economy. 
In  my  view,  deflation  was  to  some  extent,  although  not  completely,  the  cause  of  the 
stagnation in the economy. If that is the case, the economy will likely recover from the past 
stagnation under the current monetary policy. As far as real GDP shows, there seems to be 
no  such  recovery  from  stagnation  to  higher  growth,  though  this  might  be  because  of  the 
negative impact of the consumption tax hike. However, in terms of real GDP per working-age 
person,  there  appear  to  be  signs  of  such  recovery  to  some  extent.  Moreover,  the 
unemployment  rate  has  been  falling  consistently.  Let  me  note  here  that,  given  that  the 
employment situation has improved in Japan, working people will be taken care of better. 
I am aware that there is opposition to the negative interest rate policy. This is because low 
interest rates cause the flattening of the yield curve, thereby affecting financial institutions’ 
profits. However, what is important in conducting monetary policy is how financial institutions’ 
business  conditions  affect  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Currently,  the  positive  effects  of  this 
monetary policy on the economy as a whole seem to outweigh the negative ones. 
Under QQE with Yield Curve Control introduced in September 2016, I believe that Japan’s 
economy  can  proceed  steadily  toward  achieving  the  price stability  target  of  2  percent. If  a 
situation arises in which it becomes difficult to achieve the target – for example, a significant 
change  in  the  state  of  the  global  economy  –  I  think  that  the  Bank  should  take  additional 
easing measures without hesitation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
     12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
   14 
     BIS central bankers’ speeches 
      BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
      16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    17 
     18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
