Key Note Address by Ashraf Mahmood Wathra  
Governor, State Bank of Pakistan 
World Islamic Finance Forum (WIFF) 
September 05, 2016 
 Respectable  Senator  Muhammad  Ishaq  Dar,  Federal  Minister  for 
Finance,  Revenue,  Economic  Affairs,  Statistics,  &  Privatization, 
Justice  (R.)  Muhammad  Taqi  Usmani,  Dr.  Ishrat  Hussain, 
Chairman,  Dr.  Azmi  Omar,  Director  General,  Islamic  Research  & 
Training  Institute,  Professor  Dr.  Abbas  Mirakhor,  Dr.  Farrukh 
Iqbal,  Dean  and  Director,  Center  of  Excellence  in  Islamic  Finance 
Education-IBA, Distinguished Guests, Ladies & Gentlemen 
 Assalam-o-alaikum  
 
It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  see  global  strategic  players  like 
International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance,  The  Islamic 
Research  and  Training  Institute,  International  Shari’ah  Research 
Academy for Islamic Finance (ISRA) joining hands with the Centre of 
Excellence  in  Islamic  Finance  Education,  IBA  for  organizing  World 
Islamic  Finance  Forum  in  the  largest  city  of  Pakistan.  This  is  a  clear 
reflection of Pakistan being a significant contributor towards the growth 
and  development  of  Islamic  finance  industry.  I  want  to  appreciate  the 
Page 1 of 6 
 organizers for providing this forum bringing together global thinkers and 
practitioners who can synthesize the work so far done and build on the 
core competencies of Islamic finance for its sustainable growth. I wish 
all the best for the success of this global event and a very pleasant stay to 
the distinguished foreign delegates.  
Ladies & Gentlemen 
 
The  ability  of  Islamic  finance  to  introduce  greater  discipline  into  the 
financial system owing to its inherent strengths indicates this system is 
relatively more stable and resilient. Islamic banking is a growing reality 
which is expanding outside the traditional borders of Muslim countries 
into western economies; at present  global Islamic financial assets have 
reached US $1.8 trillion in 2015 from US $150 billion in the 1990s and 
are expected to exceed US $6.5 trillion by 2020. Asia is expected to be 
the key driver in advancing the growth of the Islamic finance industry; 
according  to  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board’s  (IFSB)  Report,  2015, 
Pakistan is among potential leaders of Islamic finance. 
 Despite  its  impressive  growth,  Islamic  finance  Industry  cannot  be 
complacent as there still prevails huge untapped market. There are some 
challenges  that  the  industry  is  facing  in  order  to  sustain  its  growth 
 Page 2 of 6 
momentum.  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  some  of  these  challenges  with 
respect to the theme of this event.  
 Enabling  supervisory,  regulatory  and  legal  environment,  a  suitable 
accounting  and  auditing  framework  and  supportive  financial  market 
infrastructure  are  all  pre-requisites  for  successful  development  of  the 
industry.  It  is  agreed  that  prudential  supervision  on  banks  is  just  as 
necessary in an Islamic system as in conventional systems, however, the 
supervisory  framework  needs  to  recognize  special  characteristics  of 
Islamic  banks  in  order  to  be  more  effective.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan 
(SBP) being the regulator of banking sector is aware of the significance 
of prudent and effective supervisory framework and remains committed 
to this end. Improving  market development and regulatory regimes are 
continuous  processes  in  the  context  of  changing  industry  needs  and 
overall macroeconomic environment; therefore, we regularly review and 
update our regulatory framework. In this regard one significant example 
of  recent  past  is  the  issuance  of  Shariah  Governance  Framework  for 
Islamic  banking  institutions  which  has  enhanced  the  earlier  issued 
Shariah compliance regulations for the industry. 
 Moreover,  we  are  working  on 
improving  regulatory  and 
legal 
infrastructure by providing a balanced tax regime, enhanced disclosure 
requirements, strengthening of insolvency framework and standardizing 
Page 3 of 6 
 practices.  By  taking  the  advantage  of  having  global  audience  here,  I 
would  suggest  for  a  dialogue  at  global  level  for  harmonization  and 
standardization of practices all across Islamic finance industry.  
 Ladies & Gentlemen 
 Many  researches  including  the  Knowledge,  Attitude  and  Practices  of 
Islamic  banking  in  Pakistan  (KAP)  Study  issued  by  the  State  Bank  of 
Pakistan  indicated  the  concentration  of  demand  for  Islamic  financial 
industry in the category of clients who are not only faith sensitive but are 
also  responsive  to  efficient  operations  and  high  quality  services.  This 
signifies  that  the  strategy  of  Islamic  banking  industry  should  be 
customer centric in its proposition, delivery and service. This demands 
for widening product range, improvement in operational efficiency and 
service quality. I would take this opportunity to urge industry to take full 
advantage  of  these  Centres  of  Excellence  with  particular  respect  to 
product innovation and for conducting research on contemporary issues.  
As a system, Islamic Finance facilitates in stimulating economic activity 
and  entrepreneurship 
towards  promoting  comprehensive  human 
development and addressing poverty and inequality. Under this system, 
not  only  the  prevalence  of  re-distributive  instruments  such  as  zakat, 
waqf  (endowment)  and  sadqaat  (charity)  can  play  vital  role  towards 
broad based development and poverty alleviation but characteristics like 
Page 4 of 6 
 equity  financing  can  also  lead  to  the  same  objective.  Equity  financing 
enables Islamic finance to cater to needs of unconventional but strategic 
sectors like small and medium enterprises (SMEs), agriculture and low 
income housing. However, like many other jurisdictions, the penetration 
of  banking  industry  and  especially  of  Islamic  banks  to  these  sectors  is 
very  low  in  the  country.  Lack  of  skilled  professionals  and  relatively 
young age of the industry is quoted as one among major reasons in this 
regard. Centers for Excellence for Islamic Finance Education have been 
established with the main objective of providing human resource for the 
industry with desired skills and knowledge. Closer interaction between 
industry  and  these  centres  is  critical  in  making  Islamic  Finance  & 
Banking successful in Pakistan. I would also like to encourage industry 
to  make  use  of  technology  especially  to  cater  to  these  sectors  to 
minimize cost. By expanding the range and reach of financial products, 
Islamic  finance  can  help  in  improving  financial  access  and  foster  the 
inclusion  of  those  deprived  of  financial  services  whether  voluntary  or 
involuntary. 
 Ladies & Gentlemen 
While  growth  is  likely  to  continue  at  reasonably  fast  pace,  issues  and 
challenges confronting the industry need attention and ownership on part 
of  all  stakeholders.  The  huge  untapped  potential  market  of  Islamic 
Finance can be harnessed by capitalizing on its distinct characteristics. I 
Page 5 of 6 
 would  encourage  all  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  actively  engage 
themselves  and  be  recognized  as  value  embedded,  efficient  financial 
players committed towards contributing to the real economic growth.  I 
am  optimistic  about  the  future  outlook  of  the  industry  and  events  like 
today’s are helpful in mapping out a strategy for sustainable growth of 
the  industry.  I  assure  the  full  support  and  cooperation  from  the  central 
bank. 
 I wish you successful deliberations during the conference and the best of 
luck for all future endeavors. 
 Thank You. 
     Page 6 of 6 
