  Yves Mersch: Low interest rate environment – an economic, legal and 
social analysis 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the University of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Hachenburg, 27 October 2016. 
 Many true and original comments are being made everywhere in the public debate on the 
low interest rate environment. Unfortunately, what is original is not always true, and what is 
true is not always original. 
To bring some clarity of thought to a complex debate, I will approach the subject from three 
directions: economic, legal and social. 
We are in a phase of weak growth and low interest rates – not only in Europe but in many 
mature economies. Without there being a final consensus, experts are providing a colourful 
bunch of possible explanations for the decline in growth potential over the past few years. 
Regardless  of  whether  the  causes  are  on  the  demand  or  supply  side,  there  is  broad 
agreement that the strong relative surplus of savings – some call it a savings glut  1 – has 
resulted in a worldwide fall in long-term interest rates. 
Impact of low interest rates on the economy 
The low interest rate environment is having an impact on our lives in many different ways. 
Let us start with what you as central bankers of the future will certainly be most interested in: 
the economic challenges for the European Central Bank (ECB). 
Low investment and an increased tendency to save have resulted in a fall in the equilibrium 
interest rate – the price at which savings and investment are in equilibrium. This is important 
because this interest rate plays an important role in the orientation of our monetary policy. 
But more about that later. 
Perhaps  the  greatest  risk  in  such  an  environment  is  that  individual  developments  can 
reinforce  one  other:  the  expectation  of  lower  growth  in  the  future  can  lead  to  lower 
investment and excessive saving today. 
As  I  have  said  before,  it  is  important  to  avoid  a  Ricardian  angst  effect,  meaning  that 
persistently low interest rates result in savers developing a higher tendency to save in order 
to accumulate the same wealth as they would have at higher interest rates.2  
The  fact  that  the  gross  savings  ratio  has  been  rising  again  recently  in  many  euro  are 
countries  –  standing  currently  at  17.5%  in  Germany,  14.4%  in  France  –  demands  our 
attention. 
The International  Monetary  Fund  has  put forward  similar  arguments,  warning recently  of a 
“low growth trap”.3 
Such a development would lead to even lower interest rates, as ever more savings would 
compete for ever fewer investment opportunities. Greater risks of deflation could ensue. 
                                                
1   See B. Bernanke, “The Global Saving Glut and the U.S. Current Account Deficit”, Sandridge Lecture, Virginia 
Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve Board, March 2005. 
2   Mersch,  Y.,  “Unkonventionelle  Geldpolitik  –  eine  ordnungspolitische  Würdigung”,  speech,  Albert-Ludwigs-
Universität Freiburg, 16 June 2016 
3   Lagarde C., We need forceful policies to avoid the low-growth trap, 1 September 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  A  central  bank  cannot  disregard  such  risks.  Our  mandate  is  based  on  maintaining  price 
stability,  which  is  defined  as  an  inflation  rate  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium 
term. If we see this objective at risk, we must act. 
Let us remind ourselves how monetary policy traditionally works. 
In his main work “Geldzins und Güterpreise” (1898), Knut Wicksell investigated the influence 
of  monetary  policy  on  investment  and  savings  behaviour,  as  well  as  on  the  economy.  He 
stated that if the key interest rate is reduced to below the natural interest rate, savings are 
lower  and  consumption  is  higher.  The  natural  rate  is  “the  loan  interest  rate  at  which  this 
reacts in an entirely neutral way to goods prices.”4 
As  a  result,  aggregate  demand  increases.  This  will  raise  the  incentives  for  businesses  to 
invest and they will demand more loans. If the demand for loans is so large that it is not met 
by the existing savings, the gap will be filled by newly created money. 
Interest rate cuts thus lead to loan creation, investment and greater consumption. Investment 
will lead to higher salaries. As a result, the prices of goods will rise more rapidly. Conversely, 
higher interest rates dampen demand and price increases. 
In short: if the market rate is lower than the natural rate, inflation will tend to occur, and when 
the opposite is true, then disinflation or even deflation are likely to result. 
The problem of a lower equilibrium rate is that it limits a central bank’s leeway for supporting 
measures.  If  then  in  such  an  environment  further  economic  shocks  occur  on  the  demand 
side, the central bank has to resort rather to unconventional measures, as it can only lower 
the policy rate to a limited extent. 
The package of measures taken by the ECB reflects this situation. It consists of a mixture of 
conventional and unconventional measures: first of all, we have reduced the key rate to zero, 
and the rate on the deposit facility is even at –0.4%. In addition, we have launched an asset 
purchase  programme  and  offered  long-term  loans  to  banks  at favourable  conditions  which 
reward additional loan provision. The aim of all our measures is to keep market rates below 
their long-term level and thus create an incentive for investment and consumption.5 
Finally, we want to ensure that the inflation rate over the medium term returns to close to the 
2% level. But as long-term interest rates are already at a very low level, market interest rates 
also have to be low and even negative in order to achieve an appropriate level of support. 
In order to assess the effectiveness of our actions, it is important to observe our monetary 
policy measures not in isolation but as a whole: demand for loans is increasing 6 
and  our  staff  estimate that  inflation  in  the  euro area  will  rise  to  1.6%  in  2018.  In  2019  we 
should  largely  achieve  our  aim  of  below,  but  close  to,  2%.  In  other  words,  our  monetary 
policy is working. 
However, we are also aware that our measures are having side effects and are keeping this 
in  mind.  In  particular,  we  are  aware  of  the  fact  that  these  side  effects  are  heightened  the 
longer we maintain our measures. We are therefore keeping a very close eye on the effects 
that the low or negative interest rate environment has on banks, insurers and savers. 
Indeed, banks are complaining that the profitability of their sector is being affected by the low 
interest  rate  environment.  This  is  particularly  the  case  for  banks  whose  business  model 
depends  heavily  on  net  interest  income.  First  of  all,  the  margins  derived  from  maturity 
                                                
4   Wicksell, K., “Geldzins und Güterpreise”, 1898. 
5   Draghi,  M.,  “Addressing  the  causes  of  low  interest  rates”,  speech  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Asian 
Development Bank, Frankfurt, 2 May 2016. 
6   Euro area bank lending survey, ECB, October 2016. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  transformation  are  declining  because  of  the  very  flat  yield  curve.  And  secondly,  deposit-
based refinancing becomes less profitable, mainly because it is difficult to pass on negative 
interest rates to private customers. 
Some banks have started to charge for deposits over €100,000. Ultimately, however, it will 
mean that some banks will have to adapt their business models to operate profitably in the 
long term. 
Particularly in Germany there is a need for action. And this is not primarily due to the low 
interest rate environment. The German banking sector is one of the largest in the euro area, 
but at the same time the most inefficient. The cost-income ratio of German banks stands at 
73%, significantly higher than the rest of the euro area. 
And while other countries reduced the number of their banks by almost a quarter following 
the financial and economic crisis to reduce overcapacity, in Germany it was only 10%. Life 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  which  have  promised  their  customers  a  nominal 
rate of return are also coming under pressure: they are finding it difficult to generate these 
returns in the current market environment. However, we are already seeing that the industry 
is  adapting  and  focusing  somewhat  more  on  unit-linked  products,  and  thus  on  the  more 
dynamic  capital  market.  However,  it  is  not  just  banks,  insurance  companies  and  pension 
funds  that  are  suffering  from  the  low  interest  rates  –  savers  in  general  are  also  affected. 
Private savers are asking whether, in the current environment, it is still worthwhile saving at 
all. In most cases they take the nominal interest rate of their deposits as a benchmark. In so 
doing, what they don’t take account of is the real purchasing power of their savings, namely 
what is left over after deducting the inflation rate. If we consider for instance the real rate of 
return  on  bank  deposits  of  private  households  in  Germany  since  1991,  these  generally 
remained at less than 1%, and sometimes they were even negative. The real overall portfolio 
return  shows  large  fluctuations  over  the  same  period  as  a  result  of  different  factors,  and 
stood just above 1.5% on average between 2008 and early 2015.7 
In recent years, higher valuation gains above all have supported the overall rate of return, to 
which  our  asset  purchase  programme  has also  contributed.  Because the  scope for further 
valuation  gains  in  the  future  is  estimated  to  be  fairly  limited,  analysts  in  Germany  are 
assuming  that  overall  returns  in  the  coming  year  could  decline  or  even  be  negative,  also 
because of higher inflation.8 
These developments suggest that the low-interest phase may lead to a structural change in 
the financial system, which in turn could give rise to new risks. 
Especially in the euro area countries which have been greatly affected by the financial and 
economic  crisis,  lending  by  some  banks  is  still  severely  constrained  by  legacy  assets 
resulting from crisis times. On the search for yield and reinforced by technological progress 
new participants are coming to the fore in these fields. In particular, non-banks, which also 
go  by  the  unfortunate  name  of  shadow  banks,  are  increasingly  active  in  the  traditional 
banking business. At the same time, sound and liquid companies from the real economy are 
entering the intermediation market and providing their customers with services that used to 
be the preserve of banks. 
While developments of this kind need not be a bad thing in principle, we should be vigilant 
and closely monitor the resulting risks. For example, lower lending standards or higher debt 
levels could result. We also have to bear in mind the liquidity risks and interconnectedness of 
the various sectors. 
                                                
7   German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light of the low-interest-rate environment”, Monthly 
Report, Deutsche Bundesbank, October 2015. 
8   Focus Germany: Difficult times for German savers”, Deutsche Bank Research, October 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  Despite  all  these  side  effects, I  would  like  to  emphasise  that the  benefits  of  our  monetary 
policy  so  far  are  prevailing.  But  this  situation  could  change  the  longer  these  special 
circumstances continue. Above all, we need to remember that reactions to interest rate cuts 
into negative territory do not necessarily follow a linear path.9 
Moreover, the longer the measures are in place, the less effective they may become. The 
fact that additional lending in the euro area is losing momentum and that German banks are 
saying  that  the  negative  deposit  facility  rate  is  constraining  lending  volumes  warrants 
attention.10 
We must be vigilant that this development does not spread to other euro area countries. 
So when it comes to deciding what our future monetary policy stance should be, we have to 
take this into account in our cost/benefit analysis. This applies to instruments, volumes and 
horizons. 
Legal implications 
Let me now turn to the legal dimension. I will make a distinction here between private law 
challenges and the legal framework to which the ECB is subject. 
In the financial sector, there are many products whose remuneration is based on a variable 
interest agreement. This means that the interest rates are regularly adapted to the prevailing 
market  interest  rates.  The  legal  position  here  is  very  unclear,  since  in  Europe  such 
agreements are subject not only to private law but also to regulatory requirements, based on 
the implicit assumption that interest rates are always positive in a market economy 
This new phenomenon of negative interest rates creates uncertainty and leaves much room 
for interpretation. This could lead to high legal costs if the need for clarification becomes a 
matter for the courts. 
The legal limits to our monetary policy are, on the other hand, very clearly regulated. The EU 
Treaties  define  the  objective  of  our  monetary  policy  measures:  maintaining  price  stability. 
The  ECB  has  a  large  measure  of  freedom  in  its  choice  of  instruments  to  achieve  this 
objective. However, it must ensure that the instruments chosen are necessary, appropriate 
and  proportionate.  In  addition,  it  must  be  ensured  that  the  European  System  of  Central 
Banks (ESCB) “[acts] in accordance with the principle of an open market economy with free 
competition, favouring an efficient allocation of resources”. 
And finally, we are prohibited from conducting monetary financing. This prohibition protects 
monetary policy against becoming a plaything of fiscal policy. So what may at first sight seem 
to be a restriction is, in reality, a strengthening of our mandate and our credibility. 
All the measures that we have taken over the past few years fall within this legal framework. 
The European Court of Justice and the German Constitutional Court have confirmed that this 
is the case, provided that the self-imposed boundaries are observed. We would do well not to 
shift these boundaries at whim, as this would call the current legal certainty into question. 
In the current environment, this means that we are doing and will continue to do everything 
within our mandate to ensure price stability in the euro area. But it also means that others 
have to play their part in putting the euro area back on a sustainable growth path over the 
long term. And I address these remarks principally to the governments of the Member States 
which need to make progress on the necessary structural reforms in order to make product 
                                                
9   Mersch,  Y.,  “Unkonventionelle  Geldpolitik  –  eine  ordnungspolitische  Würdigung”,  speech,  Albert-Ludwigs-
Universität Freiburg, 16 June 2016. 
10   Euro area bank lending survey, ECB, October 2016. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  and  labour  markets  more  flexible,  to  reduce  red  tape  and  where  possible  to  invest  in 
education, infrastructure and productivity improvements. 
Breeding ground for populist movements 
This brings me to my last point: societal change. Like the low interest rate environment in 
which we as a central bank are operating, the current social dislocation is being caused by, 
among  other  things,  low  growth  and  the  resulting  high  levels  of  unemployment  in  many 
economic areas. The fact that the recent annual meeting of the International Monetary Fund 
and the World Bank addressed this issue earlier this month shows how important this issue 
has become.11 
The solution to these problems does not however lie in the hands of the central banks. As I 
said, we are only responsible for maintaining price stability. Fiscal redistribution, for example, 
for the purpose of a politically motivated correction of income differences has to be decided 
and implemented by democratically elected parliaments. The division of tasks is clear. 
Nevertheless,  the  societal  changes  over  recent  years  have  had  an  impact  on  us,  and  we 
observe these developments with great concern. 
The fact is that many people in our society are finding globalisation difficult. They believe that 
it  only  benefits  large  companies,  some  of  which  pursue  excessive  tax  optimisation  and 
question protection rights for individuals – protection rights for those who are doing their bit 
for society. This sentiment, reinforced by the emotional reactions to the refugee crisis, has 
discredited the notion of open borders. 
In  addition,  growing  uncertainty  about  secure  pension  provisions,  retaining  the  value  of 
savings  and  the  deteriorating  economic  outlook  are  a  breeding  ground  for  populist  parties 
and  movements.  A  growing  number  of  people  are  ready  to  sacrifice  economic  and  social 
freedom for what they believe to be greater security. 
In  such  an  environment,  it  will  be  more  difficult  for  us,  as  a  central  bank,  to  explain  our 
monetary  policy  decisions,  particularly  if  some  groups  feel  discriminated  against  by  our 
decisions, such as savers in Germany. We must take these feelings seriously, although the 
interest rate on savings reflects the state of the economy and is not primarily the result of 
monetary policy measures 
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  prevented  the  euro  area  from  sliding  into  a  new 
recession. In the long term our decisions help to stabilise the value of the currency and thus 
ensure more fairness in society. A Bundesbank study, for example, which considers whether 
and in what way monetary policy influences the distribution of income and wealth, concludes 
that it is highly questionable that the expansionary monetary policy measures taken in recent 
years have increased inequality overall.12 
Let me conclude. 
The current environment of low growth and the resulting low interest rates are already having 
significant economic, legal and social repercussions. Through our monetary policy decisions 
in recent years we have prevented this situation from becoming deflationary. 
Ultimately, however, what matters in the long term is to increase potential economic growth, 
something  which  is  critical  for  the  prosperity  of  future  generations.  But  monetary  policy 
cannot do this. This requires others to act: those who have the power to decide on labour 
                                                
11   Communiqué  of  the  thirty-fourth  meeting  of  the  International  Monetary  and  Financial  Committee 
(IMFC), 8 October 2016 
12   Distributional effects of monetary policy”, Monthly Report, Deutsche Bundesbank, September 2016. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   market reforms, investment incentives and taxation policy. In order to push forward a lasting 
recovery and raise potential economic growth, structural reforms are indispensable. 
The longer we remain in this low interest rate environment, the stronger the side effects of 
our measures will be. So it has to be our shared goal to leave behind this special situation as 
soon as possible in order to minimise potential damage. 
[1]See  B. Bernanke,  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, Federal Reserve 
Board, March 2005. 
[2]Mersch,  Y.,  “Unkonventionelle  Geldpolitik  –  eine  ordnungspolitische Würdigung”,  speech, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, 16 June 2016 
[3]Lagarde C., We need forceful policies to avoid the low-growth trap, 1 September 2016. 
[4]Wicksell, K., “Geldzins und Güterpreise”, 1898. 
[5]Draghi, M., “Addressing the causes of low interest rates”, speech at the annual meeting of 
the Asian Development Bank, Frankfurt, 2 May 2016. 
[6]Euro area bank lending survey, ECB, October 2016. 
[7]“German  households’  saving  and  investment  behaviour  in  light  of  the  low-interest-rate 
environment”, Monthly Report, Deutsche Bundesbank, October 2015. 
[8]“Focus  Germany:  Difficult  times  for  German  savers”,  Deutsche  Bank  Research,  October 
2016. 
[9]Mersch,  Y.,  “Unkonventionelle  Geldpolitik  –  eine  ordnungspolitische Würdigung”,  speech, 
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, 16 June 2016. 
[10] Euro area bank lending survey, ECB, October 2016. 
[11]Communiqué of the thirty-fourth meeting of the International Monetary and Financial 
Committee (IMFC), 8 October 2016 
[12]“Distributional  effects  of  monetary  policy”,  Monthly  Report,  Deutsche  Bundesbank, 
September 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
