Mario Draghi: Stability, equity and monetary policy
Text  of  the  2nd  DIW  Europe  Lecture  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central
Bank, at the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW), Berlin, 25 October 2016.
 The most salient feature of the landscape facing monetary policy today is the low level of nominal
and real yields everywhere. Among the G7, three countries currently have negative yielding 5-
year bonds – Germany, France and Japan – representing 14% of world GDP. And that proportion
rises to 22% if we include bonds yielding less than 1%.
Some observers see this as an artificial state generated by the policies of central banks – and
argue that it threatens not only economic and financial stability, but social equity too. So what I
would  like  to  discuss  in  my  remarks  today  is  why  interest  rates  are  so  low,  and  what  the
implications of those low rates really are. My focus will be in particular on the distributional effects
of monetary policy.
Adjusting monetary policy to a falling natural rate
Low yields are not merely a legacy of the crisis that beset the global economy in 2008. Taking a
wider view, long-term interest rates have been on a downward trend across the global economy
for the better part of the past thirty years (Chart 1).
This trend has certainly had positive drivers, namely the success of central banks in advanced
economies since the 1980s in achieving price stability and in anchoring inflation expectations.
This has reduced both expected inflation and the inflation risk premium embedded in long-term
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
interest rates. The taming of inflation explains a large part of the initial fall in nominal yields in the
1980s and 1990s.
But there are also more worrying drivers. Behind the fall in nominal yields has also been a fall
in real yields. This has been attributed to three main factors.
The first is a secular slowdown in productivity growth across advanced economies, coupled with
pessimistic expectations about growth  potential  in  the  years  to  come,  which  has  reduced  the
expected rate of return on capital. And if that real rate of return falls, it is logical that firms will only
be willing to borrow at lower real rates. This is reflected in lower long-term real yields.
The second factor is a global imbalance of saving and investment, which has led real yields to
fall even relative to growth prospects. On the saving side, a “global saving glut”, produced among
other things by ageing populations, has bid up the price of safe assets at a time when the supply
of those assets has been shrinking, thereby compressing real yields. Factors such as a decline
in the relative price of capital goods have also led to a fall in desired investment.
And this has been exacerbated by the third factor: the debt overhang in the public and private
sectors  bequeathed  by  the  financial  crisis.  This  has  further  raised  saving  –  as  all  sectors
deleverage – and depressed investment and consumption.
As  a  consequence,  the  natural  rate  of  interest  –  which  is  the  real  interest  rate  that  balances
desired saving and planned investment, at a level consistent with output being at potential and
stable prices – has fallen over time, to very low or even negative levels. And whatever the drivers
behind  this,  central  banks  have  to  take  it  into  account  and  cut  their  policy  rates  to
commensurately lower levels.
Indeed, the way standard monetary policy works is to steer real short-term interest rates so that
they “shadow” the natural rate, which keeps the economy in balance and prices stable. When
inflation is below our objective and there is a negative output gap, monetary policy has to bring
real rates below the natural rate to provide enough demand support. And when inflation is above
our objective and the output gap is positive, the reverse is true.
If central banks did not act in this way – that is, if they did not lower short-term rates in tandem
with the natural rate – market rates would be too high relative to the real returns in the economy,
and investing would become unattractive. The economy would therefore be pushed away from
full capacity and price stability. By contrast, by holding market rates below the real rate of return,
we  encourage  the  investment  and  consumption  that  is  needed  to  bring  the  economy  back  to
potential. 
There are of course limits to how far central banks can shadow a falling natural rate with policy
interest rates, since there is a lower bound for interest rates set by the existence of cash. But
even when monetary policy approaches this point, central banks can still stimulate the economy
through the same mechanism.
This is because we can still influence the whole constellation of market interest rates and asset
prices  in  the  economy  that  determine  real  investment  and  consumption  decisions.  Through
forward guidance we can flatten the risk-free curve. Through asset purchases we can compress
additional  risk  premia,  both  directly  in  the  markets  where  we  intervene  and  indirectly  through
portfolio  rebalancing. And  through  long-term  loans  to  banks  we  can  bring  down  bank  lending
rates for firms and households.
This is precisely why the ECB has adopted a series of new unconventional measures since June
2014:  to  continue  providing  uplift  to  the  economy  even  when  policy  rates  approach  the  lower
bound. These unconventional measures follow exactly the same logic as the conventional ones:
they make financing conditions more expansionary relative to the natural rate, and in doing so
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
bring the economy back to balance and inflation back to our objective.
The distributional effects of monetary policy
But while our monetary policy, seen from this perspective, is simply a continuity of what central
banks  have  always  done  –  and  should  always  do  –  we  know  it  has  raised  concerns.  Those
concerns have focused in particular on the side effects of monetary policy and its distributional
consequences: between savers and borrowers, weaker and stronger countries, the rich and the
poor.
The question, in short, is whether there is a trade-off between stability and equity. But to answer
this,  we  have  to  make  a  distinction  between  the financial  andmacroeconomic  effects  of  our
policy, which arise over different time frames.
Over the medium-term, it is unambiguous that monetary policy has positive distributional effects
through macroeconomic channels.
Most importantly, it reduces unemployment, which benefits poorer households the most. For this
reason, research from the US and UK has shown that monetary policy actions that boost the
economy  typically  reduce  income  inequality  over  the  cycle.   And  a  faster  return  to  full
employment  should  in  turn  contribute  to  lower futureinequality,  since  we  know  that  if
unemployment  lasts  too  long  it  can  lead  to  permanent  income  losses  through  “labour  market
scarring”.
1
Securing  price  stability  over  the  medium-term  also  supports  intergenerational  equality  by
preventing arbitrary redistribution due to unexpected changes in prices. Indeed, data for the euro
area  suggests  that  unexpected  inflation  undershooting  results  in  a  redistribution  of  nominal
wealth from younger to older households, since the young are net debtors while the old are net
2
creditors.
And both savers and borrowers ultimately benefit from an effective monetary policy too, since it
increases returns on all types of financial and real assets, including deposits. Certainly, some
savers  might  suffer  from  a  temporary  period  of  low  interest  rates,  especially  if  they  rely  on
interest  income  and  cannot  smooth  their  consumption  through  credit.  But  whatever  financial
assets savers hold, in the final analysis their return always depends on the growth rate of the
economy.
It is therefore in savers’ interest as well that growth does not remain subpar for any longer than is
necessary,  and  hence  that  we  avoid  any  permanent  damage  to  potential  growth  through  so-
called  “hysteresis  effects”.  Otherwise,  financial  returns  for  savers  would  end  up  permanently
lower over time.
It  is  nonetheless  conceivable  that,  in  the  short-term,  monetary  policy  might  have  undesirable
distributional effects through financial channels. Monetary policy directly affects asset prices and
interest rates, which redistributes wealth and income among different economies, sectors and
households. This is the case for all monetary policies – indeed, it is one of the channels through
which monetary policy works.
What  some  fear,  however,  is  that  our  current  policy  of  very  low  interest  rates  and  asset
purchases  might  exacerbate  and  worsen  those  distributional  effects.  One  concern  is  that  it
penalises  poor  savers  who  rely  on  fixed  income,  while  benefitting  rich  asset  holders  through
capital gains. Another is that monetary policy redistributes income from stronger countries like
Germany to more vulnerable ones.
So the question we need to examine is two-fold: in the short-term, are the financial effects of
monetary policy creating regressive or unwelcome distributional effects in the euro area and in
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
individual countries? And over the medium-term, how is that being offset by the macroeconomic
effects of our measures?
This is ultimately an empirical question. So let us take a few moments to look at the effects our
monetary policy measures have had – and in particular the unconventional measures we have
taken since June 2014.
A closer look at the financial effects
Monetary  policy  has  two  types  of  financial  effects:  on income  and  on wealth.  First,  when  the
central bank cuts rates or buys assets, there is an inevitable redistribution of financial income
across  economies,  and  among  different  sectors  and  households  within  those  economies,
according to their net financial position.
The  component  of  financial  income  that  monetary  policy  affects  most  directly  is  net  interest
income, so it is useful to look at how the net interest income of different countries and sectors
has been affected by falling interest rates during the crisis. We can estimate this by looking at
3
how the return on the existing stock of assets and liabilities has changed during the crisis.
What we find is that for large countries such as Spain and Germany the effect of low interest
rates  on  the  total  economy  has  been  positive  –  that  is,  they  have  received  more  in  interest
earnings than they have disbursed in interest payments. The same is also true of the euro area
vis-à-vis the rest of the world (Chart 2).
For  Germany  this  result  reflects  two  factors.  First,  the  fact  that,  in  spite  of  its  large  net
international  investment  position,  the  economy’s  stock  of  fixed-income  liabilities  has  closely
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
tracked its stock of fixed income assets. And second, the fact that the drop in interest rates on
those liabilities has been significantly larger than on its assets, since Germany has acted as both
a  safe  haven  for  investors  during  periods  of  financial  stress,  and  as  the  premier  safe-asset
4
provider in the euro area in the context of the shrinking supply of AAA-rated government debt.
It is not possible to say definitively from the data whether these results are due to shifts in interest
income within the euro area or vis-à-vis the rest of the world. But from what we can tell, there are
no signs that low interest rates are shifting financial income away from stronger countries and
towards weaker ones, as is often claimed.
In fact, redistribution of financial income within countries – that is, across sectors – seems much
more important than across countries.
For Germany, we can see that the government and non-financial corporations have made large
windfall gains. The household sector, often thought to have lost out the most in Germany due to
its large net saver position, has in fact only recorded a mild loss in net interest income, since the
household  borrowing  rate  has  fallen  more  than  the  lending  rate.  And  if  one  runs  the  same
exercise from mid-2014, when our credit easing began, the household sector actually accrues a
slight gain.
In Germany the financial sector has been most affected. But this has been driven more by the
earlier fall in interest rates in 2008 than the impact of our measures since mid-2014 – an issue I
will return to later.
Such  sectoral  aggregates  will  nevertheless  always  mask  a  wide  dispersion  of  effects  across
households. This is not straightforward to measure, but we can make some inferences from the
Eurosystem’s Household Finance and Consumption Survey. Two waves have taken place so far
– in 2010 and 2014 – which gives us the possibility to see how net financial income  has shifted
between  different  households  as  interest  rates  have  fallen.  In  this  period  2-year  euro  area
benchmark bond yields fell by 130 basis points and 10-year bonds by 110 basis points.
5
What  we  see  is  that,  for  the  whole  euro  area ,  net  financial  income  as  a  fraction  of  total
household income fell slightly, which is consistent with the sectoral picture we saw above. But
behind this was some progressive distribution across net wealth groups. The households with
the lowest net wealth had an unchanged position, since their debt payments are higher than their
financial income. And the wealthiest households lost the most, as their financial income is much
higher than their debt. The same story was broadly true if we look at Germany (Chart 3).
6
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Certainly, within these groups there may still be savers who are poor in terms of income who are
losing out significantly from low rates. But we do not see evidence that those who are suffering
most are poor in terms of wealth. In fact, what these data suggest is that savers and the wealthy
are, on the whole, the same people.
Still, the distributional picture also has to take into account the second type of effects – wealth
effects – which capture the impact of monetary policy on the value of financial assets. Are those
effects accruing mainly to the rich and so worsening wealth inequality? Here again the Household
Finance and Consumption Survey allows us to make some suggestions.
What we see is that euro area households’ that hold financial assets – stocks and bonds – are
strongly concentrated in the top end of net wealth distribution. As such, only a fairly small subset
of the population benefits from capital gains in bond and equity markets; three quarters of the
population fail to benefit at all. Home ownership, by contrast, is more evenly distributed across
wealth groups. The median household thus benefits much more from housing price increases
(Chart 4).
As a result, wealth inequality tends to increase when in particular equity prices rise, but tends to
fall when housing prices go up – but with heterogeneity across countries. Inequality falls more in
those with high home ownership rates, while in countries with low ownership rates the effect is
weaker.7
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
So what is the situation in the euro area today? In this case the period we are most interested in
is the one since mid-2014, as it is mostly asset purchases that are believed to create wealth
inequality through asset price inflation. And while the data does not cover that period, we can look
at the wealth held by households in mid-2014, and apply to that the movements of stocks, bonds
8
and house prices since.
What  we  observe  is  that,  for  the  euro  area ,  there  has  been  an  absolute  gain:  all  net  wealth
groups have seen their wealth increase as a share of their mean income. This is because house
prices within the euro area went up over the period, while bond prices on average rose modestly
and  stock  prices  on  average  actually  fell.  Higher  net  wealth  households,  however,  benefitted
more in relative terms (Chart 5).
9
This result is partly driven by the situation in Germany, where home ownership is comparatively
low and hence the median household benefits less from rising house prices. Still, over half of
German  households  have  seen  net  wealth  increase  over  the  past  two  years. And  in  Spain,
households  all  along  the  wealth  distribution  have  benefitted  given  the  high  rate  of  home
ownership.
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
So overall, we do see some signs that wealthier households have benefitted relatively more from
increases in asset prices. But those benefits have also been broad-based, meaning the effect on
distribution is unlikely to have been large.
And  it  is  important  to  remember  that,  to  the  degree  that  monetary  policy  has  boosted  asset
prices, it has often been correcting previous falls in asset prices due to the crisis. In this sense,
monetary  policy  has  not  been  distorting  the  distribution  of  wealth,  but  rather  restoring  the
distribution of the status quo ante.
Bringing in the macroeconomic effects
In any case, a balanced assessment of the distributional effects of monetary policy cannot focus
only on its short-run financial effects. It must also include its more slow-moving macroeconomic
effects.
Even if low interest rates and high asset prices do worsen short-run inequality, they have positive
distributional effects over the medium term. They lead to stronger aggregate demand, a faster fall
in unemployment and medium-term price stability, all of which reduce inequality in the ways I
described above.
The  income  gains  support  firms’  profitability,  which  ultimately  sustains  higher  investment.
Redistribution of income across households is typically expansionary as well, given that liquidity
constrained  households  have  a  higher  marginal  propensity  to  consume  than  more  affluent
ones.
 And  the  wealth  effects  of  our  policy  –  which  have  been  spread  across  all  net  wealth
groups – boost the economy to the degree that households are able to convert asset price rises
into consumption.
10
Alongside this are also the expansionary effects that monetary policy creates through its other
channels:  the  exchange  rate  channel  and  intertemporal  substitution.  In  particular,  low  interest
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates  encourage  households  to  bring  forward  durable  consumption,  and  firms’  investment,
through credit.
Looking at the euro area today, what is immediately clear is that since our credit easing package
in June 2014, we have been benefitting from a more broad-based and domestic demand-driven
recovery. This was not the case during the 2009–11 recovery which relied heavily on net exports
(Chart 6). And as the economy has strengthened we have indeed seen the unemployment rate
falling significantly.
Pinning down the precise contribution of monetary policy to this is challenging, but we can see
that since June 2014  our  measures  have  triggered  a  downward  convergence  of  bank  lending
rates and an upward trend in credit volumes, with borrowing costs in vulnerable countries now
approaching  those  enjoyed  by  Germany  and  other  stronger  economies.  Lending  terms  and
conditions for SMEs have also converged rapidly towards those of large-scale borrowers.
This has been driven in part by the reversal of the unwarranted financial fragmentation we saw in
2011–12. But it also reflects a second factor: our measures have helped break a vicious circle
between bank lending rates, macroeconomic outcomes and credit risk perceptions in vulnerable
countries. When the economy was weak, banks tended to increase lending rates because they
feared  a  higher  probability  of  default.  That  choked  off  credit  demand,  worsened  the  macro
situation and increased delinquencies. Those high lending rates were then validated ex post.
But starting in the summer of 2014, our measures began to increase competitive pressures on
banks to reduce lending margins. Bank credit therefore became more affordable, which in turn
stoked  higher  credit  demand. And  as  that  has  fed  through  into  a  better  macro  picture,  loan
delinquencies have fallen. Accordingly, bank lending rates have fallen and the vicious circle has
turned virtuous.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
So our credit easing has helped reverse a negative distributional effect in terms of access to
finance.  And  that  is  now  feeding  into  aggregate  demand  through  the  most  interest-sensitive
demand components – consumption of durables and investment.
After  several  years  of  contraction,  consumption  of  durable  goods  in  the  euro  area  has  been
rebounding, growing at rates not seen since before the crisis. Monetary policy has been a key
driver. In particular in countries where credit was previously very tight, there is a close correlation
between  durables  consumption  and  the  improvement  in  credit  conditions  as  recorded  in  the
Bank Lending Survey.
The  contribution  of  investment  to  growth  has  also  been  steadily  rising.  The  sensitivity  of
investment to borrowing conditions seems, it is true, to be lower than it was before the crisis. Yet
monetary policy still appears to be having an endogenous impact on investment via aggregate
demand. Its growth path is relatively well explained by lagged but expected growth – the so-called
accelerator effect.
11
And though both components have grown most robustly in vulnerable economies, this has had
an expansionary effect on core countries as well.
As export demand has fallen off in emerging markets since early 2015, the recovery in those
economies has provided a cushion for exporters in core economies. In Germany, for instance,
intra-euro area exports rose throughout 2015 as exports to the rest of the world slowed, in part
offsetting that global slowdown. Increasing domestic demand in vulnerable euro area countries
absorbed a sizeable share of this slack in foreign demand (Chart 8).
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
And even vis-à-vis the rest of the world, our monetary policy has helped insulate the euro area
from the steep slowdown in world trade. In fact, net exports have been buffered in 2015–16 by
the lagged effect of previous exchange rate depreciation, with euro area exporters able to regain
market shares. The divergence between the monetary policy path of the euro area and that of
other major economies was one factor supporting this.
So we have every reason to believe that, with the impetus provided by our recent measures,
monetary policy is working as expected: by boosting consumption and investment and creating
jobs, which is always socially progressive.
And  importantly,  we  do  not  see  any  signs  of  another  claim  one  sometimes  hears:  that  low
interest rates on savings are causing households to increase saving to maintain their lifecycle
saving targets, thereby causing our policy to backfire. Since June 2014, there has only been a
meaningful rise in the household saving rate in one large economy, Germany. But if one looks
more closely, this is largely explained by an increase in residential investment among German
households financed out of current income. The net lending position of German households has
barely risen.
In  other  words,  decisions  by  households  are  supporting  the  macroeconomic  objectives  of
monetary policy, not countering it. This is also confirmed by survey evidence: the Bundesbank
has found that just 1% of German households are saving more because of low interest rates.
Raising the natural rate and returning to normal
12
So if we net out the effects of the financial and macroeconomic channels, I find it hard to reach
the conclusion that, over a longer time frame, the outcome of our policies has been – or will be –
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
to redistribute wealth and income in an unfair or unequal way. That is certainly not true across
countries, and there is not much to suggest it is true within countries either.
What is more, as a recent study by the Bundesbank points out
, those who claim that monetary
policy worsens inequality typically do not consider the counterfactual. They take the distributional
situation  as  given,  but 
the
macroeconomic situation was at risk of changing. In fact, according to ECB simulations, euro
area  GDP  would  be  cumulatively  at  least  1.5%  lower  between  2015  and  2018  without  the
expansionary  policy  measures  we  have  adopted  since  mid-2014,  with  worse  outcomes  for
inflation too.
is  acting  precisely  because 
that  monetary  policy 
forget 
13
Yet all this does not mean that very low interest rates are costless. We are aware of the other
distortions  that  can  result  from  them.  Indeed,  we  would  certainly  prefer  not  to  have  to  keep
interest rates at such low levels for an excessively long time, since the unwelcome side-effects
may accumulate over time.
The financial sector provides a good example. As I showed above, its net interest income has
declined. And that is not necessarily a problem right now, since – at least for banks – lower net
interest margins are being partly offset by higher asset valuations and a more robust recovery,
which in turn creates further demand for bank credit and reduces loan delinquencies.
But as very low interest rates persist, some of these offsetting factors, such as the capital gains
will diminish, whereas the drawbacks will remain in place – for instance due to the downward
stickiness of interest rates on retail deposits.
Therefore we should seek to create the conditions for a return of interest rates to higher levels.
And this requires two types of actions.
The first are actions to bring output to potential without undue delay, so that inflation can return
sustainably to our objective and policy interest rates can rise back to the natural rate. That is the
best, indeed the only way for monetary policy to normalise. And this is why, looking ahead, we
remain committed to preserving the very substantial degree of monetary accommodation which
is necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation towards levels below, but close to,
2% over the medium term.
But  it  is  also  clear  that  the  more  other  macroeconomic  stabilisation  policies  work  alongside
monetary policy, the faster the closure of the output gap will be.
Still, returning to potential will not solve the fundamental problem we started with: the fact that the
natural interest rate is itself very low. It is this that is ultimately driving interest rates down near
zero. So the second type of actions we need, if we want interest rates at higher levels, are those
that can raise the natural rate. And this requires a focus on policies that can address the root
causes of excess saving over investment – in other words, fiscal and structural policies.
High saving can be partially mitigated by public policies, but there is only so much that one can
do to reduce saving in an ageing society like the euro area. Thus more important is a focus on
raising investment demand.
This hinges crucially on structural reforms to reverse the declining trend in productivity. And it
depends  on  governments  enacting  investment-friendly  tax  and  regulatory  policies,  as  well  as
reversing  the  stagnation  in  the  public  capital  stock  we  have  seen  since  the  crisis  with
investments aimed at raising productivity.
In short, monetary policy is today protecting the interests of savers by ensuring a faster closing of
the output gap and preserving the economic potential on which savers’ income depends. But for
real  returns  to  rise  further  still,  other  policies  need  to  buttress  monetary  policy  by  raising
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment and productivity.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
For an overview see Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report (2016), “Distributional Effects of Monetary Policy”,
September 2016.
Adam, Klaus and Junyi Zhu (2014), “Price Level Changes and the Redistribution of Nominal Wealth Across the
Euro Area”, Journal of the European Economic Association, Vol. 14, pp 871–906.
The chart reflects the changes from Q2-2008 to Q2-2016, and from Q2-2014 to Q2-2016, in the 4-quarter moving
average of net interest income. To exclude the impact of variations in the stocks of assets/liabilities on net
interest income, the changes are computed by applying the asset and liability rates of return on the notional
asset and liability stocks in Q1-2008 and Q1-2014, respectively. Changes in net interest income are expressed
as percentages of GDP, with GDP fixed at the respective starting points.
See Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Hélène Rey (2016), “Real Interest Rates, Imbalances and the Curse of
Regional Safe Asset Providers at the Zero Lower Bound”, NBER Working Paper No. 22618.
Net financial income is household’s income on financial investments (interest and dividends) net of their total
debt payments.
Excluding France as second wave data on financial income is not yet available.
Adam, Klaus and Panagiota Tzamourani (2016), “Distributional Consequences of Asset Price Inflation in the
Euro Area”, European Economic Review, Vol 89, pp. 172–192.
The simulation assumes the changes in wealth components between mid-2014 and mid-2016 are driven by
country-specific developments in house prices, stock prices and bond prices. It then backs out the implications
for  changes  in  net  wealth  of  individual  households,  which  depend  on  the  share  of  each  asset  that  each
household holds. 
Including France.
See  Jappelli,  Tullio  and  Luigi  Pistaferri  (2014),  “Fiscal  Policy  and  MPC  heterogeneity”, American  Economic
Journal: Macroeconomics, Vo. 6, No. 4, October 2014.
See Bussière, M., L. Ferrara and J. Milovich (2015), “Explaining the recent slump in investment: the role of
expected demand and uncertainty”, Banque de France Working Paper No. 571, September 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report (2015), “German households’ saving and investment behaviour in light
of the low-interest-rate environment”, October 2015.
Deutsche Bundesbank Monthly Report (2016), op. cit.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
