  Peter Praet: Monetary policy and the euro area banking system 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the VII Financial Forum, organised by Expansión and KPMG, Madrid, 4 October 2016. 
 I would like to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla for his contributions to this speech and Nadya Jahn for valuable inputs. 
The euro area banking system today is stronger than when it entered the financial crisis. 
At aggregate level, risk-weighted capital ratios have steadily improved – the median Tier 1 
ratio of euro area banks almost doubled since 2008 – while banks have reduced assets and 
raised  equity,  leading  to  a  marked  decline  in  leverage.  Resilience  has  been  further 
buttressed by a reduced relative reliance on wholesale funding – which proved particularly 
run-prone in the early stages of the financial crisis – in favour of a greater share of deposits 
in their liabilities. 
But building resilience has been a long and hard-earned process, bolstered by public support 
– in the form of capital support and guarantees – at its peak amounting to as much as one 
and  a  half  trillion  euro  in  gross  terms.  And  though  the  sector  is  now  stronger  and  more 
stable, it is also facing major challenges in terms of earnings capacity and profitability. 
The  return  on  equity  of  significant  euro  area  banking  groups  still  remains  well  below  their 
cost  of  capital.  Market  valuations  point  to  an  expectation  of  subdued  earnings  prospects 
going  forward.  And  further  signs  of  weakness  have  emerged  in  response  to  the  different 
episodes of financial market turbulence since the start of 2016, which saw euro area banks’ 
price-to-book ratios particularly hard-hit. 
This troubling picture can be explained by four interlinked challenges. 
The  first  is  the  legacy  challenge  bequeathed  by  the  euro  area’s  twin  crisis,  in  which  the 
financial crisis morphed into a sovereign debt crisis and a double-dip recession. This has left 
a legacy of persistently high levels of non-performing loans (NPLs) in parts of the euro area, 
which  drive  down  bank  profitability  through  loan-loss  provisioning  charges.  NPLs  also 
hamper  the  contribution  of  the  banking  system  to  the  recovery  in  parts  of  the  euro  area 
economy, which in turn leads to weaker macroeconomic outcomes and still slower balance 
sheet  repair.  Question  marks  over  how  and  when  these  NPLs  will  be  resolved  do  little  to 
improve the situation. 
Second  is  the  cyclical  challenge  posed  by  the  low  growth  and  low  inflation  environment, 
which  go  along  with  lower  levels  of  policy  interest  rates.  So far,  low  rates  have  not  had  a 
marked  effect  on  bank  profitability,  with  net  income  actually  increasing  between  2014  and 
2015.  But  with  interest  rates  expected  to  remain  “low  for  long”  in  the  euro  area,  market 
analysts expect a significant reduction in (already low) returns on equity over the next five 
years,  especially  for  banks  whose  business  models  are  strongly  reliant  on  maturity 
transformation.  The  relatively  subdued  growth  outlook  is  also  expected  to  weigh  on  credit 
demand and hence income growth from loan volumes. 
Structural challenges are a third factor in weak profitability. Though the efficiency of the euro 
area  banking  sector  has  improved  since  the  crisis,  with  median  cost-to-income  ratios 
declining  by  almost  10  percentage  points,  operating  costs  remain  high  in  some  national 
banking systems, especially those which are characterised by overcapacity. Banks with high 
fixed  costs  are  also  facing  increasing  competitive  pressures  from  non-banks  and  new 
FinTech  entrants.  While  there  has  been  some  industry  consolidation  in  response,  it  has 
largely  taken  place  within  countries,  meaning  higher  efficiency  has  come  at  the  cost  of 
increased national concentration. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Further rationalisation of branches and consolidation of entities appears necessary. But in a 
truly integrated euro area banking sector, what I would ideally like to see – as a medium-term 
goal  –  is  such  consolidation  to  go  hand-in-hand  with  greater  geographical  diversification. 
Which is to say: banks achieving economies of scope and scale from cross-border mergers 
and  acquisitions,  while  also  deepening  macroeconomic  risk-sharing  by  diversifying  country 
risks. This is, in my view, the litmus test of whether we have completed a genuine banking 
union. 
Fourth are regulatory challenges. The increased resilience of the euro area banking sector is 
in large part down to the regulatory agenda since the crisis, but it is hard to deny that this 
agenda  has  also  created  some  uncertainties,  for  instance  over  steady  state  capital  levels, 
which are reflected in bank share prices. Regulatory constraints have had a direct impact on 
earnings capacity too, especially in the investment banking space. Revenue generation from 
fee, commission and trading income has fallen significantly as a percentage of assets since 
the  crisis.  This  is  a  welcome  and  intended  consequence  of  restrictions  on  excessive  risk-
taking, but comes at a time when interest income is also being compressed. 
The slump in bank profitability is not, per se, a concern for policymakers. The banking sector 
needs to adjust to a changing market environment just like any other economic sector. But – 
as  I  will  explain  in  today’s  speech  –  the  struggles  of  banks  are  not  innocuous  from  a 
monetary  policy  perspective  given  their  integral  role  for  monetary  policy  transmission  and 
macroeconomic  performance  more  generally.  And  the  newfound  financial  resilience  of  the 
euro area banking system can only be sustained if it is accompanied by improved financial 
performance in the future. 
So the situation needs close attention and the risks must be carefully monitored. But in my 
view,  the  path  towards  a  more  healthy  and  sustainable  sector  involves  a  clear  division  of 
responsibilities. 
Monetary  policy  will  continue  its  accommodative  stance  until  inflation  returns  to  our  aim, 
which  will  remove  some  of  the  cyclical  drivers  of  weak  profitability  linked  to  disappointing 
nominal growth. This will require interest rates to remain low for an extended period of time. 
As  such,  it  is  urgent  that,  in  parallel,  steps  be  taken  to  address  the  other  challenges 
depressing  profitability:  tackling  legacy  NPLs,  responding  to  structural  change,  providing 
regulatory  clarity.  Such  a  comprehensive  approach  means  both  private  actors  and  other 
policymakers must play their part. 
Let me address these points in greater detail. 
Monetary policy effectiveness and the state of the domestic banking system 
In a predominantly bank-intermediated financial system like the euro area’s, monetary policy-
makers  have  an  inherent  interest  in  the  position  and  prospects  of  the  domestic  banking 
system. This interest has three dimensions: the efficiency of monetary policy transmission; 
economic shock-absorption; and longer-term macroeconomic performance. 
Efficiency of transmission relates to the capacity of banks to pass on monetary impulses to 
the real economy, which is an essential pre-requisite for central banks to influence cyclical 
conditions  and  ensure  price  stability  over  a  medium-term  horizon.  Bank-enabled  economic 
shock-absorption  relates  to  the  capacity  of  banks  to  accommodate  temporary  financing 
needs  of  firms,  households,  and  the  public  sector,  thereby  helping  them  follow  smoother 
spending and investment profiles and, in turn, mitigating the macroeconomic fluctuations that 
follow from a given shock. Finally, the contribution of banks to longer-term macroeconomic 
performance stems from their capacity to allocate capital to the economic sectors deploying it 
most  productively  and  to  facilitate  savings  and  investment  decisions  by  bridging  the  gap 
between current and future spending decisions. 
In other words: a healthy banking system makes it easier for central banks to respond to a 
given shock; it reduces the overall impact that this shock would exert on the economy, even 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  absent  a  monetary  response;  and  it  improves  the  steady  state  to  which  the  economy 
gravitates when the shock has dissipated. 
These  critical  interactions  between  monetary  policy  and  the  banking  system  were  already 
well-understood prior to the crisis. But, during the crisis, their relevance became palpable as 
the  banking  system  failed  as  a  conduit  of  monetary  policy  impulses,  transformed  from  a 
shock-absorber  into  a  shock-propagator,  and  –  bogged  down  by  necessary  but  painful 
balance sheet repair efforts – has not made a decisive contribution to the recovery. 
This  crucial  role  of  the  banking  system  explains  why  many  of  our  monetary  policy 
interventions  during  the  crisis  were  aimed  at  repairing  the  bank  lending  channel.  Those 
interventions can be divided into three phases. 
from 
Bank-based monetary policy transmission during the crisis 
The  first  phase,  which  started  in  the  summer  of  2007  and  escalated  after  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers a year later, consisted in a systemic liquidity run at global level triggered by 
lack  of  transparency  on  the  amount  and  distribution  of  risks  related  to  certain  types  of 
privately issued securities. The resultant seizing-up of the interbank market spilt-over to the 
entire financial system and forced banks and other institutions into a fire-sale of assets so as 
to stay current on their short-term liabilities. 
The  ECB  confronted  this  situation  by  elastically  accommodating  the  liquidity  needs  of  the 
banking  sector  and  by  lengthening  the  duration  of  its  refinancing  operations.  Thus,  we 
avoided  that  the  liquidity  shock  morphed  into  a  self-fulfilling  solvency  crisis,  which  would 
have  induced  a  severe  monetary  contraction  when  recessionary  forces  instead  called  for 
forceful monetary expansion. 
The  second  phase  of  the  crisis,  which  occurred  in  2011–2012,  had  a  specific  euro  area 
connotation,  but  followed  a  similar  script  as  the  first  –  only  that  the  shift  in  market 
perceptions, this time, did not pertain to privately issued paper but to the debt instruments of 
certain  euro  area  governments.  The  risks  originating 
the 
corresponding challenges to monetary policy transmission were no less  severe than those 
from  the  first  phase  of  the  crisis.  In  fact,  the  consequence  for  the  broader  economy  was, 
again, an acute failure of monetary policy transmission, with countries most in need of further 
monetary policy accommodation instead facing deteriorating financing conditions. 
And, again, the ECB responded: we adopted OMT, a commitment to stamp out unwarranted 
break-up  risk  premia  from  the  price  of  the  securities  issued  by  stressed  jurisdictions 
conditional on economic adjustment. 
But the confidence crisis had already left a harmful heritage in transmission, which heralded 
a third phase of crisis: banks in a vast portion of the euro area had lost their willingness and 
capacity  to  keep  credit  flowing  to  the  real  economy.  Borrowing  conditions  were  being 
tightened precisely at the time when the economy was entering a new slump. This required 
further  flexibility  in  our  policy  framework,  articulated  in  three  main  instruments:  a  series  of 
targeted long-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), a negative interest rate policy, and an 
asset purchase programme including private and public securities. 
The TLTROs offer banks long-term refinancing conditional on their using the funds to expand 
lending.  The  asset  purchase  program,  together  with  a  negative  rate  applied  on  excess 
reserves, quickens the pace at which banks and other lenders are returning to economic risk-
taking.  Lower  term  spreads  on  public  securities  encourage  a  shift  in  the  composition  of 
banks’ portfolios toward other types of exposures with a higher risk-adjusted return. Finally, 
the tax on electronic reserves discourages liquidity hoarding and speeds up the process of 
asset reallocation. 
As  a  result  of  this  series  of  measures,  we  are  now  seeing  the  bank-based  transmission 
process working more smoothly. Banks have responded to the combination of measures by 
this  situation  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  slashing their lending rates and shifting out their loan supply schedule. Lending volumes are 
picking  up  gradually.  And  lending  rates  are  easing  considerably:  between  June  2014  and 
July 2016, the composite cost-of-borrowing indicator for new corporate loans fell by 95 basis 
points in the euro area and up to 150 basis points in stressed countries. 
There is no doubt that this contributed decisively to the ongoing cyclical recovery – indeed, 
our  measures  have  been  one  of  the  main  factors  behind  it.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  a 
robust cyclical recovery benefits all sectors of the economy. 
But a question that has arisen in some quarters is whether, at some point, the extraordinary 
steps  we  have  taken  to  sustain  bank-based  transmission  may  have  negative  side  effects. 
Certainly, in the initial phases of the crisis, the side effects were positive from the perspective 
of  banks,  as  they  were  partly  shielded  from  the  consequences  of  often  misguided  and 
imprudent business models they had adopted prior to the crisis. 
In recent times, however, several observers have instead emphasised another type of side 
effect  of  our  measures,  namely  its  negative  impact  on  bank  profitability.  In  fact,  several 
market participants have laid much of the blame for the prevailing bank profitability concerns 
on  monetary  policy,  in  particular  stressing  the  negative  effects  of  low  interest  rates  on  net 
interest margins. But this perspective is partial. 
The interaction of monetary policy and bank profitability 
Net interest margins have indeed declined in recent years in the wake of low policy interest 
rates.  But  monetary  policy  also  affects  bank  profitability  through  various  other  channels. 
Lower interest income has been partly offset by our measures leading to reductions in bank 
funding  costs,  higher  asset  valuations,  and  a  more  robust  recovery–  which  in  turn  creates 
further demand for bank credit and improves the capacity of borrowers to service their debts. 
Accounting  for  these  factors,  we  do  not  see  strong  evidence  that  bank  profitability,  on 
aggregate, has been suffering from our measures at this stage. 
However,  the  longer  the  current  low-interest  rate  environment  persists,  the  greater  the 
challenges  for  bank  profitability  will  be.  This  is  because  many  of  the  benefits  of  monetary 
accommodation for bank balance sheets, such as the concomitant capital gains, are unlikely 
to occur on a continuous basis, whereas the drawbacks are likely to remain in place – for 
instance due to the downward stickiness of interest rates on retail deposits, which implies a 
squeeze in net interest margins if lending rates and yields were to remain at their current low 
levels  for  long.  And  the  underperformance  of  bank  equities  may  actually  be  testament  to 
such concerns. 
Of course, weak bank equity markets are not, in the first instance, a public policy concern. 
But they may become such concern if they persist and morph into a systemic phenomenon. 
The  reason  is  that  the  newfound  financial  resilience  of  the  euro  area  banking  system  can 
only  be  sustained  if  it  is  accompanied  by  improved  financial  performance  in  the  future. 
Otherwise,  banks  will  struggle  to  generate  capital  organically  or  raise  equity  in  capital 
markets, which is the cushion that allows banks to weather adverse shocks, retain or even 
increase their exposure to the real economy, respond to potential regulatory changes, and 
attract future investors. 
And, besides the dampening effects on their own financial resilience, this scenario would put 
a  dent  into  the  contribution  that  banks  can  make  to  the  economic  recovery:  deteriorating 
earnings prospects weigh on bank equities, which in turn raises the cost banks face when 
raising  equity  in  the  market.  While  this  increase  in  the  cost  of  equity  may  initially  be 
compensated by the substitution of equity with debt funding, the scope for such substitution 
is limited by regulatory requirements and banks’ own motives to establish adequate capital 
buffers.  Hence,  a  persistent  decline  in  equity  valuations  will  ultimately  render  credit  more 
costly  and  less  profitable  for  banks  which,  in  response,  may  curtail  lending  to  the  real 
economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  This  adverse  link  from  low  interest  rates  to  weak  bank  profitability  to  lower  loan  supply  is 
particularly problematic in view of evidence suggesting that the low interest rate environment 
is  likely  to  persist  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  According  to  this  evidence,  declining 
potential growth together with a relative scarcity of safe assets to absorb global savings have 
led to a declining natural interest rate – that is: the rate consistent with full resource utilisation 
and steady inflation rates around the central bank objective over a longer-term perspective. 
In the context of such decline of the natural rate and the continued cyclical weakness, the 
necessary  degree  of  monetary  policy  accommodation  implies  a  constellation  of  very  low 
interest  rates  for  an  extended  period  of  time.  Therefore,  the  ECB  will  preserve  its 
accommodative  stance  until  inflation  returns  to  our  aim,  which  will  remove  some  of  the 
cyclical drivers of weak profitability linked to disappointing nominal growth. It will be crucial to 
continue  monitoring  the  implications  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  on  the  position  and 
prospects  of  the  banking  system  and  approach  any  future  re-calibration  of  our  monetary 
policy  toolkit,  should  this  be  necessary  at  all,  in  a  way  that  optimises  the  stimulus  for  the 
broader  economy  without  undermining  the  incentives  for  financial  intermediaries  to  remain 
actively engaged in transmission. 
At the same time, additional adjustment needs should be addressed decisively to ensure a 
healthy  euro  area  banking  sector:  tackling  legacy  NPLs,  responding  to  structural  change, 
providing  regulatory  clarity.  These  relate  both  to  individual  banks  and  to  the  institutional 
environment. 
relationship,  and/or 
Adjustment needs for individual banks 
A number of banks are now tackling their legacy and structural challenges rather than waiting 
for  better  times.  But  many  still  need  to  adjust  faster  to  the  new  conditions  they  face.  The 
process of disposing of NPLs is moving too slowly in some jurisdictions. And cost efficiency 
has  to  adapt  to  the  new  macroeconomic  and regulatory  environment.  As  noted,  euro  area 
banks have made important progress in reducing costs since the start of the crisis. But there 
is clearly scope for further improvements: cost-to-income ratios, for example, have remained 
high  for  euro  area  banks  compared  to  their  global  peers,  and  progress  in  efficiency 
improvements has levelled off. 
Opportunities for efficiency gains are there. The technological challenge posed by FinTech, 
for example, is also an opening for established market participants to push out the efficient 
frontier,  thereby  protecting  market  shares  and  raising  new  sources  of  revenue  in  the 
customer-to-bank 
increasing  efficiency  and  cutting  costs  on 
infrastructure.  There  is  also  scope  for  both  further  rationalisation  within  banks,  especially 
those  burdened  with  expensive  branch  structures,  and  further  consolidation  among  credit 
institutions,  in  particular  in  countries  where  fragmentation  leads  to  unsound  competitive 
behaviour and low operational efficiency. 
Indeed,  even  though  the  number  of  branches  in  the  euro  area  declined  by  16%  between 
2008 and 2014, almost half of the decrease in the number of local bank units was accounted 
for  by  Spain.  Countries  undergoing  structural  adjustment  programmes  have  also  seen  the 
largest relative decrease in the number of credit institutions. Banking systems in some larger 
countries have also adjusted but remain at relatively low concentration levels, implying scope 
for rationalisation and consolidation without reinforcing the “too-big-to-fail” problem. 
To navigate the new environment, banks business models will need to adjust as well. As a 
consequence  of  both  market  pressures  and  regulation,  many  banks  have  shifted  from 
revenue generation based on investment banking, high leverage and/or reliance on relatively 
cheap  wholesale  funding,  towards  business  models  built  around  retail  banking,  lower 
leverage and increased reliance on deposit funding. These are welcome developments from 
the perspective of financial stability – but they may also increase vulnerability to a very low 
interest rate environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  This  calls  for  stronger  efforts  to  increase  income  diversification,  which  is  currently 
widespread  only  across  larger  banks.  Funding  costs,  especially  in  terms  of  deposits,  also 
remain high in comparison with global peers, squeezing net interest income. But admittedly, 
neither more stringent pricing policies nor greater focus on fee-generating activities will likely 
compensate  for  the  downward  pressure  on  profitability  from  other  factors.  And  after  many 
years of encouraging banks towards more “plain vanilla” business models, it may be unfair to 
now expect them to reverse course. 
That is why, if the banking sector is to adjust effectively, public authorities also need to play 
their part – indeed, it is their responsibility to create a sound and supportive environment for 
such adjustment to take place. To my mind there are three priority areas for action. 
Reforms at the institutional level 
The first is to stabilise the regulatory environment. As underlined in the communiqués of the 
recent  G20  meetings,  to  remove  one  source  of  uncertainty,  the  post-crisis  regulatory 
framework  needs  to  be  finalised  in  a  timely,  full  and  consistent  manner  –  most  pressingly 
through the completion of the Basel III framework by end-2016, without further significantly 
increasing overall capital requirements across the banking sector. Those forums have also 
pointed  to  the  need  for  enhanced  monitoring  of  the  implementation  of  reforms  and  their 
effects, which is important to ensure consistency with macroeconomic policy objectives and 
to address any material unintended consequences. 
The second is to improve further the institutional environment for NPL resolution. This hinges 
on  both  supervisory  pressure  towards  individual  banks,  using  qualitative  and  quantitative 
measures, and on system-wide reforms to reduce the cost for banks and investors of getting 
NPLs  off  bank  balance  sheets.  Most  important  in  this  context  are  measures  to  speed  up 
asset recovery, such as improving the efficiency of judicial and insolvency procedures, and 
appropriate tax incentives. 
The third priority is to complete banking union. If we are to reap the economies of scale of a 
genuine  single  banking  market,  we  need  a  euro  area  institutional  framework  that  allows 
banks to thrive as euro area banks. So the main responsibility for policymakers is not to stop 
halfway. 
Indeed, in crucial ways, banking union remains incomplete. A case in point is the fact that the 
euro area is not treated as a single jurisdiction for the purposes of bank regulation. There is 
still non-negligible national discretion in implementing rules. Regulatory uncertainty remains 
on  how  fungible  excess  liquidity  and  capital  is  across  borders.  And  the  lack  of  single-
jurisdiction  status  may  impose  –  albeit  limited  –  additional  capital  charges  on  euro  area 
banks. Symptomatic is the treatment of additional capital charges for systemically important 
banks  related  to  cross-border  euro  area  exposures,  which  are  still  considered  as 
international exposures from a regulatory perspective. 
This is just one example for a bigger point: if we are to achieve a fully integrated euro area 
banking  sector  and  to  reverse  the  retrenchment  behind  national  borders  that  took  place 
during the crisis, we need to remove any remnants of the regulatory framework that implicitly 
support home bias, raise the impediments to cross-border business and disadvantage euro 
area banks internationally. Though some banks have had cautionary experiences with cross-
border  expansions  in  the  past,  the  development  of  pan-European  banks,  alongside  strong 
local banks serving local markets, must be part of the financial landscape of monetary union. 
In a monetary union the banking landscape cannot be made up of a collection of standalone 
national banking systems. And in an environment where bank profitability is weak, and where 
macroeconomic stabilisation policies are already at full throttle, the benefits of such cross-
border  integration  –  efficiency  and  risk-sharing  –  are  even  more  in  demand.  Thus  a  true 
banking union needs to be completed in a reasonable period of time. And that includes, as 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  the ECB has noted on many occasions, establishing a European Deposit Insurance Scheme 
that can ensure the fungibility of insured bank money across all parts of the monetary union. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
A resilient banking system is crucial to provide for a smooth transmission of monetary policy 
in response to cyclical fluctuations and to support economic performance over a longer-term 
horizon.  And,  indeed,  since  the  onset  of  crisis,  euro  area  banks  have  made  important 
progress in strengthening their financial resilience. 
At the same time, this newfound resilience will come under pressure if the current slump in 
bank profitability were to persist going forward. 
The  prevailing  low  interest  rate  environment  is  one  factor  that  dampens  profitability 
prospects. But, since the ongoing recovery remains strongly reliant on continued monetary 
accommodation in the context of a declining natural rate, the constellation of very low interest 
rates will probably prevail for an extended period of time. 
Against this background, the ECB will continue monitoring the implications of our monetary 
policy  measures  on  the  position  and  prospects  of  the  banking  system.  The  analytical 
underpinnings of the ECB’s strategy, which have granted a prominent role to the bank-based 
transmission mechanism in the context of our monetary pillar, are well-suited for this task. 
At the same time, many other factors, relating to legacy and structural problems, hold down 
bank profitability. Hence, a durable improvement in the prospects of the euro area banking 
system  requires  further  efforts  outside  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  These  include,  most 
notably, a swift and stringent completion of banking union and additional adjustments in the 
banking sector towards greater cost efficiency and business models that remain viable in the 
new regulatory and macroeconomic environment. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
