Egil  Matsen:  The  equity  share  in  the  Government  Pension  Fund
Global
Introductory statement by Mr Egil Matsen, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway),
Oslo, 1 December 2016.
 Accompanying slides 
INTRODUCTION
The  discovery  of  oil  off  the  Norwegian  coast  has  shaped  the  economy  for  almost  two
generations. Norway’s industry structure has undergone a fundamental change. Oil has lifted the
level of prosperity and generated substantial government revenues.
Chart: The Government Pension Fund Global
Twenty  years  have  passed  since  the  government  made  the  first  capital  transfer  to  the
Government  Petroleum  Fund,  which  has  since  been  renamed  the  Government  Pension  Fund
Global (GPFG). Since then, Norway’s subsea oil wealth has to a large extent been transformed
into foreign financial assets.
The  GPFG  serves  two  main  purposes:  to  insulate  the  central  government  budget  from  the
effects of large annual fluctuations in petroleum revenues and to preserve a substantial share of
the oil wealth and increase it for future generations.
A milestone in the management of the nation’s oil wealth was the fiscal rule, adopted in 2001.
The  fiscal  rule  permits  the  government  to  spend  the  expected  real  return  on  the  GPFG,  then
estimated  at  4  percent.  The  rule  was  introduced  to  phase  in  oil  revenues  gradually  into  the
economy in pace with the increase in the fund’s capital.
The  GPFG  has  grown  rapidly  over  the  past  ten  years.  In  line  with  the  fiscal  rule,  the  fund’s
contribution  to  the  central  government  budget  has  increased.  Owing  to  the  fall  in  oil  prices,
government petroleum revenues are now lower. Volatility in the return on the fund’s investments
could have a considerable impact on the fiscal room for manoeuvre in the coming years.
Norges  Bank  has  managed  the  GPFG  since  the  first  transfer  was  made  in  May  1996.  An
important part of our responsibility for the operational management of the fund is to advise the
Ministry of Finance on the fund’s investment strategy.
Chart: Equity share in the strategic benchmark index and of the fund
The investment strategy issue of most importance for the fund’s return and financial risk is the
fund’s equity share. Under the current investment mandate, the size of the fund’s actual equity
investments will largely be determined by the equity allocation set by the Ministry of Finance for
the fund’s benchmark portfolio. The equity share in the strategic benchmark index provides an
important indication of volatility tolerance with regard to the fund’s value. To be able to maintain
the investment strategy, not least in periods of falling equity prices, a good understanding and
broad-based acceptance of the fund’s risk are essential. The equity share in the fund’s strategic
benchmark index is therefore naturally reassessed at regular intervals.
The Ministry of Finance has increased the equity share in the strategic benchmark index twice on
the advice of Norges Bank and others. When equities were included in the investment portfolio in
1998, the strategic equity share was set at 40 percent, and the equity share in the actual portfolio
had reached this level by June of the same year.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In June 2007, it was decided to increase the strategic equity share further to 60 percent. The
implementation of this strategic change took place during a demanding period. Financial market
uncertainty was elevated. Although equity markets declined sharply in autumn 2008 and winter
2009, the new strategic equity share was maintained. The increase in the equity share was been
completed by June 2009, and Norges Bank had purchased NOK 1000 billion in equities for the
fund over this two-year period. The fund’s average ownership stake in global listed companies
had increased from 0.4 percent to 1 percent. A large share of the equities held by the fund today
was purchased during these two years.
In 2010, the GPFG’s investment universe was expanded to include unlisted real estate. Since
then, the fund’s strategic benchmark index has been composed of 60 percent equities and up to
5  percent  real  estate,  with  the  remainder  in  bonds. As  real  estate  investments  involve  some
equity risk, the equity share in the strategic benchmark index, in an index composed solely of
equities and bonds, is now slightly higher than the allocation defined in 2007.
The  question  of  the  fund’s  strategic  equity  share  is  once  again  on  the  agenda.  The  Mork
commission submitted its recommendation to the Ministry of Finance in October.
In February, Norges Bank was requested to assess whether the relationship between expected
return and risk for equities and bonds has changed, and whether there is reason to adjust the
equity share in the fund’s benchmark index. Norges Bank submitted its advice to the Ministry of
Finance today, recommending an increase in the equity share to 75 percent.
 Chart: Covers of four Discussion Notes
Norges  Bank’s  advice  and  my  remarks  today  are  based  on  a  set  of  analyses  conducted  by
1
Norges Bank. These analyses have been published in the form of four Discussion Notes.
EXPECTED RETURN
Let’s  start  by  taking  a  closer  look  at  expected  bond  returns. After  several  years  of  high  bond
returns owing to the fall in global interest rates, there are strong indications that returns will be
low ahead.
Chart: Yield and future returns
Empirical studies show that current bond yields provide a good estimate of the nominal return on
a broad bond portfolio over the next five to ten years. This is illustrated in the chart, which shows
a close correlation between the return on US government bonds and the level of yields six years
previously.
Chart: Yields on US inflation-linked bonds
It is the real return that is of relevance for the fund. For a bond portfolio of high credit quality, the
expected real return can be estimated from the yield on inflation-linked bonds. At the end of 2016
Q3, ten-year yields on inflation-linked bonds in the largest markets varied from –2 percent in the
UK to 0 percent in the US. Yields on longer-term inflation-linked bonds are somewhat higher, but
still considerably lower than their historical level.
Chart: Driving forces behind the fall in the global real interest rate
The  reasons  for  the  global  fall  in  the  real  interest  rate  are  complex.  The  fundamental  driving
forces  are  nevertheless  reasonably  well  understood  and  are  shown  in  the  chart.  The  large
current  account  surpluses  of  oil-exporting  countries  and  emerging  economies  have  been  one
important factor. In addition, population ageing and a more uneven distribution of income have
driven  up  saving  in  many  countries.  At  the  same  time,  investment  has  been  low  in  many
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
advanced economies. One reason for this could be prospects for low returns on investment in
productive  capital.  Since  the  financial  crisis,  these  structural  factors  have  been  amplified  by
cyclical  conditions.  While  deleveraging  has  pulled  up  savings,  greater  uncertainty  may  have
dampened the willingness to invest and increased the propensity to save.
Unconventional monetary policies in many countries have also contributed to pushing down real
bond yields.
the spread  between  the  return  on  fixed  income  products  with  long  and  short
Moreover, 
maturities,  the  so-called  term  premium,  has  shown  a  marked  decline  in  recent  years.
Historically, investors have been rewarded for providing loans with longer maturities – the term
premium has been positive. This is not necessarily the case today. The term premium ahead is
assumed to be approximately zero.
Based on our analyses, we consider that 0.25 percent is a reasonable estimate of the expected
annual real return on bonds over the next ten years. As the GPFG is also invested in other bond
markets, even this modest expectation is slightly higher than the yield on inflation-linked bonds in
the largest markets.
The  prospect  of  low  returns  on  bond  investments  is  undoubtedly  one  of  the  reasons  for  the
renewed discussion of the fund’s equity allocation. However, whether low bond returns warrant a
change in the size of the equity share of the benchmark index depends on the return that can be
achieved on alternative investments – namely the expected return on equities. The relevant factor
for the composition of the fund’s benchmark portfolio is the spread between the expected return
on equities and the expected return on bonds.
Chart: Realised real yields on equity and fixed income
The excess return that can be achieved in equity markets is usually measured in terms of the so-
called equity risk premium (ERP). This is defined as the spread between the return on equities
and the return on short-term government securities. Historically, the realised ERP has been high.
Since  1900,  the  world’s  equity  markets  have  yielded  a  total  return  120  times  higher  than  the
return on short-term government securities, bringing the average ERP to 5.7 percentage points
2
per year. ]
If we look at the period from 1970 to 2015, for which we have more complete data, the ERP is
even higher. This cannot be explained by company fundamentals such as growth in earnings and
dividends in this period, suggesting that market valuation of company profits has changed since
1970. Adjusting for the effect of this re-pricing, the long-term average ERP falls to just below 4
percentage points.
Chart: Equity risk premium from different model specifications
As we know, past performance is no guarantee of future results. In addition to using historical
excess returns, the ERP can also be estimated using more forward-looking models. The most
common approach is to estimate the ERP on the basis of current market prices and expected
future  dividends.  We  have  analysed  several  different  models  of  this  type.  On  average,  these
models  estimate  an  expected  ERP  of  just  below  6  percentage  points.  In  all  the  models,  the
estimate is higher than it was ten years ago.
The chart shows that model-based estimates of the ERP are uncertain and can change quickly.
The estimates are particularly sensitive to assumptions for dividend growth and the risk-free rate.
Growth in firms’ dividends has been particularly strong in the years since the financial crisis.
Chart: Growth and returns
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  the  long  term,  growth  in  dividends  and  firms’  cash  flows  will  reflect  underlying  economic
growth. In our analyses, this is clearly evident in global data: internationally, growth in firms’ cash
flows  and  equity  returns  are  correlated  with  growth  in  the  global  economy.  Global  economic
growth in the coming years is expected to be below its historical level. This “pessimism” is partly
related  to  the  driving  forces  behind  the  low  level  of  the  real  interest  rate.  If  we  use  more
conservative estimates of future dividend growth as inputs in our models, our estimate of the
ERP falls to below 4 percentage points. There is considerable uncertainty around this estimate,
and Norges Bank’s projections are based on a more cautious estimate of 3 percentage points.
Chart: Equity allocation and expected return
The Ministry of Finance has requested the Bank to provide estimates of the expected return on
the fund ahead. Expected bond returns are considerably lower than in 2006, while the expected
excess return on equities relative to bonds is somewhat higher as expected term premiums are
lower. With an equity allocation of 60 percent, our best estimate of average real return is about 2
percent per year over the next ten years. If the equity allocation is increased to 75 percent, the
expected real return rises to about 2½ percent.
VOLATILITY IN THE FUND’S VALUE
Let  me  now  turn  from  expected  returns  to  the  return  volatility  that  must  be  expected  when
different equity allocations are applied. The most common measure of risk in financial markets is
standard return deviation, i.e. return volatility around the average. 
The  standard  deviation  of  the  fund’s  benchmark  portfolio  is  determined  by  two  factors:  equity
return volatility and bond return volatility, and the degree of covariance between the two asset
types.
Chart: Equity allocation and volatility
Volatility is lower for bonds than for equities. As illustrated by the straight line in the chart, this
means in isolation that portfolio risk increases with the increase in equity exposure. There is a
pattern in our data showing that the standard deviation for equities has over time been two to
three times higher than for bonds. The analyses do not support estimates that differ from those
of ten years ago for equity risk relative to bond risk.
Equity and bond returns do not move in tandem. As a result, bonds reduce the variation in the
fund’s  value  in  addition  to  the  contribution  from  lower  volatility.  For  a  given  equity  allocation,
portfolio  volatility  will  be  smaller  the  lower  the  correlation  between  equities  and  bonds  is,  as
illustrated  by  the  dashed  curves  in  the  chart.  The  blue  curve  assumes  a  degree  of  positive
correlation between equity and  bond  returns.  This  means  that  although  bond  and  equity  price
often  covary,  this  is  not  always  the  case.  For  the  purple  curve,  we  have  assumed  that  the
correlation is negative. With this correlation, the tendency in the data is for bonds to rise in value
when equity prices fall.
Chart: Correlation between equities and bonds
There has been a marked change in the correlation between equity and bond returns in recent
years. In the period from the early 1960s to the end of the 1990s, the correlation between equities
and  bonds  was  positive.  This  trend  has  reversed.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  2000s,  the
correlation between equities and bonds has generally been negative. This shift is clearly reflected
in the chart, which is based on the correlations between US equities and bonds. The same shift
is evident in the financial markets of a number of other countries.
The decline in the correlation has received considerable attention in the financial literature.  It has
been suggested that this change may be the result of a shift in monetary policy in many countries
3
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
towards  giving  greater  weight  to  stabilisation  of  the  real  economy  in  the  face  of  supply  side
shocks. This means that there is now some divergence in response between equity and bond
markets  to  this  type  of  macroeconomic  shock.  This  type  of  shock  has  also  occurred  less
frequently in the past couple of decades.
A lower correlation means that bonds reduce the risk associated with equity investments more
effectively  than  earlier.  Investors  may  thereby  be  willing  to  accept  lower  expected  returns  on
bonds  with  long  maturities.  There  may  therefore  be  a  relationship  between  the  decline  in  the
correlation between equities and bonds and the low term premiums now observed in the bond
market.
The previous decision to change the equity share was based on the assumption of a correlation
between  equity  and  bond  returns  of  about  0.4.  Over  the  past  decade,  this  correlation  has
averaged –0.3.  In Norges Bank’s opinion, it is not unreasonable to base our advice on a lower
correlation than the last time we issued advice. With a lower correlation, the fund will need a
lower bond allocation than previously assumed in order to maintain return volatility at about the
same level.
RISK OF SUBSTANTIAL AND PERSISTENT DECLINES IN VALUE
So far, my discussion of risk has focused on the fund’s expected return volatility from one year to
the next. If returns are normally distributed, a standard deviation of 10 percent means, in slightly
simplified terms, that the value of the fund, at its current size, will change by more than NOK 700
billion in one out of every three years and by more than NOK 1400 billion in one out of every
twenty years.
Even these enormous amounts may underestimate actual risk. Financial market returns do not
follow a normal distribution. Major financial crises occur more frequently and with greater severity
than implied by a normal distribution. An example from the recent past is 2008, when the value of
the  fund’s  strategic  benchmark  index  for  equities  fell  by  almost  40  percent.  With  the  fund’s
current  size  and  equity  allocation,  this  would  have  resulted  in  a  fall  in  the  value  of  the  equity
portfolio of NOK 1700 billion. This is equivalent to 65 percent of GDP for mainland Norway.
The financial crisis triggered a deep decline in equity markets, but was followed by a relatively
rapid rebound. We cannot ignore the possibility that the return on the fund will be low for many
years. In the 1970s, the real return on US government bonds was negative for five years in a row.
In equity markets, a long period of high ERPs after the Second World War was followed by a
long period of low ERPs in the 1970s.
A good understanding and broad-based acceptance of the risk of substantial falls in the fund’s
value are, as mentioned, essential to be able to maintain the investment strategy. Experience
from the financial crisis suggests that the governance model for the fund is capable of coping
with periods of large falls in value. We should, however, remember that the value of the fund in
krone  terms  did  not  fall  to  any  great  extent  during  the  financial  crisis  because  of  substantial
transfers of petroleum revenues and a substantial depreciation of the krone. A future test of the
governance model may prove more demanding.
A FUTURE PERSPECTIVE ON WEALTH
An  assessment  of  the  fund’s  equity  share  should  not  be  exclusively  based  on  an  analysis  of
expected financial market return and risk.
Chart: The government’s petroleum wealth
It may be useful to think of the government’s total petroleum wealth as the sum of the fund and
the estimated value of the remaining oil and gas reserves. The chart shows how the composition
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
of this wealth has changed over time. Ten years ago, the estimated value of the reserves was
more than double the value of the fund. Today, this relationship has reversed – the fund now
constitutes more than two-thirds of the government’s estimated petroleum wealth.
This could have a bearing on the choice of equity share. It is reasonable to assume that oil and
gas  reserves  in  the  ground  entail  greater  financial  risk  than  a  global,  diversified  securities
portfolio. The risk associated with the government’s total petroleum wealth has been reduced by
gradually transforming oil into financial assets. If we maintain the same level of risk tolerance for
total government petroleum wealth as previously, we can take on somewhat higher risk in the
financial portion without increasing overall risk to a higher level than previously. This point was
also emphasised by the Mork commission. 
THE EQUITY ALLOCATION AND FISCAL POLICY
As I mentioned in my introduction, one of the objectives of the fund and the fiscal rule is to ensure
that Norway’s oil wealth will also benefit future generations. We have achieved this by limiting oil
revenue spending over the central government budget to the expected real return on the fund
over time. When the fiscal rule was introduced, the expected return was estimated at 4 percent.
The  estimates  presented  today  entail  a  considerably  lower  expected  rate  of  return  for  any
realistic  equity  allocation. As  mentioned,  with  an  equity  allocation  of  75  percent,  the  expected
annual real return will be about 2.5 percent per year over the next ten years.
Chart: Petroleum revenue spending over the budget
Another important objective of the GPFG and the fiscal rule is to insulate the budget from sharp
fluctuations in oil revenues. The GPFG is now so large and finances such a sizeable share of
government spending that it may become just as important to manage swings in the fund’s value
as swings in petroleum revenues.
The fiscal authorities face an important trade-off: on the one hand, closely linking fiscal policy to
changes in the value of the GPFG will have a substantial impact on other government spending
and  revenues  from  one  year  to  another.  This  is  far  from  desirable.  On  the  other  hand,  a
substantial  degree  of  decoupling  between  changes  in  the  GPFG’s  value  and  government
spending of its funds over the budget could lead to greater uncertainty about the value of the
GPFG in the longer term.
Oil revenue spending should be based on a realistic estimate of expected return. At the same
time, due consideration must be given to return uncertainty.  It may therefore be wise to consider
spending somewhat less than the expected return over time.
CONCLUSION
Norges Bank has assessed whether the equity share in the GPFG’s strategic benchmark index
should be changed. The current equity share is slightly higher than 60 percent. In Norges Bank’s
assessment, the equity allocation can be increased to 75 percent. The Bank’s proposal is based
on a broad analysis of changes since the equity allocation was last assessed.
In financial markets, bond portfolio characteristics in particular have changed over the past ten
years. Expected returns on investment grade bonds have fallen sharply. At the same time, the
expected excess returns on equities over bonds are now estimated to be somewhat higher than
when the equity allocation was last assessed. Moreover, there is reduced covariance between
bond  and  equity  returns.  In  short,  bonds  have  become  a  better,  but  also  more  costly,  hedge
against fluctuations in the fund’s value. Both of these factors suggest that some increase in the
equity allocation would be appropriate.
If  the  analysis  is  expanded  to  include  the  relationship  between  return  and  risk  for  overall
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
petroleum wealth, we arrive at a similar conclusion. Today, the GPFG accounts for a far larger
share of petroleum wealth. This means that the fund’s owner can accept a higher level of risk
associated with the return on the fund while keeping the level of risk associated with petroleum
wealth unchanged.
A higher equity allocation means that the expected return on the fund will increase. The realised
return, however, may differ considerably from expectations. In order to maintain the investment
strategy over time, a good understanding and broad acceptance of this risk are essential.
 1
2
3
NBIM  Discussion  Note  1/2016: The equity risk premium,  NBIM  Discussion  Note  2/2016: Risk and return of
different asset allocations, NBIM Discussion Note 3/2016 (forthcoming): Global growth and equity returns, NBIM
Discussion Note 4/2016 (forthcoming): Asset allocation with government revenues and spending commitments. 
NBIM Discussion Note 1/2016: The equity risk premium.
See for example Campbell J.Y., C. Pfluger and L. M. Viceira (2015): Monetary Policy Drivers of Bond and Equity
Risks, Working Paper 14–031, Harvard Business School.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
