Bank of Uganda 
  Remarks by 
 Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile 
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 Uganda Banker’s Association 
 Informal Dinner 
 Piato Restaurant 
 2nd December, 2016 
1 
   Good evening Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Thank  you  all  for  coming  here  this  evening  for  our 
informal UBA dinner.  
 I  spoke  last  week  at  the  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Financial  Services  annual  banking  dinner  about  the 
current challenges facing the banking industry. Tonight 
I  would  like  to  make  a  few  brief  remarks  about  the 
current macroeconomic situation and prospects, notably 
as  regards  economic  growth,  the  exchange  rate  and 
inflation.  
 Real  economic  growth,  over  the  last  five  years,  has 
averaged  about  five  percent  per  annum.  This  is  very 
likely  close  to  the  economy’s  sustainable  potential 
growth  rate,  given  growth  of  the  labour  force,  capital 
stock  and  productivity.  In  the  last  fiscal  year,  which 
ended in June 2016, real GDP growth was 4.8 percent, 
which is slightly below potential, but is far from being a 
recession  as  some  people  have  claimed,  although  I 
appreciate that trading conditions have been difficult for 
many businesses.  
 2 
 There were factors which probably depressed economic 
growth  in  FY  2015/16,  such  as  the  increase  in  market 
interest  rates,  the  exchange  rate  volatility  in  the  first 
half  of  the  fiscal  year  and  the  election  in  the  third 
quarter.  Without  an  election,  and  with  probably  lower 
interest rates and hopefully less volatile exchange rates 
(although  that  is  hard  to  predict)  I  would  expect  that 
conditions  in  the  current  fiscal  year  will  be  more 
conducive to growth and so I would expect that we will 
experience a small rise in the real GDP growth, to five 
percent or even slightly higher. 
 Let  me  now  turn  to  the  exchange  rate,  which  has 
depreciated in recent weeks, after a long period – nearly 
11  months  –  of  stability.  Against  the  US  dollar,  the 
Shilling has depreciated by 4.7 percent since the end of 
October.  However,  more  than  half  of  that  depreciation 
is  attributable  to  the  strengthening  of  the  US  dollar 
against  major  currencies  since  the  Presidential  election 
in  the  US,  which  has  led  to  expectations  of  higher 
interest rates in that country.  
  3 
remains  competitive  against 
My  staff  calculates  an  index  of  the  Uganda  Shilling 
against a weighted basket of Uganda’s trading partners. 
This index – called the nominal effective exchange rate 
index  –  has  depreciated  by  only  2.3  percent  since  the 
end of October. Furthermore, a nominal depreciation of 
the  exchange  rate  has  been  necessary  to  ensure  that 
Uganda 
trading 
partners.  Our  exchange  rate  policy,  which  entails  a 
flexible, market determined exchange rate, is motivated 
by  the  need  to  ensure  that  our  balance  of  payments  is 
sustainable.  Our  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange 
market, such as that which we carried out last week, are 
intended only to dampen volatility in the exchange rate, 
and  not  to  impede  adjustments  in  the  exchange  rate 
which are necessary to maintain external balance. 
its 
 Finally,  I  want  to  address  the  issue  of  inflation.  The 
outturn for inflation in 2016 has been better than we had 
feared  it  would  be  at  this  time  last  year,  when 
inflationary  pressures  were  building  up.  Annual  core 
inflation  declined  during  the  first  half  of  2016  and  for 
the last four months it has settled down at an average of 
approximately  5  percent,  which  is  in  line  with  our 
policy target for inflation.  
  4 
The  better  than  expected  inflation  outturn  in  2016  is 
attributable  to  a  combination  of  the  tightening  of 
monetary  policy  by  the  BOU  in  mid  2015,  when  we 
raised  interest  rates,  and  the  relatively  stable  exchange 
rate  since  October  of  last  year.  When  we  look  at  core 
inflation outturns over a longer horizon, we can see that 
they have been very close to our policy target. Over the 
last  four  years,  annual  inflation  has  sometimes  been 
above  5  percent  and  sometimes  been  below,  but  it  has 
averaged 4.9 percent. I hope that you will agree that this 
demonstrates the effectiveness of our inflation targeting 
monetary policy framework. 
 To  conclude,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  believe  that  the 
prospects  for  macroeconomic  stability  in  the  near  to 
medium  term  are  currently  very  good.  In  2017  we  can 
look forward to real GDP growth which is close to the 
economy’s  medium  term  potential  growth  of  around  5 
percent  per  annum.  With  inflationary  pressures  firmly 
under control we can also be confident that annual core 
inflation will continue to trend around our medium term 
target of 5 percent.  
 Thank you for listening.   
 5 
