Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 15 December
2016.
 Good  morning.  Senior  Deputy  Governor  Wilkins  and  I  are  happy  to  be  here  to  discuss
today’s Financial  System  Review  (FSR).  Let  me  begin  with  a  few  remarks  about  Governing
Council’s deliberations.
First,  a  brief  reminder  about  our  methodology.  Most  of  the  analysis  in  the  FSR  is  about
vulnerabilities here in Canada. These are pre-existing conditions that may interact with changes
in  our  economic  situation  to  present  risks  to  the  financial  system.  Macroeconomic  shocks
happen all the time and economies adjust to them. But if significant financial vulnerabilities are
present,  the  effects  of  those  shocks  on  the  economy  and  on  the  financial  system  may  be
magnified through interactions with the underlying vulnerabilities. The metaphor we have used is
that of a large tree with a crack in it—the situation may improve or worsen over time, but there’s
no immediate crisis until the wrong sort of storm comes along.
Within  this  analytical  framework,  many  possible  shocks  could,  in  theory,  transform  financial
vulnerabilities  into  financial  stability  risks.  We  offer  illustrative  risk  scenarios  in  the  FSR.  Of
course, it is possible to draw logical links between almost any macroeconomic shock, anywhere
in the world, and financial stability here in Canada, like a “butterfly effect.” We make no attempt to
catalogue  all  of  these  possibilities,  the  consequences  of  which  would  all  look  quite  similar.
Instead, we focus more of our analysis on underlying vulnerabilities in Canada.
That  being  said,  household  financial  vulnerabilities  continue  to  rise  in  Canada.  We  separate
these  vulnerabilities  into  two  areas,  household  indebtedness  and  housing  market  imbalances.
This separation is important, since although they often go hand-in-hand, it is possible that over
time one of them will diminish more than the other.
This  separation  has  always  been  present  in  our  analysis,  but  Governing  Council  sought  to
sharpen  the  distinction  in  this  FSR.  This  is  because  macroprudential  measures  have  been
introduced in recent months that will serve primarily to mitigate the potential consequences for
the  financial  system  of  rising  household  debt.  These  measures  relate  to  mortgage  qualifying
criteria,  which  will  raise  the  underlying  quality  of  household  indebtedness  over  time,  and  to
financial  institutions’  capital  requirements  and  pricing  criteria,  which  will  make  them  more
resilient to future shocks.
Accordingly, these policies will help mitigate financial stability risks over time. When it comes to
housing activity and prices, the measures will weigh on demand, especially for more expensive
houses. But demographic demand remains robust, job creation and income growth have been
strong in the greater Vancouver and Toronto areas, and housing supply constraints continue to
bind. There is a box in the FSR that describes the macroprudential measures that have been
taken and how they might be expected to affect housing fundamentals. The important takeaway
is that one cannot judge the effectiveness of these policies simply by observing whether house
prices  continue  to  rise.  This  is  because  the  measures  are  aimed  at  mitigating  risks  to
households and to the financial system, not at house prices per se. The effects of these policies
will be greatest in Vancouver and Toronto, because that is where the majority of high loan-to-
income mortgages are being granted.
In this context, Governing Council noted that price increases have begun to slow noticeably in
Vancouver,  but  it  is  too  early  to  determine  the  new  trend.  It  is  noteworthy  that  market  activity
began to slow before the imposition of the special tax on sales of homes to non-residents, which
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
suggests  that  other  factors  may  have  begun  to  interrupt  the  cycle  of  extrapolative  price
expectations. However, the situation remains highly uncertain, and we have seen no signs of a
similar moderation in the Toronto area. Again, we must emphasize that a moderating housing
market, as we have seen in Calgary, for example, may ease financial stability concerns on one
front, but leave the level of household debt at a very high level.
Governing  Council’s  discussions  of  these  risks  were  also  influenced  by  the  backup  in  global
bond  yields  since  the  US  election.  Canada’s  bond  yields  have  responded,  as  is  typically  the
case,  albeit  in  less  than  a  one-for-one  fashion.  This  has  led  to  some  increases  in  Canadian
mortgage rates. We will monitor these developments carefully in the months ahead. As we made
clear  in  our  recent  interest  rate  announcement,  we  will  continue  to  follow  an  independent
monetary policy in Canada, one aimed at returning inflation to our 2 per cent target.
Finally, there has been considerable discussion in financial markets about possible shortages of
bond  market  liquidity.  Many  have  pointed  to  regulatory  changes  as  contributing  to  this. At  the
same  time,  markets  functioned  exceptionally  well  following  the  UK  referendum  on  leaving  the
European Union and the US election.
This issue continues to draw attention at the international level. In this FSR, we bring some new
analysis to the table, which draws upon an in-depth market survey conducted by the Canadian
Fixed-Income  Forum,  an  industry  group  established  by 
the  Bank.  Governing  Council
acknowledges  that  there  are  pockets  where  liquidity  problems  are  more  evident,  such  as
corporate bonds, off-the-run government bonds and certain repo markets. But we also recognize
that markets have yet to fully adapt to the new regulatory requirements. Further, the pre-crisis
period  may  not  be  the  best  standard  for  comparison,  because  liquidity  was  excessive  and
virtually costless at that time. It is reasonable to expect that liquidity will be marginally more costly
—and  market-making  less  lucrative—under  the  new  regulatory  regime,  and  that  market
participants will continue to adapt against the backdrop of a more resilient financial system. We
will continue to monitor market behaviour and to engage with market participants, while pursuing
work on the impact of regulatory reforms at the international level.
With that, Ms. Wilkins and I will be happy to respond to your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
