Yannis Stournaras: Prospects of the Greek economy after six years
of adjustment
Speech  by  Mr  Yannis  Stournaras,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  EU-Arab  World
Summit "Partners for Growth and Development", Athens, 3 November 2016.
 It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you today and have the opportunity to share my
thoughts on the prospects of the Greek economy after six years of economic adjustment. I will
focus on four issues: First, the achievements made so far during the difficult years of economic
adjustment. Second,  the  missteps  and  delays  in  the  adjustment  process. Third,  recent
developments and future challenges and prospects. And fourth, I will highlight the main reasons
why Greek assets constitute a prime investment opportunity.
 
1. Economic adjustment over the past six years
Since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, six years ago, Greece has come a long way in
adjusting its fiscal and external imbalances and has implemented a bold programme of structural
reforms.
   First,  there  has  been  unprecedented  fiscal  consolidation.  The  fiscal  consolidation
effort  contributed  to  an  improvement  in  the  general  government  primary  balance  as  a
percentage of GDP by more than 11 percentage points over the period 2009–2015, despite
the  deepening  recession.  In  fact,  in  the  period  2013–2015  Greece  managed  to  maintain
small primary surpluses (as defined in the programme) in the general government budget for
the first time since 2001. Adjusting for the effect of the recession, the improvement in the
“structural”  primary  balance  over  the  period  2009–2015  reached  17  percentage  points  of
potential GDP; twice as much as the adjustment in other Member States that were under
EU-IMF programmes.
Second,  competitiveness  has  been  restored.  The  cumulative  loss  in  labour  cost
competitiveness vis-à-vis our trading partners recorded between 2000 and 2009 has been
fully recovered. 
This development reflects the effect of structural reforms in the labour market, which allow
for greater flexibility in the wage bargaining process, as well as the impact of the sharp rise
in unemployment on labour costs.
Third, the external adjustment has been significant. The current account posed a small
surplus in 2015 (0.1% of GDP). This marks a significant turnaround of the current account
balance by about 15 percentage points of GDP since 2008. Adjustment has come primarily
from a decline in imports of goods, particularly in 2009, when world trade collapsed due to
the  global  recession.  However,  since  2010,  exports,  excluding  shipping,  have  contributed
significantly to the improvement.
Exports of goods in real terms have actually rebounded in line with those of our euro area peers
and the shares of goods exports have increased significantly vis-à-vis non-EU countries. On the
other hand, exports of services in real terms have underperformed primarily due to the weakness
of the shipping sector. This was driven by domestic economic uncertainty and the imposition of
capital  controls,  as  well  as  global  factors,  such  as  the  weaker  growth  of  global  trade,  lower
commodity prices and a supply overhang in the global shipping sector.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In more detail, the share of exports in GDP increased from about 19% in 2009 to close to 30% in
2015,  with  about  2/3  of  this  increase  stemming  from  goods  exports  and  1/3  from  services
exports and, in particular, receipts from tourism. It should be noted that goods exports stood at
about 14% of GDP in 2015 compared with 7.5% of GDP in 2009.
Fourth, the policy agenda has included bold structural reforms. A series of structural
reforms  have  been  implemented  in  the  labour  and  product  markets,  as  well  as  in  public
administration.  These  reforms  are  expected  to  boost  the  growth  potential  of  the  Greek
economy in the long-term through higher productivity and employment growth. According to
the  OECD,  the  reforms  implemented  in  the  period  2010–2014  are  expected  to  raise  real
GDP over a 10-year-horizon by about 5.6%. Adding the reforms currently being implemented
or planned under the ESM programme, the overall increase in real GDP comes to about
13.4%  over  a  10-year-period.  However,  this  estimate  is  a  lower  bound  in  the  sense  that
additional  reforms,  for  example  improving  the  judiciary  system,  strengthening  bankruptcy
regulations, modernising the public administration and resolving the issue of non-performing
exposures (NPEs) cannot easily be quantified. In-house work by the Bank of Greece points
to similar estimates with the main effect coming from higher total factor productivity (TFP)
growth.
Fifth, the rebalancing of the economy has been remarkable. The restructuring of the
Greek  economy  towards  a  new,  extrovert,  growth  model  based  on  tradable  goods  and
services  and  a  higher  share  of  exports  in  GDP  is  already  underway.  In  more  detail,  the
relative prices of tradable goods and services rose by about 10% in the period 2010–2015,
making  their  production  more  profitable.  As  a  result,  the  share  of  tradable  goods  and
services  in  the  private  economy  has  risen  in  recent  years.  For  example,  in  gross  value
added  terms,  the  relative  size  of  the  tradable  sectors  grew  by  approximately  12%  in  the
period 2010–2015 in volume terms and by about 24% in nominal terms, while in employment
terms it grew by around 8%. This development is attributed both to the structural reforms
implemented so far and to the fact that tradable export-oriented sectors have gone through a
milder recession and have thereby gradually gained some ground in terms of volume and
employment shares.
An additional aspect worth highlighting is that on account of the decline in domestic demand and
the scaling back of construction in Greece, a great number of dynamic construction companies
expanded their businesses abroad (Middle East, Balkans) transforming a previously thought to
be a non-tradable activity into an internationally tradable one.
Going  forward,  structural  reforms  and  improved  financing  and  liquidity  in  the  economy  are
expected to speed up the restructuring of the economy in favour of tradable goods and services. 
Sixth, bank recapitalization and considerable consolidation have taken place. Over
the past few years, the landscape of the banking system has changed significantly with the
number of banks having been reduced through mergers, takeovers and resolutions. Today
the system comprises four core banks and a number of smaller ones. The banking system,
following  successive  rounds  of  recapitalization 
involving  significant  private  sector
involvement and the implementation of restructuring plans, is now well-placed to address the
major challenge posed by the high stock of non-performing exposures (NPEs). Effectively
managing  NPEs  is  key  to  the  recovery  of  credit  growth  and  to  the  restructuring  of
businesses and sectors in the real economy.
2. Missteps and delays in the adjustment process
However,  despite  the  huge  efforts  to  avert  default  and  address  imbalances,  Greece  remains
under  an  adjustment  programme,  unlike  Cyprus,  Ireland  and  Portugal,  which  have  already
completed their respective programmes, even though they entered these programmes later than
Greece did.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  lagging  behind  can  be  attributed  to  several  factors,  including:  lack  of  ownership  of  the
necessary  reforms  and  lack  of  commitment,  by  part  of  the  political  system,  to  correct  past
errors,  the  anti-bailout  rhetoric,  rivalry  and  failure  to  reach  an  understanding  among  political
parties, and the various – small and large – vested interests that have resisted reform.
Meanwhile,  the  fact  that  our  European  partners  have  yet  to  deliver  on  their  commitment  to
provide  further  debt  relief,  as  stated  in  the  Eurogroup  decisions  made  as  far  back  as  in
November 2012 (and iterated most recently in May 2016), and the threat of default and euro area
exit brandished against Greece by some of our partners whenever negotiations seemed to stall,
even  on  just  technical  matters,  has  weighed  heavily  on  market  sentiment,  further  fueling
uncertainty and negatively affecting the economic climate in Greece.
Certain  miscalculations  in  the  design  of  the  economic  adjustment  programmes  could  also
explain Greece’s lagging behind vis – a – vis the other countries, previously under programmes.
Given the size of the fiscal imbalances back in May 2010, when the first economic adjustment
programme was initiated, more emphasis was placed on fiscal consolidation, pension reform,
streamlining  budgetary  procedures,  increasing  fiscal  transparency,  as  well  as  financial  sector
restructuring. Less emphasis was given on growth-enhancing labour market reforms and, most
notably, on product and services market reforms and reorganizing the public sector. In addition,
growth forecasts were too optimistic and fiscal multipliers turned out to be higher than initially
anticipated. As  a  result,  the  economy  was  trapped  in  a  vicious  circle  of  austerity,  recession,
rising unemployment and private debt overhang.
Despite the recouping of losses in international competitiveness, exports have underperformed
relative to what could have been anticipated based on historical correlations. This can in part be
explained by the lack of financing, higher long-term borrowing costs, increased uncertainty, as
well  as  the  higher  tax  burden,  which  slows  or  even  halts  progress  towards  restoring  overall
competitiveness.  In  addition,  this  can  also  be  attributed  to  a  number  of  inherent  structural
weaknesses that hamper the international market penetration of Greek products and involve non-
cost aspects such as product quality, protected designation of origin and branding, red tape, etc.
Hence,  despite  the  improvement  in  structural  competitiveness  over  the  period  2013–2014
(according  to  a  number  of  indices  compiled  by  the  OECD,  the  World  Bank,  and  the  World
Economic Forum), Greece still ranks at the lower end of the advanced economies, and progress
has stalled or even reversed slightly in recent years.
3. Recent developments and prospects
In spite of the delays and missteps, progress in correcting past mistakes has been remarkable.
For example, the new ESM programme in place since August 2015 builds on the successes of
the  first  two  programmes  (i.e.  the  correction  of  fiscal  and  external  imbalances  and  the
improvement of labour cost competitiveness) and aims at prioritizing reforms that will increase
potential  growth  in  the  medium-to-long  term,  i.e.  reforms  in  product  markets,  public
administration, institutions and the business environment, bank recapitalization and resolution of
NPEs.
Building  on  the  progress  achieved  so  far,  the  completion  of  the  first  review  of  the  ESM
programme had a positive effect on confidence and liquidity and is expected to boost economic
activity in the second half of 2016.
Most importantly, the reinstatement of the waiver for Greek government bonds enabled Greek
banks to obtain low-cost financing from the European Central Bank (ECB). This, along with the
gradual dissipation of uncertainty, the stabilization of private sector deposits and the progress
achieved in restructuring and recapitalizing Greek banks, has contributed to the lowering of the
emergency  liquidity  assistance  (ELA)  ceiling  for  Greek  banks  by  about  €40  billion  since  July
2015, bringing it down to €51.1 billion as of today.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
These developments are expected over the medium term to encourage a return of deposits to
the  Greek  banking  system,  which  will  allow  an  easing  and,  ultimately,  the  lifting  of  capital
controls. Coupled with a more effective management of non-performing loans, this will contribute
to reducing borrowing costs and will gradually increase the lending capacity of Greek banks, with
positive effects on the financing, hence the growth performance, of the Greek economy.
The gradual economic recovery is already reflected in the performance of several key
indicators  of  economic  activity,  such  as:  industrial  production,  retail  sales,  dependent
employment flows in the private sector, and real exports of goods.
The current forecasts of the Bank of Greece point to a recovery starting from the second half
of 2016 and continuing through 2017 and 2018. Specifically, GDP is projected to post a small
decline of 0.3% in 2016, but then to grow by 2.5% and 3% in 2017 and 2018 respectively. These
projections assume that the programme implementation will remain on track, the relevant loan
tranches will be disbursed on time, and that the monetary policy of the ECB will continue to be
accommodative.
Nevertheless, risks  to  the  outlook  of 
the  Greek  economy  remain. Delays  in  the
implementation of reforms and privatizations  envisaged  in  the  programme  would  dampen
economic  growth,  thereby  refueling  uncertainty,  undermining  confidence  and  weakening  the
prospects of a definitive exit from the crisis.
Meanwhile,  there  also  are risks  and  uncertainties  regarding  the  course  of  the  global
economy,  stemming,  among  other  things,  from  protectionist  voices  and  actions  around  the
world, the implementation of a hard Brexit, and a likely exacerbation of the refugee crisis. These
risks  could  slow  down  the  recovery  of  the  Greek  economy,  both  through  negative  effects  on
tourism and trade and through a slower-than-expected decline in yields on Greek government
bonds due to the risk aversion from global investors.
T h e containment  of  the  abovementioned  risks  and  the  realization  of  the  positive
prospects  of  the  Greek  economy require  a  number  of  tangible  and  concerted  actions.
These  actions,  which  will  ensure  the  successful  conclusion  of  the  ESM  programme  and  the
return to financial markets, comprise the following:
1st  Stepping  up  the  pace  of  reforms  and  privatizations.  The  government  should  remain
committed  to  the  timely  implementation  of  the  structural  reforms  and  privatizations  that  have
been agreed upon with the Institutions. Particular emphasis should be placed on:
simplifying investment licensing procedures, reducing administrative burden on businesses
and facilitating competition,
opening up the remaining regulated professions and network industries,
scaling up the privatization and public real estate programme, and improving its governance,
modernizing and strengthening public administration,
enhancing judicial efficiency and speeding up court proceedings.
In this context, the on-going second review should be completed without undue delays, so as to
solidify the recovery prospects and the return to robust positive growth in 2017.
2nd Tackling the high stock of non-performing exposures (NPEs). Alongside the structural
reforms, using idle public property to attract foreign direct investment through appropriate land
use legislation and speeding up privatization, there is an urgent need to address the private
debt overhang problem, in order to facilitate the recovery through a stronger pick-up in lending.
On  the  one  hand,  the  high  stock  of  NPEs  reduces  bank  profitability  and  thus  constrains  the
supply of credit, which primarily affects bank-dependent SMEs. On the other hand, high NPEs
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
delay corporate restructuring and thus thwart the ability of viable firms to finance new investment
projects.
Tackling  the  high  stock  of  non-performing  loans  is  currently  the  greatest  challenge  facing  the
Greek banking system and the Greek economy. Greece has the second highest NPE ratio in
Europe (after Cyprus), with non-performing exposures at the end of the first half of 2016 reaching
45.1% of total exposures or €108.7 billion.
A  number  of  initiatives  are  underway  with  the  goal  of  setting  up  an  accelerated  and  efficient
framework for private debt resolution. These initiatives, amongst others, include:
the development of a secondary market for both performing and non-performing loans;
the establishment of an enhanced framework for out-of-court workouts and pre-bankruptcy
procedures, as well as the overhaul of bankruptcy legislation;
the  recently  revised  Code  of  Conduct  for  banks  for  the  transparent,  effective  and,  where
appropriate, flexible treatment of cooperating borrowers facing difficulties in servicing their
debt obligations;
amendments to legislation to ensure the cooperation of old shareholders in the restructuring
of the underlying businesses;
the launch of a comprehensive monitoring framework in relation to banks’ non-performing
exposure resolution activities, and, finally,
a  series  of  targets  and  key  performance  indicators  that  aim  at  reducing  overall  non-
performing exposures by 40% by the end of 2019.
On their part, banks need to pursue a more active policy for NPE management, by promoting
long-term solutions and multi-creditor workouts, as well as focusing on the restructuring of viable
businesses. These lines of action, coupled with the economy’s path out of the recession and
back to growth, should bring about a stabilization and, subsequently, a decline in the NPE ratio.
3rd Addressing the large public debt overhang The commitment of our European partners in
May 2016 to take action in order to ensure the sustainability of public debt in the short and
medium-to-long term,  reaffirmed  their  November  2012  Eurogroup  decision  and  is  a  positive
step forward. However, the envisaged long-term public debt management measures have not
been  specified  yet.  Urgent  action  is  warranted  on  the  specification  and  quantification  of  the
foreseen debt relief measures. This will enhance the credibility and acceptance of the policies
pursued, thereby helping to further consolidate confidence, strengthen economic recovery, lower
the  tax  burden  and facilitate  the  return  to  financial  markets  after  the  end  of  the
programme.
4th Easing and eventually lifting remaining capital controls. The gradual relaxation of capital
controls, along with improvements in confidence and liquidity, are expected to contribute to the
normalization  of  economic  conditions  by  facilitating  both  enterprises  and  individuals  in  their
transactions.
4. Final remarks: investment needs and opportunities in Greece
Greece is poised to return to economic and financial normality and to shift to a new, extrovert and
sustainable growth model, based on tradable goods and services. To this end, the improvements
in cost competitiveness of recent years provide considerable room for higher exports in goods
and services in the near future.
However, new investment will be needed in order to strengthen the export base of extrovert firms.
The  further  opening-up  to  international  trade,  the  participation  in  global  value  chains  and  the
closer trade links with countries and businesses with cutting-edge technology internationally will
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
enable  the  adoption  of  new  technologies  by  export  firms  and  their  diffusion  across  the  Greek
economy, strengthening its long-term growth prospects.
New  investment,  by  facilitating  innovation  and  the  introduction  of  new  technologies,  will  both
broaden the export base and improve the quality of Greek exports, raising total factor productivity
of the Greek economy. In turn, this will make the reduction in the external deficit sustainable and
increase potential output over the medium-to-long term.
Therefore,  Greece  needs  a  substantial  amount  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI). The  policy
changes  made  in  recent  years  are  conducive  to  growth,  thus  creating  profitable
investment opportunities. For example, the implementation of reforms in the labour, product
and  services  markets  and  in  public  administration,  the  enhancement  of  financial  stability,  the
utilization  of  public  real  estate,  the  stepping-up  of  the  privatization  programme,  and  efforts  to
tackle  the  private  and  public  debt  overhang  problem  improve  confidence  and  rebuild  financial
markets’  trust.  Hence,  they  generate  positive  growth  prospects  and  help  attract  foreign  direct
investment.
In this context, prospective investors will also benefit from the presence of high-skilled human
capital by OECD standards and a vast pool of idle labour resources. According to the Global
Competitiveness Report 2016–2017 of the World Economic Forum, Greece ranks quite high in
terms of workforce education and skills (38th out of 138), in higher education and training (45th),
in the availability of scientists and engineers (10th), in technological readiness (42nd). Although, a
large number of high-skilled youth have moved to other EU countries since the outbreak of the
crisis,  the  opening-up  of  new  jobs  in  Greece  as  growth  returns  and  investment  picks  up  will
contribute to the repatriation of many of them, further improving the skill and knowledge content
of the labour force.
Furthermore, the new investment incentives law (L.4399/2016) provides a clear framework
and a stable business environment for the commencement of a variety of individual investment
projects. The new law envisages several aid schemes, for example: tax exemption, subsidies for
the  acquisition  of  new  machinery  and  other  equipment,  subsidy  of  the  cost  of  created
employment, a stable corporate income tax rate for a period of 12 years from the completion of
the investment project. In order to qualify for the aid schemes, the investment projects should
entail initial investment, for example, investment in buildings, machinery, intangible assets, and
should  meet  certain  conditions  (i.e.  creation  of  new  production  units,  expansion  of  existing
production units’ capacity, etc.).
On top of the above, the recent conclusion of a number of major privatization projects — such as
the privatization of the port of Piraeus, which will upgrade its role as a shipping hub, the sale of
14  regional  airports  in  key  tourist  destination  islands  and  cities,  the  sale  and  real  estate
development of the old Athens Airport facilities at Hellinikon, as well as the participation of private
investors  in  the  recapitalization  of  Greek  banks  —  constitute  an  important  vote  of  confidence
from major foreign investors, who decided to position themselves early on the Greek market, in
anticipation of even better future prospects for the Greek economy.
Going  beyond  recent  policy  changes,  Greece  provides  significant  investment  opportunities  on
account of its geographical location in Southeast Europe and its close proximity to the Middle
East and the Arab world. There are potential gains in the trade, logistics, transport and energy
sectors as Greece aspires to become a transport and energy hub in future years, which implies
significant infrastructure, networks and other investment needs.
Moreover,  significant  investment  opportunities  exist  in tourism  as  Greece  is  a  major  tourist
destination, and at the same time it has a sizeable public real estate property that is available for
utilization by private investors in order to expand capacity and quality of tourism infrastructure.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Last  but  not  least,  Greece  is  both  a  member  of  the European  Union  and  the  euro  area.
Currency redenomination issues are off the table for good. Consequently, prospective non-EU
investors  will  benefit  from  gaining  access  to  the EU  Single  Market and  will  enjoy  a  stable
institutional  environment,  investor  protection,  as  well  as  access  to a  sound  banking  and
financial system.
Therefore, Greek assets in general can be regarded as undervalued, which, on account of all the
recent  policy  changes,  the  improvement  of  labour  cost  competitiveness  and  the  country’s
competitive  advantages,  have  great  potential  to  perform  much  better  in  the  future,  generating
substantial profits for new investors.
  In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  once  again  that  economic  adjustment  and  structural
improvements over the past six years have rendered Greece more business-friendly and have
opened  up  significant  investment  opportunities,  in  particular  for  those  who  will  position
themselves  early  in  the  Greek  economy. At  the  same  time,  foreign  direct  investment  is  also
essential for Greece, because it will set in motion a virtuous circle signaling investor confidence
in  Greece’s  future  prospects,  a  definite  exit  from  the  crisis  and  a  return  to  sustainable  and
extrovert economic growth.
Sources:
Bank of Greece (2016), Annual Report 2015, February. 
Bank of Greece (2016), Monetary Policy 2015–2016, June. 
OECD (2016), Greece, OECD Economic Surveys, March. 
Stournaras,  Y.  (2016),  “The  Greek  Economy:  Developments,  Opportunities  and  Prospects”.
Speech at the Federation of Industries of Northern Greece, Thessaloniki, 13 May 2016. 
Stournaras,  Y.  (2016),  “Greece  and  the  Eurozone  at  a  crossroads”.  Speech  at  an  event
organised by the Young Presidents’ Organization in Athens, 23 September 2016. 
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
