Collegio Carlo Alberto
Università degli Studi di Torino
Economic Challenges Facing Europe 
and the World
Panel Discussion of Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy
Luigi Federico Signorini
Moncalieri, 19 December 2016
       Germany  and  Italy  have  been  called  on  to  chair  the  G20  and  G7  in 
economically and politically turbulent times, in the world at large as well as in our 
common  European  home.  Several  years  down  the  road,  the  legacies  of  the 
global  financial  crisis  and  of  the  sovereign  crisis  in  the  euro  area  are  still 
apparent.  Sluggish  growth,  high  private  and  public  debt,  unemployment  and 
underemployment,  as  well  as  a  general  sense  of  disillusionment  among  broad 
swathes of the population  are affecting  many countries to  varying  extents. These 
facts  and  feelings  are  also  engendering  widespread  ‘anti-globalization’  sentiment, 
as well as doubts about the European project.  
This  reaction  has  deep-rooted  causes  on  which  I  shall  spend  a  few  words 
later but first of all, let me point out that this is one of the most compelling reasons 
why coordination between the German and Italian presidencies is so important. We 
must  exploit  synergies  and  join  efforts  to  reach  the  broadest  possible  consensus 
among advanced and emerging economies, taking actions that can stem what I see 
as a potentially dangerous spiral of rising disaffection and protectionism. 
The  Italian  Presidency  will  continue  the  work  of  past  G7s  in  well-known 
areas,  combating  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing,  fostering  international 
cooperation  among  tax  authorities  and  enhancing  cyber  security  (the  latter  an 
increasingly  pressing  issue  on  today’s  global  agenda).  But  there  is  also  the 
intention to promote an open-minded and broad debate on two issues that that go 
some way to addressing the concerns I mentioned earlier.  
The  first  issue,  financial  regulation,  has  been  at  the  centre  of  our  agenda 
since  the  outbreak  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  when  the  G20  and  its  technical 
bodies took on the task of redesigning financial sector regulations to avert similar 
shocks  in  the  future.  The  past  few  years  have  seen  a  comprehensive,  radical 
overhaul  of  financial  regulation.  It  seems  reasonable  now  to  step  back  for  a 
moment and look at the bigger picture. Have we done enough? Or is it possible that 
we have been doing even too much? 
 The re-regulation of the banking system has certainly been necessary, timely, 
and – within the limits of human fallibility – I believe it has done a lot to make banks 
safer. But we need to know where to stop, at least for some time. We need, first, to 
give a minimum of stability to the regulatory framework; second, to take stock of the 
work  done  and  gain  experience  to  evaluate  its  longer-term  effects;  third,  and 
perhaps most importantly, strike a balance between securing the financial system 
and avoiding rules that would overly penalize risk-taking, without which no growth is 
possible.  At  the  beginning  of  this  year  the  group  of  central  bank  governors  and 
heads  of  supervision  of  the  G20  instructed  the  Basel  Committee  to  refrain  from 
‘significantly  increasing  overall  capital  requirements’1  at  this  stage.  The  Basel  3 
package  is  currently  being  finalised  on  this  premise.  While  agreement  is  not  yet 
assured, I think we are close. Let me take this opportunity to say that my firm view 
is  that  an  agreement  is  necessary  to  give  certainty  to  the  financial  world.  The 
conditions are there and we should not miss the opportunity.  
Assuming  such  an  agreement  can  be  reached,  in  the  field  of  banking 
regulation  the  next  few  years  should  be  devoted  to  maintaining  the  regulatory 
system, not to overhauling it radically once again; we also need to review the rules, 
by  checking  for  any  embedded  procyclicality  or  other  unintended  consequences, 
rather than establishing further capital requirements.   
Efforts  to  limit  banking  risks,  however,  are  only  part  of  the  answer.  The 
financial  landscape  is  changing  apace.  The  growth  of  intermediaries  outside  the 
banking sector points to the need for new micro- and macro-prudential tools. Work 
has begun in this area but much remains to be done.   
Furthermore,  a  host  of  innovations  (digital  currencies,  distributed  ledgers, 
peer-to-peer lending, crowdfunding, to name but a few) have opened new frontiers 
for financial services and started to blur the boundaries of the financial sector itself. 
There is great potential for financial inclusion and efficiency gains here, but there 
are  also  implications  for  monetary  operations  and  transmission,  as  well  as  new 
risks  to  stability,  integrity,  and  end-user  protection.  This  raises  issues  about  the 
1  Group  of  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  (10  January  2016);  as  Stefan 
Ingves,  chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee,  recently  noted,  this  must  be  one  of  the  most 
frequently cited phrases in regulation debates these days. 
 perimeter  of  financial  regulation  and  the  appropriate  regulatory  and  policy 
measures. The FSB and various standard-setting bodies have already conducted a 
broad  discussion  on  general  themes  like  definitions,  opportunities  and  risks;  it  is 
now time to turn to discussing concrete policy questions. A key point at this stage is 
to  decide  what  requires  swift  international  coordination,  and  what  is  best  left,  at 
least for now, to jurisdiction-level experimentation.  
The G7 and G20 have a key role in steering the process of finalising the 
post-crisis financial regulation.  
 The second issue that the Italian presidency intends to move forward on is 
that of inclusive  growth. Here, too, there needs to  be interaction between the G7 
and G20, not least because economic and social marginalization is a concern for 
advanced and emerging economies alike.   
Inequality is a new subject to acquire top priority in the G7 agenda, but it is 
now  at  the  forefront  of  the  political  debate.  Its  causes,  trends  and  political 
consequences are discussed daily by the media and have become a popular topic 
in economic research as well.   
Let me first state one fact that is too easily forgotten. Globalization has been 
an  enormous  driver  of  growth  in  emerging  countries,  including  in  the  two  largest 
countries  in  the  world.  It  has  thus  reduced  overall  world  inequality.  It  has  lifted 
millions, indeed hundreds of millions, out of poverty.   
At the same time, inequalities within countries have increased. This is most 
obvious in a number of emerging economies. But in advanced economies too, the 
benefits of globalisation have not been equally distributed. Growth has been more 
subdued  than  in  emerging  economies;  the  income  of  the  median  household  in 
many  countries  has  stagnated  over  the  past  decades;  the  middle  classes’ 
perception of the future has worsened.  
While this fact is more or less universally true, the causes and effects differ 
somewhat  across  countries.  In  Italy,  for  example,  where  the  recession  has  been 
in  other  advanced  economies,  younger 
more  severe  and  protracted 
than 
 generations  have  been  hit  hardest,  with  high  (though  now  decreasing)  rates  of 
unemployment,  a  greater  risk  of  poverty,  and  reduced  income  and  career 
opportunities.   
In  any event,  the perception that there  is a  need to counter rising inequality 
and mitigate its consequences is widespread. Policy options to deal with this fact will 
be the focus of the discussions that we propose to stimulate within the G7 and G20.   
However, one should be aware that perceptions of economic unfairness and 
concerns about diminished lifetime prospects, while important, are hardly the whole 
story;  dissatisfaction  and  disillusionment  in  our  societies,  and  growing  diffidence 
towards  international  and  supranational  institutions,  are  likely  to  have  broader 
causes.  In  other  words,  the  perception  that  something  has  gone  wrong  extends 
beyond the losers from globalization (as some analyses of the votes in the U.S and 
U.K. have suggested)2, and comprises a range of countries with different trends in 
growth and inequality.   
This is certainly not the right occasion, nor am I the right person, to propose 
an  exhaustive  analysis  of  this  extremely  complex  phenomenon.  The  question  of 
what ultimately ‘lies behind it’, and where it will lead, is a very broad question, which 
must be left to future historians. Many factors are surely at play; most entail both 
opportunities and risks. Let me briefly allude to two points.  
First, the fact that we are no longer in a world dominated by a clash between 
opposing  blocks,  where  long-standing  ideologies  offered  a  general  frame  of 
reference for political debate, but one in which, to borrow Bauman’s3 term, social 
and political identities are more ‘liquid’, has freed minds, which is good. But it also 
risks making some policy debates narrow and context-free, and fostering identities 
based  exclusively  on  the  narrow  local  community  or  on  ethnicity,  feeding  fear  or 
hatred towards those outside a restricted group.   
The explosion of  social media and of  new  ways of sharing  information and 
ideas, unfiltered by political and cultural elites, is also likely to have played a role. 
2  Danny Quah and Kishore Mahububani, Project Syndicate, Dec 9, 2016 ‘The Geopolitics of 
Populism’. 
                                                        
3  Zygmunt Bauman, 2000, Liquid modernity, Cambridge (UK), Polity. 
  
Certainly,  there  is  something  very  positive  and  intrinsically  democratic  about  the 
ease  with  which  so  many  people  can  access  information  and  knowledge  once 
reserved to privileged groups and rich societies. On the other hand, users may at 
times be left with no idea as to the reliability of the facts and depth of the analysis. 
(Umberto Eco, who passed away earlier this year, would have put it more strongly). 
In  an  ideology-free  world,  this  may  lead  to  uninformed  policy  discussions.  Free, 
unfettered debate is a blessing; the lack of reality checks is not.  
 The reason why I mentioned all this is that I want to devote the second part of 
this  speech  to  Europe,  and  attitudes  towards  the  European  project,  which  is 
certainly suffering as a result of this mood of disaffection and exacerbated localism. 
Consensus around Europe, which was once very strong in countries such as Italy 
and Germany, can no longer be taken for granted. People have started questioning 
what it is for, and what is in it for them.   
The  issue  of  the  ultimate  goal  of  European  integration  remains  very  much 
one of  beliefs and  identities and  I shall  not discuss it  here (though  I shan’t resist 
confessing to my own at the end). Regardless of such preferences, and just taking 
as given the considerable degree of integration that has already been achieved, it is 
fair  to  ask  whether  European  institutions  actually  serve  their  purpose  reasonably 
well,  and  what  can  be  done  to  improve  how  they  work.  While  the  disaffection  of 
Europe’s citizens may well be more general in its origins, it cannot be addressed 
without first answering this question.  
There  are  many  ways  to  do  so,  but  let  me  propose  here  an  institutional 
perspective which, I believe, has implications that tend to go largely unnoticed but 
are far from inconsequential.  
If  we  look  at  the  architecture  of  the  European  Union,  it  is  possible  to 
observe that it now bears a very close resemblance to ‘normal’ constitutions as far 
as  Parliament  and  the  judiciary  are  concerned,  but  not  at  all  for  the  executive 
branch.  
Today the EU has an elected Parliament with a central institutional role; it 
co-decides  on  legislation,  mostly  on  a  par  with  the  Council;  it  has  budgetary 
 and  oversight  powers;  in  short,  though  within  a  narrower  mandate,  its  status, 
composition and powers are largely comparable to those of parliaments in any 
democratic polity.  
The Union also has a judicial system that ensures the uniform interpretation 
and application of EU law. While the make-up of its constituent courts is somewhat 
unique,  and  while  its  rulings  are  obviously  confined  to  matters  that  the  Treaties 
assign to the Union, the attributions and actual functioning of the European Court of 
Justice are akin to those of an ultimate court of appeal or a constitutional court in 
many democracies.   
The  executive  function,  to  the  extent  that  this  concept  can  be  applied  to 
Europe, is more unusual. The EU is in the unique position of having two institutional 
branches with powers of political direction, the Council and the Commission, with 
very  different  compositions  and  sources  of  legitimacy.  Moreover,  each  branch 
exercises different functions beyond those typical of governments.   
The  European  Council,  made  up  of  the  heads  of  the  governments  of  the 
member states, provides ‘impetus’ and, in a rather vaguely defined but practically 
important  way,  sets  the  policy  agenda.  It  has  maximum  influence  in  foreign  and 
security matters. At the same time, national governments, represented at a lower 
level in the Council of the EU, also play a key role in the legislative process.   
The European Commission, on the other hand, currently resembles in many 
ways a government in a parliamentary system. The Commission’s President, while 
proposed by the Council, must survive a vote in Parliament; Commission members 
require  Parliament’s  consent.  This  is  not  just  nominal:  after  the  2014  elections, 
Parliament  made  it  clear  that  it  would  vote  down  any  nominee  except  the 
Spitzenkandidat of the party that got the most votes. Like a normal government, the 
Commission manages and implements EU policies and the budget, and represents 
the Union outside Europe. But it lacks a clear ultimate power of direction.   
At the same time, in certain fields and with respect to its general function of 
‘custodian of the Treaties’, the Commission plays a role that would typically belong 
to the domain of independent, quasi-judicial regulatory authorities, for example by 
enforcing  competition  rules.  As  an  executive  body,  it  is  essentially  political;  as  a 
 technical  authority,  it  is  bound  by  objectivity  and  independence.  The  two  do  not 
square well: making discretionary policy choices and impartially enforcing technical 
rules are not the same thing.  
I  would  also  mention  in  passing  that  this  complexity  is  heightened  by  the 
distinction between the EU and the euro area, the latter having a Euro Summit for 
agenda-setting and a Eurogroup in a coordinating role. 
 Why  do  I  mention  this?  Because,  regardless  of  what  one  thinks  about  any 
further  moves  to  full  political  union,  the  amount  of  sovereignty  that  has  already 
been pooled at the European level, especially in economic and financial matters, is 
very  substantial.  When  Europe  was  mostly  about  things  like  fishing  quotas  and 
agricultural prices, important as these matters are, one could more or less live with 
a suboptimal arrangement. Now that it has a key role in certain issues that go to the 
heart of the political debate in any country, such as budget balances and financial 
stability,  this  is  no  longer  the  case.  The  issue  of  a  proper  executive  must  be 
addressed.  
The lack of a conventional executive branch is paralleled by the lack of some 
of  the  instruments  typically  available  to  a  government.  On  the  eve  of  the  single 
currency  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  noted 
for 
macroeconomic policy is, with the exception of the monetary field, embryonic and 
unbalanced: it can avoid harm (excessive deficits) but it cannot do good (a proper 
fiscal  policy).  (…)  It  is  thus  right  not  only  to  applaud  yesterday’s  step  but  also  to 
underline its unfinished nature, the risks and the rashness’.4   
the  Union’s 
‘capability 
that 
Without any clear institutional framework for discretionary political action, but 
in view of the massive transfer of sovereignty, European economic governance has 
largely  been  based  on  rules:  budget  rules,  the  ban  on  rescues  between  member 
countries,  rules  on  banking  supervision  and  resolution,  and  so  on.  Rules  are 
necessary, but there is a limit to what they can achieve.  You cannot run a large, 
advanced, diverse economy on autopilot.  
4 Corriere della Sera, 3 May, 1998. 
 Most  transfers  of  sovereignty  in  fiscal  and  financial  matters  have  been 
prompted  by  crisis  situations.  Since  the  eruption  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis, 
emergency  measures  have  been  progressively  accompanied  by  reforms  of  EU 
governance and especially of the euro area, starting with enhanced public finance 
rules  and  macroeconomic  surveillance.  In  the  summer  of  2012,  the  ‘Four 
Presidents’  Report’  envisaged  complementing  or  replacing  national  intervention 
tools  with  common  instruments.  For  banks,  the  report  proposed  transferring 
supervisory  responsibility  to  the  euro  area  and  establishing  joint  crisis  resolution 
and deposit guarantee mechanisms, to be supported with public funds through the 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM).  As  to  public  finance,  in  addition  to 
implementing the reforms already approved (the Six Pack and the Fiscal Compact), 
it  proposed  gradual  steps  towards  the  creation  of  a  euro-area  budget  and  the 
issuance  of  common  debt.  Most  of  these  proposals  were  taken  up  again  in 
subsequent reports, including the ‘Five Presidents’ Report’ of June 2015.   
Restrictions on the use of national mechanisms were put in place quickly. But 
the introduction of European instruments has been partial and virtually non-existent 
on the fiscal side. Member states are now constrained by more rules that say what 
cannot be done, while the EU has not gained more powers to decide what should 
be done, nor has it the tools or institutional framework to implement the policies that 
are needed. This creates a situation of vulnerability: there is a danger that national 
and European authorities will be unable to react appropriately to shocks.  
  By way of example, let’s consider fiscal policy in some detail.   
It  goes  without  saying  that  fiscal  rules  are  necessary  in  a  monetary  union. 
They serve as a coordination mechanism, ensuring that all national fiscal policies 
contribute to maintaining financial stability in the area. Poor compliance with fiscal 
rules in the period preceding the crisis justified their being strengthened.   
Coming from a country with a high public debt, I am especially conscious of 
this. Let me be absolutely clear: the Bank of Italy has constantly reminded Italian 
authorities  of  the  importance  of  fiscal  discipline.  At  Parliamentary  hearings  on 
budget plans I have not failed once to underline the strategic nature of the objective 
of debt reduction.   
    The issue is about what you can realistically achieve through a system based 
mainly on rules. Simple rules do not work well in practice. It would be unreasonable 
to take decisions on the fiscal stance without considering the cyclical situation of the 
economy, or exceptional circumstances. In the absence of a substantial EU budget, 
some degree of flexibility in the rules constraining national budgets is unavoidable.   
Thus  realism  has  required  the  introduction  of  more  and  more  elements  of 
flexibility, and these in turn have required more safeguards to fend off abuses. With 
exceptions and counter-exceptions, over time the fiscal rules and their application 
have become exceedingly complex. It now takes a specialist to navigate the various 
definitions  of  objectives  and  constraints  in  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Certain 
definitions,  like  the  ‘structural’  budget,  rely  on  statistics  that  are  open  to 
interpretation and debate: there are many possible measures of the output gap, for 
instance.  Waivers 
require,  by  definition,  a 
discretionary  assessment.  The  system  is  too  intricate  to  be  transparent  to  the 
public, nevertheless, it remains incomplete: in the real world, there is no such thing 
as a ‘complete contract’.   
for  exceptional  circumstances 
This is one case where the ambivalence between the Commission’s political 
and technical roles is apparent. There are tensions between the impartial, technical, 
rule-based assessment that it is called on to perform, and the multitude of real-life 
circumstances  that  it  faces,  in  a  climate  where  discussions  often  reach  a  heated 
political  temperature.  In  this  context  the  Commission  is  unavoidably  prone  to 
accusations of arbitrariness.   
The absence of a substantial European budget and the complications of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  interconnected.  With  some  fiscal  capacity  at  the 
European level, the constraints on national budgets could be made simpler.   
The Commission’s recent focus on an appropriate fiscal stance for the euro 
area  as  a  whole,  and  attempt  to  quantify  it  for  the  first  time,  are  welcome 
developments. My point here is not to discuss whether this quantitative assessment 
is  correct,  a  subject  of  intense  debate.  My  point  is  to  stress  that  in  our  current 
decentralized  policy  setting,  implementing  whatever  aggregate  fiscal  stance  one 
thinks appropriate is difficult, and may result in a suboptimal distribution of efforts 
across countries.   
 Automatic  stabilizers  embedded  in  a  common  budget,  on  which  the 
discussion has mostly focused so far, would partially free national budgets from the 
pressures  arising  from  adverse  cyclical  conditions.  A  common  budget,  however, 
could  also  be  used  to  adopt  discretionary  measures  consistent  with  the  cyclical 
conditions in various economies and in the euro area as a whole.  
Discretion does  not  mean total freedom  from constraints: just as they have 
been  introduced  at  the  national  level,  constitutional  limits  on  spending  or  deficits 
can  be  set  at  the  European  level.  It  only  requires  acknowledging  that  it  is 
impossible  to  govern  public  finances  by  rules  alone;  that  no  complete  contract 
exists  in  public  finances  that  can  allow  a  democracy  to  dispense  with  open, 
transparent debate on budget decisions; and that, to the extent that spillovers and 
the  common  good  require  the  imposition  of  significant  constraints  on  national 
budgets, some fiscal space must be found at the European level.   
Just to be clear, a common budget for the future does not imply mutualisation 
of past debt. That is a different discussion.  
No  mechanism  should  entail  permanent  transfers  across  member  states. 
Not  only  would  this  be  politically  unfeasible.  My  own  experience  with  regional 
differences  in  Italy  tells  me  that  structural  fiscal  compensation  of  economic 
disparities  eventually  does  not  end  them –  it  entrenches  them.  So,  for  instance, 
any  EU-wide  automatic  stabilisers  should  be  designed  to  be  geographically 
neutral in the long run.   
The  need  to  complement  rules  that  constrain  local  action  with  the 
constitutional capacity to act at the European level could be illustrated using several 
different examples besides the fiscal budget.   
Bank  supervision  and  resolution 
is  another  obvious  example.  Time 
constraints  prevent  me  from  going  into  detail  on  this;  I  will  leave  that  for  another 
occasion.  But  let  me  just  briefly  say  that,  while  banking  union  has  progressed 
considerably,  it  must  ultimately  incorporate  all  the  elements  envisaged  in  the 
original  design:  a  single  supervisor,  a  single  and  effective  resolution  mechanism, 
with  pooled  resources  and  the  determination  to  use  them  when  necessary,  a 
common  deposit  insurance  scheme,  and  finally  a  European  public  financial 
    backstop. This requires effective European resources and decision-making powers, 
so that institutions can act swiftly, boldly and freely when needed.  
 Building  the  capacity  to  act  at  the  European  level,  and  not  just  rules  to 
constrain national action, requires trust and institutional foresight. Many would say 
that the current circumstances make such steps politically difficult. There can be no 
question of trying to forge ahead with measures that many citizens are not prepared 
to accept. Still, I think it is useful to point to issues in the functioning of European 
institutions that experience and reflection tell me are important.   
A Europe that can only say ‘no’ is no consensus winner anyway.  
I may be biased by a personal lifelong commitment to Europe. I often tell the 
story that my two grandfathers fought on opposite sides during the Great War. They 
might well have killed each other. They were, however, on different fronts, and they 
didn’t. That’s why I say sometimes that Europe is, literally, in my DNA.  
I understand very well that such memories come to mean progressively less 
to younger generations. But the young are also those who seem to feel the most 
disaffected, the most estranged from the ‘establishment’, and the most in need of 
clearer, brighter long-term prospects. If something does not seem to be working, it 
is  no  use  refraining  from  suggesting  improvements,  such  as  one  can  think  of.  If 
these suggestions have any merit, the time will come when they become feasible. 
 