Pentti  Hakkarainen:  Capital-based  macro-prudential  instruments  -
what type of policy tools are needed to address macro-prudential
risks in the banking sector?
Notes by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, for the panel discussion
on  "Capital-based  macro-prudential  instruments  -  what  type  of  policy  tools  are  needed  to
address macro-prudential risks in the banking sector?", EU Commission's Public Hearing on the
Review of the EU macro-prudential framework. Brussels, 7 November 2016.
 Thank  you  for  your  invitation  to  speak  here  today  in  front  of  this  distinguished  audience.  This
review of the EU macroprudential framework is very essential work for the European Union.
In  my  opening  remark,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  two  points  on  capital-based  macro-
prudential instruments, based on our own policy making experiences: First, effects of the said
instruments are uncertain and second, processes for their usage are unnecessary complicated.
These points are intertwined.
Let me start by saying that macroprudential policy is needed addition to other economic policies.
It  is  very  important  that  authorities  have  also  macroprudential  instruments  available.  We
experienced in Finland in the early 1990’s a severe boom and bust cycle, at a time when we did
not  have  any  such  tools.  Now,  after  the  Great  Financial  Crisis,  we  have  instruments  and
framework in place. My comments today should be perceived as suggestions for improvements
only and not criticism of the framework and instruments.
We  have  several  capital-based  instruments  available  via  CRR/CRDIV,  but  in  practice  we
have found it difficult to find an “appropriate” instrument to mitigate systemic risks related to
residential real estate and household indebtedness.
Some countries are already trying to curb acceleration of growth in prices and indebtedness,
while we in Finland have been more troubled with existing levels of indebtedness and muted
macroeconomic outlook.
When  banks  are  well-capitalized  and  hold  voluntary  buffers  well  above  regulatory  capital
requirements,  broad  based  additional  capital  requirements,  as  macroprudential  tools,  are
less effective and more targeted measures would be more appropriate, in my view.
Banks  with  high  capital  buffers  have  no  need  to  respond  to  these  macroprudential  policy
actions, and therefore the impact may either be marginal or different than what was aimed
at.
I am not sure whether the differences in banking structures and their solvency metrics were
sufficiently  considered  when  the  European  legislation  for  macroprudential  policy  was
designed.
I do not suggest that we would need new capital-based instruments, but the existing ones
could be fine-tuned to increase some flexibility. With flexibility I do not mean that countries
should use different tools to the same symptom. On the contrary, I would rather argue for
less overlap between instruments. 
But, more targeted macroprudential policy via capital-based instruments could be achieved
by explicitly allowing usage of CCB and SRB (countercyclical and systemic risk buffers) also
to address systemic risks in specific sectors, e.g. by applying them to residential real estate
loans.
Turning to my second point, flexibility in instruments could further be enhanced by easing
application criteria and simplifying decision-making procedures. However, a comprehensive
assessment taking into account all relevant measures and their effects would be helpful in
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
informing macroprudential decisions.
For example, article 458 is considerably more difficult and time-consuming to use than Pillar
2  instruments,  which  in  our  view  should  not  be  used  as  primary  macro-prudential  policy
instrument. Therefore, removing the “pecking order” in CRR Art. 458 would be beneficial.
On Pillar 2, I would further like to point out that several competent authorities, of which some
are outside the SSM or EU, are relevant in the Nordic banking sector. Therefore, decisions
on  risk  weights  impacting  capital,  or  using  other  competent  authority’s  tools  for
macroprudential  purposes  may  be  complicated,  as  they  are  not  in  the  hands  of  the
macroprudential decision maker.
Conditions for using capital-based measures are not self-evident, neither are their timing nor
calibration.
When  applying  macroprudential  instruments  in  practice,  it  is  vital  to  know  expected
consequences and effects on banks, debtors and macroeconomy. Without such knowledge,
policy  makers  cannot  take  into  account  all  relevant  factors  when  making  the  decisions.
Afterwards, it is difficult to judge the effectiveness of the measures taken and possible needs
to adjust their calibration.
Impact analysis in general, both ex ante and ex post, is still at its early development steps.
However,  what  we  already  know  is  that  borrower  based  instruments  (LTI/DSTI/LTV/loan
amortization)  are  likely  more  efficient  than  capital-based  measures  for  systemic  risks  I
referred to in the beginning.
Borrower based instruments are specific and targeted instruments, but politically sensitive
and in public interest. Therefore, decision making of those instruments should remain at the
national level.
In  a  very  integrated  market  there  are,  however,  many  ways  to  circumvent  policy  actions.
Thus, reciprocity is of essence. Making reciprocity effective requires that tools available in
different EU-countries are sufficiently standardized.
Preferably,  borrower  based  tools  should  be  introduced  into  European  legislation  because
that would ensure the availability of those instruments in each jurisdiction. At a minimum, I
would see benefits in some level of EU-wide harmonization. This would be needed already
for level playing field reasons, for enabling cross-country comparisons and reciprocation.
Our  challenge  in  applying  capital-based  macroprudential  instruments  is  how  to  achieve  a
correct  impact  and  in  time.  Swift,  straightforward  decision  making  process  is  one
precondition for successful macroprudential policy going forward. However, the conduct of
macroprudential policy doesn’t require only a good timing but also a careful consideration of
interplay with other economic policies. As it has been pointed out in many occasions – like
the IMF Seminar “Rethinking Macropolicy III; Progress or Confusion?” – we may not know
exactly how to best use macroprudential instruments, but we know that we are on the right
track."
To sum up. I called for some flexibility, as systemic risks and banking structures differ from
one country to another. Macroprudential policy framework was created in a way that would
mitigate inherent inaction bias in unpopular decisions. Legislation could be developed further
into that direction, as we need more actions and less “talking to the wind”. We in Finland
have national, SSM, EU and Nordic links and procedures in place. Every measure to simplify
processes and to diminish bureaucracy would be more than welcome.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
