Vítor  Constâncio:  Challenges 
frameworks - a European perspective
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 19th Annual
International  Banking  Conference  "Achieving  Financial  Stability:  Challenges  to  Prudential
Regulation", Chicago, 4 November 2016.
future  monetary  policy
for 
 Luncheon speeches should be thought-provoking and entertaining. Unfortunately, that’s a dual
mandate  that’s  beyond  the  ability  of  this  central  banker  to  deliver.  But  if  I  cannot  provide
entertainment, allow me to at least provide some thoughts to hopefully provoke some discussion
over our meal. To do this, allow me to deviate a little from the main theme of the conference and
turn to another topic of common interest. In a cursory and compressed way, I would like to make
some remarks on the ongoing debate about the future of monetary policy frameworks, a subject
that has become quite topical here in the U.S.
We  are  now  nine  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis.  Considering  the  role  of  an
overstretched  monetary  policy  to  stave  off  a  deeper  recession,  the  following  questions  were
bound to emerge: has monetary policy done enough, should it continue along the same path?
Are low, or even negative, rates a permanent feature of monetary policy? Should the size and
composition of the central bank balance-sheet continue to be used as an unconventional tool?
Should the flexible inflation targeting regime continue to be the dominant framework? Should the
target for inflation be increased, or should we adopt a nominal GDP or price-level target instead?
Should monetary policy closely follow a concrete rule like, for instance, a Taylor Rule? Should we
assume a neo-Fisherian framework and admit that there are multiple economic equilibria and
that rates should be increased to avoid leaving the economy stuck in a low level one? Should the
operational  implementation  of  monetary  policy  go  beyond  short-term  market  rates  or  beyond
banks  as  counterparties?  Finally,  have  these  questions  a  different  meaning  when  addressed
from Europe or from the U.S.?
These questions are at the forefront of central banking discussion at present, as evidenced by
the Jackson Hole gathering this year. They are also debated by academia, the blogosphere and
at official conferences. Be reassured, though, I will not address most of them at this occasion.
The topic is too vast and my remarks would be scattered and incomplete. Instead, I will focus on
the questions surrounding the choice of target and the choice of instruments.
The debate is, unsurprisingly, more advanced here in the U.S. than in Europe, given the stronger
recovery and policy normalisation already under way. Logically, this raises questions about the
future  use  of  unconventional  instruments  and  the  efficiency  of  policy  regimes  to  deal  with  a
possible future recession.
The debate is embryonic in Europe, as the recovery remains moderate, with economic growth
and inflation only recently starting to gain momentum. Furthermore, the debate will necessarily
be more constrained given that the ECB’s hierarchical mandate, defined in primary law, confers
absolute primacy to price stability over other secondary objectives.
In fact, the debate about the dominant monetary policy regime – Flexible Inflation Targeting (FIT)
– started immediately after the emergence of the crisis. There were doubts about whether the
narrow objective of monetary policy had allowed the crisis to develop by not reacting to the signs
of  financial  instability  and  asset  price  booms.  The  question  about  the  integration  of  financial
stability concerns into the objective function of monetary policy has stayed with us, in spite of the
fragile consensus that such concerns should be the purview of macroprudential policy.
More recently, further doubts about FIT arose over the inability of monetary policy to engineer a
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
quicker recovery, strong enough to bring the economy back to its previous trend. Besides placing
too much faith in monetary policy, this also opens the discussion about the targets of monetary
policy.
Changing central banks’ targets
In  that  discussion,  a  popular  proposal  is  to  adopt  a  target  for  nominal  GDP.  There  are  clear
merits  to  nominal  income  targeting  from  a  theoretical  perspective,  since  it  is  a  close
approximation  to  the  optimal  policy  prescribed  by  standard  macroeconomic  models.  Under
perfect credibility, such a target is fully consistent with maintaining price stability in the medium
1
run.
The proposal made by Meade, back in 1978, has had many illustrious supporters.  It offers the
rationale to accommodate cost or supply side shocks that impact inflation and would have led to
more  expansionary  policies  since  the  crisis  to  counter  the  growing  GDP  deviation  from  the
previous  growth  trend.  The  proposal  faces,  however,  considerable  practical  difficulties:  from
GDP data that is untimely and prone to revision to the demanding task of communicating to the
public about a concept they do not directly experience. Another implementation obstacle relates
to uncertainty over potential output, which risks nominal GDP targets delivering higher inflation
without any benefit for real economic activity.
2
That  said,  as  shown  for  instance  by  Charles  Bean  (2009),   the  practical  difference  between
nominal GDP targeting and inflation targeting is not substantial. FIT permits policymakers to look
through  short-term  supply  shocks,  monetary  policy  would  be  similarly  accommodative  in  the
case of aggregate demand shocks under either type of target. Long ago, Lars Svensson showed
how FIT, by aiming to return to the target only gradually, is equivalent to the use of an objective
4
function with both inflation and the output gap.
3
Finally, it is not easy for monetary policy to deliver a nominal income target. The enthusiasm of
the supporters of the market monetarism school - believing that monetary aggregates could do
the job – stands out as empirically unfounded.
So while a nominal income target may be theoretically superior, I remain very sceptical of its
practical use, above and beyond the legal constraints that inhibit its adoption in the euro area.
A concept that seems close to a nominal income target is the adoption of a type of Taylor rule to
conduct monetary policy. Lars Svensson would insist on the distinction between a targeting rule
and an instrument rule, which is a formula for setting the central bank’s instrument rate as a
function  of  target  variables.  He  has  pointed  out  the  shortcomings  of  the  latter.   Benhabib,
Schmitt-Grohé  and  Uribe  (2001)   have  also  showed  how  Taylor  rules  combined  with  a  zero
lower bound would lead to multiple equilibria. It is not by chance that no central bank has ever
committed to following an instrument rule.
5
6
The problem of the lower bound on interest rates led some economists  to propose an increase
in  the  inflation  target  to  create  more  room  above  the  lower  bound  to  respond  to  future
recessionary episodes. However, changing the inflation objective at a time when outcomes have
been below the current objective for a number of years, risks damaging central banks credibility.
Changing  the  objective,  say  to  4%,  would  only  be  effective  if  inflation  expectations  were
successfully  re-anchored  at  the  higher  level,  which  would  be  unattainable  in  present
circumstances.
Changing the policy instruments: negative rates
7
Turning now to the domain of instruments, let me start with negative interest rates, which have
been used across Europe. The central bank deposit rate is negative in the euro area, Switzerland
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and Sweden, with the main Swedish policy rate also negative. Negative rates have been effective
in  lowering  the  whole  spectrum  of  short-term  rates,  and  also  at  longer  maturities  via
expectations. In this perspective, it has been a good complement to quantitative easing (QE).
The intention behind the policy has always been temporary – to boost aggregate demand, closing
the output gap more quickly, helping to normalise inflation and subsequently interest rates. Only if
central banks were to allow prolonged deflation could negative rates be considered a permanent
instrument. Outside such an environment, the accumulated negative spillovers of negative rates
on  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions,  and  the  interference  on  the  role  of  monetary  and
financial assets as a store of value, would be unacceptable. The long-term consequences of an
environment with low but positive inflation and negative rates would become too severe for the
financial sector, savers and pensioners.
In the short term though, ECB research has shown that the effect on the profitability of financial
institutions has been overall positive, as they benefited from capital gains associated with asset
price increases and, in the case of banks, from lower funding and impairment costs.   These
effects, however, decline with time and are likely to fade out at some point.
8
9
In spite of these shortcomings, there are several economists supporting the idea that negative
rates should be used practically without limit, and for that to be possible, they propose to abolish
cash  altogether,   which  has  some  theoretical  benefits.  Monetary  policy  would  no  longer  be
constrained  by  the  lower  bound,  providing  ample  room  for  manoeuver  to  counteract  severe
cyclical  downturns.  Banks  would  be  free  to  reduce  their  deposit  rates,  without  the  fear  of
customers withdrawing their money, and to increase their net interest margins. Abolishing cash
would  also  hamper  some  illegal  activities  and  improve  transparency.  Finally,  society  would
benefit  economically  from  eliminating  the  non-trivial  costs  of  storing  and  using  cash.  Also
theoretically,  as  all  economic  agents  are  supposed  to  think  in  real  terms,  further  decreasing
negative rates should be equivalent to reducing positive rates.
10
Money  illusion  however,  is  more  widespread  than  economists  presume.  There  are  important
drawbacks that raise concerns about this proposal. While eliminating certain illegal activities is
desirable,  people  should  have  the  right  to  privacy  on  their  legal  activities,  on  which  full
transparency to governments and, more importantly, to businesses would be unwarranted and
intrusive. Furthermore, as already mentioned, money should continue to perform its function of
store  of  value,  which  the  ability  to  impose  negative  interest  rates  clearly  violates  outside
continuous deflation.
In the light of all these uncertainties, a prudent policy maker would advise to be very cautious
before proceeding with these radical proposals, even if digitalisation may gain ground and finally
prevail – as we start to observe in some countries.
Changing the policy instruments: size and composition of balance-sheets
Traditionally,  central  banks  used  short-term  interest  rates  to  steer  the  economy  and  the  pre-
crisis wisdom was to use as lean a balance sheet as possible.
 The rationale behind the lean
balance sheet was to minimise the intermediation role of the central bank and related potential
market distortions. At the  limit,  financial  assets  should  simply  mirror  banknotes  on  the  liability
side of the central bank’s balance sheet.
11
But institutional arrangements do matter. Prior to the crisis, the Federal Reserve (Fed) dealt with
a small number of counterparties and mostly held Treasuries directly on its balance sheet. By
contrast, the lack of a single fiscal issuer and a fragmented banking sector along national lines
required that the ECB carried out repos with a broad range of counterparties against a broad
range of collateral. Irrespective of the different operational arrangements, central bank balance
sheets on both sides of the Atlantic have grown rapidly since the onset of the crisis, and the
 3 / 6
12
BIS central bankers' speeches
reasons behind this growth provide useful lessons for the post-crisis world. 
12
Beyond the justifications provided by the crisis for the use of the size and composition of central
banks’  balance  sheets  as  policy  instrument,  there  are  good  arguments  to  preserve  the
instrument in the policy toolkit. They stem from some structural changes that have occurred in
financial  markets.  In  particular:  the  increased  role  of  secured  money  market  transactions;  the
importance of a broad set of market rates beyond the overnight rate, in view of imperfections in
arbitrage; the growing relevance of non-bank institutions in market-based finance; and finally, the
scarcity of safe assets that affects the functioning of markets and the management of collateral.
These  developments  are  behind  proposals  recently  presented  in  Jackson  Hole  by  Duffie  and
Krishnamurthy (2016) and by Greenwood, Hanson and Stein (2016) which stress the importance
of the Fed’s reverse repo programme (RRP).
 In the first paper, the programme would be used
to involve more counterparties and affect several interest rates, thereby contributing to a better
transmission of monetary policy, in view of the limits to arbitrage hampering the pass-through
from  short-  to  long-term  interest  rates.  Recent  internal  work  at  the  ECB  also  detects  similar
pass-through imperfections in European markets. In the paper by Greenwood et al. (2016), RRP
is considered a way to create very short-term safe assets. It would foster financial stability by
avoiding the unsuccessful attempts by the private sector to fulfil that role, as we saw before the
crisis.
13
Both arguments deserve careful consideration although they are, from a European perspective
for  the  moment,  less  relevant  or  less  urgent.  In  fact,  the  enduring  predominantly  bank-based
nature of the European financial system allows us to consider the possibility of going back, once
the situation is normalised, to lending to banks as the main channel for managing liquidity and
steering short-term interest rates. Nevertheless, the structural changes that I just mentioned are
also  growing  in  Europe  and  we  have  to  reflect  on  the  possible  limitations  of  monetary  policy
transmission by only influencing the very short end of money-market rates.
Better benchmark rates are needed, ideally relying on actual transaction data to improve their
reliability  and  robustness.  Yet,  moves  to  improve  benchmarks  suffer  at  present  from  the
challenge  of  declining  transaction  volumes  in  the  unsecured  interbank  market  although  the
ongoing work points to a successful conclusion of the reform.
The discussion of which interest rates to focus on is closely intertwined with the issue of central
bank counterparties. The ECB has traditionally granted a broad range of financially sound credit
institutions  access  to  monetary  policy  operations.That  approach  enabled  us  to  swiftly  provide
liquidity to various financial market segments during the crisis where more active central bank
intermediation was warranted. Nevertheless, non-banks are beginning to play a greater role in the
European financial landscape, and are likely to take an even greater role as the Capital Markets
Union deepens and broadens financial markets in Europe.
Such consideration is not neutral for market rates in the euro area. Secured money market rates,
backed by high quality collateral, have for a while been trading well below the ECB deposit facility
rate,  which  normally  sets  a  floor  for  short-term  money  market  rates.  In  part,  this  discount  is
explained  by  non-banks’  activities  that  –  not  having  access  to  central  bank  facilities  –  are
accepting interest rates below the deposit facility rate. The discount is, of course, also attributed
to the Asset Purchase Programme which has reduced the availability of high quality collateral at
the same time as market demand for that collateral has increased. Nonetheless, understanding
these  drivers  is  crucial  for  the  central  bank  when  making  decisions  about  future  counterparty
eligibility and the choice of money market rates used to assess monetary policy transmission.
In this perspective, the path followed in the US will be of great importance for our reflections on
the other side of the Atlantic.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
Let  me  conclude.  A  number  of  potential  changes  to  monetary  policy  frameworks  could  be
necessary to meet the challenges of the new economic environment. I provided my thoughts on
some of them, but omitted many others. Other challenges stem from a prolonged period of low,
albeit  not  negative,  interest  rates  resulting  from  the  decline  in  potential  growth  and  the
demographic  effects  on  savings.
  Indeed,  the  apparent  difficulties  to  reach  higher  levels  of
inflation and real equilibrium interest rates may hamper the capacity of monetary policy to deal
with future recessionary episodes.
14
15
Some  economists  maintain  that  monetary  policy  can  do  almost  everything,  even  if  it  would
require the use of very negative rates, either because they are against the use of fiscal policy or
because  they  genuinely  believe  in  some  form  of  new  monetarism.  Central  bankers  should,
however, avoid such hubris and accept that, at present, the contributions of fiscal, regulatory and
competition  policies  are  necessary  to  foster  investment  and  improve  the  supply  side  of  our
economies.  In  view  of  the  dimension  of  the  challenges  the  world  faces,  I  think  this  word  of
humility is a good coda for a central bank talk.
Thank you for your attention
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Woodford,  M.  (2012),  “Methods  of  Policy Accommodation  at  the  Interest-Rate  Lower  Bound”, Jackson  Hole
Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City on 31 August 2012.
See Meade, J. (1978), “The meaning of internal balance”, The Economic Journal 88: 423–435.
Bean, C. (2009), “The meaning of internal balance thirty years on”, The Economic Journal 119: 442–460.
Svensson, L. E. O. (1997), “Inflation forecast targeting: Implementing and monitoring inflation targets," European
Economic Review, Elsevier, vol. 41(6), pages 1111–1146, June.
Svensson,  L.  E.  O.  (2003),  “What  is  wrong  with  Taylor  rules?  Using  judgement  in  monetary  policy  through
targeting rules” Journal of Economic Literature vol XLI, June, pp 426–477.
Benhabib, J., S. Schmitt-Grohé and M. Uribe (2001) “The perils of Taylor rules” Journal of Economic Theory 96,
40–69.
Blanchard, O., G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,”  IMF Staff Position Note,
12 February SPN 10/03; Krugman, P. (2014), “Inflation targets reconsidered”, ECB Forum on Central Banking
Monetary Policy in a changing financial landscape; Krugman, P. (2012), “Two per cent is not enough”,  The New
York Times, 26 January.
See Rostagno, M., U. Bindseil, A. Kamps, W. Lemke, T. Sugo and T. Vlassopoulos, (2016), “Breaking through
the  zero  line:  the  ECB’s  negative  interest  rate  policy”, Brookings Institution, Washington D.C., 6 June 2016.
Presentation available on the Brookings Institution website.
See Rogoff, K. (2016), “The curse of cash”, Princeton U. P. The idea to abolish currency and move completely to
electronic cash has been suggested at various times by other economists.
See Goodfriend, M. (2016), “The case for unencumbering interest rate policy at the zero lower bound”, Jackson
Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
See Bindseil, U. (2014), “Monetary Policy Operations and the Financial System”, Oxford U. P., pp. 30 for a short
discussion on the concept.
For a broad overview of the impact of the ECB asset purchase programme, see Andrade, P., J. Breckenfelder, F.
De Fiore, P. Karadi and O. Tristani (2016), “The ECB’s asset purchase programme: an early assessment”, ECB
Working Paper No. 1956.
Duffie, D. and A. Krishnamurthy (2016), “Pass-through efficiency in the FED’s new monetary policy setting” and
Greenwood, R., S. Hanson and J. Stein (2016), “The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet as a financial stability
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
tool”, both presented at the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
14
15
See Fischer, S. (2016), “Why are interest rates so low? Causes and implications”, remarks at the Economic
Club of New York, October; Gagnon, E., B. K. Johannsen and D. López-Salido (2016) “Understanding the new
normal: the role of demographics”, Federal Reserve Board Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016–
080.
Yellen,  J.  (2016),  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy  toolkit:  past,  present  and  future”,  remarks  at
the Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City; see also Reifschneider,
D. (2016), “Gauging the ability of the FOMC to respond to future recessions”, Federal Reserve Board Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 2016–068.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
