Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Europe 1
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Europe 1, conducted by Mr Jean-Pierre Elkabbach on 9 December 2016.
 So, the ECB has extended its large-scale purchases of private and public debt. A sum of
€80  billion  was  being  injected  per  month,  and  it  will  be  €60  billion  per  month  until
December  2017,  i.e.  an  extra  nine  months.  The  ECB  is  changing  the  amount  and  the
pace.  Does  that  mean  it’s  a  warning  to  Member  States  to  get  ready  to  fend  for
themselves?
First of all, it’s a sign of confidence in the euro area economy. The fact that we can reduce the
quantity of purchases also shows our confidence in growth and in the ability of inflation to return
towards 2%, which is what we are aiming for.
And how high will inflation be? It’s rising very slowly but it’s not at 2%.
It’s  going  to  increase  very  slowly  and  we  think  it  will  reach  around  1.7%  by  the  end  of  our
projection  period,  so  it  will  be  approaching  2%.  One  way  to  sum  up  simply  what  the  ECB’s
Governing Council decided yesterday is to say that the euro area is recovering, it’s getting better
but it still needs its medicine – an accommodative monetary policy with low rates. So we are
reducing the dose because things are improving but we are extending the prescription for longer.
The euro area is not cured, but...
It’s not cured.
But it’s doing less badly.
It’s doing less badly.
But it can’t take care of itself.
It’s  doing  less  badly  but  it’s  not  doing  well  enough  and  that’s  why  the  prescription  has  been
extended, and there is indeed, as you say, a kind of “warning” or let’s say...
An alert.
An alert, a message, which is as follows: all this won’t last forever, it can’t last forever, sources of
growth have to be found that don’t depend on monetary policy. Long-term interest rates are going
to rise and economic actors must prepare themselves – governments in particular, which have
benefited  greatly  from  the  decline  in  rates.  They  must  prepare  for  an  environment  in  which
monetary policy will be less necessary and where growth will have to come from elsewhere.
That’s why you are making no commitment for 2018.
We already have a commitment until the end of 2017, which isn’t bad, as this makes it possible
to cover a whole year, when there will be many economic risks inside and outside the euro area,
as we well know.
But it was noted that Mario Draghi said yesterday that, if necessary, the policy would be
eased and liquidity would continue to be provided so as to improve the economy and
growth.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
More will be done if necessary, of course, but the diagnosis that was reached yesterday by the
Governing Council is that a little less is necessary today because growth is stronger and Europe
is doing better.
And to make this quite clear, how much will the ECB disburse in, say, 2017?
The  decision  that  was  taken  yesterday  is  to  extend  our  asset  purchases  for  a  further  nine
months  by  buying  €60  billion  per  month  of  various  financial  instruments,  which  makes  an
additional  €540  billion  euro.  That’s  the  decision:  we  will  add  €540  billion  to  the  €80  billion  per
month planned for the first three months of 2017, making €240 billion, so for the whole of 2017
that comes to slightly less than €800 billion extra compared with what we are doing already.
And since March 2015?
Asset purchases today come to around €1.5 trillion in total, so if we add 1,500 and 800 it means
that, at the end of next year, we’ll be at just over €2.3 trillion.
Yes,  and  you  realise  that  with  this  €2.3  trillion  growth  is  good,  average,  but  it’s  not
stronger. What would happen without this €2.3 trillion?
Well, without it, if the ECB wasn’t doing what it’s doing, growth would be between 0% and 1%,
inflation would be close to zero and unemployment wouldn’t be falling in the euro area. But as
you know, unemployment is now falling fairly quickly in the euro area. It peaked at 13%, which is
very high, at the height of the crisis and now it’s at 9.8%, so it’s below 10%. The euro area has
created 4 million jobs in four years, that’s not bad.
Yes, this morning we have to say “Thank you, ECB”. The Banque de France has just said
this morning that it is lowering its growth forecast for France to 1.3% for 2016 and 2017,
and then to 1.4% in 2018 because of the worsening  international  environment.  Is  the
Banque  de  France  more  pessimistic  than  the  ECB?  Because  you  are  saying  that  the
growth situation isn’t bad in France.
No, we agree with the Banque de France – growth will be weaker in France than in the rest of the
euro area, unfortunately.
1.3%, 1.4%?
Yes, 1.3% in France, 1.7% in the euro area, so France is lagging behind in terms of growth.
And what does France have to do to recover or catch up with the other countries? When
you read the programmes of the candidates for the presidency, whether on the right or
the left, do you ever say to yourself that this one or that one would enable France to
catch up?
The ECB doesn’t get involved in politics...
Of course.
So don’t expect me to express a preference for one of the candidates.
However.
However, in general terms, we take note of this delayed growth and also the difficulty of reducing
the unemployment level in France which, despite starting to fall very recently, is struggling to dip
below 10%. So there is a need for labour market reform and reform of the services sector, as
that  is  where  jobs  are  created,  as  well  as  a  need  to  be  more  ambitious  in  opening  up  the
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
services sector, for example the regulated professions. In addition, and this is a message that
might not please people in France, but it’s my duty to say it – reforms are also needed in terms of
fiscal balances. French debt is approaching 100% of GDP, and the deficit is still above 3%.
So you are issuing a warning to those candidates, whoever they may be, that are saying
they are willing to let deficits slip above 3%.
Yes, we must...
That’s unacceptable.
The candidates for the French presidential election, whoever they may be, shouldn’t think that,
when they take office, they will find a pot of money to spend or room for budgetary manoeuvre.
This room for manoeuvre doesn’t exist and there is a risk that interest rates will rise. If and when
interest rates begin to rise, the debt burden will increase and the risk is that it will crowd out all
other government spending.
Benoît Cœuré...
It’s a risk.
The ECB is no fortune teller or oracle, but no doubt you already know what 2017 will look
like?
As  we  see  it,  2017  will  be  a  year  when  activity  accelerates.  We  are  very  confident  about  the
recovery in Europe.
But aren’t there risks?
There are political risks just about everywhere, both within the euro area and outside it. But it isn’t
the ECB’s task to manage political risks. That’s for politicians to deal with. It’s up to us to draw
the  economic  conclusions.  The  euro  area  will  still  require  some  sort  of  financial  protection  to
navigate what will be a risk-filled 2017.
But when you talk about political risks, that means you see people going to the polls in
the Netherlands, France, Germany and, probably, Italy, as a risk.
That’s not a risk, that’s democracy.
So more precisely, what would you describe as a risk?
For us, the risk is that Europe comes under increasing strain and pressure from nationalists,
protectionists and sovereignists, who...
So you are worried about the rise of extremism and nationalism in Europe, and in all
countries, maybe even including France.
It’s a concern for us in all countries, because it reduces our ability act jointly. Europe is strong
when  its  countries  can  act  jointly.  The  problems  Europe  is  facing  –  terrorism,  security,  the
refugee  crisis,  but  also  growth  and  employment  –  are  problems  that  we  have  to  overcome
together, and if each government turns inwards to focus on national interests and preparing for
elections, there will be no more capacity for acting as one.
And  at  the  same  time,  Donald  Trump  is  setting  an  example,  a  bad  example,  and  the
United States will become inward-looking as well.
Geopolitical  risk  –  the  risk  of  a  change  in  the  international  balance  of  power  –  is  another  risk
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Europe will have to face next year.
Benoît Cœuré, should the whole of Europe be worried about a banking crisis? Because
among  the  uncertainties,  and  even  though  we  were  told  that  the  banks  were  sound,
we’re hearing that Deutsche Bank has problems, that Portuguese and Italian banks are
struggling, and that certain banks have to be recapitalised. What do you say to that?
I don’t believe there will be a banking crisis, but I do think that European banks have profitability
problems and that there are too many banks in Europe, so reforms are needed.
In other words, some banks have to go.
Yes, but that’s an issue for the banks themselves. Solutions must come, first and foremost, from
the private sector – banks are commercial enterprises and public money won’t resolve the issue.
So  banks  will  disappear,  but  not  in  France.  Just  to  reassure  us,  how  are  the  banks
doing?
As far as I’m aware, French banks are sound, that’s what our banking supervision colleagues are
telling us.
And we need to make more out of Europe.
We need more Europe, otherwise we won’t manage to solve our problems.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
