  S S Mundra: Setting the priorities right 
Keynote address by Mr S S Mundra, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
3rd SBI Banking and Economics Conclave, Mumbai, 28 September 2016. 
Assistance provided by Shri Sanjeev Prakash is gratefully acknowledged. 
 At the outset, I would like to thank Ms. Bhattacharya and State Bank of India for inviting me 
to speak at this important and eagerly awaited event on the annual calendar. It is a privilege 
to speak before this august gathering. 
In context of the theme of the conference i.e. “Laying the Foundations for India’s Growth”, I 
would  say  that  there  are  reasons  to  be  optimistic  on  several  fronts:  Growth,  inflation, 
demography, entrepreneurship, democracy, political stability, innovation and establishment’s 
commitment.  There  are  many  eminent  speakers  &  practitioners  with  better  insights  and 
qualification who will speak on some of these issues. However, it is always helpful to also 
assess possible constraints. The idea is that collective wisdom should be applied to find the 
most  optimal  solution.  With  this  objective,  I  intend  to  raise  few  questions  for  further 
deliberations during the conference and beyond. For a change however, I would refrain from 
much spoken area of stressed assets. 
Economics of banking 
(A) 
Since the Conclave is meant for both Bankers and Economists, let me begin with something 
to engage the Economists. 
– 
– 
I  have  been  trying  to  seek  answer  to  this  question  for  some  time  now.  Few  explanations 
which I came across are: 
– 
Credit is a necessary & probably most important ingredient for economic growth. 
Is there a measurable co-relation between credit growth and GDP growth? 
The historical average credit multiplier to nominal GDP over FY01-14 is 1.6 x 
(Source: CEIC, DB Research) 
  Another model projects credit growth on the basis of GDP growth and inflation as 
per following equation: 
Credit = 2.36*GDP+ 0.36*CPI or Credit =1.93*GDP + 0.83*WPI 
(Source: ICICI Bank Research) 
 A long run actual relationship between real GDP Growth and bank credit growth is depicted 
below (Chart 1): 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Chart 1 
Real GDP growth1 and credit growth 
 Probably,  the  link  between  bank  credit  and  GDP  has  weakened  over  the  years  as  banks 
started  accommodating  companies  through  other  sources  like  CPs,  bonds,  etc.  and  other 
non-bank  entities  also  enhanced  their  share.  But  still  "Banks"  remain  the  main  source  of 
finance for the economy. Perhaps the co-relation is more relevant between the banks' total 
accommodation to companies and real GDP rather than only credit & GDP. 
However,  the  composition  of  credit  to  the  economy  itself  has  been  changing  as  depicted 
below (Table 1). While Credit from banking system has gone up by 19.22% between March 
14 and March 16, the credit from the non-bank system during the same period has gone up 
by 37.4%. 
Table 1  
Total credit deployed – banks and non-banks 
 
Then, do we see any co-relation with the total credit supply rather than bank credit alone? 
(Yes/ No/ May be) 
                                                
1  Real GDP growth rate from 1980-81 to 2011-12 are derived from data of 2004-05 base and from 2012-13 to 
2015-16 are from 2011-12 base. 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Added complications 
– 
Trade  credit  plays  an  important  role  but  not  captured  in  a  similar  way  as  other 
components 
Double count in respect of NBFCs/HFCs 
Migration from GDP to GVA may make it more difficult to analyse past trends and 
establish new benchmarks at least in initial few years 
 A more stable multiplier of real GDP and bank credit may emerge in the medium term once: 
– 
– 
banks come out of the stressed assets worries and have more risk appetite 
private  investment  sentiment  improves  on  a  sustainable  basis  (creating  higher 
demand for project finance) and, 
inflation falls on a durable basis giving rise to lower lending rates 
– 
Obviously, an efficient credit supply strategy would be handicapped in absence of reasonably 
accurate  demand  estimation.  I  urge  the  economists  present  here  to  work  towards 
possibilities of modeling such a co-relation. 
Supply side of credit 
(B) 
Broadly accepted estimations place credit growth need in the range of 12 to 15% to support 
the projected growth in the intermediate term. 
Questions to ponder over: 
– 
Resources  to  support  credit  growth  while  being  mindful  of  Asset-  Liability 
mismatches 
Capital needed- Quantum & Composition (CET1/Tier I/Tier II) 
Economic  priority  of  the  segment  needing  credit  vis-à-vis  bankers’  inclination  to 
follow that priority 
 Resources 
i) 
Gross  domestic  savings  (Table  2)  and  trend  in  growth  in  bank  deposits  (Table  3)  are 
depicted below: 
Table 2 
Gross savings 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3 
 Key observations: 
– 
– 
– 
 
Decline in Household savings 
Stagnant net financial savings 
Household indebtedness increasing 
Table 3 
Growth rate of bank deposits  
  Key observations: 
– 
– 
 Rate of growth of bank deposits has slowed down considerably especially in PSBs. 
In short run, any gap in deposit growth can be funded by leveraging excess SLR, 
however, financial savings need to strengthen in the medium to long term 
ALM trend: A gradual increase in institutional saving is also probably contributing to 
shrinking liability duration while the assets duration is expanding due to long term 
funding by banks. 
ii) 
Capital requirements 
Table 4  
Capital adequacy of banks 
 
Overall capital position in the banking systems appears adequate at present; however, few 
banks  could  be  near  the  minimum  prescribed  threshold  levels  going  forward.  This  is  on 
account of many moving components as under: 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     Supporting RWA Growth for normal growth 
Provisioning Requirements (as explained below) 
Basel Framework (CCB, D-SIBs etc.) - As per agreed framework 
Large Exposure Norms- Guidelines issued recently 
Enhanced  Market  Risk  –Credit  enhancements  to  corporate  bonds  and  increased 
derivatives portfolio would entail higher market risk capital charge 
Higher  Operational  Risk  –  Recent  episodes  of  KYC/AML  violation,  Cyber/FinTech 
related security incidents have heightened operational risk for banks 
Pension Funding- Gaps could still be there 
IFRS  –  Fair  value  treatment  would  potentially  enhance  capital  requirements  for 
banks 
Provisioning requirements 
Substandard, Doubtful and Loss advances constitute nearly 36%, 59% and 5% respectively 
of the stock of non-performing assets (Rs. 611 thousand crore) of the banking system as on 
March 2016. Though, I won’t like to hazard a guess about the provisioning numbers due to 
the dynamic nature, nevertheless due to ageing of non-performing assets and migration of a 
certain  percentage  of  standard  assets  to  NPA  category,  the  system  as  a  whole  could  be 
looking at significantly higher incremental provisioning requirements in coming year. Though 
a better recovery and up-gradation in existing NPAs can support through provision reversal, 
the  expected  provision  would  still  be  significant.  This  is  against  a  Total  Earning  before 
Provision and taxes of Rs. 2,46,067 for the sector as at the end of March 16. Incidentally, 
there is considerable divergence between the earnings of different bank groups as can be 
seen from the Table 5 below: 
Table 5  
Earning before provisions & taxes 
 Sovereign Risk Exposure (Risk Weight on Sovereign Bonds) 
Other potential factors with a bearing on capital requirement: 
– 
This is a very live issue with standard setting bodies. Even if a low 2% and 5% Risk Weight 
respectively on the bank holdings of Central and State Government securities is assumed, 
the banking system may be required to hold around Rs. 6000 crore of capital on this count 
alone. 
While we are resisting the proposals during negotiations, the state governments have to 
be extremely cautious as any irresponsible act on their part could have repercussions 
both for our arguments and also for instruments that can be treated as eligible under 
LCR framework.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  Climate Change Protocol 
– 
Discussion in the international forum is veering towards penalizing industries which  add to 
carbon  emissions  and  banks  may  be  forced  to  hold  additional  capital  for  loans  to  such 
industries on account of increased risk weights. 
Key takeaways: 
– 
Every bank should estimate its own requirement of capital under different scenarios 
including past average trend of slippages, recovery and up-gradation. 
They should carefully weigh optimum mode of raising capital and the extent to which 
it can be raised. 
This should enable them to better design their business strategy and in setting the 
risk appetite. 
I am not sure if this exercise is being done with full elaboration & scenario building 
as part of the present ICAAP exercise. 
   (C) 
a) 
National priorities 
Infrastructure 
 12th  Five  Year  Plan  (2012-17)  projected  an  investment  of  Rs  55.74  lakh  crore  in 
infrastructure  with  banks  expected  to  meet  23%  of  this  requirement.  Though,  there  is  still 
some time to go before the end of the plan period, apparently, the investment target as well 
as bank credit may fall short of the projection. 
Assuming the current pace of credit growth & that the banks continue to meet 23% of the 
infrastructure funding needs of the country between 2016 and 2020, they may be required to 
lend between 17 and 26% of their total incremental bank credit to the sector. This raises few 
issues: 
i. 
Who can avail the infra credit going forward? Till recently, a handful of promoter 
groups  have  captured  the  infrastructure  sector  and  majority  of  them  seem  to  be 
“retired hurt”. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 ii. 
iii. 
b) 
• 
    Even if new players were to come, whether the banks are equipped (both by way of 
resources and capital) and willing to lend them within the existing models. 
Whether  external  flow  can  support  major  part  of  the  infrastructure  funding 
requirements and if yes, whether the necessary enablers are in place. 
 Agriculture 
As per the 2011 Agriculture Census, 
– 
– 
– 
– 
60 per cent of the population depends on agriculture  
sector provides employment to 55 per cent of the work force 
contribution of agriculture to the national GDP is around 17% 
No. of farmers holding marginally sized land has increased substantially from 
about 36 million in 1970-71 to 93 million in 2010-11 highlighting the continuous 
fragmentation  of 
labour 
productivity and increase costs.  
lands  which  discourage  mechanization, 
lower 
35%  of  the  agricultural  households  having  less  than  1  acre  of  land,  another  35% 
holding between 1 and 2.5 acres, and only 30% households with land more than 2.5 
acres. 
80%  borrowing  of  large  farmers  (>10  hectares)  is  from  institutional  sources, 
however, only 15% of the landless farmers receive finance from formal sources 
The land under agriculture has been practically constant at around 140 mn hectare 
over past 4 decades with less than 50% being irrigated 
Table 6 
Agriculture loan outstanding 
  While credit flow to agriculture sector has increased over the years, the long term 
credit  in  agriculture  or  investment  credit  has  shown  a  declining  trend.  With  no 
additional  factors  contributing  to  enhance  the  credit  absorption  capacity  of  this 
sector, there is a need to take a look at how incremental credit is being put to use. 
Few other issues in the farm sector worth noting: 
• 
 New  generation  is  not  similarly  interested  in  farming  and  is  inclined  to  migrate  to 
cities. 
Though  many  efforts  are  underway  in  form  of  improvement  of  rural  road 
infrastructure,  e-connectivity,  direct  benefit 
transfers,  provision  of  power 
connectivity,  water-bodies 
the 
incremental measures may not be sufficient to improve the state of agriculture in the 
country. 
irrigation,  agriculture 
insurance  etc.  only 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
   c) 
• 
     Attempts must be made to target the entire agriculture value chain financing 
rather than on a solo level. 
Further, the PSBs need to take a hard look at their approach for posting their staff in 
rural  areas.  Currently,  there  is  a  very  high  turnover  in  the  staff  in  rural  branches 
which hampers a focused approach. 
MSME 
12th Five Year Plan (2012-17) highlighted a credit gap of 56 per cent in the MSME 
(micro, small and medium enterprises) finance sector in India. In absolute terms, this 
translates  to  approximately  Rs.  16  trillion  which  is  roughly  25  %  of  the  total  bank 
credit. 
Outstanding  credit  to  the  MSE  sector  of  all  scheduled  commercial  banks  as  on 
March 31, 2016 has shown a declining trend. 
RBI,  in  co-ordination  with  the  Government  of  India  and  other  stake  holders  has 
initiated several measures to enhance flow of credit to the sector. 
Banks need to employ smart technology and innovative credit scoring to meet the 
credit  needs  to  especially  the  micro  and  small  segment  a  large  %  of  which  are 
outside the formal financial system. 
In the process, however, the banks must guard against creating over indebtedness 
in the sector. 
Human Resources 
(D) 
Finance  alone  cannot  ensure  growth.  Banking is  still far  away from being  a  driverless 
car, hence human factor is crucial.  
(i) 
Public Sector Banks 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  (ii) 
(E) 
• 
   More  than  73%  staff  in  DGM/GM  cadre  is  above  55  years  of  age,  while 
another 23% are between 50 and 55 years. 
Reasonable leadership tenure is crucial. 
Pipeline to replace the Top executives is also weak and may get better only after a 
few years. 
Private  Sector  Banks  are  witnessing  very  high  rates  of  attrition  at  lower  levels 
hence  low  customer  connect  and  acute  performance  pressure  may  result  in  mis-
selling. This area also needs urgent attention of the Top Management. 
Concluding thoughts: 
Cyber Risk/Frauds/Mis-selling/ Market misconduct have the potential to bring down 
a financial institution as recent events have shown. 
Banks need to do ‘value accretive’ and ‘value based’ financing 
• 
I would like to end with a Chinese proverb which says, “The best time to plant a tree was 
20  years  ago  and  the second  best  time is  now.”  The  sector  would  do  well  not  to  miss 
planting trees at the second best time. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
