Erkki Liikanen: Low interest rate environment and systemic risks –
current issues
Speech  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  RiskLab/BoF/ESRB
Conference on Systemic Risk Analytics, Helsinki, 6 October 2016.
Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF).
 [Slide 1]
[Slide 2]
1. Introduction
[Slide 3]
Since  the  financial  crisis  there  have  been  significant  efforts  in  fiscal,  monetary  and  structural
policies to resurrect demand across the globe. Monetary policy has had an important role. High
debt  levels  in  many  countries  are  constraining  fiscal  policies.  But  even  in  those  countries
composition of expenditure could be more growth friendly.
There has been progress in the structural reforms, but there is still room to go beyond of what
we have witnessed so far. On the side of the financial market regulation the regulators around
the world have worked to make the banks and the financial system safer.
Banks’  capital  levels  have  been  increased  to  improve  resilience  and  more  liquid  assets  are
required  to  cover  banks´  liquidity  needs  in  stress.  Banks  will  also  be  required  to  fund  their
operations  from  stable  sources  that  reduce  the  reliance  on  the  short-term  wholesale  market
funding. Plans are laid out to guarantee an orderly resolution of the largest and systemically most
important banks.
As banks adjust to these requirements they will have to re-evaluate their business models. While
banks  have  become  safer,  the  new  requirements  may  have  pushed  parts  of  their  traditional
business outside the banking sector to the so called shadow banking sector, which has been
growing recently.
In this talk I will discuss the underpinnings of the low rates environment and its implications for
financial  stability.  I  will  also  touch  upon  the  developments  outside  the  banking  sector  that  we
need  to  follow  in  order  to  make  sure  we  make  use  of  the  lessons  we  have  learned  from  the
crisis.
2. The low interest rates environment
[Slide 4]
Following the financial crises, the return to economic growth has been slow in many regions.
This is explained in part by some of the long-term forces that existed already before the crisis,
and partly by the effects that resulted from the crises.
[Slide 5]
The potential long-term causes are related to ageing populations, and changes in the pace of
technological development, which drive productivity gains.
[Slide 6]
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
While the demographic trends are evident, a persistent decline in productivity growth is only one
hypothesis. There are also more optimistic ones.
The effects caused by the crises relate to high debt burdens in both the private sector and the
public  sector  in  many  countries.  High  debt  levels  tend  to  slow  down  recovery.  The  growth
potential of the world economy may have temporarily deteriorated because of a prolonged high
unemployment, lower investments and frictions in the reallocation of resources.
Research  has  also  suggested  that  the  crises  have  led  households  and  firms  to  update  their
beliefs concerning the frequency of crises. In the language of risk management, they may have
updated upwards their long-term expectations of “tail risks”, a term certainly very familiar to this
audience. This may be one factor that weighs on real investments and hence on growth.
All these explanations for slower growth are plausible but they need to be researched further.
[Slides 7]
In order to support the economy and bring inflation back to its target, monetary policy stance has
been accommodative. This is the backdrop against which the current low interest rates and the
use of unconventional monetary policy measures are necessary.
[Slide 8]
But it is also important to keep in mind that there has been a declining trend in the global real
interest  rates  since  the  1990s.  This  trend  could  partly  reflect  the  expectations  of  slower
economic growth prospects. Another driving force of the declining rates has been the high global
demand for safe assets. For example, many emerging market countries have sought ways to
safely invest their current account surplus and newly created wealth in the global markets.
Given the focus of this conference, I will discuss potential risks to financial stability, which we
have to consider in the low interest rate environment.
Search for yield
[Slide 9]
Let me first consider search for yield and the consequent excessive risk-taking, which low rates
might spur. One cannot help a feeling of déjà vu: search for yield was part of our concerns, and
rightly so, already before the Global Financial Crisis.
How is the situation different now? At least with the benefit of hindsight, it is a rather common
notion that the global monetary policy stance was too loose before the crisis with respect to real
economic activity. In such a situation, relatively low interest rates spurred search for yield which
turned out to be particularly dangerous.
The current situation is quite different in this regard. Rates are expected to stay low in the Euro
area for a prolonged period precisely because we want to support the economy and to achieve a
path of inflation in line with our target for price stability. Hence some forms of “search for yield”
such  as  bank  lending  to  the  SME  sector,    are  desirable,  because  they  support  the  real
economy.  
Having said this, it is important to monitor potential excesses in individual segments and regions,
and  take  targeted  action  to  curb  them  if  necessary.  Macroprudential  tools  are  the  key  policy
instruments in this regard. Overall, banks’ resilience has significantly improved as a result of the
regulatory reforms after the crises.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Profitability of financial institutions
[Slide 10]
A  second  theme,  which  is  related  to  financial  stability  concerns  in  the  low  interest  rate
environment, and particularly under negative interest rates, is the pressure on banks’ profitability.
It is important to note that there are several forces at work at the same time. Banks’ net interest
rate margin may be reduced if loan rates decline while retail deposit rates are sticky at the zero
lower bound. However, the effects depend on many things such as the maturity structure of bank
loans and liabilities.
Nonetheless, it is possible that banks with a strong retail deposit basis would increasingly shift to
wholesale funding where the interest rates pass-through may be more effective. This is an issue
for  financial  stability  because  we  have  learnt  that  a  short-maturity  wholesale-oriented  funding
structure can be risky. However, the new liquidity requirements in the regulatory framework are
designed to safeguard banks’ resilience in this regard.
Insurance  companies  –  like  banks  –  are  also  struggling  with  their  profitability.  On  the  life
insurance side long term promised commitment returns are running well above those that can be
found from the conventional investment products in the markets. This creates pressures for the
insurers to move towards more risky assets to improve their returns while the low interest rate
environment continues.
Importantly,  low  rates  support  the  real  economy  and  help  borrowers  to  service  their  loans.
Improved growth translates into higher lending volumes for banks and reduces loan losses which
directly supports banks’ profits. It is also up to banks themselves to adjust their business models
to maintain their profitability in the changing environment.
On resource allocation
Although the low interest rates are supporting the real economy, there is one potential caveat to
keep  an  eye  on.  The  low  rates  may  interfere  with  efficient  reallocation  of  resources,  which  is
often referred to as evergreening. This is why it is important to tackle the issue of non-performing
loans properly.  Corporate area may also need restructuring. This will allow new entrants to have
an access to the market.
In  order  to  align  banks’  incentives  with  the  aim  of  efficient  resource  allocation  from  social
perspective, the key is to make sure banks are sufficiently capitalized.  It is an important task for
the  supervision  to  oversee  that  banks  deal  with  any  problems  of  non-performing  loans  in  a
determined manner.
3. Shadow banking and systemic risks
[Slide 11]
In the wake of the financial crises, the so called shadow banking sector – entities that do similar
things as banks but are not regulated as banks – has been growing again. The Financial Stability
Committee has calculated that the so-called narrow measure of shadow banking assets have
grown  from  to  36  trillion  US  dollars  in  2014  with  the  growth  having  averaged  over  6  percent
across jurisdictions between 2011 and 2014.
At  least  three  drivers  can  be  behind  this  development.  First,  it  may  be  a  consequence  of  the
search  for  yield,  partly  spurred  by  the  long-term  declining  trend  in  interest  rates.  Second,
regulatory reforms after the crises may have raised compliance costs and are hence pushing
activities to the less regulated sector.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, technological developments, such as Fintech, may be providing new opportunities which
are partly tested outside the traditional banking sector. This is very much in line with the capital
markets  union  initiative  in  Europe  that  aims  at  provision  of  a  larger  share  of  the  funding  from
market based entities as opposed to the current strong reliance on banks.
However,  as  non-banks  assume  a  more  significant  role  in  credit  intermediation  one  needs  to
pose the question: What are the financial stability concerns of these developments?
[Slide 12]
The search for yield, together with declining rates, is closely related to the global excess demand
for safe assets as plentiful savings seek safe investment opportunities. This can lead to creation
of new “safe” assets which in actuality are increasingly less than safe. This increases the fragility
in the financial system in the form of potential runs.
As we should well remember, this kind of development already once happened as the Global
Financial  Crisis  hit  the  banking  system  that  had  increased  its  short  term  profits  with
securitization and leverage. The banks’ retained and off-balance sheet exposures to securitized
assets were a significant contributor to their problems in the crisis.
The  financial  system  is  now  more  resilient,  thanks  to  the  regulatory  reforms  which  have  also
reduced the links between banks and shadow banks, which proved fatal in the crisis. However,
non-bank financial intermediation continues to be subject to “runs” and premature liquidation and
is hence intrinsically fragile.
As the share of non-bank financial intermediation increases this fragility may expose the financial
system to a risk of systemic disruption in case the run event results in contagion. Hence we
cannot afford complacency and we need to monitor financial innovation. This is one of the key
lessons to be drawn from the previous crisis.
Financial  innovation  now  takes  new  forms,  and  part  of  it  is  true  technological  progress.  In
evaluating  the  usefulness  of  digitalization  in  the  provision  of  finance  we  need  to  consider  the
benefits  against  the  potential  risks.  Benefits  include  having  a  more  diverse  set  of  finance
providers, more efficient use of algorithms and data bases with which credit decisions are made,
and the improved access to finance for entities that would not have had the access otherwise.
The  potential  risks  stem  from  the  possible  flaws  in  these  new  lending  algorithms  and  lack  of
experience with how they fare through the credit cycle. This is particularly relevant at this time as
the new innovations are developed amid low interest rates.
But we should not be naive either: part of financial innovation may still be motivated by evasion of
regulation and taxes. New types of links between banks and shadow banks may form. To stay on
top of things, we will need in-depth analysis, building of risk scenarios and counterfactuals, and
out-of-box thinking.
Non-bank financial intermediation also has the potential to move quickly between jurisdictions,
and  the  new  low-cost  business  models  make  this  fairly  easy.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  for
international cooperation when it comes to regulation and macroprudential actions towards these
entities.
[Slide 13]
Let me also consider the question whether regulatory reforms have been excessive in the sense
that  they  would  be  increasingly  driving  activity  to  the  unregulated  segments  of  the  financial
system.  Looking  back,  bank  regulation  before  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  was  rather  light,  too
light, at least in terms of banks’ true loss absorbance capacity. Yet, certain forms of shadow
banking grew rapidly, motivated precisely by opportunities to increase banks’ leverage to even
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
higher levels.
Hence,  there  is  a  certain  irony  in  the  current  concerns  that  increased  regulations,  like  higher
capital requirements, are pushing activity to the shadow banking sector. The lesson of the past
fifteen  years  is  that  there  always  seems  to  be  this  tendency,  no  matter  how  high  or  low  the
starting  level  of  regulation  is.  Against  this  backdrop,  I  would  put  in  perspective  the  current
concerns of excessive regulation.
4. Conclusions
I  would  like  to  conclude  with  a  reminder  of  the  potential  longer  term  challenges  regarding
productivity  growth  as  well  as  the  legacy  of  the  recent  crises  that  have  contributed  to  the
currently low long-term real interest rates.
Central  banks’  have  responded  with  actions  within  their  mandates  to  improve  the  overall
economic situation. While we have some signs of improvement, at the same time we need to be
aware of the risks that the low rates environment and the changes in the regulatory environment
may result in. This necessitates in-depth supervision and analysis combined with good research.
Elements from all these fields need to be combined to identify possible risks and to guide the
policy makers in making appropriate changes that are necessary to foster financial stability.
[Slide 14]
References
Acharya, V.V., T. Eisert, C. Eufinger, C. Hirsch (2016): Whatever it takes: The Real Effects of
Unconventional Monetary Policy. Available at ssrn.com/abstract=2740338.
Adrian, T., Shin, H.S. (2009): The Shadow Banking System: Implications for Financial Regulation,
Federal 
Available
atwww.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/sr382.html
Reports. 
Reserve 
Bank 
Staff 
New 
York 
of 
Adrian, T., Ashcraft, A. B., Cetorelli, N. (2013): Shadow Bank Monitoring, Federal Reserve Bank
of 
Available
Reports. 
at www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/staff_reports/sr638.pdf
Staff 
New 
York 
Jobst,  A.  and  H.  Lin  (2016):  Negative  Interest  Rate  Policy  (NIRP):  Implications  for  Monetary
Transmission and Bank Profitability in the Euro Area. IMF Working Paper 16/172.
Kozlowski, J., L. Veldkamp, V. Venkateswaran (2016): The tail that wags the economy: The origin
of secular stagnation. VoxEU, 11 September 2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
