Andreas Dombret: Under pressure – is consolidation the solution
for Europe's banking sector?
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the Conference "Doing M&A Deals around the World", Frankfurt am Main, 13 October 2016.
 1 Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
About a week ago, the Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded for work that is of indirect interest to
the banking industry. Japan’s Yoshinori Oshumi was honoured for exploring how human cells not
only  break  down  but  also  recycle  cell  trash  that  results,  for  example,  from  fighting  diseases.
Oshumi  found  that  when  this  process,  called  autophagy,  is  disturbed,  for  example  through
ageing, this has serious repercussions on our health.
I  think  it  is  fair  to  say  that  this  sort  of  mechanism  was  truly  needed  after  the  financial  crisis
revealed the damaging cell material within banks.
Eight  years  later,  the  question  is  whether  the  organisms  of  banks  were  capable  of,  and
successful in, disposing of or recycling financial waste. Today, I will examine this question from a
European  angle. And  I  will  also  ask  whether  mergers  &  acquisitions  may  well  be  one  of  the
healing mechanisms of the European banking system.
2 In bad shape? The status quo of Europe’s banks
In the last few months, concerns about European banks spun out of control. While there was no
panic, sometimes the media discussion made us almost feel as if there was.
Now, let’s take a sober and realistic look at the facts. Over the course of this year, European
banking stocks had to weather strong headwinds. While the overall European stock market, as
represented  by  the  Euro  Stoxx  50  index,  remained  more  or  less  unchanged,  the  Euro  Stoxx
Banks index dropped by more than 30%. At the same time, volatility of the bank stocks remains
high, although that seems to be heavily related to post-Brexit jitters.
Such market movements suggest some sort of doomsday scenario. Is that justified?
Clearly not. Current concerns about the European banking sector are overstated. Yes, the sector
is  not  yet  ready  to  be  successful  in  the  new  post-crisis  environment. And  market  sentiment
reflects just that. But – and that’s where exaggeration comes in – the sharp movements do not
take into consideration that the solvency of the sector in Europe is not in doubt.
In  other  words,  while  Europe’s  banks  still  struggle  to  come  up  with  long-term  strategies  to
succeed  in  the  new,  different  and  truly  challenging  economic  environment,  in  the  short  to
medium term they would pass any health check – as the recent stress test by the European
Banking Association confirmed.
But banks also show traits and habits that can, in the long run, result in serious health issues –
unless a change of lifestyle can be achieved.
Let’s consider the health facts. EU banks have strengthened their capital positions – even if non-
performing loans remain a problem for some institutes: The aggregate tier 1 capital ratio of the
banks in the euro area today stands at around 15%. This exceeds pre-crisis levels in early 2008
by six percentage points. Another sign of good vitality and higher resilience is the improved ratio
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  common  equity  to  total  assets.  Before  the  crisis,  European  banks  held  around  3.6%  of
unweighted common equity; today, the average stands at 5.5%.
Banks  also  broadly  meet  the  new  health  standards  of  sufficient  liquidity  –  to  be  prepared  for
times of market distress.
And the euro area’s new bank supervisor, the Single Supervisory Mechanism, has contributed to
more rigorous supervision and to stronger banks.
So for the time being, the European banking sector is nowhere near the brink of collapse. The
reform  efforts  of  policymakers  and  bankers  alike  have  led  to  substantial  progress  –  even  if
important reforms, like ending the sovereign-bank nexus, remain to be finished.
However, being healthy is one thing. Being in outstanding shape, being prepared for whatever
challenges the future may throw at you, is another. To reach that level of health, banks still have
a lot to do.
At  present,  efficiency  at  euro  area  banks  is  too  low,  and  many  institutes  still  struggle  with
achieving  a  steady  stream  of  sustainable  profits  with  a  minimum  of  volatility  –  although  both,
efficiency  and  profitability,  do  vary  across  individual  countries  and  financial  institutions.
Profitability is not a goal in itself, but a means towards an end – and this end is the stability of a
bank  and  its  capacity  to  meet  regulatory  capital  requirements.  That’s  why  supervisors  are
concerned about falling profitability. Efficiency, in turn, is a means towards the end of profitability
– where increased cost efficiency improves the return.
To be in really good shape for the challenges that lie ahead, banks in the euro area must work on
their operational efficiency and need to adapt their income sources. This is true for many, if not
most, financial institutions.
So, the condition of the banking sector is healthy in general, but it clearly could be better. This is
problematic, as banks face a truly demanding future, one that holds several large-scale tasks.
I will touch only briefly on each of these challenges.
The first lies in demographic change. The workforce is set to decline, while the number of non-
working persons will grow. This will most likely be a burden on investment and on prospects for
growth – which will both weigh heavily on banks’ business. At the same time, customer cohorts
will change substantially, forcing banks to adapt to new realities.
This all the more given the second challenge: Digitalisation. Even though it’s a long time since
the digital revolution back in 2002, when humanity began storing more information in digital than
in analogue format, the challenges of digitalisation to the banking sector seem to be everywhere.
That is because digital applications are increasingly becoming mass phenomena in our everyday
lives.  This  changes  consumer  demand  and  rearranges 
financial
intermediation. Banks need to adapt to keep up with customers and to hold on to attractive parts
of the new financial value chain. So far, they have fallen behind some of their new, agile fintech
competitors.
the  value  chain  of 
Perhaps the biggest medium-term challenge is the ultra-low interest rates. They weigh heavily on
banks with interest-focused business models. The difficulty to pass negative central bank rates
on to private customers leads to deposits being a drag on income. This presents problems for
many  banks.  Small  and  medium-sized  banks  used  to  be  praised  for  their  stable  business
models  that  relied  on  taking  deposits  and  earning  higher  interest  margins  through  lending  on
capital markets. In an ultra-low interest rate environment this virtue becomes a challenge. And
this  environment  is  here  to  stay.  Fundamental  economic  factors  as  well  as  central  bank
guidance indicate that low rates will persist for quite some time.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Finally, there is regulation. Many complain that regulation has become tougher. But I would argue
that to criticise this is to question putting a lock on the drinks cabinet after someone in the family
is  hospitalised  for  overindulging.  Tougher  rules  and  more  stringent  supervision  are  not  only
necessary: They were long overdue. Complaining about their negative implications is to confuse
cause  and  effect.  The  light-touch  approach  before  the  crisis  was  simply  wrong.  We  are
correcting that mistake now. But of course, to get into shape to successfully comply with these
new rules is a demanding task.
So, if we take a panoramic picture of the sector in Europe, what does it look like? Well, first of all,
we see how the landscape has been cleaned up and dangerous areas secured. The European
banking sector has made progress in improving both its solvency and its governance.
Yet, when we zoom into the picture, we see that the landscape is still dotted with contaminated
spots.
Obviously,  the  reform  progress  is  not  over.  A  politician  would  probably  stop  now  –  thereby
dodging the question on everyone’s mind: What on earth does that mean?
Unfortunately, I have too much time left to stop just now.
3 What to do?
What to do, then, to complete the reforms in the European banking sector? What should banks
do? What should policymakers do?
For  one  thing  –  many,  if  not  most  institutions  must  retool  their  business  models.  Until  the
financial crisis of 2008, the credit bubble allowed banks to inflate their income to unsustainable
levels.  This  led  them  to  build  up  capacities  which,  from  the  perspective  of  the  real  economy,
were not fully needed.
Moreover, bubble-driven profits spared them from making their organisations lean and efficient. A
study recently found for the US financial market that productivity gains in the financial sector from
1900 onwards were mostly concentrated in the area of secondary trading – while the productivity
1
of primary market activities stagnated.
In other words, banks need to fundamentally rethink their business models. Their goal should be
to achieve, over the long run, a steady stream of sustainable profits with a minimum of volatility.
For this, banks need to compete with fintech companies for customers with different demand
patterns on the one hand, and open up new sources of income on the other hand. At the same
time, they need to increase their operational efficiency considerably.
These changes to business models and operational efficiency are likely to bring about further
cuts in the sector. We have seen this trend in Europe for some years now. Moreover, recent data
and news releases on banks’ plans to cut resources and reshape strategies indicate that this
trend  is  ongoing.  Thus,  the  sector  is  on  a  path  towards  a  size  and  structure  that  will  be
sustainable in terms of the real economy’s needs.
Yet to be clear, this can take many forms. We should not reduce this debate to a simple “we
need fewer small banks” – more market players tend to be good for a functioning market. We
should keep that in mind.
There is no need – or mandate – for supervisors to interfere with these market forces. What we
can and should do is to finalise the reform progress that began in 2008, and to do so soon. And
we will make sure that banks are put under close supervisory scrutiny.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
4 What role for bank mergers & acquisitions?
So far, I have answered the question as to what banks and policymakers should do.
That leads to the question – certainly in this room, at least: What role can mergers & acquisitions
play?
In the last few weeks, some have argued in public debate that competition in the banking sector
is too high, which, in turn results in low profitability of banks. Quite often this was then linked to
the  number  of  banks  being  too  high.  But  as  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  past,  the  number  of
2
businesses in a market is not a problem per se.
Nevertheless, I agree at least in part with the conclusion that mergers & acquisitions might be
appropriate for some institutions.
And, as I outlined earlier, we have seen that adjustment in the euro area has already progressed
in terms of the number of banks, employees, branches and balance sheet volumes. Thus, the
question that arises is: How much more room is there for viable mergers & acquisitions?
Before I answer this question, let’s look at how successful banks were in the past when merging.
Generally speaking, when the businesses of two organisations are combined, you would expect
higher  cost  efficiency  from  economies  of  scale  on  the  one  hand  and  income  synergies  from
cross-selling and complementary business lines on the other.
What we see in Europe, and also in Germany, is that on average the potential is less than that
typically  hoped  for.  The  track  record  for  mergers  &  acquisitions  in  the  banking  sector  is
mediocre.  On average, we see that banks were only modestly capable of achieving the desired
cost reductions and higher profitability.
3
That, of course, does not mean that mergers are bad per se, but rather that it depends on the
merits  of  each  individual  case.  Are  the  institutions  a  good  match?  Are  gains  in  operational
efficiency  possible?  Will  the  increased  size  even  result  in  less  efficiency  due  to  governance
problems?
Successful  mergers  or  acquisitions  depend  on  whether  synergies  are  viable.  Ultimately,  it’s
about careful decision-making with the long-term strategy in mind – but that also requires time for
a painstaking, extensive analysis of whether the expected synergies and efficiencies are actually
realisable with the two particular organisations concerned.
Beyond  analysis  and  efficiency,  mergers  or  acquisitions  is  about  people.  If  you  forge
incompatible cultures into one company, this is unlikely to generate synergies and economies of
scale. Rather, it will lead to governance problems.
But, consolidation can be fruitful, when banks find the right partners. Successful cases show that
regional or business line compatibility provide a great source of synergies.
Selected acquisitions and sales of business lines can be a good instrument to strengthen a solid
and focused business model. Again, careful analysis of the viability of synergies and efficiency
improvements are a precondition for any such transaction.
One  aspect  strikes  me  as  being  very  important.  Merging  ailing  institutes  with  healthy  ones  is
certainly no panacea. Certainly not in the eyes of bank supervisors. It may even entail risks for
the healthy party of the merger. While mathematically two minuses make a plus, this is not at all
the case with mergers. Moreover, creating further institutes that are too big to fail is certainly not
an attractive option that would be accepted by supervisors.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Likewise,  mergers  &  acquisitions  cannot  absolve  banks  from  dealing  with  the  economic
challenges I discussed earlier. Whether merged or not, becoming more efficient and profitable is
an inescapable challenge for many institutes.
Essentially, mergers & acquisitions may very well be a part of and support the banking sector’s
adjustment process, but it cannot be the main carrier of it. It can help where healthy institutions
see the possibility to create synergies in a new environment, but it cannot, and should not, solve
problems.
This implies that careful management decisions are key. And management, in turn, will rely on
the astute advice of professional mergers & acquisitions specialists.
5 Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Europe’s banking sector is healthy. But when the market sneezes, expect some banks to catch
a cold. If we want to prevent unjustified contagion, then we need first to stay calm. We should
take the time to consider the facts instead of piling on what is clearly exaggerated sentiment.
And yet we live in challenging economic times. To do business successfully and sustainably in
this environment is an enormous task.
Many banks are facing problems created by demographic change, digitalisation, ultra-low interest
rates and enhanced banking regulation; and many have begun to address their efficiency and
profitability problems.
But clearly, they are not yet up for a marathon with a good finishing time. There remains a lot to
be done.
Reorienting  business  models  and  optimising  organisational  efficiency  will  be  one  part  of  the
fitness regime. Another will be structural reorganisation in the sector. Mergers & acquisitions will
continue to play an important role here, too. But only the link-up of healthy players is likely to lead
to  stronger  teams  –  although,  even  this  cannot  be  taken  for  granted.  Putting  weak  athletes
together will certainly not lead to high performance.
I now look forward to a fruitful discussion.
Thank you very much for your attention.
1
2
3
T Phillippon (2015): Has the US Finance Industry Become Less Efficient? On the Theory and Measurement of
Financial Intermediation. American Economic Review 105(4): 1408–1438.
AR  Dombret  (2016):  Gibt  es  zu  viele  Banken?  Der  Sektor  nach  der  Finanzkrise.  Vortrag  bei  der
Generalversammlung der Österreichischen Bankwissenschaftlichen Gesellschaft in Wien.
E.g. A Behr & F Heid (2011): The success of bank mergers revisited. An assessment based on a matching
strategy. Journal of Empirical Finance 18: 117–135.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
