William  C  Dudley:  Opening  remarks  at  the  Evolution  of  Work
Conference
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Evolution of Work Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, New York City, 17 November 2016.
 Nora Fitzpatrick, Laura Pilossoph, Anika Pratt and Aysegul Sahin assisted in preparing these
remarks.
Good morning.  I would like to welcome you to this conference on the Evolution of Work.  Today,
we  will  explore  how  the  nature  of  work  is  evolving,  including  the  role  of  technology,  shifts  in
employee  work  arrangements  and  employer-employee  relationships,  and  the  effects  of  these
changes on workforce development strategies.  We are pleased to host this conference with the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Freelancers Union.  We welcome all
the  leaders  from  across  academia,  government,  industry,  labor  and  the  nonprofit  sector
assembled here to explore the transformation of the workforce, and the impact this has had on
communities and the economy more broadly.  As always, what I have to say today reflects my
own  views  and  not  necessarily  those  of  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  or  the  Federal
Reserve System.
As  you  know,  the  Federal  Reserve  monitors  the  labor  market  closely,  given  that  maximum
sustainable  employment  is  one  goal  of  the  Fed’s  dual  mandate.    The  evolving  nature  of  the
workplace—and the speed with which it is changing—are therefore important developments that
we  must  continue  to  monitor.    Traditional  nine-to-five  jobs  are  becoming  less  common,  and
people are increasingly employed in less traditional work arrangements.  Measuring the creation
and destruction of these new jobs is of utmost importance to gain a better assessment of the
health  of  the  labor  market.    We  also  need  to  understand  how  this  evolution  is  affecting  job
security and earnings stability.  While these jobs might provide workers with more flexibility, they
might also come with increased income volatility and financial vulnerability.  In today’s gathering,
we will discuss the measurement challenges we face to better understand this growing segment
of the labor market, and we will facilitate a dialogue aimed at developing a workforce aligned with
the evolving nature of work. 
The  Fed’s  efforts  to  understand  labor  markets  include  analyzing  the  comprehensive  data  that
exist  now.    But,  in  an  ever-changing  workplace,  it  is  critical  that  we  hear  from  external
stakeholders to understand their views on these changes and to ensure we incorporate them in
our  assessments.    This  is  an  important  part  of  our  discussion.    As  technological  changes
persist, it is inevitable that the nature of our jobs will continue to evolve.  We may not readily
recall the days when there was little job flexibility and we did not have today’s technology to assist
us in our work.  While technological transformation allows for further growth in productivity and
innovation,  we  must  also  think  through  how  these  changes  affect  the  workforce  overall.    We
must realign our workforce development strategies with these changes.
Today,  we  will  also  focus  on  what  this  evolution  means  for  low-  and  moderate-income
households.  One session will explore on-the-ground community development and labor models,
with a focus on the implications for low- and moderate-income earners.  This will be an important
discussion on how to help workers build the skills necessary to adapt to change—a conversation
that should ultimately include workers, their employers, their communities and the public sector,
working  together.    We  all  need  to  share  in  the  responsibility  of  helping  people  increase  and
maintain the skills relevant to contributing valued work.  Again, I wish you a fruitful dialogue, and I
commend you for coming together to discuss such important issues and the trends affecting the
U.S. workforce.
1 
BIS central bankers' speeches
