Stephen  S  Poloz:  Opening  statement  before  the  Standing  Senate
Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce
Opening statement by Mr Stephen S Poloz, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 19 October 2016.
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I
are pleased to be back before you today to discuss the Bank’s Monetary Policy Report(MPR),
which we published this morning.
It  has  been  six  months  almost  to  the  day  since  we  were  last  here,  and  several  of  the  broad
themes  that  we  spoke  about  back  in  April  remain  in  place  today.  The  Canadian  economy
continues  to  adjust  to  low  resource  prices  against  a  backdrop  of  weak  global  demand.  This
weakness, particularly in the United States in the first half of the year, has combined with ongoing
competitiveness challenges to hold back export growth. In this environment, many businesses
have continued to be reluctant to invest. These issues are not new. However, there have also
been several developments over the past six months that affected the outlook for our economy.
So, allow me to me fill in some details and outline the Bank’s current economic forecast, before
we turn to your questions.
The second quarter of 2016 was a difficult one for the Canadian economy, which shrank at an
annual rate of 1.6 per cent. The two main drivers of this result were a large, broad-based decline
in  goods  exports  and  the  impact  of  the Alberta  wildfires.  These  factors  more  than  offset  the
strength we saw in household and government spending.
However, the economy is poised to rebound in the second half of the year. This reflects, in part, a
return of oil sands production and rebuilding activity in Alberta. Indeed, we saw non-conventional
oil output jump by almost 20 per cent in July. As well, exports of goods increased in July and
August, pointing to a solid third quarter. A pickup in the US economy should help goods exports
recover some—but not all—of the ground they lost earlier this year.
Let me spend a couple of minutes on the export story, because a revised export forecast was a
central part of our deliberations. Even though exports of goods have more than fully recovered
from their dramatic plunge in 2007–09, that recovery has persistently lagged our forecasts. The
strong export performance of 2015 gave us new confidence, but this was shaken again in the
first half of this year, when we experienced a sharp decline over five months.
In  our  July  MPR  we  advanced  what  we  viewed  as  a  conservative  forecast  for  exports,  in  the
sense that it assumed only that exports would grow roughly in line with the US economy. We
have seen a significant recovery in exports since then, but the net effect of these choppy data is
that the level of exports is well below where we thought it would be by now.
It is true that international trade has been surprisingly weak globally, and we offer a box in this
MPR discussing a range of interpretations. Also, the US economy was quite weak in the first half
of the year in dimensions that are important to Canadian export demand. These factors explain
about half of the shortfall in exports relative to what we were expecting. For the remainder, we
are looking at a range of structural factors, including lost export capacity and competitiveness
challenges.
In  our  surveys,  companies  have  mentioned  a  number  of  factors  that  can  influence
competitiveness  or  hinder  exports  directly.  These  include  deficient  infrastructure,  regulatory
uncertainty,  rising  trade  barriers,  relatively  high  electricity  costs  and  the  unknown  status  of
current and future trade agreements.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This  analysis  suggests  that  more  of  our  export  shortfall  may  be  structural  than  previously
believed, rather than cyclical. This is what led us to indicate in our September decision that the
risks  around  our  July  inflation  projection  were  tilted  to  the  downside.  Our  latest  projections
incorporate  a  permanent  shortfall  in  exports  relative  to  our  understanding  of  fundamentals  in
order to rebalance our forecast risks, reducing the projected level of GDP by about 0.6 per cent
by the end of 2018 compared with our July projection.
Such  a  reduction  in  our  outlook  for  exports  may  sound  odd,  given  the  depreciation  of  the
Canadian dollar against the US dollar. However, some of our competitors have also seen large
depreciations in their currencies. For example, the Mexican peso has fallen by more than 30 per
cent against the US dollar since mid-2014, while the Canadian dollar has slid by less than 20 per
cent over the same period. So while the exchange rate will continue to support the current level
of Canadian exports, most of its impact on export growth has probably already taken place.
The export weakness is expected to lead to somewhat softer business investment. However,
there are signs that the worst may be behind us in terms of investment. Our most recent survey
of  Canadian  companies  found  that  many  businesses  believe  resource-related  activity  may  be
near a low point. Resource companies are expecting their sales to either level off or increase
modestly over the next year. Overall, more firms than in recent surveys say they plan to boost
investment spending over the next 12 months.
Household  spending  has  continued  to  support  the  economy,  with  employment  and  income
continuing  to  grow  outside  of  energy-intensive  regions,  particularly  in  service  industries.  The
Bank’s accommodative monetary policy will continue to buffer the impact on wealth and income
stemming from the fall in resource prices. The rollout of the Canada Child Benefit should start
giving an extra boost to households in the second half of this year. As well, the impact of the
federal infrastructure spending that was announced in Budget 2016 should begin to be felt. We
continue to project that these measures together will boost the level of Canadian GDP by about 1
per cent over the 2017–18 fiscal year.
One other new development I’d mention is the government’s measures to promote stability in the
housing market. With house prices still elevated in the Vancouver area and resales and starts
still robust around Toronto, these measures should dampen resale activity in the near term. Our
analysis and historical experience suggest these measures will reduce the level of GDP by about
0.3 per cent by the end of 2018, although there is much uncertainty around that estimate. While
household debt levels have continued to increase, these measures should, over time, help ease
the growth of economic vulnerabilities related to household debt and housing.
All told, we now expect growth over the third and fourth quarters to average about 2 1/2 per cent,
which is lower than we anticipated in our last MPR in July. This reduction reflects the downward
revision  to  exports,  the  pullback  in  housing  and  a  shift  in  the  timing  of  federal  infrastructure
measures that pushes some of the impact into 2017.
We have reduced our growth estimate for this year to 1.1 per cent. The expansion in both 2017
and  2018  should  be  about  2.0  per  cent,  higher  than  the  growth  rate  of  potential.  However,
because the output gap is now somewhat larger than we projected and will close later than we
expected in July, the profile for inflation is now slightly lower. We project that total CPI inflation will
remain  below  2  per  cent  through  the  end  of  the  year,  as  disinflationary  pressures  linked  to
excess  capacity  and  year-over-year  price  swings  for  gasoline  will  more  than  offset  the
inflationary pressure coming from a lower exchange rate. Total inflation should be close to the 2
per cent target in 2017 and 2018.
As always, there are a number of risks surrounding our base case. These include the risks of
sluggish  business  investment  and  weaker  household  spending,  slower  growth  in  emerging
markets, stronger growth in the US economy and higher oil prices. We judge that the risks to our
inflation profile are roughly balanced. I would point out, Senators, that we have changed the way
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
we present these risks, beginning with this MPR. We are now reporting on how we see various
aspects  of  the  risks  developing,  as  well  as  setting  out  the  indicators  we  are  watching  in
evaluating the risks. I invite you to take a look.
With that, Mr. Chairman, Carolyn and I would be happy to answer questions.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
