William C Dudley: Reforming culture and behavior in the financial
services industry - expanding the dialogue
Opening remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, at the conference "Reforming Culture and Behavior in the Financial
Services Industry: Expanding the Dialogue", Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York City,
20 October 2016.
 Welcome  to  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  and  to  our  third  conference  focused  on
culture within the financial services industry.  It is encouraging to see all of you in attendance
today—in  particular,  the  many  non-executive  directors,  representatives  from  the  investor
community,  and  foreign  supervisors  who  have  joined  us  to  help  broaden  and  deepen  the
dialogue.  Thank you for your participation.  As always, what I have to say today reflects my own
views and not necessarily those of the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve
1
System.
The  evidence  is  pervasive  that  deep-seated  cultural  and  ethical  problems  have  plagued  the
financial  services  industry  in  recent  years.    Bad  conduct  has  occurred  in  both  investment
banking  and  securities  market  activities  as  well  as  in  retail  banking.   This  has  eroded  the
industry’s trustworthiness.
2
This  erosion  impedes  the  ability  of  the  financial  services  industry  to  do  its  job.    That  job  is
financial intermediation—to facilitate the efficient transfer of resources from savers to borrowers,
and  to  help  customers  manage  the  financial  risks  they  face.    Verification—whether  through
regulation  or  internal  controls—is  an  expensive  substitute  for  trustworthiness.    Fines  for  bad
behavior drain resources that could be better used to expand access and improve services, but
billions of dollars in avoidable penalties are just the start.  The time spent handling a legal crisis is
time not spent on more productive pursuits.  Moreover, I worry that, in the long term, an industry
3
that develops a reputation for dubious ethics will not attract the best talent.  
In  contrast,  a  trustworthy  financial  services  sector  will  be  more  productive  and  better  able  to
support  the  economy.    Reliable  financial  intermediaries  can  help  increase  the  flow  of  credit,
promote economic growth and make the financial system more stable.  This is why restoring
trustworthiness must be the ultimate goal of reforming culture. 
The  industry’s  shared  norms—its  culture—will  not  change  by  mere  exhortation  to  the  good,
whether from me or from the industry’s CEOs.  In my experience, people respond far more to
incentives  and  clear  accountability  than  to  statements  of  virtues  and  values.    The  latter  are
worthy  and  necessary,  but  remain  aspirational  or  even  illusory  unless  they  are  tied  to  real
consequences.   What  does  it  mean  for  a  firm  to  profess  to  putting  the  customer  first,  if
employees  are  compensated  and  promoted  regardless  of  what’s  good  for  customers?    Or,
worse, if they are not held to account for activities that can harm customers?  If we focus on
nothing else in today’s conference, let’s explore how best to structure incentives and reinforce
accountability to align with core purposes and first principles.
4
To put it very simply, incentives drive behavior, and behavior establishes the social norms that
drive culture.  If the incentives are wrong and accountability is weak, we will get bad behavior and
cultures.  This implies a role for both firms and supervisors.  Firms need to continually assess
their incentive regimes so that they are consistent with good conduct and culture.  When they are
not consistent, the incentives need to be changed.
Supervisors should also play a role in assessing firms’ incentive structures.  For example, they
should evaluate:
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
How  is  compensation  determined?    In  particular,  is  questionable  conduct―such  as
compliance  violations―consistently  reflected 
in  decisions  about  compensation  and
promotion? 
Do risk managers have the appropriate authority to challenge frontline revenue producers
and prevent activity that is questionable?  When that occurs, are there appropriate negative
consequences for the frontline revenue producers? 
When people speak up to point out potential conduct issues, how are they treated?  Are they
held up as examples to emulate, or are they discouraged or even penalized? 
The answers to these questions should indicate whether incentives must be changed in order to
foster the appropriate behaviors and culture.
The  primary  responsibility  for  reforming  culture—and  changing  incentives—belongs  to  the
industry.  However, the industry does not act alone.  The public sector can play an important role
as well.  I’ll discuss that issue this morning with my colleagues Norman Chan, chief executive of
the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  and  Minouche  Shafik,  deputy  governor  of  the  Bank  of
England.  Later this morning another panel will discuss the ways in which supervision can further
contribute to improving bank culture.
Let’s also consider ways in which new laws or regulations might help—especially to overcome
perennial collective action and first-mover problems that are common across the industry.  Two
years ago I proposed solutions to two such obstacles to reforming culture.  First, there should be
a  database  of  banker  misconduct  to  combat  the  problem  of  “rolling  bad  apples."   Second,  a
baseline assessment of culture is needed in order to measure progress.  I proposed an industry-
wide survey, but there may be other good alternatives.  Once again, I invite the industry to take
the initiative on these issues, and to look to the public sector for support.
5
I also hope that we will attend to issues that we may have overlooked in our earlier discussions. 
Gillian  Tett  of  the Financial  Times  argues  in  her  new  book, The  Silo  Effect,  that  the  key  to
understanding any culture is identifying and explaining “social silences"—the issues that are not
6
being discussed.
Where do we encounter those issues in reforming the culture of financial services?  One place
might  be  the  role  of  investors  in  firms.    Are  their  expectations  of  returns  reasonable  and
consistent  with  a  trustworthy  financial  services  industry?    Another  place  might  be  the
boardroom.    Boards  should  establish  and  promote  a  culture  based  on  ethics  and  respect  for
law.  Have boards risen to this challenge?  If not, what’s needed?  And, going forward, are we
thinking  hard  about  how  technological  change  will  influence  incentives,  behavior  and  culture? 
We’ll hear these issues discussed in several panels today. 
These issues require thoughtful reflection by the industry.  The need for reflection, though, is not
limited to boards, or even to banks.  Regulators and bankers alike can benefit from such a habit. 
In that vein, I want to share with you an everyday checklist proposed by Ignazio Angeloni of the
7
European Central Bank.  He has posed six questions that seek to make responsibility for culture
both individual and routine:
Are you doing what you promised to do?
Are you using your best knowledge and intention in doing it?
Are you doing what public authorities, superiors, colleagues and business partners expect
you to do, and if not why?
Are  you  conforming  to  the  mission  and  the  values  of  your  company,  as  they  are  publicly
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
stated?
Will your actions enhance public confidence in your company and in the financial sector?
Finally, and crucially, would you behave similarly if your actions were publicly observed?
I suspect that while seemingly simple, the discipline of asking ourselves these questions on a
regular basis and answering them thoughtfully and honestly may be more challenging, thought
provoking and effective than one might initially think.
I thank the staff at the New York Fed who put together today’s program, and their colleagues who
are in the audience and watching today.  The diverse professional training and experience of our
staff are among the New York Fed’s strengths.  Bank supervisors, risk managers, economists,
traders  and  lawyers  contribute  insights  from  their  respective  professions  that  lead  to  better
outcomes. 
In  the  spirit  of  learning  from  other  disciplines,  I  am  delighted  to  introduce  today’s  keynote
speaker.  Some of you may recall that, two years ago, Sir David Walker opened our first culture
conference with the words, “I am grateful to the philosopher Onora O’Neill for reference to very
relevant advice." Today we have gone to the source. 
8
Baroness  O’Neill  is  professor  emeritus  of  philosophy  at  the  University  of  Cambridge,  former
president of the British Academy, and former chair of the United Kingdom’s Equality and Human
Rights Commission.  She was appointed a life peer and member of the House of Lords in 1999,
and, in 2007, was elected an Honorary Fellow of the Royal Society.
Today,  Baroness  O’Neill  serves  as  a  member  of  the  Banking  Standards  Board.    Her  2002
lectures  on 
the  book A  Question  of  Trust—have  been
tremendously influential among New York Fed staff working on culture.  Baroness O’Neill, the
floor is yours.
trustworthiness—reprinted 
in 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Stephanie Chaly, James Hennessy, Jacqueline McCormack, Thomas Noone and Joseph Tracy assisted in
preparing these remarks.
William C. Dudley, Ending Too Big to Fail, Remarks at the Global Economic Policy Forum, November 7, 2013.
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., The Rewards of an Ethical Culture, Remarks at the Bank of England, January 20, 2015.
Daniel Awrey  and  David  Kershaw,  “Toward  a  More  Ethical  Culture  in  Finance:  Regulatory  and  Governance
Strategies,” in Nicholas Morris and David Vines, eds., Capital Failure: Rebuilding Trust in Financial Services,
284  (2014)  (“While  codes  of  conduct,  ethics,  and  best  practice  can  be  drafted  and  held  up  as  identifying
desirable  behaviors,  the  norms  these  codes  purport  to  reflect  may  be  overpowered  by  other  countervailing
influences.”).
Mark Egan, Gregor Matvos, and Amit Seru, “The Market for Financial Advisor Misconduct,” Working Paper 22050,
National Bureau of Economic Research, February 2016.
Gillian Tett, The Silo Effect, 45 (2016).
Ignazio Angeloni, Ethics in finance: a banking supervisory perspective, Remarks at the Conference on “The New
Financial Regulatory System: Challenges and Consequences for the Financial Sector,” September 26, 2014.
David Walker, Trust and Trustworthiness in Banks and Bankers, Remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York, October 20, 2014.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
