John  Iannis  Mourmouras:  Post-Brexit  effects  on  global  monetary
policy and capital markets
Speech by Professor John Iannis Mourmouras, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Greece, at an
event organised by the Hellenic American Association for Professionals in Finance (HABA), New
York City, 5 October 2016.
 Views expressed in this speech are personal views and do not necessarily reflect those of the
institutions I am affiliated with.
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to be here. I would like to thank the Directors and the new President of
HABA, Fanny Trataros, for the kind invitation and also Bob Savage for his welcoming remarks.
Fanny,  please  allow  me  here  to  wish  you  all  the  best  with  your  work  for  the  Greek-American
financial community. 
In the early days following the UK vote to leave the EU, most people were very apprehensive,
even fearful, I dare say, about what the future would bring. Once again the end of the world has
not come… yet. I decided to speak today about the implications of this seminal decision by the
British  people  for  themselves,  but  also  for  the  rest  of  continental  Europe,  offering  a  more
sanguine  and  all-around  view.  No  matter  if  it  is  a  light  or  full-blown  Brexit,  the  surrounding
uncertainty  impacts  political  sentiment  in  other  EU  Member  States  and  heightens  pressure  to
adopt inward-looking policies. As a result, the future European and global economic and financial
outlook remains inconclusive. 
My lecture will be structured around the following three questions. Firstly, a little bit of finance
and,  more  specifically,  which  are  the  future  post-Brexit  prospects  of  global  capital  markets.  I
couldn’t avoid this question given the audience’s involvement in the financial industry. My second
question is about monetary policy and, in particular, about the implications of the Brexit vote for
what central banks do, including the ECB. The third question regards the dynamics of European
integration following the Brexit vote, offering a Southern point of view on the subject. 
1. The post-Brexit prospects of global capital markets 
It is true that financial markets have weathered the spike in uncertainty in the aftermath of the
Brexit  vote  surprisingly  well,  while  the  IMF  has  downgraded  from  high  to  medium  the  risk  for
Brexit’s repercussions on the UK itself, the EU and the global economy. However, for market
analysts, private investors and the official sector, the question remains pending: has the tail risk
scenario  really  diminished?  First,  allow  me  to  make  two-three  general  remarks  on  the  global
financial markets’ latest developments before giving you my own insights on the prospects by
year-end for the so-called G4 (US, UK, eurozone and Japan) major currencies, as well as equity
and bond markets. 
• General remarks 
1. Heightened policy uncertainty 
While  the  market  outlook  stabilises,  political  risks  take  center  stage,  as  there  is  almost  one
month left (only 32 days) until November election day. After Brexit any ballot can bring disorder.
Looking ahead, we will see a busy electoral agenda on both sides of the Atlantic. First is the US
presidential election, it follows the Italian referendum on constitutional reform in early December,
and in 2017 there are elections in the Netherlands, the Czech Republic, France and Germany.
 1 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Italy is set to follow in early 2018. Given rising populism, there is a non-negligible risk that one of
these  events  might  produce  a  political  “accident”.  Moreover,  the  prevailing  uncertainty  is  likely
already  to  be  acting  as  a  headwind  (Figure  1).  Brexit,  however,  offers  an  interesting  lesson.
Rather than the dramatic event of imminent recession and financial turmoil feared, it looks set to
be a prolonged, slow process driving structurally weaker growth. 
2. Volatility remains low in fragile global markets 
Following the Brexit vote, implied volatilities followed a downward trend towards or below levels
recorded at the start of the year. Stock market volatility quickly approached the lows last seen in
July 2014 and FX implied volatility is trading today near historic lows. Volatilities in other markets
were less subdued, fluctuating around their recent averages and are still far from their depths in
2014 (Figures 2, 3, 4).
  2 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Although, markets proved resilient to a number of potentially disruptive political developments,
questions  linger  as  to  whether  the  configuration  of  asset  prices  accurately  reflected  the
underlying risks. The apparent contrast between record low bond yields, on the one hand, and
sharply  higher  stock  prices  with  subdued  volatility,  on  the  other,  cast  a  shadow  over  such
valuations. 
3. Global growth is continuing along at a slow pace 
A range of indicators suggest that the euro area economy remained remarkably resilient after the
vote. The negative impact of the UK’s vote to leave the EU on growth, in the UK and the euro
area appears to have been materially less than initially expected. ECB’s President Draghi said
recently that the effect of the Brexit vote on the eurozone’s growth is estimated at around 0.5%
over three years. Despite an array of negative domestic and external events over the past two
years – the Ukraine crisis, the fear of a Grexit, China’s currency volatility, banking sector volatility
and  the  Brexit  vote  –  the  euro  economy  has  sustained  a  remarkably  steady  pace  of  growth
between 1.3% and 1.8%. Thus, the GDP growth for the euro area is estimated at 1.7% growth for
this year, while for next year, the economy is seen slowing to a pace of 1.6%, as Brexit hampers
investment and export flows in the region. 
As far as the UK is concerned, resumed political stability, a weaker currency and the Bank of
England’s policy response look to have stabilised activity, after confidence fell sharply in the wake
of the vote, and now the British economy is expected to exhibit significant resilience post-Brexit.
That  may  be  sufficient  for  GDP  to  avoid  a  modest  contraction.  According  to  the  Bank  of
England’s latest Inflation Report, GDP is forecast to remain unchanged to 2% in 2016, whereas
the 2017 forecast was slashed to 0.8% from a previous estimate of 2.3%, i.e. a drop exceeding
the  one  seen  during  the  2008  financial  crisis!  Correction  in  asset  prices,  a  housing  market
downturn, or a large decline in consumption, represent downside risks to the UK’s economy. 
As regards other advanced economies, the 2016 growth forecast was marked slightly down to
1.6%, while the global growth is projected to slow to 3.1% in 2016 before recovering to 3.4% in
2017.  One  of  the  more  problematic  features  of  the  current  cycle  is  its  over-reliance  on
consumers, while business investment and trade continue to disappoint. 
• Foreign exchange markets 
 3 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
I turn to foreign exchange (FX) prospects by end-year. 
The euro against the dollar 
Political developments on both sides of the little pond seem to be the major driver of FX price
developments (US Presidential elections, referendums-national elections in Europe). As a result,
the dollar’s strength is expected to be limited and the euro against the dollar to move in a tight
range of 1.06–1.16 by year-end. 
British pound 
The pound sterling lost almost 10% in value after the referendum result was announced, by 16%
since  mid-November  2015  and  has  not  recovered  since.  Of  course,  the  Bank  of  England’s
measures announced in August have also contributed to avoiding a shock wave in the face of
great  uncertainty.  Still,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  timing  and  the  “type  of  Brexit”  to  be
implemented,  given  the  size  of  the  current  account  deficit  and  the  uncertainty  around  the
continuation of foreign capital inflows, poses a big risk for the pound and further depreciation is
expected,  albeit,  at  a  somewhat  lesser  extent  than  originally  expected.  Sterling  investors  thus
face  continuing  pain  for  the  foreseeable  future. As  a  result,  an  expected  range  for  the  euro
against the pound by year-end is between 0.83–0.90 (Figures 5, 6). 
 4 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
Yen 
My personal view is that the most challenging currency the months ahead is the yen! Monetary
stimulus  has  not  achieved  a  lasting  weakening  of  Japan’s  currency  and  the  reflation  of  the
economy is still away. Since Bank of Japan’s last policy meeting, the new name of the game for
its monetary policy is “QQE (qualitative quantitative easing) with yield curve control”. 
Although the Bank of Japan kept interest rates unchanged at minus 0.1%, it announced a new
framework with two main elements: the first is a pledge to cap 10-year government bond yields
at  0.0%.  Second,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  pledged  to  continue  buying  assets  until  inflation
“exceeds the price stability target of 2% and stays above the target in a stable manner”. This is a
new inflation overshooting commitment. Sounds to me a bit optimistic! An expected range for the
EUR/JPY exchange rate by year-end is between 1.10–1.25 (see Figure 7). 
 5 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
• Equities 
Global  equity  markets  have  also  recovered  from  Brexit  and  by  mid-July,  despite  flagging
earnings, stock markets in the US had broken through all-time highs, while the emerging market
equities experiencing strong performance, returning to levels last seen a year earlier. All three
main equity indices (S&P 500, Dow Jones, Nasdaq) reached all-time highs around the middle of
August. European stock exchanges have recouped the losses suffered as a result of the Brexit
vote (Figures 8, 9). However, recent developments surrounding the banking system, clearly add
to  uncertainties  making  equity  markets  outlook  rather  foggy!  Taking  into  account  the  recent
Deutsche  Bank’s  troubles,  I  just  wanted  to  mention  that  it  is  among  the  systemically  most
important banks in the world and the IMF concluded in its June Financial Stability assessment
that  it  made  the  largest  net  contribution  to  global  systemic  risk.  However,  there  are  some
reassuring  factors.  The  global  financial  system  is  now  much  better  capitalised  and  able  to
withstand shocks than it was in 2008. Even if the worse came to worst, it seems likely that the
German Government would provide a bailout. And the German Government could easily afford a
bail-out without raising concerns about its own finances. 
 6 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
• Bonds 
Finally, on fixed income, core bond yields continued to probe historical lows after Brexit. More
precisely,  German  10-year  bond  yields  hover  in  the  area  of  –0.07%  and  the  peripheral  bonds
have  been  the  main  beneficiaries  of  the  hunt-for-yield  environment  along  with  the  benign  risk
environment as reflected in declining volatilities across asset classes. Also, the US government
bond yields declined further near 1.50%, mainly due to the Fed’s delay in raising rates (Figure
10).  Thus,  markets  went  through  the  Brexit  vote  with  little  or  no  disruption  to  functioning  with
ample liquidity. 
  7 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Implications of Brexit for central banks 
a. Less monetary policy divergence 
The  Brexit  vote  triggered  a  broad-based  reassessment  of  the  future  path  of  monetary  policy
globally. With improving headline growth still perceived as fragile in most advanced economies,
and inflation still persistently low, the distinct response from major central banks to the Brexit
uncertainty can be described as dovish: policy rates would stay “low for longer”. 
Bank of England 
The Bank of England cut the policy rate by 25 basis points (it is now 0.25%), and expanded the
government  bond  purchase  scheme  by  £60  billion,  bringing  the  total  to  £435  billion.  It  also
established a new corporate bond purchase program of £10 billion, and launched a new Term
Funding Scheme that will provide funding for banks at rates close to the monetary policy rate.
Forward interest rates for December 2017 quickly dropped to the new level of the policy rate,
reflecting  the  view  that  a  quick  policy  reversal  was  not  expected  (Figure  11).The  prospect  of
further Bank of England policy easing in the coming months cannot be ruled out, as the minutes
from the September 14th Bank of England MPC meeting revealed that the majority of the policy
members  are  expected  to  support  a  further  rate  cut  in  the  course  of  the  year  if  the  UK’s
economic outlook is judged to be “broadly consistent” with August projections (i.e. GDP growth is
expected  to  slow  to  0.1%  quarter-on-quarter  in  Q3  2016  from  0.6%  quarter-on-quarter  in  Q2
2016). 
 8 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Federal Reserve 
Following the Brexit shock in the US, a 2016 rate rise is not fully priced in the market with the
implied probability of a Fed rate hike in December 2016 to be around 55% today (Figure 11, right-
hand panel). In addition, the Fed at the September policy meeting cut the longer-run federal funds
rate  to  2.9%  from  3.0%  previously,  while,  based  on  the  updated  dot-pot,  the  median  path  of
appropriate monetary policy for 2017 shifted in a dovish direction. 
Bank of Japan 
The Bank of Japan in its last policy meeting launched a novel kind of monetary easing as it set a
cap  on  10-year  bond  yields  and  vowed  to  take  action  to  overshoot  its  2%  inflation  target.  Its
decision  demonstrates  that  central  bankers  are  still  willing  to  experiment  with  new  monetary
policy ideas, as inflation remains too low. Some observers characterised this shift as probably
the biggest innovation in monetary policy since the introduction of negative deposit rates by the
Danish central bank in the summer of 2012! But what actually does this new monetary policy
framework  in  Japan  mean  (we  may  call  it  long-term  interest  rate  targeting)  and  what  are  its
implications? 
There are two main issues here under consideration: firstly, this is another policy dilemma of the
nature  “prices  vs.  quantities”  and  secondly,  it  is  a  further  accommodative  monetary  policy
stance, but with an asterisk. Starting with the first, it seems that the role of quantities such as the
monetary base is downgraded and becomes much less important than before. In other words,
instead of committing to buy a fixed amount at a market-determined rate, the Bank of Japan will
buy a potentially unlimited amount at a pre-determined rate (price). 
It is true that the package of measures allows a lot of flexibility for the Bank of Japan to determine
long-term rates (in addition to short-term base rates), but also raises many questions. For one
thing, the Bank of Japan is now attempting to control both prices and quantities, which is simply
not feasible! On the other hand, fixing 10-year rates at 0% may require to buy whatever quantity
of bonds necessary to deliver rate stability, which may mean buying more or less than its target
pace of ¥80 trillion per year. In other words, the Bank of Japan could reduce the pace of QE
purchases in the future if it thinks it can achieve its yield target with fewer bond purchases, for
 9 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
example in a scenario where markets perceive the Bank of Japan’s yield target as credible or
yields turn negative! Any potential reduction in bond purchases would be equivalent to tapering. It
is exactly this built-in tapering mechanism that explains the asterisk I mentioned above. In other
words,  it  is  conceivable  in  the  future  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  could  be  forced  to  sell  JGBs  if
markets challenge the central bank by pushing the 10-year JGB yield well below its 0% target.
This selling would be equivalent to a reversal of QE, it could be self-defeating in the case where
inflation is still too low. 
ECB 
At its latest GC meeting, the European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it will extend its QE
programme  beyond  March  2017  if  needed.  Looking  forward,  markets  expect  the  eurozone
economy  to  need  more  stimulus  from  the  ECB  as  the  gap  between  current  headline  inflation
(0.2% year-to-date average), the ECB’s inflation forecasts (1.2% in 2017, 1.6% in 2018) and its
higher target justify further policy easing (Figure 12). 
  So far, there is some encouraging evidence from the ECB’s ongoing QE programme. 
In more detail: 
Banking credit channel 
Loan growth continued to recover gradually as the annual growth rate of the monetary financial
institutions (MFIs) loans to the private sector (adjusted for loan sales, securitisation and notional
cash  pooling)  is  expected  to  increase  further  in  the  second  quarter  of  2016  and  in  July  (see
Figure 13), particularly for private companies (non-financial corporations or NFCs in ECB jargon)
(see Figure 14) which recovered substantially from the trough of the first quarter of 2014. Lending
to companies grew by 1.9% year-o-year, while household lending grew by 1.8%. 
 10 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
A significant improvement has also been observed in Eurosystem banks’ composite cost of debt
financing, which declined in July to a new historical low, after broadly stabilising in the second
quarter of 2016 (see Figure 15). 
 Also,  banks  reported  a  further  net  easing  of  credit  standards  on  loans  to  enterprises  in  the
 11 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
second  quarter  of  2016,  suggesting  a  continued  improvement  in  financing  conditions  for
corporate  loans. Across  the  largest  euro  area  countries,  overall  terms  and  conditions  eased
across  all  larger  countries  except  for  Germany  (Table  1).  In  most  of  the  large  euro  area
countries, in particular, France and Italy, banks continued to report a narrowing of margins on
average loans in net terms. Margins on riskier loans widened in net terms in Spain and Germany.
 Furthermore,  bank  lending  rates  for  the  private  sector  remained  on  a  downward  trend  in  the
second  quarter  of  2016  and  in  July  (see  Figure  16).  Composite  lending  rates  for  NFCs  and
households have decreased by significantly more than market reference rates since June 2014,
and  between  May  2014  and  July  2016,  composite  lending  rates  on  loans  to  euro  area  NFCs
(corporate loans) and households (i.e. mortgages) fell by around 100 basis points. The reduction
in bank lending rates was especially strong in vulnerable euro area countries, indicating reducing
fragmentation in euro area financial markets. Over the same period, the spread between interest
rates charged on very small loans (loans of up to €0.25 million) and those charged on large loans
(loans of above €1 million) in the euro area followed a downward trend. This indicates that small-
and  medium-sized  enterprises  have  generally  been  benefiting  to  a  greater  extent  than  large
companies from the decline in lending rates.
  12 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
b. QE vs. negative rates 
Staying  in  the  eurozone  and  taking  as  a  given  fact  that  we  will  move  towards  more
accommodative monetary policy in  the  months  ahead,  a  more  open  question  is:  which  policy
instrument will be used? More QE or further negative rates? This is the essence of the monetary
policy debate in the eurozone today.
 Clearly, there are limits to persistent negative rates, namely the underlying question is how far
and  for  how  long  they  can  actually  go.  There  are  a  number  of  concerns  including  banks’
profitability, how negative rates may act as an anaesthetic to euro area governments especially
in the euro area’s southern periphery, taking into account that the fiscal space gained from lower
debt  service  costs  may  result  in  a  slower  implementation  of  necessary  fiscal  and  structural
reforms. 
Policy  rate  cuts  to  negative  levels  have  generally  been  reflected  in  corresponding  declines  in
money market rates and short-term government bond yields (see Figure 17). In turn, the fall in
bank  wholesale  funding  costs  has  helped  lower  lending  rates,  but  to  varying  degrees  across
countries. The decline in rates on new loans has been particularly notable in the eurozone (Viñals
et  al.  2016,  Jobst  and  Lin  2016).  Inflation  expectations  have  continued  to  decline  in  most
economies with negative interest rate policies (also known as NIRP countries).
 13 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
In addition, there are concerns about the political and institutional feasibility of negative rates as
their  long-term  effects  are  still  unknown.  Most  importantly,  their  effectiveness  is  put  under
question during a recession, if this were to emerge in the near future. 
I would personally, in my professorial hat, prefer to see more QE rather than further negative
rates. If this is the case, the next question is where could more QE in the eurozone come from?
In other words, does the ECB have the tools for more QE stimulus? 
Well, there are several options. From changing the parameters of the current QE programme
like,  for  instance,  buying  bonds  below  the  deposit  rate,  increasing  the  33%  issue  share  limit,
dropping the capital key allocation, or even adding new securities to the pool of eligible assets
such as bank bonds or equity. 
Let me now turn to the effects of Brexit on the dynamics of European integration and indeed offer
a southern point of view and, more particularly, make five points from the South on the Brexit
vote. 
1
3. A Southern view on Brexit’s implications for the EU
The  European  Union  is  currently  facing  crises  on  multiple  fronts  (anaemic  growth,  high
unemployment,  persistently  low  inflation  close  to  deflation,  a  debt  crisis,  an  ongoing  migrant
crisis), but Brexit represents the biggest medium- to long-term challenge of all. I will focus here
on a couple of rather important points. 
 14 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
Euroscepticism  is  now  a  strong  sentiment  in  Europe.  Populist,  authoritarian  parties  are  in
government  or  in  a  ruling  coalition  in nine (9) countries of the EU. This is an alarming figure.
Referendums in Italy and Hungary, and national elections next year in the Netherlands, the Czech
Republic, France and Germany, are expected to reinforce this eurosceptic mood. 
Beyond the obvious economic concerns which triggered the UK vote to leave the EU, everyone
agrees that the EU needs to address the issue of its democratic deficit and accountability. 
In addition, it has long been argued that the European Union remains a ‘market without a state’.
This quote perhaps summarises the debate on European integration over the last 40 years at
least. The most frequent complaint regarding the way the EU works is that it is governed by an
elite  of  unelected  technocrats  through  several  independent  European  institutions  and  bodies
(including the ECB). 
In light of the above issues of democratic deficit and accountability, Europeans are increasingly
disenchanted  with  the  EU,  as  shown  by  the  rise  of  populist,  authoritarian  parties.  Support  for
populist political parties with eurosceptic credentials has been rising, that is, parties which are by
nature more Eurosceptic and less oriented towards reforms, which of course the South badly
needs. As a result, this is a major downside risk to debt sustainability in this part of the euro
area. 
For  continental  Europe,  Brexit  represents  a  shock  to  the  institutions  and  norms  that  underpin
markets, albeit different from the euro break-up fears of 2012, the global financial crisis of 2008
or the bursting of the high-tech bubble of 2001. The origins of previous financial crises can be
located  in  multiple  factors  that  are  linked  with  the  financial  system  and  the  economic  cycle,
respectively.  The  risk  today  is  not  financial  contagion,  like  in  2008.  Instead,  it  represents  a
contagious political development. No matter whether we have a full-blown or a light Brexit, the
political risk for the continent is that referendums may mushroom across Europe in a tug-of-war
between  populist  forces  and  the  political  establishment  and  elites.  Brexit  has  the  potential  to
unleash  centrifugal  forces,  leading  perhaps  to  a  breakup  of  the  euro,  especially  if  such  a
referendum were to be held this time in a major eurozone country. Perhaps such a referendum
is more likely in a southern eurozone country. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
1
For a more detailed account, see my speech (September 2016) at Banca d’ Italia, Rome.
 15 / 15
BIS central bankers' speeches
