 Speech 
   Embargo 
24 November 2016, 6.15 pm 
Negative interest rates: necessary from a monetary policy 
perspective – but with what risks for the banks? 
Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern 
 
Fritz Zurbrügg  
 
Vice Chairman of the Governing Board* 
Swiss National Bank 
Berne, 24 November 2016 
© Swiss National Bank, Berne, 2016 (speech given in German) 
   * The speaker would like to thank Till Ebner and Adriel Jost for their support in drafting this speech. He also extends his thanks to Stefanie 
Behncke, Toni Beutler, Robert Bichsel, Rita Fleer, Pius Matter and Oleg Reichmann for their valuable comments and to the SNB 
Language Services for their assistance. 
   Page 1/10 
     Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for inviting me to speak at your annual general meeting. It has become something 
of a tradition for members of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank to appear 
before your society, the Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern, and I am 
honoured to continue this tradition. In November 2012, my colleague Thomas Jordan began 
his speech by citing a few figures to underline just how much the world had changed since the 
financial crisis. The Swiss franc exchange rate to the euro had fallen from 1.65 to 1.20, short-
term interest rates had decreased from 2.5% to almost zero, and the yield on ten-year 
Confederation bonds was just 0.5%. Who would have thought that, four years later, we would 
be confronted with an even stronger franc and even lower – indeed negative – short and long-
term interest rates? 
These extraordinary developments are ultimately a consequence of the global recession which 
hit the economy after the credit bubble on the US real estate market burst in 2007. As slide 1 
shows, the banks around the world were, and continue to be, especially hard hit by this crisis 
and its consequences; since then, their share prices have performed significantly worse than 
those of other companies. 
This is principally due to the fact that many banks are still engaged in cleaning up their 
balance sheets and, where necessary, adopting costly restructuring measures. 
Furthermore, banks have been obliged to implement stricter regulatory requirements in the 
wake of the financial crisis. These requirements, which are needed to ensure systemic 
stability, are aimed at curbing excessive risk-taking. From the banks’ point of view, however, 
today there are lower potential returns in areas which were previously often lucrative but also 
highly risky. 
Banks are also faced with structural challenges. The accelerated pace of change in 
information technology and altered customer behaviour require high levels of investment. At 
the same time, the increasing digitalisation of distribution channels has stiffened competition, 
since it is easier for new rivals to enter the market. 
Another significant challenge for banks is the current economic environment. Weak global 
growth and persistently low interest rates in recent years are weighing on profitability in the 
banking sector. 
What repercussions does the latter aspect – low interest rates – have on banks in Switzerland 
in this generally difficult environment? 
This is the question that I would like to address in detail this evening. 
I will begin by briefly explaining why the negative interest rate in Switzerland is currently 
necessary from a monetary policy perspective. I will then show the extent to which this 
interest rate environment has influenced the profitability of Swiss banks. I will conclude with 
a discussion of the associated risks to financial stability, which require special attention. 
  Page 2/10 
     Negative interest rate as a monetary policy imperative given low rates 
worldwide 
To answer the question of why the negative interest rate in Switzerland is currently necessary 
from a monetary policy perspective, it is worth looking somewhat further into the past. 
The last 30 years have seen interest rates around the globe trending downwards, as illustrated 
by the rates on ten-year government bonds in Switzerland, Germany and the US (slide 2). A 
key explanation for this downward trend is that both inflation rates and their volatility have 
declined worldwide. Consequently, investors require less compensation for the risk of a fall in 
the value of money due to inflation. The literature gives further reasons for the general decline 
in interest rates since the mid-1980s.1 The propensity to save has increased overall, while at 
the same time the demand for investment capital has receded. This combination of higher 
supply of and lower demand for capital exerts downward pressure on interest rates. Since the 
onset of the financial crisis in 2007, the prolonged slump in global growth and valiant efforts 
by central banks have pushed interest rates even lower. 
As a small open economy, Switzerland cannot decouple itself from these global 
developments. On the contrary, exceptionally low interest rates around the globe have far-
reaching consequences for our economy. 
In the past, Switzerland has invariably had lower interest rates than its trading partners, 
namely the euro area countries, as shown in slide 3, where the blue shaded area depicts the 
difference between short-term interest rates in euros (yellow) and Swiss francs (red). This 
interest rate advantage primarily reflects the lower average inflation rate in Switzerland 
compared to other countries, although political stability, sustainable fiscal policy and credible 
monetary policy also play a role. Investors have therefore traditionally been willing to hold 
Swiss franc investments at lower yields. This interest rate advantage was for a long time the 
‘natural’ state of things in Switzerland. 
However, in the wake of the financial crisis, this advantage came under mounting pressure. 
Monetary policy easing on the part of the European Central Bank resulted in a narrowing of 
the EUR/CHF interest rate differential. In 2014, yields on short-term government bonds in 
Switzerland were, at times, even higher than in Germany. This caused upward pressure on the 
Swiss franc to intensify.2 
From a monetary policy perspective, Swiss franc appreciation calls for monetary policy 
easing, since the exchange rate has a substantial influence on inflation and economic 
developments in Switzerland. Initially, appreciation places downward pressure on prices of 
imported goods and services, which account for around 25% of the basket of commodities 
  1 Cf. Bean, Charles et al. (2015), Low for long? Causes and consequences of persistently low interest rates, Geneva Reports on the World 
Economy 17, BIS (2015), 85th Annual Report, Chapter I: Is the unthinkable becoming routine?  
2 Another important reason for the upward pressure of recent years is the generally higher level of uncertainty in the financial markets, 
manifesting in a greater desire for safe investments. The Swiss franc – along with the US dollar and the yen – are commonly considered 
safe haven currencies – cf. Ranaldo, Angelo and Paul Söderlind (2010), Safe haven currencies, Review of Finance, 14, pp. 385–407. 
  Page 3/10 
     used to calculate the Swiss consumer price index. An appreciation of the Swiss franc therefore 
translates into a decline in the inflation rate. Furthermore, appreciation impairs the price 
competitiveness of the domestic export industry and dampens foreign demand for Swiss 
goods and services. This, in turn, adversely affects domestic growth and therefore also 
indirectly weighs on inflation. 
As you are aware, the SNB has a statutory mandate to ensure price stability while taking due 
account of economic developments. Thanks to the introduction of the negative interest rate in 
Switzerland, the original interest rate differential to the euro area could at least partially be 
restored. This – along with the SNB’s willingness to intervene in the foreign exchange market 
– has helped to relieve pressure on the Swiss franc. The effect of the negative interest rate on 
the exchange rate is currently playing a decisive role in enabling the SNB to fulfil its 
monetary policy mandate. It allows the SNB to counter the aforementioned consequences of 
the Swiss franc appreciation on economic developments and inflation. Without the negative 
interest rate, inflation and economic growth in Switzerland would be lower.3 
Low interest rates and Swiss banks’ profitability 
The negative interest rate thus remains indispensable from a monetary policy perspective, and 
has, as explained, achieved the desired effect. A monetary policy geared to price and 
economic stability is also a precondition for a profitable, stable financial system. An 
environment of decreasing prices and low growth would lead to reduced demand for banking 
business and increased credit defaults, losses and write-downs. 
At the same time, the exceptionally low interest rates are fraught with significant challenges. 
Above all, over time they can have economically undesirable consequences for financial 
stability. 
We have arrived at the main topic of my remarks today, namely, how does the SNB assess the 
effects of low interest rates on financial stability? 
The answer to this question largely depends on the extent to which low interest rates affect 
banks’ profitability. If the impact on profitability is substantial, it can over time undermine the 
robustness and integrity of the banking system as a whole, since only a banking system that is 
profitable in the long term can maintain and further build up its resilience. And only a resilient 
banking system is capable of seamlessly fulfilling its core economic functions. Furthermore, a 
decline in profitability could lead to banks taking excessive risks in an attempt to reach 
earnings targets, which – again – is undesirable from a financial stability perspective. 
To assess the impact of low interest rates on the Swiss banks, it is useful to start by 
considering the business activities with which banks generate their income and how these 
activities are impacted by exceptionally low interest rates. 
 3 For an extensive discussion of the effects of the negative interest rate, cf. Jordan, Thomas (2016), Monetary policy using negative interest 
rates: a status report, Speech at Vereinigung Basler Ökonomen, 24 October 2016, www.snb.ch/en/mmr/speeches/id/ref_20161024_tjn. 
   Page 4/10 
     First, let us consider the earnings. There are three key ‘pillars’ or sources of income in 
banking: interest business, commission business and trading business. 
In simple terms, interest business consists of granting interest-bearing loans and financing 
them with lower-interest deposits or by issuing debt certificates, such as bonds. This is classic 
banking business. 
Commission business principally stems from fees charged for the provision of services, such 
as asset management or advising companies on bond or share issues. Trading business mainly 
consists of purchasing and selling securities on behalf of clients or for the bank’s own 
account. 
The current low interest rate environment can affect these three pillars in different ways. 
On the one hand, lower interest rates could plausibly benefit commission and trading 
business. Customers might be inclined to shift their portfolios into riskier investments, which 
would be conducive to earnings in these business areas. At the same time, a decline in interest 
rates leads to one-off valuation gains on securities in the balance sheet. 
On the other hand, it is likely that exceptionally low interest rates negatively impact banks’ 
interest rate margins. Put simply, the interest rate margin is the difference between banks’ 
interest income and interest expense, shown as a percentage of banks’ assets. 
To better understand the relationship between the interest rate level and interest rate margin, it 
is worth looking at the composition of the latter. The interest rate margin can be divided into 
three components, namely the asset, structural and liability margins (slide 4). 
The asset margin is the difference between the interest rate charged on loans and a market 
interest rate of equal maturity. The liability margin is the difference between a short-term 
market interest rate and the interest paid on deposits and other sources of financing. And 
finally, the structural margin is the difference between longer and short-term market interest 
rates – essentially the compensation the bank receives for maturity transformation.  
Exceptionally low rates weigh on interest rate margins largely as a result of liability margins 
coming under pressure, as slide 5 illustrates.4 This is because deposit rates (yellow) that are 
already close to zero react less strongly to an interest rate cut than market rates (red) – indeed, 
in extreme cases, deposit rates do not react at all. The main reason for this is that in such 
cases, banks do not pass on lower interest rates to private customers, or only to a very limited 
extent, since doing so would expose them to the risk of customers withdrawing deposits and 
investing them at another bank, or hoarding them as cash. Banks wish to avoid this, because 
otherwise they stand to lose a source of financing for their business activities which is stable 
and convenient in the long term. 
 4 Furthermore, past experience has shown that the interest rate curve tends to flatten in periods of falling interest rates. This, in turn, weighs 
on structural margins. Cf. Borio, Claudio et al. (2015), The influence of monetary policy on bank profitability, BIS Working Paper, 514 and 
Claessens, Stijn et al. (2016), Low-for-long’ interest rates and net interest margins of banks in Advanced Foreign Economies, IFDP Notes. 
   Page 5/10 
     The negative interest rate has put renewed pressure on liability margins, which have since 
even turned negative, as shown in the blue shaded area on this slide. 
To sum up, it is conceivable that banks could profit from the low interest rate environment in 
commission and trading business. However, earnings on interest business are expected to 
come under pressure, especially if interest rates are below zero. Therefore, the extent to which 
the current interest rate situation weighs on profitability depends not least on the degree to 
which a bank or banking system is geared towards interest business. 
In practical terms, what does this mean for the Swiss banks? 
For the Swiss banking sector as a whole, interest and commission business are of roughly 
equal importance as sources of revenue, with both contributing around 35% to net earnings in 
recent years (slide 6).In comparison, as this table shows, banks in the euro area generate more 
than half of their earnings from interest business. The banking system in Switzerland is thus 
generally less dependent on interest business than elsewhere. This is a consequence of the 
comparatively greater importance of commission and trading business at the big international 
banks and the asset management-focused private banks. 
Then there are the domestically focused banks – essentially the regional, cantonal and 
Raiffeisen banks. As is clear from their income statements, these institutions are principally 
active in interest business. Net interest income – i.e. the difference between interest income 
and interest expenses – accounts for almost 70% of their earnings. It is therefore to be 
expected that the impact of low interest rates on profitability will, on average, be greater for 
these banks than for others with a different business focus. 
Stabilised interest margins of domestically focused banks 
I shall therefore concentrate on domestically focused banks in the following remarks.  
The profitability of these institutions has fallen – in some cases significantly – since the 
beginning of the low interest rate period, primarily due to declining margins on interest 
business. The average interest rate margin fell substantially between 2008 and 2014, as this 
chart illustrates (slide 7). 
However, the chart also shows that interest rate margins have stabilised since the introduction 
of negative interest. Furthermore, current business figures from domestically focused banks 
suggest that they have absorbed the negative interest rate relatively well to date, despite 
growing pressure on their liability margins. Negative interest has thus so far not caused a 
further erosion of banks’ profitability. 
At first sight, this result seems remarkable. How can it be explained? 
First: Overall, negative interest has hitherto had no material direct cost implications for 
domestically focused banks. This is due to the fact that the SNB grants an exemption 
threshold before the negative interest rate is applied. In practice, negative interest is only 
  Page 6/10 
     charged on sight deposits that exceed 20 times the minimum reserve requirement. The sight 
deposits of most domestically focused banks are below or at this threshold. 
A second – and important – explanation can be seen in the red shaded area of this chart 
(slide 8). Domestically focused banks have reacted to the decline in liability margins by 
increasing asset margins by around 50 basis points. Specifically, following the introduction of 
negative interest, they raised rates for long-term mortgages (shown here in blue), while 
returns on long-term market investments (illustrated here using the ten-year swap rate in 
yellow) continued to fall. The banks have since managed to keep asset margins high, 
notwithstanding the fact that market rates have continued to decline. 
But there is another, equally important explanation for the limited impact of the low interest 
rate environment on the profitability of domestically focused banks: these institutions have 
increased their risk appetite. This applies particularly to affordability risk (typically measured 
using the loan-to-income ratio) in lending and to interest rate risk from maturity 
transformation. 
Let’s take a closer look at the current risk situation with respect to domestically focused banks 
in Switzerland. 
Affordability risk refers to cases in which a borrower can no longer afford to make interest 
and amortisation payments for a loan under unfavourable conditions.5 A representative 
quarterly survey conducted by the SNB indicates that a substantial share of new mortgages 
exhibit high loan-to-income ratios. Moreover, this share has been rising since 2013.6 
Put simply, interest rate risk is the risk that banks will suffer losses as a result of rising 
interest rates. Such risk results from the maturity transformation process mentioned above – 
that is to say, from the fact that loans extended by banks are typically tied up for longer than 
customer deposits. Banks can increase interest rate risk exposure by, for instance, extending 
repricing maturities.7 
This chart illustrates how the banks’ appetite for interest rate risk has increased since the 
beginning of the low interest rate period (slide 9). It shows the net present value loss which 
the domestically focused banks would incur on average if the interest rate level were to rise 
by 200 basis points. This loss is considered in relation to the banks’ equity capital. The chart 
underlines that this loss potential has been very high for several years. It also makes clear that 
these banks have taken on additional interest rate risk since the introduction of negative 
interest. 
  5 In the case of mortgages, the affordability assessment typically also includes assumptions on maintenance costs. 
6 Cf. SNB (2016): Financial Stability Report 2016, www.snb.ch/en/mmr/reference/stabrep_2016/source/stabrep_2016.en.pdf. In a 
supplementary survey on the mortgage market which the SNB has been conducting since 2011, the 25 largest banks with a cumulative 
share of the domestic mortgage market of over 80% are asked to provide information about loan-to-value and loan-to-income ratios for 
new mortgages in the following segments: owner-occupied residential real estate, and residential investment property held by commercial 
borrowers and private individuals. For the purposes of the survey, new lending comprises both refinancing of an existing mortgage from 
another lender and newly granted loans for the purchase or construction of real estate. 
7 Equally, actual interest rate risk increases if banks stop – or scale back – hedging activities for such risk to reduce costs. 
  Page 7/10 
     The SNB regularly conducts simulations to gauge the significance of this interest rate risk 
exposure for financial stability. 
As set out in this year’s Financial Stability Report, these simulations suggest that the Swiss 
banking system is well positioned to absorb a gradual normalisation of interest rates under 
current conditions.8 Indeed, the banks even stand to benefit from such a scenario, as a 
moderate interest rate rise would relieve pressure on interest rate margins. This is due to the 
fact that the first effect of a moderate rise in interest rates would likely be a normalisation of 
liability margins. 
If, on the other hand, we assume a scenario in which interest rates rise very sharply, this 
would have a significant adverse impact on the banks. This outcome is attributable to the fact 
that, in such circumstances, structural margins would decline substantially – in other words, 
losses associated with maturity transformation would materialise. It would not be possible to 
offset this effect with improved liability margins. 
In this context, I should emphasise that the domestically focused banks have been 
accumulating capital in recent years and now hold sizeable capital surpluses that significantly 
exceed regulatory minimum requirements. Currently, they could even absorb the kind of 
losses that a sharp rate rise would entail. The introduction of the countercyclical capital buffer 
– which requires banks to hold capital beyond minimum requirements if momentum on the 
Swiss mortgage and real estate markets is deemed excessive – has played a role here. A 
capital buffer of this kind has been in place – specifically with respect to mortgage-backed 
loans for financing residential real estate in Switzerland – since the end of September 2013. 
So overall, as things stand today, we may draw three conclusions. First, exceptionally low 
interest rates are putting pressure on interest rate margins and this is weighing on the 
profitability of Swiss banks. This is particularly true of the domestically focused banks, 
whose operations are heavily geared towards interest business. Second, the negative interest 
rate per se has not thus far caused an additional erosion of these banks’ profitability. This is 
due in part to the fact that, thanks to the exemption thresholds granted by the SNB, for most 
domestically focused banks negative interest has not yet resulted in any material direct costs. 
At the same time, these banks have responded to profitability pressure by raising asset 
margins. Third, they have further increased their risk appetite. The risk exposure of the Swiss 
banking system is nevertheless manageable at the moment, thanks to the capital surpluses 
currently available. 
8 Cf. SNB (2016): Financial Stability Report 2016, www.snb.ch/en/mmr/reference/stabrep_2016/source/stabrep_2016.en.pdf. The 
simulations show how the banks’ net interest income – aggregated over the next five years – would develop under various interest rate 
scenarios. 
 Page 8/10 
        Low interest rate environment – all players should be cautious and alert 
So much for the current situation. But how does the SNB see low interest rates affecting the 
banking system in the future? 
First, it is worth reminding ourselves that the authorities, the SNB and the commercial banks 
jointly adopted a balanced package of measures back in 2012 to help mitigate the financial 
stability risks associated with persistently low interest rates. 
Alongside the countercyclical capital buffer referred to above, adjustments to the self-
regulation rules for banks in the area of mortgage lending are particularly worthy of mention. 
Banks now require of borrowers that at least 10% of the loan value be provided from funds 
that do not stem from the second pillar. Furthermore, borrowers must gradually pay down the 
mortgage to two-thirds of the loan value within 15 years. 
As interest rates will have to be kept low for the foreseeable future for reasons of price 
stability, all players should remain especially cautious and alert. 
The longer the exceptional interest rate situation persists, the more likely it is that banks will 
experience higher profitability pressure. Over time, competition between banks may cause 
interest rate margins to narrow further still. Additional competitive pressure may come from 
insurers and pension funds, which are increasingly seeking to position themselves as direct 
providers on the mortgage market. 
Ongoing profitability pressure creates an incentive for banks to step up their exposure to 
interest rate risk and adopt an imprudent attitude in their affordability assessments. Equally, 
banks may react to earnings pressure by expanding the volume of credit. 
Together, such developments would cause prices on the Swiss real estate market to gain 
momentum again, following a recently slowdown. This is particularly relevant given that real 
estate remains relatively attractive, not just to households but to investors searching for yield. 
The net result of this would be a renewed rise in imbalances on the real estate and credit 
markets. This would make borrowers and banks more vulnerable – to an unexpected future 
interest rate rise, for instance. In particular, it would increase the magnitude and overall 
economic impact of a price correction on the real estate market. 
In the spirit of a cautious, forward-looking approach, it is essential given the current interest 
rate environment that banks apply conservative principles in their lending activities. 
This is particularly necessary when it comes to assessing the sustainability of loans. Based on 
experience from the crisis in the 1990s, banks now typically assume an interest rate of 5% 
when assessing affordability risk; this is the approximate historical average of long-term 
mortgage interest rates.9 The level of this imputed interest rate is not set by the regulator and 
 9 Banks generally stipulate that the cost of a residential property, based on an imputed interest rate of 5% plus amortisation and maintenance 
costs, must not exceed one-third of the borrower’s gross income. When assessing affordability risk for mortgage lending, the SNB likewise 
bases its calculations on an interest rate of 5%. 
   Page 9/10 
     varies between banks. However, if this interest rate were to be lowered in the current 
environment, borrowers, banks and the economy as a whole would face significant risks. 
It is especially important when assessing affordability and the relevant interest rate to 
remember that real estate is normally purchased over a long time horizon of several decades. 
Interest payments for a mortgage will thus be incurred for the duration of this period, in the 
course of which rates may well be significantly higher than they are today. While a sharp 
interest rate rise is unlikely in the short term, there is considerable room for a substantial 
upward correction in the medium term. It is worth bearing in mind that long-term interest 
rates are currently about 300 basis points below what was considered normal during the pre-
2008 era. It is thus vital that borrowers and banks do not exclude the possibility of a sharp 
interest rate rise in the medium term and, that they ensure their ability to cope should such a 
scenario come to pass. In short, they should not assume that today’s favourable financial 
conditions will endure for their entire planning horizon. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me now wrap up. 
The negative interest rate charged on banks’ sight deposits at the SNB is indispensable from a 
monetary policy perspective. Given low interest rates around the world and the difficult 
global economic situation, negative interest – coupled with the SNB’s willingness to 
intervene in the foreign exchange market – serves to ease upward pressure on the Swiss franc. 
Negative interest helps to maintain price stability and support economic activity in 
Switzerland. Of course, the banking sector ultimately benefits if prices are stable and the 
economy thrives. 
However, the low interest rate policy is also associated with side-effects. It can have 
economically undesirable consequences for financial stability. Thanks to measures taken to 
date and the capital surpluses that banks have in place, these risks are currently manageable 
for the financial system. 
Looking to the future, ongoing low interest rates are likely to continue weighing on banks’ 
profitability; this, in turn, will create an incentive for them to take on more risk. At the same 
time, imbalances on the Swiss real estate and mortgage markets could be exacerbated over 
time. Such developments would render the banking system and the economy more vulnerable. 
It is thus all the more important that banks put aside sufficient capital surpluses and adopt a 
conservative mindset when assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. For its part, the SNB 
monitors developments on the credit and real estate markets continuously and reassesses the 
need for an adjustment of the countercyclical capital buffer on a regular basis. 
Thank you very much. 
 
  Page 10/10 
 Negative interest rates: necessary 
from a monetary policy perspective 
– but with what risks for the banks?
Fritz Zurbrügg
Vice Chairman of the Governing Board
Swiss National Bank
Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern
Berne, 24 November 2016
Slide 1
2
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 2
3
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 3
Introduction of
negative interest
4
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 4
COMPOSITION OF BANKS' INTEREST RATE MARGIN (STYLISED)
Interest rate 
margin
Structural
margin
Liability margin
Asset margin
Mortgage rate (10-year)
Capital market rate
(10-year) 
Capital market rate 
(3-year)
Interest rate on deposits
5
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 5
Introduction of
negative interest
6
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 6
CONTRIBUTIONS BY BUSINESS AREAS TO NET EARNINGS 2015
Swiss             
banks
European      
banks
Swiss 
domestically 
focused banks
Interest business
Commission business
Trading business
Other
37%
35%
13%
14%
58%
27%
9%
6%
67%
19%
9%
5%
7
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 7
Introduction of
negative interest
8
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 8
Introduction of
negative interest
9
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Slide 9
Introduction of
negative interest
10
24/11/2016 Volkswirtschaftliche Gesellschaft des Kantons Bern | Fritz Zurbrügg | © Swiss National Bank
Thank you for your attention.
© Swiss National Bank
