Jiří Rusnok: Basel Consultative Group Meeting - welcome speech
Welcome  speech  by  Mr  Jiří  Rusnok,  Governor  of  the  Czech  National  Bank,  at  the  Basel
Consultative Group Meeting, Topic "Regulatory Treatment of Sovereign Exposures - Survey of
Recommendations",  Czech  National  Bank  and  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Prague,  4
October 2016.
 Dear Basel Consultative Group members,
Dear experts from all around the world,
Dear ladies and gentlemen,
Let me warmly welcome you to the Czech National Bank (CNB). We are proud to host the expert
meeting  on  the  Basel  regulatory  reform  and  its  design,  using  the  perspective  of  emerging
markets and developing countries.
In the wake of the recent global financial crisis, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
(BCBS) is making reform steps towards more healthy, stable, and resilient banks and financial
systems. The latest Basel reform includes more and better bank capital, leverage and liquidity
requirements,  as  well  as  macro-prudential  measures,  ranging  from  G-SIB  surcharges  to
countercyclical capital buffers. The reform effort is successfully underway and new standards
are  gradually  being  implemented  worldwide,  covering  advanced  as  well  as  emerging  markets
and developing countries.
When  designing  further  details  of  the  regulatory  reform,  we  have  to  pay  special  attention  to
differences  in  financial  systems  among  countries  and  regions.  Namely,  financial  systems  in
emerging markets and developing countries are often shallower and less liquid than in advanced
economies. Therefore, emerging market countries can hardly take over all regulatory measures
without modifications. On the contrary, they need to contribute to the design of the measures to
make them robust and effective across countries. Similar holds for regulatory objectives, as what
is considered a priority for regulators in advanced countries, like the G20 countries, might not be
considered as urgent in emerging market countries.
In this regard, I welcome and strongly support the effort of the Basel Consultative Group (BSG)
as  a  forum  for  deepening  the  engagement  of  the  BCBS  with  non-member  authorities,
international institutions, and regional groups of banking supervisors on the regulatory reform and
banking  supervisory  issues.  I  see  cooperation  between  the  BCBS  and  the  BCG  as  a  key
component  helping  to  design  robust  regulation  and  supervision,  taking  into  account  financial
sector aspects in both advanced and emerging markets and developing countries. As a member
of the BCG, the CNB has actively participated in the work of the group. We contributed to the
work  agenda  evaluating  major 
III
implementation for emerging and smaller economies in the past. We also hosted a workshop on
this topic in 2013.
intended  and  unintended  consequences  of  Basel 
As I see your workshop agenda, I appreciate that you are going to discuss the timely issue of
sovereign exposures in emerging markets. The reasons for the high share of government bonds
in commercial bank assets in emerging markets are clear and straightforward. Financial markets
in  these  countries  are  still  under  development  and  shallow,  which  is  limiting  their  ability  to
diversify assets. Banks can also choose to be exposed to sovereign debt in some countries as
the  alternative  (private  lending)  is  riskier  given  existing  legal  and  institutional  imperfections.
Finally,  the  current  regulatory  setup  gives  preferential  treatment  to  sovereign  exposures,  as
banks’ exposures to domestic government in domestic currency are subject to low or even zero
risk weights.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
While banks’ sovereign exposures in advanced countries are considered to hover at reasonable
levels,  exposures  in  many  emerging  market  countries  are  significant.  The  current  level  or  its
buildup is becoming a relevant concern to emerging market countries, mainly owing to credit and
concentration risks. As the sovereign debt crisis in Europe showed recently, the zero risk weight
commonly  applied  to  sovereign  exposures  in  domestic  currency  might  not  be  fully  consistent
with empirical observations of the risks of sovereign debt defaults. Hence, the default risks of
sovereign  issuers  need  to  be  reflected  accurately  in  risk  weights  to  ensure  that  banks  have
appropriate  ex-ante  incentives  to  take  on  such  exposures.  Besides  credit  risks,  excessive
sovereign  exposure  concentration  reinforces  the  link  between  sovereign  and  banking  sector
stress. In fact, the close relationship between sovereigns and banks is seen as one of the major
reasons for the severity of the Eurozone crisis. Therefore, breaking the sovereign-bank nexus is
needed in order to strengthen macroeconomic stability.
Nevertheless, our prudential treatment of sovereign exposures needs to strike a balance. It has
to bear in mind the specific role sovereign debt plays in financial markets. Government securities
are used by central banks as collateral in managing market liquidity and implementing monetary
policy through money market operations. Furthermore, given their low risks, they are used by
banks and pension funds as investment instruments. These aspects need to be borne in mind
when designing prudential treatment of banks’ sovereign exposures. This is particularly true of
emerging  and  developing  countries,  as  their  financial  markets  are  shallow  and  low-risk
equivalents to government securities and central bank papers are hard to find.
As I have already mentioned at the beginning of my speech, the CNB hosted the BCG workshop
on the impacts of Basel III implementation on emerging markets and smaller economies three
years  ago.  The  workshop  was  efficient  and  successful,  resulting  in  a  memo  highlighting  the
effects of the reforms on these economies for the BCBS and supervisors. I am happy that we
are meeting here again to discuss regulation of sovereign exposures and other topical issues
related to Basel III regulatory reform. I hope that this workshop will reach similar success.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you and I wish you success in your work.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
