Vítor  Constâncio:  Euro  area  -  economic  outlook  and  financial
sector challenges
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the 19th Euro
Finance Week: Opening conference, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2016.
 It is with pleasure that I take part again in this year’s opening conference of the Euro Finance
Week in Frankfurt. One year on, with another round of unconventional monetary policy measures
introduced, the situation has changed for the better but some challenges persist and new risks
have emerged.
World economy faces once again an abnormal degree of uncertainty. The consequences may
not  be  immediate.  The  markets’  perception  that  the  U.S.  is  embarking  into  a  new  phase  of
expansionary  budgetary  policy  has  lifted  optimism,  with  visible  effect  in  financial  markets  last
week. Markets are driven by the insight from the macroeconomic theory that fiscal stimulus, at
this stage of the cycle, can break the liquidity trap that has hampered growth in the advanced
economies.
Consequently, we saw a beginning of a shift from bonds to equities last week. In spite of their
rich valuations in the U.S., equity prices jumped whereas bond valuations worldwide lost close to
1 trillion euros. These movements result from the understanding that fiscal stimulus will increase
growth and inflation down the road, in turn allowing a normalisation of U.S. monetary policy at
higher  interest  rates.  Anticipating  this  development,  markets  sold  bonds  thus  leading  to  an
increase  of  medium  to  long-term  yields,  steepening  the  yield  curve,  which  is  a  positive
development for financial institutions’ profitability. This expectation was indeed reflected in their
share prices amid the general increase of stock valuations last week.
Many commentators have hasted in concluding that the recent geo-political developments will
have, after all, economic benefits. This may be the case in the short-term but the real negative
effects  of  heightened  uncertainty  can  come  later.  We  should  be  cautious  in  drawing  hasty,
positive  conclusions  from  those  market  developments  because  they  may  not  necessarily
indicate that the world economy will have an accelerating recovery with higher growth. So far,
those developments point to a U.S. rise in economic growth, but in the context of an “America
first” policy. Three factors may contribute to mitigate or even reverse its international spillovers.
The first is the possibility of rising protectionism – hard or soft – that can substantially reduce the
effect of higher growth into higher U.S. imports. World trade, already quite weak, may continue to
collapse, hurting all open economies dependent on exports.
The  second  are  the  negative  effects  that  we  are  already  witnessing  in  emerging  market
economies (EMEs). In fact, significant capital outflows and exchange rate depreciations already
underway  can  hinder  future  growth.  Protectionist  measures  directed  particularly  against  large
emerging  economies  may  further  decelerate  world  economic  growth  and  create  instability  in
foreign exchange markets.
The third factor concerns Europe. In this first wave, Europe apparently benefited from positive
contagion  with  some  increase  in  equity  prices  and  a  steepening  of  the  yield  curve,  favouring
financial institutions. As concerns equities, the low starting point seems favourable for European
markets.  Share  price  levels  are  relatively  subdued  in  Europe  with,  for  instance,  a  Cyclically
Adjusted Price Earnings (CAPE) Shiller index of just 14 against 27 in the U.S. This means that
European shares, including those of banks, are undervalued with respect to other parts of the
world and could thus attract investors. However, we already observed a slight drop in European
share prices last Friday. According to market analysts, this was explained by fears concerning
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
protectionism  and  EMEs’  growth  prospects  as  well  as  the  possible  resulting  decline  in  global
trade.
Besides these external concerns, Europe’s internal problems may deter it from fully reaping the
benefits from the expected expansion in the U.S. Indeed, a range of political risks may induce
economic shocks. To face heightened world uncertainty, Europe would need to deepen its unity
and  integration,  relying  more  on  its  domestic  market  to  underpin  higher  growth.  In  turn,  this
implies that Europe needs more expansionary macroeconomic policies and more reforms in the
regulatory and competition policy fields, in order to improve the economy’s supply side. Without
higher real and nominal economic growth, Europe will have greater difficulty in overcoming its
challenges.
Euro area outlook
So far, monetary policy has been the only expansionary macroeconomic policy in support of the
recovery. Yet, securing sustained economic growth and employment cannot be dependent on
monetary policy alone. At the national and European levels, a much more comprehensive policy
response, than has been the case to date, is needed. Mainly, structural reforms and fiscal policy
have yet to deliver their share to support economic activity and counteract the “low growth trap”
dynamics faced by advanced economies at present.
The  euro  area  recovery  is  continuing  its  moderate  but  steady  pace,  supported  by  the  ECB’s
policies. These have significantly improved financial conditions, reduced financial fragmentation
and fostered economic activity and inflation.
In the first half of 2016, the euro area grew at an annualised rate of 1.7%, similar to last year’s
growth rate. This figure is far from impressive, especially considering that the euro area is in the
early phase of a recovery, after the second recession in 2012 and 2013. On the other hand, the
unemployment  rate,  albeit  falling,  still  remains  above  10%,  amid  a  continuous  increase  in  the
participation rate in the labour force since the crisis. One positive aspect is that our policies have
contributed to a decrease in financial fragmentation and that the dispersion of GDP growth and
inflation across euro area countries is at the lowest level since the beginning of monetary union in
1999. Another positive note is that the recent growth was largely driven by domestic demand.
Moreover, the recovery has proved resilient to a series of adverse shocks over the past year: the
slowdown in China last summer, the acute stock market turbulence in the early part of this year
and, most recently, the uncertainty created by the U.K. referendum.
This  resilience  reflects,  to  a  large  degree,  the  amount  of  monetary  expansion  –  actual  and
expected  –  that  is  embedded  in  financial  prices.  Indeed,  with  the  five  packages  of  measures
adopted since June 2014, we have been able to: reduce the cost of capital, produce rebalancing
effects  in  broader  asset  markets,  improve  credit  supply  conditions  and  restore  credit  volume
growth since the latter part of 2014, after two years of negative developments. In the latest move
in  March  2016,  a  powerful  set  of  measures  was  taken,  comprising  an  increase  in  the  asset
purchase programme, its extension to corporate bonds and the introduction of a new medium-
term liquidity facility with interest rates that can go as low as our negative deposit facility rate,
contingent on the banks reaching a credit growth benchmark.
Yields on bank and non-financial bonds have eased in response to the measures taken, testifying
to the effectiveness of the current monetary policy. Funding conditions for banks improved as
wholesale money market rates turned negative and as banks received direct support from new
liquidity facilities with four-year maturities and low rates (TLTRO-I and II). These developments
have stimulated the pass-through of this funding cost relief to borrowing costs for both firms and
households.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a consequence, bank lending rates to non-financial corporations (NFCs) and households are
now at historical lows, and there has been a significant reduction in the fragmentation of lending
rates across euro area countries both for large and for small loans.
Against  this  background,  in  the  most  recent  ECB  staff  projections,  real  GDP  is  forecasted  to
grow at an annual rate of 1.7% in 2016 and 1.6% in 2017. Since the projections cut-off date, the
flow  of  short-term  economic  indicators  has  been  consistent  with  the  materialisation  of  this
baseline  scenario,  and  point  to  a  continued  positive  contribution  from  domestic  demand
(alongside a negative contribution from net trade). According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, real
GDP increased by 0.3% in the third quarter with respect to the second quarter, (as was the case
in the previous quarter). This has been accompanied by increases in the flash composite output
PMI in October, with respect to September, as well as a rise in consumer confidence. Crucially,
the projection is predicated on the current supportive financial conditions persisting. In fact, it is
estimated that, cumulatively, the impact of our measures will contribute more than one and a half
percentage points to real GDP growth between 2015 and 2018.
Regarding inflation, the latest ECB staff projections foresee a rise to 1.2% in 2017 and 1.6% in
2018.  The  contribution  of  our  measures  to  this  increase  in  inflation,  to  levels  closer  to  our
objective, represents on average, an impact on the inflation rate of about half a percentage point
each  year  between  2016  and  2018.  Likewise,  short-term  indicators  are  consistent  with  the
projections.  The  October  flash  estimate  annual  HICP  inflation  stood  at  0.5%  from  0.4%  in
September. However, annual inflation for HICP excluding food and energy remained unchanged
(at 0.8%). This is a cause of concern since core inflation, depending on domestic factors, is not
recovering  which  may  affect  the  dynamics  of  headline  inflation  going  forward,  affecting  our
monetary  policy.  A  more  satisfactory  evolution  of  wages  is  needed,  now  that  inflation  and
productivity  are  increasing.  Wages  are  a  crucial  driver  of  prices  in  a  service-dominated
economy. In countries with large external surpluses, wage-dynamics should finally start showing
more favourable developments.
Overall, assuming that the potential negative effects of the present worldwide uncertainty will not
manifest themselves in the short term, I am confident that the euro area economic recovery will
continue its path and that unemployment will come down to single digits next year, for the first
time in many years. Inflation will also continue to normalise and we will see headline inflation well
above 1% as from next spring.
However,  considerable  risks  and  uncertainties  to  financial  stability  remain.  The  main  risk  is
related to my initial considerations specifically, to a possible worldwide reversal of risk premia
that could induce contagion and affect asset prices. We have just started to see this in the bond
market  and  this  is  exacerbated  by  the  present  heightened  political  uncertainty  in  advanced
economies.
A second risk regards the challenges to European banks’ profitability resulting from cyclical and
structural factors. European banks have steadily increased their robustness and resilience since
the  financial  crisis.  Solvency  positions  of  euro  area  banks,  measured  by  the  highest  quality
capital (Common Equity Tier 1 ratio) increased, on average, from 7% in 2008 to 9% in 2012 and
14.4% in June this year.
The present low profitability levels have, however, put bank stock prices under severe market
pressure,  leading  to  price-to-book  ratios  well  below  1.  Different  causes  stand  behind  banks’
profitability  challenges:  legacy  non-performing  loans,  excess  banking  capacity,  growing
competition  from  non-banks,  ineffective  cost-control  and  slow  adjustment  to  new  business
models in the context of a low interest rate environment, are among the most important ones.
Return on equity stood at 5% in the first half of 2016, against 5.5% for the whole of last year,
which  is  worryingly  well  below  the  cost  of  equity  resulting  from  share  prices  determined  by
investor’s expectations.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
As already mentioned, monetary policy responses are supporting and accelerating the economic
recovery and the normalisation of inflation and interest rates. Since March this year, the interest
rate on main refinancing operation is at 0% and the interest rate on the deposit facility has been
further lowered to -0.40%. The impact of low rates on bank profitability might not be negligible.
The overall impact is however so far positive, even if heterogeneous. Monetary policy has had a
positive effect on bank profitability since 2014 by reducing funding costs, generating capital gains
on higher prices of financial assets affected by the asset purchase programme, reducing bank
impairment  costs  and  increasing  credit  volumes  as  a  result  of  a  strengthening  recovery.  The
impact on net interest margins depends on banks’ capacity to re-price deposits and loans and on
the predominance of floating and fixed rate loans in banks’ balance sheets.
The ECB is aware that some of the positive effects of our policy on banks’ profitability will wane
with time. However, low or negative interest rates cannot be blamed for low profitability per se.
With lower interest rates, (-0.50% and -1.25% for the repo rate and deposit rate, respectively)
which have been in negative territory almost for two years now, Swedish banks, for example,
have been able to sustain ROE levels of close to 12%. There are several explanations for this
difference but a sizeable contribution comes from cost control stemming from adjusted business
models. In fact, cost per banks total asset is at 0.92 for Swedish banks against 1.42 for the euro
area, on average. This clearly shows that European banks have to adjust their business models
to improve their profitability prospects.
However, to face bank profitability challenges, the euro area needs to develop and implement a
joint  strategy,  over  a  determined  period  of  time,  to  overcome  excessive  non-performing  loans
and/or  excessive  banking  capacity  in  some  jurisdictions.  We  need  a  stronger  banking  sector
which  is  essential  to  better  transmit  monetary  policy  impulses  and  support  the  economic
recovery.
In this, as in other domains, Europe must endeavour to work together to face a more challenging
world that threatens European values of open and tolerant societies.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
