   Peter Praet: Monetary policy transmission in the euro area 
Policy address by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the SUERF Conference “Global Implications of Europe’s Redesign”, New York City, 
6 October 2016. 
 I would like to thank Claus Brand for his contributions to this speech. 
All major central banks have faced an extremely challenging economic environment since the 
onset of the global financial crisis in 2008. They have had to contend with the steepest collapse 
in output since the 1930s; with the aftermath of a combined banking and debt crisis, implying 
a prolonged period of deleveraging and an atypically slow recovery of output towards potential; 
and, more recently, with a series of global disinflationary shocks emanating from persistent 
capacity  underutilisation  in  advanced  economies,  the  slowdown  in  emerging  market 
economies  and  collapsing  energy  and  commodity  prices,  threatening  to  unmoor  inflation 
expectations. And central banks have had to confront these challenges while operating for 
many years near the effective lower bound on interest rates. 
These  constraints  have  required  central  banks  to  deploy  unconventional  measures  with 
unprecedented  intensity  to  stabilise  inflation  expectations  and  secure  medium-term  price 
stability. But in the euro area, monetary policy has also faced another type of challenge, linked 
not so much to the stance of monetary policy as its transmission. This was a challenge born in 
particular  of  weaknesses  in  the  euro  area’s  institutional  framework.  Lacking  a  common 
framework for bank recovery and resolution, banking sector repair in the euro area proceeded 
in a slower and more piecemeal fashion, notably in comparison with other large economies 
like the US. And without institutions to efficiently manage a sovereign debt crisis, the euro area 
experienced a severe widening of sovereign spreads in 2010-12 and a second recession, both 
of which fed back into further strains on bank balance sheets. Given the central role played by 
banks  in  the  transmission  process  in  the  euro  area,  these  factors  fundamentally  impaired 
monetary transmission for long periods of the crisis.  
This perspective explains why, for most of the period surrounding the sovereign debt crisis, 
our  policy  measures  were  primarily  focused  on  addressing  frictions  in  the  transmission 
process. A major burden was placed on the central bank to compensate for an incomplete 
monetary union, yet the ECB was still able to provide significant macroeconomic stabilisation 
in spite of these adverse conditions. But that episode inevitably set back the recovery: banks 
in large parts of the euro area became less willing and capable of keeping credit flowing to the 
real  economy,  producing  a  vicious  circle  of  contracting  credit  growth  and  weak  demand 
dynamics. While the US had already recouped its pre-crisis real GDP levels in 2011, the euro 
area continued to face a yawning output shortfall. Accordingly, headline inflation began to drift 
downwards, owing both to global energy and commodity price developments and to ongoing 
weakness in the core components. 
Hence, while US monetary policy began to gradually normalise, in June 2014 monetary policy 
in  the  euro  area  embarked  on  a  renewed  phase  of  expansion,  aimed  both  at  enhancing 
monetary policy transmission, in a context of continued bank deleveraging, and reinforcing 
policy accommodation in view of persistently weak inflation. With room for manoeuvre on the 
main  refinancing  rate  limited,  the  ECB  has  articulated  this  stance  in  a  series  of  new 
unconventional  measures. What I  would  like  to discuss  in  my  remarks today  is  how  these 
measures  are  transmitting  through  the  financial  system  and  economy  to  secure  our  price 
stability  objective  –  their  main  channels  of  financial  transmission,  how  those  channels  are 
affected by structural shifts in financial intermediation, and how they feed through to output 
and inflation in the real economy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   Transmission channels of unconventional policies 
The  ECB  is  delivering  its  accommodative  policy  stance  through  a  set  of  complementary 
instruments. These consist of our targeted longer-term lending operations (TLTROs), our asset 
purchase programme of public and private securities (APP), and our policy of charging zero 
interest rate on main refinancing operations and a negative rate on excess reserves. The policy 
package  is  also  underpinned  by  our  outcome-  and  date-based  forward  guidance:  that  the 
duration  of  asset  purchases  will  be  conditional  on  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of 
inflation, and that interest rates will stay low for an extended period of time, stretching well 
beyond the horizon of the net purchases. In combination, we see these measures as being 
transmitted via three main channels: direct pass-through, portfolio rebalancing and signalling, 
with these channels reinforcing each other. 
First, some of our tools are specifically designed to act on those financial instruments that have 
an immediate influence on the setting of the price of credit by financial intermediaries – the 
direct pass-through channel. I am referring specifically to the TLTROs and our purchases of 
asset-backed securities (ABS) and covered bonds under the APP, a group of measures we 
have referred to as our “credit easing” tools. These tools act on specific portions of banks’ 
liability  structures  –  central  bank  credit  and  wholesale  funding,  respectively  –  where  the 
connection with the pricing of bank credit is the closest.  
ABS and covered bonds are packages of bank loans. So, by exerting downward pressure on 
the market interest rate paid by originators of ABS and covered bonds, our measures aim to 
foster an economic arbitrage: banks are encouraged to create more loans with a view to re-
packaging them and selling them on, thereby “cashing out” the spread between the interest 
rate at which the securities are sold to the ECB and the interest rate charged on the underlying 
credit. The TLTROs work similarly by design. Under this targeted term refinancing operation, 
banks – all banks – can borrow at the interest rate on the Eurosystem’s deposit facility, but 
only on condition that the borrower can demonstrate strong performance in loan origination. 
Here,  the  intention  is  to  introduce  more  competition  in  the  market  for  bank  loans.  More 
competition  squeezes  unit  lending  margins  and  the  level  of  borrowing  costs  for  the  real 
economy. 
This “credit easing” mechanism is expected to compress the spread between the financing 
conditions  set  in  the  capital  market  and  the  borrowing  conditions  faced  by  the  individual 
borrowers in the bespoke market for individual loans. But what is the mechanism that keeps 
financing conditions in the open market well anchored at sufficiently accommodative levels in 
the first place? That mechanism is set in motion by our interventions in the sovereign bond 
space under the APP. It is by exerting downward pressure on the sovereign curves that we 
ensure that the bedrock pricing kernels used in each country to price the whole spectrum of 
local assets and credit, namely the term structure of sovereign interest rates, is sufficiently 
supportive for the economic recovery to firm, and for inflation to revive durably.  
Such interventions in the public securities segment rely on the second transmission channel – 
portfolio  rebalancing  –  as  a key  avenue  of  propagation:  the  compression  of returns  in  that 
market induces investors to move up the risk and maturity ladder, bidding up assets with higher 
risk-adjusted returns. Banks are again a key player in this chain of transmission. Our purchases 
of sovereign bonds depress the term premium and simultaneously trigger a rebalancing of 
bank balance sheets towards an expansion of asset holdings and lending, so as to offload the 
cash reserves that are created in the process. This incentive to move out of cash reserves is 
intensified by our negative rate policy.  
As for the third channel – signalling – both our purchases and our rate forward guidance are 
effective instruments in influencing expectations. The credibility of promises to follow a certain 
course  of  action for  setting the  policy  rates  in  the future  are  almost certainly  enhanced  by 
provision of asset purchases today, as these purchases are a concrete demonstration of a 
desire to provide additional stimulus. Conversely, the net stimulus provided by asset purchases 
depends in part on expectations of how the central bank will adjust short-term interest rates in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   the future in response to the stronger real activity and inflation sparked by lower term premia 
in the near term. 
Structural issues in monetary policy transmission 
These  various  transmission  channels,  however,  are  not  static;  they  depend  also  on  the 
structure  of  financial  intermediation  and  how  it  evolves  over  time.  Given  that  credit 
intermediation  has  been  largely  bank-based  in  the  euro  area,  enlisting  banks  as  the  main 
propagators of stimulus, as we did when we launched a series of LTROs between 2008 and 
2012 and, later on, when we decided to initiate the TLTROs, was a natural choice for us. At 
the same time, one should not ignore the new reality in which we see non-banks growing in 
importance for financial intermediation, also in the euro area.  
The structural shift in finance away from bank lending to credit intermediation through financial 
markets has been ushered in by financial innovation, but it is also a consequence of the global 
financial crisis and the changes in financial regulation that have followed it. The euro area is 
no exception to this development: while remaining far below corresponding levels in the US, 
the share of non-banks, such as insurance companies, pension funds and asset management 
companies in financing non-financial corporations in the euro area has risen, though from a 
very  low  level.  This  development  reflects  longer-term  structural factors, such  as  regulatory 
arbitrage, but also the low level of interest rates driving search for yield and the weak recovery 
of bank lending in the wake of the crisis. 
How would monetary transmission in the euro area change if we moved all the way to a capital 
market-based  system?  That  banks  may  become  relatively  less  important  in  financing 
households and firms would not necessarily mean that monetary policy transmission would be 
weakened. To start with, there are inherent limits in firms’ ability to substitute bank financing 
for market-based financing, and the scope for such substitution is likely to be smaller in the 
euro area – with a comparatively stronger presence of small and medium-sized enterprises 
(SMEs)  in  its  industrial  fabric  –  than  elsewhere.  But  even  abstracting  from  such  market 
imperfections, one could presume that bank lending standards and conditions in securities 
markets  may  reinforce  each  other,  supporting  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy 
transmission.  
As non-banks operate under less stringent regulatory constraints, they might step into banks’ 
lending activities where bank balance sheets are already constrained. In doing so, they can 
even mitigate the effects of financial crises on the provision of credit to the broader economy. 
Likewise, their asset portfolio and risk appetite may be more sensitive to interest rate changes, 
making  them  more  responsive  to  changes  in  monetary  policy  –  although,  admittedly,  this 
enhanced  sensitivity  to  monetary  policy  is  something  we  would  ascribe  more  to  securities 
brokers and dealers, whose leverage tends to be more pro-cyclical, rather than to insurance 
companies or pension funds, which act more as long-term investors.  
Certainly, there would be a trade-off. On the one hand, a higher share of arm’s-length finance 
in  total  intermediation could  well  increase the  share  of borrowers  in  the  real  economy  that 
benefit from very low, or even negative, short-term interest rates, compared with a system that 
is based by and large on banks. This is because non-bank lenders – compared to banks which 
finance their loans predominantly with sticky interest rate retail deposits – can more easily fund 
a larger share of their exposures in the capital market, where the short-term interest rates faced 
by  prime  institutions  are  negative,  and  thus  have  more  scope  for  passing  through  those 
negative  interest  rates  to  their  clients.  But  on  the  other  hand,  this  would  come  with  some 
financial stability risks: a larger share of wholesale market finance in conditions of low interest 
rates invites more maturity transformation, which may expose the financial system as a whole 
to sudden stop risks.  
One may also believe that portfolio rebalancing and risk-taking may play a comparatively more 
powerful role in transmitting the type of large-scale asset purchases that the Federal Reserve 
and other central banks, including the ECB, have conducted. For example, in the case of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
   US, due to the more intimate connection between capital market conditions and the financing 
terms faced by US borrowers, successive rounds of Fed large-scale asset purchases could 
probably count on a stronger reinforcing role through exchange rate effects and the impact on 
global yields. This has worked in both directions: in the context of the “taper tantrum” in 2013, 
a large number of advanced and emerging economies experienced the potent global effects 
of the portfolio rebalancing channel being partly reversed, with medium-term money market 
interest rates moving up in lockstep with US yields on a global scale.  
But overall, there is a range of common factors affecting banks and non-banks in similar ways 
in monetary policy transmission: the valuation of a broad range of financial assets, risk appetite 
and macroeconomic developments. A decrease in risk premia, for example, through its impact 
on funding conditions and portfolio valuation, is likely to support balance sheet expansions in 
both  sectors,  easing  the  borrowing  conditions  of  non-financial  corporations.  Banks  here 
operate in the same fashion and on the basis of the same relative-value logic as non-bank 
market participants: a policy-induced decline in fixed-income securities earnings encourages 
banks into the same type of portfolio re-allocations that affect investors in the capital market. 
The speed and amplitude of reallocation will probably be different, though. Non-banks may 
react to changes in market prices more rapidly than banks and banks may well entail a higher 
degree of inertia in investment patterns, with lending conditions becoming disconnected from 
the terms on which they borrow at some critical junctures.  
At any rate, the interplay between different financial intermediaries and transmission channels 
in  complementing  traditional  bank  lending  needs  to  be  analysed  and  understood  in  an 
integrated way. Assessing this structural shift has been a matter of quantification as much as 
of judgement.  
Impact of easing measures on financing conditions and macroeconomic 
developments 
What is already clear, however, is that our package of unconventional measures has had a 
substantial impact on euro area financial conditions – an impact which was indeed observable 
soon after their launch in June 2014. Bank lending rates that had remained stubbornly high in 
the preceding years started trending downwards already in the third quarter of 2014. Borrowing 
costs faced by households and companies have since dropped to unprecedented lows. And 
this improvement is also evident if we look at the dispersion of bank-individual lending rates 
(for loans to non-financial corporations). The country distribution of interest rates charged by 
banks has returned to levels comparable with pre-crisis norms.  
The generalised decline in bank lending rates has a twofold expansive effect. The first is that 
it  frees  up  purchasing  power  that  was  previously  locked  up  in  high  loan  servicing  costs. 
Whether it is because loan rates are floating and are reset according to a particular money 
market benchmark, or because borrowers are able to refinance outstanding credit at a much 
more  attractive  fixed  interest  rate  –  and  possibly  also  to  extract  housing  equity  in  the  re-
negotiation process – the end result is that borrowers receive a boost in disposable income 
that they can use to fund current consumption or expand investment.  
The second effect that is associated with a decline in lending rates of the magnitude we have 
observed  in  recent  years  is  more general-equilibrium  in  nature.  Because  the  interest  rates 
charged on loans to non-financial companies have been falling so sharply, more investment 
projects become profitable and the demand for loans expands. Note that bank unit margins 
may well decline in this process. But overall margins may even rise if the demand for loans is 
sufficiently  responsive  to  the  interest  rate,  as  banks  can  collect  lending  margins  on  an 
expanded  pool  of  assets.  Indeed,  the  pace  of contraction  of loans growth  at  country  level, 
which was massive at the start of our policies in summer 2014, started to decelerate in 2015, 
and loans to households and firms have returned to positive growth rates recently. This being 
said, the low sensitivity of real investment to borrowing conditions has declined everywhere in 
the aftermath of the crisis.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Our Bank Lending Survey (BLS) confirms that the stimulative effect of bank competition on 
loan demand is in fact working. As regards the role of TLTROs, banks participating in those 
lending operations have felt the pinch of stronger competitive pressures comparatively more 
than banks abstaining from TLTRO participation, a feature clearly borne out by the BLS as 
well.  As  regards  the  role  of  APP  and  the  negative  rate  on  excess  reserves,  banks  having 
received comparatively more net inflows of excess liquidity report stronger reductions in the 
margins on loans to enterprises. This is testament to the fact that the negative remuneration 
of excess reserves discourages liquidity hoarding and reinforces the inducement for banks to 
rebalance  their  asset  composition  towards  loans  and  securities  with  longer  maturities, 
confirming our expectations that investors move up the maturity and risk ladder.  
Overall, the BLS reported a large share of banks decreasing lending rates and easing credit 
standards in the wake of TLTRO, APP and the negative interest rate. Importantly, both our 
BLS and SAFE attest to improved credit conditions for SMEs, which form the backbone of the 
euro area’s corporate sector. And the effectiveness of our measures is highly visible in bond 
yields across sectors, too. Sovereign yields have fallen and flattened out concurrently with the 
money market yield curve. Yields on bonds issued by banks and non-financial corporations 
have decreased by similar amounts. This broad-based asset repricing has also affected the 
stock market and the euro exchange rate.  
Turning  to  the  macroeconomic  effects,  if  we  look  at  the  real-time  flow  of  high-frequency 
macroeconomic news and at the evolution of long-term market-based inflation expectations, 
two observations stand out. The credit easing component of our package and, later on, the 
APP announcement appear to have contributed to a turnaround in business sentiment and 
halted a creeping downtrend in inflation expectations. It is hard to see how, without the marked 
improvement  in  financial  conditions  produced  by  our  measures,  growth  in  employment, 
investment and consumption, which was teetering on the edge of another slowdown in 2014, 
would have stabilised around the moderate, yet steady, path we see today. Moreover, the euro 
area economy would not have weathered the repercussions from a major slowdown in global 
trade, a potentially disruptive loss of confidence in the stability of the international economy 
and, more recently, the Brexit referendum with the resilience that it has demonstrated, if these 
measures had not been in place. 
Indeed, we have to recognise that much of the progress registered in the past, and a large 
fraction of the progress towards a higher inflation that we project for the future, is due to our 
monetary policy stance. As such, the gradual return of our economy to a balanced growth path 
in conditions of price stability that we foresee in our forecasts would most likely be stalled and 
reversed if the monetary expansion that is presently embodied in credit conditions were to be 
withdrawn prematurely. Our measures are estimated to contribute to increasing real euro area 
GDP growth by more than one and a half percentage points cumulatively between 2015 and 
2018. Likewise, the estimated contribution of the measures to the projected return of inflation 
to levels closer to our objective is significant, with an impact on the annual inflation rate, on 
average, over 2016 and 2018 of about half a percentage point. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude.  
A key question in designing the modalities of our unconventional measures, over the various 
stages of the crisis, has been how to overcome impairments in monetary policy transmission 
as a precondition for the ECB to be able to deliver on its mandate. In the wake of our measures, 
financing  conditions  have  improved  significantly. They  have  supported  a  recovery  of  credit 
provision and shielded the euro area economy from adverse global shocks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   As I have discussed elsewhere, we need to be attentive to the possibility of adverse side effects 
of  the  low  interest  rate  environment1   and  take  this  into  account  in  the  calibration  of  our 
monetary policy toolkit so as to preserve the very substantial amount of monetary support. 
                                                
1   See  speech  by  Peter  Praet,  “Monetary  policy  and  the  euro  area  banking  system”,  at  VII  Financial  Forum 
organised by Expansión and KPMG, Madrid, 4 October 2016. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
