BANK OF UGANDA 
   REMARKS 
 By  
 Louis Kasekende (PhD.),  
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
   At the Launch of the Orient Bank’s Financial Literacy Programme 
– The Orient Bank Business Academy 
  Kampala, 30 August 2016 
    The Chairman and Members of the Board of Directors of Orient Bank Ltd, 
The Managing Director/CEO of Orient Bank Ltd, 
All distinguished guests, 
The Media Fraternity, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
 Good morning! 
Let  me  thank  the  Board  and  Management  of  Orient  Bank  for  inviting  me  to 
today’s 
launch  of 
the  bank’s  Financial  Literacy  and  entrepreneurship 
Programme – the Orient Bank Business Academy.  
Financial education and entrepreneurship training are critical in helping citizens 
to  participate  fully  in  the  development  process.  They  both  help  to  alleviate 
demand  side  constraints  to  financial  inclusion  and  empower  citizens  to  better 
manage their personal resources that are vital in developing small and medium-
size enterprises.  
 I  want  to  highlight  three  issues  which  are  relevant  for  this  Business  Academy 
initiative. 
 The  first  is  the  level  of  entrepreneurship  in  Uganda  and  the  related  high 
mortality  rate  of  businesses.  Uganda 
is  ranked  as  one  of 
the  most 
entrepreneurial countries in sub-Saharan Africa and the world.  
According  to  the  Global  Entrepreneurship  Monitor  (GEM)  2014  data,  Uganda 
had an early-stage entrepreneurial activity rate (the proportion of the population 
aged 18-64 years who either are a nascent entrepreneur or owner-manager of a 
 Page 2 of 7 
new  business)  of  36  percent  compared  to  the  Sub-Saharan  African  average  of 
about 28 percent.  
 Yet,  the  attrition  rate  is  also  relatively  very  high  with  a  failure1  of  businesses 
estimated at a rate of 26 percent relative to the average of about 16 percent for 
sub-Saharan Africa. So, what accounts for this high failure rate? According to 
the said GEM report, engaging in unprofitable business accounted for more than 
one  in  every  three  instances  of  business  discontinuation,  and  this  can  result 
from  a  wide  range  of  factors  such  as  continued  informality  of  businesses, 
misconception  of  a  business  idea  to  management  challenges  and  problems  of 
getting and managing finances.  
 This failure rate means that very few small firms ever grow into bigger firms to 
attain economies of scale and contribute to formal employment creation. This is 
compounded  by  low  growth  expectations  of  Ugandan  entrepreneurs  with  the 
GEM  data  estimating  that  only  ten  percent  of  the  early  stage  enterprises 
expected to employ at least 5 employees within the subsequent five years  
 The  second  issue  relates  to  some  perceptions  being  peddled  around  by  some 
commentators to the effect that the recent increase in  non-performing loans of 
the banking industry from 4 percent in June 2015 to over 7 percent in June 2016 
was mainly a result of high interest rates.   
The truth could not be far from this. While lending rates by commercial banks 
have increased since 2015, the current average lending rate of about 23 percent, 
                                                 
1 Defined by the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) as the proportion of the adult population that 
reported having discontinued a business within a year  
 Page 3 of 7 
on  shilling  denominated  loans,  is  not  out  of  line  with  their  historical  average 
over the last few years.  
 In addition, a recent review by Bank of Uganda to ascertain the reasons for the 
non-performance  of  large  credit  facilities  in  commercial  banks  indicated  that 
only  a  paltry  0.3  percent  of  non-performing  loans  as  at  March  2016  could  be 
attributed  to  high  interest  rates.  Diversion  of  funds  away  from  the  intended 
purpose of the loan was a major contributor to the non-performing loans, only 
surpassed  by  delayed  payment  by  government  (domestic  arrears)  and  cost 
overruns/  insufficient  cash  flows.  The  above  three  reasons  inclusive  of 
diversion of loaned funds and poor management accounted for about sixty five 
(65) percent of the large Non-Performing loans in our banking industry.   
 The  third  relates  to  the  feedback  we  have  received  from  the  public  during  the 
Bank of Uganda Golden Jubilee commemoration activities that involved  town-
hall  meetings,  radio  talk-shows  and  public  exhibitions  in  Mbale,  Gulu,  Arua 
and Mbarara.  
A sentiment frequently expressed by the public related to a lack of transparency 
on  charges  and  interest  rates  by  financial  institutions,  complaints  about 
customer  care  by  these  institutions,  and  lack  of  information  about  financial 
products and services. 
 I  believe  all  the  above  three  issues  can  be  dealt  with  by  increasing  financial 
education  and  stronger  consumer  protection  coupled  with  developing  the 
entrepreneurship  and  management  competencies  of  individuals  and  the  SMEs. 
With better financial literacy and enterprise management, it is not inconceivable 
 Page 4 of 7 
to  believe  that  Uganda  would  have  fewer  financially  distressed  firms,  a  lower 
business failure rate, more employment creation and higher rate of savings and 
investment.   
 Uganda  needs  to pick  a  leaf  from  several  of  the  Asian  countries  that  you  may 
refer to as “manufacturing and enterprise hubs” by enhancing its entrepreneurial 
education  and  training  in  order  to  realize  higher  labor  and  enterprise 
competitiveness within the global economy. The latest estimates by the Global 
Entrepreneurship Monitor,  measuring the extent to which training in creating or 
managing SMEs is incorporated in higher education such as vocational, college 
or business school, rated Uganda with a score of 3 compared to 5 for India and 
China, 5.2 for Malaysia, 5.9 for Indonesia, and the highest score of 6.3 for the 
Philippines.  
I  am  therefore  delighted  that  Orient  Bank  is  joining  this  important  call  and  is 
working  with  Makerere  University  Business  School  (MUBS)  in  this  financial 
literacy  drive.    This  initiative  has  the  potential  to  augment  the  capacity  of  the 
participating  small  and  medium  enterprises  (SMEs)  to  prepare  bankable 
projects,  improve  records  management  and  ultimately  enhance  their  access  to 
finance. Small sized enterprises in Uganda have about 11 percent of their bank 
loan  applications  rejected  compared  to  only  4.6  percent  for  the  medium  sized 
counterparts,  according  to  the  World  Bank’s  Enterprise  Survey  data  for  2013. 
Therefore the focus of Orient Bank’s financial literacy drive on micro and small 
enterprises is both valid and essential.  
 I  am  also  particularly  enthused  by  the  involvement  of  management  and 
entrepreneurship  professionals  from  MUBS  in  this  Orient  Bank  Business 
 Page 5 of 7 
Academy.  If 
this  financial 
literacy  and  entrepreneurial  Programme 
is 
implemented  as  designed, it  entails some  form  of  apprenticeship  model  that is 
needed  by  many  of  our  nascent  enterprises  to  sustainably graduate  to  a  higher 
scale  and  be  able  to  access  relatively  cheaper  finance  through  the  capital 
markets.  I  also  believe  that  the  program  is  beneficial  to  the  MUBS  academic 
fraternity  in  the  sense  that  it  will  provide  an  avenue  for  them  to  practice  and 
gauge  the  practicability  of  their  entrepreneurship  and  business  management 
curriculum.  
 As  you  may  all  be  aware,  the  Bank  of  Uganda  is  spearheading  the 
implementation  of  a  national  strategy  for  financial  inclusion  with  financial 
literacy as one of the key pillars. The financial inclusion drive entails elements 
of innovations like mobile money, agency and mobile banking; it encompasses 
improving data measurement, and financial consumer protection.  
In  pursuit  of  even  greater  financial  inclusion  and  in  response  to  the  public 
feedback highlighted earlier, the Bank of Uganda is undertaking; 
a) Strengthening of the current framework for financial consumer protection, 
including supporting the implementation of the recently enacted Tier four 
Microfinance law; 
b) Institutionalizing  and  reinvigorating  the  mechanism  for  complaints 
handling within the banking industry;  
c)  Supporting  efforts  to  improve  efficiency  and  realize  economies  of  scale 
within the formal financial sector and increasing the diversity of financial 
institutions and products; and,  
 Page 6 of 7 
d) Further bolstering the Bank of Uganda’s communication and stakeholder 
engagements,  with  particular  emphasis  on  improving  financial  and 
economic literacy of the public.   
  With these remarks, it is my honor and pleasure to formally declare the Orient 
Bank Business Academy launched. I thank you for listening to me. 
 Page 7 of 7 
