Norman T L Chan: HKMA Fintech Day
Speech by Mr Norman T L Chan, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at HKMA
Fintech Day, Hong Kong, 11 November 2016.
 MY, George, Julia, Frank, Herman, Albert, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
1.  It gives me great pleasure to welcome you all to this HKMA Fintech Day, which is part of the
Fintech week.  Today we have a great gathering with speakers and participants from diverse
background  of  the  financial  and  technology  sectors,  including  banks,  stored  value  facility
(SVF) operators, fintech firms, fintech investors, regulators and many others.  I am sure the
discussions today both on and off the stage will be extremely interesting.
2.  The event today is organized by the Fintech Facilitation Office (FFO) of the HKMA together
with  our  three  strategic  partners:  the Applied  Science  and  Technology  Research  Institute
(ASTRI), Cyberport and the Hong Kong Science and Technology Parks (the Science Park). 
As you are aware, we set up the FFO in March this year with the mission to facilitate the
development of fintech in Hong Kong.
3.  In the last few months, the FFO has organized many activities to bring together users and
solution providers of fintech, so as to build an ecosystem to promote the adoption of new
technologies  in  the  banking  sector.    The  FFO  will  continue  to  develop  this  collaborative
platform together with ASTRI, Cyberport and the Science Park.  In a few moments the HKMA
will  be  signing  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  each  of  them  to  formalize  the
framework of cooperation. 
4.  Now I would like to report on the latest progress of four major fintech projects launched by
the  FFO  earlier.    First,  following  my  announcement  of  the  launch  of  the  Cybersecurity
Fortification  Initiative  (CFI)  in  May,  the  FFO  has  been  making  very  good  progress  in
developing the three pillars of the CFI.  A three month industry consultation of the first pillar of
CFI, the Cybersecurity Resilience Assessment Programme, was completed in August, with
positive responses from the banking sector.  Taking into account the comments received,
the FFO is finalising the Assessment Programme and will announce the detailed framework
next month for implementation by banks in Hong Kong.  Regarding the second pillar of the
CFI, the Cybersecurity Intelligence Sharing Platform, again good progress is being made.
 The computer platform will be in operation and available to the banking sector next month
as  planned.    The  last  pillar  of  the  CFI  is  the  Professional  Development  Programme,  a
training  and  certification  programme  for  the  cybersecurity  professionals.    A  six-week
consultation with the cybersecurity professionals and industry associations was conducted
in the summer.  The industry in general welcomes the programme and has suggested the
need  to  recognise  certain  equivalent  qualifications  in  the  market  for  conducting  the
cybersecurity assessment and testing.  We agree with this suggestion, and have already
formed  an  industry  expert  panel  with  the  task  of  identifying  equivalent  qualifications  and
working out the implementation details.  The programme will be rolled out next month as
planned.  All in all, with the support of the banking industry and the stakeholders, the CFI
implementation is on track and on time.
5.  Second,  the  HKMA  has  commissioned  ASTRI  to  carry  out  a  comprehensive  study  on
distributed ledger technology (DLT).  The very fact that DLT allows information or records to
be  transferred  and  updated  by  network  participants  in  a  trustworthy,  secure  and  efficient
way, carries enormous potential in its application.  However, while the value proposition of
DLT is gradually crystallising, the use of DLT in financial services may bring about new risks
and challenges in its application.  As a regulatory authority, the HKMA needs to have a better
understanding of these issues before DLT can be adopted for wide application in the banking
sector.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
6.  In this connection, I am pleased to announce that the first stage of this research project is
completed and a white paper is published by ASTRI today.  While the white paper affirms the
good  potential  of  DLT  for  application  in  financial  services,  it  also  highlights  a  number  of
possible  issues  which  need  to  be  carefully  dealt  with  if  DLT  is  adopted  by  the  banking
sector.  For example, the decentralised model may pose some challenges for constructing
an effective governance structure and oversight mechanism.  Some legal issues have yet to
be thoroughly examined, such as the application and enforceability of laws for the cross-
border DLT models, mechanisms for handling liability and dispute resolution if there is no
centralised  party  administrating  the  DLT  platform,  and  compliance  with  personal  data
protection  principles  in  relation  to  data  sharing  and  perpetual  storage.    Also,  traditional
cybersecurity issues still apply to DLT, including denial of access attacks and other cyber
attacks.  
7.  The next stage of ASTRI’s study will deliver more detailed findings from a number of the
proof-of-concept trials, along with assessment on whether some of this work can be put into
action.    It  will  also  address  the  regulatory  implications  of  DLT,  and  the  general  control
principles for DLT for the banking and payment industry.  We plan to deliver the next set of
results in the form of another white paper in the second half of 2017.
8.  Third, as I announced in September, we are setting up the HKMA-ASTRI Fintech Innovation
Hub. I am now pleased to say that, following intensive preparation, the Hub is ready for use
as from today.  The Hub is equipped with high-powered computing resources and supported
by the experts at ASTRI to allow banks, payment service providers, fintech firms and the
HKMA to brainstorm innovative ideas, try out and evaluate new fintech solutions in a safe
and efficient manner.  All in all, the Hub will cater for the big and small institutions alike in
supporting their research and adoption of fintech.
9.  Last but not least, the HKMA launched the Fintech Supervisory Sandbox in September in
order  to  create  a  regulatory  environment  that  is  conducive  to  fintech  development.    The
Sandbox  enables  banks  to  conduct  pilot  trials  of  their  fintech  initiatives  in  a  controlled
production environment without the need to achieve full compliance with the HKMA’s usual
supervisory  requirements.    So  far,  two  banks  have  already  made  use  of  the  Sandbox  to
conduct pilot trials of their biometric authentication and securities trading services.  A few
banks are discussing with us and planning to make use of the Sandbox for conducting their
project trials in the coming few months, in areas such as blockchain, artificial intelligence
and many more.
10.  In parallel to all these fintech projects that the FFO has launched, the HKMA has issued 13
Stored  Value  Facilities  licences  in  two  batches  under  the  newly  established  regulatory
regime.    These  licensees  range  from  mobile  and  Internet  payment  service  providers  to
prepaid  card  issuers.   As  payment  and  SVF  operators  are  important  stakeholders  in  the
fintech ecosystem, we have also invited five of the SVF licensees to join today’s event and
share their experience in relation to the latest e-payment developments in Hong Kong.
11.  In  conclusion,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  have  lined  up  a  full  day’s  programme  with  top
fintech  experts  and  regulators  as  speakers.    I  am  sure  that  all  of  you  will  find  today’s
discussions fruitful and insightful.  Thank you very much.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
