Peter  Praet:  The  euro  area  economy,  monetary  policy  and
structural reforms
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Observatory Group roundtable, New York City, 18 November 2016.
 Today I will give you an assessment of the euro area economy and share some thoughts on
1
where I see us heading and on what is needed to ensure long-run sustainable growth.
On  a  positive  note,  we  have  good  indications  that  the  euro  area  economy  is  heading  for  a
continued  moderate,  but  steady  recovery,  which  seems  to  have  become  resilient  to  global
economic  and  political  uncertainty.  Real  GDP  growth  has  expanded  for  the  14th  consecutive
quarter,  growing  by  0.3%,  quarter-on-quarter,  during  the  third  quarter  according  to  the  flash
estimate. The latest incoming economic indicators continue to point to similar growth rates for
the coming quarters.
Although  global  uncertainties  continue  to  weigh  on  the  outlook  for  foreign  demand  and  could
thereby dampen export growth, robust domestic demand should partly counteract the negative
impact on growth stemming from the external environment.
Solid  domestic  demand  is  anticipated  to  remain  the  driving  force  behind  real  GDP  growth.
Consumption  expenditure  is  expected  to  grow  strongly  this  year  and  to  remain  buoyant
thereafter.  Most  notably,  consumption  is  boosted  by  improving  labour  market  conditions,  with
unemployment  falling  steadily  despite  a  rise  in  participation.  These  improvements  support  the
consumption  expenditure  of  both  existing  employees,  who  are  reassured  of  their  earnings
prospects, as well as new employees. Moreover, euro area consumers are still benefitting from
higher real disposable incomes, reflecting past declines in oil prices. Business investment is also
expected to continue recovering amid support from a number of factors, such as improvements
in corporate profitability and a need to modernise the capital stock after years of low investment
and physical depreciation.
All these developments, of course, are gaining significant support from the effective pass-through
of our accommodative monetary policy measures. Taken together, our measures have led to a
significant and broad-based easing in financing conditions for euro area firms and households,
which bolsters consumption and investment expenditure.
In terms of financing costs, since the beginning of June 2014, bank lending rates for euro area
households and NFCs have fallen sharply, with even more pronounced declines for small and
medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs).  Corporate  bond  yields  have  fallen  significantly,  too,  amid
support from the Corporate Sector Purchase Programme (CSPP), which began in June of this
year.  The  new  series  of  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTRO-II)  are  also
providing additional stimulus by allowing banks to secure long-term funding under very attractive
conditions, which they can pass on to their customers.
In  terms  of  quantities,  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector  has  been  gradually  recovering  since
early  2014.  In  the  latest  bank  lending  survey,  banks  continued  to  report  that  the  ECB’s Asset
Purchase  Programme  (APP)  and  the  negative  deposit  facility  rate  had  contributed  to  more
favourable  terms  and  conditions  on  loans,  and  are  supporting  lending  volumes.   Meanwhile,
other survey data indicate improvements in the availability of external sources of financing for
3
SMEs.
2
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Corporate bond issuance has also picked up since the announcement of the CSPP in March,
while  the  TLTRO-II  should  help  to  further  support  bank  lending  volumes  to  the  non-financial
private sector.
So  our  policy  measures  are  clearly  effective  and  are  trickling  down  to  the  funding  rates  that
matter  most  for  the  real  economy,  such  as  the  ones  faced  by  SMEs,  which  provide  jobs  for
4
around two-thirds of those in employment in the euro area.
Favourable  financing  conditions,  along  with  other  factors  such  as  employment  gains  and
improvements in the demand outlook, are expected to further support private consumption and
investment  expenditure  going  forward.  Investment  however  remains  well  below  its  pre-crisis
levels and its sensitivity to the borrowing conditions faced by companies is lower than historical
norms. According  to  the  September  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  annual  real  GDP
growth is expected to increase by 1.7% this year, and by 1.6% in each of the next two years.
Turning to price developments, headline inflation increased in October to 0.5% in year-on-year
terms, owing to a continued increase in annual energy inflation. So although price dynamics are
improving, inflation remains at low levels – far below the level which we consider consistent with
our  price  stability  objective  –  reflecting  past  declines  in  oil  prices  and  weak  wage  growth.
Underlying  inflation  in  particular  has  yet  to  show  clear  signs  of  a  more  dynamic  upward
movement.  The  annual  rate  of  HICP  inflation  excluding  food  and  energy  has  hovered  around
0.8% for the last three months as domestic cost pressures remain fundamentally weak. Yet, as
the effect of past oil price declines fades, annual HICP inflation is expected to pick up from 0.2%
this year to 1.2% in 2017. Moreover, we expect that as the recovery continues and economic
slack falls, inflation will gradually accelerate further to 1.6% in 2018.
Although the euro area recovery is showing signs of resilience, material downside risks remain,
mainly  stemming  from  the  external  environment  and  significant  uncertainties  following  the
outcome of the UK referendum. Moreover, our baseline scenario for growth and inflation in the
euro area remains crucially dependent on the current supportive financing conditions staying in
place.
Therefore, we will ensure that monetary policy continues to play its role in facilitating the cyclical
recovery. By ensuring accommodative financing conditions that buoy demand, monetary policy is
helping to raise output back to its potential level and ultimately secures inflation to return to levels
below, but close to, 2%.
to  preserving 
fully  committed 
We  remain 
the  very  substantial  amount  of  monetary
accommodation which is necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation towards our
inflation aim and stand ready to act, if warranted, to achieve our price stability objective by using
all  the  instruments  available  within  our  mandate.  To  this  end,  at  our  policy  meeting  in  early
December, we will be in a good position to take a comprehensive perspective on the inflation
outlook, our progress made in achieving a sustained adjustment and the monetary policy stance,
benefitting from incoming data and survey information, the new staff macroeconomic projections
as  well  as  the  work  of  the  Eurosystem  committees  on  options  to  ensure  a  smooth
implementation of our purchase programme until March 2017, or beyond, if needed.
Nevertheless,  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area  is  low  after  years  of  decline,  while  structural
unemployment remains high. The European Commission estimates that the potential growth rate
5
of the euro area economy this year is just 1%, half that of the United States.
Low potential growth casts a shadow over the long-run economic prospects for the euro area,
creating a negative feedback loop. Because low potential growth dampens expectations of future
income,  it  curbs  consumption  and  investment  today,  which  further  lowers  rates  of  potential
growth  tomorrow.  This  can  lead  to  a  permanent  destruction  of  productive  capacity,  including
6
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
jobs.
It is therefore imperative that decisive action is taken now in order to propel the on-going cyclical
recovery  into  a  structural  recovery.  Long-run  growth  depends  on  the  efficiency  with  which
resources  are  allocated,  the  ease  of  doing  business,  the  incentives  for  investment  and
confidence in public institutions. Making strides in these areas requires structural reforms aimed
at  supporting  investment,  enhancing  productivity  and  increasing  flexibility  in  the  markets  for
labour, goods and services. Structural reforms will go a long way, not only in bolstering the trend
7
of long-run growth but also in reducing the fluctuations around that trend.
Such  reforms  are  the  means  of  addressing  the  ongoing  adjustment  difficulties  faced  by  the
economy and of preventing secular stagnation – which is not inevitable. However, such reforms
are  outside  of  the  scope  of  monetary  policy  and  fall  under  the  remit  of  other  national  and
European policymakers.
As  the  benefits  of  structural  reforms  can  take  time  to  materialise,  they  must  be  implemented
without undue delay and are needed in order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy
measures. The highly accommodative stance of monetary policy creates ideal conditions for the
implementation  of  structural  policies,  as  it  can  help  to  cushion  the  potential  short-term
adjustment costs of such policies by supporting current demand conditions.
To  conclude,  the  euro  area  economic  recovery  remains  resilient  despite  the  continued
headwinds stemming from global economic and political uncertainties. Nevertheless, in order to
transform the cyclical recovery into a structural one, and thereby ensure resilience of growth in
the  long-run,  other  policymakers  must  play  their  part.  The  support  to  demand  from  monetary
policy must be complemented with supply policies that bolster the potential growth, productivity
and flexibility of the euro area economy.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
I would like to thank Danielle Kedan for her contributions to this speech.
ECB Bank Lending Survey, October 2016.
ECB Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area, October 2015 to March 2016.
See  ECB,  “Small  and  Medium-sized  enterprises  in  the  euro  area:  economic  importance  and  financing
conditions”, Box 6, ECB Monthly Bulletin, July 2013.
European Commission, European Economic Forecast, Autumn 2016.
For  further  discussion,  see  Praet,  P.,  “Lifting  potential  growth  in  the  euro  area”,  Speech  at  the  Welt-
Währungskonferenz, 23 April 2015.
For further details, see Praet, P. “Structural reforms and long-run growth in the euro area”, Intervention on panel
at 43rd Economics Conference of Oesterreichische Nationalbank, 15 June 2015.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
