  Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Labuan IBFC – past, present and future 
Speech  by  Mr  Muhammad  bin  Ibrahim,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank 
Negara Malaysia), at the Labuan Industry Annual Dinner 2016 “Labuan IBFC: Past, Present 
and Future”, Kuala Lumpur, 27 October 2016. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here at the 2016 Labuan Industry Annual Dinner. It is 
a  pleasure  to  share  some  of  my  thoughts  tonight  with  the  industry  players  here.  Since  its 
inception 26 years ago, we have all played a part in developing Labuan IBFC into what it is 
today. You have had a  hand in its past, and you have indeed shaped  its present. But the 
global  operating  environment  has  significantly  changed,  and  Labuan  like  any  other 
international financial centre needs to adapt to this new reality. Winds of change are upon us, 
and will only blow harder as we move forward. This will, I anticipate, alter Labuan’s role as 
events around the globe continue to shape its future. 
Drawing on tonight’s theme “Bold and Beautiful”, let us not shy away from asking the bold 
questions facing Labuan IBFC and its future. I believe that successful and actionable plans to 
secure the  industry’s future  can  only  stem from us  collectively  and  bravely  confronting the 
truths, however harsh or inconvenient. 
With this in mind, my remarks tonight will focus on three areas: 
• 
• 
• 
reflections on the evolution of international financial centres over the last few years; 
the imperatives for change; and 
possible strategies for Labuan’s next level of development. 
Travelled waters: The historical emergence of international financial centres 
The  historical  emergence  of  international  financial  centres  is  closely  linked  to  the  use  of 
strategies to improve the efficiency of doing business and tax planning. International financial 
centres  were  developed  over  many  decades.  Cultivated  piece  by  piece  around  the  globe, 
strategies  were  put  in  place  to  enable  businesses  to  be  conducted  more  easily,  more 
efficiently and more profitably. Let me briefly attempt to recount the historical milestones to 
contextualise the environment that we are now facing. 
As  far  back  as  the  1880s,  the  American  state  of  New  Jersey  liberalised  its  business 
registration laws to attract corporates to register there. The success of this approach, at a 
time of highly restrictive incorporation laws was then emulated by the state of Delaware. In 
1929,  the  British  courts  ruled  that  an  Egypt-based  company  registered  in  London  was  not 
subject to British taxes since it did not conduct any activities in the UK. This significant ruling 
set a precedent for the tax treatment of non-resident corporates, not only for the UK, but for 
the  entire  British  Empire.  In  1934,  Switzerland  introduced  laws  that  strictly  upheld  bank 
secrecy,  criminalising  offences  and  limiting  information  shared  with  third  parties.  These 
various  events  introduced  elements  that  attract  businesses  such  as  ease  of  company 
incorporation, advantageous tax treatment, sheltered offshore operations, and safeguarded 
confidentiality and secrecy. 
These  elements  had  the  effect  of  reducing  the  costs  and  improving  the  ease  of  doing 
business.  Until  recently,  these  elements  formed  the  cornerstone  of  modern  international 
financial centres. 
International financial centres proliferated in the 1960s and 1970s with the emergence of the 
offshore interbank market – or Eurodollar market – in London. Banks were allowed to carry 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  out largely unregulated deals as long as these were in foreign currency and between non-
resident  clients.  The  development  of  the  Eurodollar  market  in  London  proved  to  be  the 
principal  force  behind  an  integrated  offshore  economy.  Jurisdictions  with  close  links  to 
London  –  British  Crown  dependencies  and  former  colonies  such  as  Hong  Kong  and 
Singapore – quickly latched onto this development and opportunity. 
From  this  quick  glimpse  to  the  past,  we  can  see  that  the  emergence  and  growth  of 
international  financial  centres  is  a  testament  to  human  resourcefulness  and  ingenuity. 
Opportunities have been quickly seized upon, and barriers have been promptly overcome. In 
particular,  businesses  are  continuously  able  to  find  innovative  solutions  in  search  of  a 
brighter future. This is an important lesson. To secure Labuan’s future, we will need to call 
upon this resourcefulness and ingenuity. 
Changing tides: Developments shaping international financial centres 
Beginning in the 1990s, the attractiveness of international financial centres began to evolve 
following the wave of liberalisation and deregulation. Industrial countries also began offering 
incentives  similar  to  those  available  in  international  financial  centres.  It  is  perhaps  at  this 
point  of  the  evolutionary  journey  that  the  paths  of  international  financial  centres  began  to 
diverge. Some continued to work towards stronger standards of regulation and supervision, 
while  others  resorted  to  the  use  of  less  stringent  regulations  and  opaque  structures.  The 
latter, unfortunately, gave rise to the perception of international financial centres as shadow 
centres that harbour unscrupulous financial activity. 
The mid-nineties to the millennium were the defining years for international financial centres. 
In the aftermath of the financial crisis and the ensuing economic slowdown, pressures began 
to  mount  for  international  financial  centres  to  tighten  laws  and  adhere  to  international 
standards  on  disclosure  and  transparency.  Efforts  against  international  tax  avoidance  and 
money  laundering  intensified  and  have  since  proliferated  across  the  globe,  with  initiatives 
such as the Common Reporting Standards and the Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) 
measures. The Financial Action Task Force (FATF), of which Malaysia is a member, has also 
been  instrumental  in  driving  stronger  safeguards  that  protect  the  integrity  of  the  financial 
systems. 
This is a positive development for us in Labuan as the business activities here have always 
been developed and held to high regulatory and supervisory standards that promote sound 
and transparent operations. 
These  regulatory  developments  now  evolving  around  the  globe  will  likely  lead  to  different 
business models for international financial centres. With the expansion of global agreement 
and  coordination  in  areas  such  as  tax  harmonisation  and  regulatory  upscaling,  privileges 
such  as  tax  incentives  and  secrecy  will  eventually  cease  to  be  competitive  differentiators. 
International financial centres will need to metamorphose into “new environment relevancy” 
in order to survive these changes. 
Value propositions will need to be rethought, anchored on new expectations amidst a new 
operating  environment.  Indeed,  we  are  already  seeing  other  jurisdictions  repositioning 
themselves  –  drawing  on  real  talent  and  specialisation,  leveraging  on  infrastructure  both 
“hard”  and  “soft”,  and  diversifying  into  other  business  segments  ranging  from  arbitration 
services to medical tourism. 
Sink or swim: Repositioning Labuan IBFC 
In a world where cross-border funds are shifting in significant volumes, where rules are being 
rethought,  where  advancing  technology  is  rapidly  redefining  the  nature  of  financial 
transactions,  we  must  ask  ourselves  the  important  question  of  how  we  should  respond  to 
remain relevant as an international financial centre. Sink or swim – such is the imperative of 
Labuan IBFC’s continued success, or even existence. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Although modelled and adapted after other international financial centres, Labuan IBFC was 
always envisioned to benefit from overall growth and economic development in the region. 
Today, it has become a centre for players in niche financial services such as aircraft and oil 
and gas leasing services, reinsurance and captive insurance. 
Nevertheless,  the  mandate  to  focus  on  out-out  business  still  has  much  room  for 
improvement. Labuan was initially given the flexibility to accept domestic business to give it a 
head start. It was never the intent to make domestic based business a focal point. And yet, at 
present,  almost  half  of  the  insurance  business  here  originates  from  Malaysian  risks. 
Similarly, for the banking sector, over half of bank deposits here are derived from Malaysian 
residents. In fact, loans to Malaysian residents have more than doubled the last five years 
from USD5.9 billion in 2010 to USD12.9 billion in 2015. Such loans now account for 40% of 
Labuan’s total loans outstanding. This increased reliance on domestic business runs contrary 
to  the  central  theme  of  Labuan  IBFC’s  global  ambition.  The  reinvention  of  Labuan  going 
forward should not lose sight of its original vision. 
Returning  once  again to  tonight’s theme,  “Bold and  Beautiful”,  let  us  confront  some  of  the 
bold questions about Labuan: 
• 
First, and fundamentally, with the Island in close proximity to long established global 
financial hubs, what could we offer that other global hubs could not? In short, what 
sets Labuan apart? We need to find a differentiator. 
Second,  with  other  international  financial  centres  now  strengthening  their  own 
unique value propositions beyond tax privileges and confidentiality, what strategies 
should we adopt? 
And the third question relates to us as industry players. Are we prepared to face the 
winds  of  change?  Do  we  have  the  resources  and  expertise  in  place  to  contribute 
meaningfully  so  that  as  a  collective  we  can  reposition  Labuan  for  the  new 
environment? 
  Allow me to share some thoughts on what is in store as Labuan moves forward into new and 
competitive territory. 
Strategies to reposition Labuan IBFC 
First, we need to rethink on how Labuan IBFC can develop a distinct value proposition that 
distinguishes itself from other competitors, as well as from the onshore market. To its credit, 
the  centre  has  already  embarked  on  this  journey  by  repositioning  itself  from  an  “offshore 
centre” to a “midshore centre” over the past few years. As a “midshore centre”, it offers both 
the  ease  of  doing  business  found  typically  in  offshore  centres,  combined  with  high 
international standards of regulation and supervision found onshore. 
We now need to further refine the “midshore centre” concept by moving away from broad-
based  financial  services  already  widely  offered  and  available  onshore,  to  focus  on  niche 
areas with high growth potential. 
These include leasing, captives, commodity trading and wealth management. These areas 
have  continued  to  show  an  upward  trend  in  driving  the  centre’s  growth  in  recent  years. 
Wealth management, in particular, offers a unique value proposition given that it is the only 
international financial centre in Asia to offer private foundations and special purpose trusts, 
including Islamic foundations or waqf. In the insurance space, the increasing interest among 
corporates  to  establish  captives  as  a  risk  management  strategy  presents  immense 
opportunities to offer risk solutions that complement the onshore activities. This strategy of 
developing  specialised  areas  would  minimise  overlaps  and  maximise  complementarities 
between  financial  services  offered  by  the  onshore  market  and  in  Labuan  IBFC.  I  am 
confident that with proper planning and execution, the “midshore centre” concept could very 
well be a game changer. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  On the part of the industry, much more needs to be done. Rates of retention for Malaysian 
risks in Labuan have been steadily declining from 66.2% in 2011 to 57% in 2015. Retention 
for  offshore  risks  also  reduced  from  76.9%  to  72.7%  during  the  same  period.  The 
optimisation  policy,  which  accords  the  centre  a  preferred  status  after  optimising  onshore 
insurance  capacity,  places  a  strong  expectation  for  insurers  here  to  maximise  retention  of 
premiums  in  Labuan.  Many  of  the  offices  of  international  players  here  today  only  act  as 
conduits. This situation is certainly not satisfactory. 
On the talent front, despite greater operating flexibility and lower regulatory costs, significant 
investments  to  develop  local  capacity  and  human  capital  have  not  materialised.  For  many 
institutions,  the  outfit  here  merely  consists  of  a  name  and  skeletal  staff,  with  full-fledged 
presence in other parts of the region. Hence, while business is booked in the centre, dealings 
and technical support are provided by regional offices where the experts reside. This is not 
what the founders of Labuan IBFC envisioned and certainly detrimental to the best interest of 
Malaysia.  Industry  players  should  seriously  rethink  about  leveraging  on  the  strength  and 
opportunity  here  to  review  Labuan’s  business  strategies.  And  I  suspect  leveraging  on  ICT 
would  enable  us  to  discover  new  opportunities,  lower  transaction  costs  and  improve 
efficiency and productivity. This is especially relevant given the emergence of fintech that will 
alter the way financial services is delivered. Labuan IBFC can seize this opportunity to carve 
its own niche in this new area. 
Secondly,  the  regulatory  regime  of  Labuan  IBFC  must  continue  to  subscribe  to  high 
international  standards  of  regulation  and  supervision.  Policies  and  regulations  must  be 
facilitative of business and proportionate to risks. A well-defined regulatory framework, highly 
competent supervisors, as well as closer engagements with home and host authorities are 
key enablers to maintain a balanced regime that promotes the stability and integrity of the 
centre. This prevents our industry from attracting undesirable activities and elements. 
I should also highlight that a tax review exercise is currently in the works to harmonise the 
tax regime of Labuan IBFC with the national tax system. 
This  will  better  align  the  centre  with  international  efforts  to  arrest  tax  evasion  and  profit 
shifting,  whilst  preventing  leakages  of  tax  income  accruing  to  the  nation  for  transactions 
involving residents. With this review, we can expect tax rules and regulations that are more 
levelled  with  the  onshore  market  for  transactions  involving  residents.  We  should  envisage 
that business transactions involving non-residents will continue to be incentivised to ensure 
continued  competitiveness  of  the financial  sector  here.  Measures to  streamline  regulations 
between the domestic market and Labuan IBFC will provide greater confidence and certainty 
to international businesses and investors, benefitting both the onshore and offshore markets. 
There is also a need to elevate the level of connectivity between Labuan, the rest of Malaysia 
and  the  region  to  better  facilitate  economic  and  financial  linkages.  As  an  international 
financial  centre,  connectivity  is  one  of  the  most  important  measures  of  competitiveness. 
Connectivity  increases  the  probability  of  success.  If  we  harbour  ambitious  plans  and 
aspirations  for  Labuan  IBFC,  we  need  to  continue  expanding  its  role  in  facilitating  cross-
border investment and financial flows and we need to improve infrastructure. This requires 
additional investment in infrastructure – “hard” and “soft” – to increase the connectivity of the 
island to levels comparable to the world’s leading international financial centres. 
While infrastructure development on the island has come a long way since the 1990s, more 
can be done to enhance the connectivity between the island and mainland Sabah. This will 
greatly unlock Labuan’s vast potential and provide synergistic benefits to Sabah as well. It 
will  create  spill  over  benefits  to  sectors  such  as  tourism  and  retail  businesses.  Perhaps 
several of these initiatives could include greater connectivity by sea or even a construction of 
a  bridge  with  the  mainland.  Regional  connectivity  will  be  enhanced  via  the  Kota  Kinabalu 
International  Airport.  Further  seaport  development  can  also  assist  in  diversifying  Labuan’s 
economic model by positioning the Island as the preferred national offshore oil and gas port, 
and  even  a  marine  hub  that  houses  marine-related  functions  (such  as  specialist  marine 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  insurance  claims,  underwriting  and  maritime  training)  given  its  strategic  location  along 
international trade routes. Investment in faster internet connection is another imperative as it 
will facilitate business interactions and improve general liveability. 
Overall,  better  connectivity  will  not  only  benefit  inbound  access  to  the  centre,  but  also 
outbound  access.  Businesses  based  in  the  Island  will  thus  enjoy  access  to  the  rest  of 
Malaysia  and  neighbouring  countries.  More  specifically,  given  the  establishment  of  the 
ASEAN Economic Community last year, there is significant potential for Labuan IBFC to tap 
into greater regional financial flows for economic development in the region. 
Initiatives undertaken by Labuan FSA 
As the regulator of the centre, Labuan FSA has a critical role and continues to strive towards 
ensuring that Labuan IBFC remains a vibrant and progressive business destination. Today, I 
am pleased to announce three key policy initiatives that will be embarked upon in 2017: 
• 
Firstly,  the  legal  framework  is  being  reviewed  to  better  reflect  regulatory  and 
supervisory  policy  intentions,  as  well  as  to  ensure  the  legal  requirements  remain 
relevant  and  current.  This  reflects  the  ongoing  commitment  of  the  centre  to  be  a 
leading  jurisdiction  in  advocating  strong  prudential,  transparency,  anti-money 
laundering  and  counter  terrorism  financing  standards.  The  new  legal  settings  will 
allow  international  players  to  enjoy  jurisdictional  neutrality,  while  operating  in  a 
sound and stable environment; 
Secondly,  Labuan  FSA  will  deploy  more  efficient  systems for  regulatory  reporting, 
leveraging on technology. This will improve the timely access, accuracy and value of 
information  that  is  captured  by  Labuan  FSA  to  support  its  work.  The  new  system 
also  aims  to  provide  for  the  ease  of  reporting  and  data  exchange  with  other 
stakeholders; and 
Thirdly,  Labuan  IBFC  will  implement  the  Inter-Governmental  Agreement  of  Model 
1B.  This  will  facilitate  compliance  by  financial  institutions  here  to  the  Foreign 
Account Tax Compliance Act (FATCA) and exchange information with the US. This 
and other similar agreements will further strengthen the framework for international 
cooperation and confidence in Labuan IBFC globally. 
  Moving Forward 
The future of Labuan IBFC is inextricably linked with the broader Malaysian financial system. 
Much  needs  to  be  done.  We  face  the  same  waves  and  undercurrents.  Any  actions  and 
strategies  undertaken  with  regards  to  the  future  of  the  centre,  affect  not  only  Labuan,  but 
Malaysia as a whole. 
Collaboration of various stakeholders is essential. It is with this in view that the Labuan FSA 
is collaborating with Bank Negara Malaysia, Labuan Corporation and the Ministry of Finance 
to  undertake  a  comprehensive  positional  review  of the  centre  and  the  Labuan  Island  as  a 
whole. The outcome of this review, once finalised, will ensure that Labuan IBFC emerges not 
only  as  a  stronger  international  financial  centre,  but  one  with  an  enlarged  role  in  the 
Malaysian financial system and economy. 
This is a bold journey with great promise. All of us here tonight need to give our best and 
play our roles in transforming Labuan IBFC. With a shared vision and steadfast commitment 
to common objectives and principles, together, let us steer our journey in unison to a better 
destination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
