Statement by Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Constituency of 
Albania, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, San Marino, and Timor-Leste 
Development Committee, Washington D.C., October 8, 2016 
   1. 
Introduction 
Global  growth  remains  disappointingly  anaemic.  Adverse  long-term  trends  in  advanced 
economies  –  low  productivity  growth,  aging  populations  –  combined  with  the  slowdown  in 
emerging  economies  and  especially  heightened  geopolitical  risks  result  in  a  high  degree  of 
uncertainty which prompt firms to scale back their investment plans. If we do not act to reverse 
this situation a self-fulfilling trap of low growth may take hold. 
Policies  both  on  the  supply  and  demand  side  are  crucial.    To  take  full  advantage  of  the  very 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policies  other  policies  to  support  demand  and  especially 
appropriate structural reforms should be implemented.  
The reduction in global poverty experienced in the last couple of decades is a success. It has been 
facilitated  by  booming  international  trade  and  rapid  growth,  especially  in  some  populous 
emerging economies. However, not  everybody  has benefitted. Guiding  political and economic 
institutions in a more inclusive direction is essential to limiting adjustment costs and facilitating 
sectorial reallocation. 
Maintaining market openness to revitalise trade in goods and services may enhance economic 
growth. Multilateral cooperation among all economies is essential to generate better outcomes 
and the World Bank should continue to play an important role towards this end. 
2. 
A better and more legitimate Bank  
A  “better”  Bank  identifies  sound  examples  of  previous  interventions,  using  data-driven  and 
evidence-based  analysis  to  systematically  assess  their  degree  of  success  and  to  implement  the 
lessons learnt. This is necessary not only for proposing transformative  development solutions, 
but  also  for  appropriately  managing  risks.  The  recent  approval  of  the  new  environmental  and 
social safeguards, if properly implemented, may represent an important step in this direction. 
We welcome the agreement on the dynamic formula in the context of the periodic revision of 
Bank shareholding. Introducing a dynamic adjustment mechanism, which builds on the Bank’s 
development mission and global economic reality, will strengthen the  IBRD’s legitimacy as a 
global  player.  Recognising  support  for  its  development  mission  is  essential  for  strengthening 
incentives to foster future contributions. The compression factor acknowledges the cooperative 
 1 
foundation of the IBRD and ensures an equitable representation of all shareholders for the years 
to come. 
3. 
The contribution of IDA to development  
Over the last decades IDA has provided a fundamental contribution to the long-term agenda of 
poverty  alleviation.  It  should  continue  to  focus  its  efforts  and  resources  on  the  long-term 
challenges  of  poverty  eradication  and  sharing  prosperity  in  the  poorest  countries.  With  these 
goals in mind, we expect that a larger group of countries will consider mobilizing resources.  
We welcome progress in leveraging IDA equity, which will enable the Bank to both target scarce 
concessional financing to the poorest IDA clients and increase allocations of non-concessional 
resources to countries at a more advanced stage of development, in line with the different needs 
and capacities of IDA’s evolving client base.  
We support the proposal of a window in IDA18 to leverage IFC and MIGA to promote private 
sector  development  in  IDA-only  countries,  paying  special  attention  to  Fragile  Conflict 
Situations.  We  nonetheless  think  that  the  best  way  to  promote  private  sector  activity  in  these 
areas is to address the challenges related to institutional capacity and regulatory framework.  
4.  
The Forward Look  
We welcome the report on the year-long engagement between the Board of Directors and Senior 
Management  on  the  medium-  to  long-term  role  of  the  World  Bank  Group.  It  provides  an 
important basis for the decisions shareholders should make on the financial capacity.  
Given  the  ambitious  agenda  of  the  2030  Sustainable  Development  Goals  (SDGs),  the  WBG 
should help address the issue of why the large amount of global liquidity flows only to a limited 
extent  towards  capital-poor  countries.  While  this  may  still  be  due  to  global  capital  market 
imperfections,  differences  in  fundamentals  that  affect  the  structure  of  these  countries’ 
economies—such  as  technological  capabilities,  missing  factors  of  production,  government 
policies,  and  institutional  structure—play  an  important  role.  Therefore,  the  crucial  role  of  the 
Bank is to build on the knowledge accumulated in so many years of financing for development 
and  help  developing  economies  overcome  such  shortcomings.  In  particular,  helping  countries 
implement  the  policies  most  conducive  to  a  friendly  business  environment  is  essential  to 
leverage private sector investments. 
We recognize that an appropriate funding of the measures to achieve the SDGs in a challenging 
global  economic  context  may  put  pressure  on  the  WBG’s  financial  resources.  As  the  World 
Bank’s scope of intervention cannot be unlimited, particularly in an international environment 
where  many  organizations  share  the  same  broad  goal  of  helping  the  poor,  scarce  resources 
should  be  used  with  greater  efficiency.  We  need  a  more  intense  coordination  among  all 
multilateral actors, building on their respective missions and expertise. 
We strongly recommend an optimized use of resources and enhanced selectivity of interventions, 
firmly  grounded  in  the  Bank’s  comparative  advantages,  with  a  focus  on  those  clients  having 
limited access to alternative source of funding.  
In the coming months, it will be pivotal for the Bank to consider where the resources needed can 
and should come from. The persistence of low interest rates calls the current business model into 
 2 
question. The current income generation capacity is unable to boost capital to support increased 
lending,  even  in  the  absence  of  strong  cost  dynamics.  This  calls  for  a  multifaceted  approach 
which  would  not  exclude  widening  the  revenue  base  of  the  Bank,  modifying  the  price  of  its 
services,  and  optimizing  its  balance  sheet,  while  adhering  to  the  highest  standards  of  budget 
discipline.  
 3 
