Cyril Roux: Perspectives on financial regulation in Ireland
Speech by Mr Cyril Roux, Deputy Governor (Financial Regulation) of the Central Bank of Ireland,
at the Institute of International and European Affairs (IIEA), Dublin, 1 December 2016.
 It is a great pleasure to be here today at the Institute of International and European Affairs, and I’d
like to thank chairperson Brendan Halligan and director general Tom Arnold for the invitation.
The Central Bank has a broad mandate – to safeguard stability and protect consumers – but it’s
also one that is easily misunderstood as being all-encompassing. European and national laws
give us a number of powers that we exercise, while also defining the limits of our role.
A core objective of the Central Bank is to be trusted by the public, whose interests we serve. It
behoves  us  to  explain  clearly  what  we  do  and  what  we  don’t  do.  This  is  why  we  publish  a
performance statement every spring in relation to our financial relation function, come in front of
the Oireachtas at its discretion, and explain our actions throughout the year.
Today,  I’d  like  to  explain  a  little  more  about  our  mandate  and  our  work  by  offering  concrete
examples  on  three  areas:  residential  mortgages,  domestic  insurance,  and  Brexit.  These  are
three areas which may seem somewhat disparate at first, but in fact, all serve to illustrate the
manner in which the Bank seeks to fulfil its mandate, as well as the roles the Bank doesn’t play.
Let me start with residential mortgages.
The Central Bank is the national macroprudential authority for Ireland, meaning it is our role to
limit risk to the financial system as a whole.
The mortgage measures, which we introduced in February 2015, are one of the tools by which
we limit such risk. The measures also demonstrate the importance we attach to the protection of
borrowers.
Borrowers  should  not  over-extend  themselves  and  borrow  out  of  line  with  their  income,  nor
should they risk entering into negative equity by leaving too little room for price reversals. Lenders
for their part should not take excessive credit risk by lending at or beyond the circumstances of
their  consumers,  and  are  required  to  ensure,  under  the  Consumer  Protection  Code,  that  the
mortgage  is  affordable  for  the  borrower.  That  is  why  we  impose  the  mortgage  measures.
Although  we  slightly  recalibrated  them  this  month,  based  on  the  evidence  to  date,  we  regard
them as a permanent fixture of the regulation of domestic credit.
The Central Bank will shortly appear before the Oireachtas Finance Committee in public session
to discuss the Variable Rate Mortgages Bill (2016), which proposes to give the Bank the power to
cap variable mortgage rates charged by lenders.
Out of respect to the Committee and its deliberations, I don’t intend to make extensive comment
on the Bill here, other than to say that the Central Bank will fully explain its reservations about the
Bill at the Committee hearing. In a nutshell, we believe that the Bill would conflict and interfere
with  our  monetary  and  prudential  mandates,  while  having  counterproductive  effects  for
borrowers.
Furthermore, the Central Bank has a prudential regulation and consumer protection mandate, but
is not a competition authority, and that is an important distinction. There is a competition authority
in the country, namely the Competition and Consumer Protection Commission, with which the
Bank  engages  and  exchanges  to  the  fullest  extent  of  our  respective  mandates.  The  same
distinction  applies  at  European  level,  where  the  European  Commission  is  the  competition
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
authority while prudential supervision of banks is entrusted to the European Central Bank.
Naturally,  however,  we  will  work  both  to  the  letter  and  spirit  of  any  law  the  Oireachtas  may
ultimately pass.
In the meantime, it may be useful to explain precisely what our role is in relation to mortgage
interest rates.
Our job is to ensure transparency for borrowers and facilitate switching.
This is why, earlier this year, we strengthened our disclosure requirements on lenders.
The Central Bank directed lenders to give sufficient notice when they change the interest rate
they charge, to explain in layman’s terms the rationale for such changes, and to facilitate their
customers who are in a position to switch to a different mortgage or to a different lender.
When lenders do not honour these consumer protection obligations, when they fail to point out to
their customers the options open to them, or worse, when they mislead or bring their customers
to pay more interest than they should, the Central Bank acts forcefully.
And to emphasise that point, the Central Bank has driven all mortgage lenders to review their
mortgage books to ensure that all borrowers who should have been on tracker mortgages are on
tracker mortgages, and compensated accordingly if incorrect rates were applied.
As part of this programme of work, we have just reprimanded and fined Springboard and ordered
it to pay redress for serious failings in its obligations to tracker mortgage customers. The fine of
€4.5 million is amongst the largest ever collected by the Central Bank.
Other banks will shortly follow suit in offering redress to affected tracker mortgage customers at
the direction of the Central Bank, as part of our wider tracker mortgage examination, which will
lead ultimately to all lenders making their borrowers whole.
This critical multi-year project is a powerful example of the Central Bank exercising its mandate
to protect consumers.
Let me now move on to a second case study, that of non-life insurance – typically motor and
home insurance.
Whereas for many years’ motor insurance premiums were low and falling, they have risen much
of late.
This has led, understandably, to some people asking why the Central Bank, given its financial
regulation  and  consumer  protection  mandates,  is  not  doing  more  to  cap,  or  drive  down,
premiums.
But while the questions are understandable, they arise from a misunderstanding of our mandate
in a market-based economy where prices are set commercially. In the circumstances, they also
fail to acknowledge that high premiums are driven by the high cost of claims.
The Central Bank has no role in setting or capping premiums or renewal rates, as that is strictly
prohibited under EU law. Put simply, regulators cannot intervene on the level of premiums. As
with  the  interest  rates  of  mortgages,  capping  premiums  would  conflict  with  our  prudential
mandate, mix our role with that of the competition authority, and would likely be counterproductive
for policyholders. Price transparency, on the other hand, is the area of pricing on which the Bank
can intervene, and we do so to the fullest extent. We require insurers to disclose clearly their
premiums,  and  to  provide  renewal  rates  sufficiently  in  advance  for  people  to  be  able  to  shop
around.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
There have been calls for greater transparency around claims data and the Bank will continue to
work with Minister of State, Eoghan Murphy and Department of Finance on this matter. The Bank
will monitor from next spring the public provision of granular claims data by insurers, as required
by the Solvency II directive. We will publish on foot of these disclosures more detailed aggregate
claims  data  for  all  Irish  insurers.  However,  the  Bank  is  a  public  institution,  with  a  specific
mandate, and strict limits set in European law on its ability to collect and publish commercially
sensitive or regulatory data.
More  generally,  our  role  in  relation  to  protecting  consumers  in  their  dealings  with  insurance
companies is threefold.
First, we monitor continuously and act to ensure the solvency of Irish insurers – so that they
always have sufficient funds to pay claims in full.
Second, we set requirements for insurers to treat consumers fairly.
Third, we regulate the large and numerous retail intermediaries sector and root out those who
are  failing  to  meet  minimum  regulatory  standards  and  shouldn’t  be  acting  as  insurance
intermediaries.
On  the  first  point,  the  Central  Bank  has  intervened  forcefully  in  recent  years.  We  oversaw  a
combined increase of the solvency capital of insurers in this sector by more than €750m in the
past  few  years.  In  addition,  we  have  ensured  these  firms  have  increased  support  from  their
parent  companies  and  have  put  in  place  more  extensive  reinsurance  cover  in  a  number  of
cases. 
As  a  result,  all  Irish  insurers  have  remained  solvent  and  open  for  business,  despite  their
extensive  losses.  Their  customers  have  been  protected  from  the  loss  which  failure  of  these
insurers would have caused.
This  in  stark  contrast  to  Setanta  and  Enterprise,  which  were  regulated  in  Malta  and  Gibraltar
respectively  and  who  “passported”  their  services  into  Ireland  without  need  for  any  further
authorisation from the Central Bank. These insurers subsequently failed, leaving their customers
without  cover.  Two  more  insurers  based  in  Gibraltar  have  decided  to  enter  the  Irish  motor
insurance market this month, and people who choose to be covered by these insurers will have
to  rely  on  the  prudential  supervision  conducted  by  the  Gibraltar  regulator  for  the  continued
solvency of their underwriters.
On  the  second  point,  our  consumer  protection  code  and  the  insurance  regulations  that  we
enforce require insurers to provide the correct information when buying an insurance product,
and  ensure  these  products  are  suitable  for  their  consumers.  When  insurers  sell  unsuitable
products, we mandate redress. This has brought Irish insurance consumers €70m in the case of
mis-sold payment protection insurance, and close to €20m for mis-sold credit card insurance.
Our customer protection also covers how claims and complaints must be handled. In addition,
insurers  and  brokers  must  employ  sufficiently  qualified  staff.  We  have  fined  two  insurance
companies  this  year  for  breach  of  these  consumer  requirements,  following  similar  fines  in
previous years.
Finally, we monitor and root out unsuitable retail intermediaries. We turn away unfit or improper
applicants and revoke intermediaries that run afoul of our rules. We have also issued prohibition
notices  in  several  cases,  so  that  in  total,  citizens  can  avail  of  the  service  of  insurance
intermediaries in Ireland in the knowledge they are fit for the role, competent and solvent.
Mention of passporting brings me neatly to my third case study, on Brexit.
Since  the  UK  referendum,  there  has  been  a  material  increase  in  the  number  of  authorisation
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
queries  from  UK-authorised  entities.  Many  of  these  engagements  have  been  preliminary  in
nature. But several have moved into the pre-application or application phase, and this is likely to
continue in the coming months as UK firms prepare for the possibility of a loss of passporting
rights into the EU.
As the Governor stated to this institute in August  the Central Bank is committed to providing
transparency,  consistency  and  predictability  with  regard  to  our  regulatory  and  supervisory
responsibilities.
1
Potential applicants will find the Central Bank to be engaged, efficient, open, and rigorous.
In determining an application for authorisation, we follow clear, published rules and processes
derived from EU law, and are guided by our mandate to protect consumers. We are mindful of
the  fiduciary  role  of  financial  actors,  and  the  need  to  safeguard  deposits,  premiums,  or  client
assets from loss stemming from incompetence, mis-governance or outright failure.
In authorising a firm, we will want to be satisfied that we are authorising a business or line of
business that will be run from Ireland and which we will be effectively supervising. We will expect
there to be substantive presence.
Outsourcing and insourcing are acceptable – up to a point. One may outsource activities, but
one may not outsource responsibility. A firm may not outsource to the extent that it is effectively
hollowing out its regulated activity.
It has been said that the Central Bank does not want to see investment banking or trading in
Dublin.
I want to be clear: we do not have such a position. We have not sought to dissuade any such
entities from seeking authorisation nor are we planning to do so.
Such applicants, of course, like any other applicant, can expect a rigorous process where we will
expect to understand clearly the risks inherent in the business and how they are managed and
mitigated. We will need to be satisfied that this is done appropriately and well.
This is no more and no less than would be expected by any applicant for any type of business.
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  note  the  collective  commitment  of  supervisors  in  the  EU  to
safeguard the integrity and the homogeneity of rules and our determination to avoid regulatory
arbitrage.
The Irish financial sector is set to grow, and quite possibly to a significant extent. The Central
Bank is committed to meeting the challenge. Our workforce planning for next year reflects the
additional resources needed to deal with applications that will come our way, and we have built in
contingency should the need arise.
As Governor Lane has indicated, due to an expanded universe of regulated and supervised firms,
further resources are necessary, and the Central Bank will staff-up as required.
But  it’s  important  to  note  that  the  Central  Bank  no  longer  has  a  mandate  to  promote  the
development of financial services in Ireland. We did have such a mandate in the past and it was
judged that this compromised our authorisation and supervisory stance. There is good reason
this has been removed from the Act that defines our role. Rather, we have a clear mandate to
promote stability and protect consumers.
Conclusion
Residential mortgages, insurance and Brexit have helped me to illustrate, in different but related
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ways, the nature of the Central Bank’s work.
Our mission – to safeguard stability and protect consumers – is a wide-ranging and critical one.
And in my remarks, I’ve tried to give a flavour of our powers under that mandate, and how we
exercise them in the people’s interest.
We are a public body. And the public is our first priority.
At the end of a year such of this, it is important to convey that. Citizens need to feel that public
institutions are acting in their interest. More so, public institutions need to demonstrate as much.
Part of that process means conveying what we are and what we are not. The Central Bank is the
monetary  authority,  the  prudential  regulator,  the  financial  consumer  protection  authority,  the
macroprudential  authority  and  the  resolution  authority  of  Ireland.  We  are  fully  committed  to
fulfilling our wide-ranging duties under these mandates, while recognising that responsibility for
many  policies  that  affect  the  financial  conditions  facing  households  and  firms  lies  with  the
Oireachtas and executed by a range of State bodies. We interact, cooperate and collaborate with
the relevant State agencies and a range of national and international bodies, while ensuring we
both  confine  ourselves  to  our  mandate  while  fully  respecting  the  individual  mandates  of  each
organisation.
I hope I have given you a useful perspective on the Central Bank and welcome your questions.
1
 www.centralbank.ie/press-area/speeches/Pages/Macro-FinancialPerspectives.aspx
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
