Yandraduth Googoolye: Growing prominence of the role of auditors
– a central banker’s perspective
Speech  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the
Forum  of  Accountants,  organised  by  the  Mauritius  Institute  of  Professional  Accountants,
Balaclava, 11 August 2016.
Good Morning
 First of all, I would like to thank the Mauritius Institute of Professional Accountants – MIPA – for
giving me the opportunity to address this select audience today.
The Importance of Auditors
The importance of Auditors in this time and age cannot be over emphasised. Being myself a
fellow of the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants, UK and a Fellow of the Association
of  International  Accountants,  I  am  very  much  alive  of  the  expectations  which  regulators,
stakeholders and members of the public generally have from auditors. They expect auditors –
internal and external auditors alike – to be the watchdog of their respective institutions.
Today, however, I am wearing my other hat – that of the regulator of the banking sector – and I
will  share  with  you  a  few  reflections  on  the  growing  prominence  of  the  role  of  auditors  in  the
financial sector, particularly the banking industry, from a prudential perspective.
Unlike other companies, most of the funds used by banks to conduct their business belong to
their creditors, in particular to their depositors. Since they act as intermediaries between savers
and  users  of  capital,  banks  operate  within  a  controlled  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework
where sound corporate governance and effective internal control systems play a predominant
role.
Following the financial crisis and other blows to market confidence and integrity of the financial
sector – amongst which the LIBOR rigging scandal – corporate governance as well as the role of
auditors has been under a strong and critical public spotlight. The potential systemic implications
of  weak  internal  control  systems  of  a  bank  on  the  integrity  and  stability  of  the  whole  financial
system  had  the  consequence  of  raising  investors’,  regulators’  and  other  stakeholders’
expectations  of  boards  and  senior  management,  and  of  those  charged  with  providing  an
independent review of a company’s operations and financial accounts.
There  were  concerted  efforts  worldwide  to  improve  standards  of  corporate  behaviour  and
transparency through the international harmonisation of accounting standards, strengthening the
principles of corporate governance, lifting the bar on the ‘fitness and propriety’ of directors and
senior  officers  and  introducing  improved  market  disclosure  standards.  Auditors  were  also
subjected to higher levels of scrutiny by the regulators and their professional bodies.
Quality of Audit
One  of  the  tenets  of  the  Core  Principles  for  Effective  Banking  Supervision,  developed  by  the
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in 2006 and revised in 2012, is that banks should have
in  place  internal  control  frameworks  to  establish  and  maintain  a  properly  controlled  operating
environment for the conduct of their business taking into account their risk profile, which should
include,  inter  alia,  appropriate  independent  internal  audit  and  compliance  functions  to  test
adherence to these controls as well as applicable laws and regulations. In addition, the bank’s
Board and management have the responsibility for ensuring that the financial statements issued
annually  to  the  public  bear  an  independent  external  auditor’s  opinion  as  a  result  of  an  audit
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
conducted in accordance with internationally accepted auditing practices and standards.
Therefore, both external and internal auditors have a key role to play in strengthening corporate
governance as they are the third line of defence within the combined assurance frameworks after
the risk management control and compliance functions.
The internal audit function is one of the fundamental “checks and balances” for sound corporate
governance, designed to provide an independent assurance to the board of directors and senior
management on the quality and effectiveness of a bank’s internal control, risk management and
governance  systems  and  processes,  to  help  the  board  and  senior  management  protect  their
organisation and its reputation. While external auditors, on the other hand, are responsible for
providing  reasonable  assurance 
from  material
misstatements and prepared according to international financial reporting standards.
financial  statements  are 
free 
that 
the 
The global financial crisis, however, not only revealed weaknesses in risk management, control
and  governance  processes  in  banks,  but  also  highlighted  the  need  to  improve  the  quality  of
external audits of banks.
While  until  now,  the  “three  lines  of  defence  model”  has  been  used  traditionally  to  model  the
interaction between corporate governance and internal control systems,  international  standard
setters and policy-makers are calling for a stronger interaction between banks and supervisors,
particularly on the governance of risk. According to the four-lines-of-defence model, the external
auditor would be required to provide an autonomous assessment of the first three lines.
In March 2014, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision issued new guidelines on external
audit of banks in aiming at reinforcing the key role the audit committee plays in promoting quality
bank audits through effective communication with the external auditor and robust oversight of the
external audit process.
Though the external auditor does not have direct corporate governance responsibility, he must
provide  a  check  on  the  information  aspects  of  the  governance  system,  notably,  whether  the
financial  information  given  to  investors  and  other  stakeholders  is  reliable  to  help  foster  their
confidence  in  the  financial  reports,  are  in  line  with  the  accounting  standards  and  disclosure
requirements and faithfully portray the economics of a transaction.
Independence of Auditors
To foster confidence in the bank’s financial statements, it is imperative that the independence of
the external auditor is preserved.
As far back as the late 90s, the banking legislation in Mauritius was reviewed necessitating the
rotation  of  the  audit  engagement  partners  every  5  years.  Further,  the  appointment  of  external
auditors by financial institutions under our purview for the yearly audit of their financial statements
is subject to the approval of the central bank. To reinforce this independence, we have proposed
that it is the firm of auditors itself which is subject to rotation every 5 years as opposed to solely
the engagement partners.
The Relationship between the Supervisory Authority, the Internal Auditor and External
Auditors
As  the  work  carried  out  by  the  internal  auditor  involves  review  of  the  internal  controls,  risk
management  and  governance  processes,  the  supervisor  holds  consultations  with  the  internal
auditors  to  discuss  the  functioning  of  the  internal  audit  department  and  the  findings  of  the
department,  particularly  in  areas  presenting  a  significant  risk  and  reviews  the  internal  audit
reports to identify control problems and areas of potential risks.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In many respects, the work of banking supervisors and external auditors may be perceived as
complementary as they often look at the very same issues from a different point of view. In light
thereof, the supervisor place reliance on the work of the external auditors, such as their report on
the  internal  controls  system  in  place  at  the  banks  and  their  management  letter  for  a  more
efficient oversight of banks.
In Mauritius, every bank is required to appoint annually an external auditor to audit its accounts,
and such appointment is subject to the approval of the Bank of Mauritius. The external auditor
must be independent, experienced in the audit of financial institutions and have the necessary
resources  to  undertake  audits  of  financial  institutions  on  a  consolidated  basis.  If  the  financial
institution fails to appoint an auditor approved by the central bank, the central bank may itself
appoint the auditor.
The  role,  duties  and  powers  vested  on  the  auditor  are  clearly  spelt  out  in  Section  39  of  the
Banking Act  2004. Auditors  are  required  to  submit  a  report  on  the  financial  statements  of  the
financial  institution,  wherein,  amongst  others,  the  auditor  must  state  whether  the  financial
statements –
(i) have been prepared in accordance with International Accounting Standards and any additional
prudential requirements set out in guidelines issued by the central bank;
(ii) are, in his opinion, complete, fair and properly drawn up;
(iii) present a true and fair view of the affairs of the financial institution;
The Banking Act 2004 also empowers the Central Bank to, inter alia, impose on an auditor of a
bank  a  duty  to  carry  out  an  extended  scope  audit  or  other  examination  and  make
recommendations as necessary. The Bank of Mauritius may also require the auditor to submit a
report as to whether, in his opinion, the systems of credit provisioning and write-offs specified by
the central bank are being complied with and whether or not measures to counter the possibility
of  money  laundering  or  the  funding  of  terrorist  activities  have  been  adopted  by  the  financial
institution and are being implemented in accordance with any enactment relating to anti-money
laundering and prevention of terrorism and with guidelines or instructions issued by the central
bank.
The  Bank  also  issued  a Guideline  on  Transactions  or  Conditions  respecting  Well-being  of  a
Financial Institution Reportable by the External Auditor to the Bank of Mauritius. This Guideline
was  reviewed  in  February  2014  and  lays  down  the  ground  rules  respecting  certain  types  of
relationships  between  financial  institutions  and  their  external  auditors.  The  relationships  are
described  in  terms  of  categories  of  transactions  or  conditions  impinging  on  the  well-being  of
financial institutions that must be reported by their external auditors to the Bank of Mauritius.
Additionally,  in  terms  of  Section  39  of  the  Banking Act  and  the  Guideline  on  Transactions  or
Conditions respecting Well Being of a Financial Institution reportable by the External Auditor, the
external  auditors  have  an  obligation  to  report  directly  to  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  if  they  become
aware of serious issues during their audit that the supervisor should know about in the public
interest.
In furtherance of a more effective and efficient oversight, the Bank of Mauritius holds trilateral
meetings with the banks and their external auditors on an annual basis after the publication of the
audited financial statements to review the financial results and discuss any issue of concern.
Concluding Remarks
No governance system, however well designed, can fully prevent a financial institution from being
victim  to  frauds  and  other  malpractices.  The  BAI  case  is  a  crying  lesson  to  be  learnt  where
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
deceptive  practices  enabled  the  group  to  mask  the  huge  losses  of  the  BAI  Group  since
December 2010.
The auditing profession has an important role to play in ensuring that financial reports reflect the
way the business has actually been run or the risks to which the business has actually been
exposed.  The  ethical  values,  integrity  and  impeachable  professional  conduct  expected  from
auditors cannot be underscored enough in the promotion of a stable and sound financial system.
I  am  sure  that  the  other  distinguished  speakers  will  also  touch  upon  these  issues  during  this
Forum. I wish you all fruitful deliberations.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
