 SPEECH 
SPEECH BY GOVERNOR LARS ROHDE AT THE 
ANNUAL MEETING OF THE DANISH BANKERS 
ASSOCIATION 
 
 
  
 
 
 
CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 
  
 
5 December 2016 
    Thank you for inviting me to speak. 
 
I have these two key messages today: 
Increased digitisation is good news for customers, banks and society 
in general. 
Increased digitisation also makes the sector more vulnerable to 
destructive hacker attacks, but Danmarks Nationalbank and the 
sector are continuously working to prevent this. 
1. 
 
2. 
  The Danes have gone digital – and very much so. There are more mobile 
phones than people in Denmark, and nearly all homes are online. In fact, 
digital readiness is higher in Denmark than anywhere else. [Chart 1] 
Technological advances have changed the way banks operate. 
New possibilities have paved the way for a number of initiatives that have 
made the financial sector more efficient. This benefits the sector, and it 
benefits the Danes. 
With increased digitisation, more processes can be automated and 
customers can increasingly serve themselves. This reduces the need for 
branches and employees – a trend that has been seen for some years as 
this chart shows. [Chart 2] 
Page 1 of 5 
  Technology has made digitisation a competitive parameter, which means 
that all banks are trying to attract customers by offering the best digital 
products. 
However, it has also opened the door to increased competition from new 
actors, who will be able to enter areas that used to be completely 
dominated by the banks. 
Competition is good, and there are no indications that we will have less 
competition in future. In fact, we can expect fiercer competition as a 
result of the EU's new Payment Services Directive, PSD2, which could be a 
game changer for the financial sector. 
PSD2 allows third parties – with the customer's consent – to gain direct 
access to perform transactions in a customer's bank account. A third 
party could be e.g. a coffee chain, an airline company or another bank 
than the one where the customer has a deposit account. 
The point is that PSD2 allows new actors to offer payment services 
without providing deposit accounts. Once they have got a foot in the 
door, they will also be able to offer other services, such as loans, which 
are actually sources of income for the banks – unlike payment services. 
The Danish banks have been good at moving with the times and 
developing their own digital products. Examples are mobile payment 
solutions, which have become very popular among the Danes. These 
solutions have helped to prevent foreign actors from gaining significant 
market shares in Denmark until now. Obviously the limited size of the 
Danish market also plays a role. 
Increased digitisation makes heavy demands on the individual banks if 
they are to keep up with technological advances and remain competitive. 
That is expensive. Typically it requires substantial investment, and in this 
respect the size of the bank is a factor. 
The large banks are better positioned to develop their own digital 
solutions. Conversely, the small banks rely on collaboration with e.g. a 
data centre or a larger bank in order to be able to offer the solutions 
requested by customers. 
Digital developments may increase the spread between small and large 
banks, as the large banks can typically benefit from economies of scale. 
So increased digitisation will contribute further to the downward trend in 
the number of banks. [Chart 3] 
Page 2 of 5 
   Increased digitisation also involves a degree of vulnerability. The financial 
sector relies on complex IT systems. Every day, nearly kr. 600 billion is 
transferred between accounts via those systems. That is equivalent to 
more than one quarter of Denmark's gross domestic product. And that 
makes the Danish financial sector an obvious target of cybercrime. 
So today we are facing other threats than previously. There are still 
people like the Olsen Gang [Chart 4], but modern-day threats are 
radically different and may affect society as a whole. 
In a historical perspective, cybercrime is a new type of crime, which can 
be committed from Herning, Hong Kong or anywhere else. We have 
already witnessed many attacks on financial institutions around the 
world. The attack on the Bangladeshi central bank made global headlines 
and was a warning that cyberattacks are becoming increasingly 
sophisticated. 
The threat could well be even greater if it comes from organised 
hacktivism, terrorism or actual state-sponsored attacks. 
An extensive attack that affects several critical actors or systems in e.g. 
the payments infrastructure could potentially paralyse the whole sector 
or significant parts of it for a while. Hence, unauthorised access to 
financial sector computers could constitute a systemic risk and ultimately 
threaten financial stability. 
Even less serious attacks can – if they occur repeatedly – weaken 
confidence in the financial system. 
This would be particularly critical if it were to happen at a time when the 
sector is already struggling – as it was in the autumn of 2008, for 
example. 
That is the systemic angle which makes the cyber threat an issue for 
Danmarks Nationalbank. 
One of the reasons why there is a systemic risk is that the Danish banks 
and mortgage banks are closely interconnected via payment and 
settlement systems handling large values. Moreover, the financial 
institutions use the same data centres, network service providers, etc. 
Consequently, it is important that all key links in the chain are very 
strong. 
Page 3 of 5 
  The Danish Financial Supervisory Authority and Danmarks Nationalbank 
have examined the cyber resilience of 15 of the largest and most 
important financial sector participants. 
Although a survey of this type is subject to certain caveats, our 
conclusion is that, overall, cyber resilience is at a reasonable level – but 
there is room for improvement. 
The risk of unauthorised access to or sabotage of important IT systems 
calls for IT security measures that perhaps received little attention 
previously. 
Traditionally focus has been on severed cables, power outages or 
software errors. We still need to take these factors into account, but 
cybercrime poses new questions and requires new answers. 
It is important to remember that attacks to computer systems are not 
unintentional. There are criminal minds at work, and they are constantly 
fine-tuning their methods. So the threats are changing all the time. This 
means that an attack may actually be difficult to detect in time. 
Our survey shows that the individual sector participants are working with 
these challenges, but it also shows that the highest levels of security and 
protection against cyberattacks have generally been achieved by 
organisations with a cyber strategy which has been approved by the 
board of directors. 
In other words, a strategy laid down by top management has helped to 
ensure focus on these issues throughout the organisation and to target 
efforts. 
Interconnectedness and the resultant interdependence between virtually 
all sector participants mean that information-sharing and collaboration 
are essential if we are to stem the tide of attacks that will undoubtedly 
come in the future. 
First and foremost, I would like to emphasise that collaboration is 
necessary – especially in situations where there is a potential threat to 
financial stability. 
That is why we have established the FSOR – the Financial Sector forum for 
Operational Resilience. 
Page 4 of 5 
  The FSOR is a forum for collaboration between authorities and all key 
financial sector participants [Chart 5]. Its task is to implement "joint 
measures to ensure financial sector resilience". The focus is on preventing 
failures, but also on handling them if they, nevertheless, occur. 
The ambitious vision for this collaboration is that we should be best in 
class in Europe when it comes to counter the threat from cybercrime. 
The first specific initiative was the large-scale test of the financial sector's 
crisis response plans conducted the week before last. It really put the 
sector's ability to work together and coordinate efforts in the event of an 
extensive cyberattack on critical systems to the test. 
It was an educational experience. We all learned a few lessons and came 
home with knowledge that we can use in our further efforts. And 
fortunately it was only a test. But if it becomes necessary, we are ready. It 
is better to activate the crisis response one time too many than one time 
too few. 
One of Danmarks Nationalbank's tasks is to ensure that the Danish 
economy is robust. An important element of a robust economy is a 
financial sector with a robust infrastructure. 
There is more work to do for the whole sector, but focus must be on the 
efforts made by the individual sector participants. 
Thank you for your attention. 
Page 5 of 5 
