Jens  Weidmann:  United  in  diversity  –  on  the  responsibility  of
countries and regions in the monetary union
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, upon receiving the &quot;Medal for
meritorious service to Bavaria in a united Europe&quot;, Frankfurt am Main, 5 December 2016.
 1 Introductory remarks
Dear Minster of State Dr Merk
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you very much for the words of praise, and I am pleased and honoured to be the recipient
of the “Medal for meritorious service to Bavaria in a unified Europe".
I was not expecting this at all, quite honestly: that I would be honoured “for meritorious service to
Bavaria". But we are, after all, talking about “Bavaria in a unified Europe".
I am therefore taking this distinction as (moral) support for my advocacy of a stable monetary
union – a monetary union in which actions and accountability are aligned – a monetary union in
which  rules  are  observed  and  agreements  are  kept.  Keeping  promises  is  crucial  to  ensuring
public acceptance of monetary union.
My  stability-oriented  stance  in  monetary  policy  issues  could  well  have  been  a  factor,  and  you
might be expecting me to sound a note or two of caution regarding current ECB policy.
However, the Governing Council has a fundamentally sensible agreement in place not to make
any public pronouncements about current monetary policy in the week leading up to a monetary
policy meeting. And since a monetary policy meeting is coming up this week, I shall refrain from
making any comment about this subject in my speech. But me say this much about fundamental
considerations regarding the role of monetary policy:
The  idea  that  central  banks  can  use  cheap  money  to  fight  the  causes  of  the  financial  and
sovereign debt crisis, fears about globalisation or the upsurge in populism, is dangerous. The
central bank constantly stepping into the breach for elected politicians or even going so far as to
attempt to influence democratic processes would lead to a politicisation that could jeopardise its
independence.
The fact that accommodative monetary policy buys time for politicians is, at best, a side effect,
but it must not become the objective of monetary policy decisions. And how a given monetary
policy stance is maintained must depend entirely on what is required to safeguard price stability.
My fellow ECB Governing Council members would probably say much the same thing.
The accommodative monetary policy can make fiscal consolidation, as well as reforms, appear
less urgent. I am thinking here of institutional reforms to make the euro area more stable. And
this is precisely what I wish to talk briefly about today.
2 Assessment of the Italian referendum
In this context, this must, of course, include an initial, provisional assessment of the implications
of the Italian referendum. As you know, a majority of Italian voters rejected constitutional reform in
yesterday’s referendum.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
There is cause for concern that reforms in Italy will stall once again. And this would be a troubling
development, not just for Italy. For years now, Italy has been plagued by anaemic growth, very
high government debt and piles of bad debt on banks’ balance sheets.
To quote the Italian finance minister, a “No” would not the end of the world; however, it is now all
the more important for Italy’s political class to send convincing signals that it is willing to tackle
the root causes of its economic woes. 
3 The institutional architecture of the monetary union and the need for reforms
Minister of State Dr Merk,
You  have  invited  us  all  to  attend  the  award  ceremony  here  at  the  Prinz-Carl  Palace,  which
houses the offices of Bavaria’s prime minister and is regarded as one of Munich’s most beautiful
buildings.
It is all the more noteworthy that this building’s architect, Karl von Fischer, was all of 21 years old
and still a student when he received the commission to design this building. However, the patron,
a  French  clergyman  named  Pierre  de  Salabert,  found  Fischer’s  blueprint  too  complex  –  and
possibly too expensive – forcing the architect to scale back his design. What was built was the
main section with a representative facade and a shortened wing branching off to the left.
Ladies and gentlemen, why am I telling you this story, which I’m sure you know already?
Well, the reason is that it somehow reminds me of the construction of European economic and
monetary union. And I’m not saying that the architects of monetary union were novices. But it
does appear that it was impossible to give the builders more comprehensive blueprints, which is
why the monetary union was initially built with only one wing: the single currency. The second
wing – a single fiscal and economic policy – was intentionally left out.
This has left us with a single monetary policy in the euro area but largely autonomous national
fiscal and economic policies.
Now, the architects were very well aware that this edifice has a decisive weakness: The risk of
accumulating excessive debt is greater in such a monetary union than in countries that have their
own currencies.
One reason is that the member states of a monetary union of this design are not borrowing in
their  own  currency.  They  therefore  cannot  meet  their  payment  obligations  by  simply  printing
money  –  a  solution  which,  for  stability-oriented  central  bankers,  is  generally  a  non-starter
anyway.
Another  is  that  there  are  greater  incentives  to  borrow  in  a  monetary  union  because  any
consequences of relying increasingly on capital market funding can be passed on to the other
member states.
And  that  was  why  the  member  states  pledged  to  maintain  sound  public  finances,  introduced
upper limits for annual budget deficits and public debt levels, and agreed to a “no bail-out clause”
that would prevent one member state from assuming liability for the debts of another. They also
prohibited central banks from printing money to help cash-strapped euro-area governments
This was designed to ensure that member states are liable for their own debts and cannot pass
them  on  to  other  members  of  the  Community. At  the  end  of  the  day,  people  will  behave  in  a
responsible manner only if they take responsibility for their own actions.  Or, to put it slightly more
bluntly: each member state must “pay its own way".
All this is ultimately intended to protect the single monetary policy from coming under pressure to
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflate away excessive levels of government debt through monetisation. The founding fathers of
the monetary union were well aware that there would be a loud cry for monetary policy action if
the soundness of public finances should be at risk at any time.
The debt crisis in the euro area showed us that the Maastricht framework was unable to prevent
sovereign  debt  crises  and  had  also  failed  to  effectively  counteract  other  unsound  economic
developments  such  as  a  severe  loss  of  international  competitiveness  and  excessive  current
account deficits.
During the crisis, as you are well aware, we then set up the much-publicised European rescue
packages during the crisis and took other measures – including through the Eurosystem – in
order to prevent the crisis from escalating. But at the same time, these measures undermined
the principle of individual national responsibility.
Although the “no bail-out” rule still applies, in reality, elements of communitised liability have been
gaining ground. This upset the balance between actions and accountability because, naturally,
the member states were not willing to hand over control.
And  there  are  calls  for  greater  joint  liability  in  the  euro  area,  say,  in  the  form  of  a  European
deposit  insurance  scheme  or  a  European  unemployment  insurance  fund,  to  name  but  two
examples.
Since member states are evidently still as reluctant to cede sovereignty rights to the European
level  as  they  were  25  years  ago,  I  think  that  increasing  the  communitisation  of  liability  is  the
wrong route to take. And that is why I am sceptical about calls to build a second wing, so to
speak, on the basis of such initiatives.
In a recent article for the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung newspaper (FAZ), Horst Seehofer, the
Bavarian state premier wrote, “Europe is a treaty-based community; you can’t always get what
you wish". Looking at the proposals for the future development of the euro area, however, it is
sometimes possible to get exactly the impression that you can.
We need to restore the balance between actions and accountability. And, to my mind, the only
way we can do this is by strengthening individual national responsibility and the decentralised
framework.
"United  in  diversity”  has  been  Europe’s  motto  since  2000,  highlighting  the  fact  that  European
integration and regional diversity do not have to be a contradiction in terms. And we must not
forget that the principle of subsidiarity, which is likewise enshrined in the treaties, also stipulates
that  tasks  should  be  transferred  to  the  European  level  only  if  they  cannot  be  performed
adequately when responsibility lies at the national or regional level.
Strengthening individual national responsibility and the decentralised framework implies restoring
the credibility of the “no bail-out” clause. That was exactly what was lacking in the run-up to the
crisis. The example of Switzerland shows that a credible no bail-out regime for government debt
is fundamentally possible. 
Of  course,  the  no  bail-out  principle  can  only  function  if  it  is  possible,  in  extreme  cases,  to
restructure  sovereign  debt  without  jeopardising  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The
European rescue measures were motivated not least by the fact that the consequences of a
disorderly sovereign insolvency were unpredictable.
The fear of a further escalation of the financial crisis led to European taxpayers’ money being
used as the first line of defence. That wasn’t really fair, as it contravened the principle that it is,
first  and  foremost,  shareholders  and  investors  who  must  bear  the  consequences  of  their
decisions. And it goes at least some way to explaining the increasingly critical attitude of some
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
members of the public towards our economic and financial system.
This is why, a number of years ago, the Bundesbank proposed the automatic extension of bond
maturities where governments are facing funding difficulties.
So far, a large part of the funds available to the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) rescue fund
has been used to buy out the holders of expiring government bonds. This means that the original
creditors are off the hook and European taxpayers are exposed to risk instead. Our proposal of
extending  the  maturity  of  existing  bonds  by  three  years,  say,  when  a  government  applies
for ESM assistance, would keep the burden of responsibility on the original creditors. They could
be made jointly liable if debt restructuring were to take place at a later date.
Incidentally, this would reinforce the disciplining function of the capital markets in response to
unsound public finances and would therefore have a preventive effect. The greater the risk of an
insolvency, the higher the premium has to be that potential creditors demand as compensation
for providing further funding.
But  it  would  be  irresponsible  to  rely  solely  on  the  markets  to  impose  fiscal  discipline.  This  is
something the founders of monetary union also realised, which is why the Stability and Growth
Pact also contains rules on debt. But what use are rules when they are interpreted so freely that
almost any excuse is accepted for exceeding the deficit limits?
In  response  to  the  European  Commission’s  recent  appeal  to  the  member  states  for  a  more
expansionary fiscal policy, the Eurogroup President Jeroen Dijsselbloem recently stressed that,
in  the  event  of  a  conflict  of  interest  between  fiscal  expansion  and  excessive  deficits,  the
Commission has to adhere to the pact.
In a sense, the European Commission’s take on the rules brings to mind that famous line from
Goethe’s Faust: “Two souls, alas! are dwelling in my breast". One soul, as it were, is there to
guard the treaties, while the other sees itself as a political institution which repeatedly turns not
just one blind eye, but sometimes two.
This conflict of aims can only really be resolved if responsibility for monitoring compliance with
the fiscal rules is transferred to an independent agency – a proposal that has the backing of both
the Bundesbank and Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble.
Ladies and gentlemen
As I said earlier, the only way the no bail-out principle can work at all is if the financial system
really is able to cope with debt restructuring. This means ensuring that banks, in particular, have
enough  equity  capital  to  be  able  to  sustain  losses  from  a  potential  debt  restructuring  without
jeopardising their own solvency.
In  international  bodies,  therefore,  we  are  arguing  for  risk-appropriate  capital  backing  of
government bonds and a cap on large exposures for lending to public debtors.
Incidentally, sovereign nations are not the only public debtors. Federal states and local authorities
also borrow money, and in the case of local authorities it is often municipal banks that provide the
money, thereby building up cluster risks.
The  premise  that  actions  and  accountability  must  go  hand  in  hand  applies  equally  at  local
government level. In Germany, too, the federal states are not technically liable for debts incurred
by their local authorities; however, they do exert substantial influence through federal supervision
and through the municipal revenue-sharing scheme. However, these state-level instruments are
not always used in a targeted, stability-oriented way. Nor is there an Insolvency Code for local
authorities.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Lenders evidently assume that the respective federal state will cover the debts of an insolvent
municipality.  This  explains  why  local  authorities  can  apparently  finance  themselves  even  in  a
precarious financial situation in the form of excess balance sheet debt, without incurring large
risk premiums.
Overall, there are clearly insufficient incentives for municipalities to avoid excessive debt. This is
shown  not  least  by  the  fact  that  cash  advances  are  often  at  high  levels  and  sometimes  still
increasing. While hardly any cash advances were recorded in the early 1990s, their level has
since risen sharply and currently stands at over €50 billion, although I should add that Bavarian
municipalities make scarcely any contribution to this.
The steep rise in cash advances has meant that some federal states have had to set up local
government debt relief and consolidation programmes.
In my opinion, in order to effectively avert the danger of derailing local authority finances, it would
be  worth  thinking  about  setting  municipal  cash  advances,  as  a  matter  of  policy,  against  the
scope of the respective federal state as part of the debt brake, and stipulating that, from now on,
cash  advances  can  only  be  taken  from  a  federal  state.  We  made  a  recommendation  to  that
1
effect in our October Monthly Report.
Ladies and gentlemen
Fiscal solidarity is a key prerequisite for a stable currency and a stable monetary union. And this
prerequisite is a responsibility that lies with the member states and their regions.
Competitiveness and economic prosperity of the member states are also vital for stability, and
again, it is primarily at the national level that the course is set for this. I emphasise this because it
presents each member state with its own special challenges. And this applies not only to the
countries in crisis, but also to supposed paragons of virtue such as Germany.
At all events, the long-term outlook for growth in Germany is not rosy enough to give us cause for
complacency. Germany is facing major challenges. Most notable among these is demographic
change,  but  globalisation,  digitalisation,  the  shift  to  renewable  sources  of  energy,  and  the
integration of refugees into the labour market should also be mentioned.
This makes it all the more important to set the right economic and socio-political course in order
to boost economic momentum and ensure the sustainability of public finances. And let me add
that not all the decisions made in the past few years fulfilled this requirement.
4  Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
As the Swiss musicologist Peter Benary once said – and this surely applies to speeches as well
– “Every ending is comforting; only infinity is comfortless.” I would like, therefore, to conclude my
remarks.
In the article for the Frankfurter Allgemeine that I mentioned earlier, Horst Seehofer wrote: “When
words of warning come from Bavaria, they are spoken out of loyalty and concern for Europe and
not out of hostility.” I would like to adopt this maxim – replacing “Bavaria” with “the Bundesbank",
of course.
The Bundesbank is an integral part of the Eurosystem. We are committed to the European idea
and  see  the  advantages  of  a  single  currency.  However,  if  we  want  to  preserve  the  monetary
union as a union of stability, we must not plot our course in the wrong direction.
In  this  context,  any  critical  comments  about  the  communitisation  of  liability  risks  without  a
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
corresponding  transfer  of  rights  of  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  are  not  directed  against
Europe. Rather, they express the concern that joint liability without joint control could cause long-
term harm to the European idea.
With this in mind, I thank you warmly once again for awarding me the Bavarian Europe Medal.
I read, by the way, that during its more than 200-year history, the Prinz-Carl Palace has been
redesigned, rededicated and rebuilt a number of times, probably putting the building under some
strain.
Like the palace, the monetary union is no longer in its original state. It is currently going through a
transition period, except that in this case, the architects do not know exactly what it will look like
in the future.
For me, it is not so important whether there will be annexes, structural alterations or even partial
demolitions; nor are the aesthetics of primary importance. Rather, it is crucial that the outcome is
internally  coherent,  and  that  means,  above  all,  that  actions  and  accountability  are  closely
interlinked.
Thank you very much.
1
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2016),  Local  government  finances:  Development  and  selected  aspects,  October
Monthly Report, pp 13-36.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
