Benoît Cœuré: Greece - progress achieved and challenges ahead
Keynote speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the American-Hellenic Chamber of Commerce conference on "Greece and the global
disruptive environment: A look into the future", Athens, 28 November 2016.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you for inviting me to this conference.
 I am grateful for this opportunity to share with you the ECB’s perspective on the third economic
adjustment programme for Greece.
This  conference  aims  to  be  “a  look  into  the  future”,  and  I  will  indeed  try  to  provide  that  by
considering  the  challenges  and  prospects  ahead.  Before  doing  so,  let  me  briefly  recall  the
circumstances  in  which  the  third  European  Stability  Mechanism  programme  for  Greece  was
negotiated, as this remains key to understanding where we are now. Against this backdrop, I will
review the progress made in the third programme and discuss the way forward.
I  will  mainly  focus  on  financial  issues,  as  I  believe  this  is  where  the  ECB’s  perspective  is  of
particular relevance.
Challenges for Greece at the start of the third programme
What  were  the  challenges  facing  Greece  in  summer  2015  when  the  programme  was
negotiated?
After a severe and long recession, which started back in 2009, the long-awaited rebound of the
Greek economy finally got under way in the second half of 2014. But renewed uncertainty and the
lack  of  any  prospect  of  continued  financial  assistance  led  to  a  worsening  of  the  economic
environment and of sovereign creditworthiness in early 2015. This in turn had a severe impact on
an already severely weakened financial sector.
Between December 2014 and June 2015, deposit outflows amounted to more than a quarter of
total deposits. Lack of adherence to the second programme barred the ECB, under its rules,
from waiving its minimum credit requirements and accepting Greek government-linked securities
as  collateral  in  its  monetary  policy  operations.  Nevertheless,  the  Eurosystem  provided  the
liquidity  necessary  for  the  Greek  economy  to  function,  with  adequate  safeguards  against
monetary financing of the government. As a result, central bank funding rose from €56 billion to
over €125 billion, more than two-thirds of Greece’s gross domestic product.
Amid mounting uncertainty, bank holidays and capital controls were introduced in late June 2015,
which eased immediate liquidity pressures in the banking sector. In August 2015 an agreement
was reached on a third programme. One of the immediate priorities at that time was to regain
depositor and market confidence in the Greek banking system.
To  this  end,  ECB  Banking  Supervision  conducted  a  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  four
significant  Greek  banks  between August  and  October  2015.  It  was  followed  by  a  successful
recapitalisation exercise. The identified capital shortfall of the banks, which amounted to €14.4
billion, was largely covered by private funds, while reliance on public funds was limited to €4.5
billion.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Measuring progress so far
The conclusion of the programme negotiations and the successful recapitalisation of the banking
system led to a stabilisation of economic conditions in the second half of 2015. Benefiting from
the  macroeconomic  stabilisation,  the  situation  in  the  Greek  banking  sector  also  gradually
improved  during  the  first  year  of  the  programme,  although  it  is  far  from  having  regained  the
ground lost in the first half of 2015.
Since  the  bank  recapitalisation  in  late  2015,  the  focus  has  been  on  resolving  non-performing
loans (NPLs) and on improving bank governance. The non-performing exposure (NPE) ratio of
Greek banks is very high – 49% in June 2016. Reducing it is a key precondition for gradually
restoring  an  adequate  and  efficient  supply  of  credit  to  the  Greek  economy,  and  for  achieving
sustained growth.
Some important legislative reforms in this direction have already been passed. For instance, the
household  insolvency  law  was  amended  to  ensure  that  banks  can  take  legal  steps  against
strategic defaulters and debtors make payments in line with their ability to pay. The authorities
also  adopted  legislation  that  liberalises  NPL  servicing  for  all  loan  categories,  and  provided  a
framework  for  the  sale  of  loans.  In  addition,  banks  have  set  up  comprehensive  strategies,
including  detailed  operational  measures  and  actions.  The  supervisory  arm  of  the  ECB  in
cooperation  with  the  Bank  of  Greece  recently  agreed  with  banks  on  operational  and  financial
targets to significantly reduce their NPE stocks over the coming years.
These policy actions and the gradual macroeconomic stabilisation have already started to work.
And the liquidity position of Greek banks has improved, albeit at a slow pace.
The way forward
The  important  challenges  Greece  still  faces  today  can  only  be  addressed  by  a  steady
implementation of the agreed policies and strong political support from all stakeholders.
The reshaping of banks’ governance structures in compliance with new requirements is one key
element. Considerable progress has been made this year in the review and reconstitution of the
boards of directors of Greek banks. This process needs to be finalised in the near future. The
banks will face difficult and complex decisions, particularly when resolving the large stock of non-
performing  loans.  Thus,  bank  boards  have  to  have  strong  and  independent  directors  with  a
robust  track  record  who  can  ensure  arm’s  length  decisions  in  the  best  interests  of  their
stakeholders and of the Greek economy.
Bank management needs to be free of political interference and vested interests. With this aim in
mind,  we  encourage  the  Hellenic  Financial  Stability  Fund  to  make  every  reasonable  effort  to
finalise the review and reconstitution process within the next few weeks.
On  financial  sector  policy,  there  are  other  important  elements  of  the  ongoing  second  review
which seek to further reduce structural impediments to swift and effective NPL resolution. Let me
highlight the reform of the out-of-court workout framework, with its main goal being to provide
sufficient incentives for creditors and debtors to agree on mutually beneficial debt restructuring
arrangements. The framework is intended for viable but distressed firms whose profitability has
been severely hit by the prolonged economic crisis. To be effective, it needs to take into account
the  fact  that  Greek  firms  have  both  significant  non-performing  loans  vis-à-vis  banks  and
significant  arrears  to  the  state.  Let  me  add  that  as  of  end-2015  total  arrears  to  the  state  in
respect of taxes and social security contributions were around €110 billion, of which about €79
billion was due from corporations, small and medium-sized enterprises as well as professionals
– the categories eligible for out-of-court frameworks. The stock of non-performing exposures in
Greek banks relative to these same categories amounted to another €55 billion.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Apart from developing effective out-of-court frameworks, the Greek authorities also need to fully
implement  the  agreed  measures  to  strengthen  the  judicial  system,  thereby  substantially
shortening legal proceedings and enhancing the competence of the courts. These requirements
are  not  specific  to  Greece;  experience  has  shown  that  NPL  resolution  requires  strong  legal
frameworks throughout the euro area. In any case, creditors in Greece have to wait longer to
obtain a court ruling after an insolvency than in any other EU country except the Slovak Republic.
It takes on average about three and a half years, compared with less than six months in Ireland,
the EU’s best performer.
Swift progress on NPL resolution will also help banks to support the economic recovery through
credit provision, eventually ending the prolonged period of negative credit growth. So far, credit
developments remain subdued, with credit from monetary financial institutions to the domestic
non-financial sector continuing its downward trend that started in early 2011.
The  success  of  the  adjustment  programme,  however,  ultimately  rests  on  its  capacity  to  re-
establish conditions for a path of economic growth that is sustained and sustainable over time.
The  success  of  the  out-of-court  workouts  will  provide  an  input  to  support  the  recovery  by
contributing  to  restore  the  viability  of  non-financial  corporations.  Bear  in  mind  that  the
indebtedness of Greek non-financial corporations, when measured by debt-to-GDP ratio, rose
from  about  52%  to  approximately  64%  between  end-2008  and  end-2015.  Non-residential
investment by the private sector declined by about 50% in the same period.
In this respect, financial sector policy is only one element, but a crucial one, of a much broader
strategy. The strategy is based on decisive action to strengthen competitiveness and investment,
and to restore fiscal sustainability.
Boosting competitiveness and attracting investment are two formidable challenges for the Greek
economy.  A  lot  has  been  done  to  improve  competitiveness  and  the  gains  should  not  be
unwound. More needs to be done, however, to restore the conditions for a pick-up in investment,
both domestic and from abroad. A business environment more conducive to growth needs to be
established through further structural and product market reforms and a full implementation of
the privatisation programme.
All  these  efforts  need  to  go  hand  in  hand  with  policies  to  alleviate  the  costs  for  the  most
vulnerable members of society and to help the economy escape the trap of high and long-term
unemployment and increased inequality. The improved targeting and tailoring of the active labour
market policy framework and the rollover of the guaranteed minimum income scheme go exactly
in this direction.
Regarding fiscal sustainability, all stakeholders in the Greek adjustment programme realise that
there  are  serious  concerns  about  the  sustainability  of  Greek  public  debt. As  you  are  all  well
aware, a discussion is currently ongoing in the Eurogroup on the short-term, medium-term and
long-term measures needed to secure the sustainability of Greek debt. We are looking forward to
a solution that can reassure markets, restore confidence in the sustainability of public debt in an
uncertain macroeconomic environment allow the full involvement of the IMF in the programme –
which  would  enhance  the  programme’s  credibility  –  and  ultimately  restore  market  access  for
Greece before the programme ends in July 2018, while not undermining the reform effort.
As  regards  the  potential  inclusion  of  Greek  bonds  in  the  Public  Sector  Purchase  Programme
(PSPP), a topic much debated by politicians and the media in Greece in recent weeks, let me be
clear that the Governing Council of the ECB takes decisions on the PSPP in full independence.
Programme  developments  and,  in  particular,  the  debt  sustainability  assessment  of  the
institutions  are  an  important  input,  but  they  are  not  the  only  ones.  The  Governing  Council  will
base its assessments also on internal analysis and will take into account other risk management
considerations before making its final decision.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
To  bring  the  programme  to  a  successful  conclusion  and  to  restore  market  access  for  the
sovereign on a lasting basis, it is above all essential that the Greek authorities continue to show a
serious  commitment  to  the  goals  and  measures  taken  under  the  programme.  Only  if  this
happens  can  all  stakeholders  be  confident  that  reforms  will  not  be  reversed  and  in  fact  be
strengthened  after  the  programme,  therefore  further  supporting  the  potential  for  growth  of  the
Greek economy.
Conclusions
Let me conclude. I have outlined the progress achieved so far and mapped out the challenges
ahead  for  the  third  Greek  adjustment  programme.  In  the  summer  of  2015,  European  leaders
agreed on a series of measures that will secure Greece’s future in the euro. If everyone plays
their part, I am firmly convinced that, by the end, Greece will be better able to reap the benefits of
Economic and Monetary Union – a Union of 340 million people sharing the same currency – and
its economy will be stronger and more resilient.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
