Yannis  Stournaras:  Open  and  orderly  capital  movements  -  does
global co-operation matter?
Speech by Mr Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the OECD High-level policy
seminar on "Open and orderly capital movements: does global co-operation matter?", Paris, 25
October 2016.
 Thank you for inviting me to participate in this seminar and to share some thoughts on capital
movements with you. The issue of open and orderly capital movements is particularly topical and
one  for  which  an  exchange  of  views  among  policy  makers  across  various  economies  is
essential.  Discussion,  communication  and  debate  are,  after  all,  the  first  steps  towards
multilateral co-operation. 
It appears to me that the crisis has placed us at a crossroads with regard  to  many  areas  of
policy-making. Confronted with unprecedented circumstances, we were forced to reassess our
policy frameworks in order to better guard our economies against risks. I believe that, for the
most part, we have managed to do so collectively and in a spirit of multilateral co-operation, a
spirit that, I would suggest, is necessary in our globalised world. 
Policies with regard to capital movements fall into this category. We are called upon to decide
how to find ways to harness the benefits from global capital flows, so as to avoid slipping back
into  protectionism  and  financial  retrenchment,  with  potentially  detrimental  effects  on  global
recovery. 
Benefits and risks of financial openness 
The benefits of free capital movements are well-known: 
efficient global allocation of resources; 
reduced cost of capital in capital-scarce countries; 
greater and more efficient investment; 
normalisation of consumption fluctuations in response to temporary shocks; 
1
international risk-sharing ; 
support for the transfer of technology and managerial knowhow; 
promotion  of  financial  development  and  sound  macroeconomic  policies  in  recipient
2
countries . 
Nevertheless,  the  extent  to  which  countries  can  realise  these  benefits  presupposes  certain
3
conditions : 
a developed financial system; 
sound institutions; 
prudent macroeconomic policies and sufficient macroprudential supervision;
Additionally, the benefits will depend on the level and composition of capital flows. 
Absence of these conditions raises the risks associated with capital flow liberalisation, especially
4
in the event of a negative shock, creating significant challenges for policy makers . 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Managing capital flows 
In the face of risks, countries have at their disposal a range of policy tools for managing capital
flows:  exchange  rate  flexibility,  foreign  reserves  accumulation,  monetary  policy  action,
5
macroprudential measures and, in some instances, even capital flow management measures . 
These  policies  also  come  with  their  challenges  and  can  have  multilateral  spillover  effects  on
global economic and financial stability . Policy co-operation is thus an important complementary
tool for capital flow management. Multilateral co-operation can mitigate the cross-border effects
of capital flows management measures and can provide economies with a useful framework for
gradual capital flow liberalisation in line with their financial and institutional development. 
6
It is precisely in this way that the OECD Code of Liberalisation of Capital Movements makes its
contribution.  Through  the  Code,  countries  are  provided  guidance  on  the  sequencing  of
liberalisation and the appropriateness of policy response to shocks. By fostering transparency,
dialogue  and  accountability,  adherence  to  the  Code  ensures  non-discriminatory  treatment  of
countries,  provides  reassurance  to  markets  as  to  the  scope  and  duration  of  measures  and
catalyses policy support for reforms and adjustments. 
Overall, the ever more interconnected international environment makes policy co-operation more
necessary. To illustrate this point, I would like to draw on two examples: First, can coordination
help moderate volatility in response to specific shocks, especially those emanating from global
players? Second, can it prevent the emergence of global imbalances? 
Diverging monetary policies 
One pertinent example of the need for policy co-operation to avert large and volatile capital flows
is in dealing with the effect of divergent monetary policies on global financial markets. 
It  is  broadly  agreed  that  the  impact  of  US  monetary  policy  can  have  global  repercussions,
influencing exchange rates, risk  premia  and  asset  prices  and  causing  valuation  effects  of  US
dollar-denominated liabilities. Thus, changes of stance can be associated with significant capital
flows  especially  to/from  emerging  market  economies.  The  taper  tantrum  that  affected  global
7
financial markets in 2013 is one example . 
Over the near future, it is widely expected that the US interest rate will be gradually raised, while
those in the euro area and other advanced economies remain low. This divergence is likely to
impact on global capital flows. Uncertainty about the pace is judged to be a source of volatility in
financial markets. Thus, informal discussions between policy makers, if not closer co-operation,
along with clear and coordinated communication and execution of policies, can be a useful tool
for dampening volatility and preventing undue financial market turbulence. 
Euro area imbalances 
My second example which supports the case for greater co-operation is the lessons that emerge
from the build-up of structural imbalances in the euro area before the crisis. 
A  corollary  of  monetary  integration  is  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk,  which  reduces
transaction costs and increases the elasticity of substitution between financial assets issued by
member states of the monetary union. In the euro area, financial linkages were greatly facilitated
by the introduction of the single currency. 
A  distinct  feature  of  these  linkages  was  the  build-up  of  current  account  imbalances.  Deficits
accumulated in the periphery were mirrored by a build-up of surpluses in core countries. The
financial account counterpart involved significant capital flows from the core to the periphery, with
its counterpart in the accumulation of debt – whether public or private. These flows were directed
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
mainly  to  non-tradable  sectors  (public  consumption  and  residential  investment).  The  crisis
brought with it a “sudden stop” to these capital flows, resulting in sharp adjustment, largely in
8
deficit countries . 
Subsequently, much has been done to address what we now recognise as deficiencies in the
design  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  –  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and
subsequently  the  European  Stability  Mechanism;  the  banking  union  and  its  components.  But
more  importantly  for  imbalances,  the  surveillance  framework  of  EU  Member  States  has  been
strengthened through new rules and procedures, among them, the Macroeconomic Imbalances
Procedure. In short, co-operation is important also at the regional level. These changes are also
supporting the reform process in Greece. 
Conclusions 
The  course  and  magnitude  of  global  financial  flows  and  our  own  perceptions  of  financial
openness are being continually reshaped in the 21st century. A period of relative abundance was
rapidly brought to a halt with the international financial crisis of 2008. Our experience with free
capital flows can help us ensure that in the future we harness their benefits and multilateral co-
operation is key to achieving that. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
(1)  See  Obstfeld,  Maurice.  Risk-taking,  global  diversification,  and  growth.  No.  w4093.  National  Bureau  of
Economic  Research,  1992,  Van  Wincoop,  Eric.  “How  big  are  potential  welfare  gains  from  international
risksharing?.”  Journal  of  International  Economics  47,  no.  1  (1999):  109–135  and  Agénor,  Pierre Richard.
“Benefits and costs of international financial integration: theory and facts.” The World Economy 26, no. 8 (2003):
1089–1118. 
(2) See Kose, M. Ayhan, Eswar S. Prasad, and Ashley D. Taylor. “Thresholds in the process of international
financial integration.” Journal of International Money and Finance 30, no. 1 (2011): 147–179. 
(3)  See  for  instance,  Kose,  M.  Ayhan,  Eswar  Prasad,  Kenneth  Rogoff,  and  Shang-Jin  Wei.  “Financial
globalization: A reappraisal.” IMF Staff Papers 56, no. 1 (2009): 8-62 and Prasad, Eswar S., and Raghuram G.
Rajan. “A pragmatic approach to capital account liberalization.” The Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, no. 3
(2008): 149–172. 
(4) See Rogoff, Mr Kenneth, Mr Eswar Prasad, Mr M. Ayhan Kose, and Shang-Jin Wei. Effects on financial
globalization on developing countries: Some empirical evidence. No. 220. International Monetary Fund, 2004. 
(5) Ostry, Jonathan D. “Managing Capital Flows: What Tools to Use?.” Asian Development Review 29, no. 1
(2012): 82. 
(6)  See  Beck,  R.,  Beirne,  J.,  Paternò,  F.,  Peeters,  J.,  Ramos-Tallada,  J.,  Rebillard,  C.,  Reinhardt,  D.,
Weissenseel, L. and Wörz, J., 2015. The side effects of national financial sector policies: framing the debate on
financial protectionism. ECB Occasional Paper 166. 
(7) See Fratzscher Marcel, Marco Lo Duca and Rolad Straub. “A global monetary tsunami? On the spillovers of
US quantitative easing”. CEPR Discussion paper No 9195, October 2012, Miranda-Agrippino, Silvia, and Hélène
Rey. World asset markets and the global financial cycle. No. w21722. National Bureau of Economic Research,
2015 and Lim, Jamus Jerome, Sanket Mohapatra, and Marc Stocker. “Tinker, Taper, QE, Bye? The effect of
quantitative easing on financial flows to developing countries.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
6820 (2014). 
(8)  See  Lane,  Philip  R.  “Capital  Flows  in  the  Euro Area.”  Economic  papers  497  (2013):  1-54  and  Hobza,
Alexandr, and Stefan Zeugner. “The ‘imbalanced balance’ and its unravelling: current accounts and bilateral
financial flows in the euro area.” European Economy, Economic papers 520 (2014): 1-32.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
