Armando M Tetangco, Jr: Central banking and symphonies
Speech by Mr Armando M Tetangco, Jr, Former Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas 
(BSP,  the  central bank  of the  Philippines),  at the  24th  Anniversary  Program  of the  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 3 July 2017.
 Happy anniversary Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!
Ladies and gentlemen, we celebrate the 24th year of the BSP on a high note.
Just last month, the Singapore-based publication The Asian Banker named the Bangko Sentral
ng  Pilipinas  as  the  Best  Macroeconomic  Regulator  in  Asia-Pacific.  The  Asian  Banker  also
presented the BSP Governor with a “Lifetime Leadership Achievement Award”, citing the central
bank’s contributions to the Philippine financial system and the economy under his watch.
Last May, a report published by the international credit rating agency S&P said our “central bank
has  a  record  of  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  responding  appropriately  to
changing economic circumstances.”  S&P added that our “ability to maintain macroeconomic
and price stability through an economic cycle has been tested, including a period of exogenous
shocks.”
And  last  February,  the  Hong  Kong-based  publication  FinanceAsia  named  the  BSP  Governor
“Outstanding Achievement Awardee” for excellent stewardship of the BSP, managing the difficult
task of keeping inflation under control at the same time as giving the country room to grow and
fulfill its potential.  FinanceAsia cited our contributions to Philippine economic development and to
the improvement of central banking standards in the region.
Indeed fellow BSPers, our monetary and banking policies have continued to provide the stability
needed by our economy to overcome the humps and bumps, and the twists and turns in the
global landscape, including the Global Financial Crisis and its lingering effects on economies and
central banks.  Here in the Philippines, we did not only survive the GFC, we continue to thrive.    
Ladies and gentlemen of the BSP, we accomplished this together.  BSPers, past and present,
lahat may kontribusyon!  As I keep saying, the BSP is not a one-man band. The individual and the
institutional awards we receive belong to ALL BSPers across the country – mula Luzon, Visayas
at Mindanao! Thank you and congratulations BSPers!
The way I see it, the role of a central bank governor has a lot in common with that of a musical
conductor, who leads people from different disciplines to create beautiful harmonies that add up
to masterful symphonies.
Of  course,  there  were  times  we  heard  some  discordant  notes.  But  by  and  large,  we  played
harmonious and beautiful music together, so to speak, that resulted in benefits for our people!
Let me cite some highlights of our performance:
We achieved low and stable inflation conducive to sustained economic growth by adopting
data-driven and forward looking policies;
We have a sound, stable and liquid banking system  that is well-capitalized and supports the
financing needs of our economy particularly the productive sectors;
We operate a safe and reliable payments system that minimizes possible systemic risks
and inspires confidence in our financial system;
We have nurtured a strong external position that provides buffers to potential shocks to the
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy and the financial system; and
We  are  implementing  a  comprehensive  agenda  for  financial  inclusion  to  ensure  inclusive
growth that improves the quality of life of Filipinos.
Given  these  positive  outcomes,  how  do  these  play  out  and  benefit  our  economy  and  our
people?  
The first and most notable positive change is the transformation of the Philippine economy —
from being described as the sick man of Asia, we have moved up as a rising tiger economy
whose growth is among the fastest in the region.
In  cooperation  with  other  institutions,  we  have  achieved  the  ideal  convergence  of  low  inflation
amid high economic growth.  Definitely, the size of the economy has been expanding  — from an
average GDP growth of 4.9 percent from 2005 to 2010, growth went up to an average of 6.1 per
cent in 2011 to 2016 and reached 6.4 percent in the first quarter of 2017. On the other hand,
inflation averaged 5.2% in my first six years as Governor (from 2005 to 2010) and dropped to
3.0% in my second term (2011 to 2016). From January to May this year, inflation has remained
stable and  averaged 3.1%.    
The  second  positive  outcome  of  our  policies  is  the  strengthening  of  our  domestic  banks,
particularly in terms of size, capitalization and reach. The banking system has tripled in size over
the  past  decade,  with  year-on-year  growth  of  12.6  percent.  As  of  end-April  2017,  the  total
resources of the banking system reached   P14 trillion, the highest on record. Parallel to this,
banks’ overall capitalization is at levels above both the national requirement and the international
BIS standard. As the main provider of domestic credit, the Philippine banking system is seen by
international debt watchers as a source of sovereign strength.
The third benefit is the continued increase in the volume and value of PhilPASS transactions —
from  its  modest  start  in  2002  with  5,685  transactions,  first  quarter  2017  transactions  alone
already hit 419,455 while value of transactions  shot up from P2.4 trillion in 2002 to P78.7 trillion
in the first quarter 2017. Indeed, confidence in the BSP’s PhilPass supports the continued growth
and development of our financial system.  
The fourth improvement is the sustained build-up of the country’s foreign exchange reserves—
from a GIR level of $18.5 billion enough to cover about 4.6 months’ worth of imports of goods and
services in 2005, our import cover had moved up to about 9 months on a GIR of $82.2 billion  as
of end May 2017. At the same time, the country’s debt management program saw external debt-
to-GDP improve by more than half — from 59.7 percent of GDP in 2005 to 24.0 percent as of
end-March 2017.
The fifth benefit is the country’s elevation to investment grade beginning 2013. Major international
credit rating agencies (i.e., Moody’s, Fitch, and S&P) uniformly acknowledge the BSP as one of
the institutional pillars that generates positive marks for the country.   
Ladies and gentlemen, the BSP has been able to accomplish all these because, as an institution,
the  BSP  is  ready.  It  is  nimble  enough  to  be  able  to  adapt  to  the  changes  in  its  operating
environment. We have built capacity among our people, streamlined processes, leveraged off
technology  as  appropriate,  and  inculcated  an  overall  sense  of  good  governance  and
accountability in all that we do.
In  recent  years,  we  have  also  institutionalized  the  new  norm  of  financial  stability  in  our
organization as well as  in policy  coordination and cooperation with other financial regulators.
This new mindset has allowed us to put on a more holistic lens in the conduct of surveillance and
the crafting of policy.
So far, so good. Looking ahead, I see the BSP successfully pursuing its mandate to help provide
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
stability and promote sustained growth of our economy through monetary and banking policies.
 Ladies and gentlemen. We thank President Rodrigo Roa Duterte for having chosen the path of
stability and continuity by appointing veteran central banker Nestor Espenilla, Jr. as our new BSP
Governor. With Gov Nesting’s deep knowledge of the BSP — its history, mandate, organization,
and corporate culture – he can certainly hit the ground running. I have worked closely with him
and I can tell you that Gov Nesting is a  top-notch central banker and a man of integrity, who has
what it takes to excel as the BSP’s new leader.
Let us also welcome the three appointees of the President who will join the Monetary Board for a
term of six-years  each — former trade secretary and veteran banker Peter Favila who returns to
the MB; former economic planning secretary and eminent economist Dr. Phillip Medalla who was
reinstated  for  another  term        at  the  Board;  and  veteran  banker  and  corporate  CEO   Antonio
Abacan. They complete the seven-man MB with Finance Secretary Sonny Dominguez; former
general counsel and deputy governor of the BSP Juan de Zuniga, Jr.; veteran banker and former
PDIC Head Val Araneta; and Monetary Board Chairman and BSP Governor Nestor Espenilla, Jr.  
I am very pleased to see therefore that we have with us distinguished guests who can provide
crucial support and cooperation to move the BSP’s agenda forward under Gov Nesting’s watch.
With  us  this  morning  are  former  Central  Bank  governors  and  colleagues,  fellow  workers  in
government,  representatives  from  the  banking  sector,  the  business  community,  multilateral
agencies, our friends from the media and the members of our families. Indeed, it is fitting that we
have  multi-sectoral  representations  today  as  BSP’s  policies  ultimately  affect  all  Filipinos,  our
economy and our country.  
I hope therefore that Gov Nesting and all the Members of the Monetary Board will receive all the
support they need to craft, formulate, innovate and implement effective policies and programs to
serve the best interest of our people, our economy and our country.      
Finally, I  want to thank all of you for the unstinting support  you have given me during my 43-
years  of  service  as  a  central  banker,  the  last  12-years  of  which  was  as  Chairman  of  the
Monetary Board and Governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. In particular, I am  privileged
and honored to have worked shoulder to shoulder with members of TEAM BSP—members of
the Monetary Board, Management, officers and staff across the country. Your dedication to the
pursuit of the BSP’s mandate runs deep and strong, knowing that what is at stake could affect
the quality of life of our people and our future as a nation. You are true public servants. Salamat
sa inyo!
On behalf of my family – my wife Elma, my daughters Eula and Mia, my son Patrick and his wife
Miko together with my unica apo Zara, my brothers and sisters—  I thank you all. We are grateful
that in sickness and in health, you were always there for me giving support, even singing and
dancing to cheer us on.
Maraming, maraming salamat sa inyo!
Today, as I leave the BSP as citizen Say, I will not say goodbye. Instead, I will say … until we
meet again.
Mabuhay si Governor Nesting at ang Monetary Board! Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas!
Mabuhay ang ating Inang Bayan! Mabuhay po tayong lahat! 
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
