Dimitar  Radev:  Recent  achievements 
banking sector issues
Address  by  Mr  Dimitar  Radev,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  at  a  forum  of  the
Association of Banks in Bulgaria on the occasion of the 25th anniversary of its foundation, Sofia,
24 May 2017.
in  resolving  Bulgaria's
Dear colleagues,
 First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  you  on  the  occasion  of  the  25   anniversary  of  your
Association. During this, sometimes turbulent, period the Association proved itself not only as a
branch organization supporting its members in their banking business, but also as a reliable and
reputable partner to public authorities and institutions, including BNB.
th
We  highly  appreciate  this  role.  It  was  also  demonstrated  in  the  best  of  ways  in  the
implementation  of  the  measures  in  the  banking  sector  after  the  turmoil  in  2014.  In  the  short
period  after  it  we  went  together  a  long  way.  As  a  central  bank,  we  focused  on  improving
supervision  and  building  a  reliable  institutional  framework  for  resolving  banking  sector  issues.
Undoubtedly, however, our most important joint effort was the asset quality review and the stress
test conducted last year. An exercise unprecedented in its scale that was a real challenge and a
test not only for the central bank, but for our banking system as a whole.
Only two days ago, our achievements in the banking sector were a subject of an objective and
independent discussion. This happened at the consideration and approval of our financial system
assessment  at  the  highest  possible  professional  forum  for  such  discussions  –  the  Executive
Board of the IMF. The conclusions from this discussion are categorical. Progress is achieved in
the implementation of all measures we launched in 2015. Supervision is in a better condition. As
a result of the asset quality assessment we have a clearer picture and high quality data of bank
impairment practices and collateral valuations. Our banking sector is generally stable and with
high capital adequacy and liquidity.
Certainly,  those  things  are  well  known  in  the  banking  sector.  The  discussion  two  days  ago
provided a platform so things can be made visible for those outside the banking sector as well. I
must immediately stress that the discussion reached yet another important conclusion, which
we are well – perhaps even better – aware of than external observers, namely, that we need to
consolidate the achieved progress. I would sum this up in the following way: we have made a
definite progress; however, even more remains to be done. And this is what we are currently
focusing on.
All our actions will be anchored in our legislative mandate which is: price stability, stability of the
lev, and stability of our monetary regime. I will say once again what I have stated repeatedly: the
only exit from our currency board monetary arrangement is our entry into the euro area and the
adoption of the euro. That will happen when all necessary conditions for this are fulfilled. We are
not at this stage yet; however we are working hard in this direction.
I should now like to say a few words about our immediate priority tasks.
First,  we  are  making  sure  the  measures  resulting  from  the  asset  quality  review  are  strictly
applied  with  a  focus  on  the  capital  buffer  replenishment  plans  as  prescribed  for  some  of  the
banks.
Second, we are finalising the plan to further enhance the work of the banking supervision. That is
a continuation of the plan we have been implementing for the last almost two years now and
whose  fulfilment  has  produced  good  results.  The  new  accents  are:  internal  regulations,
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
information systems, and increase of resources, including appointment of the additional number
of  people  as  provided  for  in  the  original  plan,  which,  unfortunately,  takes  more  time  than  we
expected.
Third,  we  adopted  a  combination  of  measures  to  make  the  already  developed  system  for
recovery  and  resolution  of  banks  fully  functioning.  In  this  area  we  have  prioritised  two  sets  of
measures:  the  approval  of  resolution  plans  for  the  systemically  important  domestic  banks
(something that we have already done for the subsidiaries of EU banks); and the joint work with
the Ministry of Finance of possibilities for the BNB to provide liquidity support.
Fourth, we have thoroughly analysed the issue of nonperforming loans (NPL), both at banking
system level and at an individual bank level, and we are developing comprehensive measures
which  would  create  conditions  for  reduction  of  these  loans,  including  strengthened  loan-loss
provisions, higher NPL write-offs, improved collateral valuations, enhanced disclosure practices,
and strengthened data collection.
Fifth, we are continuing the efforts to bring the regulatory framework fully in line with the EU law.
For  example,  we  are  drawing  up  a  completely  new  law  on  payment  services  and  payment
systems  which,  inter  alia,  would  strengthen  the  requirements  for  security  of  payments  made
electronically and via Internet.
I mention all these priority tasks of the BNB because for their performance we would largely rely
on our constructive partnership with you, as we have done so far.
Of  course,  we  are  well  aware  of  the  specific  challenges  that  you  too  are  facing.  The  strong
pressure on profitability with a still weak, though increasing, and demand for loans requires that
you  keep  seeking  solutions  for  greater  efficiency.  The  topics  of  credit  risk  management  and
costs  policies  would  more  and  more  be  high  on  the  agenda  also  because  it  is  likely  that  we
would  witness  another  cycle  of  rising  interest  rates,  given  the  worldwide  trends  and  the
expectations of such a development in the euro area sooner or later.
These are topics that we will continue to discuss.
Thank you for the good cooperation, and congratulations on the 25  anniversary!
th
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
