Vítor Constâncio: Developing models for policy analysis in central
banks
Opening speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the
Annual Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 25 September 2017.
 I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  second Annual  Research  Conference  of  the  European
Central  Bank.  Every  year  this  aims  to  be  our  flagship  research  event,  bringing  together
academics and central bank researchers working at the cutting edge of economics.
We  value  research  because  it  contributes  to  shape  the  intellectual  framework  that  we  use  to
understand  economic  developments  and  to  take  policy  decisions.  We  are  especially  keen  to
keep abreast of new developments in the research frontier because they are on top of the new
challenges  to  understand  the  economy´s  behaviour  which  is  vital  for  devising  appropriate
policies. In the words of Christiano, the Great Recession was a macroeconomics earthquake  to
which the field is still adjusting. Christiano highlights mainly three aspects: the need to recuperate
the Keynesian view that demand shocks and the paradox-of-thrift can be important for economic
performance, the notion that economy is not quickly self-correcting and requires public policies
intervention  and,  finally,  that  the  financial  sector  can  endogenously  generate  imbalances  with
significant consequences for the real economy. With hindsight, it is surprising how these points
were  neglected  by  mainstream  economics  for  so  long.  Many  other  aspects  can  be  usefully
added to that list.
1
First,  that  stabilisation  policies  are  crucial  and  that  not  only  growth  counts  as  significant
fluctuations  leave  behind  permanent  losses.  Related  to  this,  is  the  the  notion  that  demand
shocks can affect the supply side via hysteresis effects in labour supply and the capital stock via
investment deceleration. The distinction between short- and long-term is necessary for theorising
and teaching, but often is not useful for policy analysis models.
Second,  the  heterogeneity  of  agents,  particularly  of  consumers,  is  important  to  understand
aggregate  behaviour,  in  view  of  indebtness,  credit  restrictions  and  income  and  wealth
composition.
Third, behavioural economics has also cast doubt on the full rational expectations paradigm as a
too demanding hypothesis about the cognitive powers of economic agents, especially for long
horizons.  In  this  context,  the  myopic  assumption  explored  by  Gabaix  (2017)   is  a  welcomed
development.
2
Fourth,  agents’  heterogeneity  relates  to  the  issue  of  distribution  that  had  been  neglected  but
which, with the use of Heterogenous Agents New Keynesian (HANK) models, helped bring to the
fore as exemplified by the recent contribution of Ahn et al. (2017) at the NBER Macroeconomics
Annual Conference.  It shows how significant the feedback loop is and how models with realistic
household heterogeneity fit empirical consumption dynamics better.
3
Fifth, the assumption of a unique steady state is now challenged by the consideration of multiple
equilibria,  particularly  some  without  full  employment  as  seen  in  the  work  by  Farmer  and
collaborators . The idea of abandoning the notion of an aprioristic theoretical equilibria in favour
of  the  pure  interaction  of  heterogeneous  agents  with  behaviour  rules  in ABMs  (Agent  Based
Models) is more controversial.
4
A  final  point  refers  to  the  question  whether  conventional  monetary  policy  is  as  powerful  as
portrayed in mainstream DSGE models via Euler equations. The protracted recovery seems to
give ground to the old view of monetary policy effectiveness being asymmetric and weaker in
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
recessions. There is justification for rethinking a more active role for fiscal policy, following the
recent papers by Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2017) . A reconsideration of the effectiveness of
both macro policies has become even more necessary in view of the two major problems that
central  banks  are  now  confronted  with:  first,  the  lingering  low  inflation  associated  with  flatter
Phillips curves that impairs the policy transmission and, second, the need for policy instruments
to deal with the next recession, even if a mild one.
5
The  various  points  I  just  listed  are  some  of  the  relevant  aspects  of  the  on-going  revision  of
macroeconomics and justify the point recently made by Blanchard that we need different types of
models to understand, forecast and analyse the economy and the policies necessary to address
its  shortcomings.  In  that  spirit,  I  will  concentrate  my  remaining  remarks  on  some  on-going
developments in the specification of macroeconomic models at the ECB.
Desirable properties of policy models
Macroeconomic models can be used for a variety of purposes in central banks. They are helpful
to  articulate  relationships  between  certain  variables  of  interest  in  a  systematic  fashion,  while
ensuring that resource constraints are respected. They provide input to the complex process of
macroeconomic forecasting. And they can be helpful to conduct scenario analyses and study
policy counterfactuals.
To perform these tasks effectively, a model should satisfy two simple criteria. First, since many
policy questions are inherently quantitative in nature, a useful model must fit the data reasonably
well and should be able to produce effective economic forecasts. Model-based counterfactual
analyses  will  only  serve  as  a  credible  benchmark  for  policy  discussion,  if  the  results  are
quantitatively  plausible.  In  practice,  this  criterion  has  two  implications.  On  the  one  hand,  the
model should incorporate realistic elasticities. For example, the dynamic effects of changes in
monetary policy interest rates should be consistent with available reduced-form evidence. In the
euro  area,  the  model  should  provide  a  reasonably  good  account  of  the  inflationary  impact  of
national fiscal expansions, or of developments in national wage negotiations. On the other hand,
the model should provide a credible narrative for observed economic developments.
The second criterion is really an implication of the first. Partly due to new research findings, partly
as  a  result  of  puzzling  economic  developments,  we  constantly  update  our  beliefs  on  the  key
economic  mechanisms  that  are  necessary  to  fit  the  data.  The  model  should  be  reasonably
flexible  to  be  able  to  adapt  to  a  changing  economic  and  policy  environment  and  to  speak  to
current  policy  questions.  The  financial  crisis  is  a  case  in  point.  The  macroeconomic  models
maintained by central banks in the early 2000s were not equipped to speak to all the questions
arising in the aftermath of the crisis without further adjustments. From today’s standpoint, these
adjustments are simply inescapable. We would like the model to provide a reasonable account of
the dynamic effects of non-standard monetary policy measures. With policy rates at the effective
lower bound, we really need the model to provide realistic implications on the impact of forward
guidance. For me as a policymaker, it is of key importance that our models can be adapted fast
enough to address newly emerging questions in a timely manner. Of course, in order to reap the
benefits of a flexible modelling framework, it is equally important to have expert staff using and
enhancing the models in a practical and innovative manner.
The new ECB multi-country model: ECB-MC
These considerations played an important role at the ECB, when we were just recently faced
with the decision of enhancing the multi-country (MC) model of the euro area. Which paradigm
should we adopt?
One option was to remain within the DSGE framework. For over 10 years, DSGE models have
been the key tool used for policy analysis exercises in many central banks. This has also been
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
the  case  at  the  ECB,  where  the  initial  development  of  estimated  DSGE  models  has  taken
place.   DSGE  models  are  typically  estimated  and  thus  consistent  with  the  data.  They  often
reproduce the dynamic effects of changes in monetary policy interest rates that are observed in
identified  Variable Autoregression  Models  (VARs.)  This  is  also  the  case  for  the  DSGE  model
developed in the Directorate General Research, the New Area-Wide Model, is regularly used for
7
counterfactual policy analysis.
At  the  same  time,  a  good  fit  of  the  data  is  to  some  extent  accomplished  by  DSGE  models
through  persistent  shock  processes,  which  questions  the  empirical  validity  of  the  model’s
intrinsic  propagation  mechanisms.  More  importantly,  DSGE  models  do  not  always  provide  a
plausible  story  for  observed  economic  developments.  For  example,  so-called  “technology
shocks” tend to play an overwhelmingly important role in accounting for the evolution of GDP,
even  when  external  data  do  not  show  any  evidence  of  technological  innovations.  Moreover,
DSGE models can only slowly be adapted to a new policy environment. The requirement of full
internal  consistency  makes  the  incorporation  of  new  features—be  it  a  more  granular  financial
sector,  household  heterogeneity  or  stronger  nonlinearities—often  very  demanding.
Enhancements come with long gestation periods, sometimes limiting the ability of DSGE models
to speak to newly emerging policy questions, in a timely manner.
In designing the new ECB-MC we have therefore started from the premise that, in the words of
Olivier  Blanchard,  “policy  models”  cannot  be  expected  to  have  the  same  tight  structure  as
“theory  models”.   We  have  decided  to  adopt  a  semi-structural  approach  inspired  by  two
guidelines: 1) include financial frictions or financial mechanisms that could allow monetary policy
shocks to be transmitted via channels that were absent before the crisis; 2) adopt a more flexible
and empirically-driven approach.
8
The  emphasis  is  on  equation-by-equation  fit,  while  the  cross-equation  constraints  are  mostly
ignored  because  they  do  not  impinge  on  the  model’s  ability  to  provide  sound  quantitative
predictions. When introducing financial frictions, we have relied on a reduced form representation
that is consistent with different theoretical micro-foundations. This more flexible, semi-structural
approach allows us to model a wide range of banking and financial variables, going from bank
lending  spreads  to  term  premia,  without  taking  a  stance  on  the  exact  theoretical  mechanism
linking them to the macroeconomy.
9
At its core, the new ECB-MC model is designed along the lines of the Federal Reserve’s FRB/US
model.  The behavioural decision rules of private agents are based on optimisation and in the
long run the model boils down to a neoclassical growth model. In the short run, however, it is
assumed that agents face adjustment costs which imply staggered adjustment of the actual to
the desired levels.
Challenges ahead
I  believe  the  design  of  the  ECB-  MC  model  will  increase  the  robustness  of  our  model-based
policy analyses and strengthen our capability to address newly emerging policy questions in a
timely  manner.  The  model  development,  which  has  been  led  by  the  Directorate  General
Research,  is  a  joint  effort  of  economists  from  a  wide-range  of  policy  areas  inside  the  ECB,
colleagues from national central banks and academic consultants. I am confident it will soon be
part of the ECB toolkit. However, it is easy to forecast that further refinements will prove to be
necessary in the future, for the model to continue being a valuable policy tool. I specifically see
four  areas  where  significant  progress  has  already  been  made,  but  further  improvements  are
likely to be necessary.
The  first  area  is  related  to  the  modelling  of  aggregate  consumption.  I  share  the  concern  of
Muellbauer  that  the  standard  DSGE  framework  imposes  unrealistic  micro-foundations  for  the
behaviour of households as embodied in the ‘rational expectations permanent income’ model of
10
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
10
11
consumption.
 In typical representative-agent models, consumption behaviour is captured by an
Euler equation, an inter-temporal optimality condition that links today’s level of consumption to
expected consumption in the next period and further into the future. In its linearised form, it does
neither envisage that consumers face idiosyncratic (household-specific) and uninsurable income
uncertainty,  nor  that  uncertainty  interacts  with  credit  or  liquidity  constraints.  This  is  in  stark
contrast  to  recent  research  that  emphasises  the  importance  of  precautionary  saving,  liquidity
constraints,  leverage  and  of  heterogeneity,  including  heterogeneity  in  marginal  propensities  to
 Compared to simple representative-agent models, the ECB-MC clearly marks an
consume.
improvement.  The  consumption 
is  explicitly  affected  by  agents’  wealth
holdings.
 Agents have shorter average horizons than presumed under the text-book permanent
income hypothesis and the model further allows for the presence of agents that do not optimize
but  rather  exhibit  ‘hand-to-mouth’  behaviour.  Last,  but  not  least,  risk  aversion  and  income
uncertainty  also  play  a  role  for  consumption  behaviour.  This  setup,  for  example,  allows
quantifying how larger income uncertainty reduces the power of forward guidance. All in all, I think
that we are moving in the right direction. Nevertheless, the modelling of aggregate consumption
is an area in which research is currently developing fast and we should be ready to learn from
new findings.
function 
12
The  second  area  of  improvement  concerns  the  modelling  of  expectations. As  Sargent  (1993)
emphasizes,  rational  expectations  can  be  a  meaningful  characterisation  of  the  long-run
equilibrium, but the transition to a new steady state might display non-rational behaviour.
 An
increasing body of research aims to explore the implications of alternative types of departures
from  rational  expectations  for  business  cycle  dynamics  in  general,  and  the  transmission  of
monetary policy in particular, as in the papers by Garcia-Schmidt and Woodford (2015), Gabaix
(2017) or Fahri and Werning.
 Once again, the ECB-MC goes in the right direction. The model
can be simulated under two expectation setups: (i) in a model consistent manner, and (ii) under
the assumption of bounded rationality where agents form expectations with a small-scale VAR
model.  Other  expectation  formation  mechanisms,  such  as  learning  or  the  use  of  market
expectations, are also easily implementable. As was shown by Blanchard and co-authors in a
recent  study  on  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  changes  in  the  expectations  of  long-run
productivity growth, different assumptions on the expectation formation mechanism can lead to
considerably different outcomes.
 Assessing the most realistic way of treating expectations in
policy models remains a crucial area for further work.
14
15
13
17
16
The third area of improvement has to do with the nexus between inflation, wages and the real
economy. When modelled through the expectations-augmented Phillips curve, the nexus seems
to have become weaker after the financial crisis.
  Commentators have repeatedly talked about
a  “missing  disinflation”  at  the  trough  of  the  Great  Recession,  and  about  “missing  inflation”  in
more  recent  years.
  Recent  studies  have  come  up  with  alternative  explanations  for  these
phenomena. For instance, the “missing disinflation” has been argued to be the consequence of
either  the  presence  of  well-anchored  inflation  expectations ,  increased  downward  wage
rigidities  in  recessions ,  or  a  fall  in  total  factor  productivity  and  increased  costs  of  working
capital
.  Understanding  the  underlying  sources  of  this  apparent  structural  change  will  be
important  for  monetary  policy.  The  semi-reduced-form  nature  of  the  ECB-MC  makes  it  ill-
equipped  to  address  this  deep  question,  but  studying  structural  changes  is  challenging  for  all
current models built to study cyclical developments.
18
19
20
The fourth and final area where further improvements are necessary is macro-financial linkages.
I have already mentioned that the ECB-MC incorporates such linkages. Nevertheless, the exact
way  in  which  they  affect  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  remains  imperfectly
understood, even if the empirical literature is making important advances.
 These linkages are
also  relevant  for  financial  stability  and  may  evolve  in  response  to  the  recent  reforms  in  the
regulatory environment. This is why at the ECB we are also making parallel progress on this front
21
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
within the DSGE paradigm, through the 3D model. The 3D model has been developed under the
macroprudential  research  (MaRS)  network,  and  can  be  used  to  assess  the  macroeconomic
benefits and costs of macroprudential policies. “3D” alludes to the fact that, contrary to previous
models, it captures the distinct benefits of capital requirements through reductions in default risk
in  the  economy,  not  only  for  banks  but  also  for  borrowers,  i.e.  non-financial  firms  and
households.
Concluding remarks
22
To  conclude,  building  models  for  policy  analysis  is  associated  with  trade-offs.  This  is  an
important reason for central banks to not rely on a single model and a single modelling paradigm,
but to make use of a suite of models based on different paradigms. I could not agree more with
Blanchard who recently expressed his view that also other types of general equilibrium models
beyond DSGEs are useful policy tools.
 I am pleased this view has been getting more traction
lately,  as  alternative  types  of  models  will  continue  to  be  part  of  central  banks’  toolbox.
Development of those models can greatly benefit from insights from academic research, so I am
very much looking forward to the contributions to be presented at this conference.
23
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Christiano, L. (2017), “The Great Recession: a macroeconomics earthquake”, Minneapolis FED Policy Paper
17–01.
Gabaix, X. (2017), “A Behavioral New Keynesian Model”, mimeo.
Ahn, S., G. Kaplan, B. Moll, T Winberry and C. Wolf (2017), “When inequality matters for Macro and Macro matters
for Inequality”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
See, e.g. Famer, R. and K. Platonov (2017), “Animal spirits in a monetary model”.
Auerbach, A. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2017), “Fiscal stimulus and fiscal sustainability”, paper presented at the
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
See,  e.g.  Coenen,  G.,  R.  Motto,  M.  Rostagno,  S.  Schmidt,  and  F.  Smets  (2017),  “DSGE  models  and
counterfactual analysis”, in “DSGE Models in the Conduct of Policy: Use as intended” (eds. R. Gürkaynak and C.
Tille), VoxEU.org Book, CEPR Press.
See Christoffel, K., G. Coenen, and A. Warne (2008), “The New Area-Wide Model of the Euro Area: A Micro-
Founded Open-Economy Model for Forecasting and Policy Analysis”, ECB Working Paper Series No. 944.
See Blanchard, O. “The Need for Different Classes of Macroeconomic Models”, PIIE RealTime Economic Issues
Watch, January 12, 2017.
Brayton, F. and P. A. Tinsley (1996), “A guide to FRB/US: a macroeconomic model of the United States", Finance
and Economics Discussion Series 96–42, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (U.S.).
Muellbauer, J. (2016), “Macroeconomics and consumption: Why central bank models failed and how to repair
them’,’ VOXEU. See also Muellbauer, J. (2016), “Consumption and macroeconomics“, CEPR Discussion Paper
No 11588.
See, e.g., Kaplan, G., and G. L. Violante (2014), “A Model of the Consumption Response to Fiscal Stimulus
Payments”, Econometrica, 82(4), 1199– 1239; and Mian, A., K. Rao, and A. Sufi (2013), “Household Balance
Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128 (4): 1687–1726.
Muelbauer, J. and R. Lattimore (1995), “The Consumption Function: A Theoretical and Empirical Overview,” in
Handbook of Applied Econometrics Macroeconomics, eds. M. H. Pesaran and M. Wickens (Oxford, K.: Blackwell,
1995), 221–311.
Sargent, T. J. (1993), ”Bounded Rationality in Economics”, (Oxford: Clarendon).
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
See, for instance, García-Schmidt, M. and M. Woodford (2015), “Are Low Interest Rates Deflationary? A Paradox
of  Perfect-Foresight  Analysis”, NBER  Working  Paper  No.  21614;  Gabaix,  X.  (2016),  “A  Behavioral  New
Keynesian  Model”, NBER Working Paper No. 22954; and Farhi, E. and I. Werning (2017), “Monetary Policy,
Bounded Rationality and Incomplete Markets”, NBER Working Paper No. 23281.
Blanchard, O., G. Lorenzoni and J. P. L’Huillier (2017), “Short-run effects of lower productivity growth. A twist on
the secular stagnation hypothesis”, Journal of Policy Modeling, 2017, ISSN 0161–8938.
Blanchard, O., E. Cerutti and L. Summers (2016), “Inflation and activity – two explorations and their monetary
policy implications”, ECB, Inflation and Unemployment in Europe, Conference proceedings of the ECB Forum
on Central Banking, pp. 25–46.
For a summary see Constâncio, V. (2015)“Understanding inflation dynamics and monetary policy” remarks at
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Economic  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming.  See  also
Constâncio,  V.  (2017),  “Understanding  and  overcoming  low  inflation”,  remarks  at  the  Conference  on
“Understanding  inflation:  lessons  from  the  past,  lessons  for  the  future?”,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  21  and  22
September 2017.
Bernanke, B. (2010), “The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy”, speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of
Kansas City Economic Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming.
Daly, M. C. and B. Hobijn, (2014), “Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve”, Journal of
Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 46(S2), 51–93.
Christiano, L. J., M. S. Eichenbaum and M. Trabandt (2015), “Understanding the Great Recession”, American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, Vol. 7(1), 110—167.
See Gertler, M. and P. Karadi (2015), “Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity”,  American
Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, pp. 44–76.
Clerc, L., A. Derviz, C. Mendicino, S. Moyen, K. Nikolov, L. Stracca, J. Suarez and A. P. Vardoulakis (2015),
“Capital Regulation in a Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Default”, International Journal of Central
Banking, pp. 9-63.
See: Blanchard, O. (2016), “Do DSGE models have a future?”, Peterson Institute for International Economics
Policy Brief 16, 11 August; Blanchard, O. (2016), “Further Thoughts on DSGE Models”, Peterson Institute for
International  Economics  Realtime  Economic  Issues  Watch,  3  October ;Blanchard,  O.  (2017),  “The  need  for
different classes of macroeconomic models”, Peterson Institute for International Economics Realtime Economic
Issues Watch, 12 January.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
