François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  What  responses  to  terms  of  trade
shocks in poor and vulnerable countries?
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  Bank  of
France-FERDI (Fondation pour les Etudes et Recherches sur le Développement International)
conference, Paris, 24 January 2017.
 Good morning and welcome to all in the auditorium of the Banque de France.
It is a great pleasure to welcome you here with Patrick Guillaumont, President of FERDI and co-
organiser  of  this  conference,  to  whom  I  extend  my  warmest  greetings.  I  would  also  like  to
welcome Jan Gunning, Professor Emeritus at the Free University of Amsterdam, as well as all
the speakers who honour us with their presence.
The  Banque  de  France  has  established  research  partnerships  with  several  foundations  and
universities:  the  Paris  School  of  Economics,  the  Toulouse  School  of  Economics  and  the
Fondation  nationale  des  Sciences  politiques.  The  partnership  with  FERDI  (Fondation  pour  les
études et recherches sur le développement international), which we are pleased about, focuses
on extending and enriching discussions and research on monetary and financial issues related to
development, including:
the  financing  of  development,  in  particular  the  mobilisation  of  domestic  and  international
savings,
the competitiveness of African countries and exchange regimes and strategies,
regional integration in Africa, which was the theme of our first conference in 2014,
the  “curse”  of  commodities  in  low-income  countries,  and  the  management  of  the  Dutch
syndrome  and  the  terms  of  trade  cycles,  i.e.  changes  in  the  relative  prices  of  exports
compared to imports: this is the theme of today’s conference.
The  subject  chosen  is  highly  topical,  following  the  very  sharp  drop  in  commodity  prices,  in
particular  oil  prices,  between  mid-2014  and  early  2016,  the  effects  of  which  on  exporting
countries  had  been  underestimated,  both  by  the  countries  themselves,  but  also  by  the
international financial community. Thus, the economic growth forecasts for sub-Saharan Africa
made by the main international organisations were revised downwards only very late. In January
2016, the IMF still expected Sub-Saharan Africa to grow by 4% in 2016 and by 4.7% in 2017, but
the forecasts in the October 2016 global economic outlook were only 1.4% for 2016 and 2.9% for
2017, almost solely as a result of the recession in the oil economies. The Ivorian economy is
another  illustration  of  the  importance  of  the  terms  of  trade  for  economies  focused  on
commodities. After experiencing exceptional growth over the last three years, partly driven by the
good  performance  of  cocoa  prices,  contrary  to  that  of  other  commodities,  activity  appears  to
have slowed down, in the wake of the downturn in prices.
The subject is also of major importance for central banks because the challenge here is to find
how  to  implement  appropriate  counter-cyclical  policies  in  the  face  of  large-scale  shocks  that
monetary policy cannot deal with either on its own or in the long run.
In  this  spirit,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  this  morning  some  thoughts  on  two  issues:  how
important are the terms of trade cycles for the economic and financial situation of the exporting
poor countries and their neighbours? And how to mitigate shocks?
 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
1.    How important are terms of trade shocks for poor and vulnerable countries?
To  illustrate  my  point,  I  will  take  the  example  of  sub-Saharan  Africa.  The  super  cycle  of
commodity price growth has coincided with over a decade of strong economic growth in sub-
Saharan  Africa.  The  degree  of  causality  between  these  two  developments  is  the  subject  of
debate. Before the cyclical downturn, a large majority of observers emphasised the endogenous
nature  of  African  growth  and  minimised,  or  even  denied,  the  role  of  the  terms  of  trade
appreciation.
However, the current terms of trade shock has led to a reversal of the perception of the African
outlook.  For  oil-exporting  countries,  the  twofold  decline  in  prices  between  mid-2014  and  early
2016  resulted  in  large  budget  and  external  deficits,  calling  for  a  rapid  adjustment,  due  to  the
weakness or lack of countercyclical leeway. The savings accumulated during the upswing in oil
prices proved largely insufficient and the borrowing capacity of the countries concerned remains
very limited, although some benefited from debt cancellations under the Heavily Indebted Poor
Countries initiative.
In  poor  and  vulnerable  countries  where  financial  development  is  weak  and  sovereign
indebtedness  with  the  banking  sector  is  predominant,  the  feedback  effects  between  the
deterioration in public accounts and rising debt, on the one hand, and liquidity, or even solvency
of the banking system on the other, also foster the propagation and amplification of shocks.
The current terms of trade shock thus highlights the excessive dependence of vulnerable and
poor countries on commodities.
 
2. How to mitigate terms of trade shocks?
On  this  subject,  it  seems  essential  to  distinguish  two  types  of  objectives:  the  objectives  of
economic and financial stabilisation on the one hand, and the objectives of prevention and better
resilience to terms of trade shocks on the other.
As  regards  economic  and  financial  stabilisation,  macroeconomic  policies,  in  particular  fiscal
policies, play a central role in this field. Of course, in order for these to be implemented, it is
necessary to have sufficient countercyclical room for manoeuvre. Consideration should also be
given  to  how  fiscal  consolidation  policies  can  preserve  investment  priorities  for  sustainable
development, based on the development of infrastructure and human capital (health, education).
The  effects  of  fiscal  consolidation  can  thus  be  mitigated  by  changes  in  the  composition  of
government revenue and expenditures, more favourable to long term growth.
As  regards  the  exchange  rate,  the  optimal  policies  to  be  put  in  place  in  developing  countries
facing exogenous shocks are the subject of debate. While exchange rate flexibility cushions a
terms  of  trade  shock,  it  is  also  associated  with  risks  of  amplification,  via  the  triggering  of
inflationary  spirals  or  the  foreign  exchange  losses  that  economic  agents  must  bear.  Fixed
exchange rate regimes have the advantage of anchoring the expectations of economic agents
and  thus  providing  a  favorable  framework  for  investment.  They  will  of  course  be  all  the  more
credible if they benefit from a convertibility guarantee, as is the case of the Franc Zone monetary
unions.
Furthermore, for poor and vulnerable countries with limited access to international financing and
sometimes  dependent  on  official  development  assistance,  the  coordination  of  national  public
authorities and international development partners is an important issue.
The  effective  implementation  of  macroeconomic  stabilisation  policies  is  conditional  on  the
financing of their balances of payments, often under the aegis of the IMF. In this regard, I would
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
like to welcome the commitment, announced simultaneously by the CEMAC member countries
on  23  December,  to  open  and  rapidly  conclude  bilateral  negotiations  with  the  IMF  in  order  to
better structure their adjustment efforts.
At the same time, the IMF should adjust its intervention tools and the conditionalities associated
with its programmes in poor and vulnerable countries in order to fully respond to the scale of
commodity price shocks. First, the IMF should provide, directly or indirectly, a volume of financing
commensurate with the shock. Second, the objective of the IMF should be to find ways of making
the least costly fiscal adjustment in terms of growth, while strengthening its recommendations on
the prevention of this type of shock.
This brings me to focus on the second type of objectives: the objectives of prevention and better
resilience to terms of trade shocks.
The first priority to improve prevention and resilience is to create sufficient countercyclical fiscal
leeway,  by  limiting  public  debt,  or  even  by  accumulating  budgetary  reserves.  In  this  regard,
controlling the public payroll, which is the most dynamic item of expenditure in times of growth in
many poor and vulnerable countries, as well as improving the efficiency of public spending, are
essential.
Consideration should also be given to setting up fiscal rules on the basis of deficits excluding
commodity-related receipts, adopting stricter debt ceilings for the public sector and creating an
adequate savings buffer for countercyclical purposes, taking into account the scale and length of
commodity price cycles. In countries exporting non-renewable commodities, in particular oil, this
savings buffer must be even more substantial since it must aim to cover not only the decline in
the value of receipts but also part of the decline in the value of reserves.
The  second  priority  concerns  the  diversification  of  the  economy.  Industrial  policies  based  on
sectoral subsidies or tax expenditures are not viable in the event of a fall in commodity prices and
make the policy of diversification pro cyclical. Public action should instead focus on improving the
business climate, which is the only way to promote entrepreneurship in the formal sector and
ultimately improve the country’s international attractiveness. Diversification is only sustainable if
one  avoids  the  Dutch  syndrome,  characterised  by  an  excessive  appreciation  of  the  real
exchange  rate,  restricting  the  growth  of  other  export  sectors.  The  accumulation  of  external
savings  contributes  to  this  objective.  Finally,  the  third  priority  concerns  the  robustness  of  the
financial  sector.  I  will  emphasise  the  importance  of  measuring,  via  stress  tests,  the  potential
effects of a sharp drop in commodity prices on the solvency of the banking system. These stress
tests  make  it  possible  to  determine  the  adequate  level  of  bank  capital  needed  to  withstand
shocks.
 Allow  me  to  conclude  briefly  by  expressing  once  again  my  gratitude  to  all  the  speakers  and
participants who came here today to share their thoughts on these crucial issues. I wish you
fruitful exchanges and now give the floor to Patrick Guillaumont. Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
