Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  7  September
2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest  rates unchanged. We expect them to remain at their present levels for an extended
period of time, and well past the horizon of our net asset purchases. Regarding non-standard
monetary policy measures, we confirm that our net asset purchases, at the current monthly
pace of €60 billion, are intended to run until the end of December 2017, or beyond, if necessary,
and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation
consistent  with  its  inflation  aim.  The  net  purchases  are  made  alongside  reinvestments  of  the
principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset purchase programme.
The  incoming  information,  including  our  new  staff  projections,  confirms  a  broadly  unchanged
medium-term  outlook  for  euro  area  economic  growth  and  inflation.  The  economic  expansion,
which accelerated more than expected in the first half of 2017, continues to be solid and broad-
based across countries and sectors. At the same time, the recent volatility in the exchange rate
represents  a  source  of  uncertainty  which  requires  monitoring  with  regard  to  its  possible
implications for the medium-term outlook for price stability.
While the ongoing economic expansion provides confidence that inflation will gradually head to
levels  in  line  with  our  inflation  aim,  it  has  yet  to  translate  sufficiently  into  stronger  inflation
dynamics. Measures of underlying inflation have ticked up slightly in recent months but, overall,
remain at subdued levels. Therefore, a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation is
still needed for underlying inflation pressures to gradually build up and support headline inflation
developments  in  the  medium  term.  If  the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial
conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path
of inflation, we stand ready to increase our asset purchase programme in terms of size and/or
duration. This autumn we will decide on the calibration of our policy instruments beyond the end
of the year, taking into account the expected path of inflation and the financial conditions needed
for a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are below, but close to, 2%.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.6%, quarter on quarter, in the second quarter of 2017, after 0.5%
in the first quarter. Survey data point to continued broad-based growth in the period ahead. Our
monetary  policy  measures  are  supporting  domestic  demand  and  have  facilitated  the
deleveraging process. Private consumption is underpinned by employment gains, which are also
benefiting from past labour market reforms, and by increasing household wealth. The recovery in
investment continues to benefit from very favourable financing conditions and improvements in
corporate profitability. Moreover, the broad-based global recovery will support euro area exports.
This  assessment  is  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2017  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area. These projections foresee annual real GDP increasing by 2.2% in
2017, by 1.8% in 2018 and by 1.7% in 2019. Compared with the June 2017 Eurosystem staff
macroeconomic  projections,  the  outlook  for  real  GDP  growth  has  been  revised  up  for  2017,
reflecting the recent stronger growth momentum, and is broadly unchanged thereafter.
Risks surrounding the euro area growth outlook remain broadly balanced. On the one hand, the
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
current  positive  cyclical  momentum  increases  the  chances  of  a  stronger  than  expected
economic  upswing.  On  the  other  hand,  downside  risks  continue  to  exist,  primarily  relating  to
global factors and developments in foreign exchange markets.
Euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  1.5%  in August.  Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current
futures prices for oil, annual rates of headline inflation are likely to temporarily decline towards the
turn of the year, mainly reflecting base effects in energy prices. At the same time, measures of
underlying inflation have ticked up moderately in recent months, but have yet to show convincing
signs of a sustained upward trend. Domestic cost pressures, notably from labour markets, are
still subdued. Underlying inflation in the euro area is expected to rise gradually over the medium
term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing  economic  expansion,  the
corresponding gradual absorption of economic slack and rising wages.
This  assessment  is  also  broadly  reflected  in  the  September  2017  ECB  staff  macroeconomic
projections for the euro area, which foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.5% in 2017, 1.2% in 2018
and 1.5% in 2019. Compared with the June 2017 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections,
the outlook for headline HICP inflation has been revised down slightly, mainly reflecting the recent
appreciation of the euro exchange rate.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3), despite some monthly volatility, continues
to expand at a robust pace, with an annual rate of growth of 4.5% in July 2017, after 5.0% in
June. As  in  previous  months,  annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid
components, with the narrow monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 9.1% in July
2017, down from 9.7% in June.
The recovery in the growth of loans to the private sector observed since the beginning of 2014 is
proceeding. The annual growth rate of loans to non-financial corporations increased to 2.4% in
July 2017, up from 2.0% in June, while the annual growth rate of loans to households remained
stable at 2.6%. The pass-through of the monetary policy measures put in place since June 2014
continues  to  significantly  support  borrowing  conditions  for  firms  and  households,  access  to
financing ‒ notably for small and medium-sized enterprises ‒ and credit flows across the euro
area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2%.
the 
to  strengthening 
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  decisively 
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing
vulnerabilities. The implementation of structural reforms needs to be substantially stepped up to
increase resilience, reduce structural unemployment and boost euro area growth potential and
productivity.  Regarding fiscal  policies,  all  countries  would  benefit  from  intensifying  efforts
towards achieving a more growth-friendly composition of public finances. A full, transparent and
consistent  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  of  the  macroeconomic
imbalances procedure over time and across countries remains essential to bolster the resilience
of the euro area economy. Strengthening Economic and Monetary Union remains a priority. The
Governing  Council  welcomes  the  ongoing  discussions  on  further  enhancing  the  institutional
architecture of our Economic and Monetary Union.
We are now at your disposal for questions
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
