Mario  Marcel:  The  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  the  Financial
Stability Report
Presentation  by  Mr  Mario  Marcel,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  before  the  Finance
Committee of the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 19 December 2016.
Introduction
 Mr.  President  of  the  Senate’s  Finance  Committee,  Senator  Andrés  Zaldívar,  honorable
members of this Committee, ladies and gentlemen,
Thank you for your invitation to present the views of the Board of the Central Bank of Chile on
the recent macroeconomic and financial developments and prospects and their implications
for  monetary  and  financial  policy.  This  vision  is  contained  in  detail  in  our Monetary  Policy
Report of December 2016 and our Financial Stability Report of the second half 2016.
On  this  occasion,  our  reports  feature  a  special  characteristic:  they  were  prepared  mostly
under  the  direction  of  the  Bank’s  outgoing  Governor,  Rodrigo  Vergara,  and  are  being
presented by an incoming Governor.  Interestingly enough, this is rather anecdotic, since our
reports  rely  on  the  work  of  the  Bank’s  technical  team  and  the  Board’s  deliberations,
regardless  of  the  Governor  in  charge.  This  attests  to  the  continuity  that  characterizes  a
sound  institution  with  permanent  responsibility  for  the  Chilean  economy’s  monetary  and
financial stability, and that must inspire confidence in economic agents and in the population
at large.
This is remarkable, in my view, as the soundness and reliability of institutions is a matter of
growing concern in Chile these days. Still, we must be aware that  accumulated trust does
not suffice; in our present world such trust must be renewed every day, on the basis of the
ability  to  respond  to  new  demands  and  challenges.  I  will  comment  on  some  of  these
challenges towards the end of my presentation.
On  the  recent  evolution  of  the  economy,  the  most  noticeable  event  has  been  the  drop  in
inflation. After several quarters in which the annual CPI variation was above 4%, in recent
months it fell sharply to 3%, placing y-o-y CPI inflation at 2.9% in November.
We  had  foreseen  inflation  declining  at  a  slower  pace.  In  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  we
presented to the Senate last September, we projected that annual headline inflation would
close this year at 3.5%. Today, private expectations—as well as our own—put it a little under
3%. In addition, in the  baseline scenario I will be describing in a moment, we assume that
this decline will continue, such that during most of 2017 annual CPI inflation will stand in the
lower part of the tolerance range, to start converging back to the target by year’s end.
Domestic activity has also shown some surprises. It grew in line with forecasts in the third
quarter and even somewhat better in sectors not related with natural resources—what we
call  Other  GDP.  However,  it  began  the  fourth  quarter  quite  poorly.  The  decline  in  mining
activity weighed significantly, as has been the trend throughout the year, and so did some
specific industry lines. However,  the  lower  dynamism  estimated  for  the  last  quarter  of  the
year leads us to expect that 2016 growth will be in the lower bound of the range projected in
September.  Going  forward,  we  estimate  that  the  economy  will  return  to  near-potential
expansion  rates  towards  the  end  of  2017,  although  at  a  somewhat  slower  pace  than  we
estimated in September.
Abroad, the biggest news has been the changes in financial markets after the US election.
The  movements  that  followed  took  a  toll  on  financial  conditions,  despite  that  they  are  still
 1 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
expansionary from a historical standpoint. Last week the Federal Reserve raised the policy
rate for the second time, a decision that was widely expected by the markets. The surprise
was  the  confirmation  of  a  slightly  faster  withdrawal  of  the  monetary  stimulus,  which  has
shaken  the  financial  markets  in  recent  days. As  for  activity  and  inflation,  they  continue  to
show  advances  in  the  developed  world,  while  they  are  tending  to  stabilize  in  the  main
emerging economies. We see some improvement in the terms of trade in the near future.
Considering all the above and its effects on the medium-term outlook, the baseline scenario
of this MP Report has revised the 2017 inflation trajectory from September downward. This is
because  core  inflation—what  we  call  the  CPIEFE  (i.e.  excluding  foods  and  energy)—is
expected to drop significantly, due to the important weight in inflation of import-related prices.
The normally more persistent services inflation will also fall, although considering the basis of
comparison effect, the impact of lower inflation on indexed prices and its own inertia. All this
in  a  context  where,  despite  some  widening,  the  output  gaps  are  still  bounded  and  the
expected external impulse facing the Chilean economy over the next two years shows no big
change from September.
Still, beyond these changed projections, what merits the most attention is that the range of
risks has increased.
In  this  context,  in  our  latest  monetary  policy  meetings  we  have  held  the  monetary  policy
interest rate (MPR) unchanged at 3.5%. At the same time, while acknowledging the effects
that the changes in the macroeconomic scenario are having on the medium-term inflation
outlook, in our last meeting we noted that, for us to meet our objective of placing inflation at
3% in two years, a higher monetary impulse might be necessary.
Let me now present to you the details of our vision of the macroeconomic scenario and the
projections contained in our Monetary Policy Report.
 
The Monetary Policy Report
As  I  said,  in  November  the  CPI  posted  an  annual  variation  of  2.9%,  almost  half  of  a
percentage point less than we had estimated in September. This sharper decline in inflation
is  mainly  related  to  those  goods  most  closely  related  with  the  exchange  rate  and  some
foodstuffs. Thus, goods CPIEFE inflation fell to 1.6% in November, that is, 2.1 percentage
points less than in July, in a context where the exchange rate has fluctuated—give or take—
between 650 and 680 pesos per dollar. Services CPIEFE inflation has declined at a more
measured pace, in line with the moderate expansion of capacity gaps and its high content of
indexed prices. In any case, it has accumulated a decline of a little over one percentage point
in ten months. The low inflation for fresh fruits and vegetables was a surprise because of its
atypical behavior compared with the known seasonal patterns (figure 1).
Third-quarter  activity  figures  continued  to  reveal  limited  strength.  During  the  first  three
quarters of the year, sectors other than natural resources (i.e. Other GDP) grew slightly less
than  2.5%  annually,  driven  by  services  and  trade,  while  construction  and,  especially,
manufacturing performed rather poorly.
Meanwhile, in the first three quarters, domestic demand—excluding inventory change—grew
in tandem with Other GDP, driven by private and government consumption. Investment was
better than expected, but in annual terms it was negative again, particularly due to the further
deterioration of construction and other works (figure 2).
The negative annual variation of the Imacec in October was unexpected. Beyond the volatility
of month-to-month figures, the result is still strongly influenced by the poor performance of
 2 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
mining, coupled with the weak performance of some industry lines (figure 3). Even though
this figure is not a trend setter, it is sufficient to reduce fourth-quarter growth, which in turn
weighs in the revision of estimated 2016 growth, which now stands at 1.5%, i.e., the floor of
the  forecast  range  we  estimated  in  September.  Despite  the  performance  of  activity  in
October, partial fourth-quarter data suggest that the behavior of domestic spending has not
changed significantly. This, in an environment where the labor market is adjusting gradually,
with an unemployment rate that remains low (although strongly influenced by increased self-
employment)  (figure  4).  In  turn,  although  with  monthly  fluctuations,  wages  show  annual
expansions  around  their  historical  averages.  Bear  in  mind  that  the  decline  in  inflation  has
accelerated growth in the wage bill in real terms (figure 5).
As I said, the main event abroad was the American election. It opened a number of questions
about the external economic outlook, characterized by highly expansionary monetary policies
in the developed world. One such question is about the potential effects of a fiscal package in
the  US,  which  the  financial  markets  estimate  to  be  very  likely.  This  yielded  the  way  to
increased  inflation  expectations,  prospects  of  a  not-so-expansionary  monetary  policy,  a
strengthening of the dollar and reduced appetite for longer-term securities. Thus, long-term
interest rates have increased substantially in the US, and have been replicated in the rest of
the  world  with  varying  intensities.  In  this  context,  financial  conditions  facing  emerging
economies have tightened, although they remain positive from a historic standpoint (figure 6).
This deterioration of financial conditions owes not only to increased funding costs, but also to
capitals outflows towards the developed world (figure 7).
In Chile, the markets’ first reaction to the American election outcome mirrored that of the rest
of the world, with a significant increase in nominal and indexed long-term interest rates and a
depreciation of the currency. Most recently, however, these trends have been reversed. The
10-year BCP rate, which rose about 60 bp in the wake of the election, stood at 4.4% at the
Monetary  Policy  Report’s  statistical  cutoff  date,  that  is,  20  bp  above  its  pre-election  level
(figure  8).  Meanwhile,  at  this  Report’s  closing,  the  nominal  exchange  rate  was  near  650
pesos  per  dollar,  after  trading  around  680  CLP/USD  on  some  days  in  November.  Thus,
considering the average of the ten days prior to this and the last Report’s statistical closing,
the peso-dollar parity has almost stayed the same, but in multilateral terms it has appreciated
close to 3.5% (figure 9). Immediately after the statistical cutoff, and after the decision of the
Fed, the dollar appreciated again globally, and the peso followed suit. Thus, in recent days
the  nominal  exchange  rate  has  traded  above  670  pesos  per  dollar.  The  evolution  of  the
multilateral  parity,  combined  with  the  behavior  of  inflation,  domestic  and  external,  and  the
copper  price,  have  resulted  in  a  lower  real  exchange  rate  (RER)  compared  with  a  few
months back. Thus, at the statistical cutoff date it was within the range of estimated short-
term fundamentals, but below its 15- to 20-year average. The baseline scenario uses as a
working  assumption  that  the  real  exchange  rate  will  depreciate  steadily  throughout  the
projection horizon, reflecting the interest rate differential with the US rates (figure 10).
Abroad, incoming figures for output and inflation show no big changes in these tendencies so
far. In the United States, activity and labor indicators point to a strong economic performance.
In other developed economies, there are signs of an incipient recovery. As regards emerging
economies, China’s growth is stable and Latin America shows heterogeneity. In this context,
the need for further monetary stimulus in Europe and Japan is not so urgent anymore, and
the expectation of a new policy rate increase by the Fed has consolidated. As I said earlier,
this decision occurred after we had stopped the presses for this Report. It is worth noting that
the Fed announced that the withdrawal of the monetary stimulus would be slightly faster. The
copper price was fairly stable up to early November, when it jumped from around 2.2 dollars
per pound to nearly 2.6. Nonetheless, this movement seems excessive given the evolution of
its fundamentals. Oil, in turn, over the past few months, has fluctuated between 45 and 50
dollars  per  barrel  most  of  the  time.  Most  recently,  after  OPEC  agreements  and
announcements by other producers that they would limit production, it is trading around 55
 3 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
dollars per barrel.
I now turn to our projections and associated risks.
In the baseline scenario of the MP Report I present today, this year’s growth is estimated at
1.5%. As I said, this is the lower bound of the range we estimated in September, considering
the slower growth foreseen for the fourth quarter. About 2017, the slower initial pace, in a
context of higher risks and still very pessimistic confidence levels, we foresee that activity will
take longer to resume near-potential growth. Accordingly, our growth estimate for 2017 has
been  adjusted  to  a  range  between  1.5%  and  2.5%  (1.75%  to  2.75%  in  September).  This
higher growth in 2017 compared with 2016 is based on the fact that the economy does not
present  any  imbalances,  the  mining  sector  will  not  to  repeat  the  sharp  drops  of  previous
years,  and  investment  will  post  some  increase  after  three  years  in  a  row  falling  in  annual
terms. The effects of these changes will be seen more clearly in the second half of the year.
All this, in a context where the fiscal consolidation announced by the government continues
and monetary conditions remain expansionary.
Excluding inventories, domestic demand will grow 2% in 2017. Just as in 2016, we expect
private  consumption  to  boost  expenditure,  considering  a  further  gradual  adjustment  of  the
labor  market  and  lower  inflation  driving  real  wages.  Plus  the  already  mentioned  fact  that
November’s  consumer  goods  imports  showed  a  rebound  and  that,  while  still  pessimistic,
consumer  expectations  have  shown  some  increase  in  recent  months,  especially  for
durables. About investment, in the near future we see no significant projects, low activity in
housing construction and still bad business expectations. Nevertheless, this component is
expected to post positive  growth  in  2017,  as  assumed  in  September,  after  contracting  for
three years in a row (figure 11). Thus, the baseline scenario estimates that, as a percentage
of GDP, gross fixed capital formation will continue to drop in both real and nominal terms, to
22.9% and 21.7% of GDP, respectively (22.6 and 21.8% in September).
As  for  the  external  scenario,  a  current  account  deficit  is  expected  with  no  major  changes
between  2016  and  2017,  very  close  to  September  estimates:  1.7%  and  1.9%  of  GDP,
respectively. However, as this figure contemplates an improvement in the terms of trade, at
trend prices the current account deficit is bigger than was implicit in the last Report, by about
half a percentage point in 2017. Our current account forecast assumes that Chilean exports
volume  will  grow  about  2%  in  2017,  after  a  fairly  flat  2015  and  a  down-sloping  2015.  By
sectors, we expect increased volumes of both mining and non-mining shipments (table 1).
In this scenario, annual inflation will decline further, to less than 3% during most of 2017, and
remain  stable  through  the  rest  of  the  projection  horizon.  This  course  reflects  a  significant
reduction in the CPIEFE in 2017, owing to different elements. On one hand, the exchange
rate  trajectory  will  continue  to  contribute  to  reduce  imported  goods  inflation.  On  the  other
hand, beyond the effects of comparison basis related to the stamp tax, services inflation is
expected to continue to decrease gradually, especially because the reduced inflation at the
end of 2016 will affect indexed prices during the early part of 2017. This, in a context where
medium-term inflationary pressures are bounded, and where capacity gaps will continue to
exist during the entire projection horizon. Meanwhile, energy and foods inflation is expected to
rise, partly offsetting the effects of the aforementioned elements on headline inflation (figure
12).
Beyond the presence of higher risks, this forecast assumes that the external impulse facing
the  Chilean  economy  will  be  as  estimated  in  September.  In  particular,  external  financial
conditions  will  be  less  favorable,  but  better  terms  of  trade  are  expected.  The  baseline
scenario  projects  a  copper  price  of  US$2.35  and  US$2.40  per  pound  in  2017  and  2018,
respectively, in line with forecasts by market analysts and with an environment marked by an
appreciated dollar and higher interest rates. The oil price, in turn, is revised slightly upward
 4 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
from September, to an average of 55 dollars per barrel in 2017–2018. Growth projections for
the  world  and  our  trading  partners  show  no  changes  on  aggregate  and  point  to  some
acceleration in 2017 and 2018 (table 2).
As regards the MPR, the baseline scenario uses as a working assumption that it will follow a
trajectory  comparable  to  the  one  assumed  in  the  various  expectations  indicators.  This
ensures that monetary policy will remain expansionary throughout the projection horizon. As
always, the implementation of monetary policy and any possible adjustments to the policy
rate  will  be  conditional  on  incoming  information  and  its  effects  on  the  projected  inflation
dynamic (figure 13).
On the external front, although the market anticipates an increase in the fiscal impulse in the
United States, with planned infrastructure works, tax cuts and measures generally intended
to boost growth, their details are still unknown, as is the time it will take to carry them out. In
that  sense,  there  is  the  possibility  of  a  significant  fiscal  package  that  results  in  higher
economic growth in the US and the rest of the world. However, another possibility is that the
impulse  disappoints  and  financial  markets  deteriorate,  ending  up  in  dominating  negative
effects. The US inflation outlook also poses risks, as it could precipitate a more aggressive
behavior of the Fed. For now, after the meeting of last week, the Fed announced a slightly
faster withdrawal of the monetary stimulus. The effects of potential protectionist measures on
world activity and trade has to be considered as well. All this, with Brexit’s effects still in the
dark and with several major European economies preparing election processes. Plus doubts
surrounding the soundness of some European banks.
Financial  conditions  facing  the  emerging  world  have  worsened,  and  there  is  the  risk  of  a
sharper  deterioration.  In  China,  despite  stabilizing  activity,  risks  remain,  especially  in  its
financial  system.  In  Latin America,  there  are  still  economies  in  need  for  adjustments  and
others making changes that could create some turbulence.
At  home,  the  inflationary  surprises  of  recent  months  concentrate  in  prices  linked  to  the
exchange  rate  and  foodstuffs,  but  some  delay  in  inflation’s  convergence  to  3%  cannot  be
ruled out, especially if capacity gaps widen more than forecast. Meanwhile, the evolution of
the peso will continue to be subject to a high degree of uncertainty, which could affect short-
term inflation in either direction.
Regarding  activity,  the  most  recent  figures  put  a  note  of  caution,  even  considering  the
volatility of month-to-month data and that demand-side information at hand has been more
favorable. Also, the deterioration of external financial conditions could have a stronger than
anticipated impact. Conversely, the baseline scenario considers that the level reached by the
price of copper in recent weeks will not remain over the projection horizon. This, because
there has not been any corresponding change in its fundamentals and because its increase
has gone counter to the evolution of global interest rates and the value of the dollar. However,
it is possible that the current prices of the metal will last for longer than expected, which could
boost domestic spending once again —for example by an earlier recovery of investment in
the sector— or because it could improve confidence sooner.
All considered, the Board estimates that the balance risk is unbiased for both activity and
inflation.
Summing up, we now face a scenario where inflation has dropped faster than expected— but
will stand at 3% at the end of the projection horizon—and where activity continues to grow
slowly. Both domestic and external risks have increased.
Let me now turn to the issues we explored in our Financial Stability Report.
 5 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
The Financial Stability Report
Our  Financial  Stability  Report,  which  we  publish  in  June  and  December  of  each  year,
presents  recent  macroeconomic  and  financial  developments  that  might  influence  the
financial stability of the Chilean economy.
On the external front, the risks presented in the FS Report are the same of the Monetary
Policy  Report  I  just  described.  Worth  mentioning  is  the  uncertainty  surrounding  how  the
worsened  external  financial  conditions  and  the  Chinese  situation  will  affect  us.  In  China,
private credit is still on the rise, as is the banks’ exposure to the real estate sector, where
house  prices  continue  to  grow  at  two-digit  rates  in  the  high  demand  cities.  The  quality  of
banks’  portfolios  has  deteriorated  further,  in  line  with  the  poor  behavior  of  the  corporate
sector. This situation could worsen further with a rise in financial costs, again if international
trade policies move towards protectionism, given the still high dependence of the Chinese
economy on its exports.
At home, the effects of the higher external interest rates on local rates and on the valuation of
mutual and pension funds, especially fixed-income-intensive ones (e.g., the E pension fund)
are worth noting. In the particular case of mutual funds, significant withdrawals have been
observed  in  medium-  to  long-term  funds,  which  undid  part  of  the  increases  reported  in
previous FS reports. Although so far there have been no significant hikes in money market
rates, the greater dependence of medium-sized banks on financing coming from these funds
is one risk worth keeping an eye on.
The  financial  situation  of  domestic  firms  has  not  changed  much  from  earlier  FS  reports.
Corporate debt has fallen a little, to 119% of GDP at the third quarter, but it is still near peak
levels. A large part of the variation owes to the peso appreciation against the dollar during the
period (figure 14). The profitability of domestic firms also kept its downward trend at the close
of 2015. A similar pattern is seen for a group of companies reporting to the Superintendence
of  Securities  and  Insurance  (SBIF)  which  maintain  low  profits  and  high  indebtedness  by
historic standards. Meanwhile, various indicators reveal that the exchange rate risk remains
bounded.  Finally,  firms’  bank  debt  repayment  default  remains  stable  and  relatively  low,
although the increase in the substandard commercial portfolio reflects a slight decrease in
borrowers’ capacity to keep their repayments up to date. This situation could worsen in the
face  of  a  more  adverse  economic  scenario  resulting  from  slower  economic  activity  or
increased financial expenses. The latter could be seen if the increases in funding costs were
transmitted  to  the  local  lending  rates,  thus  affecting  firms  needing  to  renegotiate  their
liabilities.  Our  estimates,  however,  suggest  that  a  deterioration  in  activity  would  have  a
greater impact on firms’ financial strength than would an increase in financial expenses.
Household risk indicators remain fairly stable, in line with the gradual adjustment of the labor
market. Aggregate household indebtedness continues to increase because of a higher share
of mortgage loans. The lower interest rates seen up to September helped to maintain the
aggregate  financial  burden  relatively  stable  around  15%  (figure  15).  At  the  same  time,
delinquency in both consumer and mortgage loans remained bounded with no major variation
from the previous half. Some exceptions include consumer loans granted by Clearing and
Family Allowance Houses and bank mortgage credits in the northern regions, where credit
quality  has  fallen.  Thus,  one  risk  identified  in  the  FS  report  is  that  a  worsening  of  labor
indicators could hinder the repayment capacity of households.
Turning to the real estate sector, both housing prices and mortgage credit have moderated
their  growth  rates.  Several  housing  price  indicators  posted  lower  growth  rates  than  in
previous  quarters,  reflecting  the  dynamics  of  their  components  (figure  16).  Data  from  real
estate  companies  reporting  to  the  SBIF  show  no  increase  in  withdrawal  rates  at  the  third
quarter of 2016. It is worth noting, however, that this risk persists because a large part of
 6 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
promised projects in 2015 were due to be delivered between the last quarter of 2016 and the
year 2017. Lately, there has been an increase in the down payment required by the banks to
grant a mortgage loan, which could result in more withdrawn promises by those households
that were unable to meet the necessary savings to comply.
Profitability  of  the  banking  system  has  dropped,  as  interest  spreads  have  reduced  their
contribution. This can be explained by a change in composition of the credit portfolio towards
lower  relative  return  products—fewer  consumer  and  more  mortgage  loans—and  by  the
migration towards less risky clients, who are offered lower interest rates. At the same time,
the capitalizations of the first half of 2016 drove up the banking system’s capital adequacy
ratios (CAR), strengthening their position to deal with adverse economic scenarios. In fact,
stress  tests  indicate  that  banks  have  the  sufficient  capital  to  face  severely  stressful
conditions. All  in  all,  capital  gaps  are  similar  to  those  in  comparable  countries.  Although
several capital increases have been made lately, no changes in banks’ dividend withholding
policies have been observed that would allow increasing the capital base endogenously. In an
international context, the CAR level of the banking system remains below the 25th percentile
in  both  OECD  countries  and  in  the  region. Accordingly,  it  is  important  to  advance  in  the
discussion of legislative initiatives that help to strengthen the banking system’s capitalization,
in line with the efforts that other countries have made to converge with Basel III requirements
(figure 17).
In  summary,  although  in  this  Financial  Stability  Report  we  conclude  that  there  are  no
fundamental changes in our risk outlook, we do see that local agents’ financial strength has
diminished steadily during the past few years due to weakening economic activity. Household
and corporate debt has increased moderately but persistently, non-financial firms’ profitability
has fallen together with the limited expansion of output—reducing their capacity to deal with
greater financial expenses—and the banks’ profits and capitalization have dwindled. Although
the lower interest rates have helped these developments not to translate into financial stress,
the agents’ capacity to deal with an adverse external scenario is now lower than it was a few
years ago, especially if such scenario causes further economic slowdown. In this context, it
is  very  important  that  some  of  the  trends  of  recent  quarters,  such  as  the  lower  growth  in
corporate debt and higher bank capitalization, consolidate.
I would like to end this presentation—my first as the Governor of the Central Bank of Chile—
by  sharing  some  thoughts  about  the  achievements  and  challenges  facing  the  institution  I
have now begun to lead.
Final thoughts
Let  me  begin  by  stressing  that  I  have  been  handed  an  institution  that  can  show  great
strengths and unquestionable achievements. As I said, the last inflation figure was 2.9% in
twelve  months,  practically  right  on  the  monetary  policy  target.  Financial  risks  are  well
contained  and  the  Chilean  economy  has  successfully  weathered  a  period  of  significant
slowdown without much trouble.
As an institution, the Bank inspires credibility and trust. Over the past several years, inflation
expectations two years out have remained stable at the policy target. Also, the voice of the
Bank has been heard when it has identified risks emerging in the financial sector, and its
model  of  organization  and  autonomy  has  inspired  every  agent  searching  for  institutional
schemes granting a transparent and equitable operation in key functions.
It  is  important  to  recognize  the  contribution  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile’s  staff,  Board
members and Governors that came before me to achieving those high standards.
Getting to this point wasn’t easy, in either substantive or institutional terms. During the past
few years, the evolution of the economy has been determined largely by the swings in the
 7 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
world  economy.  The  end  of  the  so-called  commodity  boom,  the  persistence  of  very
expansionary monetary policies—both conventional and unconventional—, deflation replacing
inflation  as  a  macroeconomic  risk  and  the  profound  transformations  that  the  Chinese
economy has experienced, among others, are some of the large-scale phenomena that have
generated  major,  even  atypical,  changes  in  the  external  scenario  facing  the  emerging
economies.
These changes have been perceived especially clearly in Chile. During the years of highly-
priced commodities, especially when they were coupled with particularly low interest rates,
our economy grew more than 5% annually, the real exchange rate dropped substantially, and
investment boomed. Despite this, they were years of particularly low inflation, driven by the
drop in many tradable goods’ inflation.
The  situation  changed  dramatically  in  late  2013,  when  Chile’s  terms  or  trade  reversed
significantly. Since then growth has been near 2% and investment has receded, as has the
current  account  deficit.  Between  2013  and  2015  the  peso  depreciated  largely,  pushing
inflation above the tolerance range for longer than expected.
The transition from high growth and low inflation to low growth and high inflation is certainly
uncomfortable  for  any  central  bank.  More  so  if  this  transition  features  an  autonomous
confidence shock as happened in our case. But we do not choose the shocks that hit us.
What we can do is to deal with them and cushion their impact on the overall economy. This
has been possible, to a great extent, because of our appropriate policy framework.
This  framework  consists  of  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  with  a  floating  exchange
rate. This makes it possible to adjust the monetary impulse so that projected inflation two
years out stands at 3%, allowing relative prices to adjust to changes in external conditions. In
the  context  of  the  end  of  the  long  cycle  of  high  commodity  prices,  this  policy  framework
helped the economy to walk the path of the necessary adjustments it had to make, which
required low real interest rates and a depreciated currency. Thus, although inflation soared in
the years 2014 and 2015, monetary policy was eased, because despite the higher inflation,
we saw that medium-term pressures were pushing down.
This countercyclical operation of monetary policy was accompanied by a policy of structural
fiscal balance that allowed the budget’s automatic stabilizers to act. The combination of both
elements and their rigorous application throughout the cycle allowed to attenuate its inherent
volatility, and therefore its social costs. But as the fiscal policy framework assumes a rather
passive role for it, monetary policy has been, and will continue to be, the first line of defense.
The continuity of the monetary policy framework and its fiscal counterpart over sixteen years
has proven effective during booms and busts, passing difficult economic and political tests.
Thus, the continuity with the outlines that our Central Bank has built is not only an expression
of its soundness as an institution, but a logical course of action, when its objectives have
been clearly achieved.
Continuity provides a sound base to face new challenges and to build and strengthen the
institutions. The innovations that the Central Bank of Chile has incorporated into all its areas
of action, from monetary policy to its own corporate management, from generating statistics
to the management of circulating money, are proof that a sound institution is not necessarily
immutable. Also, that an autonomous organization can develop beyond its legal mandates.
The challenges facing the Bank in the future, in both the macroeconomic and the institutional
fields must not be underestimated. The confidence that our citizens put in this institution is
not an insured capital but something that, again, needs to be earned day by day in each one
of its areas of responsibility.
 8 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
These challenges involve, first and foremost, applying the inflation targeting framework in a
changing  macroeconomic  context,  both  externally  and  internally.  The  business  cycle  has
stopped  behaving  as  it  was  traditionally  understood—with  a  certain  regularity  between
economic activity in the United States and the emerging economies; between the value of the
dollar  and  commodity  prices;  between  the  money  supply  and  market  interest  rates.
International  trade  and  investment  have  been  slow  to  recover,  which  has  been  especially
damaging for exporters of natural resources, such as Chile.
China’s economic prominence, the integration of financial markets and the accumulation of
liquidity  globally  have  amplified  the  contagion  mechanisms  across  countries  and  sectors.
Deep social and demographic changes have altered household behavior in terms of work,
saving and consumption, while technological development, the densification of value chains
and changes in consumer preferences broaden the range of firms’ choices about how and
for whom to produce.
All this will force the Central Bank to multiply its efforts to generate new data and analyses, to
better  understand  the  international  transmission  mechanisms,  the  financial  behavior  of
households, the sources of systemic risks in the banking industry and the operation of key
markets, such as those for financial derivatives and mortgages, among others.
A better understanding of expectations-building mechanisms and the bases of consumer and
business confidence can also help the Bank fine-tune the mechanisms to communicate its
policy  decisions  so  that  it  can  provide  reliable  guidance  to  the  markets.  But  the  need  for
greater  transparency  does  not  end  in  monetary  and  financial  policy,  because  the  Central
Bank, being a public institution, must be able to adapt its standards of transparency to the
changing needs of markets and to the demands of Chilean citizens.
It  must  also  be  able  to  identify  and  prevent  new  perils  threatening  the  performance  of  its
various  functions.  At  this  point,  it  is  particularly  important  to  ensure  the  continuity  of  the
payment systems and operations whereby monetary policy takes place, because of the great
technological developments in this area and the high costs of any failure. Equally important
are  the  risks  associated  with  the  circulation  of  banknotes  and  coins  and  the  lesser  value
means of payment that are part of the day to day lives of every Chilean.
The autonomy of the Central Bank also means that the quality of its institutional management
is  a  special  responsibility. Although  it  is  not  part  of  the  State’s  administration,  it  is  equally
owned by every Chilean, who rightfully demand an efficient use of their resources.
To undertake all these tasks, it is important to recognize that trust in a central bank also rests
on  its  prudence.  An  institution  responsible  for  price  stability  and  financial  stability  cannot
afford to improvise or experiment.
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  acknowledge  the  potential,  but  also  the  limits  of  monetary
policy. In particular, we must reaffirm that it does not have the capacity to affect the medium-
term  trends  of  the  economy  and  not  even  completely  eliminate  the  cyclical  variations  that
affect it. Our main contribution to the country’s development is, in line with the mandate of our
Organic Law, to keep inflation low and stable, reducing economic volatility and financial risks,
with  the  expectation  that  by  reducing  uncertainty  we  will  facilitate  investment,  employment
and consumption decisions that shorten the cycle.
The right mix of prudence and determination is not easy to calibrate. Prudence is necessary
to correctly assess the implications of changes in the economic environment, resisting the
temptation to look for the easy way out, which can prove very costly in the medium term.
Determination is necessary in order to act in a timely way, because an untimely monetary
policy will delay the convergence of inflation to the target or will do so at an unnecessary cost.
 9 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  practice,  this  means  making  robust  monetary  policy  decisions  in  uncertain  conditions.
Thus, in our last monetary policy meeting we communicated that, in the most likely scenario,
a bounded easing of the monetary impulse would be needed.
The search for the right combination of prudence and determination is also necessary in the
other  fields  where  the  Central  Bank  operates.  To  monitor  the  financial  sector  without
restricting its ability to innovate; to develop instruments and facilities that are attractive to the
market, and to improve risk management and transparency without compromising efficiency
and timeliness.
Identifying  the  new  challenges  facing  the  Central  Bank  and  finding  the  answers  that  best
balance  prudence  and  determination  requires  organized  and  systematic  efforts.  As  an
expression of it, in the coming months we will develop a new institutional strategic planning
exercise.  We  intend  to  consult  with  various  players,  both  public  and  private,  including,  of
course, this Committee.
The purpose of this exercise, of the initiatives we undertake, and the conduct of our regular
policy  decisions  must  be  particularly  explicit.  What  we  ultimately  aspire  is  to  continue  to
strengthen the Central Bank of Chile as an institution of excellence, that our fellow Chileans
can trust.
Thank you.
  10 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 11 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 12 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 13 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 14 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 15 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 16 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 17 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
 18 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
  19 / 19
BIS central bankers' speeches
