Joachim  Wuermeling:  Remarks  on  the  growing  importance  of
Green Finance
Introductory  remarks  by  Prof  Joachim  Wuermeling,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Dinner  reception  within  the  scope  of  the  Green  Finance  Study
Group meeting, Frankfurt am Main, 17 January 2017.
 On behalf of the Deutsche Bundesbank I welcome all of you here in Frankfurt heartily for the first
core meeting of the Green Finance Study Group under the German G20 presidency.
I’m very happy to host tonight’s dinner event in this spectacular museum.
Before  giving  the  floor  to  Mr.  Bräunig,  let  me  make  a  few  short  remarks  on  the  growing
importance of Green Finance and the latest trends in sustainable investing of Bundesbank in our
role as a fiscal agent.
It’s a pleasure to welcome you here in this amazing museum. In this museum you may travel
through times long ago and learn about the evolution of life on our planet. You are invited to an
exclusive tour after dinner. The most spectacular exhibits– not only for kids – are the enormous
dinosaur skeletons. To me, they are an impressive example of evolution – but also a warning that
even such powerful creatures were very sensitive to changes in the world’s ecosystem.
The question how dinosaurs became extinct about 65 million years ago has been analyzed quite
extensively. Even though, as I understand it, a prevailing answer hasn’t been found yet; at least,
there’s some common ground between the theories: Climate change – either a very sudden or a
rather gradual one – played an important role for the extinction.
Today, in the 21st century, climate change, pollution and natural resource depletion are important
challenges all over the world. It goes without saying that the world of finance will play a crucial
role in mobilizing private capital for green investments. And I would argue that the financial sector
is well advised to embrace this trend towards a greener economy.
The  Green  Finance  Study  Group  plays  a  valuable  role  in  this  context. All  of  you  have  made
remarkable contributions. The Chinese presidency brought the project to first base. The German
presidency now has the honor to support the run to the second.
When  transforming  the  economy  to  a  greener  one,  it’s  crucial  in  my  point  of  view  to  rely  on
market-based  concepts:  „Going  green“  should  not  only  be  a  moral  obligation  but  a  superior
economic choice. Environmental factors have to be integrated into the financial decision making
properly. Investors have to have all relevant environmental data at their disposal.
I’m convinced that the ongoing work in the Study Group helps to make significant progress in this
respect.
The Bundesbank acts as fiscal agent alongside its classical role as central bank of Germany. In
this capacity, we help to set up and passively manage pension funds for the federal and various
state governments. At the Bundesbank, we recently observe a growing interest in sustainable
investment strategies within the public sector. This is particularly true for equity investments. The
fixed  income  market  still  lags  behind  slightly. At  the  current  stage,  Green  Bonds  can  only  be
considered a small complement to an existing portfolio allocation due to the fact that the market
is still at a nascent stage.
How do we – at Bundesbank – take these developments into account? We take our fiduciary
duties  very  seriously:  We  share  our  knowledge  and  expertise  in  the  field  of  sustainable
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
investments. And we ultimately implement our clients’ investment decisions.
Some of our clients have either been using sustainability criteria within their equity portfolio for
quite some time or recently took the decision to include such criteria in a timely manner. Others
currently rethink their investment strategy and consider sustainability criteria as well.
We are working on instruments which allow for further ways to include sustainability criteria in
our passive portfolio management.
Investors  have  plenty  of  possibilities  when  investing  in  sustainable  equity  indices.  They  can
customize indices according to their own ethical beliefs. In order to achieve the expected mixture
of equities various complex questions have to be answered by the investor and considered by
the index provider.
For instance:
What’s our interpretation or definition of sustainability?
Are we mainly concerned about environmental issues?
Or do we focus on social responsibility as well?
What about governance issues?
How rigorous are we in pursuing the selected strategy?
for example: if we exclude tobacco producers, how do we treat supermarket chains that sell
cigarettes?
These questions are not easy to answer, and they may well differ substantially from investor to
investor.  It  seems  that  individualization  sometimes  replaces  standardization  in  terms  of
constructing  an  index.  I  think  this  is  positive.  It  enhances  market  variety,  diversification  and
market  intelligence.  The  investors  take  advantage  of  ever  more  choices.  It  encourages
competition and supports a growing universe of green assets.
There’s one message I’d like to send: Sustainable investing does not necessarily mean losing
performance.  It  is  not  a  question  of  “either-or".  Incorporating  sustainability  criteria  gives  fresh
impetus to risk management and may well lead to outperformance.
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  wish  you  fruitful  discussions  in  tomorrow’s  sessions  and  a  lot  of
success in pushing the topic of Green finance in the coming months. I hope that all of you will
take a lot of ideas with you and help to promote their implementation at home.
I also hope that you take a positive impression with you: From Frankfurt as financial capital not
only of Germany but of the whole Euro area. London City will be leaving the EU. We are ready for
new responsibilities. But we are not competing with other locations in an aggressive manner.
Division of labor is key to the success of European markets. Rather than marketing for big shifts
from  London  to  Frankfurt,  we  offer  to  be  the  Euro-end  of  a  wide  bridge  from  the  City  to  the
continent. Frankfurt stands for a resilient, stable and extremely well-functioning financial industry.
And it is open for fresh thinking – and doing. Green Finance is one of our high-priority topics.
For example the KfW, Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau, is Germany’s most important promotional
bank. It was founded in 1948 and has ever since been encouraging forward-looking ideas – in
Germany, Europe and throughout the world. With an issuance volume of 2.8 billion Euro in 2016
alone, the KfW is one of the leading issuers of Green bonds. The KfW does not only talk about
Green Finance – it does it.
This is why it’s a great pleasure for me to introduce to you Mr. Günther Bräunig who is truly an
expert  in  the  field  of  Green  Finance.  Mr.  Bräunig  has  joined  the  KfW  in  1989  and  has  been
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
member of the Executive Board since 2006. He is responsible for capital markets.
After the next course, Mr. Bräunig will take the floor. Mr. Bräunig:  I’m really looking forward to
your remarks. And to all of you: Have a pleasant and productive stay in Frankfurt.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
