Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Major milestone for financial integration in
ASEAN
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia), at the Luncheon, hosted by Bank Mandiri, Kuala Lumpur, 6 July 2017.
 I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  deliver  the  remarks  for  the  lunch  gathering  hosted  by  Bank
Mandiri. I am confident that Bank Mandiri will be the first Qualified ASEAN Bank in Malaysia, a
major milestone for financial integration in ASEAN.
Indonesia and Malaysia – neighbours and friends
Let me start with the close relationship between both of our countries. Our relationship extends
beyond our geographical proximity but is bound by our similarities in language, culture and of
course – food. These natural forces have allowed us to forge and strengthen a strong history of
cross-border  trade  and  investments.  Businesses  from  both  countries  have  also  strongly
committed to invest and contribute to each other’s socio-economic development.
Malaysian companies have made significant investments in Indonesia, amounting to USD12.1
billion at end 1Q-2017. These investments span the financial services, telecommunication and
agriculture sectors.
In  fact,  the  collaboration  between  Malaysian  and  Indonesian  corporates  gave  birth  to  Malindo
Airways Sdn Bhd in 2012. It speaks volume of the partnership and close cooperation between
our two countries. Indeed this venture will further open up ASEAN skies and expanded the close
ties between the people of Indonesia and Malaysia.
Over  the  last  few  years,  Indonesian  firms  have  also  started  to  increase  their  presence  in
Malaysia.  A  significant  step  forward  came  last  month  when  our  respective  Trade  Ministers
announced a target for bilateral trade of USD30 billion in the coming years. This is a doubling of
USD13.8 billion recorded in 2016. I strongly believe that this target is very much achievable and
with the closer banking relationship our trade will further flourish.
Reflecting on our journey towards ASEAN integration
Our partnership in ASEAN marks another integral part of our long standing and deep relationship.
There is always the risk that many may take ASEAN integration for granted. If we reflect closely
on our journey and how far we have come, is not by mere coincidence. It is a culmination of the
collective  vision,  commitment  and  conviction  to  realise  the  benefits  from  deeper  integration.
Where we stand today is the true embodiment of the spirit of ASEAN of mutual trust and close
cooperation.  We continue to believe that this is the path forward for our region, and one that
requires us to further deepen our strong ties to meet the challenges of the future.
This occasion is also a testament to the leadership of Indonesia and Malaysia and the excellent
working relationship between the two countries. It gives me great pleasure and satisfaction to
see many familiar faces today who have been instrumental in realising this efforts, especially Pak
Muliaman and Pak Wimboh. For those who are not aware, we go back a long way. In 2011, Pak
Muliaman  and  I  were  given  the  privilege  to  lead  the  Taskforce  on ASEAN  Banking  Integration
Framework.  We  were  succeeded  by  Deputy  Governor  Abdul  Rasheed  and  Pak  Wimboh.
Coincidentally, both of them were at the IMF together representing our constituency, in their roles
as Alternate ED and ED respectively. They were replaced by Aznan Aziz and Pak Mulya Sirega.
When they completed their term at the IMF, Pak Wimbo became the Chairman of Bank Mandiri
and  Rasheed  became  the  Deputy  Governor.  As  fate  had  it,  Pak  Muliaman  became  OJK
Chairman and yours truly became the Governor.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
All the planets were perfectly aligned. All of our efforts culminated in 2014 with the signing of the
ASEAN  Banking  Integration  Framework  by  ASEAN  Central  Bank  Governors.  Another  key
achievement was the signing of the bilateral ABIF agreement between Indonesia and Malaysia in
August  2016  by  Pak  Muliaman  and  I.  Six  years  since  its  genesis,  we  are  proud  to  see  the
conceptualisation and realisation of ASEAN banking integration beginning to take shape.
Under ABIF, banks in the region will be able to play a greater role in facilitating cross-border trade
and investment. It will further enhance linkages. The framework allows deeper integration while
providing  adequate  safeguards  to  account  for  national  development  objectives  and  financial
stability.
Given the significant role of banks in regional economies, the successful implementation of ABIF
will be a major catalyst for sustainable, inclusive and mutually reinforcing growth in the region. As
a sign of Malaysia’s commitment towards this agenda, the ratification of ABIF commitments was
completed  in  March  this  year.  I  hope  that  the  ratification  process  can  be  concluded  swiftly  to
enable Indonesian QABs to operate in Malaysia in the near future.
Dawn of a new era
The operationalisation of the ASEAN Banking Integration Framework represents the dawn of a
new  era  of  banking  relationship  between  Indonesia  and  Malaysia.  We  are  privileged  to  be  a
witness  and  contributor  to  this  historical  event.  Financial  integration  is  a  key  agenda  for  the
ASEAN region and will only intensify further in the future.
As an ASEAN bank embodying the ASEAN spirit, and the largest bank in Indonesia, Bank Mandiri
can bring much experience and leadership across the region. Bank Mandiri’s current scope of
activities covering trade financing, SME and micro banking products is highly relevant towards
advancing the interests of both Malaysia and the broader ASEAN region.
The  entry  of  Bank  Mandiri  into  Malaysia  via  the  ABIF  Framework  would  also  provide  an
opportunity to further enhance the regional integration in payment systems between Malaysia and
Indonesia.
The current collaboration between the ATM switches in Malaysia (MEPS) and Indonesia (ATM
Bersama) to facilitate cross-border cash withdrawals can be enhanced to facilitate cross-border
remittances leveraging on over 11,000 ATMs in Malaysia and 17,000 ATMs in Indonesia. This can
be  leveraged  upon  by  both  the  Malaysian  and  Indonesian  population  including  the  diaspora
groups to undertake safe and efficient cross-border remittances. 
Such  collaboration  can  also  be  extended  to  facilitate  retail  payment  card  transactions  via  the
domestic  debit  card  schemes  of  both  countries.  Eventually,  I  envision ATMs  in  Malaysia  and
Indonesia will be linked seamlessly. This will reduce cost, enhance safety and expand outreach.
Conclusion
Let me conclude with a quote by Malaysia’s second Prime Minister, Tun Abdul Razak Hussein,
who said in 1967 that, “We cannot survive for long as independent but isolated peoples unless
we also think and act together and unless we prove by deeds that we belong to a family of South-
East Asian nations bound together by ties of friendship and goodwill”
We  have  indeed  come  a  long  way  in  our  cooperation  and  journey  between  Indonesia  and
Malaysia.  The  potential  of  Bank  Mandiri  as  a  Qualified  ASEAN  Bank  in  Malaysia  will  be  a
significant milestone for both our countries and the ASEAN region. It represents the realisation of
a  vision  that  was  formed  more  than  six  years  ago  with  the  ASEAN  Banking  Integration
Framework, with roots that go even further back. We should expect greater achievements by
both our countries.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Thank you.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
