Michele Bullock: Big banks and financial stability
Speech by Ms Michele Bullock, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, at the Economic and Social Outlook Conference, Melbourne, 21 July 2017.
 Thanks to David Orsmond, Penny Smith, David Norman and Dilhan Perera for assistance with
this speech.
Good  afternoon  and  thank  you  to  the  Melbourne  Institute  for  the  invitation  to  speak  at  this
interesting  conference.  The  theme  of  new  directions  in  an  uncertain  world  certainly  has
resonance at the moment in any manner of ways – political, economic, social and environmental.
Many of these themes have been examined during the course of the conference. The theme of
this session is: are the banks too big? What I will attempt to do in the next 20 or so minutes is
take the banking system structure as given and talk about the implications of this for the stability
of the Australian financial system.
First,  a  bit  of  background.  Australia  has  always  had  a  fairly  concentrated  banking  system.
Through  the  1960s  and  1970s,  the  major  banking  groups,  of  which  there  were  up  to  eight,
accounted for around 80 per cent of banking assets in Australia (Graph 1). This share declined to
around  65  per  cent  following  deregulation  and  the  entry  of  foreign  banks  in  the  mid  1980s.  It
remained around this level until the global financial crisis when the share of the major banks, of
which there were now only four, rose back to around 80 per cent.
The concentration of the banking system in Australia is not unique internationally but it is at the
high end. There are other countries that have similar levels of concentration to Australia, even a
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
bit  higher,  including  Canada  and  Sweden  (Graph  2).  But  there  are  many  countries  that  have
much  lower  levels  of  concentration  including  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and  a
number of European countries.
Aside from the concentration, there are a couple of features of the Australian banking system that
are worth highlighting.
First, if we look at cost-to-income ratios, Australian banks seem to be fairly efficient (Graph 3).
On average, the four major Australian banks have a cost-to-income ratio of around 40 per cent,
at the lower end of cost-to-income ratios for a selection of banks in other countries. It’s likely that
this reflects, in part, differences in the business models of the banks. Banks like the Australian
banks, with a greater emphasis on traditional lending activity, tend to have lower cost-to-income
ratios than banks with a greater focus on other activities, such as investment banking and wealth
management.
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Second, the major Australian banks are very profitable (Graph 4). Apart from a brief period after
the global financial crisis, returns on equity for the major Australian banks have consistently been
around 15 per cent and even higher in some years. Their performance has been helped by a long
run of consistent economic growth in Australia – we haven’t had a recession in over 25 years. So
our banks haven’t had to deal with substantial credit losses that have impinged so heavily on the
profits  of  many  overseas  banks  following  the  global  financial  crisis.  This  profitability  has  also
meant  that  the  banks  have  found  it  relatively  easy  to  build  capital  in  response  to  international
moves to improve the resilience of the banking system worldwide.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
So while we have a concentrated banking system, the major banks appear relatively efficient and
strong.  What,  then,  can  we  say  about  the  implications  of  this  structure  for  financial  stability?
Does  having  a  relatively  concentrated  banking  system  promote  financial  stability?  Or  does  it
make  the  system  more  susceptible  to  shocks?  The  answer  to  this  question  is  not
straightforward.
One view is that a concentrated banking system promotes financial stability in a number of ways.
It  is  sometimes  argued,  for  example,  that  if  a  concentrated  banking  system  implies  less
competition,  the  large  banks  will  be  more  profitable  and  able  to  generate  capital  organically,
increasing  their  resilience.  This  argument  therefore  suggests  that  a  concentrated  banking
system  will  promote  financial  stability.  Having  a  few  large  banks  might  also  promote  financial
stability in other ways. Larger banks might be more diversified in the risks they take on and have
more sophisticated risk management systems. It could also be argued that it is easier for our
prudential  regulator,  the  Australian  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (APRA),  to  supervise  and
regulate a small number of large banks.
On the other hand, an alternative view is that a concentrated banking system results in large
banks that are too big to fail. According to this argument, this is not good for financial stability if
this implicit guarantee encourages the banks to take on excessive risk in the knowledge that they
will not be allowed to fail. Furthermore, if the large banks all have very similar business models,
as they do in Australia, problems in one bank might portend problems in the others and hence a
large  systemic  issue.  If  anything,  the  major Australian  banks’  business  models  have  become
more similar over the years since the global financial crisis. They are all now more focussed on
housing  lending  and  some  are  pulling  back  from  wealth  management  and  international
operations. Finally, it could also be argued that a large bank is, by its nature, more complex and
hence more difficult to supervise than a set of smaller banks.
The academic literature doesn’t provide much guidance on which of these views is likely to be of
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
more relevance for Australia. But is there anything we can say from experience over the past
couple  of  decades  since  deregulation?  Has  increasing  competition  from  new  entrants  had  an
impact  on  financial  stability?  Has  the  concentration  of  the  system  resulted  in  concerns  about
financial stability? I will take both these issues in turn.
The  issue  of  competition  in Australia’s  banking  system  has  generated  a  lot  of  interest.  There
have  been  a  myriad  of  reviews  and  inquiries  over  the  years.  Indeed,  another  inquiry  into
competition in the financial system, undertaken by the Productivity Commission, has just kicked
off. And the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission has recently been tasked with
keeping a watching brief on competition in the financial system.
The  Bank  supports  the  Productivity  Commission’s  work  on  competition.  But  in  the  context  of
what  competition  might  mean  for  financial  stability,  it  is  worth  making  three  points.  First,
concentration  of  itself  does  not  necessarily  imply  a  lack  of  competition.  Indeed,  indicators  of
market  structure  such  as  measures  of  concentration  are  not  regarded  as  a  very  accurate
measure of competition. In principle, four large banks could still compete very actively among
themselves. So if you have a concern that competition could lead to financial instability, having a
concentrated system will not necessarily address the issue.
Second, competition tends to be pro-cyclical. Competition on the lending side tends to hot up
during the good times. Lending for housing, for example, has been pretty competitive over the
past few years. In tougher times, however, competition for some types of funding, particularly
more  stable  types,  tends  to  increase.  Post-crisis,  for  example,  banks  looked  to  increase  the
amount of deposit funding relative to wholesale funding, increasing competition for deposits, and
in particular, term deposits. Regulators therefore need to be aware of this and take it into account
when considering financial stability.
Third, at least some sectors of the market do appear to be contestable, as demonstrated by the
impact that new entrants have periodically had on the competitive landscape. The arrival of the
mortgage  originators  in  the  1990s,  for  example,  resulted  in  more  competition  in  the  housing
lending  space.  And  foreign  bank  branches  have  utilised  intragroup  funding  and  wholesale
deposits to compete in areas such as institutional lending. Despite the dominance of the four
major banks in the market for deposits, competition has increased in this space as well. Foreign
banks have introduced innovative online saving accounts, allowing them to compete for deposits
without  having  a  large  physical  presence.  More  recently,  financial  technology  brings  the
possibility of even more contestability in the financial system. Competition and innovation are to
be  encouraged.  Regulators  nevertheless  need  to  be  alert  to  developments  and  any  potential
implications for financial stability. There is, consequently, a great deal of interest internationally on
whether developments in financial technology will have implications for financial stability.
While competition can, at times, pose challenges for stability of the financial system it is also true
that large banks pose particular risks. A strong framework of prudential regulation and proactive
supervision are therefore necessary regardless of the specific structure of the system.
The actions taken on housing lending in Australia over the past few years are an example of how
active  supervision  can  address  risks  that  might  arise  in  an  environment  of  heightened
competition. Over the past few years, the regulators had observed very strong growth in lending
to investors for housing. Furthermore, a large share of that lending was interest only for the first
5–10 years of the loan – that is, the loans were not being amortised for a very long time. And this
behaviour was being fuelled by competition between the banks. Individual banks were reluctant to
pull back because if they did so, the business would go to their competitors.
This raised concerns about the financial stability implications if this behaviour continued. So in
late 2014, with the support of the Council of Financial Regulators, APRA introduced a 10 per cent
‘speed  limit’  on  growth  in  investor  housing  credit  as  well  as  tighter  lending  standards.  The
Australian  Securities  and  Investments  Commission  supported  this  with  work  on  responsible
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
lending. This was followed up in March this year with a limit on the share of interest-only loans
and further guidance on lending standards. As Wayne Byres (the Chairman of APRA) recently
highlighted, the concerns that prompted action were not about competition on interest rates or
customer service standards. Rather, the concern was that competition was manifesting itself in
an erosion of lending standards. Not only were the banks taking on more risk, but households
were carrying a higher level of debt that they would have to service, which could be particularly
concerning  in  the  event  of  a  shock.  In  other  words,  it  was  a  financial  stability  issue  not  only
because of its potential impact on banks’ balance sheets, but also because it was increasing the
vulnerability of the household sector.
The  importance  of  the  major  banks  for  financial  stability  is  also  explicitly  recognised  in  the
regulatory  framework.  Since  the  financial  crisis  there  has  been  a  major  international  effort  to
increase the resilience of the global financial system, and Australia has been an active participant
both in the policy debate and in implementation. There have been a number of elements to this
work – raising capital levels, increasing liquidity buffers, identifying and regulating systemically
important financial institutions and addressing the issue of ‘too big to fail’.
The  implementation  of  capital  requirements  in  Australia  has  been  driven  by  the  international
move  to  higher  capital  ratios  as  well  as  a  desire  to  ensure  that  the  Australian  banks  are
‘unquestionably  strong’.  The  Financial  System  Inquiry  (FSI)  set  out  the  rationale  for Australian
banks  to  achieve  this.  It  noted  that  the  concentrated  nature  of  the  system  and  the  similar
business models of the major banks could exacerbate contagion if one major bank experienced
difficulties. With capital levels increasing around the world, the FSI therefore concluded that it
was important that the Australian regulatory framework continued to evolve to ensure confidence
in the Australian banks. It also suggested that higher capital ratios would help to reduce the value
of any implicit government guarantees.
Australian banks’ capital levels have therefore risen substantially in recent years, both relative to
the past and in relation to international peers (Graph 5). Furthermore, consistent with the Basel
framework for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBS), APRA has determined that due
to  their  size,  interconnectedness,  substitutability  and  complexity,  the  major  banks  should  be
required to hold more capital against their risk-weighted assets than smaller financial intuitions.
Specifically, they are required to hold an additional 1 per cent of their risk-weighted assets as
common equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital, bringing the minimum CET1 capital requirement for the
major banks to 8 per cent (Graph 6). All of the major banks are currently comfortably above this
minimum. But APRA’s announcement earlier this week on unquestionably strong capital ratios
means  that  the  larger  banks,  in  particular,  will  need  to  build  their  capital  a  little  further  over
coming  years. As  D-SIBS,  the  major  banks  are  also  subject  to  more  intense  supervision  by
APRA.
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  higher  capital  levels  and  greater  intensity  of  supervision  provide  confidence  that,
notwithstanding the systemic importance of the major banks, the Australian financial system is
more resilient to shocks than it was in the past. But there is still a need to consider what might
happen in the event of a bank failure. Global initiatives in this area have focused on developing
appropriate resolution frameworks and on addressing too big to fail.
The  centrepieces  of  this  work  are  the  Financial  Stability  Board’s Key  Attributes  of  Effective
Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions (Key Attributes) and total loss absorbing capacity
(TLAC) for global systemically important financial institutions (G-SIFIs). The intention is that the
relevant  authorities  should  be  able  to  resolve  failing  global  financial  institutions  in  an  orderly
manner without taxpayer exposure to loss from solvency support. TLAC helps to operationalise
the Key Attributes for G-SIFIs, by ensuring that there are sufficient resources to recapitalise a
failing institution. This includes securities that could be ‘bailed in’ in the event that losses were
large enough to reduce the capital below certain minimum levels.
It is still too early to determine how effective the new arrangements for resolution are likely to be.
Most  countries  are  developing  their  frameworks  for  resolution,  although  if  the  institution  being
resolved is a large, interconnected, international bank, the process will be complex and difficult
regardless, especially given the cross-border issues associated with resolution. Most countries
are also still to finalise their TLAC regimes, so how this might work in practice is not clear at this
stage.  But  many  financial  institutions  are  issuing  securities  with  TLAC-like  features  and  there
have  been  recent  examples  in  Europe  where  these  types  of  securities  have  played  a  role  in
resolving troubled banks.
In Australia, we are working on improvements to our resolution framework in line with the Key
Attributes and legislation is being drafted to give APRA stronger crisis management powers. But
the  issue  of  an  appropriate  regime  to  enhance  banks’  loss  absorption  and  recapitalisation
capacity,  as  recommended  by  the  FSI,  is  still  being  considered.  We  will  be  watching
developments  overseas  on  this  issue  closely  to  determine  the  most  appropriate  regime  for
Australia.
In conclusion, I want to reiterate that the concentration of the banking system in four major banks
in  Australia  does  not  necessarily  provide  financial  stability  benefits.  Nor  is  it  necessarily
detrimental to financial stability. But the systemic importance of the four major banks in Australia
does mean that they need to have a proportionately greater supervisory focus. The strengthening
of capital and liquidity standards post crisis, and the use of proactive and intensive supervision,
has certainly improved the resilience of the major banks in Australia, and the financial system
more broadly. The success of other global initiatives to address the issues that arise when a
bank fails, however, remain to be seen.
Thank you.
References
RBA  (Reserve  Bank  of  Australia)  (2014),  ‘Submission  to  the  Financial  System  Inquiry’,
Submission to the Financial System Inquiry, 2 April.
Davis K (2007), ‘Banking Concentration, Financial Stability and Public Policy’, in Kent C and J
Lawson 
(ed), The  Structure  and  Resilience  of  the  Financial  System,  Proceedings  of  a
Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 255–284.
Byres  W  (2017),  ‘Opening  Statement’,  Opening  Statement  at  the  Roundtable  Hearing  for  the
Productivity Commission Inquiry into the State of Competition in the Australian Financial System',
29 June.
Byres W (2017), ‘Fortis, Fortuna, Adiuvat: Fortune Favours the Strong’, Keynote address at the
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
AFR Banking and Wealth Summit 2017, 5 April.
FSB  (Financial  Stability  Board)  (2014), Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for
Financial Institutions, October.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
