Jerome  Powell:  Relationship  between  regulation  and  economic
growth
Speech  by  Mr  Jerome  H  Powell,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, Washington
DC, 22 June 2017.
 Chairman  Crapo,  Ranking  Member  Brown,  and  members  of  the  committee,  I  appreciate  the
opportunity  to  testify  at  today’s  hearing  on  the  relationship  between  regulation  and  economic
growth.  We  need  a  resilient,  well-capitalized,  well-regulated  financial  system  that  is  strong
enough to withstand even severe shocks and support economic growth by lending through the
economic  cycle.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  approached  the  post-crisis  regulatory  and
supervisory reforms with that outcome in mind.
As a result of an improving economy and actions taken by both the federal regulators and the
industry, the U.S. financial system is substantially stronger and more stable than it was before
the financial crisis erupted nearly a decade ago. In this testimony, I will highlight the considerable
gains made since the crisis and reflect on the principles that should guide us in the next phase. I
will  also  discuss  some  specific  actions  that  align  with  these  principles  that  we  have  recently
taken  or  expect  to  take  that  are  designed  to  reduce  regulatory  burden  without  compromising
safety and soundness and financial stability.
Post-crisis regulatory and supervisory reform
There is little doubt that the U.S. financial system is stronger today than it was a decade ago. As I
will discuss, loss-absorbing capacity among banks is substantially higher. The banking industry,
and the largest banking firms in particular, face far less liquidity risk than before the crisis. And
progress in resolution planning by the largest firms has reduced the threat that their failure would
pose. These efforts have made U.S. banking firms both more robust and more resolvable. And
history shows that when U.S. banking firms are financially strong, they are able to better serve
their customers.
Today  I  will  highlight  developments  in  the  four  key  regulatory  areas  designed  to  improve  and
maintain  the  resiliency  of  the  banking  industry:  capital,  stress  testing,  liquidity,  and  resolution
planning.
Regulatory capital reforms
The U.S. banking agencies have substantially strengthened regulatory capital requirements for
large  banking  firms,  improving  the  quality  and  increasing  the  amount  of  capital  in  the  banking
system.  High-quality  common  equity  tier  1  capital  (CET1)  is  important  because  it  is  available
under all circumstances to absorb losses.
Since the financial crisis, U.S. banks have been required to meet new minimum requirements for
CET1 to ensure a base of protection against losses. U.S. banks also have been required to meet
capital conservation buffers that incentivize banking firms to keep their capital levels well above
the minimums in order to maintain full flexibility to allocate profits to shareholders and employees.
For the U.S. global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), we have also imposed an additional
capital surcharge designed to reduce the threat that a failure of any of these firms would pose to
financial stability.
Stress testing
The Federal Reserve also conducts the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), a
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
stress test that assesses whether large banking firms have enough capital to withstand severely
adverse macroeconomic and financial market stress. We also use this process to assess the
quality  of  the  capital  planning  processes  of  large  banking  firms.  The  U.S.  bank  holding
companies (BHCs) subject to CCAR have more than doubled the dollar amount of their CET1
from around $500 billion in 2009 to $1.2 trillion in the first quarter of 2017, and have more than
doubled their CET1 risk-based capital ratios from 5.5 percent to 12.4 percent over that period.
Liquidity regulation reforms
The banking agencies have also required large banking firms to substantially reduce their liquidity
risk.  Our  key  reforms  in  this  area  include  a  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR)  that  requires  large
banking  firms  to  keep  enough  high-quality  liquid  assets  (HQLA)  to  meet  net  stressed  cash
outflows  over  a  30-day  period.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  adopted  the  Comprehensive
Liquidity Analysis and Review (CLAR) supervisory program for evaluating the liquidity of the most
systemic banking firms. In addition, the banking agencies have proposed a net stable funding
ratio (NSFR) regulation that would help ensure that large banking firms maintain a stable funding
profile over a one-year horizon.
Liquidity positions within the U.S. banking system have improved substantially since the financial
crisis. The U.S. G-SIBs increased their holdings of HQLA from about $1.5 trillion to about $2.3
trillion between 2011 and the first quarter of 2017. The same institutions have also reduced their
reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  funding  from  approximately  35  percent  of  assets  in  2006  to
about 15 percent of assets today.
Large bank resolvability reforms 
As required by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank
Act),  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  working  with  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation
(FDIC) to improve resolution planning by banks. Through thoughtful resolution planning, firms can
reduce the risk that their failure would have disruptive effects on the financial system and the
economy.  The  resolution  planning  process  has  caused  the  largest  U.S.  banking  firms  to
substantially improve their internal structures, governance, information collection systems, and
allocation of capital and  liquidity  in  ways  that  both  promote  resolvability.  The  Federal  Reserve
also has helped improve the resolvability of the largest banking firms by requiring U.S. G-SIBs
and the U.S. intermediate holding companies of foreign G-SIBs to meet long-term debt and total
loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements.
Effect of regulation on U.S. banks
1
Evidence overwhelmingly shows that financial crises can cause severe and lasting damage to
the economy’s productive capacity and growth potential.  Post-crisis reforms to financial sector
regulation and supervision have been designed to significantly reduce the likelihood and severity
of future financial crises. We have sought to accomplish this goal in significant part by reducing
both the probability of failure of a large banking firm and the consequences of such a failure were
it  to  occur.  We  have  substantially  increased  the  capital,  liquidity,  and  other  prudential
requirements  for  large  banking  firms,  and  these  increases  are  not  free.  Stronger  capital
requirements increase bank costs, and at least some of those costs are passed along to bank
customers. But in the longer term, stronger prudential requirements for large banking firms will
produce more sustainable credit availability and economic growth. Our objective should be to set
capital and other prudential requirements for large banking firms at a level that protects financial
stability and maximizes long-term, through-the-cycle credit availability and economic growth.
Guiding principles to simplify and reduce regulatory burden
As we near completion of the major post-crisis regulatory reforms, this is a good time to assess
the effectiveness and efficiency of these reforms. Several principles are guiding us in this effort.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, we should protect the core elements of the reforms for our largest banking firms in capital
regulation,  stress  testing,  liquidity  regulation,  and  resolvability.  Second,  we  should  continue  to
tailor  our  requirements  to  the  size,  risk,  and  complexity  of  the  firms  subject  to  those
requirements. In particular, we should always be aware that community banks face higher costs
to meet complex requirements.  Third,  we  should  assess  whether  we  can  adjust  regulation  in
common-sense ways that will simplify rules and reduce unnecessary regulatory burden without
compromising  safety  and  soundness.  And  finally,  we  should  strive  to  provide  appropriate
transparency to supervised firms and the public regarding our expectations.
Areas of focus for recalibration and simplification
Small and medium bank regulatory simplification
Over  the  course  of  the  last  year,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  U.S.  banking  agencies
finalized  significant  burden-reducing  measures  for  smaller  banks.  The  banking  agencies
significantly  streamlined  Call  Report  requirements  for  banks  with  less  than  $1  billion  in  total
assets. This streamlined Call Report resulted in 24 fewer pages than the previous total of 85, and
reduced data items required to be reported by small banks by 40 percent. The banking agencies
also increased the number of institutions eligible for 18-month, rather than 12-month, cycles for
safety and soundness and Bank Secrecy Act exams. And the Federal Reserve implemented a
desirable  statutory  change  to  raise  the  threshold  of  its  Small  Bank  Holding  Company  Policy
Statement from $500 million to $1 billion in assets.
In  addition,  earlier  this  year,  the  U.S.  banking  agencies  issued  a  report  under  the  Economic
Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) that outlined additional measures
that the agencies committed to completing to reduce regulatory burden. Perhaps most notably,
the  agencies  committed  to  developing  a  proposal  to  simplify  the  generally  applicable  capital
framework that applies to community banking organizations. Among other things, this proposal is
being  designed  to  simplify  the  current  regulatory  capital  treatment  of  commercial  real  estate
exposures,  mortgage-servicing  assets,  and  deferred  tax  assets.  The  agencies  would  seek
industry  comment  on  the  proposal  through  the  normal  notice  and  comment  process.  The
agencies also expect to further reduce burden on small banks by additional streamlining of Call
Reports.
The Federal Reserve has also supported increases in various statutory thresholds in the Dodd-
Frank Act to more narrowly focus financial stability reforms on larger banking firms. For example,
we believe that small banking organizations could be exempted from the Volcker rule and from
the  incentive  compensation  requirements  of  the  Dodd-Frank Act.  We  also  would  support  an
increase in the $10 billion Dodd-Frank Act asset threshold for company-run stress tests and risk
committee  requirements,  and  in  the  $50  billion  threshold  for  enhanced  prudential  standards
under section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act.
Resolution plans
The U.S. G-SIBs have made substantial progress in improving their resolvability and have taken
concrete  steps  to  implement  important  organizational,  governance,  and  operational  measures
developed  in  the  course  of  their  resolution  planning  exercises.  These  firms  will  be  filing  new
plans on July 1 that should incorporate agency feedback and guidance. The Federal Reserve and
FDIC will engage in a full review of these plans.
We are exploring with the FDIC ways to improve the resolution planning process. We believe it is
worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every
two  years,  and  focusing  every  other  of  these  filings  on  key  topics  of  interest  and  material
changes from the prior full plan submission. In addition, there may be opportunities to greatly
reduce  the  submission  requirements  for  a  large  number  of  firms  due  to  their  relatively  small,
simple,  and  domestically  focused  activities.  Such  an  approach  could  limit  full  plan  filing
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
requirements to firms that are large, complex, or have systemically critical operations.
Volcker rule
The  Federal  Reserve  is  reassessing  whether  the  Volcker  rule  implementing  regulation  most
efficiently  achieves  its  policy  objectives,  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  the  other  four
Volcker  rule  agencies  to  find  ways  to  improve  the  regulation.  In  our  view,  there  is  room  for
eliminating  or  relaxing  aspects  of  the  implementing  regulation  that  do  not  directly  bear  on  the
Volcker  rule’s  main  policy  goals.  We  also  believe  it  would  be  constructive  for  Congress  to
consider focusing the Volcker rule on entities with significant trading books and eliminating the
requirement  that  smaller  firms  be  subject  to  the  rule.  In  the  meantime,  we  believe  that  it  is
worthwhile for the agencies to consider further tailoring of the implementing rule as it applies to
smaller firms and firms with small trading books, and to consider ways to streamline or reduce
the paperwork and reporting burden associated with the rule.
Enhancements to stress testing and CCAR
The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to  increasing  the  transparency  of  the  stress  testing  and
CCAR processes. We will soon seek public feedback concerning possible forms of enhanced
disclosure.  One  such  disclosure  would  be  a  range  of  indicative  loss  rates  predicted  by  the
Federal  Reserve’s  models  for  various  loan  and  securities  portfolios.  We  would  also  disclose
more information about risk characteristics that contribute to the loss-estimate ranges.
When  we  release  CCAR  results  next  week,  we  will  disclose  more  detailed  information  on
CCAR’s qualitative assessment. We will also publish a document later this year summarizing
the performance of the industry on qualitative matters. Many of our largest banking firms have
made substantial progress toward meeting supervisory expectations for capital planning. If that
progress continues, I believe it will be appropriate to consider removing the qualitative objection
from CCAR for those firms that achieve and sustain high-quality capital planning capabilities. We
would continue to assess the capital planning practices of these firms as part of our ongoing
supervisory  processes.  I  would  also  see  it  as  appropriate  to  adjust  CCAR’s  assumptions
regarding  the  balance  sheet  and  capital  distributions.  These  adjustments  would  take  place  in
conjunction with the integration of the stress test into a firm’s regulatory capital requirements.
Leverage ratio
In  light  of  the  substantial  progress  in  the  build-out  of  our  overall  regulatory  capital  and  stress
testing frameworks over the past few years, the Federal Reserve is taking a fresh look at the
enhanced  supplementary  leverage  ratio.  We  believe  that  the  leverage  ratio  is  an  important
backstop  to  the  risk-based  capital  framework,  but  that  it  is  important  to  get  the  relative
calibrations of the leverage ratio and the risk-based capital requirements right. Doing so is critical
to mitigating any perverse incentives and preventing distortions in money markets and other safe
asset markets. Changes along these lines also could address concerns of custody banks that
their business model is disproportionately affected by the leverage ratio.
Conclusion 
U.S.  banks  today  are  as  strong  as  any  in  the  world,  as  shown  by  their  solid  profitability  and
healthy  lending  over  recent  years.  As  we  consider  the  progress  that  has  been  achieved  in
improving the resiliency and resolvability of our banking industry, it is important for us to look for
ways  to  reduce  unnecessary  burden.  We  must  also  be  vigilant  against  new  risks  that  may
develop. In all of our efforts, our goal is to establish a regulatory framework that helps ensure the
resiliency of our financial system, the availability of credit, economic growth, and financial market
efficiency. We look forward to working with our fellow regulatory agencies and with Congress to
achieve these important goals.
1
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
See,  for  example,  Robert  F.  Martin,  Teyanna  Munyan,  and  Beth Anne  Wilson  (2014),  “ Potential  Output  and
Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves?” IFDP Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, November 12); and Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), “Inflation and
Activity—Two  Explorations  and  Their  Monetary  Policy  Implications  (PDF),”  IMF  Working  Paper  WP/15/230
(Washington: International Monetary Fund, November).
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
