Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr:  Financial  education  and  consumer
protection – triggering a positive ripple effect
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Launch of Wealth Watch Book II, Manila, 6 June 2017.
 Thank you for joining us at the launching of the second volume of the Wealth Watch book of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. 
This is a special event that marks our continuing program to help improve the lives of Filipinos
through financial inclusion, education and protection. 
In  particular,  this  book  provides  practical  tips  on  wealth  creation  and  enhancing  the  readers’
financial  well-being  through  investments  management  and  entrepreneurship.  Indeed,  the
increasing sophistication of financial markets makes continuing financial education necessary. 
Thus, even as we encourage our youth and the unbanked to develop the habit of saving, we also
continue  to  develop  for  those  who  already  have  savings,  guides  on  how  to  make  prudent
decisions to grow and invest their money.  
The timing is perfect. The Philippine economy has been growing consistently and in recent years
at levels regarded as one of the fastest in Asia. In fact, our growth rate of 6.4% in the first quarter
this year, brought our record of achieving uninterrupted GDP growth for 73 consecutive quarters
now. In other words, our economy has been on a growth track since the first quarter in 1999 or in
the last 18 years.
To make this economic growth meaningful and inclusive, we should continue to empower our
people to prosper and achieve financial security.   
The link between financial literacy and the economy
Ladies and gentlemen. An increasing body of research shows that a financially-literate population
can create “economic ripples”. They have higher levels of savings and diversified investments.
They manage credit and mortgages well, and make retirement planning a priority.   In short, they
make  good  financial  decisions  that  lead  to  better  economic  well-being  for  themselves,  their
families and eventually, their communities. Very few initiatives have such transformational power.
Financial literacy in the Philippines
1
As a people, therefore, we should aspire for the development of a financially-learned citizenry
who can protect themselves from fraud, even as they gain from being part of the financial system
and a robust economy. In this manner, they can contribute to the sustained growth and strength
of our economy.
This is the challenge before us. A World Bank survey indicated that, on average, Filipino adults
correctly answered only three out of seven financial literacy-related questions. The same survey
also found that Filipinos lack specific knowledge required to make informed saving and borrowing
decisions.   Clearly, there is a need for effective financial education interventions.
The BSP Economic and Financial Learning Program
2
The  BSP  has  long  recognized  the  importance  of  economic  and  financial  education  and  its
potential to help improve people’s lives. In 2010, we consolidated all BSP learning events under
one umbrella – the Economic and Financial Learning Program (EFLP) to ensure consistency of
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
messages,  synergy  of  activities,  and  efficient  use  of  resources.  We  focused  on  current
economic  issues,  the  role  of  the  BSP  in  the  economy,  good  money  habits,  personal  finance
management and financial consumer protection.
EFLP now consists of more than 10 component programs designed for specific audiences: the
children,  college  students,  the  working  sector,  investors,  overseas  Filipinos,  and  selected
unbanked  sectors.  This  is  a  nationwide  program  that  involves  seven  departments  within  the
3
  EFLP participants have rated the programs
BSP, as well as our regional offices and branches.
with an average of 4.5, with 5 as highest possible score.
Having said this, we know a lot more needs to be done.   In this connection, we will continue to
enhance,  innovate  and  diversify  our  outreach  programs  to  determine  the  most  effective  and
efficient ways to reach our target audience and attain our education objectives. 
Financial education, a key component of consumer protection
At the BSP, financial education is not just an advocacy — it is integral to the Financial Consumer
Protection Framework. This is a set of regulations that promotes consumer welfare and upholds
– within BSP-supervised institutions – a culture of transparent, fair and responsible treatment of
consumers.  This  means  that  financial  institutions  under  BSP  supervision  will  be  held
accountable for ensuring that consumers are:
1.  Provided with correct and understandable information about their financial transactions;
2.  Protected  from  mis-use  or  abuse  of  their  personal  data  through  risk-based  data  handling
procedures;
3.  Treated fairly and professionally, with the consumer’s well-being in mind;
4.  Given access to an objective and efficient mechanism for complaint resolution and redress;
and
5.  Assisted  to  make  sound  decisions  through  objective  financial  education  and  awareness-
raising methods.
Indeed, we remind our institutions that a customer-centric approach to any business, including
banking and finance, works well and makes for good business in the end. 
At this point, I want to share key lessons we have learned along that way:
1.  First  —  Consumer  protection  and  financial  education  is  a  collective  responsibility.
Regulations set in place by regulators such as the BSP could only be as effective as the
manner in which these are observed and implemented by financial institutions. At the same
time, our people must do their part to become financially-literate.
2.  Second  —  Multi-sectoral  partnership  and  collaboration  is  critical  in  promoting  consumer
literacy and protection. We are a country of over 100 million people, and growing. We have
varied demographic, geographic, learning preferences and cultural characteristics, that must
be considered when designing and implementing consumer education programs. 
3.  Third — The efficiency and effectiveness of policies and programs must be monitored and
measured  using  suitable  methodologies. Among  others,  we  want  to  measure  changes  in
consumer  behaviour  as  a  result  of  education  interventions  and  consumer  protection
measures. Only through fact-based measurement will we be able to calibrate our programs
to become more effective and efficient.
Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen, while we continue to register gains in the goals we have set for financial
inclusion,  education  and  consumer  protection,  we  do  need  to  further  broaden  and  deepen
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
engagement with our financial consumers.
I wish to reiterate therefore that the BSP is open to partner with like-minded organizations that
share our vision of a financially-literate citizenry. Together, we can develop a financially secure
future for our family, our community and our country.
Maraming salamat, at magandang hapon!  
Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas!
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
1
2
3
Sources: Lusardi and Mitchell, 2007; Lusardi and Tufano, 2008; Stango and Zinman, 2006; Lusardi and Mitchell,
2007; Alessie, Lusardi and van Rooij, 2007; Hogarth and O.Donnell, 1999.
World  Bank,  2015,  Enhancing  Financial  Capability  and  Inclusion  in  the  Philippines:  A  Demand-Side
Assessment.
EFLC, FCPD, IFAO, CORAO, DER, DES, CIIO and regional offices/branches.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
