Associazione Bancaria Italiana 
Unione Bancaria e Basilea 3 – Risk & Supervision 2017 
 The Italian banking system and the exit from the crisis 
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Fabio Panetta 
        Rome, 14 June 2017 
    The economic situation and outlook  
Growth in the euro area is firming up, driven by the accommodative monetary policy stance 
and increased international trade. In Italy the recovery has been under way for more than two years 
and is taking hold. Recently released data from Istat indicate that in the first quarter of this year 
GDP  grew  by  0.4  per  cent,  pushed  up  by  household  consumption  and  firms’  inventories. 
Investment, which had been accelerating strongly since the start of 2016, slowed, but this should 
only be temporary. Our analyses suggest that firms will expand their production capacity once again 
in 2017. After the sharp increase at the end of last year, exports are continuing to grow in parallel 
with world trade.  
The recent positive performances are partly unexpected and must be analysed carefully; they 
will have to be confirmed in the months to come. They are, however, consistent with improvements 
in the labour market. Although excess labour supply depresses wage growth, the number of people 
in employment continues to increase, with an acceleration in April, and this despite the termination 
of the incentives for hiring new employees on permanent contracts.  
Inflation is rising but its core component remains weak. Similar developments can be seen in 
the euro area. Although the risks of deflation have declined, upward pressures on prices have not 
emerged to the extent that they are self-sustained in the medium term or that justify a revision of the 
monetary policy stance.  
The outlook for the Italian economy is favourable. In the forecasts published last week, we 
calculated that GDP could grow by 1.0 per cent in the current year and by 1.2 per cent in the two 
following  years.  The  national  accounts  data  released  a  few  days  ago  (and  not  included  in  our 
forecasts)  suggest  higher  growth  at  the  end  of  the  first  quarter,  which  would  raise  GDP  growth, 
other things equal, to 1.3 per cent on average in 2017. The gap between Italy and the other euro-
area economies should continue to narrow.   
The banking system has almost completely adapted to the new economic environment and to 
the comprehensive regulatory reform that followed the crisis. There are important open  issues that 
require the banks and the authorities to be fully committed. After going through an unprecedented 
recession  and  setting  out  on  a  path  of  capital  strengthening  under  very  difficult  conditions,  the 
positive performance of the real economy has now created the pre-conditions for Italian banks to 
move out of the stage where they are just reacting to the crisis.  
 2 
Regulatory developments and supervisory action 
Banking  regulations  introduced  in  response  to  the  financial  crisis  are  having  a  profound 
effects on prudential and accounting rules and on supervision. The new regulations are compressing 
the size of the banking sector. The Basel III rules raised capital requirements, limited leverage, and 
established  stringent  liquidity  requirements.  Additional  capital  requirements  are  envisaged  for 
systemically important banks. Several countries have introduced measures to separate lending from 
the financial activities that banks carry out on their own account. Other capital measures, of which I 
will comment today, are in the final stages of preparation as part of the completion of Basel III.  
Looking ahead, these regulatory changes will make banks less risky, increasing their capital 
and liquidity and lowering their leverage. However, banks’ profitability and the development of the 
lending market will be under pressure, with potential repercussions on the availability of credit for 
the real economy.  In the euro area these developments are coupled with a limited role of capital 
markets in financing business.  
Most  of  the  new  regulations  have  been  implemented  and  are  already  producing  effects.  A 
pause  is  now  desirable  to  allow  time  to  adapt  to  the  new  system  and  to  prevent  the  continuous 
introduction of new rules from itself becoming a source of uncertainty. Outstanding issues must be 
solved rapidly.  
The first important issue is that of internal models. The measures currently under discussion 
would  reduce  latitude  in  calculating  risk  parameters  and  limit  the  unjustified  variability  of  risk-
weighted  assets,  which  are  the  denominator  in  capital  ratios.  Differences  among  countries  have 
emerged  in  capital  requirements  measured  with  internal  models.  This  issue  is  less  important  for 
Italian banks, which have so far made limited use of such models. However, it is essential to reach 
an agreement on the matter to ensure a level playing field with foreign banks, which have made 
broad  use  of  internal  models  for  a  long  time.  By  taking  steps  to  develop  internal  models,  even 
within a consortium and subject to verification by the supervisory authorities, the Italian banking 
system could align itself with those of the other main European countries on this issue. 
The  Targeted  Review  of  Internal  Models  (TRIM)  project  recently  launched  by  the  Single 
Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) assesses the compliance of significant banks’ internal models and 
ensures  uniform  supervisory  practices.  The  review  covers  models  for  credit  risk  as  well  as  for 
market and counterparty risk. Over 100 assessments are scheduled in 2017, in which Bank of Italy 
staff will be actively involved. The goal is to swiftly eliminate any deviation from the regulations; 
3 
misalignments with the practices set out in the TRIM Guide will be assessed at a later stage.1 Italian 
banks  must  plan  in  advance  any  adjustments  to  their  risk  measurement  systems,  anticipating 
potential  consequences  on  capital.  They  have  already  made  significant  progress,  but  much  more 
remains to be done.  
A  second  important  issue  to  ensure  more  effective  supervision  and  a  level  playing  field  at 
European  level  is  the  removal  of  uncertainty  in  the  valuation  of  bank  assets.  The  assets  and 
liabilities recorded in banks’ balance sheets as Level 2 (L2) and Level 3 (L3) instruments play a key 
role, as their evaluation is particularly complex. Their value is not directly inferable from market 
prices  but  must  be  estimated  using  complicated  techniques.  Coupled  with  the  difficulty  of 
distinguishing between L2 and L3 contracts, this can lead banks to make valuations whose goal is to 
keep down capital requirements through accounting and regulatory arbitrage.  
Classifying a contract as L2 instead of L3 has several advantages. First, it is possible from the 
outset to book profits equal to the entire difference between the actual transaction price and the fair 
value estimated through internal models (known as the day-1 profit). Second, it limits the ‘stigma’ 
associated  with  holding  large  amounts  of  L3  instruments,  which  analysts  regard  as  highly  risky 
assets.  
Because  of  their  high  degree  of  complexity  and  low  level  of  standardization,  L2  and  L3 
instruments  are  illiquid;  their  quick  sale  would  likely  entail  a  substantial  discount  on  their  fair 
value. When the high risks embedded in these financial instruments emerged in the United States in 
2008, the value of L2 assets decreased by 15 per cent and that of L3 assets by 21 per cent, with 
troughs of 31 per cent and 57 per cent respectively.2 If not properly accounted for in the valuations, 
illiquidity could give rise to fictitious profits representative of hidden risks. Moreover, the actual 
value of L2 and L3 portfolios is difficult to assess, as it cannot be inferred from the prices recorded 
in the markets but is instead estimated using models based on variables whose liquidity is also low 
or nil.  
The total value of the complex instruments held by euro-area banks is very high. L3 and L2 
assets total €162 billion and €3.3 trillion respectively; L3 and L2 liabilities amount to €143 billion 
and €3.1 trillion. The total amount of these instruments is twelve times greater than that of net non-
performing loans. Two national banking systems hold 73 per cent of the euro-area total and five 
banks  (none  of  them  Italian)  58  per  cent.  The  available  data  do  not  tell  us  whether  the  risks 
                                                 
1 Italian  banks  show  misalignments  in  the  credit  conversion  factor  and  in  the  prudential  treatment  of  exposures  in 
default. As regards this last point, the estimation of the loss given default parameter must take into account the recovery 
processes still under way.  
2 See B.W. Goh, D. Li, J. Ng, K. Ow Yong, ‘Market Pricing of Banks’ Fair Value Assets Reported under SFAS 157 
since the 2008 Economic Crisis’, Journal of Accounting and Public Policy, 2015, 34:2, 129–145. 
4 
embedded in assets in these classes are covered by liabilities in the same class. Only with a “perfect 
hedge” would the underlying risks be offset. The uncertainty about the valuation could therefore 
manifest  itself  through  both  an  overestimation  of  assets  and  an  underestimation  of  liabilities, 
thereby compounding the risks rather than cancelling them out. 
Since its establishment the SSM has tackled resolutely the issue of loan valuation, especially 
for  non-performing  loans,  or  NPLs.  Opaque,  illiquid  and  difficult  to  evaluate,  L2  and  L3 
instruments are in many ways similar to NPLs, although they require much lower capital charges. 
Especially in a stress scenario, a decrease in the prices of these instruments could have systemic 
repercussions.  It  is  therefore  crucial  to  enhance  supervision  of  the  accounting  and  prudential 
treatment  of  L2  and  L3  instruments  and  of  the  appropriateness  of  the  values  recorded  in  banks’ 
balance sheets. Within the SSM the Bank of Italy will submit a specific proposal to this effect to the 
Supervisory Board. 
While most of the issues mentioned so far mainly  concern large banks,  many others affect 
smaller ones. An example is the new IFRS 9 accounting standard, which will change loan valuation 
starting from 2018; banks will have to recognize provisions for expected losses and no longer only 
in relation to defaults. This will lead to an increase in loan loss provisions as soon as credit quality 
worsens.  
The new standard will force banks to improve the allocation and assessment of loans and to 
adopt new criteria to measure credit risk and calculate loan loss provisions. To make the impact on 
banks’  supervisory  capital  more  gradual,  the  European  Commission  has  proposed  a  five-year 
transition period. The methods and procedures, however, will have to be in effect at the beginning 
of  next  year.  Supervisory  authorities,  both  in  Europe  and  in  Italy,  are  closely  monitoring  the 
adjustment process, for example through ad hoc surveys. For Italian banks the progress is mixed; in 
many  cases  there  are  delays  in  project  governance,  information  quality  and  model  development. 
They must be tackled and eliminated rapidly. 
Starting next year the prudential filter on available for sale (AFS) exposures towards central 
Government  will  be  removed  for  Italian  less  significant  banks  as  well,  following  the  SSM’s 
decision to lift them for significant banks starting from October 2016. Smaller banks must assess 
carefully the impact of this measure on their capital ratios and should start planning as of now any 
necessary countermeasures.  
The  move  to  IFRS  9  and  the  removal  of  the  AFS  filter  will  increase  the  volatility  of 
regulatory capital. The effect on banks could be more pronounced in Italy owing to the high level of 
sovereign exposures and to the fact that securities with a lower ratings  display  greater volatility. 
5 
Scenario analysis based on changes in the interest rate and risk premium curves is a very useful tool 
for  capital  planning.  In  adopting  IFRS  9,  banks  will  be  allowed  to  decide  whether  to  allocate 
government securities to portfolios other than the AFS one. 
The  consequences  of  the  introduction  of  the  MREL  requirements  will  also  be  far  from 
negligible,  as  banks  will  need  to  issue  liabilities  capable  of  absorbing  losses  if  a  resolution 
procedure is initiated. When fully phased in, the rules will make crisis management easier, but in 
the  short  term  they  will  increase  costs  by  a  factor  that  will  depend  on  the  choices  −  still  being 
debated  −  regarding  the  calibration  of  the  requirement  and  the  nature  of  eligible  liabilities.  The 
funding instruments that qualify for compliance with the MREL requirements are costlier than those 
currently in the balance sheets, especially in countries like Italy characterized by a large share of 
bank  liabilities  placed  with  retail  customers  −  who  could  become  unwilling  to  hold  instruments 
potentially subject to bail-in − and by the limited development of institutional investors, i.e. those 
more interested in liabilities of this kind. 
The  difficulties  and  costs  of  compliance  with  the  MREL  requirements  will  be  greater  for 
smaller banks owing to their limited access to wholesale markets and less liquid issues. This will 
have to be kept in mind when setting the requirements for this type of bank. 
More generally, an excessive burden should not be placed on small banks, in adherence to the 
principle  of  proportionality.  For  example,  for  such  banks  there  is  a  tendency  to  rule  out  the 
existence of a general public interest, which is necessary to initiate resolution procedures. In spite of 
this, the current regulatory framework calls on these banks to pay into a crisis management system 
from which they cannot benefit. As part of the review of EU regulations, some thought should be 
given to measures that respond to the needs of smaller banks, which play a key role in lending to 
small firms, the backbone of the Italian economy. 
Crisis management 
In the crisis years the Bank of Italy dealt with numerous cases of banks in difficulty. Since 
2011 there have been 36 special administration procedures. In 17 cases where it was not possible to 
find a market-based solution, the process led to the start of compulsory administrative liquidation. 
These cases involved small banks and accounted for a combined 0.2 per cent of Italian banks’ total 
assets.  
In market conditions where it has become difficult to transfer bank assets, the new European 
regulatory framework makes managing the crises of large banks problematic. Action is entrusted to 
6 
a plethora of authorities and institutions − national and European − which are independent of each 
other, have non-aligned objectives and have no effective coordination in place between them. This 
extends the time necessary for a solution and makes the decision-making process inefficient and not 
very  transparent,  with  the  very  real  risk  of  confusing  the  responsibilities  of  the  actors  involved. 
Recent experience shows that these problems can be mitigated as long as there are concrete market 
solutions. 
The new rules have so far been interpreted in a such way as to deny recourse to some of the 
tools used in the past to manage problematic company cases without causing disruption. In practice, 
this  makes  crisis  management  more  complicated.  In  particular,  preventive  intervention  through 
deposit  guarantee  funds  is  not  allowed  today,  as  it  is  considered  equivalent  to  state  aid;  in  this 
regard the Italian government lodged an appeal with the European Court of Justice. Furthermore, 
excessively stringent limits have been established for the use of public funds, even if advantageous 
financially and following the full involvement of shareholders and subordinated bond holders; this 
is  the  case  even  in  the  presence  of  serious  risks  for  systemic  stability  or  contagion  of  financial 
intermediaries.  
Effective  crisis  management  requires  a  rapid  and  reliable  time  frame,  a  clear  definition  of 
priorities and responsibilities, and full cooperation between the entities involved. In respect of the 
European regulations, the action of all the authorities must aim to preserve the value of the banking 
business to the benefit of savers, employees and the companies to which they lend. In the absence 
of these conditions, the vulnerability of the banks in crisis will increase, as we have seen in practice.  
The difficulties that preceded the  agreement on the precautionary recapitalization of Banca 
Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena  and  the  long  and  troubled  discussions  involving  Banca  Popolare  di 
Vicenza and Veneto Banca are not due to financial constraints, since the resources earmarked by 
the  Italian  government  are  much  greater  than  those  needed  to  restructure  these  banks.  The 
difficulties stem from regulatory obstacles, which can and must be removed.  
A solution for these two Veneto banks must be outlined very shortly, protecting savers and 
guaranteeing  the  continuity  of  the  business  relationships  maintained  by  the  many  small  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  based  in  an  economically  important  area  of  the  country.  The  Italian 
authorities are totally committed to resolving this problem.  
7 
Non-performing loans 
The problem of non-performing loans is easing as the economy recovers. The flow of new 
NPLs in relation to total loans now stands at 2.7 per cent, which is lower than before the crisis. The 
stock, net of loan loss provisions, is also diminishing, from 10.9 to 9.4 per cent of total loans in 
2016. The disposals already scheduled by the main Italian banking groups will speed up the rate of 
decrease.  
The Bank of Italy has voiced its opinion on the matter of NPLs on several occasions. I will 
therefore simply mention again the key issues and refer you to other documents for a more detailed 
analysis.3 One of the first issues relates to the strategies adopted by banks to manage NPLs. Far-
reaching changes are necessary here. The guidelines published by the SSM are an important point 
of  reference;  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  extending  them,  with  the  necessary  adjustments,  to  the  banks 
under its direct supervision. There are a large number of options from which the banks can choose 
and  they  should  take  advantage  of  them.  The  Italian  banking  system  is  now  more  aware  of  the 
various incentives, as is clear  from the initiatives already under way, but a stronger and broader 
commitment is needed.  
Banks need to get the most out of the instruments available for out-of-court settlement with 
firms regarding debt restructuring and the transfer of real estate collateral. The measures will only 
be effective to the extent that the banks make use of them.  
Complete  and  reliable  information  on  NPLs  also  needs  to  be  made  more  widely  available. 
The  new  system  for  reporting  bad  loans  introduced  by  the  Bank  of  Italy  is  a  step  in  the  right 
direction.  
There is ample scope for improvement in the quality of the data reported. In many cases the 
information  on  the  status  of  recovery  procedures  and  the  nature  of  the  collateral  is  incomplete. 
Approaches differ as regards ongoing procedures; not all banks act promptly. More effort is needed 
to reduce the backlog and exploit the new database to the full. The information must become part of 
the  dossier  provided  to  senior  management  so  that  strategies  can  be  developed  to  maximize 
recovery rates. 
Another  important  issue  concerns  the  length  of  judicial  proceedings.  The  global  reform  of 
arrangements  with  creditors  that  the  Government  has  set  in  motion,  incorporating  the  Rordorf 
Committee’s proposal in a draft bill, will effectively lead to more efficient procedures and better 
                                                 
3 See I. Visco, The Governor’s Concluding Remarks, 31 May 2017; F. Panetta, Seminario istituzionale sulle tematiche 
legate ai non-performing loans, 15 May 2017; C. Barbagallo, I crediti deteriorati delle banche italiane: problematiche 
e tendenze recenti, 6 June 2017. 
8 
outcomes. Rationalizing and simplifying procedures – the aim of the delegated legislation – is an 
important step forward.  
Organizational  changes  to  encourage  judicial  specialization  within  the  court  system 
(particularly  as regards  arrangements with creditors) could be introduced within a short space of 
time. A law effectively creating specialized sections of the courts across the country – possibly by 
reviewing  the  competencies  of  the  different  courts  and  pooling  at  least  the  more  complex 
proceedings – would bring further improvements.  
Part of the problem of the excessive length of judicial proceedings is not due to the legislative 
framework.  The  Italian  courts  vary  widely  as  to  the  duration  of  proceedings  for  bankruptcy  and 
arrangements with creditors. According to data by the Ministry of Justice, comparing the situation 
in  the  north  and  the  south  of  the  country,  at  the  end  of  2015  the  average  duration  of  mortgage 
foreclosure proceedings was 2 years in the Trieste court district and 8.2 years in that of Messina. In 
the case of bankruptcy proceedings the duration ranges from 4.8 years in Trento to 15.4 years in 
Messina. Improving the efficiency of the courts where proceedings take longer than average would 
be of considerable help in reducing the stock of NPLs.  
Large  fire  sales  of  NPLs  can  only  be  a  solution  when  the  bank’s  stability  is  at  risk.  The 
generalized  adoption  of  policies  aimed  at  selling  off  NPLs,  which  would  effectively  lead  to  an 
unwelcome  transfer  of  resources  to  the  detriment  of  Italian  banks  but  to  the  advantage  of  a  few 
specialized  investors,  mostly  foreign,  operating  in  an  oligopolistic  market  for  NPLs  must  be 
avoided. This type of policy would erode banks’ own funds at a time when raising capital is still 
beset with difficulty.  
A solution to the problem of NPLs is on the horizon, but as in the past it will take time.4 The 
banks still need to tackle it resolutely, following prudent provisioning policies and improving the 
way they manage internally not only NPLs but also exposures with a smaller degree of impairment. 
They should assess whether or not to keep impaired loans on their balance sheet according to the 
real likelihood of recovery.  
Business models  
As they overcome the legacy of the double dip recession, Italian banks must equip themselves 
with the means to cope with the new competitive environment, one in which technology plays a 
central role. The rise of Fintech companies, which provide financial services at various points of 
                                                 
4 After the lira crisis of 1992, the bad debt ratio jumped from 5 per cent that year to 10 per cent in 1996. The bad debts 
generated by the crisis were absorbed by banks’ balance sheets over the following four years, with the bad debt ratio 
dropping back to 5 per cent in 2001 (see Pierluigi Ciocca, ‘Sulla questione del problema bancario’, mimeo, 2017).  
9 
production,  and  the  entry  of  major  web  companies  in  the  payment  services  market  bring  strong 
competitive  pressure  to  bear  but  also  support  innovation.  These  may  represent  valuable 
opportunities for the banks. 
There is no single, winning business model. Our analyses indicate that profitable banks are 
active in many different sectors but have in common a high efficiency and productivity. Of the 125 
banking groups supervised by the SSM, about 20 have had an average ROE of at least 6 per cent in 
the last three  years. This subset has a low cost-income ratio, mainly thanks to much higher than 
average unit revenues. Such results are achieved by combining technology with human capital and 
efficient organization. 
Last  year,  the  operating  costs  of  Italian  significant  banking  groups  were  higher  than  the 
average costs of their ‘virtuous’ competitors by about 0.5 percentage points of total assets. This is a 
considerable gap, even adjusted to take account of non-recurring expenses; it is largely due to staff 
costs. Measures already  taken to rationalize branch networks and reduce  personnel will  go some 
way  towards  reducing  the  discrepancy,  but  they  must  be  accompanied  by  more  efficient  labour 
organization with the assistance of technology. In order to ensure that cost cutting does not diminish 
the quality of the products offered or the effectiveness of internal controls, it will be necessary to 
adopt strategies to increase human capital.  
The need to re-assess costs and revenues is particularly pressing for small and medium-sized 
banks, whose reduced scale of operation limits their capacity to invest and achieve economies of 
scale  and  scope.  Consolidation  can  be  an  opportunity,  particularly  for  banks  not  belonging  to 
mutual banking groups. Progress in this direction could be achieved through measures designed to 
forge closer bonds between banks, along the lines of the institutional protection schemes introduced 
by European legislation and already adopted in other countries; this would make it easier for them 
to obtain liquidity or capital in case of need.  
Improving  the  structure  of  the  financial  system,  with  the  markets  playing  a  greater  role  in 
financing  business,  is  part  and  parcel  of  the  current  transition.  The  Government  has  introduced 
several measures in this direction and a  capital  market union is one of the objectives pursued at 
European  level.  As  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  past,  it  is  in  the  banks’  interest  to  support  these 
changes, which will bring benefits to our corporate sector.  
10 
Conclusion 
Now that the economic recovery is gaining strength, progress in the Italian banking system 
can be pursued with determination. Gradually eliminating the risk factors that have been clouding 
analysts’ perception of Italian banks will facilitate this process; banks can now focus on their main 
objective: to restore profitability.  
The conditions are now right for Italian banks to approach the challenges of the new market 
context  with  confidence,  once  again  providing  full  support  to  the  economic  recovery.  Those 
challenges can only be overcome with commitment and determination. 
11 
