Andreas  Dombret:  The  merits  of  and  challenges  for  global
cooperation
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  a  reception  to  celebrate  the  30th  anniversary  of  the  Bundesbank's  Representative  Office,
Tokyo, 22 May 2017.
 1. Introduction
Governor Kuroda
Deputy Governor Nakaso
Ladies and gentlemen
It is wonderful to be back in Tokyo, this extraordinary city. I am happy to see so many of familiar
faces and so many important stakeholders here with us today.
Tonight we are celebrating the 30th anniversary of the Bundesbank’s Representative Office in
Tokyo. Actually, we are ten days early: the Representative Office started its work on 1 June 1987.
But what are ten days among friends?
To mark the occasion, I would like to say a few words on the merits of global cooperation.
 
2. The merits of cooperation
Nowadays, international cooperation is under attack from nationalist, populist movements. Their
claim: We are better off on our own. And I must say that –from an economic point of view –
some  of  the  frustration  is  rational,  since  the  advanced  economies  have  been  undergoing  a
substantial economic transformation due to trade and technological change, which always has
both winners and losers.
Yet,  I  cannot  agree  with  the  conclusion  that  we  should  heavily  limit  or  even  withdraw  from
international trade and global cooperation.
Why, you may ask. The answer is simple: Evolution. One of the key insights of the theory of
evolution is "the survival of the fittest". Many people conclude from this that “competition” is what
makes our species so successful. And while that is not wrong, it falls short of explaining why the
human species is one of the most successful on earth – meaning that it has spread over most
regions  of  the  planet  and  massively  increased  in  number;  because  it  is  cooperation  and  the
division of labour which make our species so successful.
Evolutionary biologists have shown that there are only a few species – between ten and twenty,
depending on the exact definition – on the planet that are capable of cooperating in a complex
manner. And these eusocial species, as they are labelled, are the most successful species on
the planet. The fittest to survive will be those who can compete and cooperate.
In other words: while competition within a species is important for progress, cooperation may be
even more important. This is actually programmed into our DNA.
Let  me  explain  by  giving  an  example.  In  two  scientific  studies,  capuchin  monkeys   and
chimpanzees  proved that primates are programmed to be fair and place a high value on social
contracts. In these studies, two primates were each offered a snack in return for carrying out a
simple task. The two animals would get either a tasty grape or a less tasty piece of vegetable. All
2
1
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the animals preferred the grapes, but they also liked the vegetables – they would eat the latter,
as long as both primates got the piece of vegetable. You can probably see where this is going:
once one of the two animals got a grape and the other a vegetable, the latter would refuse to eat
his snack, even though he had eaten it when both got the vegetable. To express their feeling that
this was unfair, several of the disadvantaged primates actually threw the pieces of vegetable at
the researchers!
The study with chimpanzees revealed a further very interesting finding: if one chimpanzee got a
grape and saw the other receiving the vegetable, the one with the grape would in most cases
also refuse to eat the tasty grape. What a conscience! Primates clearly seem to be programmed
to cooperate.
tendencies 
But why then the recent tide of populism and nationalism, you may ask. Well, it may be because
redistributive  and  restructuring 
in  developed  economies,  globalisation  and
technological change in particular – while having created huge welfare gains for our societies –
have  also  been  penalising  significant  segments  of  our  societies.  This  has  created  political
tension and conflict over time – the Great Recession was a tipping point at which the frustration
grew. This has led people to be frustrated with globalisation and free markets. But we should be
careful  not  to  throw  out  the  baby  with  the  bathwater:  trade  and  globalisation  have  brought  us
more  gains  than  losses.  So  rather  than  resorting  to  protectionism,  we  should  improve
international cooperation.
 
3. Focused global cooperation
Yet, when talking about global market liberalisation and economic cooperation, we hear extreme,
ideologically  motivated  solutions  all  too  often:  for  instance,  populist  nationalism  promises  that
everything will get better if we build new walls between our societies. At the other extreme are
those  who  favour  hyper-globalisation,  that  is,  no  borders  to  economic  activity  at  all  and  full
harmonisation.
History  has  proven  that  both  solutions  are  mere  ideologies.  The  theories  of  both  sides  have
proven to be unrealistic and, to a considerable extent, plain wrong.
So what form of international economic coordination is actually viable?
To answer that – without giving a long lecture – we can borrow a simple yet powerful analysis:
the  globalisation  trilemma.  Dani  Rodrik,  the  well-known  economist  from  Harvard  University,
argues  that  we  face  the  following  trilemma:  we  cannot  have  all  three  things  at  once:  (a)  full,
global market liberalisation, (b) national sovereignty, and (c) democracy. We must choose two of
3
these three, and give one up.
If we choose full economic globalisation, without any obstacles to free trade, then we must give
up either our national sovereignty or our democratic ability to oppose global rules. For example, if
we give up democracy, an autocratic ruler could decree that everyone has to accept the global
rules. If we give up national sovereignty, we could have a global democracy. I think it is fair to say
that we would rather not give up democracy or national sovereignty.
What remains is to limit market liberalisation where our societies deem this necessary. This is
not a convenient truth, because it means we have to look for answers in less clear waters: we
need to find those areas where global cooperation and harmonisation is sensible, and how far it
can  go.  This  strategy  must  then  go  hand  in  hand  with  more  national  autonomy  for  finding
domestic solutions to national challenges.
Given  these  constraints,  a  realistic  middle  ground  would  be  focused  global  cooperation:
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
continuing to cooperate and to harmonise regulations where possible – but also focusing and
improving our efforts. Focused global cooperation would also offer greater scope for solutions
that respect the legitimate interests of countries wanting to run their economies independently.
But let’s not throw vegetables at each other – let’s share grapes.
 
4. The value of personal ties
A few years down the road, I very much hope that we will be living in a world where multilateral
cooperation has been enhanced to benefit all segments of society. Close friendships like those
between  Japan  and  Germany  and  the  multilateral  approach  would  still  form  the  bedrock  of
international cooperation.
The Bundesbank’s office in Tokyo furthers that cause. Our team has done an excellent job over
the past 30 years by playing a vital role in the exchange between the Bundesbank and the Bank
of Japan as well as the Japanese Government. And that is crucial for cooperation: while it may
be technically possible to cooperate without ever meeting each other personally, close personal
ties and an understanding of where the other side is coming from are more important than ever –
especially during times of heated debate.
I want to thank all our colleagues for their dedicated and excellent work – and that includes not
only the current staff but all those who have been serving here since 1987. And especially I want
to thank Ms. Gudrun Moede for her excellent job in running the office and preparing today’s event.
At the same time, we could not be more thankful for the outstanding partnership with the Bank of
Japan. From the very first day, our team felt more than welcome and I am confident that this will
continue into the future.
Governor Kuroda, I would like to thank you and your team in the name of the Bundesbank and our
Tokyo team: it has been and continues to be a privilege to work side by side with you and the
team of the Bank of Japan. We are deeply thankful for the warm welcome, for your support and
for your honest, friendly, and effective cooperation.
 
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Global  economic  cooperation  has  helped  us  to  build  a  more  prosperous  society.  However,  it
does have side effects. Only by reducing and managing these side effects can we foster global
cooperation in the long term.
Only if we manage to strengthen the cooperative principle can we remain successful. Focused
global cooperation promises a way forward. We should all put our minds together to decide how
this can be best achieved.
Continued close cooperation between our nations will serve us well. And our office here in Tokyo
will continue to further that cause.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
Brosnan, S. F. & De Waal, F. B. (2003). Monkeys reject unequal pay. Nature, 425(6955): 297–299.
Brosnan, S. F. et al (2010). Mechanisms underlying responses to inequitable outcomes in chimpanzees, Pan
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
troglodytes. Animal Behaviour, 79(6): 1229–1237.
3
Rodrik, D. (2000). How far will international economic integration go? Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(1):
177–186.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
