  An address by Francois Groepe,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Actuarial Society Banking Seminar 
 The Maslow Hotel, Sandton 
2 August 2017 
 Bank-wide stress testing as a risk management tool 
 Members of the Actuarial Society, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  you  at  this  third  Actuarial  Society  Banking 
Seminar.  The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  would  like  to  congratulate  the 
Actuarial Society of South Africa on its efforts to build expertise in banking – and on 
becoming  a  world  leader  in  this  regard.  Your  initiative  to  introduce  a  Banking 
Fellowship  coupled  with  allowing  actuaries  to  qualify  as  banking  actuaries  is 
commendable and could make important contributions to improving the resilience and 
stability of the domestic banking sector. 
 My  address  today  will  focus  on  stress  testing  and  how  it  is  being  applied  as  a  risk 
management tool. I would also like to share the progress the SARB has made and the 
methodologies it has applied in its approach to stress testing the South African banking 
sector.  
 Stress testing forms part of the macroprudential monitoring framework applied by the 
SARB  in  fulfilling  its  now-expanded  mandate  of  protecting  and  enhancing  financial 
stability, in addition to its price stability mandate. As you are all aware, the mandate of 
the SARB, specifically its primary objective and independence, as entrenched in the 
Constitution, has come into sharp focus recently. The primary objective of the SARB 
is  stated  in  the  Constitution:  “Protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of 
balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.”  This  objective  and  the  independence 
 Page 1 of 9 
provided to the SARB in the Constitution can only be changed by a two-thirds majority 
of the members of Parliament; thereafter any such change would need to be ratified 
by  the  Constitutional  Court.  In  this  way,  the  courts  protect  the  SARB  against  any 
unlawful encroachment of its independence.  
 Furthermore,  the  notion  of  a  central  bank  as  a  public  institution,  with  the  goal  of 
promoting  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  the  interest  of  the  general  public,  is 
remote  from  the  traditional  concept  of  a  commercial  company  with  a  profit  motive. 
Central  banks  have  been  structured  by  their  respective  governments  to  suit  public-
interest  ends.  The  shareholding  structures  have  been  retained  in  some  cases, 
including  by the SARB and in  various others, such as the central banks of Belgium 
and Switzerland. But the inconsistencies with the shareholding of private companies 
necessitated a realignment of the rights and powers of shareholders in central banks. 
Limitations were consequently built into the rights and powers of the shareholders in 
the SARB, such as no policymaking or management roles, a fixed return of R200 000 
per  annum  on  shares  held,  no  claim  on  the  reserves  held  by  the  SARB,  and  the 
election  of  a  minority  of  the  Board  of  Directors  (Board).  The  management  of  the 
business of the SARB, including the setting of monetary and financial stability policies, 
vests  in  the  Governor  and  Deputy  Governors,  appointed  by  the  President  after 
consultations with the Minister of Finance and the Board of the SARB. 
 The  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill,  approved  by  Parliament  in  June  2017  and 
currently awaiting sign-off by the President, makes provision for an expanded mandate 
for  the  SARB,  which  includes  financial  stability.  Financial  stability  aims  to  enhance 
resilience to systemic shocks and to mitigate the macroeconomic costs of a disruption 
in financial sectors. Financial stability is not an end in itself but is generally regarded 
as  an  important  precondition  for  sustainable  economic  growth,  serving  the 
constitutional mandate of the SARB. Financial stability is not about preventing shocks 
or  crises,  but  more  about  identifying  and  mitigating  the  build-up  of  risks  and 
vulnerabilities in the financial sector. Neither is financial stability about preventing bank 
failures at all cost, as the failure of non-systemic banks ameliorates the risk of moral 
hazard and reinforces market discipline. 
  Page 2 of 9 
A stable banking sector is, however, crucial for financial stability as these risks and 
vulnerabilities often originate from systemically important banks and their clients in the 
corporate and household sectors. To identify the vulnerabilities that might be building 
up in the banking sector early enough and to ensure proactive mitigating action, stress 
testing has become an important tool in the toolkit of systemic regulators. It adds an 
important  macroprudential  dimension  to  the  supervision  of  banks  by  assisting 
supervisors  and  macroprudential  authorities  in  evaluating  the  aggregate  capital 
position of the largest banking firms as well as their individual capital levels. 
 Internationally active banks have been applying stress testing at the level of individual 
institutions since the early 1990s; today bank regulators require the use of stress tests 
for monitoring both market and credit risks. Macro stress testing, as a tool to assess 
the vulnerability of entire financial systems, is instead much more recent. It has been 
an  important  component  of  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Programs  (FSAPs) 
launched  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the World  Bank  in  the  late 
1990s,  and  has  become  an  integral  part  of  the  financial  stability  toolbox  of 
policymakers. It was during one of these FSAPs that stress testing experienced severe 
criticism  and  major  challenges as  a  technique  to  assess  the  soundness  of banking 
systems. In its Financial System Stability Assessment  after  the FSAP on Iceland in 
August  2008,  the  IMF  stated  that  the  financial  indicators  of  the  Icelandic  banking 
system  were  above  the  minimum  regulatory  requirements and  indicated  that  stress 
tests  had  suggested  that  the  system  was  resilient. As  you  all  know,  the  Icelandic 
banking system collapsed soon afterwards. 
 To the uninitiated, what the IMF said then may sound astonishing. But it simply echoed 
the message of the stress tests carried out by authorities and banks around the globe 
ahead of what turned out to be one of the worst financial crises in world history, namely 
that  the  financial  system  was  resilient,  sound,  and  strong.  This  was  the  unyielding 
message  confronting  those  who  were  deeply  involved  in  assessing  vulnerabilities 
during  the  years  of  the  so-called  Great  Moderation,  even  as  the  cracks  started  to 
appear.  
 It is, of course, all too easy to criticise stress tests after the fact, but the most recent 
global financial crisis raised a key question: what can and cannot be expected of stress 
 Page 3 of 9 
tests, both now and in the future? It was only in 2009 – when bank regulatory agencies 
in the United States (US) applied their Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or 
SCAP, popularly known as the ‘bank stress tests’ – that the technique regained some 
of its credibility. The SCAP marked the first time that the US bank regulatory agencies 
had  conducted  a  supervisory  stress  test  simultaneously  across  the  largest  banking 
firms.  
 In retrospect, the SCAP stands out for me as one of the critical turning points in the 
global  financial  crisis.  It  provided  anxious  investors  with  credible  information  about 
prospective losses at banks. Supervisors’ public disclosure of the stress-test results 
helped  to  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  system  and  enabled  its  successful 
recapitalization. The resilience of the US banking system has greatly improved since 
then,  and  the  more  intensive  use  and  greater  sophistication  of  supervisory  stress 
testing, as well as supervisors’ increased emphasis on the effectiveness of banks’ own 
capital planning processes, deserve some credit for that improvement. 
 Today, the US has two distinct but related supervisory programs that rely on stress 
testing. The first is the stress testing required by the Dodd-Frank Act, which has the 
purpose  to  quantitatively  assess  how  bank  capital  levels  would  fare  in  stressful 
economic  and  financial  scenarios.  The  second  program,  called  the  Comprehensive 
Capital Analysis and Review, combines the quantitative results from the stress tests 
with  the  more  qualitative  assessments  of  the  capital  planning  processes  used  by 
banks in the US.  
 These  supervisory  programs,  developed  as  part  of  regulatory  reforms  following  the 
global financial crisis, have been strongly challenged by the new political regime in the 
US. The  US Federal Reserve  (Fed) conducted its first exercise in 2009 to increase 
confidence  in  the  system.  Today,  bankers  believe  the  tests  have  morphed  into  a 
mysterious,  laborious,  and  time-consuming  process  from  what  was  once  a 
straightforward examination of financial strength. The outcome determines how much 
capital banks must hold, but experience shows that  getting a passing grade can be 
tough. The tests also prove to be resource-intensive as some of the bigger banks have 
to call on hundreds of their employees to work on stress-test submissions each year.  
  Page 4 of 9 
Politicians and bankers argue that reducing the stress tests’ complexity and frequency 
could not only save man-hours, but also help the US economy by stimulating more 
lending. They argue for a fresh look at how stress testing is conducted, making their 
case  in  meetings  with  legislators  who  are  stewarding  a  financial  overhaul  by  the 
current US administration. Regulators, however, remain sceptic, pushing back on the 
industry’s pleas, arguing that it is crucial that a strong capital regime be maintained, 
especially as it applies to systemically important banks. Former Fed Governor Daniel 
Tarullo said in April: “Neither regulators nor legislators should agree to changes that 
would effectively weaken the regulatory regime.”   
 Irrespective of what the outcome of the debate in the US might be, macro stress testing 
has  become  a  tool  of  the  macroprudential  frameworks  that  authorities  are 
implementing  globally.  It  is,  however,  important  to  keep  in  mind  that  stress  testing 
cannot  address  all  the  risk  management  weaknesses  by  itself.  As  part  of  a 
comprehensive approach, it has a leading role to play in strengthening bank corporate 
governance  as  well  as  the  resilience  of  individual  banks  and  the  financial  system. 
Whether macro stress tests will ever be able to act as effective early warning devices 
is an open question, given the analytical challenges.  
 By contrast, macro stress testing can be quite effective as a tool for crisis management 
and  resolution,  since  in  that  context  its  messages  may  be  more  reliable.  More 
generally speaking, macro stress tests can discipline thinking about financial stability 
risks. In the process, they can yield additional benefits, such as:  
  helping to reconcile the widely different perspectives of the various stakeholders 
(banks, supervisory authorities, central banks, and the public at large); 
 fostering better communication; 
  cross-checking the performance of individual firms’ risk models; and  
 identifying important data gaps.  
 That said, in order to yield the hoped-for benefits, it is critical to design stress tests 
properly, tailoring them to the specific purpose. Furthermore, the tool can only be the 
beginning, never the end, of a conversation about financial stability risks. It can only 
be  a  complement,  never  a  substitute,  for  other  tools  and  processes.  Stress  testing 
plays a particularly important role in:  
 Page 5 of 9 
  providing forward-looking assessments of risk;  
  overcoming the limitations of models and historical data;  
  supporting internal and external communication;  
feeding into capital and liquidity planning procedures;  
informing the setting of banks’ risk tolerance levels; and  
facilitating  the development of  risk mitigation  and/or  contingency  plans  across  a 
range of stressed conditions. 
    Ideally, one would like to subject the whole financial system to a macro stress test. In 
practice,  however,  tests  have  considered  parts  of  the  overall  system.  The  banking 
sector  is  the  most  common  object  of  analysis,  given  its  importance  for  financial 
stability.  But  stress  tests  have  sometimes  also  covered  other  institutions,  such  as 
insurance  companies  and  pension  funds.  These  tests  have  tended  to  assess  the 
strength  of  institutions  in  individual  jurisdictions,  although  typically  including  their 
consolidated balance sheets worldwide. The only coordinated multi-country tests have 
been  the  recent  exercises  in  the  European  Union.  More  recently,  the  European 
Banking Authority  started  the  process  of  its  2018  stress  testing  of  Europe’s  largest 
banks when it published its draft stress-test methodology. This test will again look at 
the  effect of macroeconomic stress  on a bank’s viability, taking into account market 
risk and litigation risk. It will, however, be much tougher than previous tests, as it will 
include the International Financial Reporting Standard (IFRS) 9, which requires  that 
banks model credit risk losses for loans even before they have defaulted. This is likely 
to  result  in  higher  levels  of  provisioning  and  may  potentially  impact  somewhat  on 
capital adequacy ratios. Incremental risk provisioning under IFRS 9 will focus on loans 
that show deterioration in borrowers’ credit quality since the inception of the loan. It is 
therefore expected that banks that are challenged by low growth and persistent asset 
quality pressures will be more severely affected. 
 In the United Kingdom (UK), the Bank of England (BoE) announced the key elements 
of its 2017 stress test in March. The 2017 stress test includes two stress scenarios. 
Alongside  the  annual  cyclical  scenario,  the  BoE  is  for  the  first  time  running  an 
additional exploratory scenario. The aim of this additional scenario is to consider how 
the UK banking system might evolve if recent headwinds to bank profitability persist 
 Page 6 of 9 
or  intensify.  It  includes  weak  global  growth,  persistently  low  interest  rates,  and 
stagnant world trade; it has a seven-year horizon to capture these long-term trends. 
 As  I  have  mentioned  before,  stress  testing  forms  an  important  component  of  the 
financial stability framework in South Africa. As part of the 2014 FSAP for South Africa, 
the IMF conducted a full stress-testing exercise for the banking and insurance sectors. 
The  focus  of  the  exercise  was  on  both  solvency  and  liquidity  stress  testing.  In  its 
recommendations, the IMF proposed that the SARB develop a macroprudential stress-
testing framework (following a top-down approach) to complement the existing bottom-
up exercises conducted by banks. 
 In January 2015, the SARB established a Stress Testing Division within its Financial 
Stability  Department.  The  division  conducted  a  full  stress-testing  exercise  on  the 
domestic  operations  of  the  major  banks  in  South  Africa  during  the  period  from 
December 2015 to April 2016. Six major banks participated in the exercise, covering 
in excess of 80% of the banking sector’s assets. The SARB requested the participating 
banks to conduct a bottom-up stress test focusing mainly on credit risk while the SARB 
conducted a top-down exercise using a common scenario. 
 The Stress Testing Division followed a formal risk identification and scenario design 
by  developing  a  Risk  Assessment  Matrix,  involving  the  identification  of  the  most 
relevant  risks  from  the  global  and  domestic  environments,  an  assessment  of  their 
likelihood, as well as a qualitative evaluation of their impact on the real economy, the 
banking sector, and the financial system. Major global risks were identified on which 
to  base  the  scenarios;  these  included  a  surge  in  global  financial  market  volatility 
combined with a prolonged period of slower  growth in both advanced and emerging 
markets. 
 The  results  of  the  bottom-up  stress  tests  were  aggregated  and  validated  against 
SARB’s top-down stress-testing exercise.  The participating banks were found to be 
adequately  capitalised  to  withstand  significant  credit  losses  throughout  the  stress 
scenarios  before  taking  into  account  any  mitigating  action  by  banks’  management. 
This resilience stems from the high capital buffers already prevailing in the banking 
 Page 7 of 9 
system. The results of the exercise were published in the Financial Stability Review in 
May 2016. 
 This stress-testing exercise was subjected to two peer reviews, firstly by the Deutsche 
Bundesbank  and  secondly  by  the  IMF,  to  ensure  the  robustness  of  the  procedures 
and  future  stress-testing  exercises.  The  contributions  that  emanated  from  the  peer 
reviews have been actioned and incorporated into the refinement and expansion of 
the  stress-testing  model  and  framework.  In  line  with  the  SARB’s  governance 
framework, full stress-testing exercises will be conducted once every two years or if 
and when they may be required. Work on the next cycle of the exercise is underway. 
 I would like to conclude by stating that banking systems are much stronger since the 
implementation of stress-testing frameworks – and this has contributed in part to the 
improvement  of  economies in many countries. Stress tests are forward-looking and 
focus on improbable but plausible risks, as opposed to common risks. As a result, they 
complement conventional capital and leverage ratios. The disclosure of the results of 
stress-testing exercises, coupled with firms’ disclosure of their own stress-test results, 
provides  market  participants  with  deeper  insight  and  confidence,  not  only  into  the 
financial  strength  of  banks,  but  also  into  the  quality  of  their  risk  management  and 
capital planning. Stress testing is also proving highly complementary to supervisors’ 
monitoring and analysis of potential systemic risks. 
 A very important benefit of regular stress testing is that it forces banks and supervisors 
to develop the capacity to assess the enterprise-wide exposures of their institutions to 
risks, and to use this information to ensure that they maintain adequate levels of capital 
and liquidity. The development and ongoing refinement of risk management capacity 
is in itself critical for protecting individual banks and the banking system, upon which 
the health of our economy rests. 
 I wish you everything of the best with your further deliberations today.  
 Thank you. 
   Page 8 of 9 
Reference 
 Borio, C., Drehmann, M. and Tsatsoronis, K. 2012. Stress-testing macro stress testing: 
does it live up to expectations? Basel: Bank for International Settlements. 
     Page 9 of 9 
