S S Mundra: Fraud risk management in banks - the do's and don'ts
Keynote  address  by  Mr  S  S  Mundra,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the
Seminar  on  Financial  Crimes  Management,  arranged  by  the  Centre  for  Advanced  Financial
Research and Learning (CAFRAL), Mumbai, 30 January 2017.
 Shri  Gopalakrishna,  Director,  CAFRAL;  fellow  bankers  and  participants  of  the  Program  on
Financial Crimes Management! At the outset, let me mention that this is the third occasion I am
speaking on frauds in as many months. In November 2016, I spoke on “Fraud Risk Management
in Banks – Major Concerns and 12 Sutras for Bankers” and last month I spoke on “Fraud Risk
Management – Forging Partnership between Public and Private sector banks” in which I focused
on  the  ‘contemporary  scene’,  ‘challenges’  and  ‘what  more  we  could  do’  to  strengthen  the
defences against frauds in collective manner. It cannot be sheer coincidence that I am speaking
on this issue so frequently. It has probably to do with both- a sharp increase in number of frauds
in  the  banking  sector  coinciding  with  a  greater  appreciation  of  fraud  risk  in  the  system.  My
involvement in these seminars/workshops also underlines the importance that RBI, as banking
supervisor, attaches to the management of fraud risk in the system. Each time I speak on the
issue  I  do  so  with  a  fervent  hope  that  each  participant  in  these  seminars  develops  greater
commitment  and  sensitivity  to  mitigating  and  managing  fraud  risk  in  his/her  respective
organisation. Today I intend to explore few other dimensions of the broad theme of fraud risk
management.  But  before  I  begin,  let  me  commend  CAFRAL  for  organising  this  event  and
providing a platform for the senior officials of the banks to gather and brainstorm on this issue of
critical importance.
In the first section of my speech today, I would focus on cyber security and cyber frauds while in
the second section I will highlight a few concerns outside the cyberspace.
Cyber security & frauds
2. In  recent  times,  we  have  seen  several  high  profile  cyber-incidents  both  in  India  as  well  as
globally. You will remember the Bangladesh Bank incident which rattled banks/central banks and
forced us to look more closely at cyber security risks. There is an increasing trend in incidents
pertaining  to  theft  of  personal  information,  abuse  of  ATMs  and  Distributed  Denial  of  Service
(DDoS) attacks on various banks. We have already witnessed an attempt to defraud a bank by
abusing the SWIFT messaging system which thankfully could be salvaged post event without
any  apparent  monetary  loss.  We  also  continue  to  receive  information  on  several  other  cyber
incidents- be it ransomware attack, ATM / Debit card incident or unauthorised access to bank
servers. Phishing / Vishing also continue to haunt bank customers with such attacks becoming
more and more sophisticated.
3. Technology adoption by banks and other financial entities has increased manifold in the recent
years and today if a bank is not present in the digital world it would be well-nigh impossible for it
to compete in the market. As technology evolves from being an enabler and differentiator to being
at  the  core  of  the  banks’  operations,  associated  issues  of  security  need  to  be  addressed
comprehensively.
4. Post withdrawal of legal tender character of ₹ 500 and ₹ 1000 bank notes, there has been a
phenomenal  push  towards  digital  mode  of  payment  across  the  country.  Aadhaar  Enabled
Payment  Systems  are  gaining  currency  and  the  recent  launch  of  ‘BHIM’  app  for  facilitating
payments  is  another  welcome  move.  While  increasing  adoption  of  digital  payment  technology
would bring in several benefits to the economy, we need to be conscious of security aspects as
well. Given this backdrop, let us look at some of the developments internationally.
5. In October 2016, G-7 countries came out with what is called as ‘Fundamental Elements of
1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Cyber  Security  for  the  Financial  Sector’,  which  covers  cybersecurity  strategy  and  framework,
governance, risk and control assessment, monitoring, response, recovery, information sharing
and  continuous  learning  as  key  elements.  The  Committee  on  Payments  and  Market
Infrastructures  (CPMI),  BIS  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions
(IOSCO) have issued Guidance on cyber resilience for financial market infrastructures (FMIs)
which  also  emphasises  on  the  importance  for  authorities  to  cooperate  to  support  broader
financial  stability  objectives.  The  Bank  of  England  (BoE)  has  implemented  “CBEST”,  a  new
framework for testing cyber security vulnerabilities, particularly in respect of core financial sector
entities.  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  has  announced  the  launch  of  a  “Cybersecurity
Fortification Initiative” (CFI), a comprehensive initiative aiming to raise the level of cybersecurity of
banks.
6. Closer home, RBI issued a circular on Cyber Security Framework in Banks on June 2, 2016
mandating cyber security preparedness. A specialised cell (C-SITE) has been created within the
supervision  department  of  RBI  to  conduct  detailed  IT  examination  of  banks’  cyber  security
preparedness, to identify the gaps and to monitor the progress of remedial measures. More than
30 major banks are slated to be covered under detailed IT examination during 2016-17 and all
banks by 2017-18. RBI’s IT subsidiary (the Reserve Bank Information Technology (ReBIT) Pvt
Ltd  has  also  become  operational  with  a  mandate  to  focus  on  issues  around  IT  systems  and
cyber security (including related research) of the financial sector and to also assist in the audit
and assessment of the entities regulated by the Reserve Bank.
7. In terms of June 2 circular, banks were advised to assess the gaps in their preparedness vis a
vis the baseline requirements prescribed by RBI and to draw a time bound plan to bridge the
gaps urgently. The assessment reveals that barring a few banks the gaps are indeed significant,
more so in respect of public sector banks. This warrants immediate and continued attention of
the Board and the senior management of the banks. In the changed world, if bank boards do not
have  expertise  in  this  area,  it  would  become  a  handicap  in  the  smooth  operations  of  banks.
Second, the traditional ways of allocating budgets for IT services in general and cyber security in
particular  need  to  undergo  a  radical  change  leading  to  need  based  assessment  and  cost
effective solutions. The scare that was created during the recent ATM/Debit card incident clearly
indicates  that  cyber  security  requires  top  attention  by  the  Board.  A  few  days  ago,  Risk.Net
published an article on the Top 10 Operational Risks for 2017 and indicated Cyber Risk as the
top most risk in the minds of Chief Risk Officers.
8. Against this backdrop, the involvement of the Board / Senior Management in appointing Chief
Information  Security  Officers  is  becoming  increasingly  crucial. It  is  important  that CISO  is
sufficiently senior in hierarchy; understands technology well; appreciates the security aspects
of all the technologies adopted by the bank; is responsive and is sufficiently enabled to stall
launch of unsecure products, whenever necessary. However, ground realities do not provide
the needed comfort. I want to use this forum to reiterate that the role of CISO needs to be clearly
articulated and reinforced immediately.
9. Our June 2 circular also mandates having a separate cyber security policy and cyber crisis
management  plan  in  place.  We  have  observed  that  in  many  cases,  the  banks  react  to  cyber
incidents in a knee jerk and an ad hoc manner which at times has a potential to jeopardise future
investigations. Having a thorough plan of action with clearly identified roles and responsibilities in
the event of cyber incidents is a must in today’s environment.
10. The old adage, prevention is better than cure applies to cyber security as well. Banks need to
have a robust defence mechanism against cyber incidents at all times. However, our observation
is that many a times, certain finer details such as configuration of devices, patch management,
OEM supported software, password management or port management, are ignored or entirely
left  to  the  vendors  resulting  in  an  undesirable  impact.  Statistics  suggest  that  it  takes  on  an
average about 6 months to detect cyber-attacks by outsiders and longer in cases where attacks
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
are  by  insiders.  Thus,  early  detection  and  response  assumes  significant  importance.  Banks
need to build capabilities to detect cyber-attacks early and respond to them quickly. Recovery
from the incident is another aspect that needs to be well thought out.
11. The world has learnt that in dealing with cyber-attacks, awareness and sharing of information
plays an important role. Knowledge on cyber related aspects is relevant for all the stakeholders
including the Board members. We often observe that this key premise is ignored.
12. RBI has mandated that all unusual cyber-incidents have to be reported within 2 to 6 hours
invariably. We observe that banks take much longer time in reporting the incident. Once reported,
the results of root cause analysis as well as findings of forensic audit also need to be shared
promptly. You would appreciate that timely reporting of cyber incidents is very crucial to enable
issuance of suitable cautionary advisories to other banks.
13. In a nutshell, all stakeholders must work collectively to guard and fight against the menace of
cyber threat. To quote our Prime Minister, “I dream of a DIGITAL INDIA where: Cyber Security
becomes an integral part of our National Security ” Yes, when such message comes from the
highest  authority  in  the  country,  we  need  no  further  stimulus  for  action.  I  am  sure  that  this
Program will leave you with many takeaways and enable you to be a change agent within your
respective institutions for securing the IT infrastructure as well as for educating the customers on
how to avoid becoming a victim of fraud.
1
14.  Before  I  move  beyond  the  cyberspace  and  talk  about  other  frauds,  let  me  mention  three
issues related to cyber security that I wish the participants to deliberate upon during the course of
the Seminar and one issue for the policy makers to ponder over.
a.  The  rate  at  which  technology  is  undergoing  a  change  is  overwhelming.  Contrary  to  that,
human  beings  are  slow  learners  and  slower  to  adapt  to  changes,  especially  if  it  is  a  new
technology. Against this background, the question that we need to ask ourselves is whether there
is a need to employ newer and newer technology enabled products at a fast pace or are we
merely doing this since competition has done so? Are you convinced that the new product would
significantly enhance the efficiencies & enable better customer experience? My point is frequent
introduction  of  new  technology  may  only  end  up  stretching  human  resources  beyond  their
capabilities and might eventually prove counter-productive.
b.  One  trend  that  has  been  increasingly  witnessed  in  recent  instances  of  cyber  fraud  is
introduction of malware in the computer systems by the fraudsters that sit ideal for days and
months  together  before  striking.  These  malwares  are  also  known  to  self  –destruct  after  they
have achieved their desired objective. This is a really scary situation and hence, we need to be
not only on continuous guard to identify the vulnerabilities that exist in our systems and to plug
them but also scout for innocuous looking unknown programmes/malware from time to time.
c. The next aspect that I wish to highlight is around human behaviour. We have always known
banking to be a relationship built on trust. However, when we talk about cyber security I tend to
believe that ‘zero trust’ is the way to address it. What I am hinting at is that physical and logical
access  controls  must  work  as  designed  and  only  such  employees  who  ‘need  to  know’  the
intricacies of the application software/programmes must have access to them.
15. Finally, I want to raise the issue of cyber literacy for consideration of the policy makers. As we
go whole hog into the digital world, it is imperative that the employees as well as customers are
cyber literate. I understand that some countries like Israel, have introduced cyber awareness in
their  high  school  curriculum.  Perhaps,  we  also  need  to  think  on  similar  lines.  With  moderate
levels of general literacy in our country, this could be a tall order, but nevertheless it is a goal
worth pursuing relentlessly.
Let me now move from the cyber space to an earthly level.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Advances related frauds
16.  During  the  FY  2016,  advances  related  frauds  constituted  nearly  92%  of  the  total  frauds
reported by all banks. This was more pronounced in case of PSU banks and less in case of
private  and  foreign  banks.  In  almost  all  the  cases,  we  observed  that  the  exposure  had  got
seasoned  as  an  NPA  for  3  to  4  years  before  the  borrower  was  declared  as  fraudulent. As  a
consequence,  the  gap  between  the  date  of  occurrence  and  detection  has  been  widening.
Further, the gap between first bank and the last bank reporting the borrowal account as fraud to
RBI is also very long. What is the concern here? As you know ‘fraud’ is a criminal offence and
any  delay  on  the  part  of  the  bankers  in  initially  red  flagging  an  exposure  and  subsequently
declaring it as a fraud will have far reaching implications on the employee conduct and internal
governance standard. Banks and bankers could be charged for abetting the criminal offence. My
call to you therefore, is to identify and declare the account as fraud without wasting time. The
best course of action would be to follow the instructions in letter and spirit and take a responsible
and pro-active stand while attending consortium meetings.
17. As a penal measure borrowers who have committed a fraud in the account are debarred
from availing bank finance from banks/FIs/NBFCs etc., for a period of five years from the date of
full payment of the defrauded amount. After this period, it is for individual institutions to take a call
on whether to lend to such a borrower. Anecdotal evidence and our transaction testing on the
ground has suggested that this instruction is not always being followed. Recently, we had come
across a case where a bank had extended a ‘hand holding operation’ facility in case of very large
fraud account.
18. Frauds in the area of cheque cloning continue to be one of the areas of concern for us. We
have  come  across  cases  where  though  the  original  cheques  remained  in  the  custody  of  the
customer, cheques with the same series were presented and encashed by fraudsters. RBI has
issued  guidelines  in  the  issue  to  the  banks  in  November  2014  and  it  is  necessary  that  the
instructions are followed to prevent fraudulent practices.
People risk
19. In most of the PSU banks the demographic profile of the employees is very unfavourable and
massive  recruitment  is  happening  across  the  banks  at  the  entry  level.  While  banks  are
augmenting the HR stock, most of them do not have the capacity to train, build and absorb them.
In the process the banks are adding significant people risk.
20. Another  form  in  which  people  risk  can  manifest  is  on  account  of  gap  in  understanding  of
technology  between  two  sets  of  employees,  colloquially  called  “digital  immigrants”  (older
generation) and the “digital natives” (the newer generation). Especially in the public sector banks
which  suffer  from  a  “Missing  Middle”,  the  knowledge  gap  between  the  supervisors  and
supervised  in  the  area  of  digital  can  be  very  stark  and  might  result  in  loose  controls.  It  is,
therefore, important for the Board and Top Management of banks to look for ways to mitigate the
people risk as part of the overall Fraud Risk Management Framework.
Conclusion
21. I am of the view that only eternal vigilance can bring us closer to a fraud free eco-system. At
the cost of repetition, I would like to reiterate the 12 important messages/sutras for bankers for
Bankers that I had outlined in another seminar which according to me are key to a better
fraud risk management. Like Sutras, which are short pithy instructive sayings, these messages
are simple and straightforward.
Sutra 1: Have a ROBUST Fraud risk identification, event reporting, control, allocation and
mitigation  framework.  ‘Four  eyes  principle’  must  be  followed  in  all  sensitive  areas
without compromise.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Sutra  2:  Follow  the  5  ‘Cs”  of  CREDIT  -  Capacity,  Capital,  Collateral,  Conditions  and
Character.
Sutra 3: Bring in a CULTURE of eternal vigilance, strong internal control and compliance.
Please remember Fraud is criminal offence.
Sutra 4: Remember that the solution for TECHNOLOGICAL CHALLENGES is not always
more technology.
Sutra 5: Institute checks and balances to calibrate PEOPLE RISK. High rate of attrition is a
new  normal  which  we  have  to  face.  Under  the  circumstances,  it  is  important  that  the  newly
recruited staff is appropriately trained to work at the desk he/she is attached to. I feel it would also
be  useful  for  the  newly  recruited  staff  to  have  properly  documented  systems  and  rule  books
alongside some kind of a FAQ support.
Sutra 6: EMPOWER fraud risk managers adequately.
Sutra  7:  Use  extensively  the  3  Cs  –  CFR  (Central  Fraud  Registry),  CRILC  and  CREDIT
BUREAUS
Sutra 8: Rely on MARKET INTELLIGENCE.
Sutra 9: Develop BUSINESS ANALYTICS tools.
Sutra 10: CUT LOSSES and exit when the situation so demands.
Sutra 11: DO NOT THROW GOOD MONEY after bad money in fraud cases.
Sutra 12: Comply with RBI Regulations in letter and spirit.
22. To conclude, I would say that programs like these are very useful towards acquiring requisite
skill sets as the participants also get to learn from practical experiences of fellow practitioners. I
once again thank Shri Gopalakrishna for inviting me here this morning and wish the rest of the
Seminar all success.
1
pib.nic.in/newsite/PrintRelease.aspx?relid=148097
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
