Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks - "The G20 Agenda under the
German Presidency"
Welcome  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 9th Annual IIF
G20 Conference "The G20 Agenda under the German Presidency", Frankfurt am Main, 15 March
2017.
 1. Introduction
Timothy Adams
Ladies and gentlemen
It’s  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  this  conference,  which  is  a  joint  event  of  the
Institute of International Finance (IIF) and the German G20 presidency.
Many thanks to you, Tim and the IIF team, for organising this conference, which is taking place
for the ninth time, this year just ahead of the meeting of G20 finance ministers and central bank
governors in Baden-Baden.
The  economist  John  Kenneth  Galbraith  is  quoted  as  joking  that  “Business  conventions  are
important because they demonstrate how many people a company can operate without."
I don’t want to get too drawn into the merits of his humorous remark, or whether it applies to
banking conferences as well, but I will say that there are compelling reasons why this conference
is, indeed, an important event.
One reason is that it provides a good opportunity for dialogue between official and private sector
leaders. This dialogue is particularly important in such challenging times, which is also reflected
in the focus on very topical issues over the next two days.
"A global crisis requires a global solution."
This  simple  statement  by  the  G20  heads  of  state  or  government  back  in April  2009  –  in  the
middle  of  the  financial  crisis  –  captured  the  essence  of  the  cooperation  between  the  key
industrial countries and emerging market economies. And although the G20 is an informal body –
or perhaps precisely for that reason – it is an important source of impetus.
As  the  financial  crisis  unfolded,  the  G20  grew  in  status  to  become  the  dominant  forum  for
economic cooperation worldwide. It played a key role in drawing the right conclusions from the
crisis. But the job isn’t finished yet. Additional efforts are necessary to make the global financial
system more stable and the world economy more prosperous.
There  are  therefore  several  issues  of  global  importance  on  the  permanent  agenda  of
the G20 that will continue to be pursued. In this regard, the German presidency is building on the
important  achievements  of  preceding  presidencies,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  continuity  in  the
G20’s activities. Just think, for example, of the growth strategies of the Brisbane summit or the
structural  reform  agenda  of  the  Chinese  presidency  last  year.  And  some  of  you  may  also
remember the debt reduction targets of the Toronto summit.
Beyond continuing the work of the existing G20 work streams, it is also the privilege and, indeed,
the duty of every presidency to generate new inputs.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
2. Priorities of the German presidency
The German G20 agenda rests on three main pillars: building resilience, improving sustainability
and assuming responsibility.
To this end, Germany has set three main priorities for discussions between finance ministers
and  central  bank  governors  and  among  the  G20  working  groups  within  the  “Finance  Track".
These are
Enhancing resilience
Promoting investment, especially in Africa; and
Shaping digitalisation
Let me go a bit deeper into these issues, starting with resilience.
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  underpinned  how  important  resilience  is.  While  the  crisis  is
considered to have passed, its negative consequences have not yet been completely overcome.
Making  our  economies  more  resilient  means  improving  their  ability  to  cope  with  economic
shocks, but also responding appropriately to longer-term structural challenges like demographic
change or digitalisation.
The more resilient national economies are, the more resilient the world economy is as a whole.
In economic terms, strengthening national resilience is a positive externality.
In order to strengthen national resilience, the German presidency is seeking an agreement on a
set of principles in Baden-Baden. 
Rather  than  prescribing  specific  measures  or  reforms,  such  principles  can  act  as  a  guide
for G20 members when considering different actions aimed at enhancing the resilience of their
economies. Moreover, they complement other ongoing G20 initiatives and priorities, including the
2016 Hangzhou Enhanced Structural Reform Agenda.
The  principles  on  resilience,  which  are  currently  being  discussed  in  the  G20,  should  aim  to
ensure sound public finances and to reduce vulnerabilities in the private sector. With respect to
the  real  economy,  they  should  advocate  a  favourable  business  environment,  flexible  labour
market conditions and efficient social security systems.
Furthermore, monetary policies should be in line with central banks’ mandates and should not
overstretch them or undermine the legitimacy of central banks’ independence.
Finally,  G20  members  should  remain  committed  to  the  principle  of  open  markets  and  cross-
border trade – a point I come back to later in my speech.
The second priority of the German presidency within the Finance Track is related to the objective
of stimulating investment, particularly in Africa. In an increasingly interconnected world, it is more
important than ever to build global partnerships.
In  order  to  create  new  and  competitive  jobs,  the  conditions  for  private-sector  investment  and
investment in infrastructure need to be improved. Setting up a ‘Compact with Africa’ initiative is
therefore  intended  to  create  better  investment  conditions,  for  example  by  improving  legal
certainty,  making  taxation  more  reliable,  and  reducing  investment  risks  with  the  help  of
international guarantees.
Furthermore, the G20 will provide political support for specific investment agreements between
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
African  countries  and  international  organisations  and  –  if  desired  –  with  developed  partner
countries.
In addition, transfers of money from migrant workers to their home countries are an important
source of funds for many countries – not only in Africa. In several countries, these remittances
account for more than one fifth of GDP and significantly contribute to domestic consumption and
investment. The aim is therefore to improve the conditions for frictionless and efficient money
transfers. Rules against money laundering and the financing of terrorism are important, but they
should be applied in a way that does not discourage banks from providing correspondent banking
services.
Last but not least, the third priority of the German presidency relates to digital finance and its
implications for the financial sector.
From an economic point of view, digital finance can deliver a wealth of benefits. First of all, digital
financial services can bring about significant efficiency gains – and I’m sure all of you know this
much more than I do.
But  digitalisation  can  also  boost  competition  within  the  financial  system,  because  new
competitors, like fintechs, are stepping onto the field. What some of you might regard as a threat
to  your  business  –  because  it  could  intensify  the  problem  of  narrowing  profit  margins  among
traditional banks – has, on the other hand, a positive impact on overall welfare.
The  question  of  whether  digitalisation  will  lead  to  a  revolution  in  financial  services  and
infrastructure,  as  some  commentators  argue,  remains  unanswered  for  the  time  being,  in  my
view. However, one certainly can’t deny that new technologies like blockchain, robo advisors or
crowd  funding  could  have  the  potential  to  make  financial  markets  and  services  faster,  more
efficient, more convenient, and more inexpensive for everyone.
This  is  why  some  central  banks  are  carrying  out  research,  especially  with  regard  to  the
implications of blockchain technology. And the Bundesbank is among them.
To identify the requirements which central banks might need to meet in future in connection with
blockchain-based instruments, the Bundesbank and Deutsche Börse AG have jointly unveiled a
prototype for a securities settlement system based on blockchain technology. The idea behind
this joint project is to analyse the technological performance and scalability of blockchain-based
applications. It is not the intention to issue a digital euro coin.
New technologies may also represent a source of financial stability risk. Herding behaviour, for
example,  could  be  amplified  by  automated  advisory  services  in  portfolio  management.  Robo
advisors might exacerbate financial volatility and pro-cyclicality if the assets under management
reach a significant level, which is not yet the case.
Pro-cyclicality might result from weaker customer relationships and the interoperability of access
points.
This calls for the regulation of fintechs, at least to a certain extent. A lot of corporations using
technology-enabled  financial  innovations  operate  either  on  a  global  scale  or  carry  out  a  large
number  of  cross-border  transactions.  Identifying  key  regulatory  issues  to  safeguard  financial
stability  is  therefore  a  goal  that  the  German  presidency  is  aiming  at  in  cooperation  with  the
Financial Stability Board and other standard setting bodies.
Another  pressing  issue  in  a  digitised  world  is  cybercrime.  Cyber-attacks  can  potentially
undermine peoples’ trust in the financial system. In order to avoid jeopardising the positive impact
of  digital  finance,  it  will  be  crucial  to  address  these  cyber  risks.  It  is  therefore  on  the  Baden-
Baden agenda to start work in this area at the G20 level.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
further 
A 
the G20 digitalisation conference in Wiesbaden, in January, is financial literacy.
implication  of  digitalisation,  which  was  already  an 
important 
topic  at
It  is  an  indisputable  benefit  that  new  technological  developments  have  enabled  the  financial
inclusion of people who would otherwise lack access to financial services – for example, there
are five countries in Sub-Saharan Africa where more people have a mobile money account than
a conventional bank account.
That  said,  more  and  more  people  with  insufficient  knowledge  and  understanding  of  financial
concepts and risks are getting easier access to financial services. And this is true not only for
developing countries but for industrialised countries, too.
If it becomes easier for people to become their own “fund manager", so to speak, they should at
least have basic knowledge of economic concepts like compound interest. Therefore, financial
literacy  is  not  just  an  issue  for  consumer  protection  authorities,  but  also  for  schools  and  the
financial industry as well.
For  central  banks,  financial  education  is  an  issue,  too,  because  effective  monetary  policy
communication relies on people having a basic grasp of concepts such as inflation and interest
rates. Ensuring the public has basic knowledge of these issues is therefore important for the
success of central banks, as the ability of the latter to maintain price stability depends, not least,
on public support for a stability-oriented monetary policy. 
Ultimately,  all  of  us  should  have  an  interest  in  consumers  being  well-informed  about  financial
services. 
In addition to the key topics I have mentioned, Germany will also be continuing the G20 agenda in
a  number  of  other  fields.  This  includes  a  further  strengthening  of  the  international  financial
architecture and additional progress on the international regulatory agenda.
 
3. G20 achievements
Ladies and gentlemen
What are the greatest achievements of the G20 so far?
In my view, there are two.
The  first  is  that  the  G20  member  states  by  and  large  resisted  temptations  to  implement
protectionist  measures  to  stimulate  their  national  economies  after  the  great  recession  in
2008/09. “Beggar-thy-neighbour” policies were not chosen to improve the economic situation at
home at the cost of other economies.
This success was due, not least, to the explicit rejection of protectionism by the G20 and the
renewed commitment to an open, global economy.
The other great achievement of the G20 is that, through common efforts, important lessons were
drawn from the financial crisis.
All  the  milestones  of  regulatory  reform  were  endorsed  by  the  G20.  The  tightening  of  bank
regulation under Basel III, for example, would hardly have been imaginable without the political
support of the G20.  
It’s now all the more important that these achievements are not given up.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Open markets and a competitive economic system are the pillars on which the prosperity of our
economies  rests. A  greater  variety  of  inexpensive  and  good-quality  products  are  available  on
open  markets,  and  this  increases  citizens’  purchasing  power.  In  this  way,  free  trade  and
competition  result  in  a  quantifiable  increase  in  prosperity,  particularly  for  those  who  have  to
consider their spending carefully. Moreover, spurred by international competition, industries are
more innovative and new ideas are spread more rapidly.
But today we are seeing mounting scepticism of globalisation, a sentiment by no means confined
to  the  United  States.  In  Europe,  too,  globalisation  fears  are  on  the  rise  and  people  are
increasingly  shunning  open  markets.  According  to  a  recent  poll,  45%  of  Europeans  view
globalisation as problematic, and among the voters of populist parties more than two thirds see
globalisation as a threat.
Public concerns like these need to be taken seriously. It can’t be denied that globalisation puts
particular pressure on certain groups of people. Although open markets boost prosperity overall,
they don’t necessarily boost it for all people all of the time. But it’s also safe to say that barriers
and exclusion would be the wrong response to these concerns.
In advanced economies, low-skilled workers feel the pressure of globalisation, particularly those
who work in industry sectors that are exposed to low-cost competitors from abroad. And that’s
why inclusive growth is so important.
In order to have more inclusive growth, however, we need to ensure that enterprises and their
employees  are  properly  equipped  to  harness  the  opportunities  presented  by  globalisation  and
technological progress and that they are able to manage structural change.
I already mentioned the need for a favourable business environment. That means, for example,
less  red  tape,  limits  to  increasing  social-security  contributions  or  creating  innovation-friendly
conditions by an efficient product market regulation.
Investment in education and lifelong learning are important for improving employees’ adaptability
to a changing environment. People who lose their job have to be able to find another position
swiftly.
And a target driven and transparent tax and transfer system is able to act as a cushion for those
who  are  not  able  to  benefit  from  new  job  creation.  Policy  must  help  those  who  lose  from
globalisation, and the positive effects of trade should provide scope for such policies.
Regarding the second great achievement of the G20, I am somewhat concerned, too. While, on
the one hand, the regulatory agenda has not been completed yet, calls for de-regulation are on
the rise again.
I  already  mentioned  Basel  III.  I’m  fully  aware  that  the  implementation  of  the  new  standards  is
challenging for banks worldwide. But the new standards have significantly improved the capital
adequacy of the banking system and have made the global financial system more stable. And
although  banks  sometimes  criticise  the  higher  capital  requirements,  a  more  stable  financial
system is beneficial for them as well – as greater stability is also reflected in lower funding costs.
Nevertheless, in contrast to the original plans, there was no final agreement on Basel III last year.
While  most  of  the  residual  work  has  been  completed,  one  important  issue  still  remains
unresolved. This is the question of how far credit institutions should be permitted to use their own
internal  models  to  determine  their  capital  adequacy  requirements  for  credit  risk  –  or  to  be
precise, whether to fix a lower threshold for capital adequacy requirements calculated with the
aid of the internal model and if so, how to calibrate this threshold.
The  negotiations  on  that  issue  are  currently  on  hold  because  the  positions  of  the  US  chief
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
negotiators have not yet been filled. A swift resumption of negotiations would be in our common
interest, especially as the ongoing regulatory uncertainty caused by the delay in finalising Basel III
is undoubtedly a burden for the banks.
And so I hope that the upcoming meetings in Baden-Baden and Basel will lead to a return to the
negotiation table.
Ladies and Gentlemen
One lesson of the financial crisis was that banks, especially the global systemically important
ones,  need  more  capital.  The  second  lesson  was  that  public  bail-outs  of  banks  should  be
avoided in future.
And so it is completely understandable that President Trump recently declared, in his executive
order  of  3rd  February,  that  the  prevention  of  taxpayer-funded  bailouts  is  a  core  principle  of
regulation.
That  said,  achieving  this  aim  also  makes  it  essential  to  refrain  from  adopting  regulatory
measures which would make public bail outs more likely or which would destroy the level playing
field.
Thus, I fully agree with Mario Draghi, who recently said that “the last thing we need at this point is
a  relaxation  of  regulation.”  That  does  not,  of  course,  exclude  us  from  regularly  evaluating  our
regulation and its effectiveness and fine-tuning it if necessary. But the G20 should stick to its
commitment to regulatory reforms and its clear rejection of regulatory arbitrage.
Carrying  out  deregulation  in  the  hope  of  stimulating  the  economy  could  backfire.  Insufficiently
regulated financial markets can do significant harm to economic prosperity if a crisis occurs, as
the latest financial crisis has painfully demonstrated.
Back in 2013, the then Secretary of the US Treasury, Jack Lew, said that “(…) the global financial
crisis (…) underscored the need for strengthening financial sector regulation across the globe. In
particular, the crisis highlighted the need for building much stronger and more resilient financial
institutions, greater market transparency, and a high quality level playing field across borders that
protects against regulatory gaps, arbitrage, and a race to the bottom."
I think this is still true.
 
4. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
On this note, I would like to bring my speech to a close.
In times of uncertainty, international cooperation is particularly important, and we are certainly
living in a period of heightened uncertainty at the moment.
In times like these, the G20 is a precious treasure. The German presidency is seeking to guard
this treasure and ensure its value is further enhanced.
Thank you for your attention. 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
