“Solvency II and small and medium-sized insurers”
2nd Conference 
Welcome Address
Salvatore Rossi – President of IVASS
Bank of Italy’s Congress Centre
Rome, 3 March 2017
       Ladies and gentlemen,  
I am delighted to welcome you all to this Conference.  
I  want  to  thank  Gabriel  Bernardino,  President  of  the  European  Insurance  and 
Occupational  Pensions  Authority  (EIOPA),  and  all  the  other  panelists,  for  kindly 
accepting our invitation. 
This is the second conference we hold in IVASS on Solvency  II. This time we 
decided  to  focus  on  a  specific  topic,  the  effects  of  the  new  prudential  framework  on 
small and medium-sized insurers – SMIs from now on. 
After Gabriel’s keynote speech we will have two panels: the first one will have a 
more  international  flavor,  while  the  second  one,  opened  by  Bianca  Maria  Farina, 
President  of  the  Italian  Insurance  Association  (ANIA),  will  be  focused  on  the  Italian 
market.  
The panelists are well known representatives of both the supervisory community 
and the industry. The moderators will be Karel Van Hulle, one of the founders of the 
Solvency  II  framework,  former  Head  of  the  Insurance  Unit  at  the  European 
Commission, and Ferdinando Giugliano, journalist and economic commentator.  
Alberto Corinti, member of the Board of IVASS and of the Management Board of 
EIOPA, will offer some concluding remarks. 
Why a conference on small and medium-sized insurers?  
I gave some hints last June, when presenting IVASS Annual Report. At that time 
only few months had passed since Solvency II entered into force, but we could already 
notice how difficult this new world had become for small companies.  
Solvency II pursues the objective – I said in June – of creating a risk-sensitive 
prudential regime for all and of incentivizing good corporate governance. To this end it 
has  introduced  three  pillars  of  new  rules:  1)  some  very  complex  methods  for 
calculating the capital requirement; 2) a minimum, but still high, level of organizational 
  requirements;  3)  and  a  detailed  information  system,  over  and  beyond  balance-sheet 
reporting obligations. Smaller firms are finding the investment consequently needed in 
human, technological and organizational capital something of a burden. 
Even the IMF has many concerns. Its Report The Insurance sector: trends and 
systemic  risk  implications  issued  in  April  20161  saw  a  clear  tendency  by  small 
companies  to  run  more  risks,  also  in  an  attempt  to  cover  the  growing  costs  of 
compliance with rules that have become much more stringent than before.  
If just one small firm fails, then there may be a loss of confidence in the system. 
So it is certainly wise for supervisors to be worried; it is not only a matter of market 
efficiency. 
Let me concentrate on capital requirements. The main goal of Solvency II is that 
of  linking  each  company’s  capital  requirement  to  the  actual  risks  that  it  faces.  Such 
risks are self-measured by the company through methods controlled or even validated 
by  the  national  supervisory  authority.  Ordering  these  tools  by  increasing  complexity, 
we have the so-called "standard formula", then the "undertaking-specific parameters" 
(USPs), and finally the "internal models".  
Inevitably, when you go from basic – Solvency I – to sophisticated – Solvency II 
– you have to accept an increase in the level of complexity. So, no surprise, not only 
are internal models very complex, but also USPs and even the standard formula. The 
latter  is  the  method  chosen  by  most  SMIs  to  calculate  their  capital  requirements. 
Though it is the simplest of the three methods, it is much more complex than the one in 
use under Solvency I.  
Many SMIs lament that Solvency II was conceived and developed having the 
big  market  players  in  mind.  Is  this  true?  I  don't  know,  but  in  any  case  trying  to 
answer  such  a  question  would  be  sterile.  A  more  subtle  and  useful  question  is 
whether the increased complexity of regulation just reflects that of the business, or 
whether  it  adds  a  further,  and  unnecessary,  layer  of  sophistication  to  the  picture, 
especially for SMIs. 
FMI, “Global Financial Stability Report”, April 2016. 
                                                 
1  
 
 
Are small insurers too small?  
 We may argue that the modern world is "no country for midgets" to paraphrase 
the title of a famous movie. The two big challenges that the world insurance industry is 
facing nowadays – digitalization and persistently low interest rates – seem to be even 
bigger for SMIs, so that many foresee a consolidation of the insurance services supply, 
with more and more M&As taking place that will significantly increase the average size 
of companies.  
Let's consider technological innovation first.  
On  the  one  hand,  digitalization  is  a  unique  opportunity  for  SMIs.  Internet  of 
things  and  big  data  are  revolutionary  trends  that  have  the  power  to  induce  a  deep 
transformation also in the insurance sector. Technological innovation connects people, 
integrates  and  manages  data,  automates  processes,  stimulates  new  products 
engineering.  SMIs  will  have  the  chance  to  play  an  important  role  if  they  are  able  to 
cover the many niche markets that will arise.  
On  the  other  hand,  this  still  largely  unexplored  world  is  full  of  threats,  in 
particular for SMIs. 
Cyber  risk  is  a  clear  example  of  opportunity/threat  coming  from  technological 
innovation. It is a relatively new and promising market for insurers: as soon as firms 
and  families  realize  how  dangerous  cyber  risks  are,  a  lot  of  new  insurance  policies 
could be designed and sold. However, insurers themselves may gain more visibility as 
a  target  for  cyber-attacks  while  they  migrate  towards  highly  integrated  and  big  data 
storage  systems.  The  higher  the  sophistication  of  the  security  system  in  place,  the 
lower  the  exposure.  Are  SMIs  able  to  use  sophisticated  enough  security  systems? 
That's an open question. 
factor 
for  SMIs 
Another  risky 
interest  rates 
environment. It is partly linked with the monetary policies in the current phase of the 
cycle,  but  also,  in  a  longer  term  perspective,  with  the  evolution  of  longer  term 
fundamentals and  demographic trends; it is intertwined with technological change, 
the  persistently 
low 
is 
  since  it  may  accelerate  it,  and  so  the  ensuing  M&A  process2.  We  still  don't  know 
how  long  this  environment  will  last:  as  for  monetary  policy,  headline  inflation  has 
increased  lately,  largely  owing  to  energy  prices,  but  underlying  inflation  pressures 
remain subdued.  
Most insurance companies are being induced to change their business models, 
lowering  guarantees  offered  to  policyholders  or  shifting  towards  products  with  a 
stronger "financial" component, or to take more risk on the asset side. SMIs are less 
equipped  to  weather  this  storm.  Is  a  SMI  capable  of  managing  more  complex, 
innovative products? Is it capable of managing more risky assets like stocks? Here is 
another engine of potential consolidation. 
It is likely that, eventually, market interest rates will have to somehow normalize 
from  the  current  very  low  levels.  When  that  happens,  the  market  value  of  bonds  in 
insurers' portfolios will be reduced. At the same time returns on bonds will get back to 
more "normal" levels, allowing insurers, in particular life insurers, to offer again to their 
customers  traditional  insurance  products,  with  a  guarantee  attached.  That  would 
require new contracts.  
Timing will be crucial: if the rise in market interest rates is gradual, as well as the 
shift  in  policyholders'  demand  from  existing  contracts  to  new  ones,  then  the  regime 
change  can  be  managed  by  companies  and  can  result  in  a  net  benefit  for  them. 
Sudden hikes on both fronts may instead be dangerous, and SMIs may be the most 
affected. That's a further reason for consolidation. 
But  these  are  market  forces.  We  as  regulators  must  ask  ourselves  whether 
regulation  itself  is  such  as  to  induce  consolidation,  without  any  explicit  prudential 
reasons to do that. An excessive number of M&As may result in a reduction of market 
competition,  in  lack  of  diversity  in  insurance  coverage,  and  may  eventually  feed  the 
never dormant “too big to fail” issue. 
                                                 
2   ESRB,  Macroprudential  policy  issues  arising  from  low  interest  rates  and  structural  changes  in  the  EU  financial 
system. November 2016.  
 Is proportionality a solution? 
Proportionality  in  the  application  of  Solvency  II  could  be  a  way  out  of  these 
doldrums. It will be interesting to hear from you on this point.  
I think that proportionality is a good principle, and its application to the second 
and  third  pillar  of  Solvency  II  –  that  is  governance  and reporting  –  is  certainly  worth 
being discussed. For instance, in IVASS we have been working a lot on the national 
implementation of the governance requirements set by Solvency II, and we have spent 
quite  some  time  in  thinking  on  how  best  to  ensure  their  proportionate  application, 
taking into account the needs of SMIs.  
Following previous fruitful experiences, we see merits in an early involvement of 
the industry in this process. We shall be launching a public consultation soon.  
Applying the proportionality principle to the first pillar – the capital requirement – 
is instead a more thorny affair. The forthcoming SCR review led by EIOPA and by the 
European  Commission  might  be  an  occasion  to  examine  this  issue.  Insurance 
companies could take advantage of the public consultation that EIOPA is running. 
For sure, in the meantime we could make a better use of the existing prudential 
framework. For instance, the Own Risk and Solvency Assessment (ORSA), on top of 
being used internally, can serve the purpose of improving the intensity and quality of 
the dialogue with supervisors. 
 To conclude, I very much hope that this Conference could be of inspiration to the 
reflections  and  works  that  both  regulators  and  insurers  will  conduct  on  this  delicate 
issue. I wish everybody an interesting and fruitful discussion.  
Thank you for your attention. 
by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
