M a r c h   8 ,   2 0 1 7
Bank  of  Japan
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Remarks at the Ninth Japan Securities Summit in London 
  Takako Masai 
Member of the Policy Board 
It is a great honor to have the opportunity today to be a panel member at the ninth Japan 
Securities Summit. 
 
Japan's economy had been suffering from deflation for more than 15 years, since the late 
1990s, with the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) being about 
zero  or  slightly  negative.  In  such  circumstances,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  been  conducting 
monetary policies in various unconventional ways for nearly 20 years (Chart 1). 
 
Looking back, in 1998, now nearly 20 years ago, Japan's policy interest rate -- which at that 
time was the uncollateralized overnight call rate -- already had been lowered to close to zero, 
at  0.25  percent.  Given  that  economic  activity  and  prices  did  not  improve  even  in  this 
situation,  the  Bank  introduced a  zero  interest  rate policy  in  February  1999.  Thereafter,  it 
introduced a quantitative easing policy, in which the operating target was the outstanding 
balance  of  current  accounts  at  the  Bank.  Later,  it  also  implemented  a  comprehensive 
monetary  easing  policy,  in  which  it  purchased  assets  such  as  CP,  corporate  bonds, 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs). The Bank 
continues  to  make  these  asset  purchases  to  the  present,  and  with  respect  to  ETFs  and 
J-REITs, it has significantly increased the amount of purchases since 2013. Meanwhile, it 
also introduced the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations 
for Economic Growth as well as the Fund-Provisioning Measure to Stimulate Bank Lending, 
and these also continue to this day. As illustrated, the Bank has pursued monetary easing by 
making  full  use  of  various  means.  As  a  result,  accommodative  financial  conditions  have 
been  realized  in  Japan.  Such  accommodative  financial  conditions  have  underpinned  the 
economy,  and  the  Bank's  large-scale  fund-provisioning  measures  have  contributed  --  in 
certain phases -- to maintaining financial system stability and preventing the economy from 
falling  into  a  deflationary  spiral.  Nevertheless,  it  is  true  that  at  the  same  time  there 
continued to be mild deflation. Therefore, the Bank made a strong and clear commitment to 
ensuring the economy's exit from deflation -- which had lasted for nearly 15 years -- and 
began  large-scale  monetary  easing  to  fulfill  the  commitment.  This  is  Quantitative 
Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE), which continues through to the present. 
 1 
The Bank also introduced the price stability target in January 2013 and set it at 2 percent in 
terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. At the same time, the government and 
the Bank released a joint statement, in which they emphasized their policy coordination. I 
view this as extremely important, because it indicated the determination by the government 
and  the  Bank  to  work  together  in  order  to  overcome  deflation  and  achieve  sustainable 
economic  growth.  The  Bank  then  introduced  QQE  in  April  2013.  After  increasing  the 
amount of its asset purchases further in 2014, it adopted a negative interest rate policy in 
January 2016 and introduced QQE with Yield Curve Control in September of that year. 
 
Since  the  introduction  of  QQE,  the  basic  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  itself  has  not 
changed;  that  is,  (1)  pushing  down  the  entire  yield  curve  through  the  Bank's  large-scale 
purchases  of  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs),  and  (2)  raising  inflation  expectations 
through  the  Bank's  strong  commitment  to  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  The 
transmission mechanism envisaged by the Bank is that these factors will lead to a reduction 
in  real  interest  rates,  thereby  producing  positive  effects  on Japan's  economic  activity  and 
prices (Chart 2). Under QQE, the underlying trend in the CPI (all items less fresh food and 
energy) turned positive and has been in such territory for more than two and a half years; 
this leads to the judgment that Japan's economy has reached a state of being no longer in 
deflation, which is commonly defined as a sustained decline in prices (Chart 3).   
 
Furthermore, the Bank introduced last year QQE with Yield Curve Control as a means of 
strengthening the past framework for monetary easing. My understanding is that there are 
two  points  as  the  background  to  this  decision.  First,  although  QQE  has  produced  its 
intended effects, the price stability target of 2 percent has not been achieved, and therefore a 
more effective framework was necessary. 
 
Second, while it was confirmed that the combination of large-scale purchases of JGBs and 
the negative interest rate policy was effective in influencing the entire yield curve, there was 
concern over a possibility that this combination could in some cases push down the yield 
curve more than necessary, thereby having a negative impact on financial functioning. 
 
2 
Under "yield curve control," which is the major component of the new framework, the Bank 
is able to conduct monetary policy in an effective and flexible manner by taking account of 
the economic, price, and financial conditions -- including the impact on the functioning of 
financial intermediation -- as it directly targets long-term interest rates.   
 
Another component of the new framework is an "inflation-overshooting commitment." With 
this commitment, the Bank aims to raise inflation expectations by demonstrating its strong 
determination.   
 
The Bank has attempted to make expectation formation more forward-looking through QQE. 
In reality, however, before the forward-looking expectation formation fully took hold, the 
observed  inflation  rate  declined,  due  mainly  to  the  fall  in  crude  oil  prices.  As  a  result, 
people's inflation expectations also declined in an adaptive manner. Therefore, I consider 
that, in order to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent, it is absolutely necessary to 
raise  inflation  expectations  and  promote  a  shift  in  expectation  formation  toward  a  more 
forward-looking direction. The inflation-overshooting commitment is a means to this end. 
 
Inflation  expectations  are,  so  to  speak,  the  sense  of  price  trends  among  individuals  and 
firms, and to change such expectations is not an easy task. This is even more the case with a 
country like Japan that has experienced protracted deflation. When QQE was introduced, 
the Bank set a time frame of about two years to achieve the price stability target in order to 
emphasize its strong and clear commitment to ensuring the economy's exit from deflation. 
Therefore, it may seem like it has taken a long time for the Bank to achieve this target. On 
the other side of the coin, only four years have passed since the target was set. Needless to 
say, this does not mean that taking a long time to meet the objective is acceptable. First, it 
remains  important  to  have  the  Bank's  strong  commitment  to  achieving  the  price  stability 
target  and  express  it  in  various  different  ways.  Then,  under  the  highly  accommodative 
financial  conditions  maintained  by  the  Bank  in  addition  to  the  large-scale  economic 
stimulus package implemented by the government, I consider it essential to enhance private 
demand by further accelerating efforts in both the public and private sectors to strengthen 
the growth potential. 
 
3 
In fact, such efforts already have been undertaken by both the public and private sectors. In 
this context, the government decided the Japan Revitalization Strategy 2016 in June 2016 
and launched the 10 strategic public-private joint projects, in which the public and private 
sectors  share  knowledge  and  strategy,  and  cultivate  new  promising  markets  (Chart  4). 
Looking  at  the  list  of  projects  may  leave  an  impression  that  it  is  an  all-around  list  of 
challenges  facing  Japan's  economy.  I  believe  that  what  the  economy  needs  now  is  to 
implement  various  initiatives  simultaneously  to  overcome  many  such  challenges.  What  I 
mean  is  that,  while  these  initiatives  may  look  like  "a  little  bit  of  everything,"  firmly 
promoting them in order to achieve economic revitalization in an omnidirectional manner, 
and  thereby  revitalizing  Japan's  economy,  is  necessary.  I  think  that  this  will  lead  to  an 
increase in growth expectations, and ultimately to a rise in inflation expectations. 
 
For  Japan's  economy,  the  third  largest  in  the  world,  ending  deflation  and  returning  to  a 
sustainable  growth  path  will  also  have  significant  meaning  for  the  global  economy.  The 
Bank will maintain highly accommodative financial conditions, with a view to achieving 
the price stability target of 2 percent, and ensure the overcoming of deflation. I believe that 
highly accommodative financial conditions, combined with the initiatives of the public and 
private  sectors  just  mentioned,  will  give  a  boost  to  firms'  investment  and  efforts  for 
improving  productivity.  Let  me  conclude  by  emphasizing  that  ensuring  the  exit  from 
deflation in Japan will lead to a more dynamic and stronger economy. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
4 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy
March 8, 2017
Takako Masai
Bank of Japan
Chart 1
Changes in the Bank's Monetary Policy Management
1999年2月 「ゼロ金利政策」の開始
Feb 1999
Mar 2001
Mar 2006
Dec 2009
Introduction of the zero interest rate policy （- Aug 2000）
Introduction of the quantitative easing policy（- Mar 2006 ）
Release of "The Bank's Thinking on Price Stability"
Release of "Clarification of the 'Understanding of Medium- to Long-
Term Price Stability'"
Introduction of the comprehensive monetary easing policy
Introduction of the "price stability goal in the medium to long term"
Introduction of the "price stability target" of 2 percent
Release of "Joint Statement of the Government and the Bank of Japan 
on Overcoming Deflation and Achieving Sustainable Economic 
Growth"
Introduction of Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE)
Expansion of QQE
Introduction of QQE with a Negative Interest Rate
Introduction of QQE with Yield Curve Control
Oct 2010
Feb 2012
Jan  2013 
〃
Apr 2013 
Oct 2014 
Jan  2016
Sep 2016
Mechanism of QQE
Chart 2
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing (QQE)
Large-scale purchases of JGBs Strong and clear commitment to 
achieve the price stability target of 
2 percent
Decrease
Increase
Nominal interest rates － Inflation expectations ＝ Real interest rates
   Decrease
Improvement in the economy 
and increase in prices
y/y % chg. 
Consumer Prices
Chart 3
CPI (all items less fresh food and energy)
CPI (all items less fresh food)
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
07
-3
CY
Notes: 1. Figures for the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy) are calculated by the Research and Statistics Department, Bank of Japan.
14
15
16
08
09
10
11
12
13
2. Figures for the CPI are adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the consumption tax rate.
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications.
The 10 Strategic Public-Private Joint Projects 
toward GDP of 600 Trillion Yen
Chart 4
1. The fourth industrial revolution
2. Toward a world leading healthcare country
3. Overcoming environmental and energy constraints and expanding investments
4. Changing sports to a growth industry
5. Revitalizing markets for transaction of existing houses and reform
6.
7. Bringing about revolution among small and medium-sized firms and micro firms
8. Promoting proactive agriculture, forestry and fishery, as well as reinforcing 
Improving productivity in the service industry
exports
9. Realizing Japan as a tourism-oriented country
10. Taking measures to stimulate domestic consumer sentiment
Source: "Japan Revitalization Strategy 2016" (Cabinet Decision, June 2, 2016)
