Encik Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid: Islamic finance - future trend
Keynote address by Mr Encik Adnan Zaylani Mohamad Zahid, Assistant Governor of the Central
Bank  of  Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  13th  Kuala  Lumpur  Islamic  Finance  Forum
2016 (KLIFF) "Islamic Finance - Future Trend", Kuala Lumpur, 21 November 2016.
 It is my pleasure; and an honour to be given the opportunity to speak at this forum today.  Since
the first introduction of KLIFF, more than a decade ago the event has gained recognition as a
prestigious annual gathering for industry experts and key players in Islamic finance. I therefore
wish to congratulate the organisers for its success in organising this event and maintaining its
momentum.  This  year,  in  line  with  the  chosen  theme  deliberations  in  the  forum  will  revolve
around  strategies  to  elevate  Islamic  finance  to  the  next  level. As  we  are  now  at  an  important
crossroads in Islamic finance, its continued dynamism in the journey ahead, requires the industry
to strategically respond to the changing requirements of the global economy.
My remarks today centres on the future trend of Islamic finance. In charting our growth for the
industry,  I  will  reflect  on  our  achievements;  and  offer  some  thoughts  on  key  areas  that  can
accelerate the industry forward. I would then deliberate on the key underpinnings for the industry
to successfully meet the intended objectives, in my conclusion.
Islamic finance with a growth rate of between 10 to 12% annually in the past decade is gaining
prominence  at  many  fronts,  including  its  ability  to  meet  the  unique  demands  of  the  modern
economy.  The  sukuk  market  in  particular,  has  produced  a  dynamic  stream  of  cutting  edge
products with an appeal that transcends beyond borders and beliefs. It has a wide geographical
spread, with global sukuk outstanding domiciled in over 20 countries, and an investor base that
spans from Europe to the Middle East and Asia, thus allowing greater diversification of exposures
and risks. Malaysia, with a consistent global sukuk market share of more than 50%, over the last
10 years, has sustained its position as the market leader.
In the last few years, we have witnessed increasing sovereign sukuk issuances by non-Muslim
jurisdictions to meet the varying motivations of its issuers. In 2015, at least 13 jurisdictions have
tapped the global sovereign sukuk market. Issuances by the United Kingdom and Hong Kong, are
testimonies that the sukuk has come of age. As for Malaysia, its market share of sovereign sukuk
stands at 40% and the recent issuance of a Sukuk Wakalah by the Government, with 30-year
tenure is currently the longest tenured sovereign sukuk globally. The horizons and usability of
sukuk have also expanded into the sphere of Socially Responsible Investment (SRI); following
the issuance of the first SRI Sukuk in 2015 by a Malaysian GLC. This is an example of innovative
impact investing that generates positive social outcomes.
Progress is also evident in our agenda towards becoming the centre for Islamic fund and wealth
management. We emerged as the largest hub, with 35% market share and the most number of
Islamic  funds.  The  Malaysian  Islamic  capital  market  has  also  gained  its  pace  as  a  reputable
destination for investment, given its wide range of world class financial products. Backed by a
robust Shariah screening methodology, more than 70% of total listed securities in the country are
Shariah-compliant, thus providing a wide array of selection for investors.
Islamic  finance  has  also  become  part  of  the  growth  strategies  of  global  financial  players,
indicating greater appreciation of its value propositions. A host of global banking players offering
Islamic banking services from diversified regions including from Japan; Europe; and the Middle
East have also established their presence in Malaysia.
A number of our industry players that offer Islamic finance have also ventured abroad to various
jurisdictions. Our MIFC Community, with nearly 40 professional ancillary service entities not only
provide  key  services  locally,  but  many  serve  global  demand  and  have  set  benchmarks  for
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
international best practices.
These  industry  developments  which  I  have  highlighted  have  indeed  enhanced  the  depth  and
breadth of the Islamic financial services industry. Nevertheless, against the onslaught of global
challenges that have intensified uncertainties and complexities, there is heightened urgency for
the industry to strategically chart its next phase and reinforce its core strengths. In the Malaysian
context, the various initiatives and developments taken place during the period of the Financial
Sector Masterplan; between 2001 to 2010 have indeed sparked the growth and vibrancy of the
industry. While achievements in various market segments have placed us at the forefront, more
ground breaking initiatives are needed to seize the opportunities in new growth areas; and to re-
energise  the  industry.  An  honest  assessment  on  the  existing  business  models  and  product
offerings  must  be  undertaken  to  recognise  gaps  and  issues,  which  is  a  crucial  step  towards
realising the true value propositions of Islamic finance.
The future growth of Islamic finance, in my view, is underpinned by three key areas. This could
also lead us to defining the future of Islamic finance as the ‘New Normal’ that can bring greater
sustainable and equitable economic development.
First, is to have a more cohesive efforts by industry players across all sectors in Islamic finance
to  realise  its  virtues  that  uphold  social  justice;  equality;  economic  prosperity;  and  inclusivity.
Indeed,  these  are  challenging  and  daunting  expectations.  However,  it  is  only  through
collaboration, that the Islamic finance industry could push its growth trajectory, into the next level
of maturity. Working in silos should be replaced by promoting a culture of collaboration. Industry
players should not only play a proactive role to enhance collaboration within the industry, it should
also be extended beyond sectoral boundaries. In the area of product development for example,
collaboration within the banking group can be explored to offer a more comprehensive range of
products and gain greater scale such as the offering of microfinancing and microtakaful as a
composite product.
Moving forward, collaboration beyond traditional sectors; and into competitive industries, such as
retail,  communication  and  oil  and  gas  should  be  advanced  as  it  opens  up  and  extends  our
outreach to form new alliances. Joining forces with other industries will allow us to embark on a
faster learning curve, while equipping ourselves with new skill sets. This will enable the intended
business objectives and outcomes to be met within a short period of time.
A  recent  example  of  such  collaboration  between  a  few  domestic  Islamic  banks  is  the
establishment of the Investment Account Platform.  The test of the collaboration however, lies in
its strength and sustainability in pursuing the intended outcomes. At the regional level, there is
also  potential  for  industry  players  to  collaborate  through  the  Islamic  Infrastructure  Investment
Platform or (I3P) that is now still at the proposal stage. Through this regional dialogue platform,
collaboration may be fostered between financial institutions, regulators and ministries from APEC
economies  with  multilateral  institutions  and  academic  experts  to  explore  measures  that  can
expand cross-border investments by Islamic financial institutions. In particular, the potential for
Islamic pension funds and takaful to finance infrastructure projects in APEC economies can be
explored.
In  realising  the  virtues  of  Islamic  finance,  it  also  warrants  Islamic  banks  to  progressively
strengthen its intermediary functions. I would like to encourage Islamic banks to take on a more
prominent and proactive role as investment intermediaries in addition to credit intermediation. In
Malaysia,  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Act  2013  (IFSA)  provides  the  enabling  grounds  for
Islamic banks to extend its role to include investment intermediation.
The  virtues  of  Islamic  finance  are  also  characterised  by  its  range  of  financial  offerings  with
diverse products that meet the needs of customers across all levels. However, statistics have
shown that retail financing by Islamic banks in the country dominates at nearly 60% and indeed,
Islamic banks are predominantly strong in household financing. In addition to that, there is a large
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
concentration of financing by domestic Islamic banks using the Tawarruq contract, estimated at
20% of outstanding financing.  There is a wide array of Shariah contracts that is readily available
for the Shariah and product development units in Islamic banks to explore to reduce over reliance
on  Tawarruq,  including  risk  sharing  contracts  such  as  Musharakah  and  Mudarabah  to  better
serve the diverse needs of customers.
The contract-based regulatory framework under IFSA 2013 provides the regulatory support for
Islamic banks to expand their product offerings beyond the traditional debt-based products. The
14 Shariah Standards comprising debt-based contracts; equity contracts; leasing; and ancillary
contracts  and  arrangements  are  expected  to  facilitate  the  Islamic  financial  institutions  in
diversifying their spectrum of products and services.
The second key area to drive industry growth is the acceleration of innovation by Islamic financial
institutions.  By  embracing  and  embarking  on  digital  innovations,  it  opens  up  new  and  ample
opportunities for our industry players to re-ignite productivity growth and increase efficiency of
processes.  Technology  will  certainly  redefine  the  future  financial  landscape;  and  fintech  is
progressing  by  leaps  and  bounds  in  the  conventional  sphere;  and  rapidly  changing  consumer
behaviour and needs. Islamic finance, being a relatively young industry, has vast opportunities to
leverage on technology as a catalyst to scale up businesses and enhance operational efficiency.
This includes understanding the potential of blockchain technology and its associated risks to
enable its effective adoption that is both cost and time-saving.
The integration of digitisation strategies in the business model of our domestic players is already
taking place with the recent launch of the Investment Account Platform. Another important area of
growth for industry players to optimally use technology to increase process efficiency is Islamic
trade finance that currently has a domestic market share of only 4% of total Islamic financing. A
more advanced trade execution leveraging on technology is expected to further stimulate cross-
border trade and growth of the real economy.
From the regulators’ perspective, disruptive innovations in the industry are very much welcomed.
Financial regulators in Australia, China, Singapore, United Kingdom and the United States are
amongst  those  that  have  positively  embraced  the  infusion  of  technology  in  their  financial
industries. For Malaysia, the issuance of the Regulatory Sandbox policy document in October
provides  regulatory  clarity;  lowers  barriers  to  entry;  and  accelerates  the  time-to-market  for
productive innovations. Our Sandbox is unique as it is the first to include Islamic finance.  Thus,
industry players can be assured of the regulatory support by the Bank in expanding their frontiers
of innovation. We would therefore expect to see more technological platforms to be introduced
and infusion of technology to take place not only to disrupt the way we do things, but at the end of
the day, to be able to significantly enhance values and experience for the consumers.
The third and final key area relates to the measurement of the industry’s contribution to society
and  the  wider  economy.  Islamic  finance  has  more  to  offer  beyond  the  confines  of  the
conventional parameters of Sustainable, Responsible and Impact Investing (SRI); as well as the
Environmental,  Social  and  Governance  (ESG)  considerations.  A  natural  alignment  between
Islamic finance and SRI already exist, given that the principles of fairness; equality; and ethics
are embedded in Islamic finance which are associated with social well-being of the people.
Given these common core values, there are certainly vast opportunities for Islamic finance to
broaden  its  investor  portfolio  to  access  the  global  SRI  funds  that  stands  at  more  than  USD3
trillion.  In  broadening  the  horizon  of  Islamic  finance  by  tapping  into  socially-conscious
investments, the industry can actively spearhead efforts to promote and reach out to investors
whom are value driven. We envision that investments through Islamic finance products would
meet  the  aspiration  and  needs  of  this  group  of  investors.  It  is  therefore  important  for  Islamic
finance practitioners to have greater understanding on the scope of SRI to effectively match the
segments of opportunities available in the SRI space.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
An  imperative  to  the  successful  outcomes  of  the  key  growth  areas  is  the  availability  of  multi-
skilled and top-notch talent in the industry. In Malaysia, we have over 26,000 talents in the Islamic
banking  industry  and  a  holistic  infrastructural  ecosystem  that  supports  their  developmental
needs. As we move forward, we need a deep talent pool with wider set of competencies beyond
the scope of Islamic finance knowledge to provide the additional competitive edge to the industry.
Continuous nurturing of Islamic finance talent, with intellectual diversity in other related disciplines
such  as  economics,  finance,  law  and  financial  technology  can  give  rise  to  new  visions  and
wisdoms that go beyond traditional boundaries.
Under the current scenario, talent development is crucial at every level of the organisation from
the  Board  to  Shariah  committee  members  as  well  as  front-liners.  Currently,  an  initiative  is
underway  to  develop  a  dedicated  programme  for  Board  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  with  a
scope  that  includes  wide-ranging  and  unique  issues  within  the  Islamic  finance  industry.  The
Shariah Leaders Education Programme that has commenced since last year has enriched more
than 100 local Shariah scholars with the necessary governance and business insights for them
to  effectively  perform  their  roles  as  Shariah  Committee  members.  Given  the  success  of  this
programme, an international flagship programme will soon be introduced to enhance business
professionalism  of  Shariah  scholars  worldwide,  thus  complementing  their  existing  Shariah
expertise.
Conclusion
In  conclusion,  the  environment  that  we  operate  in  will  continue  to  be  unpredictable  with
economic, social and political changes taking place in the global economy. For Islamic finance,
we have witnessed its increasing recognition and widespread appreciation. The future however
requires greater impact by Islamic finance to truly realise its potential in providing solutions to the
problems faced by society.
Domestically, we are beyond  half  way  of  our  Financial  Sector  Blueprint.  While  certain  targets
have been met, more tangible outcomes are required from the industry to meet the targeted 40%
market share by 2020. Of importance is the need for the industry to be driven by clear objectives
and targets that leverage on the key growth areas that have been deliberated. “Reflect on existing
strengths; and build new capabilities to create new engines of growth within the industry. Seize
various growth opportunities. Continuously reinvent, re-energise and re-anchor the industry”. We
can therefore successfully reap the immense dividends of the future.
Thank you.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
