Sabine Lautenschläger: Interview with Mannheimer Morgen
Interview by Ms Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, with Mannheimer
Morgen, conducted by Mr Rolf Obertreis on 25 July and published on 29 July 2017.
 IKB, a German Mittelstandsbank , was facing a serious crisis at the end of July ten years
ago. Do you remember that?
1
The  problems  with  subprime  securities,  i.e.  risky  home  loans  packaged  together  in  bonds,
started to appear in April 2007 in a US company. We already had an uneasy feeling in the spring,
but we didn’t think that it would send the banking systems into a tailspin.
Many people thought that it was a one-off event. Did you have a premonition of what
September 2008 might bring and of what might follow?
Nobody foresaw the extent of what would happen between summer 2007 and summer 2009,
even though in late summer 2007 it was becoming clearer that the turbulence could intensify.
Could such a financial and banking crisis happen again?
I  would  never  say  that  there  could  be  no  recurrence  of  a  financial  and  banking  crisis.  100%
protection  does  not  exist.  However,  supervision  is  today  in  a  much  better  position.  We  can
intervene much more decisively and also in a more preventive way. Before 2009 supervisors in
Germany could only take action if they could clearly demonstrate that banks were at risk and that
damage  would  soon  be  inflicted.  Supervisors  can  now  demand  much  higher  capital
requirements for risks at a much earlier stage. A comprehensive new regulatory framework has
greatly strengthened supervision.
So, banks and savings banks are now safer than ten years ago.
All credit institutions have significantly more capital and significantly higher liquidity today. The
requirements  have  been  increased,  including  in  respect  of  a  bank’s  risk  management.  The
management  board  of  a  large  bank  must,  for  example,  include  a  chief  risk  officer  with  wide-
ranging powers who has equal status with the other board members.
Banks only need to hold 3% of their balance sheet total as capital. In Germany, measured
against the risks on the balance sheets, the figure is now on average around 12%. That
seems small when you look at the capital ratios of small and medium-sized enterprises,
for instance.
The 3% relates to each and every bank transaction, whether it is risky or not. It is a sort of basic
provision. Besides, the quality of capital is very carefully monitored. Is it immediately available to
cover risks? Or is there only a commitment that the capital would be available in the event of a
crisis? Supervisors closely scrutinise the risks posed by assets, loans and trading activities. The
greater  the  risks  of  such  deals,  the  more  capital  the  bank  must  hold. A  German  government
bond, for example, does not represent a risk when calculating the capital ratio, unlike securitised
loans. So the average figure of 12% is only indicative.
So you take a close look at banks’ books?
Yes. And in the end the capital ratio for one business segment may be much higher than the
average. On average three times as much capital has been put aside for the trading activities of
banks as in 2008. But we also need to strike the right balance between capital requirements and
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
risk. After all, banks should always be able to issue loans to businesses and consumers and to
support the real economy, to assist with mergers and acquisitions, and to organise initial public
offerings on the stock market.
Savings  banks  and  credit  unions  are  complaining  about  the  costs  of  regulation  and
about supervisors going too far.
Generally  speaking,  the  same  risks  must  be  subject  to  the  same  rules.  Nevertheless,  a
systemically important bank must today meet considerably more stringent requirements and is
monitored much more closely than a savings bank or a credit union. The key point is that a major
bank in difficulty is more likely to pose a threat to financial stability than a small bank, and if that is
the case, distinctions are called for in some, but not all, rules. And after ten years, we should
check whether the new rules are also having the intended effect.
In the United States there are plans to relax the rules for banks.
I don’t believe in returning now to deregulation or to purely national rules. That would be a big
mistake. We need globally consistent rules for the activities of large banks, of banks which are
important  for  the  financial  system.  The  crisis  should  have  taught  us  that.  Banks  are  not  only
highly interconnected with each other but also with financial markets, and only global rules can
protect us from chain reactions and regulatory arbitrage, i.e. exploiting differences in regulatory
standards.
There  is  now  a  European  resolution  authority  for  ailing  banks,  but  recently  it  didn’t
intervene  in  several  credit  institutions  in  Italy. Again,  the  taxpayer  is  being  asked  to
cough up. You can’t have liked that.
We have taken some enormous steps forward with the European resolution authority and our
banking  supervision.  But  we  haven’t  yet  reached  our  goal.  For  instance,  European  banking
supervision  is  still  lacking  some  tried  and  tested  tools  to  be  able  to  act  more  quickly  and
effectively. Take the moratorium tool, for example: if a bank gets into trouble, all cash outflows
can initially be stopped. That tool exists in Germany but not in Spain.
But  banking  supervision  is  in  any  case  in  a  state  of  flux  because  there  are  constant
innovations. Just think of the fintechs.
Yes, there are always new developments in the banking business – but there’s no need to react
to every innovation with a new tool. After all, you don’t buy a new screwdriver every time you buy
a  new  shelf,  regardless  of  whether  you  bought  it  from  a  Swedish  furniture  store  or  from  an
exclusive manufacturer.
Are credit institutions earning enough money? Banks are complaining about low interest
rates and the resulting lower interest margin.
The  low  interest  rate  environment  is  certainly  a  challenge  in  the  long  run.  But  the  earnings
performance  of  quite  a  few  banks  was  already  critical  when  interest  rates  were  high.  That’s
because, among other things, we have a very large number of banks in Germany, around 1,600.
There are, in fact, too many of them. They maintain a large and very costly network of branches.
And because competition is fierce, the banks’ margins are low. Loans are cheap, some of them
too  cheap,  and  some  banking  services  are  being  provided  free  of  charge.  That  eats  away  at
earnings.
So we need more mergers.
Consolidation is necessary. Some banks have already been moving in that direction, such as in
the cooperative sector. There are now fewer than 1,000 cooperative banks; 15 years ago there
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
were  several  hundred  more.  But  banks  must  continue  to  squeeze  costs  and  open  up  new
sources of revenue.
So prices are set to rise for customers?
Not all banking services can remain as favourable as they are now. We see aggressive rates in
some areas. While the supervisor doesn’t determine prices, generally speaking good services
should command fair prices. Such services can’t be free forever.
Do you understand why German savers are complaining about low interest rates?
Yes, I understand why, but every saver is an employee or a business person, and sometimes
also a borrower. There are, for instance, many young families who can build their own home
because interest rates are very low. An expansionary monetary policy helps in the medium and
long term, also because, as a result of growth, jobs are created, which in turn generate income.
Only that makes it possible for people to buy property or to save or invest.
You  approach  monetary  policy  as  a  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board  and
Governing Council. When will the ECB start to unwind its monetary policy?
The expansionary monetary policy has both advantages and side effects. As time passes, the
positive effects get weaker and the risks increase. So it’s important to prepare for the exit in good
time. What’s crucial in that context is a stable trend in the rate of inflation towards our objective of
just under 2%. It’s not quite there yet. Still, we need to address the issue: how should the return
to normal monetary policy be arranged? What will be the time frame, what will be the tools and
what will be the sequence? What steps are to be taken and when should we start to wind down
the bond purchases?
That’s likely to be a long process.
That’s why we on the ECB’s Governing Council should now answer the questions I just asked.
1
A Mittelstandsbank serves small and medium-sized enterprises.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
