Amando M Tetangco: Philippine banking in an integrated regional
financial market
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central  bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the Annual  Reception  for  the  Closing  Plenary  of  the  29th
National Convention of the Bankers Institute of the Philippines, Tagaytay City, 11 March 2017.
 Good evening everyone! It is a great pleasure for me to join BAIPHIL’s 29th national convention. 
BAIPHIL is important to us. You are one of the key partners of the BSP in ensuring that the quality
of bank personnel meets the rigorous requirements of our banking system. This is crucial — our
banking sector has grown into a P13.5 trillion industry in terms of assets and is responsible for
deposits that have reached a record high of P10.4 trillion as of December 2016. This is a great
responsibility.  
Given this, and as we consider the way forward, let me take this opportunity to share with you my
thoughts about critical developments that will define our financial markets in the years to come.
I will take this opportunity therefore to share my thoughts about critical developments that will
define our financial markets in the years to come. 
Ladies and gentlemen. 2017 is bound to bring on a new set of challenges to the global economy
with Brexit, policy changes in the US under its new President, the US Fed’s decision to increase
policy rates, and China’s decision to pursue stability by moderating economic growth.   
The  IMF  sees  some  softening  from Asian  emerging  markets,  but  projects  a  modest  growth
overall in the world economy. What about the Philippines? Well, you will be pleased to know that
quite  a  number  of  multilateral  agencies  and  global  institutions  expect  the  Philippines  to
outperform many of our economic peers.
Nevertheless,  we  should  not  be  complacent.    Given  the  sea  change  unfolding  in  the  global
markets, we need to be strategic in our thinking and deliberate in our collective actions if we are
to successfully navigate through emerging challenges.
One  area  where  we  find  challenges  and  opportunities  for  us,  is  the ASEAN  integration.  If  we
revisit the underpinnings of ASEAN market integration, we find that its vision is premised literally
on the concept of building a community. And like all communities, the ASEAN Community is itself
built  around  different  components,  specifically,  developing  a  Political-Security  Community,  a
Socio-Cultural Community and an Economic Community.
With the establishment of the ASEAN Economic Community or AEC in 2015, we are now at that
phase of formally consolidating the 10 ASEAN markets into a single economic base. To achieve
this, it is necessary that we have an integrated and well-functioning regional financial system. 
This is defined under the ASEAN Financial Integration Framework or AFIF. Within the AFIF is the
integration  of  the  banking  markets.  This  is  what  we  refer  to  as ABIF  and  it  is  being  pursued
alongside the integration of the other facets of the financial market such as the payments and
settlement system, the capital market, and the insurance sector.
A  proper  response  to  your  chosen  topic  of  what  ASEAN  integration  means  to  Asian  and
Philippine banking must therefore take a holistic view that considers ABIF in the context of AFIF,
which in turn is an essential element of the AEC,  which itself is only 1 of the 3 “communities”.
There are many moving parts in ASEAN integration but it is clear that the envisioned upside is
premised on economies of scale and scope. Latest statistics from the ASEAN Secretariat tell us
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
that  ASEAN  represents  USD2.4  trillion  in  combined  GDP,  making  it  among  the  10  biggest
economies in the world.  Over the past decade and a half, ASEAN was the 3rd fastest growing
economy in the world, behind only China and India. ASEAN has a population base of 629 million,
35% of whom are below 20 years old. Total trade volumes reached a high of USD2.53 trillion in
1
2014 and FDI inflows, USD120.8 billion in 2015.
Clearly,  these  are  not  small  numbers;  but  they  are  relevant  only  if  we  see  ASEAN  as  an
integrated market. Taking full advantage of this aggregate size and collective economic strength
is precisely the point of integration so that there is freer movement of goods and services as well
as of labor and capital.  In ASEAN’s vision, this will allow for the unbundling of distribution from
production, so that one can produce in the jurisdictions which have the comparative advantage
for the product and have the product sold in other jurisdictions where there is greatest demand.
The  freer  movement  of  capital  is  not  only  for  production,  it  also  holds  true  for  the  regional
financial  market.  When  compared  with  other  regional  blocs  or  other  countries  in  the  world,
ASEAN is well-documented to have a higher saving rate relative to GDP. Cross-border portfolio
flows  data  confirm,  however,  that ASEAN  minimally  invests  into ASEAN.  Thus,  an  important
opportunity  of  an  integrated ASEAN  market  is  the  re-channeling  of  regional  savings  back  into
ASEAN.
What do all of these mean for Philippine banks? What do you think? To me, this is a task which
is  squarely  within  your  sphere  of  competence.    With  the  path  ahead  defined,  it  would  be  a
serious  error  for  one  to  think  that  all  these  remain  within  the  realm  of  the  abstract.  For  your
information, the AEC Blueprint 2025 has been finalized and is freely available for download via
the  ASEAN  website.  Within  that  blueprint  are  identified  milestones  that  are  monitored
continuously  for  their  progress.  Thus,  the  different  moving  parts  that  I  mentioned  earlier  have
been set in motion and working towards the envisioned outcomes.
I have talked about the collective advantage of ASEAN integration but is there a specific upside
for the Philippines and Philippine banks?
From the perspective of macroeconomic activity, there is significant room for the Philippines to
move up because we have arguably more stable fundamentals than most, if not the rest, of the
region. We have achieved 72 consecutive quarters of uninterrupted growth, a remarkable record
considering  the  market  environment  over  this  period. And  today,  the  Philippines  is  one  of  the
fastest growing economies in the world.
In the financial markets, the Philippines can target a larger portion of ASEAN savings. Here we
lag  behind  Indonesia,  Malaysia,  Singapore  and  Thailand.  The  same  is  true  for  external  trade,
another potential growth area for the Philippines.  
In both portfolio investments and in external trade, Philippine banks have a clear role to play as an
intermediary, paying/collecting agent and investment advisor. Of course, the possibilities are not
limited to those within the purview of the banking system. Taking in more market share within
ASEAN means that we move forward to develop our capital market and to institutionalize cross-
border payments and settlement arrangements.
The  critical  elements  under  the  ASEAN  Financial  Integration  Framework  are  securities,
insurance, the payment and settlement systems and finally, banking or ABIF.  This is where the
Philippines can set specific targets  for increased market share in the region.
Ladies and gentlemen.  ABIF is now unfolding  — it provides us with opportunities. The strategic
issue therefore is how you will now operate given that regional integration is upon us. Should you
choose  to  be  a  Qualified ASEAN  Bank  or  a  QAB,  you  have  added  opportunities  in  a  bigger
market but you have to deal with new aspects of competition, different market conditions, and
differences in capital requirements, among others.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
On the other hand, those who choose to “stay home” so to speak, are not necessarily shielded
from heightened competition. Indeed,  banks  need  to  have  a  good  competitive  strategy  even  if
they are not immediately aspiring to be QABs.
We have seen how foreign banks that enter our market reshape competitive forces. Aside from
QABs, even outside the ABIF guidelines, foreign banks can still come into our shores under the
purview of RA 10641.
As you are aware, our strong fundamentals and sound banking system keep the Philippines an
attractive  destination  for  investments.   Already,  nine  foreign  banks  have  entered  our  banking
system thru RA 10641 while another six banks are in various stages of talks with the BSP. 
ABIF  makes  it  imperative  that  you  improve  your  competitiveness  by  lowering  operating  costs,
increasing product and service innovations, and improving service quality. This requires more
investments in technology and training. Ultimately, this needs more capital and scale to thrive.
The changes that come with ASEAN integration, however, will be akin to a process unfolding. 
While the framework is already approved, the transition will be gradual.  
Now,  then,  is  the  time  to  consider  your  options.  This  is  true  for  non-QABs  and  for  QABs.
Whether  it  is  backroom  support  or  frontline  services,  what  is  certain  and  necessary  from  a
classic BAIPhil perspective, is the development and upgrading of skills and training programs not
only in banking but also in areas such as market surveillance and regulatory reforms.
Preferring the status quo will be a competitive disadvantage. Change is the reality and banking
organizations such as BAIPhil have a significant role to play in navigating the banking industry
toward a new competitive landscape.
Clearly, much needs to be done; but I am positive you will be up to these emerging challenges. 
Let me assure you — the BSP is working with the banking community to prepare the way for
ABIF.     Among  others,  the  BSP  has  been  upgrading  the  supervision  framework  in  line  with
international  standards,  especially  on  corporate  governance  and  risk  management;  requiring
capital build-up and encouraging mergers and consolidations; and opening up barriers to entry.
And  in  accordance  with ABIF,  the  BSP  has  signed  a  high-level  agreement  with  Bank  Negara
Malaysia governing QABs and looks forward to forging at least two more agreements as early as
next month.
In addition, our Supervision and Examination Sector and the newly-created Office of Systemic
Risk Management will engage  the  banks  in  discussions  to  demystify  and  clarify  the  concepts
behind ABIF and AFIF as you operate in an integrated and more globally-active ASEAN market.
But even as you prepare for ASEAN integration, I hope that you will always be mindful and never
lose  sight  of  the  risks  before  you. Always  make  sure  that  you  operate  in  a  safe  and  sound
manner, keeping in mind the interest of financial consumers who have entrusted their resources
with you.  
Finally, I wish to thank the BAIPHIL for its continuing support and cooperation with the BSP in
keeping the banking system sound and stable. I particularly thank you for your active participation
in the BSP’s financial education program by teaching thousands of parents and teachers sound
money management.  This has enabled our public school teachers to become excellent financial
educators, at least two of whom were chosen National Awardees under the DepEd-BSP’s Guro
ng  Pag-Asa  Awards.  The  awards  were  given  last  Tuesday  by  Education  Secretary  Leonor
Briones,  yours  truly,  and  members  of  the  Monetary  Board,  in  the  presence  of  bank  industry
leaders  and  BAIPHIL’s  President  Liza  Ortiz  and  Marilen  Ruiz  of  your  Special  Projects
Committee. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
BAIPHIL, you walk your talk. You train bank employees and share your financial management
expertise with the unbanked and underbanked. All of these to make our banking system stable,
inclusive and a channel for promoting inclusive growth. I will always remember BAIPHIL for this.
Ladies and gentlemen. This is the last time I will join your National Convention as Governor of the
Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. I take this opportunity therefore to thank all of you and wish that all
your efforts will contribute to make our banking system better, stronger, and more responsive to
the needs of our people and our country.
Maraming salamat!  Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
1
Data taken from the “ASEAN Community in Figures 2016” published by the ASEAN Secretariat.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
