Vitas Vasiliauskas: Should macroprudential policy target real estate
prices?
Welcome  remarks  by  Mr  Vitas  Vasiliauskas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Lithuania, 
at the Macroprudential Policy Conference, Vilnius,12 May 2017.
Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen,
 It’s my pleasure to join you on the second day of this conference and thank you all – speakers,
panellists and participants – for getting together to discuss this relevant topic. And of course, a
special thank you to our keynote speakers – Dr Stefan Ingves, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank,
and  Dr  Jon  Danielsson,  Director  of  the  Systemic  Risk  Center,  who  gave  a  keynote  speech
yesterday.
Much to my regret I wasn’t able to be part of your previous exchange of views on whether and
how macroprudential policy should react to real estate price changes. I know you also discussed
the  current  macropudential  measures  and  their  ability  to  efficiently  reduce  real  estate  market
imbalances. But still a good bunch of pending questions promises us another intensive day.
Dear Colleagues,
Today – when we ask ‘should macroprudential policy target real estate prices?’, one may answer
with a quick ‘no’. But this would make us think about the periods, when the real estate boom
ended in a bust.
You know better than anyone, that people use various indicators to foresee the turning of the
business  cycle  –  industrial  production,  credit  and  real  estate  price  growth,  or  even  cranes
looming over the city.
Well, this morning while driving through the city I got the impression that they – I mean cranes –
 do disturb the skyline quite freely and, thus, warn us to watch the market temperature closely. 
It’s broadly acknowledged that huge fluctuations in real estate prices have a chance of leading to
financial disasters. History has taught us that crises are typically preceded by lending booms and
formation of asset price bubbles. When the bubble deflates, it hurts the financial system and then
– the real economy. Eventually this costs us far too much.
Having in mind what we all witnessed in the last decade, I’m tempted to answer the previous
question with a ‘yes’. 
Let’s look at what was happening in real estate sectors of the Baltic States in the years prior to
the financial crisis and the years afterwards. 
To illustrate: prior to the great turmoil of 2008 Lithuania’s real estate sector was flooded by credit.
The  curve  of  the  real  estate  price  growth  was  very  steep:  within  4  years  real  prices  almost
tripled.
Back then we didn’t have macroprudential policy and, when the shock hit our financial system,
we experienced the deepest fall in real estate prices ever seen in our country. We lost around
one  third  of  the  market  value  of  residential  real  estate.  Unemployment  tripled.  And  GDP
contracted by 15 per cent. We experienced one of the deepest economic recessions in the EU.
Thankfully,  it  was  also  one  of  the  shortest;  although  we  achieved  the  recovery  through  great
pains.
1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Or if we were to look towards the other shore of the Baltic Sea and recall Sweden three decades
ago,  where,  by  the  beginning  of  the  ’90s,  real  estate  values  and  stock  prices  had  more  than
doubled. Soon after – the price bubble blew up. Half of the property value was lost. And – that left
the Swedes to deal with very painful consequences for their economy. 
Dear Stefan,
maybe later you will share your thoughts on how to prevent history from repeating itsel?
From our side I can firmly say that after muddling through the turmoil, we learned our lesson. We
took actions. The Bank of Lithuania now has the mandate to shape macroprudential policy. This
is  a  big  responsibility  and  I  am  confident  that  we  are  delivering  on  the  mandate  of  financial
stability. We have a number of well-targeted measures, which, I believe, are doing their job. Had
these tools been in place before 2008, the cycle would have been smoother. And the negative
consequences for our economy wouldn’t have been so dramatic.
However, despite actions taken and ammunition obtained, my colleagues at the Bank of Lithuania
encourage  asking  ourselves  whether  we  could  do  more. And  I  do  agree  with  them  –in-depth
analysis and discussions are very welcome.
When doing more, it seems obvious to intervene somewhere at the start of the cycle. And if, for
example, easy money is needed to invigorate real economy, then we could maybe do something
about a probable speculative bubble. Something like setting the speed limit on real estate price
growth and then using prudential policy measures to steer the real estate sector when needed. 
But maybe we should target real estate imbalances instead? If, for instance, we witnessed that
housing prices increase much faster in the big cities than they do outside, it would make sense
to consider these imbalances as well. We could adjust and use measures, which are already in
our arsenal. Then we would have location-based measures.
Let me tell you that I’m still a bit sceptical about focusing only on real estate prices. Why?
Firstly, we must keep in mind that we have a mandate to ensure the stability of the entire financial
system.
Secondly,  stability  in  the  real  estate  sector  is  not  sufficient  enough  for  financial  stability  in
general. 
Yes,  trends  in  the  real  estate  sector  are  extremely  important.  For  prudential  policy  they  are
important  to  the  extent  that  they  relate  to  developments  in  credit,  balance  sheets  of  financial
institutions and, the financial system as a whole. But at the same time – the real estate sector is
not  the  only  one  to  keep  an  eye  on.  Imbalances  in  other  asset  markets,  vulnerabilities  in  the
banking sector – these also demand our equal attention.
Let us look at the expansion of credit which is most likely the culprit of “speeding” prices. Some
colleagues  distinguish  between  “productive”  and  “non-productive”  credit,  because  not  every
credit  contributes  equally  to  economic  growth.   A  loan  to  finance  a  business  is  much  more
productive than a mortgage to buy an old apartment. Non-productive credit instead of fuelling the
economy might be felt as a heavy load. 
So should macroprudential policies be active in steering credit structure towards some desirable
levels? For example, imposing different risk weights on different types of credit? What measures
do we already have in order to start implementing such policy?
Today we will hear about prudential policy experiences in different countries. And I’m excited to
open the floor to needed and well-targeted discussions. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I wish you an interesting day and fruitful exchange of views.
And now I gladly pass the microphone to our keynote speaker, our good friend Governor Ingves.
Please, Stefan, the floor is yours.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
