An address by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB),  
to the Ninety-Seventh Annual Ordinary General Meeting 
of the SARB Shareholders 
South African Reserve Bank, Pretoria 
28 July 2017 at 10:00 
This  past  year  has  been  extremely  eventful,  from  both  an  economic  and  a  political 
perspective. This has been the case both globally and domestically.  
A number of themes dominated the global backdrop. First, there were major shifts in 
the political settings. Surprise outcomes in the UK1 referendum regarding its continued 
membership of the European Union and in the US2 presidential election coincided with 
increased  concerns  about  the  rise  of  political  populism  in  a  number  of  regions,  a 
backlash against rising inequality blamed on globalisation, and a rise in nationalistic 
tendencies.  The  French  political  landscape  changed  dramatically,  given  the 
decimation  of  traditional  parties,  but  a  strong  move  to  the  extreme  right  did  not 
transpire as feared. 
Second,  these  developments  threatened  the  sustainability  of  the  global  economic 
recovery  which  had  shown  signs  of  resilience  after  a  few  years  of  disappointing 
outcomes and false starts. But despite these uncertainties, there appear to be definite 
signs that most regions are on a path of sustained recovery from the most recent global 
economic crisis. It has taken almost 10 years to reach this point, which is indicative of 
how  long  it  takes  to  recover  from  economic  slowdowns  following  a  financial  crisis. 
Nevertheless, expectations are for a lower growth trend than in the pre-crisis period. 
1 United Kingdom 
2 United States 
Page - 1 - of 11 
 Third,  most  of  the  advanced  economies  saw  a  decline  in  unemployment  rates, 
although they remain relatively high in the euro area on average. Despite tightening 
labour  market  conditions,  wage  growth  in  these  economies  has  remained  minimal. 
While  some  ascribe  this  trend  in  part  to  low  productivity  growth  or  the  impact  of 
technological change, the full explanation remains a subject of much debate. But this 
trend could contribute to the persistence in rising inequality and political instability. 
 The  fourth  global  theme  relates  to  inflation.  Earlier  concerns  about  deflation  have 
abated. Inflation generally remains benign and below target in most of the advanced 
economies  despite  the  improved  growth  outlook  and  lower  unemployment.  The 
volatility  that  was  observed  was  driven  primarily  by  oil  price  fluctuations.  A  notable 
exception is the UK where the inflation target has been exceeded following the Brexit-
induced  depreciation  of  the  sterling.  The  subdued  global  inflation  environment  is 
ascribed in part to low wage growth. 
 Fifth, despite the absence of inflation pressures, monetary policies in the advanced 
economies have begun a slow retreat from their highly accommodative stances. The 
US Fed3 has led the way with three Fed Funds rate increases of 25 basis points each 
in the past year. The Fed has also communicated its intention to begin slowly shrinking 
its balance sheet – which was expanded significantly during the global financial crisis 
– this year. The ECB4 and the Bank of England have also recently signalled a possible 
end  to  their  extremely  accommodative  monetary  policy  stances  later  this  year,  but 
rates are expected to remain low in Japan.  
 Sixth, capital flows to emerging markets have remained relatively robust but sensitive 
to  changes  in  advanced  economy  policy  signals.  While  changing  expectations 
regarding ECB and US monetary policy in particular have impacted on a number of 
emerging market currencies and bond yields, the reaction has been relatively muted. 
Those economies that were most sensitive to the 2013 ‘taper tantrum’ episode have 
                                                           
3 US Federal Reserve 
4 European Central Bank 
 Page - 2 - of 11 
much-improved macroeconomic balances, and their currencies are less vulnerable to 
possible spillover effects from US monetary tightening. 
 Finally, international oil prices have also been fairly volatile. Attempts by OPEC5 and 
other producers to underpin falling prices through output restrictions were effective in 
the short run, with oil prices rising to around US$58 per barrel in December 2016 from 
earlier levels of around US$45-50, after they had fallen to below US$30 per barrel in 
early  2016.  Since  April  we  have  seen  this  strategy  being  undermined  by  increased 
output from shale gas producers in the US in particular, and  by non-compliance by 
parties to the agreement.  
 Turning closer to home: while global growth prospects have generally improved, South 
Africa is unfortunately an outlier. This past year has seen the worst domestic growth 
performance since the recession during the global financial crisis. The economy grew 
at a paltry 0.3% in 2016, and recently recorded two consecutive quarters of negative 
growth. The SARB6 had expected the fourth quarter of 2016 to be the low point in the 
cycle, but growth in the first quarter of this year surprised significantly on the downside 
at  -0.7%.  This  contraction  was  broad-based,  with  only  the  primary  sector  recording 
positive growth.  
 Despite this, we believe that the worst is behind us – and that growth in the second 
quarter of this year will be positive. However, the SARB’s growth forecast was revised 
down  significantly,  as communicated at  the  recent meeting  of  the  MPC7.  Growth of 
just 0.5% is now forecast for this year, rising to 1.3% and 1.5% respectively in the next 
two years. This is clearly too low to make any meaningful inroads on unemployment. 
 For most of the past year, headline inflation was above the upper end of the target 
range of 3-6%, at an average of 6.3% and a peak of 6.8% in December. In the early 
months of 2017, inflation moderated considerably and returned to within the inflation 
target range in April.  
                                                            
5 Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
6 South African Reserve Bank 
7 Monetary Policy Committee 
 Page - 3 - of 11 
The  inflation  forecast  presented  to  the  MPC  at  its  most  recent  meeting  showed  a 
marked  improvement. While  previous forecasts  had  suggested  that  the  longer-term 
inflation trajectory would be uncomfortably close to the upper end of the target range 
over the forecast period, the new forecast showed a more benign path. Inflation is now 
expected to average 5.3% in 2017 and 4.9% and 5.2% respectively in the coming two 
years, with a low point of 4.6% in early 2018. The core inflation forecast is just below 
5.0% for all three forecast years. 
 The drivers of these improved inflation outcomes over the past few months include: 
   lower food price inflation, as the effects of the drought recede; 
lower international oil prices;  
lower electricity tariff increases;  
  a  more  resilient  exchange  rate  than  had  previously  been  expected,  coupled 
with muted exchange rate pass-through; and  
  weak domestic demand.  
 More recently, there have also been indications of some wage moderation.  
 Despite the improved outlook, the MPC is still concerned that inflation expectations 
remain  sticky  at  the  upper  end  of  the  target  range.  As  indicated  in  our  post-MPC 
statement, we would prefer expectations to be anchored closer to the midpoint of the 
range. Furthermore, we are aware that the inflation outlook can change quickly in the 
event of supply-side shocks. At this point, however, we view the risks to the inflation 
outlook to be broadly balanced.  
 The  main  risk  to  the  inflation  outlook  has,  for  some  time,  been  the  exchange  rate. 
During the past year, while volatile, the rand has been relatively resilient, considering 
the adverse shocks it has had to face. At current levels, it is still stronger than it was 
at  this  time  last  year.  The  local  currency  has  been  supported  by  the  significant 
improvement of the current account of the balance of payments, favourable terms of 
trade, and the generally positive capital flow environment for emerging markets. The 
rand has been adversely affected by low growth, political and policy uncertainty, and 
 Page - 4 - of 11 
the credit ratings downgrades. These factors, along with the possibility of advanced 
economy monetary tightening, continue to weigh on the rand. 
 For  much  of  the  past  year,  monetary  policy  has  had  to  deal  with  the  increasingly 
difficult scenario of accelerating inflation in the context of slowing domestic economic 
growth. With inflation expectations anchored at levels of around 6.0%, the monetary 
policy  challenges  were  significant.  Furthermore,  most  of  the  pressures  on  inflation 
emanated  from  the  supply  side,  in  particular  food  prices,  and  were  not  driven  by 
excess demand.  
 Faced with this policy dilemma, the MPC accommodated the temporary breach of the 
upper end of the inflation target band and maintained an unchanged monetary policy 
stance since the 25 basis point increase of the repo rate8 to 7.0% in March 2016. In 
both March and May of this year, as the inflation outlook improved, the MPC indicated 
that the tightening cycle was likely to have ended but that a further improvement in the 
inflation outlook would be required before the policy rate could be reduced. At its most 
recent  meeting,  following  the  improved  inflation  forecast  and  deteriorating  growth 
outlook, the MPC reduced the repo rate by 25 basis points, to 6.75% per annum. The 
MPC also noted that future policy decisions would be dependent on data outcomes 
and the assessment of the balance of risks. The MPC will remain vigilant and will not 
hesitate to reverse this decision should the inflation outlook and risks deteriorate.    
 The most recent global financial crisis saw increased financial stability responsibilities 
being given to central banks around the world. Although the SARB has had a role in 
ensuring  financial  stability  for  some  time,  our  responsibilities  in  this  area  have 
expanded.  The  SARB’s  role  in  maintaining,  promoting,  and  enhancing  financial 
stability  is  formally  mandated  in  the  Financial  Sector  Regulation  Bill  (FSR  Bill). 
Unfortunately,  the  parliamentary  processes  to  promulgate  the  FSR  Bill  took  longer 
than  expected.  This  has  delayed  the  establishment  of  the  proposed  Prudential 
Authority,  which  will  expand  the  SARB’s  regulatory  responsibilities  in  the  financial 
sector. I am, however, pleased to be able to report that the  FSR Bill has now been 
                                                           
8 repurchase rate 
 Page - 5 - of 11 
passed,  and  is  awaiting  the  signature  of  the  President.  Implementation  planning  is 
nonetheless well advanced. 
 The  delay  in  the  promulgation  of  the  FSR  Bill  has  not  detracted  from  our  focus  on 
those areas of responsibility that we currently have, both at macroprudential and  at 
microprudential levels. As I alluded to earlier, the recovery in the advanced economies 
from the global financial crisis has taken 10 years and is still not completely assured. 
This  underlines  the  importance  of  financial  crisis  prevention.  We  therefore  need  to 
ensure  the  stability  of  the  banking  sector  through  appropriate  regulation  and 
supervision, and to monitor the broader economy for excesses that could undermine 
financial stability.  
 As you are all no doubt aware, the SARB has been in the spotlight for the past few 
weeks,  mainly  for  the  wrong  reasons.  It  is  appropriate  for  me  to  make  a  few  brief 
comments about some of these issues. The first relates to the remedial instruction by 
the  Public  Protector  to  Parliament  to  set  in  motion  a  process  to  change  the 
constitutional mandate of the SARB. We have challenged this remedial action in the 
High Court on a number of grounds, and the matter will be heard in court next week, 
even though the Public Protector has chosen not to oppose our submissions. Apart 
from the issue of whether the Public Protector has overstepped her legal powers in 
this  regard,  or  the  issue  that  the  remedial  actions  proposed  were  unrelated  to  the 
original complaint under investigation, these developments have opened the door to 
a  debate  about  the  appropriateness  of  our  mandate  and  of  the  inflation-targeting 
mandate specifically. 
 Price stability, or the protection of the value of the currency, is a core function of central 
banks. I know of no central bank that does not have this mandate. These institutions 
are best equipped to carry out this function, and stripping them of this mandate would 
raise  the  question  as  to  where  the  responsibility  for  price  stability  should  lie.  Our 
Constitution is very clear: this is, correctly, a SARB function, and we should protect 
the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  growth  in  the 
South African economy. 
  Page - 6 - of 11 
There is no virtue to high inflation, which ravages the incomes and savings of the poor 
in  particular,  but  which  has  also  wiped  out  the  savings  of  the  middle  classes  in  a 
number  of  countries.  We  need  not  look  further  than  our  northern  border  to  see  the 
impact.  The  wealthy  are  more  able  to  protect  themselves  through  various  hedging 
mechanisms,  and  in  this  respect  inflation  has  a  negative  distributive  effect.  Low 
inflation, by contrast, protects the purchasing power of incomes and social pensions 
and  savings,  and  provides  a  more  conducive  environment  for  investment  and  job 
creation by reducing uncertainty about future prices.  
 Any mandate given to a central bank should focus on what it can do and not on what 
we would like it to do. A socio-economic objective such as protecting the buying power 
of the money in the pockets of South African citizens is an important and attainable 
objective, and in the area of our core competency.   
 Apart from this objective, we also: 
  ensure the availability of good-quality banknotes and coin;  
  ensure the effective functioning of the national payment system;  
  prudently  manage  the  official  gold  and  foreign  exchange  reserves  of  the 
country;  
  strive for a stable financial system; and  
 regulate and supervise the banking system.   
 As we have seen from the global financial crisis, such crises have a devastating effect 
on the economy – and it takes many years to recover. It would be counterproductive 
to divert the SARB’s policies away from these important socio-economic objectives in 
order to try and achieve outcomes over which the SARB has little or no influence.  
 The fact that we do not have an explicit employment or growth mandate does not imply 
that  we  have  a  narrow  focus  on  inflation  to  the  exclusion  of  these  considerations. 
However, we must be clear about what a growth mandate means for central banks. 
Monetary  policy  cannot  determine  the  longer-run  growth  potential  of  the  economy. 
This  is  the domain  of other  policies,  as  potential  growth  is  determined  by  structural 
policies  (e.g.  on  education,  infrastructure,  and  technology).  South  Africa’s  high 
 Page - 7 - of 11 
unemployment  rate  is  largely  structural.  The  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can 
make to long-run growth is through ensuring price stability, which is more conducive 
to  longer-term  investment  and  expenditure  decisions.  The  higher  and  more  volatile 
inflation is, the higher the riskiness of investment.  
 Monetary policy can, however, impact on the real economy over the economic cycle, 
i.e. on the extent to which growth fluctuates around potential output. The extremely 
moderate nature of the tightening cycle since 2014 is an illustration of our concerns 
for cyclical growth. While it is true that excessively tight monetary policy conditions can 
undermine  growth  and  employment,  the  low  and  at  times  negative  policy  rate 
prevailing in South Africa in recent years is indicative of an accommodative monetary 
policy stance. 
 The bottom  line  is  this:  we  cannot  solve  a  structural  growth  problem  with monetary 
policy, irrespective of our monetary policy framework. Keeping interest rates artificially 
low may have short-term benefits, but it will result in higher inflation in the long run. 
We cannot  ‘buy’  higher  growth  and employment  through high  inflation.  In fact, high 
inflation inhibits growth. Low inflation, by contrast, allows for lower interest rates and 
higher growth. 
 Whether we operate in an inflation-targeting framework or not, our objective will still 
be the protection of the value of the currency. Inflation targeting is a framework within 
which to achieve this target. It makes our objective transparent and helps to anchor 
inflation expectations. We would not behave differently in the absence of an explicit 
target.  Inflation  targeting  has  been  successfully  adopted  by  many  other  emerging 
markets as well, and more recently by a number of developing economies, including 
Ghana and Uganda. 
 The issue of private shareholding in the SARB also needs addressing, particularly in 
this forum. Private shareholding in central banks is an historical legacy, as originally 
central banks were in fact privately owned. This changed over time, particularly since 
the 1930s. Apart from the SARB, there are nine other central banks that have some 
 Page - 8 - of 11 
form of private shareholding. These include the US Federal Reserve System as well 
as the central banks of Belgium, Greece, Italy, Japan, and Switzerland.  
 The critical issue is the role that private shareholders play and the potential for conflicts 
of  interest.  In  the  SARB,  private  shareholding  does  not  impart  the  same  rights  and 
benefits that shareholders in private companies have. The notion of a central bank as 
a  public  policy  institution,  with  the  main  goal  of  promoting  monetary  and  financial 
stability in the interests of the general public, is remote from the traditional concept of 
a commercial company with a profit motive. The SARB is an independent legal person, 
a public institution that has no profit motive and is not owned by  its shareholders or 
anyone else.  
 Accordingly, shareholders in the SARB: 
  have very limited rights; 
  have no role whatsoever in the setting of, or influencing, the key mandates of 
the SARB, i.e. monetary policy and financial stability policy; 
  have no sway over the day-to-day management of the SARB;  
  are restricted to a maximum of 10 000 shares per shareholder out of 2 million 
issued shares (including those of their associates); 
 receive a fixed return on their shares of 10 cents per share from profits made 
(This amounts to an overall divided payment by the SARB of R200 000 per year. 
In  fact,  90%  of  the  SARB’s  profits  are  transferred  to  government,  and  the 
remaining 10% are allocated to the SARB’s reserves.); 
  do not have any claim on the foreign exchange reserves of the SARB; and 
  are  unable,  by  means  of  a  resolution  or  otherwise,  to  amend  or  change  the 
SARB’s affairs by deviating from the prescriptions of the SARB Act9. 
  In terms of the SARB Act, the most effective powers of the shareholders are: 
 the  approval  of  the  appointment  of  auditors  for  the  SARB  and  their 
remuneration; and  
                                                           
9 South African Reserve Bank Act 90 of 1989 
 Page - 9 - of 11 
 the election, from a vetted list, of seven non-executive directors to the Board. 
(The other eight members are appointed by the President. These include the 
Governor and the three Deputy Governors.)  
 Furthermore, the Board itself is a corporate governance  board, and has no input or 
say in policies related to the SARB’s mandates and primary functions. The Board’s 
functions  are  limited  to  corporate  governance  issues,  internal  controls  (including 
auditing), staff policies, and staff remuneration.  
 The  management  of  the  business  of  the  SARB,  including  the  setting  of  monetary 
policy,  vests  in  the  Governor  and  Deputy  Governors,  who  are  appointed  by  the 
President after consultations with the Minister of Finance and the  SARB Board. The 
Governor  and  Deputy  Governors  are  clothed  with  decentralised  original  powers  of 
management.  
 Private shareholding represents an additional layer in the governance framework, to 
strengthen accountability and transparency, and complements the mechanism of how 
we are accountable to South Africans through their representatives in Parliament.   
 While international experience does not suggest that the shareholding structure of a 
central bank meaningfully affects its performance, there is equally no obvious case for 
changing this structure at present. Any move towards ‘nationalisation’ would be largely 
symbolic and would have no impact whatsoever on the SARB’s mandate. The view 
that the SARB is owned and run in the interest of the private sector is incorrect. Our 
independence and mandate are enshrined in the Constitution. Whether the SARB has 
private shareholders or whether all its shares are owned by government, its primary 
mandate remains. 
 A considerable number of legal considerations would have to be taken into account if 
private  shareholding  were  to  be  removed.  The  potential  purchase  of  all  the  SARB 
shares by government would require the introduction of suitable legislative measures, 
since the SARB Act does not currently provide for this. This legislation would also have 
 Page - 10 - of 11 
to  provide  for  measures  such  as  the  determination  of  the  value  of  the  shares,  as 
determined by the Legislature.  
 On private shareholding, it should also be noted that the SARB embarked on a process 
of  regularising  its  shareholder  structure,  which  culminated  in  a  judgement  obtained 
from the Gauteng division of the High Court in November 2016. In terms of said court 
order,  a  total  of  149  200  SARB  shares  held  by  15  shareholders  were  disposed  of, 
which resulted in 57 new shareholders spread across the general public. The interest 
in SARB shares is currently exceptionally high, with standing buy offers from 28 buyers 
wishing to purchase 90 109 shares.  
 Conclusion 
 The economy has been in recession but is expected to recover in the latter part of this 
year.  Understandably,  in  times  like  these  questions  arise  about  the  role  of  central 
banks and their contribution to economic growth. Our Constitution is very clear: the 
core  mandate of  the SARB  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interest  of 
balanced and sustainable growth in the South African economy. However, monetary 
policy  cannot  determine  the  longer-run  growth  potential  of  the  economy.  Our 
Constitution is clear on this, too: in carrying out its mandate, the SARB must not bow 
to any pressure, be it political or from the private sector.   
 Despite the challenging environment in which we operate, the SARB as an institution 
remains  strong;  it  is  staffed  by  people  who  are  committed  to  the  promotion  of  the 
economic well-being of all South Africans. 
 Thank you.  
  Page - 11 - of 11 
