Jens Weidmann: Monetary policy after the crisis
Text  of  the  IMFS  Distinguished  Lecture  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche
Bundesbank and Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements,
Frankfurt am Main, 14 September 2017.
 1. Introduction
Dear Volker Wieland
Ladies and gentlemen
It was on this day exactly ten years ago – 14 September 2007 – that savers lined the street in
front of the UK bank Northern Rock in order to rescue their savings. They had lost confidence in
their bank upon hearing the news that it had applied for an emergency loan from the Bank of
England.
This financial assistance was the last hope for Northern Rock, which by that time was unable to
obtain funding from the markets. Given the prospect of loan losses, the institution was no longer
able to find any takers for its piles of mortgage-backed securities (MBS), which in the past had
been a key source of funding for the bank. This was the first run on a UK bank in 150 years.
As  we  now  know,  Northern  Rock  would  not  be  the  only  bank  to  run  into  trouble  owing  to  the
financial crisis and subsequent economic crisis.
The financial market turmoil caused the sharpest drop in GDP in post-war history. The severity of
the contraction caught not only the general public, but also economists, off guard. As recently as
2003,  Nobel  Prize  winner  Robert  Lucas   had  declared  the  central  problem  of  depression
prevention to have been solved.
1
2
A year later, Ben Bernanke,
 then a Governor at the USFederal Reserve, delivered a speech in
which he laid out what he regarded as the most striking economic development in the past 20
years: the extreme economic stability in the industrial countries.
Much like Francis Fukuyama, in his influential book The End of History and the Last Man, hoped
that the end of the Cold War would put an end once and for all to the clash between the major
ideologies,  so,  too,  did  many  economists  think  the  end  of  major  economic  crises  was  within
reach.
This assessment rested on the observation that, since the mid-1980s, inflation and GDP had
been  moving  with  an  unprecedented  degree  of  synchronicity.  This  is  why  Ben  Bernanke’s
speech was entitled, fittingly, “The Great Moderation".
He  attributed  the  increasingly  stable  pattern  of  economic  development  primarily  to  better
monetary policy: in the 1960s and 1970s, economic and central banks were still beholden to the
idea 
inflation  and
unemployment,  where,  by  accepting  a 
inflation,  policymakers  could  keep
unemployment down for good.
that  monetary  policy  could  exploit  a  permanent 
trade-off  between 
little  more 
As Ben Bernanke outlined in his speech, this idea turned out to be wrong. Higher inflation is NOT
able to keep unemployment down in the long run as, once inflation has gone up, labour, and the
unions, form expectations that this expansionary monetary policy – and thus higher inflation – will
persist in the future as well. They therefore demand higher nominal wages to offset the attendant
real purchasing power losses. Which counteracts the creation of jobs. It is a phenomenon which
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
economists call the time inconsistency problem.
Monetary policy which is geared towards short-term employment growth or which even attempts
to push unemployment below its structural level will only end up delivering higher inflation rates.
This  is  what  transpired  in  the  1970s  and  early  1980s,  when  inflation  in  the  major  industrial
countries averaged roughly 8½%. Decisive factors included not only energy-related price rises
but  also  central  banks’  increasing  tilt  towards  employment-driven  monetary  policy  and  the
absence of central bank independence in many quarters.
A monetary policy that is focused on safeguarding monetary stability, on the other hand, will tend
to lessen volatility in economic activity. If a central bank’s efforts to fight inflation are credible,
wage moderation will also ensue. This, in turn, will have a stabilising impact on economic activity.
In his remarks, Bernanke expressed the hope that monetary policymakers would not forget the
lessons of the period of skyrocketing inflation in the 1970s and early 1980s and that the era of
macroeconomic stability would persist for a long time to come.
However, as we all know, even at that time risks to financial stability were beginning to appear on
the  horizon  which  would  later  unleash  massive  turmoil  in  the  financial  system  and  trigger  a
severe economic crisis.
Central  banks  around  the  world  responded  to  the  financial  crisis  –  and  to  the  sovereign  debt
crisis  that  struck  the  euro  area  later  on  –  by  resorting  to  measures  hitherto  deemed
inconceivable: by reducing interest rates to zero or even below that, by providing more or less
unlimited liquidity, and by purchasing assets on a large scale.
But did that mark the advent of a new monetary policy paradigm – or has the monetary policy
approach remained unchanged, on the whole? I would like to focus in my lecture today on how I
believe  liquidity  should  be  made  available  in  the  future,  whether  government  bond  purchases
should be a fixture of central banks’ policy toolkits, and what role monetary policy should play in
financial system stability. Not all of these questions can be answered once and for all today. But
look on the bright side: monetary policy debates will maintain their excitement in the future.
2. Liquidity policy
Ladies and gentlemen
I would like to begin by presenting what is arguably one of the most distinct symptoms of the
recent financial crisis: the sudden rise in the provision of liquidity by central banks. As a case in
point, excess liquidity in the euro area surged from €1.2bn in July 2007 to €230bn at the end of
2008.  That  may  not  seem  like  very  much,  compared  to  today’s  figure  of  €1,668bn  in  excess
liquidity,  which  is  being  expanded  ever  further  thanks  to  the  Eurosystem’s  asset  purchase
programme (APP), yet at that time it was a noteworthy increase.
Here is a simplified explanation of the monetary transmission mechanism in the euro area as it
was seen prior to the financial crisis: the central bank changes interest rates on its short-term,
largely risk-free refinancing operations, which then impacts on the interbank market. Banks then
“transmit” the monetary policy stimulus to the rest of the financial market and then from there to
the real sector. This is how monetary policy “feeds into” prices.
Once  the  crisis  broke  out,  however,  the  monetary  transmission  process  faced  the  danger  of
being halted abruptly.
Banks had doubts about the soundness of their counterparties. Risk spreads between secured
and unsecured money market exposures skyrocketed, the volume of money market transactions
declined, and the drying-up of the money markets forced banks to tap monetary policy operations
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
for  funding.  The  number  of  banks  participating  in  monetary  policy  operations  therefore  rose
sharply.
The Governing Council of the ECB reacted by switching its refinancing operations to tenders with
full  allotment. As  long  as  banks  were  able  to  post  sufficient  collateral,  they  could  thus  obtain
unlimited amounts of liquidity from the Eurosystem. In practice, this allowed them to bypass the
strained interbank market.
The  Governing  Council  also  offered  additional  longer-term  refinancing  operations  including,
naturally, the three-year refinancing operations at the end of 2011 and the beginning of 2012 in
particular.  It  also  reduced  the  rating  threshold  for  certain  types  of  monetary  policy  collateral,
thereby giving banks greater scope for taking out Eurosystem refinancing loans.
The central banks of the Eurosystem – like those elsewhere in the world – thus took on, to a
major extent, the money market’s role as an intermediary during the crisis. By acting as a lender
of last resort to banks, they were able to contain the threat of massive bank runs.
This approach becomes a problem, however, once the ample provision of central bank money
goes  from  being  used  to  bridge  temporary  liquidity  shortfalls  to  helping  keep  banks  without  a
sustainable business model afloat permanently.
Those institutions will then tend to prolong their loans to legacy customers so as not to have to
take a potential financial loss. However, they will subsequently also grant fewer new loans. This
means that funding remains with less productive firms instead of being channelled towards more
3
innovative firms. The situation in Japan should serve as a warning in this respect.
Weak  banks  therefore  tend  to  foster  weak  firms  –  and  the  attendant  inefficient  distribution  of
funding will dampen an economy’s innovativeness and dynamism.
Studies by the OECD  confirm that a non-negligible percentage of firms can be classified as
“zombie firms". For instance, in 2013 28% of capital resources in Greece, 19% in Italy and 16%
in Spain were sunk in firms that were unable to cover their cost of capital.
4
5
  show  how  the  health  of  the
Economists Fabiano Schivardi, Enrico Sette and Guido Tabellini
banking  system  influences  capital  allocation.  They  estimate  that  credit  misallocation  in  Italy
reduced  annual  GDP  growth  by  between  0.2  and  0.35  percentage  point  in  the  2008  to  2013
period.
What  we  see,  therefore,  is  that  providing  liquidity  is  a  balancing  act  for  central  banks.  Not
providing  enough  liquidity  could  cause  a  spark  to  turn  into  a  fire,  while  providing  too  much
liquidity,  and  thus  keeping  “zombie  banks”  on  life  support,  could  cause  the  foundation  of  our
competitive economic system to become brittle and shaky.
This  dilemma  cannot  be  resolved  by  monetary  policy  on  its  own.  It  is  therefore  important  for
banks to be sufficiently capitalised so as, for instance, to be able to cope with credit losses. For
that reason, it is a good thing that banks now need to hold more and better-quality capital. They
are also required to continue to shrink their holdings of non-performing loans.
This is ultimately all about, in particular, giving banks greater incentive to be more risk-aware in
their decision-making processes than they were prior to the outbreak of the crisis. For that to
work,  it  has  to  be  ensured  that  institutions  with  riskier  business  models  also  pay  higher  risk
premiums.
This, however, also requires investors to be correspondingly aware of risk in their own actions.
And a decisive factor here is that banks, in a pinch, need to be permitted to fail – without bringing
the financial system to its knees – and that investors and creditors, and not the tax payer, need to
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
be first in line to pick up the tab for banks’ losses.
These  factors  are  what  make  the  new  European  rules  for  bank  resolution,  and  their  rigorous
application, so important. Amidst all the contentious debate, recent events have shown, at least,
that  banks  are  now  able  to  exit  the  market  without  jeopardising  the  functional  viability  of  the
financial system.
But in order not to thwart these rules, the Eurosystem has to return, over the long term, to a way
of providing liquidity that is more in line with market conditions. The pre-crisis monetary policy
framework had some merits in that respect. Banks obtained liquidity from the Eurosystem on
terms that were not significantly more favourable than those on the interbank market. If central
bank  loans,  which  are  not  priced  according  to  the  credit  institutions’  financial  standing,  are
significantly  more  favourable  than  funding  via  the  money  market,  the  banks  will  have  few
incentives to lower their risk premiums by means of an appropriate risk management.
That also applies to longer-term refinancing operations. Interest rates for longer-term refinancing
not  being  set  by  the  market  weakens  banks’  inherent  responsibility  for  their  own  liquidity  and
credit  risk  management.  Furthermore,  it  distorts  competition  because  institutions  that  do  not
have a sustainable business model can obtain funding from the Eurosystem over the long term
irrespective  of  the  risk  involved  –  and  do  so,  moreover,  with  collateral  of  lower  quality  than
collateral on the interbank market.
3. Government bond purchases
Ladies and gentlemen
In the crisis, not only did the Eurosystem switch to full allotment of liquidity as well as expanding
the collateral framework, it also launched purchase programmes for government bonds.
As  early  as  May  2010,  Greek  sovereign  bonds  were  being  purchased  under  the  Securities
Markets Programme. To these were later added bonds from Ireland, Portugal, Spain and Italy –
countries with a low credit rating.
In the summer of 2012, this programme was replaced, as you know, by the Outright Monetary
Transactions (OMT) programme which – even though it never led to any purchases – has still
had a perceptible impact on the capital markets.
And  since  2015  the  Eurosystem  has  been  making  large-scale  purchases  of  sovereign  debt
under the public sector purchase programme.
In  saying  that,  it  is  undisputed  that  such  purchases  have  an  effect  on  the  monetary  policy
objective.  Bundesbank  analyses,  too,  show  that  government  bond  purchases  have  an
expansionary effect on aggregate demand and inflation. There is, nevertheless, a large amount of
estimation uncertainty, and different model approaches lead to very different assessments with
6
regard to the effectiveness of such purchases.
7
At the same time, government bond purchases also have some inherent unintended side effects.
An  analysis  by  the  economists  Viral  Acharya,  Tim  Eisert,  Christian  Eufinger  and  Christian
Hirsch.     for  example,  shows  that  the  Eurosystem’s  OMT  programme  has  impaired  credit
allocation in the euro area. The authors argue that the announcement of possible purchases of
financially distressed governments’ bonds has stabilised the prices of such bonds and thus also
the assets side of bank balance sheets. The authors say that the banks that have been shored
up in this way have granted loans to less productive firms, thus adding to an inefficient allocation
of credit.
But  that  is  not  the  only  respect  in  which  government  bond  purchases  targeted  at  individual
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries’ risk premiums raise problems in the euro area. There is a hidden danger that using the
central bank balance sheet to communitise fiscal risks will undermine the principle – enshrined in
the Maastricht Treaty – of member states being individually responsible for their own finances.
The possibility of passing on government liabilities to the European level reduces incentives for
embracing fiscal prudence.
In order to mitigate this problem, the bonds of member states purchased by the national central
banks  under  the  present  PSPPare  also  not  subject  to  distribution  of  losses  within  the
Eurosystem.
The bonds are, furthermore, being purchased in proportion to the ECB capital key. In that way,
too, the Eurosystem is trying to avoid the moral hazard that could arise as a result of purchasing
a disproportionately large amount of bonds issued by highly indebted governments.
In addition to that, purchases are restricted to a maximum of 33% per country and bond series.
This limit was set so that the Eurosystem does not have to get into the awkward situation of
having  to  prevent  any  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt  that  may  be  deemed  necessary.  If  the
Eurosystem were to acquire too many bonds, it would have a blocking minority in any vote on a
haircut.  And  it  would  have  to  make  use  of  its  blocking  minority  in  order  not  to  violate  the
prohibition of monetary financing.
But even below that threshold, the purchases have made the Eurosystem the member states’
largest creditor. What is more, in the context of asset purchases, changes in monetary policy
impact much more directly on governments’ funding costs than interest rate moves do. This has
additionally blurred the line between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Ultimately, if a return to
monetary  policy  normality  were  called  for,  this  could  lead  to  the  central  bank  coming  under
greater political pressure to keep funding costs at a low level – even if this were to the detriment
of the objective of price stability.
Since, moreover, governments pay largely the same rate of interest on that part of their debt held
by the central banks, for that part the disciplining effect of the capital markets is undermined, too.
Given  the  large  number  of  problems,  I  regard  government  bond  purchases  purely  as  an
instrument of last resort, say, when it comes to staving off a dangerous deflationary downward
spiral  of  declining  prices  and  wages.  But  I’ve  said  in  the  past  that  the  fears  of  deflation  are
exaggerated. Now they have very largely disappeared.
Indeed,  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area  is  gaining  further  momentum  and  is  broadly
based. That is also evidenced by the upward revision of the ECB staff’s growth projection. The
projection  has  also  shown,  however,  that  inflationary  pressure  remains  rather  subdued.  The
domestic price pressures identified in the projection are, however, quite consistent with a path
towards our definition of price stability.
That fact that it’s taking a little longer to achieve our monetary policy objectives also has to do
with enterprises and households in many euro-area countries still being occupied with reducing
their high levels of debt in some cases.
And  a  number  of  crisis-affected  countries  have  succeeded 
their
competitiveness and transforming current account deficits into surpluses. But improving price
competitiveness through wage moderation is, naturally enough, also dampening domestic price
pressures.
in  strengthening 
Given  subdued  inflationary  pressure,  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  remains
appropriate in the euro area. Opinions can, admittedly, differ with regard to how much we should
step on the pedal in terms of monetary policy and what instruments ought to be used for that.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  saying  that,  it  is  obvious  that,  even  after  the  net  purchases  under  the  asset  purchase
programme  have  been  discontinued,  euro-area  monetary  policy  will  remain  extremely
accommodative. First, what is crucial for the degree of expansion in monetary policy is not so
much the amount of monthly purchases but, above all, the total outstanding volume of sovereign
bonds on our books.
And the amount held by the Eurosystem will remain at a very high level even when net purchases
have  been  discontinued. After  all,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  taken  a  decision  to
reinvest the proceeds from the maturing bonds.
Second,  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  not  to  raise  interest  rates  until  after  the  net
purchases have ended. Speaking metaphorically, that means we’re not talking about slamming
on the brakes but rather about no longer constantly putting our foot down on the accelerator.
With that in mind, too, the Governing Council of the ECB has to make sure it doesn’t miss the
right  moment  for  a  return  to  normal  in  monetary  policy.  Precisely  because  the  monetary
conditions will continue to support economic activity for a long time to come, the question arises
as  to  how  much  room  for  manoeuvre  monetary  policymakers  will  still  have  when  the  next
downturn comes.
4. Monetary policy and financial stability
Ladies and gentlemen
Economics owes its name to the Greek philosopher Aristotle. He understood economics as a
broad social science which had to be built upon a sound moral foundation.
To Aristotle, the concept of moderation was central in every way. According to this view, a true
“Great  Moderation”  would  surely  not  only  mean  a  moderation  of  inflation  and  economic
fluctuations, it would also involve avoiding excesses in the financial system.
So  what  does  the  new  division  of  labour  in  macroeconomics  look  like?  What  role  should
monetary  policy  have  in  securing  financial  stability?  This  is,  incidentally,  a  major  focus  of  the
Bundesbank’s  research.  The  Bundesbank  has  formed  what  is  known  as  the  Trinity  research
network with Sweden’s Riksbank, the Bank of Canada and the Federal Reserve Bank of New
York to investigate the questions this raises.
One  thing  does  seem  obvious  to  me,  however:  monetary  policy  influences  economic  agents’
propensity to take risks. One of the aims of monetary policy today, of course, is to make riskier
financial  assets  comparatively  more  attractive  through  very  low  risk-free  interest  rates  –
monetary  policymakers  are  pinning  their  hopes  on  what  is  known  as  the  portfolio  rebalancing
channel.
The  figures  bear  this  out:  even  the  Germans,  who  tend  to  be  very  conservative  in  their
investment decisions, are currently putting more money into potentially more profitable, but also
riskier financial assets such as shares and mutual funds. And the exuberance on several asset
markets in the euro area at the moment is certainly related to the low-interest-rate environment.
Monetary  policy  can  therefore  affect  financial  players’  willingness  to  take  risks.  And  it  also
influences banks’ propensity to run risks in another, unintentional way: the more a central bank
protects banks against potential risks and leads them to believe that they will receive central bank
funding if the worst comes to the worst, the less wary they will be of taking on excessive risk.
Studies, amongst others by former IMF Chief Economist and Governor of the Reserve Bank of
India, Raghuram Rajan, as well as Nobel Prize winner Jean Tirole provide compelling evidence
that  the  implicit  promise  of  a  central  bank  to  step  in  by  lowering  interest  rates  and  providing
8 9
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
8 9
liquidity in a crisis increases banks’ appetite for risk.  
In  other  words,  monetary  policy  affects  financial  stability.  But  does  that  mean  that  monetary
policymakers should make financial stability an explicit objective, maybe even on a par with the
objective of price stability?
That would be dangerous, in my opinion. The more objectives monetary policymakers pursue,
the more likely that they will get mired in a conflict of objectives and be forced to weigh up one
objective  against  the  other.  That  could  not  only  put  monetary  policy  under  greater  political
pressure, it might also give the impression of monetary policy arbitrariness.
This problem is especially pronounced when it comes to financial stability. After all, the concept
of  financial  stability  is  much  harder  to  grasp  than  that  of  price  stability.  Price  stability  can  be
depicted using a single indicator, the consumer price index. There is no one such indicator for
financial stability. Financial stability is therefore often defined, very broadly, as a state in which the
financial system performs all of its macroeconomic functions properly.
But the absence of a clear indicator with which to measure whether a monetary policy objective
has been achieved can damage the credibility of monetary policy.
Moreover,  a  potential  conflict  of  objectives  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  arises
from the fact that monetary policy may not only help prevent financial imbalances. It can also
mitigate their consequences after the event – by producing inflation, which reduces the real level
of debt. There is, consequently, a short-term trade-off between the objective of price stability and
that of financial stability, which can result in higher inflation in the long term.
Ladies and gentlemen
As  always,  the  world  is  not  just  black  or  white:  rejecting  financial  stability  as  an  additional
objective for monetary policymakers alongside the objective of price stability does not mean that
central  banks  should  shun  responsibility  for  ensuring  financial  stability. After  all,  central  banks
generally possess a high level of expertise in analysing risks to financial stability.
However,  the  method  of  choice  for  combatting  these  risks  is  not  monetary  policy,  it  is
macroprudential policy. Macroprudential instruments can be employed in a much more targeted
way than monetary policy. In the case of the euro area, in particular, one of the key advantages of
macroprudential policy is that it can be used to counteract, in a targeted manner, problematic
national developments that cannot be addressed by the single monetary policy.
Macroprudential  instruments  include  measures  such  as  countercyclical  capital  buffers  and
measures that target the demand for credit, say actions aimed at containing exaggerations on
the real estate markets. Caps on the loan-to-value or loan-to-income ratios are examples.
So where monetary policy is the hammer in a central bank’s toolkit in relation to financial stability,
macroprudential instruments are the scalpel. Macroprudential instruments need not necessarily
be used by central banks. In Germany, it is politicians who decide on the use of macroprudential
measures, not the Bundesbank, and for good reason. Many of these instruments can have a
fairly  large  impact  on  the  way  citizens  lead  their  lives  and  therefore  require  democratic
legitimacy.
And  while  I  am  on  the  subject  of  macroprudential  measures:  if  anything  can  be  said  to  be  a
winner of the crisis, it would probably be the word “macroprudential".
However, it goes without saying that banking supervisory measures are still necessary to ensure
the soundness of individual  institutions.  The  global  turmoil  of  the  financial  crisis  did,  however,
also show that the resilience of the financial system needs strengthening overall.
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
On this, we have made good progress since the crisis, thanks to Basel III. Mario Draghi, in his
speech in Jackson Hole a few weeks ago, also stressed how important what has been achieved
is for the stability of the global financial system.
Rolling back the reforms would therefore be extremely problematic, in my view. Of course, that
does not mean that we should not evaluate the measures agreed upon and how they interact in
order 
financial  stability  as  efficiently  as  possible.  The
German G20 presidency has therefore launched a process on the Financial Stability Board to
examine the cost-benefit ratio of individual regulations.
the  objective  of 
to  achieve 
Does the existence of macroprudential instruments mean that monetary policy should stand idly
by as financial imbalances build?
After the experiences of the crisis, that would be difficult to reconcile with the mandate of price
stability. It may be advisable, even for a monetary policy that focuses exclusively on the objective
of price stability, to heed developments on the financial markets.
As  we  have  recently  witnessed,  financial  crises  have  a  considerable  impact  on  the  monetary
policy transmission process and monetary policymakers’ ability to guarantee price stability. And
yet financial crises almost always originate in excessively loose bank lending.
 The last crisis
was no exception. In the euro area, M3 growth rose from 5½% in 2004 to more than 11% in
2007.  And  loans  to  the  private  non-financial  sector  grew  at  a  similar  clip  over  this  period.
Monetary and credit aggregates are, therefore, good indicators of financial imbalances.
10
The  second,  monetary  pillar  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  has  therefore  lost
none of its importance. This is particularly true as monetary developments can provide valuable
additional  information  for  the  economic  analysis  of  the  Eurosystem,  as  demonstrated,  for
instance, by the work of Volker Wieland  and of course by the Bundesbank’s experiences.
11
The  longer-term  outlook  provided  by  monetary  analysis  is  important  for  another  reason,  too:
macroeconomic variables such as the output gap are fraught with major estimation uncertainty.
Uncertainty  also  surrounds  the  speed  and  intensity  with  which  monetary  policy  impulses  are
implemented.  Taking  a  slightly  longer-term  perspective  can  therefore  help  prevent  monetary
policy from succumbing to the illusion that it can micro-manage everything.
Incidentally, Claudio Borio, Chief Economist at the BIS, points out that the more you concentrate
on the long-term perspective [in monetary policy], the more price stability and financial stability
complement each other and no longer contradict each other.
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Monetary policy serves society best if it concentrates on safeguarding stable prices. This lesson
of the “Great Moderation” remains true today.
Equally,  it  is  also  true  that  permanent  macroeconomic  stability  cannot  be  achieved  without
financial stability. Here, macroprudential instruments are the method of first choice to ensure the
financial system, too, finds a golden mean. If, however, financial stability risks build up and, for
instance, excessive credit growth jeopardises longer-term price stability, monetary policy must
not look on idly.
My  personal  contribution  to  finding  the  golden  mean  is  that  I  will  conclude  at  this  point.  I  look
forward to a lively debate!
1
2
Robert Lucas (2003), Macroeconomic priorities, American Economic Review, 2003, Vol 93, issue 1, 1-14.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Ben Bernanke, “The Great Moderation", speech delivered on 20 February 2004 at the meetings of the Eastern
Economic Association, Washington, DC.
Caballero, R J, T Hoshi, and A K Kashyap (2008), “Zombie Lending and Depressed Restructuring in Japan,”
American Economic Review 98: 1943–77.
Müge Adalet  McGowan,  Dan Andrews  and  Valentine  Millot  (2017),  “The  Walking  Dead?  Zombie  Firms  and
Productivity Performance in OECD Countries", OECD Working Paper 1372.
Schivardi,  Fabiano,  Enrico  Sette,  and  Guido  Tabellini  (2017),  “Credit  Misallocation  During  the  European
Financial Crisis", CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11901
See Deutsche Bundesbank, The macroeconomic impact of quantitative easing in the euro area, Monthly Report,
June 2016, pp 29–53.
Viral V Acharya, Tim Eisert, Christian Eufinger and Christian Hirsch (2017), Whatever it takes: the real effects of
unconventional monetary policy, CEPR Discussion Paper DP12005.
Diamond,  D  W  and  R  G  Rajan  (2012),  Illiquid  banks,  financial  stability,  and  interest  rate  policy,  Journal  of
Political Economy 120(3), 552–591.
Farhi,  E  and  J  Tirole  (2012),  Collective  moral  hazard,  maturity  mismatch,  and  systemic  bailouts, American
Economic Review 102(1), 60–93.
Schularick, Moritz, and Alan M Taylor. 2012. "Credit booms gone bust: monetary policy, leverage cycles, and
financial crises, 1870–2008." American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–61.
Guenter  Coenen, Andrew  Levin  and  Volker  Wieland  (2005),  Data  uncertainty  and  the  role  of  money  as  an
information variable for monetary policy, European Economic Review, Vol.49 (4), May 2005, pp. 975–1006.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
