  Monetary Policy:  Why we target inflation – an address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the University of KwaZulu-
Natal 
 Durban 
25 April 2017 
 Good  evening,  and  thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  deliver  this  lecture  on  why  we 
target inflation. 
 Introduction  
 South Africa is at an intensely contested, creative moment in its history. The country 
is energetically debating the problems we face and the policies we should implement 
to fix these problems. Many of these problems have no straightforward answers. But 
if  we  are  to fix  them,  it  is  appropriate  that  we  take  risks,  conduct experiments, and 
accept some chance of failure.  
 
However, not all our policies need to be  experimental.1 It is crucial  that we get this 
distinction  right.  Let me  illustrate  this point  with  a medical analogy.  If  you  go to the 
doctor with an incurable disease, you may well accept some experimental, high-risk 
treatment.  But  for  flu  you  should  just  accept  regular  medicine.  Some  medical 
practitioners may tell you that their medicine is better and that it will also bring back 
your lost lover, but this promise is always too good to be true. 
                                                             
1 A similar point has been made by India’s previous Reserve Bank Governor, Raghuram Rajan. See 
The fight against inflation: a measure of our institutional development 
(http://www.bis.org/review/r160628f.htm).  
 Page 1 of 12 
Similarly,  there  may  be  socio-economic  problems  that  require  experimentation.  But 
for most problems we already have tried and tested solutions, many of them based 
on other countries’  experiences and a vast literature. We know  which  policies work 
and  which  cause  economic  damage.  We  also  know  that  many  economic  problems 
take time to resolve, improving the education of our people to increase productivity 
and incomes perhaps the best example. With this in mind, it would be inexcusable to 
implement  policies  that  have  been  proven  to  cause  lasting  economic  damage;  the 
ability to learn from our own history and that of others is within our grasp. 
 Today, I would like to address some frequently asked questions to explain the design 
of our monetary policy framework. I will discuss why we target inflation and not some 
other  variable,  like  unemployment.  I  will  talk  about  who  bears  a  disproportionate 
brunt of inflation and why inflation is essentially a badly designed tax that increases 
poverty and inequality. I will also explain how inflation targeting keeps interest rates 
low and why it is therefore an important element of developmental policy.  
 How inflation targeting keeps interest rates low 
 From  time  to  time,  I  hear  the  argument  that  if  we  did  not  target  inflation,  we  could 
have lower interest rates. Another version of this argument is that if we had a higher 
inflation target, then interest rates could come down. These claims make superficial 
sense but are fundamentally wrong. In fact, higher inflation raises interest rates. The 
best way to get permanently lower interest rates is to bring down inflation – and then 
keep it low and predictable.  
 To  understand  why  this  is  so,  let  us  start  with  a  few  basic  concepts.  The  Fisher 
equation says that the interest rate charged for a loan will include expected inflation 
plus  a  real  rate  of  interest.2  The  inflation  part  of  the  interest  rate  ensures  that  a 
lender gets their initial capital back when the loan is repaid; if that does not happen, 
then the loan is actually partly a gift because, thanks to inflation, a portion of the loan 
is not being paid back. On top of that is a small payment to the lender because the 
capital cannot be used for other purposes while it is with the borrower. Furthermore, 
                                                           
2 This equation, also called the Fisher effect, was originally set out by Irving Fisher in his 1930 classic, 
The theory of interest. 
 Page 2 of 12 
the  lender  gets  paid  some  insurance  against  the  borrower  defaulting.  Therefore,  if 
you  think  inflation  will  be  10%,  you  will  start  with  a  10%  interest  rate  and  then  add 
these  terms  and  risk  premiums.  These  premiums  are  normally  quite  small,  unless 
uncertainty and/or risk are very high. The largest part of the interest cost is inflation. 
This implies that lowering inflation is the easiest way to lower interest rates.  
 Consider another example. The South African government borrows in both local and 
foreign  currency.  When  it  borrows  for  10  years  in  rand,  it  pays  an  interest  rate  of 
close to 9%. But when it borrows in US3 dollars, the interest rate is a little below 5%.4 
In both cases the borrower is the same. The most important difference  between the 
two cases is that the rand loses value faster than the dollar: US inflation is normally 
close  to  2%  while  South  African  inflation  has  been  nearer  to  6%.  Accordingly, 
lenders  demand  a  higher  interest  rate  on  the  rand  debt  to  compensate  for  inflation 
and inflation risk. 
 Another  example  comes  from  Europe.  Before  2000,  different  European  countries 
had  different  currencies.  Germany  borrowed  in  Deutsche  marks,  France  in  francs, 
and Italy in lira. Some of Europe’s countries had higher average inflation rates than 
others,  and  inflation  was  also  more  variable,  meaning  that  it  sometimes  got  out  of 
control. In other countries – Germany being the prime example – inflation was much 
lower and more stable.  
 So  during  the  1980s,  for  instance,  West  German  inflation  averaged  2.9%,  French 
inflation was 7.6%, and Italian inflation was 11.4%. No doubt you can see what this 
did  to  borrowing  costs:  the  spread  of  government  borrowing  costs  over  West 
Germany  was,  on  average,  4.1%  for  France  and  7.1%  for  Italy;  where  the  West 
Germans  could  borrow  at  about  8%,  the  French  had  to  pay  nearly  12%  and  the 
Italians almost 15%.  
                                                             
3 United States 
4 For the year to date, the rand-denominated South African government bond maturing in 2026 has 
earned 8.73%. The equivalent US dollar-denominated bond yield has been 4.69% over the same 
period. 
 Page 3 of 12 
To  lower  borrowing  costs,  European  governments  realised  they  needed  to  bring 
down  inflation  and  make  a  credible  promise  to  keep  it  low.  To  achieve  this,  they 
created  the  euro,  a  currency  controlled  by  an  independent  central  bank  situated  in 
Germany  and  modelled  on  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank, the  German  central  bank.  It 
worked:  by  the  time  the  euro  became  a  binding  commitment,  French  and  Italian 
borrowing  costs  were  very  close  to  Germany’s,  and  the  other  countries  which  had 
committed to the euro had a similar experience.  
 Of course, the experience after the 2007/08 global financial crisis illustrates the cost 
of  giving  up  monetary  policy  to  an  external  agency,  and  in  particular  the  cost  of 
giving  up  a  country’s  own  flexible  exchange  rate.  This  seems  especially  true  for 
peripheral  economies  that  needed  greater  economic  adjustment.  For  others,  like 
Germany,  one  might  also  conclude  that  interest  rates  can  sometimes  be  too  low, 
hampering  efficient  credit  allocation  and  causing  asset  price  bubbles.  The  clearest 
lesson remains, however, that a low and stable inflation policy generates low interest 
rates over time, not high interest rates. 
 For  a final example,  consider  the  policy  rates  in  other  emerging  markets  which  are 
similar  to  South  Africa.  This  is  a  little  different  to  the  examples  mentioned  above, 
because  these  are  very  short-term  rates  and  they  are  set  by  central  banks,  not  in 
markets. The example is interesting also because these are the rates which critics of 
monetary policy think could be lowered if inflation targets were higher.  
 Since  2005,  the  average  repo  rate  in  South  Africa  has  been  7.1%.  Over  the  same 
period,  it  has  been  5.7%  in  Colombia,  5.4%  in  Mexico,  4.1%  in  Chile,  and  4.0% in 
Peru.  Over  this  period,  all  of  these  countries  have  had  lower  inflation  and  lower 
inflation  targets  than  South  Africa.  Their  headline  inflation  has  averaged  between 
3.0% and 4.5%, whereas South Africa’s inflation has averaged about 6.0%.  
 Of  course,  policy  rates  have  moved  up  and  down  in  all  these  Latin  American 
countries  over  time.  But  they  have  fluctuated  around  a  lower  average  precisely 
because their inflation is lower. People who believe that a higher inflation target will 
lower rates need to explain why countries with lower targets and lower inflation have 
lower interest rates, including emerging markets very similar to South Africa.  
 Page 4 of 12 
 When  we  were  planning  South  Africa’s  monetary  policy  framework  back  in  the 
1990s,  we  came  from  a  difficult  starting  point.  Inflation  was  relatively  variable  and 
also  quite  high,  averaging  9%  between  1994  and  1999.  We  set  out  to  stabilise 
inflation  and  anchor  expectations  through  an  inflation-targeting  framework,  and  we 
chose  to  accumulate  reserves  to  enhance  South  Africa’s  robustness  to  external 
shocks.  These  reforms  paid  off:  within  a  few  years,  we  closed  the  forward  position 
and inflation expectations stabilised within the inflation target range. We have  been 
benefiting from these policies ever since.  
 There is one instance, of course, in which inflation can bring down interest rates, and 
that is by reducing the real value of debt so that it is worth less when repayment is 
due. But this only works once. If you can persuade a lender that inflation will be 6% 
but  then  inflation  is  actually  10%,  you  can  reduce  your  real  interest  rate  by  4%.  Of 
course, this is bad for the lender. Yet it is also bad for the borrower.  
 Lenders will not be fooled twice, so the next  time you want to borrow,  your interest 
rate  will  now  be  at  least  4%  higher,  with  a  larger  risk  premium  in  case  inflation 
surprises again. You may also be unable to borrow in your own currency, especially 
over  the  longer  term,  because  people  will  rather  lend  in  euros  or  dollars  to  protect 
themselves  from  inflation  risk.  This  will  make  it  more  difficult  to  finance  major 
investments that pay off over longer periods of time, and it will increase vulnerability 
to currency depreciation. For this reason, using inflation to get low interest rates may 
work once, but after that it always means higher interest rates.   
 Who benefits from low inflation? 
 Low  inflation  is  desirable  for  reasons  beyond  low  interest  rates.  One  of  the  most 
important  is  that  inflation  has  adverse  redistributional  consequences.  Some  people 
can protect themselves from inflation  and even profit from it. Other people are less 
fortunate.  Inflation  is  therefore  essentially  a  regressive  tax  –  a  tax  which 
impoverishes those whom society should really be helping. 
  Page 5 of 12 
To protect yourself from inflation, you need knowledge, power and assets that hold 
their  real  value.  Inflation  was  6.3%  in  South  Africa  last  year.  If  your  salary  of 
R6 000 went up to R6 300, you did not get a raise because you only got 5% more. 
You  got  a  pay  cut  in  real  terms.  If  you  had  R20 000  in  a  savings  account  and  you 
earned  R1 000  in  interest,  you  are  now  poorer  than  you  were  last  year.  Not 
understanding these concepts makes people vulnerable to inflation. 
 Furthermore,  even  where  people  do  understand  inflation,  they  may  lack  the 
negotiating power to respond. If you have a strong union to negotiate on your behalf 
or  if  you  have  scarce  skills  your  employer  needs,  then  you  should  be  able  to 
negotiate  a  raise  big  enough  to  keep  up  with  inflation.  Unfortunately,  many  South 
Africans  are  not  in  such  an  advantageous  position.  Although  data  limitations 
preclude  an  exact  measurement  of  this  point,  we  get  some  sense  of  its  scale from 
the Labour Force Dynamics report published by Statistics South Africa. It shows that, 
between  2010  and  2015,  the median  wage  in  South Africa  increased  by  just  6.9%. 
The  median  for  skilled  people  increased  by  37.8%.  The  price  level  rose  by  30.0%. 
This  strongly  implies  that  some  earnings  are  better  protected  from  inflation  than 
others.5  
 Finally, inflation affects wealth. For a rich South African with shares in big companies 
and some real estate, more inflation is not much of a problem. Those big companies 
can  just  charge  higher  prices  and  their  foreign  operations  will  continue  to  earn 
foreign  currency,  so  their  equity  valuations  will  at  least  stay  constant  in  real  terms. 
Similarly,  house  prices  can  adjust  and  a  house  will  still  have  the  same  real  value, 
irrespective  of  the  level  of  the  price  index.  Yet  if  you  depend  on  a  fixed  income, 
perhaps from money in a savings account or from an annuity, inflation is expensive.  
 For these reasons, it is better to keep inflation low rather than let high inflation  hurt 
the  poor  and  exacerbate  inequality  between  the  people  privileged  with  knowledge, 
power and assets, and those without.  
                                                            
5 See  by Statistics South Africa (http://www.statssa.gov.za/publications/Report-02-11-02/Report-02-
11-022015.pdf).  
 Page 6 of 12 
A  low  interest  rate  policy  that  raises  inflation  is  effectively  a  tax  that  takes  money 
away  from  people  lacking  knowledge,  power  and  protected  forms  of  wealth,  and 
gives  it  to  borrowers  and  the  people  who  sell  to  them. We  have  a  tax  system  that 
works  the  way  it  does  precisely  because  there  are  more  efficient  and  progressive 
ways to transfer financial resources.   
 Should  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  also  target  employment  or 
unemployment rate? 
 Many people agree that low inflation is beneficial, and they appreciate the efforts  of 
the South African Reserve Bank (or SARB) to keep it low. Their question, though, is 
whether the SARB could do more, such as targeting unemployment rate, in the same 
way  the  US  Federal  Reserve  has  twin  mandates  for  low  inflation  and  low 
unemployment.  
 South Africa has a terrible unemployment problem which has lasted for at least two 
decades. It therefore makes sense that we should be looking for creative solutions to 
the problem. However, the central bank is not well placed to solve this with monetary 
policy.  The first  reason for  this  is  that almost  all  of  South Africa’s  unemployment  is 
explained by structural factors, not the kind of cyclical factors that can be addressed 
by  changes  in  interest  rates.  The  second  reason  is  that  monetary  policy  is  already 
sensitive  to  cyclical  factors;  the  difference  in  approach  between  a  dual-mandate 
central  bank  (like  the  Fed)  and  a  more  straightforward,  single-mandate  inflation 
targeter (like the SARB) is quite small.  
 One of the more important concepts in macroeconomics has the acronym NAIRU; it 
stands  for  the  ‘non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment’.  When  the 
unemployment  rate  is  near  the  NAIRU  rate,  then  wages  start  accelerating  and  this 
generates price inflation. By contrast, when unemployment is above the NAIRU rate, 
wage  pressure  is  weak  and  this  keeps firms’  costs down,  so  inflation  is  softer. The 
best a central bank can do is to stabilise unemployment at its natural rate. If a central 
bank  attempts  to  get  unemployment  below  the  NAIRU  rate,  the  result  will  be  more 
inflation but only a small and temporary increase in the number of jobs.  
  Page 7 of 12 
What,  then,  is  the  NAIRU  rate  in  South  Africa?  It  is  difficult  to  estimate,  in  part 
because  the  relevant  data  are  incomplete.  As  policymakers,  we  usually  find  that 
other  measures,  such  as  the  output  gap  and  capacity  utilisation,  are  more  useful. 
Nonetheless, our best estimate of the NAIRU rate is in the region of 25%.6 This is a 
very  high  level.  In  the  US,  where  the  concept  is  heavily  used,  the  corresponding 
number is currently estimated at around 4.6%.7  
 The  difference  between  the  two  is  explained  by  the  structural  factors  I  alluded  to 
earlier.  One  of  these  factors  is  spatial  patterns.  Many  South  Africans  do  not  live 
close enough to where the job opportunities are. Another factor is skills constraints. 
Employers would like to hire people but cannot find people with the skills they need.8 
High unemployment  is also affected by the design of our labour market institutions, 
which tend to penalise small businesses and favour larger firms.9 
 Looser  monetary  policies  will  not  get  our  people  Bachelor  of  Science  degrees  or 
move  their  residences  closer  to  where  the  job  opportunities  are.  Nor  will  lower 
interest  rates  reform  our  labour  markets.  The  scope  for  reducing  unemployment 
through  monetary  policy  is  therefore  much  smaller  than  its  proponents  perhaps 
imagine. 
 For all those reasons, the difference that a dual mandate would make for the central 
bank  would  probably  also  be  small.  Consider  how  the  Fed  implements  its  dual 
mandate.  It sets out a goal for inflation, which it specifies as 2%. This goal is fixed 
over  time:  there  is  no  policy  of  aiming  for  higher  inflation  when  unemployment  is 
high, or vice versa.  
                                                            
6 See ‘Estimating a time-varying Phillip’s curve for South Africa’, South African Reserve Bank Working 
Paper 16(05), by A Kabundi, E Schaling and M Some, published in May 2016 
(http://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/7277/WP1605.pdf). 
7 This is according to Congressional Budget Office estimates of the short-term natural rate of 
unemployment, available from the FRED database (https://fred.stlouisfed.org/series/NROUST). 
8 See REDI3x3 conference: policies for inclusive growth by M Leibbrandt and P Green, published in 
February 2017 
(http://www.econ3x3.org/sites/default/files/articles/Leibbrandt%20%26%20Green%202017%20REDI
%20conference%20on%20inclusive%20growth%20FINAL_0.pdf). 
9 See ‘High unemployment yet few small firms: the role of centralised bargaining in South Africa’, 
American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4(3), by J R Magruder, published in July 2012. 
 Page 8 of 12 
That  said,  as  long  as  the  Fed  has  credibility  around  its  price  stability  mandate, 
meaning  that  as  long  as  its  commitment  to  2%  is  believed,  there  is  scope  for 
flexibility.10  For  this  reason,  interest  rate  decisions  tend  to  respond  to  both  inflation 
and employment dynamics.  
 As the economist John Taylor has shown, one can predict the path of interest rates 
quite accurately by using simple rules that include the deviation of inflation from the 
target and the deviation of unemployment from the NAIRU rate.  
 At  the  SARB,  we  also  look  at  these  sorts  of  rules.  We  do  not  use  them  to  dictate 
policy,  but  we  certainly  consider  both  inflation  and  the  real  economy  when  we  set 
interest rates. This is why the Taylor rules for South Africa have a weighting on both 
the  output  gap  and  inflation  relative  to  the  target.11  This  should  also  be  clear  from 
any  statement  of  the  SARB’s  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  or  from  the 
biannual Monetary Policy Review, all of which are available on our website.  
 There  are  two  ‘takeaways’  from  this  discussion.  Even  a  central  bank  with  an 
employment mandate will still behave like an inflation targeter. And inflation-targeting 
central banks also consider real variables such as growth and unemployment when 
they make monetary policy.  
 Conclusion 
 Central banks have the power to deliver low inflation. Where monetary policymakers 
have  adopted  other  priorities,  such  as  financing  governments  or  prioritising  high 
employment,  they  have  caused  widespread  economic  damage.  In  such  cases, 
countries have struggled with higher inflation, higher borrowing costs and eventually 
                                                           
10 As former Chairman Ben Bernanke once explained: “The key to explaining why price stability 
promotes stability in both output and employment is the realization that, when inflation itself is well-
controlled, then the public’s expectations of inflation will also be low and stable. In a virtuous circle, 
stable inflation expectations help the central bank to keep inflation low even as it retains substantial 
freedom to respond to disturbances to the broader economy.” From The benefits of price stability 
published on 24 February 2006 
(https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20060224a.htm). 
11 See, for instance, ‘A revised Quarterly Projection Model for South Africa’, South African Reserve 
Bank Working Paper 15(3), by S de Jager, M Johnston and R Steinbach, published in August 2015 
(https://www.resbank.co.za/Lists/News%20and%20Publications/Attachments/6839/WP1503.pdf). 
 Page 9 of 12 
high  economic  costs  to  reverse  earlier  policy  mistakes.  Such  policies  tend  to 
exacerbate inequality and deepen poverty.  
 By contrast, when monetary policy starts with a strong commitment to price stability 
(which is the case with inflation targeting), it can also offer other benefits. A credible 
monetary policy can be more flexible, meaning it can do more about  any short-term 
deviations of employment and output from natural rates. A credible monetary policy 
can also keep borrowing costs lower than they would otherwise be. This is a central 
benefit  to  long-term  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  When  inflation  rises  and 
stays  high,  investment  decisions  are  distorted  towards  short-term  investments  that 
carry  with  them  short-term  jobs.  For  this  reason,  low  inflation  is  a  sound 
developmental  policy.  It  encourages  firms  across  the  private  and  public  sectors  to 
make long-term investment decisions that imply productivity growth over time. This is 
critical, indeed a prerequisite, for sustainable jobs and income growth. 
 Critics  often miss  the fact  that monetary  policy  is  about  creating  a healthy  long-run 
environment  for  investment  and  consumption,  where  inflation  is  predictable  and 
purchasing  power  is  protected.  They  just  want  us  to  cut  interest  rates,  in  part 
because they equate  long-run economic growth  with household consumption.  They 
think a good decision is a cut of 25 basis points and a better decision is a bigger cut. 
Unfortunately,  this  does  not  always  work  out  well.  Household  debt  rises  if 
productivity and incomes do not also increase, and this boom eventually turns into a 
bust, with marginal workers getting hurt the most. Consumption based on rising debt 
levels  cannot  be  a  sustainable  growth  and  development  strategy.  Growth  and 
development  can  be  built  on  a  low  inflation  and  low  interest  rate  strategy  but,  as  I 
have emphasised, they need to go together.  
 Individual interest rate decisions can be difficult, and we often have vigorous debates 
in MPC meetings about the exact policy stance. At times, different people will favour 
a somewhat higher or lower repo rate. We all agree, however, that the larger policy 
framework is the right one. It does more for South Africa than the alternatives would 
because it allows for flexibility while being grounded in how to best support long-term 
sustainable economic growth and job creation. Interest rates do go up and down, but 
on  average  they  are  lower  than  they  would  be  otherwise.  Inflation  is  under  control, 
 Page 10 of 12 
which  reduces  poverty  and  inequality.  We  are  more  flexible  precisely  because  we 
have more credibility. We have built this framework up over many years, and it is one 
of this country’s strengths.  
 Thank you. 
   Page 11 of 12 
Government borrowing costs 
Germany
Italy
France
Supplementary charts 
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
25
20
15
10
5
0
-5
1980 -
1983 -
1986 -
1989 -
1992 -
1995 -
1998 -
2001 -
2004 -
2007 -
2010 -
2013 -
2016 -
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
Jan
 Central Bank rates for EMs similar to SA 
 
t
n
e
c
 
r
e
P
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
2005/01/31
2008/01/31
2011/01/31
2014/01/31
2017/01/31
Colombia
Mexico
South Africa
Chile
Peru
   Page 12 of 12 
