Carlos  da  Silva  Costa:  Addressing  NPLs  at  a  European  level  -
leaving the crossroads
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, in the magazine of the
Eurofi conference in Malta, 5-7 April 2017.
 Addressing  the  high  level  of  NPLs  was  one  of  the  SSM’s  supervisory  priorities  for  2016.  It
remains one of the major supervisory challenges in 2017.
Indeed,  the  overall  stock  of  NPLs  in  the  euro  area  is  relatively  high  compared  with  other
geographies,  albeit  with  significant  heterogeneity.  Some  Member  States  experienced  a  rapid
surge in the NPL ratio subsequent to a burst of a real estate bubble. In other Member States, the
increase occurred later and was widespread across sectors. This is the case of Portugal, for
instance,  where  NPLs  grew  essentially  in  the  context  of  the  2011–13  recession  and  are  a
manifestation of the ongoing economic adjustment process, characterized by a reallocation of
resources towards the tradable sector and away from the construction and real estate sectors.
The current setting mirrors these differences in pace and drivers, as well as the specificities of
national economies: some jurisdictions report double-digit NPL ratios, while others report much
lower levels.
In an integrated market, however, different ratios do not – cannot – mean different degrees of
concern.  Repercussions  of  high  NPL  levels  cross  borders:  through  banks’  balances  sheet
cross-exposures, through economic spillovers in the face of subdued credit supply and hindered
monetary policy transmission and inevitably through market perception. The systemic nature of
such  risks  is  heightened  by  widespread  low  bank  profitability,  increasing  capital  requirements
and a still incipient NPL secondary market.
NPLs  are,  indisputably,  a  European  problem. And  a  European  problem  calls  for  a  European
approach. But to what extent?
A European approach resides first and foremost on concerted action from all Member States.
Enhanced  efforts  at  national  level,  especially  in  what  regards  bank  supervision  and  marked
improvements  in  the  legal/judicial/tax  framework  –  notably  to  reduce  the  significant  bid/ask
spread in NPLs secondary market – are a necessary condition to address the high NPL stock
and  to  build  the  foundations  for  a  better  management  of  flows.  But  they  are  certainly  not
sufficient. The abovementioned risks of contagion also require targeted and potent initiatives to
reduce the NPL stock – and this is where a unified European strategy could prove more valuable.
A European problem calls for a European approach. But to what extent?
The  first  step  for  a  unified  European  strategy  is  acknowledging  its  need.  In  the  face  of  non-
negligible risks to financial stability and financial integration, as well as the referred heterogeneity
across banks and economies, a debate should be launched on the possible mismatch between
the repercussions of high NPL levels and the current strictness of the EU legal and regulatory
framework. In particular, the BRRD was designed for a steady-state, which is still far from the
current situation in financial markets, and State aid rules, while placing financial stability at the
core, seem to provide little flexibility to address the systemic nature of the problem. To reduce
NPLs in a significant and swift way, these constraints must be addressed – but only a European
approach can do so while ensuring the necessary level playing field, an essential precondition for
the coordinated action that should follow.
This discussion – ideally complemented by enhanced flexibility – would provide decisive clarity
on the rules of the game and likely pave the way for bolder solutions at national level, especially in
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries  where  the  NPL  challenge  is  more  pressing.  It  could  also  be  the  starting  point  for
considering and conceiving a more ambitious strategy to effectively reduce NPL stocks across
Europe. A  strategy  with  the  necessary  firepower  to  enhance  national  efforts  and  complement
ongoing initiatives in the SSM and other European fora. Some promising European approaches
have been recently put forward and deserve to be further explored.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
