Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 8 June 2017.
 Good morning. Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are glad to be with you today to talk about
the June issue of the Bank’s Financial System Review (FSR), which we published this morning.
Let me start with a quick reminder about the purpose of the FSR. It identifies vulnerabilities in the
financial system—pre-existing conditions that can interact with economic shocks—and monitors
how they are evolving. It also looks at the potential impact on the financial system and economy if
a shock were to interact with, and be magnified by, these vulnerabilities.
Canada’s  financial  system  remains  resilient,  and  this  resilience  has  increased  because  the
Canadian economy has strengthened since our previous FSR in December. Still, the two most
important  vulnerabilities  for  Canada’s  financial  system—the  elevated  level  of  household
indebtedness  and  imbalances  in  the  Canadian  housing  market—have  moved  higher  over  the
past six months.
On the first, the level of household indebtedness in Canada continues to rise. A good portion of
this increased debt consists of mortgages and home equity lines of credit located in the greater
Toronto and Vancouver Areas.
Last  year,  the  federal  government  introduced  changes  to  housing  finance  policies  aimed  at
improving the quality of borrowing. And there is evidence that these changes are working. This is
particularly true for insured mortgages, where more than 80 per cent of the cost of the home is
being borrowed. We have seen a drop in the proportion of insured mortgages being issued to
highly  indebted  borrowers,  that  is,  people  whose  debts  are  more  than  450  per  cent  of  their
income. This is a positive development.
However,  we  are  now  seeing  more  uninsured  mortgages  being  issued,  particularly  in  places
such as Toronto and Vancouver, where prices are the highest in Canada. In part, this is to be
expected, given that insurance is not available for mortgages on homes with a price greater than
$1  million.  Still,  some  of  these  uninsured  mortgages  are  showing  riskier  characteristics.  A
growing share is going to people who are highly indebted, and these borrowers are amortizing
the mortgages over longer periods. As well, we see some evidence that people are borrowing
from  other  sources  to  put  together  enough  of  a  down  payment  to  avoid  the  insurance
requirement. This could be a concern, depending on the source of the borrowing.
Imbalances  in  housing  markets,  the  second  vulnerability,  have  also  grown  since  December.
Policies  aimed  at  cooling  the  Greater  Vancouver  Area  market  appear  to  have  had  only  a
temporary  effect,  as  sales  and  prices  are  rising  again.  Similar  policies  have  recently  been
implemented  for  the  Greater  Toronto Area  (GTA).  While  the  most  recent  average  home  sale
price in the GTA has declined, that followed significant price acceleration over the previous year,
across dwelling types. There is a map in the FSR showing that large price increases are now
being seen across the region, from Niagara to Peterborough.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
We expect macroprudential and housing policy measures to help mitigate this vulnerability over
time. And I would point out that housing market fundamentals remain very strong in the greater
Toronto  and  Vancouver  areas,  with  solid  growth  in  population  and  employment.  However,
fundamentals alone cannot explain the price movements we have seen, and there is evidence
that extrapolative expectations continue to play an important role.
This is important because there is a greater chance of a correction when prices rise at a faster
pace than fundamentals would imply. And where extrapolative expectations are at work, there is
always a risk that expectations can turn quickly, amplifying the drop in prices.
So, given the evolution of these two vulnerabilities, the Bank looked at the most important risk
scenarios  for  the  Canadian  economy.  Specifically,  we  once  again  looked  at  a  risk  scenario
where a severe recession triggers a correction in house prices. And we took a narrower look at a
different risk scenario, where a house price correction in specific regional markets occurs on its
own, rather than being caused by some external shock.
Under the first scenario, a severe recession would lead to widespread job losses and declining
income,  which  would  hurt  highly  indebted  households  in  particular.  The  ensuing  house  price
correction would worsen the impact of the recession, which could lead to widespread stress in
the financial system and economy. The Canadian economy has been strengthening in recent
months, so the chance of this scenario happening is decreasing. However, its impact could now
be more severe because the underlying vulnerabilities have grown.
The second scenario we looked at involved a significant house price correction in the greater
Toronto  and  Vancouver  areas.  Such  a  correction  would  hit  the  British  Columbia  and  Ontario
economies,  affecting  spending  on  housing  and  related  goods  and  services.  There  would  be
some spillovers to other regions and sectors of the economy. Bank balance sheets would also
be affected in this scenario, leading to tighter lending standards.
The  likelihood  of  this  second  scenario  occurring  is  greater  than  the  first.  However,  its  impact
would be less severe, and we don’t anticipate that a house price correction would trigger the
widespread rise in unemployment assumed in the first scenario.
Given recent events, some people might naturally wonder if there is a connection between the
two vulnerabilities we’ve described and the situation at Home Capital. While we don’t generally
discuss individual financial institutions, I can say our assessment is that the situation reflected
firm-specific factors. The regulatory and supervisory system worked as it is designed to do, and
we  are  not  seeing  signs  of  broader  stress.  Indeed,  those  recent  events  were  a  pretty  clear
indication of the resilience of Canada’s financial system as a whole.
Let me close by pointing out that the FSR includes a section that describes how we measure the
resilience of the Canadian financial system. It shows that capital, leverage and liquidity ratios in
the Canadian financial system are all well above regulatory minimums and have improved over
the past year.
We are seeing early signs of a recovery in business investment. The process of adjustment to
the oil price shock is mostly behind us, having been facilitated by the monetary policy actions we
took in 2015. This improving economic backdrop will add to the resilience of Canada’s financial
system. And as such, we decided to drop the risk of prolonged weakness in commodity prices
from our risk assessment.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to respond to your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
