Benoît Cœuré: Scars or scratches? Hysteresis in the euro area
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies, Geneva, 19 May 2017.
Accompanying slides.
 One of the most interesting questions for policymakers to have emerged from the crisis is the
strength of links between the demand and supply sides of the economy. The classical view –
that  only  cyclical  policies  influence  the  former,  and  structural  policies  the  latter  –  has  been
challenged in two ways: first, by the observation that long periods of weak demand can lead to
rising structural unemployment and a permanently lower capital stock – the so-called hysteresis
effects. And second, by corollary suggestion that stronger demand might be able to reverse such
effects.
1
These  insights  are  not  entirely  new,  of  course.  In  1986,  Blanchard  and  Summers’  seminal
“insider-outsider”  model  laid  bare  how  recessions  might  lead  to  higher  underlying  “structural”
unemployment rates even after shocks have fully dissipated.
The question of hysteresis, however, received renewed interest as we have gone through the
steepest collapse in demand since the Second World War, which has exposed our economies
to significantly higher risks of hysteresis than in the past. And, as a consequence, policymakers
are asking themselves if this should change the way they implement monetary policy. Should
they, as usual, raise rates when there are signs that price pressures are building, so as to be
ahead of the curve? Or should they stay their hand, in the expectation that what appears to be
structural unemployment might actually be cyclical?
This is the debate that I would like to enter into today, from the perspective of the euro area – that
is, to ask whether we have indeed seen significant hysteresis effects, and whether this warrants
changing how we think about our monetary policy decisions.
My tentative answer today is that we have not yet seen hysteresis in its typical form – we have
seen scratches, not scars. And though this more subtle type of hysteresis may warrant policy
accommodation over a longer period, this is solely with the aim of achieving our price stability
mandate, not preventing a rise in structural unemployment per se. Indeed, if those two aims were
ever in conflict, our choice would be absolutely clear.
Evidence of hysteresis in the euro area
Let me start with a chart similar to the one Larry Summers showed for the US economy in his
seminal 2014 speech.  You can see that the level of potential output in the euro area today is
much lower than what we had expected before the outbreak of the crisis, assuming it would have
continued to grow at its 2007 growth rate.
2
By this measure, the output gap has largely closed – not because the economy has been doing
so well but because potential GDP has been revised significantly.
These  effects  have  been  taken  by  many  as  evidence  for  hysteresis.   But  the  discussion  is
arguably more complex than this. For sure, potential output estimates are chronically unreliable
and often subject to substantial revisions ex post. Faced with the despair of failure, we often tend
to underestimate our ability to overcome crises – a phenomenon I will return to in a minute.
3
Moreover, recessions often tend to have a permanent effect on the level of potential output. It is
much less clear, however, whether the crisis will also leave a permanent footprint on the trend
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
potential growth rate – something Laurence Ball called “super-hysteresis” effects.
In fact, on the right-hand side of the first slide you can see that potential output growth had been
slowing in the euro area well before the crisis, mainly reflecting a long-term slowdown in total
factor productivity (TFP).
So the question I would like to ask today is not so much why potential output growth appears to
be decelerating in the long run, or whether we are entering a period of secular stagnation – the
jury is still out on this. It is whether the crisis, and the persistent shortfall in aggregate demand,
has accelerated, or not, the decline in potential growth.
The first point to consider is whether the crisis has had a significant effect on labour participation
– that is, the size of the total labour force. Hysteresis effects might be caused by unemployed
workers becoming discouraged and discontinuing their search for employment, leading them to
become detached from the workforce and lose their skills over time. Although this would reduce
unemployment, it would lead to a permanent reduction in labour supply and growth potential.
So is there any evidence of this in the euro area?
The  overall  picture  suggests  not:  the  euro  area  has  not  been  affected  by  strong  adverse
participation effects, as was seen for example in the United States – where the unemployment
rate would have been significantly higher during the crisis had it not been for workers dropping
out of the labour force. You can see this on the left-hand side of slide 2.
For  the  euro  area,  this  is  not  a  statistical  artefact  due  to  pension  reforms  or  other  possibly
distorting measures: participation is growing virtually within all age groups.  Workers have on the
whole remained attached to the labour market and, today, headcount employment has virtually
regained its pre-crisis level. This is shown on the right-hand side. The same is true of the euro
area  employment  rate,  which  expresses  headcount  employment  as  a  share  of  the  population
aged 15 to 74.
4
This in itself provides strong evidence against participation-related hysteresis in the euro area.
But even though labour force participation has held up relatively well in the euro area, the second
issue we need to look at is the composition of the unemployed.
It might be the case that, given the depth and severity of the crisis, some workers have remained
in  the  labour  force  but  have  been  without  a  job  for  so  long  that  they  have  become  virtually
unemployable – that is, that they have become structurally unemployed. This would also have a
negative effect on growth potential.
The natural starting point to assess the magnitude of such effects is to consider estimates of the
NAIRU.
What  we  see  here  is  that,  in  certain  countries  where  unemployment  rose  sharply  and  where
there was a strong sectoral dimension to the crisis, estimates of structural unemployment have
indeed risen significantly. Current real-time estimates from a variety of international institutions,
for example, suggest that Spanish structural unemployment increased by over three percentage
points in the aftermath of the crisis, to around 17%.
At face value, this would suggest that virtually all of the unemployment that we currently observe
in Spain is of a structural nature – and that the crisis has left permanent and irreversible scars.
And although current estimates do not suggest a notable increase in structural unemployment for
the euro area as a whole, this was not true just a few years ago. For example, on the third slide
you can see that in 2013 the European Commission estimated that structural unemployment for
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
5
the euro area as a whole was likely to increase from pre-crisis levels of around 8.5% to 11.6%.
Today, Commission staff believe that structural unemployment in the euro area is closer to 9% –
compared with an actual unemployment rate of 9.5% in March 2017.
In other words, without the significant downward revisions of recent years, we would currently
face a negative unemployment gap in the euro area. And even according to the Commission’s
latest estimates, policy-relevant labour market slack would have vanished, by and large.
You can see what I’m getting at.
If structural unemployment had indeed risen during the crisis to the extent suggested, then we
would  have  expected  inflationary  pressures  to  emerge  much  more  rapidly,  since  the
unemployment gap would have been closing faster than otherwise.
But this is not what we see in the euro area – or, in fact, in many other economies.
Despite  a  rapid  fall  in  the  unemployment  rate,  wages  have  remained  stubbornly  low. Annual
growth in compensation per employee hovered around 1.2% since mid-2014 and only increased
to  1.5%  at  the  end  of  last  year  –  substantially  below  its  historical  average  of  2.1%.   And
measures of core inflation – in its simplest form headline inflation excluding volatile items such
as food and energy – have also remained at depressed levels of below 1% for most of the past
three years.
6
This is confirmed by Phillips curve estimates. As you can see from the right-hand side chart on
slide 3, ECB in-house  estimates  using  a  variety  of  slack  and  inflation  expectations  measures
suggest that core inflation today is well below what historical regularities would suggest.
Of  course,  a  number  of  factors  –  such  as  changes  in  the  slope,  weak  productivity  growth  or
second-round effects of past low inflation – might be at work here. But in the current context this
is unlikely to be the whole story.
For one, there is considerable uncertainty around the slope of the Phillips curve. As we heard this
morning, some estimates show that the curve has flattened in recent years. ECB research, by
contrast,  found  evidence  that  inflation  has  become  more  responsive  to  slack  lately,  but  with
notable heterogeneity across euro area Member States.  Blanchard, Cerutti and Summers have
8
not found much change at all during the crisis.
7
Second, our Phillips curve estimates show that even once we control for past low inflation and
weak productivity growth, there is still a considerable part that cannot be explained by the model.
These  analyses  therefore  do  offer  one  useful  conclusion:  that  slack  may  be  larger  and  that
structural unemployment may perhaps not have risen by as much as some estimates suggest.
This also means that policymakers should be careful in attaching too much weight to notoriously
unreliable  and  hard-to-estimate  measures  such  as  the  NAIRU.  Indeed,  already  20  years  ago
Staiger, Stock and Watson  pointed out that the most striking feature of NAIRU-based inflation
estimates is their lack of precision, not to mention model uncertainty as evidenced by the right-
hand chart on slide 3.
9
So what, then, is causing the sluggish performance of inflation?
Here  I  want  to  argue  that  there  are  more  subtle  forms  of  hysteresis  in  the  economy  that  are
altering how we typically understand labour market slack. These are the scratches rather than
the scars.
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
A different perspective on labour market slack
One of the features of the recent employment recovery is that many new jobs have been of a
lower  “quality”  compared  with  those  seen  before  the  crisis.  While  employment  ratios  have
rebounded  strongly,  employment  of  full-time  workers  with  permanent  contracts  has  in  fact
declined.
The latest EU Labour Force Survey (LFS) data suggest that “core” employment – that is, full-time
positions  on  open-ended  permanent  contracts  –  now  account  for  just  over  two  thirds  of  all
employees.  You  can  see  on  slide  4  that  this  is  the  lowest  share  since  the  survey  was  first
conducted. The LFS also suggests that of the net employment created since the crisis, around a
third has been for workers on temporary contracts, and around a quarter part-time.
Of course, a fraction of those seeking part-time employment do so as a way to balance work and
other commitments. But, for others, the choice for part-time work is involuntary. Currently there
are more than seven million underemployed part-time workers across the euro area – those who
would like to work more hours but cannot – an increase of around one million since the crisis.
This may have important implications for inflation dynamics.
While  the  main  objective  for  workers  in  permanent  work  is  typically  higher  wages,  those  in
temporary or part-time positions may pursue objectives other than wage increases, such as full-
time employment or an increase in hours worked.
Or if they do seek higher wages, they may be less likely to benefit from union representation and
thus have less bargaining power. An increase in temporary or part-time employment as a share
of total employment may therefore lead to less pressure on wage inflation.
Recent estimates by ECB staff – which you can see on the right-hand side of slide 4 – suggest
that broader measures of labour market slack, including the unemployed, underemployed and
those marginally attached to the labour force currently affect around 18% of the extended euro
area labour force.
10
This broader measure of slack also appears to be less sensitive to GDP growth than traditional
measures:  it  has  declined  rather  less  than  the  reductions  in  the  unemployment  rate  over  the
course of the recovery – a broader version of Okun’s, law if you will.
And  our  analysis  suggests  that  this  might  help  explain  why  underlying  inflation  has  been  so
sluggish recently.
Rerunning  our  Phillips  curve  models  using  this  broader  measure  of  slack,  or  equivalently,  a
measure  of  “core”  employment  only,  leads  to  the  prediction  errors  for  inflation  becoming
measurably  smaller.  Look  at  how  the  gap  between  actual  and  predicted  inflation  largely
disappears on slide 5, in particular for the recent history.
All this essentially means that it may take longer for inflation to gain steam and wage pressure
might only start to rise meaningfully once adjustments in the “intensive margin” take hold – that
is, once those who want to work more hours also succeed in doing so and once those who are
still  willing  to  work,  but  not  currently  counted  as  unemployed,  are  reabsorbed.  Indeed,  hours
worked per employee have not recovered since the double-dip recession.
So what is the link between these developments and hysteresis?
To be sure, the increasing prevalence of part-time and temporary work reflects several factors –
including, in part, important structural reforms in many euro area economies that have helped
strengthen the resilience of the euro area.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Yet, the compositional effects we are seeing in the labour market may also reflect more crisis-
related  factors,  in  particular  uncertainty  about  the  strength  and  durability  of  the  recovery  and
pessimism about the long-term impact of the downturn on growth.
As  Blanchard  and  co-authors  have  recently  postulated,  a  revision  to  future  potential  growth
prospects may cause firms to cut back on investment plans, causing muted growth expectations
to become self-fulfilling.
11
On the right-hand side of slide 5 you can see Blanchard and Co.’s analysis replicated for the
euro area. And we see signs that such effects might have also been at play in the euro area:
there is a positive correlation between potential growth revisions and investment error forecasts.
This  might  suggest  that  investment,  and  therefore  demand,  is  influenced  by  long-term  animal
spirits – changes in expectations concerning the steady-state path of the economy.
But the logic may also run in reverse and create a vicious feedback loop: this would be the case
if the pessimism-induced period of low demand ultimately affected long-run potential growth.
I would call this an “anxiety trap” that could ultimately lead to the more subtle forms of hysteresis I
mentioned earlier.
The reason is that if the effect of low expectations and high uncertainty is to quell animal spirits,
large demand shocks can have long-lasting effects: the increase in risk aversion slows down
capital accumulation, thereby reducing productivity growth, while uncertainty encourages firms to
enter into more flexible forms of employment that shed labour market risks onto workers.
This then feeds back into wage growth in three ways: (i) through lower labour productivity, which
depresses real wages, (ii) through a higher level of effective labour market slack and (iii), in an
environment of high uncertainty, through employees and trade unions valuing job security more
than higher wages – in particular after recessions where wage growth would likely have been
negative for a while had it not been for downward nominal wage rigidity.
Put differently, what we could be seeing today is a hysteresis in the euro area economy that has
an effect on wages quite unlike that of “traditional” labour market hysteresis.
The issue might not be so much that fewer “insiders” may be able to push aggregate wages up –
which was a key insight of Blanchard and Summers’ earlier work. It is rather that hysteresis may
be  affecting  labour  markets  through  employers’  risk  perceptions  and  subsequent  hiring  and
investment choices, which have so far had the contrary effect of pushing wages down.
But while this form of hysteresis might leave some workers working less than they would like,
they remain – by and large – attached to the labour market. And by retaining their professional
network  and  skills,  they  are  less  likely  to  become  marginalised  and,  on  aggregate,  structural
unemployment is less likely to become entrenched.
This is what I mean when I say that the crisis may have caused scratches, but not necessarily
scars.
Still, while the labour market has proven surprisingly resilient to the repercussions of the double-
dip recession, the perils of hysteresis – of real scars – remain: you can see on slide 6 that long-
term unemployment as a share of total unemployment has increased from levels around 45%
before the outbreak of the crisis to 50% today and has barely declined in recent years. In other
words,  one  in  every  two  of  the  more  than  15  million  currently  unemployed  face  the  risk  of
becoming increasingly detached from the labour market.
Some of the long-term unemployed will be absorbed back into the labour force as the recovery
continues, and some of the marginally attached will also rejoin. But expecting the economic cycle
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
to fully resolve these wider problems would be misguided.
This  is  particularly  worrisome  for  younger  generations,  for  whom  extended  spells  of
unemployment at the start of their working lives may lead to lifelong “scarring” effects – including
a  higher  propensity  for  further  spells  of  unemployment,  which  are  likely  to  constrain  labour
market choices and earnings throughout their working lives.
 In short, they risk becoming a “lost
generation”.
12
Concerns regarding labour market mismatches – effectively precluding the reabsorption of those
displaced from some permanently downsized sectors – also remain. The euro area Beveridge
curve – as you can see on the right-hand side of slide 6 – looks to have shifted outward during
the  crisis.  This  is  consistent  with  a  lower  degree  of  matching  efficiency  post-crisis,  with  the
unemployment  level  still  remaining  high  despite  rising  labour  demand  over  the  duration  of  the
recovery.
Hysteresis effects and monetary policy
So what is the role of monetary policy as regards hysteresis effects?
Though  our  primary  mandate  is  price  stability  and  not  employment,  in  conditions  of  weak
aggregate demand there is typically a “divine coincidence” between those two variables, since
unemployment  rises  while  inflation  falls  after  adverse  shocks  hit  the  economy.  So,  only  by
reducing  labour  market  slack  can  we  create  the  conditions  for  wage  and  price  pressures  to
emerge and for inflation to return to our preferred aim within our definition of price stability.
This is largely what we have seen in the euro area. Since the adoption of the ECB’s credit easing
package in June 2014, around five million jobs have been created in the euro area. Model-based
evidence  indicates  that  our  policy  has  contributed  meaningfully  to  this  increase:  the  current
recovery has, by and large, been driven by monetary policy, with additional temporary support
from the fall in oil prices.
So,  forceful  policy  action  in  the  face  of  risks  to  our  price  stability  mandate  has  measurably
reduced  the  risks  of  hysteresis  by  creating  the  financial  conditions  necessary  for  growth  and
employment to flourish.
What is more, our actions have also defeated a potentially very nasty form of hysteresis, namely
a destabilisation of inflation expectations. This could have had hysteresis-like effects by shifting
the  Phillips  curve  inwards  and  permanently  lowering  the  inflation  rate,  towards  which  the
economy  gravitates  once  all  shocks  have  dissipated.  Fortunately,  survey-based  measures  of
medium-term  inflation  expectations  have  consistently  remained  close  to  our  definition  of  price
stability.
But  the  concrete  anatomy  of  labour  market  dynamics  and  the  possible  effects  of  hysteresis
arguably become more important in informing monetary policy decisions at later stages of the
easing cycle or at turning points.
With the recovery in the euro area now fully underway, policymakers must judge at what point
they  expect  inflationary  pressures  to  emerge  in  a  sustainable  manner  that  would  warrant  a
gradual withdrawal of policy accommodation.
Conditions  in  the  labour  market  are,  of  course,  an  important  part  of  this  discussion.  Wage
developments  are  a  key  driver  for  service  price  inflation  and,  thus,  for  headline  inflation.  The
amount  of  slack  we  expect  to  see  in  the  economy,  and  in  the  labour  market  in  particular,
therefore has an important bearing on our stance.
For example, were we to ignore the facts that I just presented, namely that labour market slack
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
may be larger than is suggested by headline unemployment measures, we could run the risk of
tightening  policy  prematurely.  Choking  off  growth  too  quickly  would  lead  to  us  failing  on  our
medium-term inflation mandate and would needlessly keep people out of work.
Similarly, the changes in the composition of labour contracts that I mentioned earlier are likely to
imply that inflationary pressures might take longer than usual to build up. We need to factor this
information into our policy deliberations.
At the same time, we need to monitor carefully developments in long-term unemployment, labour
force participation rates and hours worked with a view to informing our assessment on the likely
evolution of structural unemployment.
Should  the  share  of  long-term  unemployed  stabilise  at  one  point,  with  no  convincing  signs  of
further  likely  downward  adjustments,  the  risks  of  inflationary  pressures  starting  to  emerge  at
higher levels of unemployment would increase.
At this point – when scratches indeed become scars – the level of slack relevant for determining
medium-term price stability would decline. Policymakers would therefore need to start tightening
policy earlier to remain faithful to their primary mandate.
As I mentioned in my introduction, however, there are some who argue that such a response
would be premature, since if hysteresis effects can be caused by lack of demand, then they can
equally be reversed by excess demand. In a high-pressure economy, for example, firms might
be  encouraged  to  dig  deeper  into  the  labour  market  to  find  recruits,  thereby  reactivating  and
retraining  some  of  those  workers  who  were  previously  thought  to  be  unemployable.  Glenn
Rudebusch  and  John  Williams  therefore  conclude  that  optimal  monetary  policy  would  allow
inflation to overshoot its target.
13
I have some doubts about this view, mainly for two reasons. First, and most importantly, unlike in
the US, allowing inflation to overshoot our price stability definition for the sole purpose of bringing
more  people  back  into  employment  would  not  be  consistent  with  our  primary  mandate.  The
“divine coincidence” applies only insofar as employment developments are consistent with our
definition of price stability. Beyond that there is no room for trade-offs.
Second, there are doubts as to the likely efficacy of such a policy. We have seen some evidence
in the United States that the participation rate can become partially endogenous to demand, as
discouraged workers return to job-seeking in a strengthening labour market.
But we have seen no such evidence in the euro area. Our participation rate has continued to
increase over time. So the question in the euro area is much more whether, or not, long-term
unemployment is likely to be amenable to continued policy accommodation.
The evidence raises at least doubts. For example, although many claim that monetary policy was
too accommodative during the boom years of 2005 and 2006 – as also evidenced by policy rates
often being lower than what standard Taylor rules would have predicted – the share of long-term
unemployed in the euro area has remained fairly constant over this period.
So,  even  if  the  desired  effects  of  accommodative  policy  lead  to  more  investment  and
employment,  it  remains  questionable  whether  employers  will  respond  by  taking  on  chronically
unemployed or whether they would instead rely on “insiders” whose pay has been stagnant or,
alternatively,  on  fresh  university  graduates.  A  recent  study  analysing  the  experience  of  the
Spanish  labour  market  confirms  this  view:  over  time  job  finding  rates  become  less  and  less
responsive to improvements in the aggregate labour market.
14
I  would  even  go  one  step  further,  namely  to  question  whether  allowing  inflation  to  overshoot
would help address the more subtle forms of hysteresis in the economy linked to uncertainty and
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
investment.
I have no doubt that investment would have been much lower today were it not for the impulse
generated by our policies. But central banks cannot address all of the underlying causes of weak
capital formation.
For  example,  if  it  is  true  that  investment  is  being  affected  to  some  extent  by  weak  long-term
growth expectations, then monetary policy cannot be the whole answer – unless one believes in
a very hard form of “reverse hysteresis”.
The truth is that should weak long-term growth expectations indeed become self-fulfilling, then
we would also see signs of hysteresis in the natural rate of interest, which economists frequently
call "r-star". A lower r-star, in turn, would push the interest rate level at which policy becomes
expansionary  even  lower  –  feeding  concerns  about  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  address
advanced cases of hysteresis.
We don't want the central bank itself to fall into the “anxiety trap”.
The answer therefore has to address the structural causes of low trend growth and long-term
unemployment through policies supporting productivity and minimising both dualities in the labour
market and social exclusion.
Other scratches also need early and effective treatment to avoid becoming scars. For example,
insofar  as  investment  is  being  affected  by  post-crisis  legacies,  such  as  the  debt  overhang  in
parts of the private and public sector – the famous Fisher-Minsky-Koo channel of debt deflation –
history suggests that effective deleveraging nearly always involves a combination of growing out
of debt and writing down debt – which is to say, structural policies are also key.
15
And action also at the EU level is crucial. Efforts to complete the Single Market, for example,
would incentivise more firms to invest and grow as they have a larger market to serve and exploit
economies of scale. Progress with the Capital Markets Union (CMU) would likewise help to raise
productivity by facilitating capital reallocation.
Conclusion
So, to conclude, the evidence suggests that hysteresis as it is often understood – meaning rising
structural unemployment – has not yet materialised meaningfully in our economy. We see more
scratches than we see scars. And unlike “classical” hysteresis, these scratches are currently
reducing price pressures, warranting our currently very accommodative monetary policy stance.
We can be confident that this stance will have the desired effect. The ongoing broadening of the
recovery, together with the gradual disappearance of downside risks, increases the chances that
those who want to work more will be able to do so. This, in turn, will create the necessary price
and wage pressures for a return of inflation towards levels closer to 2%.
But should we reach a point where the path of inflation is expected to be self-sustaining, but long-
term unemployment remains high, there should be no doubt as to how I would decide regarding
our  policy  stance.  Monetary  policy  cannot  “run  the  economy  hot”  as  insurance  against  labour
market risks – that is, the risk that long-term unemployment becomes structural unemployment.
This would be neither desirable in view of our primary mandate, nor efficient given the euro area
circumstances. It will be up to other policymakers to tackle this issue – as they must.
1
2
I would like to thank V. Jarvis and E. Lis for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely responsible for the
opinions contained herein.
See  Summers,  L.  (2014),  “U.S.  Economic  Prospects:  Secular  Stagnation,  Hysteresis,  and  theZero  Lower
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Bound”, Keynote Address at the NABE Policy Conference, 24 February 2014.
See, e.g., Ball, L. (2014), “Long-Term Damage from the Great Recession in OECD Countries”, NBER Working
Paper No. 20185.
Participation rates have fallen for the under-25s and remain some way below their pre-crisis levels – in part
reflecting higher enrolment rates, as young people exercise their “outside option” of staying in education in the
face of less advantageous labour markets.
The level expected to prevail in 2015.
The picture changes little when hourly wage growth is considered, with annual rates ranging from 1.0% to 1.3%
over the course of the recovery. Yet, it picked up more strongly in the last two quarters of 2016, standing at 1.8%
in the last quarter of 2016.
See  Ciccarelli,  M.  and  C.  Osbat  (2017),  “Low  inflation  in  the  euro  area:  Causes  and  consequences”,  ECB
Occasional Paper No 181.
See  Blanchard,  O.,  E.  Cerutti  and  L.  Summers  (2015),  “Inflation  and  activity  –  Two  Explorations  and  their
Monetary Policy Implications”, IMF Working Paper No 230.
Staiger,  D.,  J.  Stock  and  M.  Watson  (1997),  “The  NAIRU,  Unemployment  and  Monetary  Policy”,  Journal  of
Economic Perspectives, 11(1): 33-49.
See the recent Economic Bulletin box entitled “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3,
ECB, 2017. The figure is computed by expressing the numbers of unemployed and underemployed, together
with estimates of those available for work but not seeking it, and those seeking work but not available for it (the
“potential additional labour force”), as a percentage of the extended labour force (i.e., the employed and the
unemployed, who comprise the active labour force, plus the potential additional labour force).
See Blanchard, O., G. Lorenzoni and J.-P. L'Huillier (2017), “Short-Run Effects of Lower Productivity Growth: A
Twist on the Secular Stagnation Hypothesis”, NBER Working Paper No 23160, February 2017.
See Bell, D. and D. Blanchflower (2011), "Young people and the Great Recession", Oxford Review of Economic
Policy, 27, pp. 241–267.
Rudebusch,  G.  and  J.  Williams  (2016),  “A  wedge  in  the  dual  mandate:  Monetary  policy  and  long-term
unemployment”, Journal of Macroeconomics, Volume 47, Part A, March 2016, Pages 5–18.
Bentolila,  S.,  J.  Ignacio  García-Pérez  and  M.  Jansen  (2017),  “Are  the  Spanish  Long-Term  Unemployed
Unemployable?”, CESIFO Working paper No. 6338.
For example, streamlined insolvency frameworks, better judicial efficiency and supervisory action against non-
performing loans.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
