Jens Weidmann: Low rates, loud talk?
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 48th Konstanzer Seminar,
Constance, 31 May 2017.
1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen, dear Jürgen von Hagen,
 Thank you very much for your kind invitation to this seminar - it is a pleasure to be back. I must
confess that this is a very moving moment for me, as it brings back many positive memories.
The last time I attended this conference was when I was still working with Manfred Neumann at
Bonn University, having just completed my PhD thesis. So it was probably twenty or more years
ago.
For me, as for Manfred’s other doctoral students, the Konstanz Seminar was always the high
point of our academic year. Having the opportunity to listen to and discuss with so many eminent
scholars who we knew mostly from the literature was very exciting and stimulating.
But  Manfred  wouldn’t  have  been  Manfred  if  he  had  not  carefully  monitored  whether  our
contributions lived up to his expectations. And we all knew that, in the end, our thesis would have
to  stand  the  test  of  a  presentation  at  the  Konstanz  Seminar.  So  I  guess  we  felt  some
ambivalence towards this event.
I also remember the seminar because it sought to connect theory and practice. This is why today
I am by far neither the first attendee nor the first speaker from a central bank. Another reason I
enjoyed coming here as a PhD student was that I was long on theory and short on practice.
Nowadays it’s rather the other way round. So for me, being here today brings theory and practice
a little bit closer to balance, and I hope the same goes for you.
At least I will speak on a topic that demonstrates how theory and practice can benefit each other:
central  bank  communication.  The  role  of  communication  in  monetary  policy  has  increased
dramatically  over  the  last  few  decades.  This  change  has  been  the  result  of  several  mutually
reinforcing  developments  in  policy  making  and  economic  thinking.  In  addition,  the  question  of
whether there should be changes to the ECB’s forward guidance is an important topic at the
moment.
2. Manfred J M Neumann
But although I am aware that you have already commemorated Manfred, please allow me first to
seize the opportunity to say a few more words about him.
Like  many  of  you,  I  owe  a  lot  to  Manfred.  The  time  under  his  supervision  at  the  Institute  for
International Economics - with my fellow doctoral students Katrin Assenmacher and Susanne
Janeba - was indeed a time I fondly remember.
As  a  thesis  supervisor,  Manfred  struck  the  right  balance  between  freedom  and  direction,
motivation and criticism, respect and provocation. Almost every day during that time, we went to
lunch together in the no-frills university canteen. This was the time to discuss progress in our
academic endeavours. But Manfred also had us apply our theoretical economic knowledge to
practical topical issues and political questions. In fact, to him, such applications were not just
brainteasers or amusing thought experiments. Rather, economic thinking and research had to be
both rigorous and of practical relevance.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Drawing  on  both  his  impressive  academic  expertise  and  his  excellent  economic  intuition,  in
the 1990s he repeatedly and prominently intervened in the public discussions surrounding the
creation of the monetary union.
All in all, I would characterise Manfred as a “doctoral father” or as an advisor in the best sense of
the word. I owe him my passion for monetary policy and my interest in the empirical facets of our
profession.
Even after I left his institute for the IMF, we never lost touch. Over time, I gained a close and
supporting companion during the subsequent steps of my career. In his straight-spoken way he
remained an advisor throughout who, in a fatherly and friendly way, continued to challenge me,
visiting  me  at  the  Bundesbank  with  a  multitude  of  charts  and  regression  results,  pointing  out
emerging issues or questioning traditional positions. I miss his clear voice in the debate, and I
miss a friend.
3. Central bank communication
One issue we would have discussed for sure is how vital the communication has become for
central banks.
For a long time, central bankers did not attach any great importance to communicating monetary
policy decisions. In the 1970s, when the first Konstanz seminars took place, central banks still
held the firm conviction that monetary policy makers must be tight-lipped and unpredictable. And
the Federal Reserve, for example, did not begin communicating its interest rate target until 1994.
Forrest  Capie,  the  historian  of  the  Bank  of  England,  provides  a  succinct  example  of  how
uncommunicative central bankers were at that time. He once recalled how the first press officer
of the Bank of England was instructed to “keep the Bank out of the press and the press out of the
Bank".
The  doctrine  that  communication  has  little  part  in  monetary  policy  still  applied  when  Alan
Greenspan was chairman of the Fed. His by now famous remark to journalists: “I guess I should
warn you, if I turn out to be particularly clear, you’ve probably misunderstood what I’ve said” is a
memorable proof of this attitude.
All this began to change in the 1990s. On the practical side, policy makers began to make central
banks  more  independent.  And  the  flipside  of  more  central  bank  independence  is  more
transparency and central bank accountability.
At  roughly  the  same  time,  the  advent  of  inflation  targeting  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  enhanced
transparency and communication. It was increasingly recognised that having a clear monetary
policy  objective  was  making  monetary  policy  more  credible  and  helped  anchor  inflation
expectations.
In  addition,  more  central  banks  came  to  appreciate  the  fact  that  a  well-understood  monetary
policy strategy would allow market participants and the public to form expectations about how the
central  bank  reacts  to  economic  and  monetary  developments.  For  this  strategy  to  work,
monetary  policy  makers  had  to  clearly  communicate  their  objective,  explain  how  they  plan  to
achieve it and inform the public about their economic outlook and inflation forecast.
As  a Bundesbanker,  I  cannot  resist  the  temptation  to  mention  that  some  consider  the
Bundesbank  to  be  a  forerunner  in  this  regard.  The  Bundesbank  always  assigned  great
importance  to  explaining  to  the  public  the  value  of  stable  prices.  We  were  -  and  still  are  -
convinced that a stability-oriented monetary policy ultimately depends on a public that not only
has  an  abstract  notion  of  stable  prices,  but  also  values  the  concrete  advantages  of  a  stable
currency. This is why the Bundesbank engaged very early on in communication with the public.
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Already in 1970, the Bundesbank participated in issuing a brochure “on money", which illustrated
in plain words the importance of money for society. 
And  Manfred  Neumann  had  certainly  a  valid  point,  when  he  later  said  that  the  introduction  of
monetary  targets  in  the  1970s  was  used  by  the  Bundesbank  to  provide  guidance  about  its
1
intended policy course .
With hindsight, researchers have confirmed empirically that where communication was used to
2 3
guide expectations, monetary policy has indeed become more predictable.  
Researchers  from  the Bundesbank  have  recently  re-examined  the  value  of  central  bank
communication. They argue that when the public disagrees about the inflation outlook, market
participants rely more than usual on interpreting central bank actions to draw inferences about
the true state of inflation.  They may then interpret an unexpected loosening of monetary policy
as  a  policy  response  to  a  worsening  economic  outlook  and  adjust  their  inflation  expectations
accordingly. A loosening of the monetary policy stance could then even lower inflation – and vice
versa.
4
There is thus a clear case for explaining our outlook for inflation and the economy to the public to
prevent an unintended transmission of a monetary policy impulse.
In fact, it is safe to say that for some time now, the new consensus is that communication plays
a central role in monetary policy making. Communication has almost become a monetary policy
instrument  in  its  own  right.  Michael  Woodford  once  summarised  this  idea  with  the  following
words:  “Successful  monetary  policy  is  not  so  much  a  matter  of  effective  control  of  overnight
rates […] as of affecting […] the evolution of market expectations". And expectations depend to a
great extent on central bank communication.
Central bankers use a wide variety of tools to communicate their monetary policy, ranging from
press  statements,  press  conferences  and  speeches  to  monthly  reports,  research  letters  and
research  conferences.  From  the  very  beginning,  the  ECB,  for  instance,  has  held  press
conferences after each monetary policy meeting.
In recent years, the role of communication in monetary policy has increased even further. The
quote  of  Michael  Woodford  is  from  2001.  That  was  long  before  policy  rates  reached  or  even
came close to the effective lower bound in large parts of the advanced economies. But if policy
rates  are  beginning  to  be  constrained  by  the  effective  lower  bound,  it  is  becoming  harder  for
market  participants  to  draw  inferences  about  how  the  central  bank  assesses  the  economic
outlook from the policy rates alone, and how it can react in future when policy rate cuts are no
longer  possible.  Technically  speaking,  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function  is  growing  more
complex.
At the effective lower bound, there is therefore a need to undertake greater efforts to clarify the
reaction  function  and  to  explain  future  policy  intentions. And  there  is  a  need  to  explain  future
policy intentions over a potentially longer time horizon, not least because changes to the short-
term rate can be substituted, at least in part, by shaping the public’s expectation about the future
path of short-term rates.    
So when interest rates are close to the zero lower bound, central banks do not talk louder, but
more.
To guide markets, monetary policy makers must engage more intensively in communicating their
expectations about the economic outlook – for instance, if they believe that economic conditions
warrant  low  interest  rates  for  longer  than  the  market  expects.  This  is  called  Delphic  forward
guidance,  because  it  relies  on  a  forecast,  like  the  prophecies  of  the  Oracle  of  Delphi.  It  is
important to recognise that Delphic forward guidance does not constitute a commitment to future
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
monetary  policy  actions.  It  merely  gives  guidance  about  the  expected  level  of  future  interest
rates, depending on the economic outlook.
5
In the academic discussion we also find a different form of forward guidance: one in which the
central  bank  commits  to  maintaining  low  rates  for  longer  than  economic  conditions  would
warrant.   This  second  form  of  forward  guidance  is  also  referred  to  as  Odyssean  forward
guidance.  It  commits  the  central  bank  to  remain  inactive,  even  when  the  inflation  outlook  has
changed, just as Odysseus committed himself to remaining on his ship even when he heard the
sirens.
It is thus no surprise that central banks increasingly resorted to forward guidance as nominal
policy rates began approaching the zero lower bound. The Bank of Japan did so as far back as
the late 1990s, the Federal Reserve introduced forward guidance in August 2011, and the Bank
of England followed in August 2013.
4. The ECB’s forward guidance
The  ECB  first  introduced  forward  guidance  into  its  introductory  statements  at  the  press
conference in July 2013, saying that it “expects the key ECB interest rates to remain at present
or lower levels for an extended period of time". This is also referred to as expansionary bias with
respect to interest rates.  
When the asset purchases began, forward guidance was augmented by the assertion that the
“net asset purchases are intended to continue […] until the Governing Council sees a sustained
adjustment in the path of inflation". One may refer to this as an “exit criterion".
In addition, forward guidance also states that the Governing Council “stands ready to increase
our asset purchase programme in terms of size and/or duration". This is the expansionary bias
with respect to asset purchases.
Mario  Draghi  emphasised  at  this  year’s  ECB  watchers  conference  that  the  Eurosystem’s
monetary  policy  currently  consists  of  three  main  elements:  the  key  interest  rates,  asset
purchases  and  forward  guidance.  This  underlines  that  forward  guidance  currently  plays  a
prominent role.
The  ECB’s  forward  guidance  is  clearly  a  Delphic  form  of  forward  guidance.  It  formulates
expectations  with  respect  to  the  future  evolution  of  interest  rates  and  the  volume  of  asset
purchases. It is not a commitment to maintain a looser monetary policy stance for longer than is
consistent with price stability.
This is no accident. An Odyssean form of forward guidance – at least in an extreme form of a
commitment to an unconditional interest path – would not be consistent with our mandate. This
6
was recently also emphasised by Benoît Cœuré.
Because our forward guidance conveys expectations about the future course of monetary policy,
it depends, of course, on the economic outlook. If the outlook changes, this will eventually have to
be reflected in our forward guidance.
4.1 Economic outlook
As  a  matter  of  fact,  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  has  improved  over  the  past
12 months. Real GDP growth accelerated in 2016, from +0.2 % in the second quarter to +0.5 %
in the final quarter. And the euro-area economy maintained this momentum at the beginning of
this  year.  At  the  same  time,  the  cyclical  recovery  is  firming.  Growth  is  broad-based  and  is
widening to increasingly more countries. The ECB currently predicts the economy in the euro
area to grow by 1.8 % this year and 1.7 % next year.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
And  with  the  robust  economic  recovery,  the  ECB  also  forecasts  an  ongoing  decline  in
unemployment and a rise in wage growth. Hence, domestic price pressure in the euro area is
expected to rise gradually.
The improving economic outlook moves one particular element of our forward guidance more
into  the  focus  of  public  attention:  the  officially  stated  precondition  for  ending  the  net  asset
purchases. Many people are asking: “What exactly does a ‘sustained adjustment’ in the rate of
inflation mean?"  
There is a temptation to answer: “You’ll know it when you see it.” But monetary policy isn’t that
easy. It requires greater precision - in particular since central bank communication has taken on
a more prominent role.
In fact, we have established four criteria to assess whether there is a sustained adjustment in the
path of inflation consistent with our definition of price stability.
First, headline inflation has to converge to levels below, but close to 2 % over a medium-
term horizon.
Second, the return of inflation into that range has to be durable, that is not only transitional.
Third, and this is rather self-evident, this development must hold for the euro-area average
and not just for individual countries.
Fourth  and  finally,  the  convergence  of  inflation  has  to  be  self-sustained  in  the  sense  that
inflation will return to the area consistent with our definition of price stability and will remain
there even when the current level of monetary policy support is withdrawn.
This last condition clearly requires an estimate of how much the asset purchase programme is
contributing to current and future inflation. In other words, one has to quantify the effect of the
asset purchases on inflation.
And this is where monetary policy making leans heavily on academic research.
Quantifying the effect of economic policy measures is always difficult, because you don’t know
what the circumstances would have been if a certain policy measure had not been taken. Thus,
we  have  to  construct  counterfactuals  from  macroeconomic  models,  and  in  building  these
models we want to be close to the research frontier.
5. SAPI task force
To operationalise the concept of “sustainable adjustment", the Eurosystem acted as any public
authority would: it set up a task force - a task force on a sustained adjustment in the path of
inflation - the SAPI task force.
One important task assigned to it was to quantify the effects of the asset purchases on inflation
and output.
The economists at the Bundesbank contributed by providing the task force with two simulations
7
to identify the counterfactual situation. Both use a state-of-the-art DSGE model .
As  you  know,  the  first  step  in  applying  such  a  model  is  to  think  about  why  asset  purchases
should affect prices at all. After all, at the effective lower bound, central bank money and (short-
term)  government  bonds  are  close  substitutes.  In  a  perfect  capital  market,  central  bank
purchases  of  government  bonds  merely  boil  down  to  an  asset  swap  by  the  banking  system.
They would have no impact on the real economy or the prices of goods.
But  capital  markets  aren’t  perfect.  So,  in  practice,  there  are  multiple  channels  through  which
asset purchases by the central bank can have an effect on the economy.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Our two DSGE models are based on different such channels. The first model works through the
portfolio-rebalancing  channel.  Banks  substitute  government  bonds  sold  to  the  central  bank  by
corporate  bonds.  Purchasing  government  bonds  by  the  central  bank  therefore  increases  the
price of corporate bonds. Owners of these bonds receive capital gains which they use to finance
additional investments.
The second model also depends on the portfolio-rebalancing channel. But in this model, banks
not only invest in government bonds and bonds used to finance private investment. They also
extend bank credit which they value at par. As in the first model, banks supply of credit depends
on how much equity they hold. Asset purchases by the central bank lead to higher valuations of
the banks’ assets and therefore ultimately result in higher bank equity and increased lending.
We have used both models to simulate the effect of the ECB’s asset purchase programme as it
was  initially  announced  in  January  2015: A  purchase  of  public  and  private  sector  assets  at  a
8
volume of €60bn each month over a period of 19 month – implying a total volume of €1140 bn .
The  models  suggest  that  the  asset  purchases  increase  inflation  by  between  0.1  and  2.5
percentage  points  after  two  years.  Real  GDP  increases  by  0.1  %  and  1  %  over  the  same
horizon.
In the first model, the positive effects of the asset purchases relax the so called loan-in-advance
constraint of investors and therefore investment demand increases notably.
The second model yields much smaller results. This is because asset purchases by the central
bank have two opposing effects. On the one hand, higher asset prices boost banks’ equity. On
the other hand, low interest rates reduce banks’ profitability and hence bank equity. This partially
offsets the first effect.
In my view, it would be fair to assume that the Bundesbank results provide a lower and upper
bound  for  the  size  of  the  effects  of  our  asset  purchases  -  with  respect  to  both  output  and
inflation. But they also demonstrate vividly that the exact size of the effect is highly uncertain.
Asset purchases work through many channels, and the total magnitude of the effect depends on
the relative importance of these channels.
So what does this mean with respect to the question of whether there is a sustained adjustment
in the inflation path of the euro area?
First  of  all,  the  asset  purchase  programme  has  certainly  raised  inflation,  although  it  is  rather
uncertain to what extent. I do believe it is important to also consider the negative effects of our
policies on bank profitability.
Second, the strengthening of the economic recovery makes it increasingly likely that the rise in
inflation we have seen since August 2016 is not just a flash in the pan, but that we would have
higher  inflation  rates  compared  to  previous  years  even  under  a  reduced  degree  of  monetary
policy accommodation.
It is also true, though, that the increase in headline inflation since last year is mainly driven by
higher energy prices. But higher inflation in itself reduces the real interest rate as long as our key
interest rates remain unchanged. This will further contribute to a strengthening of domestic price
pressure - perhaps not immediately, but in the medium term.
And last but not least, our definition of price stability is a medium-term, forward-looking concept.
Inflation does not always have to be in the target range of close to, but below two percent. Given
the long and variable time lags in monetary policy, we do not fine-tune the inflation rate. These
lags are sometimes shorter and other times longer. And in the current situation in which we are
still in the aftermath of a financial crisis, this lag is probably longer. 
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In my view, the current economic outlook together with the improvement in the balance of risks
suggests that the Governing Council is beginning to discuss whether and when it will be time to
adjust our forward guidance.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen,
I  recently  read  a  new  book  entitled  “The  seventh  function  of  language".  It’s  a  novel  about  the
murder  of  a  linguist  who  discovered  how  to  unleash  the  language’s  magical  powers  of
persuasion.
If central banks had these powers, life would be much easier.
But Laurent Binet’s book is fiction - and happily so, I would add. Communication is not so easy in
the real world, at least not for central banks. It always contains an element of trial and error: we
have  to  see  what  works  best. And  in  doing  so,  we  keep  a  close  watch  on  what  suggestions
research has in store. So let me conclude with these words: Keep up the good work.
Thank you. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
M J M Neumann (2007): Pre-commitment and guidance, lessons from the Bundesbank’s history. In: Monetary
Policy - A journey from theory to practice. An ECB colloquium held in honour of Otmar Issing. European Central
Bank.
W Poole and R H Rasche (2003): The Impact of Changes in FOMC Disclosure Practices on the Transparency of
Monetary Policy: Are Markets and the FOMC Better “Synched"?
J Lange, B Sack and W Whitesell (2003): Anticipations in Monetary Policy in Financial Markets. Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, 32(3): 435–441.
M Hoffmann and P Hürtgen (2016): Inflation expectations, disagreement and monetary policy. Economic Letters
(2016), Vol. 146: 59–63.
G Eggertsson and M Woodford (2003): The zero bound on short-term interest rates and optimal monetary policy.
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1: 139–211.
B Cœuré (2017): Central bank communication in a low interest rate environment. Speech at an event organised
by Bruegel, Brussels, 31 March 2017.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016): The macroeconomic impact of quantitative easing in the euro area. Monthly
Report 06/2016, pp. 29–53.
Deutsche Bundesbank (2016): The macroeconomic impact of quantitative easing in the euro area. Monthly
Report 06/2016.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
