Mario Draghi: Security through unity - making integration work for
Europe
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the joint ECB and Bank
of  Slovenia  conference  on  the  occasion  of  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  adoption  of  the  euro,
Ljubljana, 2 February 2017.
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  celebrate  this  milestone  in  the  history  of  your
country and of our Union.
Though recent years have been difficult for Slovenia, as they have for the rest of Europe, you can
look back with pride on what your nation has achieved. After only two years of EU membership
you were able to join the euro – the first of the “new Member States” to do so. And since then
Slovenia has become deeply integrated into our monetary union. Even today 85% of Slovenes
1
are in favour of the euro, reflecting the strength of our common bond.
But  as  we  celebrate  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  Slovenia,  we  can
likewise celebrate other anniversaries in the recent history of Europe: 60 years since the Rome
Treaty,  which  created  the  common  market;  more  or  less  a  quarter  of  a  century  since  the
Maastricht  Treaty,  which  launched  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU);  20  years  since  the
Amsterdam Treaty, which enacted a common foreign and security policy.
There  are  those  who  would  like  to  see  such  events  as  part  of  distinct  histories,  one  of  the
economic integration of Europe, one of its monetary union, and one of its military and political
alliance. But those histories are not distinct.
They have all been part of the same impetus, which is the desire of the  people  of  Europe  to
ensure their security in the face of common threats: the threat of continental war evoked time
and again in our history; and the global threats created by evolving technology, geopolitical risks,
and upheavals in our natural environment.
The strength of this impetus has meant that, for most of the period since 1945, the course of
European integration has been clear. Though the different strands of integration have advanced
at different speeds, the direction has always been forwards. It was hardly disputed that, in the
long  run,  coming  together  as  a  Union  was  the  best  response  to  the  common  challenges  we
faced. Deeper integration was a question of when, not if.
Yet, today, perceptions of insecurity are on the rise. And to some, it is no longer self-evident that
closer  union  provides  the  answer.  Integration  is  viewed  in  some  quarters  as  a  source  of
insecurity  rather  than  a  bulwark  against  it.  One  country  has  even  decided  that  it  is  better  to
reverse that process than continue it.
This insecurity in part reflects common factors emerging across Western democracies, such as
fears about immigration, globalisation and social change. But in Europe there are also unique
forces at play. In particular, the severity of the euro crisis has weakened faith in the EU as a
foundation of economic security.
So Europe, and even more so the euro area, faces a moment of decision. We need answers to
the questions that citizens are asking. But those answers also need to be balanced: there are
things that need to change in Europe, but there is much we can be proud of as well.
European  integration  has  produced  many  achievements  and  we  should  not  let  our  current
difficulties  diminish  them.  On  the  contrary,  we  need  to  be  confident  in  the  progress  we  have
made – and clear that we would be worse off without it.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But where things evidently need to be better, we need to make them so. Most importantly, that
means making the changes in our monetary union that all can see are necessary.
The significance of the single market
Since its formation in 1957, the European project has been built, above all, on a commitment to
openness, epitomised by the establishment of a single market among its Member States. This
commitment was idealistic, but it was also eminently pragmatic. The founders of the EU had
witnessed the damage caused by the inwardness and protectionism of the interwar years. They
understood that sustaining economic growth was vital to drain support for divisive nationalism,
and the best way to achieve this was through open markets.
Though the last decade has been difficult, over the long sweep of post-war history their vision
has  been  proved  right.  Since  1960  cumulative  growth  in  GDP  per  capita  has  been  one-third
higher in the EU15 than in the United States. Private wealth, which had been twice wiped out by
the wars of the twentieth century, has also doubled as a percentage of national income. This was
of course partly driven by the natural catching-up process after the Second World War. But there
is plenty of evidence that growth has been accelerated by integration.
According to one estimate, the EU’s GDP per capita would be as much as one-fifth lower today if
no  integration  had  taken  place  since  the  war.     Another  estimate  looking  at  the  effects  of
integration since the 1980s – so after postwar catching-up had run its course –finds a gain in per
3
capita GDP of around 12% relative to the non-membership scenario.
2
And the countries that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007, such as Slovenia, have also shared in
those gains. The increase in GDP produced by EU membership may turn out to be as high as
40% for the 12 new members,  which would not be surprising, since the EU is by far the main
trading partner for countries in central and eastern Europe and the main source of FDI.
4
Today, some are questioning whether openness remains the best way to ensure our economic
security. But we need to ask where we would be today if we had not had such a long phase of
integration on our continent. And the likely answer is: much poorer.
What  is  more,  the  single  market  has  not  only  provided  a  foundation  for  growth,  but  also
for sustaining open markets. As we are seeing today at the global level, markets cannot stay
open for long if not all participants are perceived to be playing by the same rules, or if the benefits
are seen to be shared unfairly. The single market has survived, in large part, because Europe
has built a unique model for managing those challenges.
Deepening  the  market  in  Europe  has  entailed  building  common  institutions  to  protect  citizens
from  unfair  competition  or  discrimination  from  abroad  –  namely  the  common  regulatory
framework enforced by the European Court of Justice. Safeguards central to the European social
model have been progressively embedded in European law, notably the Charter of Fundamental
Rights, to provide protection for the most vulnerable.
And Europe has forged the first redistribution system across countries to help prevent persistent
regional inequalities. As early as the mid-1970s, European funds were being used to support less
developed regions or those threatened with industrial decline. From 2007–13, €350 billion was
allocated in the EU budget to structural and investment funds. And let me add that Slovenia was
a net recipient of those funds, with annual investment financing amounting to, on average, one-
fifth of what the Slovenian government spent on public investment.
No one would claim this system of rules, safeguards and redistribution has been perfect. We
know that some feel it improves their lives too little, and others that it intrudes into their lives too
much. But what we have built in Europe is a model for sustainable openness – one that can reap
its gains while mitigating its unwanted effects. So if we see problems, our challenge is to nurture
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and improve that model, not to turn it back.
Because  that  would  not  only  mean  less  wealth  for  our  continent.  It  would  also  mean
less political  security  for  our  citizens.  We  should  not  forget  that  besides  being  an  engine  for
growth, the single market has brought vital political benefits as well.
The  first  is  that  it  has  provided  a  motor  for  binding  political  integration  among  the  states  of
Europe.
As I just described, a single market can only be sustained if there is a common system of laws
overseen by a common judiciary – the ECJ. And if there is a judiciary, there must be a legislature
to write the law, which in Europe is provided by the EU Council and the European Parliament.
And there must be an executive to enforce the decisions of the legislature and judiciary, which in
our case is the role of the European Commission. The single market, in other words, creates by
its very nature a closer political union.
This is a dynamic we have also seen in the US as its own internal market has developed. As is
well-known, the short “Commerce Clause” of the US constitution – which grants Congress the
power to regulate commerce among the states – has led over time to a substantial expansion of
the role of the federal government in economic affairs.
The second political benefit has been to enhance Europe’s influence in the world.
Trade policy decided in common gives Europe real sway in global negotiations, both in the deals
it can extract bilaterally, and in the setting of multilateral rules in the WTO. A large market has
leverage over large multinational firms, allowing Europe to protect what it deems important, such
as privacy on the internet. It also permits Europe to use trade sanctions to counter hostility from
unfriendly  countries,  and  thereby  enhances  military  security  too. And  if  Europe  wants  now  to
integrate further in other areas – such as defence and foreign policy – it will need the economic
foundation the single market provides.
Thus for all these reasons, we should be proud of what we have gained from integration. That
does  not  mean  we  should  be  blind  to  its  challenges,  nor  to  the  disappointing  performance  of
recent  years.  We  need  to  restart  the  single  market  as  a  growth  agent  and  do  better  in
compensating the losers it creates. But we should also be clear: we would be worse off today,
both economically and politically, if we had not followed this path.
From the single market to the euro
But the single market also had a further effect: it led directly to the euro. Once Europe decided to
embark  towards  a  fully  integrated  market,  a  single  currency  was  desirable,  if  not  essential.
Hence the euro was set in motion at the Hanover summit in 1988, immediately in the wake of the
decision to achieve a true single market.
Today some people question this link between market and currency, and ask whether retaining
national currencies might have been better for Europe. But one has to remember that the single
currency  did  not  appear  out  of  thin  air.  It  was  rather  a  consequence  of  Europe’s  long  and
unsatisfactory  experience  with  different  exchange  rate  regimes  since  the  war.  It  was  also,  in
other words, both an idealistic and a pragmatic decision.
Europeans had always been sceptical of fully floating exchange rates, seeing currency volatility
as inimical to trade integration. That is why, as soon as the Bretton Woods system broke down,
they  sought  to  restore  fixed  exchange  rates,  first  through  “the  snake  in  the  tunnel”,  and  later
through various iterations of the European Monetary System. The prevailing thinking was well-
captured  by  Nobel  laureate  Robert  Mundell,  who  developed  his  theory  on  optimum  currency
areas in the belief that, and I quote,
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
“I could not see why countries that were in the process of forming a common market should
5
saddle themselves with a new barrier to trade in the form of uncertainty about exchange rates.”
Hence,  it  was  inevitable  that  the  single  market  would  be  buttressed  by  some  form  of  fixed
exchange rate regime. The question was what form. And Europe had experienced the costs of
fixed exchange rate regimes that fell short of a single currency.
Countries  were  vulnerable  to  speculative  attacks  and  currency  crises,  most  painfully
demonstrated  by  the  ERM  crisis  in  1992–3,  and  that  was  in  a  world  where  capital  was  less
mobile  than  it  is  today.  Most  members  had  little  monetary  policy  autonomy,  since  they  were
required to effectively import the monetary policy of the anchor currency. And when countries did
devalue,  it  did  not  always  prove  an  effective  adjustment  mechanism  for  nominal  shocks,
provoking instead higher inflation and the need for further devaluations.
Moreover, the fear was that, without a single currency, repeated cycles of devaluations would
distort the conditions for fair competition and undermine the single market in the long run. An
economy  that  increased  productivity  and  competitiveness  could  be  deprived  of  the  benefits  it
should  enjoy,  in  terms  of  increased  market  share,  because  of  currency  depreciation  in
competing  countries.  And  if  some  countries  were  prepared  to  practice  such  “beggar  thy
neighbour” behaviour, why should others permanently open their borders to them?
The  point  was  not  that  the  single  market  could  not  tolerate  small  exchange  rate  adjustments
among a few of its members. It was that major currency volatility, of the type we had seen in the
1980s, would severely test the willingness of all to keep their markets open. And we can only
imagine how, without the euro, currency markets would have reacted to shocks we have seen
since its launch – the dotcom crash, the Lehman bankruptcy, the sovereign debt crisis.
The conditions for success in EMU
However, the case for the euro was always based on a trade-off. By reinforcing the single market
in  this  way,  it  would  lock-in  the  gains  of  economic  integration  and  thereby  benefit  the  whole
Union. But it would also deprive individual countries of adjustment tools for short-term shocks,
notably their own exchange rate. Thus for the trade-off to be beneficial, it was essential that those
short-term costs were reduced as much as possible.
This depended on certain conditions being fulfilled, which were established by Mundell and later
authors  as  part  of  the  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas.  They  included:  trade  integration,  to
reduce  the  incidence  of  asymmetric  shocks;  factor  mobility  and  wage  and  price  flexibility,  to
accelerate adjustment when shocks did hit; and a system of risk-sharing, to reduce the costs of
that  adjustment  process  for  individual  members.  But,  in  the  euro  area,  it  was  clear  that  the
importance attached to each of those conditions would not be the same.
Large-scale labour mobility was always unlikely, given cultural and linguistic barriers. It was also
improbable that fiscal risk-sharing would reach U.S. levels, not least owing to the relatively larger
role for national budgets as fiscal stabilisers. Hence it was essential that euro area countries
substituted for lower integration in these areas with stronger commitments in others. This meant
four things in particular.
The  first  was  avoiding  policy  mistakes,  such  as  boom-bust  cycles  emanating  from  weak
prudential supervision. The second was building resilience to shocks through structural reforms
and the continued deepening of the single market. The third was sound fiscal policies to provide
sufficient fiscal buffers over the cycle. And the fourth was a strong financial union, with diversified
asset holdings and hence real private risk-sharing.
In this way, countries would be able to reduce the severity of local slumps, since asymmetric
shocks  would  be  tempered  by  trade  linkages  and  sound  financial  policies.  When  shocks  did
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
occur, wages and prices would be able to adjust more quickly, and resources would reallocate
faster in response, limiting the employment cost of adjustment. Fiscal policies would be available
at the national level to stabilise the economy during the transition. And losses would be shared
across the Union through integrated financial markets.
There was no secret about this. It was known to all in 1999 that these were the conditions for
success. This was why we agreed the Stability and Growth Pact for fiscal policies. It is why there
was an “E” in EMU: it was clear that structural convergence had to occur. And it is why there has
always been a strong emphasis on the need for sustainable financial integration.
We know the history that followed: the slowing down of structural reforms, the watering-down of
the  Pact,  the  fragility  of  financial  integration,  and  the  underlying divergence  between  countries
that ensued. But we need to be very clear that it was not the euro as a currency that was to
blame for this. National authorities knew what they had to do. The currency could not protect
them from their own policy decisions.
Indeed, it is worth emphasising that, when countries do pursue the right policies, the euro is no
hindrance to success. Germany, for example, did not experience a boom-bust financial cycle,
ran relatively sound fiscal policies, and passed a series of labour market reforms in the early
2000s. Its unemployment has fallen from close to 11% in 2005 to under 4% today, and that was
during the worst recession since the 1930s.
And even in the presence of policy mistakes, countries that meet the necessary conditions in
other  areas  are  able  to  adjust  adequately  within  the  single  currency.  Consider  Ireland,  which
suffered acutely from the financial crisis. Yet it has seen its unemployment fall from more than
15% in 2012 to 7% today, not least because of its flexible labour market and successful industrial
strategy aimed at attracting FDI.
There are some today who believe that Europe would be better off if we did not have the single
currency and could devalue our exchange rates instead. But as we have seen, countries that
have  implemented  reforms  do  not  depend  on  a  flexible  exchange  rate  to  achieve  sustainable
growth. And for those that have not reformed, one has to ask how beneficial a flexible exchange
rate would really be. After all, if a country has low productivity growth because of deep-rooted
structural problems, the exchange rate cannot be the answer.
Still, it is important to ask, if some governments did not follow the right policies to succeed in
EMU, why did they not? The euro area relied heavily on the notion that the integration process
would itself create the incentives for sound policies. Faced with stronger competition through the
single  market  and  an  inability  to  devalue,  governments  would  be  forced  to  address  long-term
structural problems and ensure fiscal sustainability.
That this did not happen was in part because the single market process stalled. But it was also
because we lacked some key institutions at the euro area level. We did not have a common
system  of  banking  oversight  to  monitor  financial  flows,  which  in  some  countries  allowed
mounting competitiveness losses to be masked by unsustainable finance-driven growth. And we
had only weak common decision-making for fiscal and economic policies.
Several  important  steps  have  now  been  taken  to  address  these  issues,  most  notably  the
establishment of Banking Union. But that project is still unfinished. And as has been laid out in the
Five Presidents’ report, we still remain some way short of a complete monetary union – which is
to  say,  one  where  countries  take  collective  responsibility  for  the  euro  area  within  common
institutions. 
Conclusion
So it is clear what the way ahead is for our union. Not to turn away from what has worked: our
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
model of economic openness reinforced by our single currency. But to put right the mistakes that
have prevented it from working as well as it should.
For  national  governments  this  means  fulfilling  the  conditions  that  we  have  always  known  are
necessary  to  prosper  in  our  monetary  union.  And  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  it  means
constructing an institutional architecture that sets the right incentives for those policies, and that
make us more resilient in the face of common shocks.
But it is also clear that, to reach this point, the sequence has to be right. What is preventing us
from moving ahead today is, in part, the legacy of those past failures, which creates a lack of
trust among countries to enter into such a new stage of integration.
Trust  that  all  countries  will  comply  with  the  rules  that  they  have  set  for  themselves,  so  as  to
reduce their mutual vulnerability. And trust that all will enact the necessary reforms to ensure
structural convergence, so that complying with those rules becomes easier, and sharing risks
does  not  create  permanent  transfers  between  countries.  Compliance  and  convergence,  and
through it growth, are the keys today to give to the integration process new impetus.
And that impetus we must find, because we cannot stay where we are. We have to make our
Union more stable and prosperous to deliver the security our citizens crave. And by doing so we
will put ourselves in a stronger position to confront the new challenges we face today: the rise of
political extremism, insecurity on our borders and an ever more uncertain global order.
So  we  must  rediscover  the  spirit  that  has  carried  our  Union  this  far.  The  spirit  that  has  led
generations of Europeans to work together to secure themselves against common threats. That
has  yielded  tangible  improvements  for  our  citizens,  such  as  the  freedom  to  work  and  trade
across our continent and transact in a single currency. And the spirit that, if channelled once
more into common action, can overcome the new threats we face today.
Unity is the key to security for our continent – today as it always has been.
1
2
3
4
5
Standard Eurobarometer 86, Autumn 2016.
Badinger, H., “Growth Effects of Economic Integration: Evidence from the EU Member States”, Review of World
Economics, Vol. 141, No 1, pp. 50–78, 2005.
Campos, N., Coricelli, F. and Moretti, L., “Economic Growth and Political Integration: Synthetic Counterfactuals
Evidence from Europe”, IZA Discussion Paper, No 8162, April 2014.
Lejour A.M., Solanic V., Tang P.J.G., “EU Accession and Income Growth: An Empirical Approach”,  Transition
Studies Review, Vol. 16, Issue 1, pp 127–144, May 2009.
Mundell, R., “Optimum Currency Areas”, luncheon speech at Tel Aviv University, 5 December 1997.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
