Graeme  Wheeler:  Some  thoughts  on  the  balance  of  risks  around
the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy setting
Speech  by  Mr  Graeme  Wheeler,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  Craigs
Investment Partners’ Investor Day, Auckland, 2 March 2017.
Introduction
 Thank you for inviting me to join you today.  It’s a pleasure to exchange views on the challenges
facing  the  Reserve  Bank  (Bank)  and  investors  in  interpreting  policy  signals  and  political  and
market developments.  In particular, I will focus on what we consider to be the main risks around
the interest rate projections in the February 2017 Monetary Policy Statement (MPS).
New  Zealand  is  one  of  the  few  countries  where  the  central  bank  publishes  interest  rate
projections in its MPS.  These projections represent the Bank’s central view of the policy path
needed to return inflation to the 2 percent mid-point of the target range specified in the Policy
Targets Agreement (PTA).
Such projections are highly conditional and based on a range of assumptions – many of which lie
beyond  the  Bank’s  control.    Such  factors  include:  the  outlook  for  global  growth,  inflation  and
commodity  prices;  movements  in  exchange  rates  and  long  term  interest  rates;  the  scale  of
migration flows; and the government’s spending and tax policies.
These key assumptions, and other factors that affect the economy’s output gap (or the extent to
which  there  are  capacity  constraints,  and  therefore  inflation  pressures  in  the  economy)  are
extensively debated in-house prior to finalising the MPS.
The OCR track contained in the February 2017 MPS
The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projections in the November 2016 MPS contained a slight easing
bias, building in a 20 percent probability of a further 25 basis-point interest rate cut.  This easing
bias was replaced with a neutral bias in the February 2017 MPS, which shows an unchanged
OCR until mid-2019.  This suggests that if the economy were to develop along the lines of the
Bank’s economic projections, the current OCR would be sufficient to return annual consumer
price inflation to around 2 percent.  (The track incorporated a 25 basis point increase in the OCR
in  late  2019.   As  the  economy  would  then  be  entering  its  11th  year  of  expansion,  the  usual
maturation processes in a business cycle suggest it would be reasonable to expect an eventual
rise in the policy rate as capacity pressures become more broad based.)
 1 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The risks around future OCR movements are considered to be equally weighted.  In effect, there
is an equal probability that the next OCR adjustment could be up or down.  We consider the
balance of risks for the global outlook to be downside.  For the domestic economy, there is some
potential upside for output growth if migration and commodity prices turn out to be stronger than
forecast, but the risks around inflation look balanced.
Of course, small open economies such as New Zealand are hit by multiple shocks that may be
political, economic or financial policy-related, or linked to natural or other disasters.  The Bank
reviews  the  implications  of  these  events  for  the  PTA  and  the  OCR  and  summarises  its
conclusions every six weeks in OCR statements and the quarterly MPS.
Policymakers  confront  large  shocks  that  are  difficult  to  predict.    For  example,  we  saw  how
financial markets and policy makers did not anticipate the 1997 Asian Financial Crisis, the 2008
Global  Financial  Crisis,  the  outcome  of  the  United  Kingdom  European  Union  membership
referendum, or the recent US Presidential election.
Nevertheless, policy makers need to think carefully about risk and uncertainty and the ‘what if’
consequences  of  possible  developments.    Like  many  central  banks,  the  Bank  uses  scenario
analysis  to  model  the  possible  economic  impacts  of  specific  shocks  of  a  given  magnitude. 
Several scenarios have been included in MPSs over the past few years – the February 2017
MPS included scenarios showing a sharp rise in commodity prices and softer growth in private
consumption.
Considering the implications of possible shocks becomes even more important when levels of
uncertainty are particularly high, which is currently the case  (even though measures of equity
2
market volatility remain low ).
1
 2 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Risks surrounding New Zealand’s economic expansion
New  Zealand’s  current  economic  expansion  is  entering  its  eighth  year  of  what  the  OECD
describe as a strong broad-based expansion.  In the absence of major shocks, prospects look
reasonable  for  continued  strong  growth  over  the  next  two  years  driven  by  accommodative
monetary  policy,  construction  spending,  and  net  inward  migration.    If  these  prospects  are
realised, the current expansion would be New Zealand’s longest in over 50 years.
 3 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Table 1 compares the latest summary macro-economic indicators with the 30 year average.
Table 1: Summary macro-economic indicators
Year to December 2016
30 Year Average
 GDP growth (%)
CPI Inflation (%)
Employment growth (%)***
Unemployment rate (%)
3.5**
1.3
3.2
5.2
2.5
2.1*
1.7
6.2
-3.7
Current account balance (% GDP)
-2.7**
*CPI Inflation is a post-1991 average, reflecting the inflation targeting period.
** RBNZ estimate
*** Based on filled jobs in the Quarterly Employment Survey
Source: Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ
Expansions in small open advanced economies generally come to an end due to one or more
factors:
Global economic growth weakens or slows in major trading partners and affects the terms of
trade and export growth.  This might be triggered by a sharp rise in oil prices or a financial
crisis.
A  major  domestic  policy  correction  is  needed  to  address  a  deteriorating  fiscal  or  current
account deficit.
Long-term  interest  rates  rise  significantly  in  response  to  offshore  movements  triggered  by
higher inflation expectations, and/or increased risk premia in major economies.  Alternatively,
domestic  short-term  rates  may  need  to  rise  sharply  to  moderate  inflation  pressures
associated with growing supply and demand imbalances.
At this stage the Bank’s policy analysis does not suggest the need to adjust monetary policy in
response  to  fiscal  imbalances,  external  indebtedness  or  domestic  inflationary  pressures.    In
addition, New Zealand’s financial system remains sound and continues to operate effectively.
i) domestic risks
The  strength  of  the  expansion  will  be  affected  by  changes  in  households’  desire  to  save,  the
scale of net immigration, and shifts in expectations about future inflation.  Our forecasts do not
incorporate any significant change in the household saving rate, but assume a reduced flow of
net  immigration  that  remains  high  by  historical  standards.    Measures  of  long-term  inflation
expectations continue to be well-anchored at 2 percent.
 4 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  possibility  of  worsening  imbalances  in  the  housing  market  remains  a  major  risk  with
continued low interest rates and strong migration, and rising construction cost inflation reflecting
increasing resource pressures.  There are upside risks in respect of our migration projections. 
Although departures remain low, arrivals have continued to increase with arrivals by migrants on
work visas being particularly strong in recent months.
New Zealand house price indicators (such as the growth in real house prices, house price-to-
income ratios and house price-to-rent ratios) are very high internationally and historically.  At a
time of heightened uncertainty, households are particularly vulnerable to a correction in house
prices given the large rise in household debt since 1990.  Household debt is now equivalent to
around  165  percent  of  household  disposable  income,  up  from  100  percent  in  2000  and  60
percent in 1990.
Households are also exposed to a normalisation in mortgage rates given the short interest rate
duration  of  the  mortgage  market  (with  89  percent  of  mortgage  loans        re-pricing  within  two
years).  In addition, the share of lending at debt-to-income ratios of over 5 and 6 has increased
steadily for all borrower groups since September 2014.
Fortunately, house price inflation has moderated substantially in recent months in response to
increased housing supply, rising mortgage rates, the tighter lending criteria adopted by banks,
and  the  impact  of  loan-to-value  restrictions.    Nationwide  house  prices  have  been  broadly
unchanged over the past six months, compared to a 12 percent increase in the six months prior.
It’s too early to say whether this moderation will continue, but future developments in respect of
housing  market  imbalances  and  debt  servicing  costs  are  likely  to  be  important  influences  on
household spending and the level of aggregate demand in the economy. 
 5 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another risk is that the exchange rate remains higher than projected in the MPS, suppressing
tradables inflation and net exports.  As we indicated in the MPS, whether monetary easing would
be required to offset this would depend on the factors driving the exchange rate (e.g. weaker
global growth, higher commodity prices) and how domestic capacity pressures were changing.
ii) external risks
Developments  in  the  global  economy  often  have  major  impacts  on  small  open  economies
through channels such as trade flows, commodity prices, exchange rates, capital movements
and funding costs.  There have been four troughs in global economic activity over the past 50
years    –  1975,  1982,  1991,  and  2009  –  where  we  saw  declines  in  world  real  GDP  per
capita.  Three of these troughs were linked to oil price increases and the policy responses to
them (1975, 1982, and 1991). The other was caused by the Global Financial Crisis (2009).
3
Several sources of uncertainty currently exist in the global economy including:
The outlook for growth in Europe and the extent to which consumer and business confidence
might  be  affected  by  issues  such  as  Brexit  negotiations,  migration,  upcoming  elections  in
large  European  countries,  the  Greek  debt  negotiations  and  concerns  regarding  the
vulnerability of some European banks.
The  extent  to  which  the  US  Administration  follows  through  with  its  ‘America  first”  policy
platform and adopts trade protectionist measures.  Uncertainty also exists around the degree
of fiscal stimulus likely to be adopted and its composition (e.g. through reductions in corporate
tax rates, including border tax adjustments, and increases in infrastructure spending).
The  outlook  for  medium-term  growth  in  China  given  the  very  rapid  build-up  in  corporate
(mainly  SOE)  debt  since  2008,  and  the  rising  level  of  bad  debts  in  the  shadow  banking
 6 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
sector.    Uncertainty  also  exists  around  the  pace  at  which  the  comprehensive  economic
reforms identified in the 3rd Plenum will be implemented.
Sources of uncertainty elsewhere include the Middle East, Russia, North Korea, and Brazil, but
unless developments in these countries trigger commodity or security-related risks, such events
are less likely to have major global economic and financial impacts.
To  what  extent  could  developments  in  the  US,  Europe  and  China  affect  New  Zealand’s
economy?  Many of the risks in these regions are well known, and already reflected in relative
prices such as interest rates, exchange rates and commodity prices.  It is new information, either
through  additional  data  or  greater  clarity  about  policy  intent,  that  leads  to  reassessments  of
judgements around economic impacts and transmission effects.
a) Brexit
The  financial  market  turbulence  immediately  following  the  Brexit  vote  appears  to  have  largely
settled down, and the UK economy has performed better than expected since this vote.  Clearly,
however, much uncertainty lies ahead as the actual Brexit negotiations get underway and as we
wait to observe the overall tone, shape and outcomes of these discussions.  Although the EU
and UK are important trading partners of each other, and have much to gain through trade, there
is always a risk that political considerations predominate and lead to more restrictive longer-term
trading arrangements.
The combined EU and UK economies absorb around 14 percent of our goods exports and 23
percent of our service exports.  If negotiations appear to head to an impasse or unfavourable
outcomes, financial market pressures could spread into global markets and affect our external
funding costs, equity markets and exchange rate.  Greater uncertainty, along with higher funding
costs, could reduce investment intentions with longer-run implications for domestic output and
productivity.
b) Slowdown in China
A significant slowdown in economic growth in China would directly impact New Zealand (through
trade  volumes,  investment,  commodity  prices,  tourism  etc.)  and  indirectly  through  reduced
growth prospects in our regional trading partners – China, Australia and the rest of Asia account
for around three quarters of our trade.  China accounts for around 15 percent of world output (at
current  market  exchange  rates)  and  is  New  Zealand’s  largest  trading  partner  for  exports  and
imports of goods.  IMF estimates suggest that an investment-driven, one percentage point drop
4
in China’s output growth would reduce G20 growth by ¼ percentage point.
However,  while  there  are  important  issues  around  the  build-up  of  debt,  house  price  inflation,
capital outflows, and the slow speed of reform in the SOE sector, the consensus international
forecasts are that the Chinese economy will avoid any material slowdown and grow by around
6¼ percent pa over the next two years.
New Zealand would be partly protected from any mild slowdown in China as some of our main
exports (e.g. dairy products, meat, and tourism) are supported by China’s move towards more
consumption-led growth.  But demand for these and other exports would weaken in the case of a
more severe slowdown, especially if combined with financial disruption.
c) Risks emanating from the United States
Currently, the greatest source of uncertainty that could have important impacts on our economy
relate  to  fiscal  expansion  (on  the  upside)  and  an  increase  in  trade  protectionism  (on  the
downside) in the United States.
 7 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
i) Increase in trade protection
In the run up to the US election, Donald Trump labelled China a ‘currency manipulator’ (a view
not shared by the IMF) and suggested that tariffs of 45 percent should be imposed on China, and
tariffs also be levied on imports from Mexico.  House Republicans continue to push hard on their
corporate tax plan that involves border tax adjustments that would redefine the taxable base for
corporate income. It would disallow deduction of import costs and exempt export revenues.  The
White House has indicated it will publish its tax proposals in early March.
Such calls for protectionism are contrary to the global trend in trade liberalisation over recent
decades.  They also come at a time when the growth in merchandise trade volumes over the
past five years is the weakest since the early 1980s and new trade-restrictive measures by G20
5
countries are at their highest level since the GFC.
  There  is  much  uncertainty  around  the  objectives  of  trade  policy  under  the  new  US
Administration,  and  the  specific  policy  instruments  that  will  be  used  in  pursuit  of  these  goals.
However  some  lines  seem  clear.  The  US  Administration  withdrew  from  the  Trans  Pacific
Partnership,  the  negotiations  around  the  Transatlantic  Trade  and  Investment  Partnership
between  the  EU  and  US  are  in  jeopardy,  and  the  Administration  has  signaled  it  wants  to
renegotiate the North America Free Trade Agreement.
Higher tariffs would raise prices for US consumers, could require a more accelerated tightening
in monetary policy by the Federal Reserve, and could be expected to put upward pressure on the
US  dollar  exchange  rate.    Furthermore,  US  tariffs  would  invite  retaliatory  actions  by  other
countries.  This would raise prices to consumers, and distort global supply chains as producers
 8 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
in the US and elsewhere change sources of supply and product destination.
Increased  protectionist  measures  would  represent  a  negative  global  supply  shock.    Recent
simulations conducted by the OECD estimate the potential impact of a general 10 percentage
point increase in trade costs imposed by the major trading economies – the US, Europe, and
China.  Such an increase  could  have  a  major  impact,  especially  on  the  countries  introducing
these restrictions: their GDP could fall by 2 to 3 percent; imports by 5 to 10 percent; and exports
by 10 to 15 percent, with the US the worst affected.  And the rest of the world would suffer too
from falling GDP, imports, and exports. 
6
New  Zealand  would  not  fare  well  in  such  circumstances.  Even  if  our  exports  of  goods  and
services to the US—currently over $8 billion – were not directly subject to higher tariffs, we would
be hard hit by a downturn in the global economy, including among our main trading partners, in
response  to  the  direct  and  indirect  impact  of  protectionist  measures.    We  would  experience
lower  global  demand  and  weaker  commodity  prices.    Our  exporters  would  also  experience
efficiency losses and increased costs if they faced disruptions to established supply chains.  We
would also experience spillovers as foreign producers’ diverted trade in response to tariffs and
more general trading conditions.
World financial conditions would also change as heightened uncertainty and a rise in global risk
aversion would likely lead to higher external funding costs even as global growth slows.  In such
a situation portfolio flows may shift to larger more liquid financial markets and our exchange rate
could fall, placing upward pressure on domestic prices and eroding real incomes.
ii) Fiscal expansion in the US
 9 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
As with the protectionist sentiment, it is too soon to be specific about the nature and size of fiscal
stimulus in the US.  However, the possibility of a significant US fiscal stimulus represents an
upside risk for New Zealand.  A significant stimulus would boost economic demand in the US and
spillover  to  other  countries.  New  Zealand  would  benefit  through  higher  commodity  prices  and
increased exports to the US and to our other trading partners experiencing higher growth as a
result of the US stimulus.
Modelling within the Bank suggests that a fiscal expansion that boosts US GDP by 1 percent
would increase New Zealand’s GDP by around 0.3 percent after 18 months.  This increase in
GDP results from higher commodity prices and expanded trade with the US and other regions
benefiting from the US stimulus.
 In the absence of offsetting changes, the Federal Reserve would likely need to tighten monetary
policy more quickly than currently expected and the expectation and implementation of increases
in  the  Fed  Funds  rate  would  put  upward  pressure  on  the  US  exchange  rate.    US  long  term
interest rates would be expected to rise given the increased Government debt issuance.
In New Zealand, our long-term interest rates would be expected to increase and flow into higher
mortgage rates, but the tightening in monetary conditions might be offset by some weakening in
the NZ dollar exchange rate.
Conclusion
The  Reserve  Bank’s  economic  projections  in  the  February  2017  Monetary  Policy  Statement,
which are based on several assumptions, suggest that the economy could grow by around 3½
percent pa over the next two years.  Headline consumer price inflation is expected to return to the
mid-point  of  the  target  band  gradually,  reflecting  the  strength  of  the  economy,  and  despite
persistent negative tradables inflation.
The official cash rate projections contained a neutral bias with an unchanged OCR until mid-
2019.    This  means  that  if  the  economy  were  to  develop  in  line  with  the  Bank’s  economic
projections, the OCR would remain at its current level over the next two years.  However, small
open  economies  such  as  New  Zealand  are  hit  by  multiple  shocks  and  the  Bank  assesses
whether these, or a combination of them, warrants a change in monetary policy.
While the outlook for global growth has improved over the past 6 months due to rising commodity
prices  and  stronger  business  and  consumer  sentiment,  several  major  sources  of  uncertainty
exist in Europe, China and the United States.  The balance of risk in the global economy is on the
 10 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
downside.
Many of the risks in these regions are well known, and already reflected in relative prices such as
interest rates, exchange rates and commodity prices.  The greatest source of uncertainty relates
to  the  US Administration  policies  in  respect  to  its  ‘America  first’  policy  platform.   Although  a
substantial US fiscal stimulus could be positive for growth in the global economy, the prospect of
a marked increase in protectionism – coming at a time when global trade is growing slowly and
trade disputes are increasing – would have sizeable impacts on the global economy.
Domestically, there are several uncertainties around the economy including the future path for
commodity prices, the exchange rate, migration, the housing market, and household saving.  The
greatest source of uncertainty currently lies around the housing market and the possibility that
imbalances  in  the  housing  market  might  deteriorate.    Fortunately,  house  price  inflation  has
moderated substantially in recent months, but it’s too early to say whether this moderation will
continue.
We remain comfortable with our economic projections.  Given the external and domestic risks in
respect of output and inflation, we consider the risks evenly balanced in respect of the OCR.
1
2
3
4
5
6
  The  Global  Economic  Policy  Uncertainty  Index  is  a  GDP-weighted  average  of  national  EPU  indices  for  15
countries that account for around three-quarters of global output at current prices.  Each country’s EPU index is
constructed from an algorithm that searches newspapers for words related to uncertainty in an economic or
policy context.  The VIX is an index of S and P 500 options. 
One possible reason why the VIX is muted despite rising uncertainty is that stocks are moving in different
directions following recent US policy signals, supressing realised correlation and index volatility.  However the
Chicago  Board  of  Options  Exchange  Skew  Index,  which  measures  the  price  of  buying  protection  against
dramatic moves in the S and P 500, indicates that investors appear to be concerned about tail risks.
 IMF, April 2009, World Economic Outlook, Box 1.1 Global Business Cycles
 IMF, April 2016, World Economic Outlook and 2016 China Article IV consultation report
 WTO Report on G20 Trade Measures (mid-October 2015 to mid-May 2016)
 OECD, November 2016 Economic Outlook
 11 / 11
BIS central bankers' speeches
