  06.06.2017 
 Appearance by the Governor before the Senate in relation to the Draft 
State Budget for 2017  
Luis M. Linde 
Governor 
 
  Ladies and gentlemen,  
In my appearance, which forms part of this Chamber’s discussion and approval of the State 
budget for 2017, I shall begin by reviewing the current macroeconomic setting and outlook 
for the Spanish economy. I shall then analyse the main aspects of the State budget for this 
year,  according  to  the  draft  Law  approved  by  the  Government  on  31  March,  and  the 
Updated  Stability  Programme  for  the  period  2017-2020,  submitted  by  the  Council  of 
Ministers to the European Commission on 29 April.  
The external environment of the Spanish economy  
The current international economic setting is characterised by an increase in uncertainty, 
chiefly the outcome of the political changes in the past year in the United States and the 
United Kingdom. However, that does not appear to have exerted a significant influence, so 
far,  on  the  real  economy,  or  on  the  financial  markets.  Both  have  continued  to  perform 
favourably and, despite rising in the final months of 2016, interest rates are holding at still-
moderate levels at all terms. The main exception to this climate of relative stability has been 
oil prices, which have been highly volatile in recent months.  
Recent economic developments in the euro area show a firming in the recovery, which is 
progressively extending to more sectors and countries. Euro area inflation stood in May at 
1.4%,  after  several  months  of  high  volatility,  the  result  –  among  other  things  –  of  the 
oscillations in energy prices. In the medium term, the projections published in March by the 
ECB, the  update of which  will  be  released  this very  week,  suggest  a  continuation of  the 
recovery in activity and inflation across the euro area.  
Performance of and outlook for the Spanish economy  
The Spanish economy grew by 0.8% in 2017 Q1 and the latest indicators show that the rate 
of expansion remained high in April and May. 
The increase in activity in Q1 continued to be underpinned by domestic demand, with an 
acceleration in investment in equipment and construction, and in government consumption, 
which offset the easing recorded in household consumption. The external sector was highly 
dynamic,  with  export  and  import  growth  slightly  increasing  their  positive  contribution  to 
growth.  
For 2017 as a whole, the consensus among analysts suggests GDP growth will once again 
clearly outpace the average for the euro area. Next week, the Banco de España will publish 
new projections for the Spanish economy and, on the basis of the latest indicators, it cannot 
be ruled out that the growth estimated for this year will be somewhat higher than anticipated 
some months ago, standing even above 3%.  
The prolongation of the Spanish economy’s current growth phase over the coming months 
will essentially be based on the strong pace of expansion of national demand, although the 
external sector will continue – as seen since 2016 – to maintain its positive contribution. In 
particular,  buoyant  employment  and  the  favourable  conditions  of  access  to  credit  are 
boosting household consumption and the pick-up in spending on residential investment and 
on equipment. 
 3/8 
 In  the  medium  term,  there  will  foreseeably  be  a  gradual  convergence  towards  more 
moderate  growth  rates,  as  a  result  of  the  disappearance  of  certain  factors  that  have 
contributed  to  boosting  activity.  Such  factors  have  been  the  declines  in  oil  prices,  the 
moderation  of  financing  costs,  supported  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy,  and  the 
expansionary fiscal policy stance over the two-year period 2015-2016. 
As in the euro area as a whole, since late last year the year-on-year rate of change of the 
CPI has been highly volatile; it stood in May at 1.9%, the outcome – as earlier stated – of 
energy price fluctuations and, also, of the effect of the Easter holiday week in April, given 
that in 2016 Easter fell in March. These temporary factors will progressively peter out in the 
coming months, although the average rate for the year is expected to stand at around 2%. 
In 2018 and 2019, in the absence of further shocks, the rate of increase of the CPI might 
settle below this reference.  
The main risks and factors of vulnerability  
The scenario I have outlined also poses risks to our economy.  
Firstly, the improved international setting has been affected by higher global uncertainty, 
the result of recent proposals to curb trade, migratory movements and policy coordination. 
In  this  respect,  mention  should  be  made  of  the  potentially  adverse  impact  of  the  Brexit 
negotiations, given the highly significant trade and financial ties between Spain and the UK.  
Secondly, the rise in US long-term interest rates in late 2016, which partly reflects certain 
changes  expected  in  the  stance  of  its  economic  policies,  has  already  impacted  the 
European markets. While it is premature to conclude that this is the start of the normalisation 
of monetary conditions, it should be recalled that such normalisation will come about if, as 
is expected, the recovery in the advanced economies takes root.  
Within Spain, the level of public debt and of that of certain segments of the households and 
firms sectors remains at high levels, thereby generating high dependency on financing from 
abroad. This is a source of vulnerability, in particular to any future tightening in monetary 
and financial conditions on international markets.  
Finally,  from  a  broader  time  perspective,  the  sizeable  structural  component  of  the 
unemployment rate, population ageing and low productivity are the main constraints on the 
sustained growth of our economy.  
Budgetary policy in 2017 
Before  going  on  to  specify  the  broad  outlines  of budgetary  policy  for  2017,  allow  me  to 
remind  you  that  the  State  and  Social  Security  budget  provides  only  a  partial  picture  of 
general  government  activity.  In  a  country  as  decentralised  as  Spain,  in  which  more  than 
40% of public spending is by local and regional government, it is essential to take a broader 
perspective.  
Since my speech to the Parliamentary Budget Committee on 25 April, the Government has 
published (at the end of April) the Updated Stability Programme for the period 2017-2020. 
This document offers an overview of the budgets of central government agencies along with 
those of regional and local governments. Moreover, the Stability Programme, by adopting a 
4/8 
  broader time horizon, provides a medium-term plan, which is important for correcting public 
finance imbalances. 
The  macroeconomic  projections  accompanying  the  Stability  Programme,  which  update 
those included in the draft budget for 2017, involve an extension of the current economic 
recovery to 2020, albeit with GDP growth gradually slowing from the 3.2% rate recorded in 
both 2015 and 2016. Specifically, real GDP is projected to grow by 2.7%, 2.5%, 2.4% and 
2.4% in 2017, 2018, 2019 and 2020, respectively, while prices are projected to recover, so 
that nominal GDP growth would stand, on average, slightly above 4% throughout the period.  
These  projections  thus  incorporate  a  path  of  slowing  economic  growth,  which  is  also 
present in the forecasts of the Banco de España. However, as mentioned, real GDP may 
behave more positively in the short term than in the Stability Programme. 
As regards the budget, the path projected for the overall general government deficit is in 
line with the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact: declining from 3.1% of GDP in 
2017, to 2.2% in 2018 and 1.3% of GDP in 2019. In 2020 a budget deficit of 0.5% of GDP 
is projected. This path of reduction of Spain’s budget deficit needs to be achieved if the 
excessive deficit situation (a deficit of more than 3% of GDP) is to end in 2018. Public debt, 
according to the Stability Programme, is expected to fall gradually, to reach 92.5% of GDP 
in 2020. 
In the current environment of high economic growth and low general government financing 
costs, the budget consolidation required to achieve the deficit targets for the period 2017-
2020 (as measured by the change in the primary structural balance) is relatively small. 
The Stability Programme includes the stability objectives for 2017 – for each sub-heading 
of public expenditure – that were approved by Parliament in December last year and extends 
them to 2020; then, budget balance is projected for all levels of general government, except 
the  Social  Security  system,  which  would  still  record  a  deficit  of  0.5%  of  GDP.  Central 
government, which currently has the largest deficit, will be responsible for making the bulk 
of the projected adjustment. 
With regard to the composition of this adjustment, according to the Stability Programme the 
public  deficit  path  projected  for  the  period  2017-2020  will  be  achieved  mainly  through 
control  of  total  primary  public  expenditure,  i.e.  without  including  public  debt  interest 
payments.  Specifically,  if  the  projections  are  fulfilled,  the  weight  of  primary  public 
expenditure in GDP will be reduced by 3 pp over this period, to 36.6% in 2020. At the same 
time, government revenues are expected to grow moderately, by 0.9 pp of GDP over the 
programme’s horizon, to 2020.  
On the expenditure side, the Government projects moderate growth in its wage bill, basically 
reflecting the 1% rise in the remuneration of public-sector employees approved for 2017 
and the impact of savings arising from reforms approved in previous years.  
At the same time, the Stability Programme assumes that the downward trend in spending 
on unemployment will continue, in line with favourable labour market developments; that 
the  application  of  the  adjustment  factor  to  pensions  will  continue  to  hold  down  pension 
spending,  in  a  positive  inflation  environment;  and  that  current  spending  on  goods  and 
services will continue to be firmly controlled over the coming years.  
 5/8 
 As  for  public  investment,  the  Stability  Programme  projects  an  increase  in  general 
government  investment  of  10%  in  2017.  However,  after  deducting  the  effect  of  certain 
defence-related  payments  outstanding  from  previous  years,  as  well  as  the  possible 
spending arising from liability associated with legal proceedings relating to the insolvency 
of the toll motorways, this item is projected to grow only very moderately this year and over 
the next few years. Under these plans, therefore, the downward trend in public investment 
as a proportion of GDP, which has already lasted more than a decade, would continue.  
Interest payments are expected to continue to decline as a result of the expected favourable 
developments in financing conditions, although at a more moderate rate than over the last 
two years. 
The  increase  in  revenues  included  in  the  Stability  Programme  is  based  mainly  on  the 
measures  approved in  December  last  year  in  Royal  Decree-Law  3/2016.  Notable  among 
these is the amendment to corporate income tax to broaden the tax base, the increase in 
duties on alcoholic drinks and tobacco products, the increase of 3% in the maximum social 
contribution base and the 8% increase in the minimum wage. Notwithstanding the positive 
impact of these measures, achievement of the government’s medium-term revenue target 
is subject to some uncertainty, as revenue will need to perform more favourably relative to 
activity than it would if the historical relationship between these two variables were to remain 
unchanged.  
As a result, the performance of revenue and the impact on spending of the plans announced 
for public-sector employment will need to be monitored over the next few years, so that, in 
the event of any deviation from the projections, action can be taken in time to avoid the risk 
of failure to achieve deficit commitments. 
The importance of budgetary consolidation 
Finally,  it  seems  to  me  necessary  to  stress  the  importance  of  completing  the  budgetary 
consolidation process.  
The current environment of high growth and low interest rates is a very favourable one in 
which to reduce the structural budget deficit and public debt to levels more in line with those 
in the main euro area economies, and this opportunity should not be wasted. The cost of 
financing public debt (which still stands at 100% of GDP) would be reduced and there would 
be  some  scope  for  fiscal  policy  to  respond  to  possible  adverse  scenarios.  Moreover, 
consolidation is essential to address the challenge that an ageing population will pose for 
spending on health, dependency and, above all, pensions.  
In this respect, the magnitude of the adjustment needed to achieve sound public finances 
in Spain is still significant. Hence the need to comply with all the domestic and European 
budgetary  framework  requirements.  Following  their  strengthening  in  recent  years,  this 
means not only that the budget deficit (defined in total and structural terms) and public debt 
must be progressively reduced, but also that the so-called spending rule must be observed. 
The spending rule is especially important in the case of those government entities that have 
already achieved budget balance.  
6/8 
  Under the rule, neither the budgeted nor the actual spending of the government entity can 
exceed the Spanish economy’s nominal potential growth rate. Since government revenues 
have  an  elasticity  with  respect  to  nominal  GDP  of  approximately  one,  the  spending  rule 
involves linking its growth to that government revenues. Spending growth may only exceed 
this reference rate if there is an increase in revenues that is recurrent in nature; likewise, 
legal  changes  involving  permanent  losses  of  revenue  should  automatically  lead  to  a 
downward  revision  in  the  spending  threshold.  One  of  the  advantages  of  this  rule  is  that 
increases in government revenues above their normal trend must be saved, such as during 
the upswing prior to the last crisis, when very significant extraordinary revenue increases 
associated  with  the  real  estate  boom  were  recorded.  Also,  by  linking  spending  to  the 
economy’s potential rather than its actual growth, and by excluding from its definition non-
discretionary  spending  on  unemployment  benefits,  public  spending  should  grow  more 
slowly than GDP and revenues during economic upswings (when actual GDP and, therefore, 
revenues are growing at above their potential rate), while in recessions the opposite should 
occur. 
Thus,  the  spending  rule  requires  general  government  to  accumulate  budgetary  savings 
during economic upswings that may be used during downswings, allowing the behaviour of 
public  finances  to  be  disciplined  and  automatic  stabilisers  to  function  at  the  same  time. 
Obviously,  if  the  starting  point  is  a  structural  budget  deficit,  then  the  return  to  budget 
balance  will  require  spending  to  grow  more  slowly  than  nominal  growth  or  else  a 
discretionary increase in revenues, until balance is achieved. Evidence suggests that the 
application  of  a  rule  of  this  type  during  the  upswing  prior  to  the  last  crisis  would  have 
substantially curbed the public spending permitted each year, allowing the generation of 
significant room for manoeuvre that would have limited the deterioration in public finances 
during the crisis. 
Finally, pressing ahead with the various pending reforms would raise the economy’s growth 
potential which – through its effects on employment and productivity – is one of the basic 
determinants  of  reductions  in  public  debt.  These  reforms  include,  in  the  regulatory  area, 
revision of regulations that hinder the market entry of new firms or that limit their growth; in 
the labour market, reforms to reduce the degree of duality and to improve the employment 
prospects for the long-term unemployed; and the need to increase the efficiency of the legal 
system  and  of  the  education  system  and  to  promote  the  accumulation  of  technological 
capital,  among  others.  Accordingly,  any  delay  in  their  implementation  or,  worse  still,  a 
hypothetical  reversal  of  reforms  already  introduced  since  the  start  of  the  crisis,  would 
significantly  worsen  the  prospects  for  economic  growth  and  would  make  the  fiscal 
consolidation still needed more costly. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by recalling the challenges and risks for the economy as a whole raised by 
the current fiscal imbalance in Spain.  
High volumes of deficit and public debt over long periods are usually associated with higher 
interest rates and, therefore, lower rates of private investment and growth in the medium 
term. Also, correcting a very high debt-to-GDP ratio normally requires significant primary 
budget surpluses, which must be achieved through higher taxation or lower spending, other 
than on interest payments.  
 7/8 
 Large  deficits  and  high  levels  of  public  debt  reduce  the  scope  for  fiscal  policy  to  play  a 
countercyclical role in adverse economic situations, a particularly necessary and valuable 
lever in a monetary union. Also, the need to resort constantly to the financial markets to 
refinance a substantial level of debt and the current deficit increases the vulnerability of the 
economy to potentially adverse reactions by investor sentiment, as seen in recent years.  
Facing  up  to  these  challenges  and  minimising  these  risks  requires  completing  fiscal 
consolidation, by gradually correcting the budget deficit and reducing public debt. This must 
be one of the main priorities of economic policy in the coming years. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
  8/8 
 