Peter Praet: Karl-Otto Pöhl Lecture
Text  of  the  Karl-Otto  Pöhl  Lecture  by  Mr  Peter  Praet,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the
European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 13 September 2017.
 The monetary policy measures introduced by the ECB since June 2014 have played a pivotal
role  in  supporting  the  economy  and  have  proven  to  be  effective  in  preventing  a  period  of
disinflation from degenerating into one of outright deflation. More than three years on, the risks of
deflation  have  largely  disappeared  and  the  transmission  of  our  policy  measures  to  the  real
economy is clearly demonstrated by a broad-based recovery with solid momentum. This is a
pre-condition  for  inflation  returning  to  the  medium-term  objective  that  the  Governing  Council
identified almost 15 years ago as its preferred definition of price stability.
Before turning to price dynamics and monetary policy, let me say a bit more about the latest
economic developments.
Real GDP in the euro area has expanded for 17 consecutive quarters, growing by 2.3% year-on-
year during the second quarter of 2017, according to Eurostat – and surpassing our projection at
the start of the year. This compares with the latest potential growth estimates for the euro area of
1
just over 1%.
See, for example, European Commission (2017), European Economic Forecast – Spring 2017.
The  latest  survey  data  point  to  a  strong  start  to  the  third  quarter.  The  composite  output
Purchasing Managers’ Index – which is highly correlated with growth in the euro area – is above
its long-term average and remains close to six-year highs. The forward-looking components of
the  survey  continue  to  point  to  growth  in  the  quarters  ahead.  Moreover,  Eurostat’s  economic
sentiment indicator is at a ten-year high.
A distinctive feature of the ongoing recovery is that it has led to tangible employment gains. Since
hitting a trough in mid-2013, the number of people employed in the euro area has increased by
almost 7 million. As a result, all of the employment losses recorded during the crisis have been
offset.  The  unemployment  rate  is  also  continuing  to  fall,  despite  an  increase  in  labour  force
participation, and is now at its lowest level in eight years.
Employment growth, together with the gradual increase in employee compensation, is supporting
households’  disposable  income  and  underpinning  solid  consumption  dynamics.  Buoyant
sentiment, favourable bank lending conditions and the notable progress achieved with respect to
deleveraging  are  all  conducive  to  robust  consumer  spending.  The  investment  outlook  is  also
positive,  supported  not  only  by  a  need  to  modernise  the  capital  stock  after  years  of  subdued
investment and an improving outlook for profitability, but also by highly accommodative financing
conditions as our policy measures have passed through financial markets to affect the borrowing
conditions of businesses and their customers.
Since  June  2014,  bank  lending  rates  for  euro  area  non-financial  corporations  have  fallen  by
almost 120 basis points, and for households by over 100 basis points. Lending rates for very
small loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to small and medium-sized enterprises
(SMEs),  have  declined  by  almost  190  basis  points.  The  significant  improvement  in  funding
conditions for SMEs is especially encouraging as they provide two-thirds of total private sector
employment  in  the  euro  area.  Heterogeneity  of  lending  rates  across  countries  has  also  fallen
sharply. For example, the difference between the average lending rate for firms in countries that
were severely affected by the crisis versus other countries has narrowed by about 100 basis
points over this three-year period. The pass-through of monetary policy has become more even
and less distorting.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
These  positive  developments  have  been  further  supported  by  the  second  series  of  targeted
longer-term refinancing operations, which have led to banks passing on the favourable funding
2
conditions to their customers.
For  more  details  on  the  impact  of  the  TLTROs,  see  European  Central  Bank  (2017),  “The
targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-up and their impact on bank
intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, Box 5.
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
3
as recent surveys have shown.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, July 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access
to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
Moreover, bank lending volumes have been gradually recovering since early 2014. According to
the  latest  Survey  on  the Access  to  Finance  of  Enterprises,  covering  the  period  from  October
2016 to March 2017, euro area SMEs have continued to signal improvements in the availability of
bank loans. Market-based funding conditions, too, have improved significantly in response to the
corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
Against the backdrop of this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand has
become  the  mainstay  of  growth  in  the  euro  area,  making  the  recovery  more  resilient  to
developments overseas. The latest ECB staff macroeconomic projections point to robust private
consumption and a continued recovery in investment over the period ahead. Real GDP growth is
projected to remain well above potential growth and to average between 1.7% and 2.2% in 2017,
2018 and 2019. The risks to the growth outlook are broadly balanced: on the upside, the current
cyclical momentum could result in stronger than expected growth, while the remaining downside
risks relate primarily to global factors and developments in the exchange rate.
From  today’s  point  of  view,  the  strength  and  resilience  of  the  recovery  tends  to  boost  our
confidence  that  reflationary  forces  will  gradually  support  headline  inflation  returning  towards  a
level that is below, but close to, 2%. But it’s too soon to claim victory: inflation dynamics remain
subdued.  After  hovering  at  levels  well  below  1%  for  three  years,  with  occasional  dips  into
negative  territory,  euro  area  headline  inflation  edged  higher  towards  the  end  of  last  year  and
stood at 1.5% in August according to Eurostat’s flash estimate. Owing to energy-related base
effects,  headline  inflation  rates  are  likely  to  temporarily  decline  towards  the  turn  of  the  year.
Looking further ahead, headline inflation, according to our latest staff projections, is expected to
remain  clearly  below  a  level  that  is  consistent  with  our  inflation  aim  over  the  next  two  years,
averaging  1.5%  in  2019.  Furthermore,  the  recent  volatility  in  the  exchange  rate  represents  a
source of uncertainty which requires monitoring with regard to its possible implications for the
medium-term outlook for price stability. Some measures of underlying inflation – which relates
more to domestic price pressures – have ticked up moderately in recent months. For example,
HICP inflation excluding food and energy, which in August was 1.3% for the second consecutive
month,  has  surpassed  the  1%  level  where  it  had  been  languishing  for  around  three  years.
Nevertheless,  underlying  inflation  pressures  are  yet  to  show  convincing  signs  of  a  sustained
upward trend.
An  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage  dynamics,
which  are  shaped  by  many  factors.  Besides  weak  productivity  developments,  the  significant
degree of remaining labour market slack acts to contain wage growth. When assessing slack, it
is  also  worth  looking  at  alternative  measures  of  unemployment.  The  so-called  U6  measure
captures  unemployment,  underemployment  (meaning  workers  who  would  like  to  work  more
hours) and marginal attachment, namely those workers who are not competing very actively in
the labour market, for example because they are not available to start a new job at short notice.
Labour  market  slack  measured  in  this  way  currently  affects  around  18%  of  the  euro  area
 2 / 3
4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
extended labour force and is thus considerably higher than the headline unemployment rate. 
See European Central Bank (2017), “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue
3, Box 3.
We are undoubtedly experiencing a solid, broad-based and resilient economic recovery that is
contributing  to  a  narrowing  of  the  output  and  unemployment  gaps,  but  a  seeming  disconnect
between  growth  and  inflation  remains.  As  slack  in  the  economy  continues  to  be  absorbed,
reflationary  forces  will  gradually  build  up  and  the  traditional  Phillips  curve  connection  between
inflation and the business cycle should eventually re-assert itself.
the  relationship  between 
Recent empirical evidence suggests the Phillips curve has flattened since the period preceding
the global financial crisis. There are two polar interpretations of this development. The weakening
of 
to  a
mismeasurement of slack, owing to structural changes in the labour market. But there could be a
less benign interpretation too. Lower estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve could also stem
from parallel shifts in the curve. If such shifts result from sustained disinflationary developments
unmooring inflation expectations, they raise significant concerns. It is our duty, as a central bank,
to ensure that the Phillips curve reasserts itself at a steady rate of inflation that is in line with our
medium-term objective of below, but close to, 2%.
inflation  and  economic  slack  could  be  attributed 
Our mission is not yet accomplished and we must remain patient and persistent.
Patience is required for inflationary pressures to show through convincingly in the data. The euro
area’s economic environment is improving, and the negative tail risks to inflation expectations,
which were so visible at the start of our asset purchase programme, have virtually disappeared.
But measured inflation rates are exceedingly volatile and metrics of underlying price pressures
remain anaemic. The entire distribution of inflation expectations still needs to shift a fair distance
to the right.
We must also be persistent with the use of our policy instruments to ensure a durable and self-
sustained return of inflation towards a level that is below, but close to, 2% over a meaningful
medium-term  horizon.  The  baseline  scenario  for  inflation  going  forward  remains  crucially
contingent  on  very  easy  financing  conditions  which,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  on  the  current
accommodative monetary policy stance.
Therefore, maintaining a steady hand continues to be critical to fostering a durable convergence
of inflation towards our monetary policy objective.
1
2
3
4
See, for example, European Commission (2017), European Economic Forecast – Spring 2017.
For more details on the impact of the TLTROs, see European Central Bank (2017), “The targeted longer-term
refinancing operations: an overview of the take-up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin,
Issue 3, Box 5.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, July 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
See European Central Bank (2017), “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, Box 3.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
