    
 
Market Functioning 
 
Speech given by 
Chris Salmon, Executive Director, Markets, Bank of England 
   OMFIF City Lecture, London 
Tuesday 24 January 2017 
  I am grateful to Charlotte Barton, Nick Butt, Liam Crowley-Reidy, Nick Govier, Tom Horn,  
Rebecca Jackson, Sarah John and Nick Mclaren for their assistance in preparing this speech. 
 
 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
1 
    
 
Introduction 
 It is a pleasure to be here this evening.  The economic and political events of the past twelve months raise 
many questions.  From my vantage point as the head of the Bank of England’s Markets Directorate, they 
reemphasise the need for central banks to understand the structure and functioning of core financial 
markets.  That matters both for our role as guardians of financial stability, and to ensure the effectiveness of 
our own operations to implement monetary policy.  Let me illustrate this with reference to developments in 
two very different markets. 
i) 
The first – the sterling FX market – a large, global, highly liquid, and almost continuously traded, 
market, with a constantly evolving structure.  Here, the challenge is to understand how those 
developments affect the functioning of the market.  My focus will be on the lessons about market 
functioning from two particular episodes last year: the period immediately following the EU 
referendum and its ‘flash crash’ a few months later.   
ii)  The second market – the sterling corporate bond market – is small, local, and thinly traded, with 
heterogeneous underlying assets.  Here I will explain how our analysis of market structure shaped 
the design of the Bank’s corporate bond purchase scheme, and how the scheme may have 
affected the functioning of the market. 
In both cases our understanding of these markets, informed by market intelligence, analysis and our own 
experience in previous operations, has been both tested and improved as the Bank has responded to 
events. 
Section 1 – Sterling’s headline days during 2016 
The foreign exchange markets are core to the broader financial system, processing enormous volumes of 
transactions and relied upon by a broad range of economic participants from corporates to individuals.  The 
structure of these markets has evolved markedly in recent years, with electronic trading playing an ever 
greater role, while the amount of balance sheet devoted to this activity by intermediaries has fallen.  Benefits 
of the broader trend towards greater speed and electronification, common across a range of markets, include 
a reduced cost of transacting – and hence better value for end-users – but these structural changes as a 
whole have also led some to question whether markets are now less resilient in periods of stress.1 
The value of sterling fell by 17% against the US dollar over 20162, largely as market participants digested the 
impact of the EU referendum decision on its long-term sustainable level.  Although sterling was in the 
spotlight for much of the year, two key episodes stand out: the sharp adjustment in the exchange rate 
                                                      
1 These issues are examined in more detail in a Financial Stability Paper released by the Bank in October 2015 which draws together a 
body of analysis looking across a number of previous events of this nature. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/financialstability/Pages/fpc/fspapers/fs_paper34.aspx  
2 And by 15% on a trade-weighted basis. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
2 
 
2 
   
 
immediately after the referendum result, and the so-called flash event in the early (UK) hours of 7 October 
(Chart 1). 
Markets displayed resilience in the immediate aftermath of the referendum:  the record 11% depreciation of 
sterling against the US dollar3 that took place over the succeeding two trading days was accompanied by 
exceptionally high trading volumes (Chart 2). The market facilitated an orderly correction in the sterling 
exchange rate, while enabling individual participants to adjust their portfolios in response to the news, and 
can therefore be reasonably judged to have functioned effectively.  This was aided in no small part by the 
well-telegraphed nature of the event.  Informed by the lesson of the CHF de-peg a year and a half earlier, our 
market intelligence was that dealers engaged in extensive planning and preparation to cater for the 
possibility of sharp movements in sterling, including by reducing trading positions, pre-defining trading 
strategies and risk appetites for a range of scenarios, recalibrating algorithms and engaging in conversation 
with their clients to manage their expectations. 
The contrast with the events of 7 October – less than four months later – could not be stronger.  In the early 
hours of the morning sterling depreciated by around 9% against the US dollar in a matter of seconds, before 
quickly retracing almost all of the move.  Not only did this represent almost unprecedented volatility, but for 
short periods market depth on key trading platforms all but evaporated.  The Amihud measure of liquidity, 
based on the price impact of individual trades, suggests that there was a notable period at the start of this 
event where liquidity was markedly poorer than during the events around the referendum (Chart 3).4 
The Bank for International Settlements recently published an exhaustive study of the event drawing on 
analysis conducted by the Bank of England.5  Like many flash events, the sterling moves seemed to have no 
clear trigger – just unusually large selling flows at a typically quiet period of the trading day.  Instead the BIS 
report characterises the moves as the result of a confluence of factors, including the time of day, significant 
demand to sell sterling to hedge options positions, the execution of stop-loss orders and the withdrawal of 
liquidity by both human and automated traders in the face of unexpected volatility.  Whilst it is true that this 
event was over in less time than it would have taken me to buy my regular morning latte, and as the BIS 
report noted, no systemic financial institutions appear to have incurred material losses, the reality is that our 
ability to describe how the flash unfolded doesn’t mean we can explain why it happened on 7 October.  
The events immediately after the referendum and on 7 October paint sharply different pictures about market 
functioning.  As I noted above, the FX market functioned very effectively during the first episode, enabling the 
sterling exchange rate to act as an important initial shock absorber to the referendum news.  But functioning 
in the second event was poor, with as large a move in sterling but without a fundamental trigger, creating a 
dearth of liquidity and for a short period of time the absence of a functioning two-way market for sterling. 
                                                      
3 And by 9% on a trade-weighted basis. 
4 The Amihud measure of price impact calculates the ratio between price moves and volumes traded. 
5 http://www.bis.org/publ/mktc09.htm  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
 3 
 
3 
  
 
The proximity of these events points to a nuanced conclusion about market functioning.  Modern, highly 
electronic markets can facilitate a rapid and orderly reaction to significant news, but resilience might depend 
importantly on preparation.  Moreover, the events of 7 October also highlight the vulnerability of such 
markets to seemingly unprompted flash price movements.  It wasn’t the first flash event we’ve seen in core 
financial markets, nor the most violent, but it was certainly the closest to home.  Combined with the evidence 
from the US Treasury event of 2014, it suggests growing potential for flash events to occur in core markets, 
where we might previously have expected the depth of liquidity and breadth of participation to provide some 
protection against such stresses. 
So while recent events fortify my confidence in the ability of core financial markets to process identifiable 
risks, I equally expect flash moves in the self-same markets to continue to surprise us, even if I cannot hope 
to predict precisely when or in what instrument or currency pair the next significant flash event will occur.6 
Section 2 – The Bank of England’s corporate bond operations 
Of course, the referendum result prompted a lot more than an exchange rate reaction.  An important 
consequence was the MPC’s re-evaluation of the likely prospects for the economy and decision in August to 
take a number of steps to ease monetary conditions.  Some of these steps were familiar – reducing Bank 
Rate and initiating further gilt purchases.  Some were more novel – providing term funding to banks in order 
to support Bank Rate pass-through, and purchasing corporate bonds.7 
The sterling corporate bond market is relatively small and concentrated in nature, with limited trading in the 
secondary market. This is obviously true relative to foreign exchange markets, but also relative to the gilt 
market, which had been the exclusive focus of previous MPC asset purchase decisions.  To provide some 
metrics:  the volume of sterling corporate bonds traded in a typical day is less than 5% of that traded in gilts, 
while typical trade sizes are around £2-5mn and £50mn respectively.  Bid-offer spreads for a representative 
sterling investment grade bond would be around 10bps, whereas for a benchmark 10 year gilt these would 
generally be less than half a basis point.  So a key challenge was to articulate an approach which would be 
effective in this different context. 
An immediate consequence was that the MPC framed its policy decision somewhat differently: it determined 
to purchase up to £10 billion of corporate bonds over 18 months, whereas for gilts the MPC decided to 
purchase a fixed total of £60 billion of gilts over a six month period, reflecting not only our ability to purchase 
more quickly in that market but greater certainty about the achievable pace. 
Turning to implementation, the Bank has an inclination to use auction-based mechanisms to implement 
policy decisions where possible.  Auctions cater for wide participation among active participants in the 
market in question and avoid the Bank having to discriminate actively between counterparties or instruments.  
                                                      
6 There was a much smaller (around 1.5%), near-instantaneous and much less remarked-upon spike on 30 December in the euro-US 
dollar exchange rate.  
7 See box on page 9 of the Bank’s August 2016 Inflation Report. 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/inflationreport/2016/aug.aspx  
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
4 
 
4 
   
 
In auctions we offer to buy across the range of eligible assets the MPC has specified, pre-define the 
mechanisms we will use to weigh the competitiveness of offers, and then passively respond to the pattern of 
bids that we receive in any given auction.  Our judgement last summer was that the MPC’s corporate bond 
purchase objective would probably also be best achieved using auctions, but that we would need to make a 
number of changes relative to the pre-existing gilt auction design to cater for the differences in the underlying 
markets.  Let me highlight this by explaining three of the main, mutually reinforcing, changes that we made, 
informed by auction theory and expert advice. 
First, the size of our purchase operations were designed to be flexible, adjusting automatically to reflect the 
quantity and quality of the offers received.  This means the purchase pace can fluctuate to account for 
seasonality, market conditions and so on.  It also encourages greater competition between offers, as some 
offers are likely to be rejected, even in auctions where there are a smaller total number of offers.  By contrast 
our gilt purchases are made at a pre-announced pace through fixed-size auctions. 
Second, we changed our allocation method within our auctions with the aim of promoting participation and 
competition.  Experience has shown that the competitive nature of the gilt market routinely delivers 
widespread participation in our auctions.8  As the level of competition in the corporate bond market is much 
lower, a key priority in the design of these operations was to encourage strong participation from market 
makers.  Accordingly we decided to adopt a uniform pricing method for these auctions, in which the Bank 
pays the same (highest) price for all the accepted offers to sell us a given bond.  Our judgement, was that 
this approach would help incentivise participation and therefore competition, as participants do not need to 
make firm judgements about the overall market level, but can instead focus on their own valuations.  This 
effect may be particularly important for increasing the likelihood of smaller or less informed market 
participants taking part.  This increased participation should in turn increase the likelihood of the Bank 
achieving competitive pricing in its purchases.  By contrast our gilt auctions allocate on a receive-your-offer 
(‘discriminatory pricing’) basis.  This works well when broad participation is assured. 
Third, the relative value of offers is judged in a different manner in our corporate bond operations.  For gilts, 
we allocate relative to representative market yields at the end of our auctions – this enables participants to 
accurately anticipate the competitiveness of their offers.  If a similar approach had been applied to our 
corporate bond operations, where there is considerably less certainty around the prevailing executable 
market price , the Bank would have risked allocating against stale market prices, or prices that could easily 
be influenced by participants in the auction.  Given these considerations, the Bank chose instead to set 
minimum reserve spreads privately for each bond in the auction, drawing on a range of sources of 
information. 
One factor is the balance of our portfolio relative to the market as a whole, where the MPC was very clear 
that purchases should be representative of outstanding issuance.  The Bank therefore publishes every 
month a ‘sector key’, showing the target share of purchases for each sector alongside our current holdings.  
                                                      
8 Since the August 2016 decision, cover in these operations has averaged 3.1, with the second operation in August 2016, which 
received offers slightly below the target level of purchases, standing out as an anomaly. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
5 
 
5 
   
 
By adjusting our reserve spreads over time to reflect progress against that sector key, we can make 
ourselves relatively more willing to buy in sectors where we are underweight, tilting purchases towards those 
sectors.   
Collectively these choices were designed to encourage participation and competition in the auction, ensure 
that the Bank does not over-pay for bonds but delivers appropriate value for money, and accommodate the 
likely variable intensity of participation through time. 
Impact so far 
So if that was the theory, what have the results been? 
Most obviously, and even before purchases began, there was a clear and immediate impact on market 
pricing from the announcement of the August package.  Yields on gilts eligible for purchase in the APF fell by 
14-18 basis points on the day (Chart 4).9 
In the sterling corporate bond market yields fell by even more, with spreads to gilt yields narrowing by around 
20 basis points. Little comparable movement was observed in equivalent US dollar or euro-area markets 
(Chart 5), suggesting this was largely attributable to the Bank’s actions.  And while only investment grade 
bonds are eligible for purchase in the APF, spreads on sterling non-investment grade bonds fell by a similar 
amount (Chart 6). 
Turning to the corporate bond auctions themselves, participation has been widespread, with nearly 90% of 
eligible counterparties typically participating and making multiple offers in each auction.  This depth of 
participation has helped ensure competitive allocations, with the Bank accepting only the most attractive 
offers received. 
More tentatively, we think there is evidence that our auctions have provided a boost to secondary market 
liquidity for sterling corporate bonds more generally.  Our contacts, as well as some proprietary data, suggest 
that the operations provide a liquidity point for the market that can catalyse trading activity. And there is 
some evidence that the scheme has dampened the volatility of corporate spreads relative to comparable 
equity and government bonds markets, with corporate bond spreads having remained stable during broader 
market volatility toward the end of last year. 
Turning to the primary market, there was a sharp increase in sterling issuance after the scheme was 
launched, with total issuance by investment grade UK corporates of almost £10 billion between August and 
November – considerably higher than the same period in previous years (Charts 7 & 8).  Market contacts 
suggest this reflects a combination of the lower cost of issuance and a surge of pent-up supply being brought 
to market, and we have heard several specific examples of issuance plans being increased in size, targeted 
at longer maturities, or switched to sterling directly in response to the announcement.  This bears similarities 
                                                      
9 Gilts with greater than three years to maturity are eligible for purchase in the programme. The 3.75% September 2019 gilt was due to 
fall below this limit shortly after the announcement, so the impact on its yield was lower than for other bonds. 
 
 
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
6 
 
6 
   
 
with the experience for the ECB where a comparable increase in Euro issuance was observed following the 
announcement of its CPSS scheme in early 2016. 
Stepping back, the big picture is of a discernible impact on the cost of funding for firms and a strong second 
half of the year for issuance, despite a big uncertainty challenge.  The introduction of the CBPS has helped 
ensure that downside risks following the referendum did not materialise and that the market remained robust 
in the face of wider market volatility. 
In addition to those early successes, one area where the scheme has certainly been effective is the pace of 
purchases. Last week, and just four months since we started purchases, we passed the half-way mark for 
these purchases. This is faster than we expected at the outset, perhaps because the auctions have acted to 
boost secondary market liquidity by more than we had allowed for. So far our approach to setting reserve 
spreads has also successfully driven the Bank’s holdings towards our ‘sector key’ (Chart 9), and I am 
confident it will continue to enable us to make our purchases in a neutral manner across economic sectors.  
So while our purchase pace will continue to depend on the nature of the offers we receive, and portfolio 
matching constraints are likely to become more binding as we near the purchase target, it seems probable 
that the Bank will be able to complete the purchase programme faster than we thought possible to begin 
with. 
Conclusion 
 In concluding, I hope my remarks have helped demonstrate that a detailed understanding of market structure 
is a core part of effective central banking.  From the experience of 2016 I’d draw two specific lessons. 
First, so long as central banks design their operations carefully, drawing on study of the relevant market 
structures, they retain the capability to broaden the range of policy tools at their disposal.  The early success 
of the corporate bond scheme – both in effectively purchasing the bonds and in terms of initial evidence 
about the transmission to wider economy of those purchases – underscores the continued scope for central 
banks to innovate when circumstances dictate that need.   
Notwithstanding the success of foreign exchange markets in processing the initial referendum news, the 
second lesson comes from the flash crash.  It emphasises that central banks need to deepen their 
understanding of the features of modern market structures that exacerbate these vulnerabilities and why they 
seem to be occurring across a broader range of markets.  In particular, we need a deeper understanding of 
the potential for flash events to have longer-lasting consequences than has been the case so far.  That 
would increase the potential systemic costs of flash events and increase the case for some form of public 
policy response.  In the Bank’s context that helps explain why the Financial Policy Committee is seeking to 
examine the potential implications of these developments for financial stability.  
I am sure that there are many broader lessons from 2016 that OMFIF will help us all work through, and look 
forward to benefiting from those insights, but for now, thank you. 
   
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
7 
 
7 
   Annex 
 
Chart 1: GBP/USD exchange rate in 2016 
Chart 2: Trading volumes in GBP/USD on 24 June 
and 7 October 
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations 
Chart 3: Price impact of individual trades in 
GBP/USD on 24 June and 7 October(a) 
  Sample periods are (BST): 
a)  24 June 2016 00:00:02 – 21:59:16 
b)  2 October 2016 18:51:07 – 6 October 23:56:06 
c)  7 October 2016 00:02:10 – 22:01:24. 
Note: this measure is presented without scale for 
confidentiality reasons. 
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bank calculations. 
Chart 4: Change in gilt yields-to-maturity and OIS 
curve on 4 August 2016  
(a) The Amihud measure of price impact calculates the 
Note: The Bank of England does not purchase gilts with 
ratio between price moves and volumes traded. 
Sources: Thomson Reuters and Bank calculations. 
maturity below 3-years. 
Sources: Bloomberg and Bank calculations 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
8 
 
8 
   Chart 5: Investment grade, non-financial bond 
Chart 6: Sterling investment grade non-financial 
spreads 
bond spreads, split by eligible and ineligible 
securities 
Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Bloomberg 
and Bank calculations 
 Sources: Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Bloomberg and 
Bank calculations 
 Chart 7: Sterling investment grade corporate bond 
Chart 8:  Investment grade bond issuance by UK 
issuance 
private, non-financial corporates (PNFCs) 
Sources: Dealogic and Bank calculations 
Sources: Dealogic and Bank calculations 
    
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
9 
 
9 
   Chart 9: CBPS portfolio relative to sector key 
 (a)  As at 5 January 2017 
(b)  As at CoB 4 January 2017 
Source: Bank calculations 
     
All speeches are available online at www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches 
10 
 
10 
 