Philip Lowe: Household debt, housing prices and resilience
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Economic Society
of Australia (QLD) Business Lunch, Brisbane, 4 May 2017.
 I  would  like  to  thank  Gianni  La  Cava,  Andre  Liew  and  Fiona  Price  for  assistance  in  the
preparation of this talk.
Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  address  the  Queensland  branch  of  the  Economic  Society  of
Australia. It is a pleasure to be in Brisbane again today.
This afternoon I would like to talk about household debt and housing prices.
This  is  a  familiar  topic  and  one  that  has  attracted  a  lot  of  attention  over  recent  times.  It  is
understandable why this is so. The cost of housing and how we finance it matters to us all. We
all need somewhere to live and for many people, their home is their largest single asset. Real
estate is also the major form of collateral for bank lending. The levels of debt and housing prices
also affect the resilience of our economy to future shocks. Beyond these economic effects, high
levels of debt and housing prices have broader effects on the communities in which we live. The
high cost of housing is a real issue for many Australians and can have serious side-effects. High
levels of debt and high housing costs can also reinforce the existing distribution of wealth in our
society,  making  social  and  geographic  mobility  more  difficult.  So  it  is  understandable  why
Australians are so interested in these issues.
At the Reserve Bank, we too have been focused on these issues in the context of our monetary
policy  and  financial  stability  responsibilities.  Our  work  has  been  in  three  broad  areas.  First,
understanding  the  aggregate  trends  and  their  causes.  Second,  understanding  how  debt  is
distributed across the community. And third, understanding how the level of debt and housing
prices affect the way the economy operates and its resilience to future shocks.
This afternoon, I would like to make some observations in each of these three areas.
Aggregate trends
This first chart provides a good summary of the aggregate picture (Graph 1). It shows the ratios
of nationwide housing prices and household debt to household income. Housing prices and debt
both rose a lot from the mid 1990s to the early 2000s. The ratios then moved sideways for the
better part of a decade – in some years they were up and in others they were down. Then, in the
past few years, these ratios have been rising again.  Both are now at record highs.
1
 1 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Although the debt-to-income ratio has increased over recent times, the ratio of debt to the value
of the housing stock has not risen. This reflects the large increase in housing prices and the
growth in the number of homes. Over recent times, there has also been a substantial increase in
the  value  of  households’  financial  assets,  with  the  result  that  the  ratio  of  household  wealth  to
income  is  at  a  record  high  (Graph  2).  So  both  the  value  of  our  assets  and  the  value  of  our
liabilities have increased relative to our incomes.
 2 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Turning now to why the ratios of housing prices and debt to income have risen over time.  A
central factor is that financial liberalisation and the lower nominal interest rates that came with
the lower inflation of the 1990s increased people’s ability to borrow. These developments meant
that Australians could take out larger and more flexible loans. By and large, we took advantage of
this new ability, as we sought to buy the housing we desired.
2
We could, of course, have used the benefit of lower nominal interest rates in the 1990s and the
increased ability to borrow for other purposes. But instead we chose to borrow more for housing
and this pushed up the average price of housing given the constraints on the supply side. The
supply of well-located housing and land in our cities has been constrained by a combination of
zoning  issues,  geography  and  inadequate  transport.  Another  related  factor  was  that  our
population was growing at a reasonable pace. Adding to the picture, Australians consume more
land per dwelling than is possible in many other countries, although this is changing, and many of
us have chosen to live in a few large coastal cities.  Increased ability to borrow, more demand
and constrained supply meant higher prices.
3
So we saw marked increases in the ratios of housing prices and debt to household incomes up
until the early 2000s. At the time, there was much discussion as to whether these higher ratios
were sustainable. As things turned out, the higher ratios have been sustained for quite a while.
This largely reflects the choices we have made as a society regarding where and how we live
(and  how  much  at  least  some  of  us  are  prepared  to  spend  to  do  so),  urban  planning  and
 3 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
transport, and the nature of our financial system. It is these choices that have underpinned the
high  level  of  housing  prices.  So  the  changes  that  we  have  seen  in  these  ratios  are  largely
structural.
Recently, the ratios of housing prices and debt to household income have been increasing again.
Lower  interest  rates  both  in  real  and  nominal  terms  –  this  time,  largely  reflecting  global
developments – have again played some role. But there have also been other important factors
at work over recent times.
One of these is the slow growth in household income. During the 2000s, aggregate household
income increased at an average rate of over 7 per cent (Graph 3). In contrast, over the past four
years growth has averaged less than half of this, at about 3 per cent. Slower growth in incomes
will push up the debt-to-income ratio unless growth in debt also slows. This partly explains what
has happened over recent years.
A second factor is that some of our cities have become major global cities. Reflecting this, in
some markets there has been strong demand by overseas investors.
A  third  factor  has  been  stronger  population  growth.  Population  growth  picked  up  during  the
mining investment boom and, although it subsequently slowed, it is still around ½ percentage
point faster than it was before the boom (Graph 4). For some time the rate of home-building did
 4 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
not  respond  to  the  faster  population  growth;  indeed,  the  response  took  the  better  part  of  a
decade.  The  rate  of  home-building  has  now  responded  and  we  are  currently  adding  to  the
housing  stock  at  a  rate  not  seen  for  more  than  two  decades.  Over  time,  this  will  make  a
difference.
It is Melbourne and Sydney where population growth has been the fastest over recent times. Not
surprisingly, it is these two cities where the price gains have been largest, and these price gains
have helped induce more supply. Indeed, Victoria and New South Wales account for all of the
recent upward movement in the national housing price-to-income ratio (Graph 5). In the other
states, the ratio of housing prices to income is below previous peaks. So there is not a single
story across the country. This is despite us having a common monetary policy for the country as
a whole. Factors other than the level of interest rates are clearly at work.
  5 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
In summary then, the supply-demand dynamics have been pushing aggregate housing prices in
our largest cities higher relative to our incomes. With interest rates as low as they have been,
and prices rising, many people have found it attractive to borrow money to invest in an asset
whose  price  is  increasing.  The  result  has  been  strong  growth  in  borrowing  by  investors,  with
investors accounting for 30 to 40 per cent of new loans.
This borrowing is not the underlying cause of the higher housing prices. But the borrowing has
added to the upward pressure on prices caused by the underlying supply-demand dynamics. It
has  acted  as  a  financial  amplifier  in  some  cities,  adding  to  the  already  upward  pressure  on
prices. The borrowing by investors is also obviously contributing to the rise in the aggregate debt-
to-income  ratio.  Just  like  in  the  early  2000s,  there  is  again  a  discussion  as  to  whether  these
increases will continue and whether they are sustainable.
The distribution of debt
I would now like to turn to the distribution of housing debt across households. This is important,
as it is not the ‘average’ household that gets into trouble. At the Reserve Bank we have devoted
considerable resources to understanding this distribution. One important source of household-
level information is the survey of Household Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia (HILDA).
If we look across the income distribution, it is clear that the rise in the debt-to-income ratio has
been  most  pronounced  for  higher-income  households  (Graph  6).  This  is  different  from  what
 6 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
occurred  in  the  United  States  in  the  run-up  to  the  subprime  crisis,  when  many  lower-income
households borrowed a lot of money.
It  is  also  possible  to  look  at  how  the  debt-to-income  ratio  has  changed  across  the  age
distribution. This ratio has risen for households of all ages, except the very youngest, who tend to
have low levels of debt (Graph 7). Borrowers of all ages have taken out larger mortgages relative
to their incomes and they are taking longer to pay them off. Older households are also more likely
than before to have an investment property with a mortgage and it has become more common to
have a mortgage at the time of retirement.
 7 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
We also look at the share of households with a debt-to-income ratio above specific thresholds. In
2002,  around  12  per  cent  of  households  had  debt  that  was  over  three  times  their  income
(Graph 8). By 2014, this figure had increased to 20 per cent of households. There has also been
an increase, although not as pronounced, in the share of households with even higher debt-to-
income ratios.
 8 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another dataset that provides insight into distributional issues is one maintained by the Reserve
Bank  on  loans  that  have  been  securitised.   This  indicates  that  around  two-thirds  of  housing
borrowers are at least one month ahead of their scheduled repayments and half of borrowers are
six months or more ahead (Graph 9). This is good news. But a substantial number of borrowers
have only small buffers if things go wrong.
4
 9 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
At the overall level, though, nationwide indicators of household financial stress remain contained.
This  is  not  surprising  with  many  borrowers  materially  ahead  on  their  mortgage  repayments,
interest rates being low and the unemployment rate being broadly steady over recent years. At
the same time, though, the household-level data show that there has been a fairly broad-based
increase in indebtedness across the population and the number of highly indebted households
has increased.
Impact on economy and policy considerations
I would now like to turn to the third element of our work: the implications of all this for the way the
economy operates and its resilience.
It is now commonplace to say that housing prices and debt levels matter because of financial
stability. What people typically have in mind is that a severe correction in property prices when
balance sheets are highly leveraged could make for instability in the banking system, damaging
the economy. So the traditional financial stability concern is that the banks get in trouble and this
causes trouble for the overall economy.
This is not what lies behind the Reserve Bank’s recent focus on household debt and housing
prices  in  Australia.  The  Australian  banks  are  resilient  and  they  are  soundly  capitalised.  A
significant  correction  in  the  property  market  would,  no  doubt,  affect  their  profitability.  But  the
stress tests that have been done under APRA’s eye confirm that the banks are resilient to large
movements in the price of residential property.
 10 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
Instead,  the  issue  we  have  focused  on  is  the  possibility  of  future  sharp  cuts  in  household
spending because of stretched balance sheets. Given the high levels of debt and housing prices,
relative  to  incomes,  it  is  likely  that  some  households  respond  to  a  future  shock  to  income  or
housing  prices  by  deciding  that  they  have  borrowed  too  much.  This  could  prompt  a  sharp
contraction in their spending, as they try to get their balance sheets back into better shape. An
otherwise manageable downturn could be turned into something more serious. So the financial
stability question is: to what extent does the higher level of household debt make us less resilient
to future shocks?
Answering this question with  precision  is  difficult.  History  does  not  provide  a  particularly  good
guide, given that housing prices and debt relative to income are at levels that we have not seen
before, and the distribution of debt across the population is changing.
Given  this,  one  of  the  research  priorities  at  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  to  use  individual
household data to understand better how the level of indebtedness affects household spending.
The results indicate that the higher is indebtedness, the greater is the sensitivity of spending to
shocks  to  income.   This  is  regardless  of  whether  we  measure  indebtedness  by  the  debt-to-
income ratio or the share of income spent on servicing the debt. If this result were to translate to
the  aggregate  level,  it  would  mean  that  higher  levels  of  debt  increase  the  sensitivity  of  future
6
consumer spending to certain shocks.
5
The  higher  debt  levels  also  appear  to  have  affected  how  higher  housing  prices  influence
household spending. For some years, households used the increasing equity in their homes to
finance extra spending. Today, the reaction seems different. This is evident in the estimates of
housing  equity  injection  (Graph  10).  In  earlier  periods  of  rising  housing  prices,  the  household
sector was withdrawing equity from their housing to finance spending. Today, households are
much  less  inclined  to  do  this.  Many  of  us  feel  that  we  have  enough  debt  and  don’t  want  to
increase  consumption  using  borrowed  money.  Many  also  worry  about  the  impact  of  higher
housing prices on the future cost of housing for their children. As I have spoken about previously,
higher housing prices are a two-edged sword.  They deliver capital gains for the current owners,
but increase the cost of future housing services, including for our children.
7
 11 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
This change in attitude is also affecting how spending responds to lower interest rates. With less
appetite  to  incur  more  debt  for  current  consumption,  this  part  of  the  monetary  transmission
mechanism looks to be weaker than it once was. There is, however, likely to be an asymmetry
here. When the interest rate cycle turns and rates begin to rise, the higher debt levels are likely to
make  spending  more  responsive  to  interest  rates  than  was  the  case  in  the  past.  This  is
something that we will need to take into account.
In  terms  of  resilience,  my  overall  assessment  is  that  the  recent  increase  in  household  debt
relative  to  our  incomes  has  made  the  economy  less  resilient  to  future  shocks.  Given  this
assessment, the Reserve Bank has strongly supported the prudential measures undertaken by
APRA. Double-digit growth in debt owed by investors at a time of weak income growth cannot be
strengthening the resilience of our economy. Nor can a high concentration of interest-only loans.
8
  The
I  want  to  point  out  that  APRA’s  measures  are  not  targeted  at  high  housing  prices.
international evidence is that these types of measures cannot sustainably address pressures on
housing  prices  originating  from  the  underlying  supply-demand  balance.  But  they  can  provide
some  breathing  space  while  the  underlying  issues  are  addressed.  In  doing  so,  they  can  help
lessen  the  financial  amplification  of  the  cycle  that  I  spoke  about  before.  Reducing  this
 12 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
amplification while a better balance is established between supply and demand in the housing
market can help with the resilience of our economy.
There are some reasons to expect that a better balance between supply and demand will be
established over time.
One is the increased rate of home-building. As we are seeing here in Brisbane and some parts
of Melbourne, increased supply does affect prices. This increase in supply is also affecting rents,
which are increasing very slowly in most markets.
A second reason is the increased investment in some cities, including in Sydney, on transport.
Over time, this will increase the supply of well-located residential land, and this will help as well.
And a third reason is that at some point, interest rates in Australia will increase. To be clear, this
is not a signal about the near-term outlook for interest rates in Australia but rather a reminder that
over time we could expect interest rates to rise, not least because of global developments. Over
recent years, the low interest rates in Australia have helped the economy adjust to the winding
down  of  the  mining  investment  boom.  They  have  helped  support  employment  and  demand
through  a  significant  adjustment  in  the  Australian  economy.  We  should  not,  though,  expect
interest rates always to be this low.
It  remains  to  be  seen  how  the  various  influences  on  housing  prices  play  out.  Other  policies,
including tax and zoning policies, also have an effect. But increased supply and better transport
could be expected to help address the ongoing rises in housing prices relative to incomes. These
changes and some normalisation of interest rates over time might also reduce the incentive to
borrow to invest in an asset whose price is rising strongly. To the extent that, over time, a better
balance  is  established,  we  will  be  better  off  not  incurring  too  much  debt,  and  having  housing
prices go too high, while this is occurring.
I want to make it clear that the Reserve Bank does not have a target for the debt-to-income ratio
or the ratio of nationwide housing prices to income.
As I spoke about earlier, there are good reasons why these ratios move over time. My judgement,
though, is that, in the current environment, the resilience of our economy would be enhanced by
an extended period in which housing prices and debt outstanding increased no faster than our
incomes. Again, this is not a target or a policy objective of the Reserve Bank, but rather a general
observation about how we build resilience.
Many of you will be aware that these issues have figured in the deliberations of the Reserve Bank
Board for some time. This is entirely consistent with our flexible medium-term inflation targeting
framework. With a medium-term target, it is appropriate that we pay attention to the resilience of
our economy to future shocks. In the current environment of low income growth, faster growth in
household debt is unlikely to help that resilience.
We have also been watching the labour market closely. The unemployment rate has moved up a
little over recent months and wage growth remains subdued. Encouragingly, employment growth
has  been  a  bit  stronger  of  late  and  the  forward-looking  indicators  suggest  ongoing  growth  in
employment.  We  will  want  to  see  a  continuation  of  these  trends  if  the  overall  growth  in  the
economy  is  to  pick  up  as  we  expect.  Stronger  growth  in  incomes  would  of  course  also  help
people  deal  with  the  high  levels  of  debt  and  housing  prices.  Overall,  our  latest  forecast  is  for
economic growth to pick up gradually and average around 3 per cent or so over the next few
years.
To conclude, I hope these remarks help provide some insight into the Reserve Bank’s thinking
about housing prices and household debt. As household balance sheets have changed, so too
has the way that the economy works. Both from an individual and an economy-wide perspective,
 13 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
we need to pay attention to how the higher level of debt affects our resilience to future shocks.
Thank you. I look forward to your questions.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
When balances in offset accounts are taken into account, the recent rise in household debt is less pronounced,
although the household debt-to-income ratio has still risen to a record high.
For RBA analysis of this issue see Kohler M and M van der Merwe (2015), ‘Long-run Trends in Housing Price
Growth’,  RBA  Bulletin,  September,  pp  21–30  and  RBA  (2003)  ‘ Household  Debt:  What  the  Data  Show’,
RBA Bulletin, March, pp 1–11.
See  RBA  (2015),  ‘Submission  to  the  Inquiry  into  Home  Ownership’,  Submission  to  the  House  of
Representatives Standing Committee on Economics Inquiry into Home Ownership, 25 June, and RBA (2014),
‘Submission  to  the  Inquiry  into  Affordable  Housing’,  Submission  to  the  Senate  Economics  References
Committee Inquiry into Affordable Housing, 14 February.
These data, which go down to the level of the individual (anonymised) underlying loans, are collected by the
Reserve  Bank  and  assist  in  managing  our  exposures  to  asset-backed  securities  accepted  in  market
operations. These data cover around one-quarter of the value of outstanding housing loans.
See La Cava G, H Hughson and G Kaplan (2016) ‘The Household Cash Flow Channel of Monetary Policy’, RBA
Research Discussion Paper No 2016–12.
It is, however, worth pointing out that, at least to date, aggregate consumption has not been more volatile
following the earlier increase in the debt-to-income ratio.
Lowe,  P  (2015) ‘National  Wealth,  Land  Values  and  Monetary  Policy’, Address  to  the  54th  Shann  Memorial
Lecture, Perth, 12 August 2015.
See  Byres  W 
the  Property  Market’,  available  at
<www.apra.gov.au/Speeches/Documents/Prudential prespectives on the property market – 28 April 2017.pdf>,
Remarks at CEDA’s 2017 NSW Property Market Outlook, Sydney, 28 April.
‘Prudential  Perspectives  on 
(2017) 
 14 / 14
BIS central bankers' speeches
