Michele Bullock: Has the way we look at financial stability changed
since the Global Financial Crisis?
Speech by Ms Michele Bullock, Assistant Governor (Financial System) of the Reserve Bank of
Australia, at the Bloomberg Breakfast, Sydney, 14 March 2017.
 Good morning and thank you to Bloomberg for the invitation to speak this morning. This is my
first speech as Assistant Governor Financial System. And while I have not been involved in the
Bank’s  Financial  Stability  area  before,  I  was  part  of  the  Financial  System  Group  when  it  was
established  in  1998  –  sitting  in  its  sister  department  Payments  Policy.  So  reflecting  my  own
recent journey in getting my head around this area, I thought today I would have a look back at
how the Bank’s work on financial stability has evolved over the past 20 years and particularly
since the financial crisis. I have posed the question ‘has the way we look at financial stability
changed since the GFC?’ I will give you the answer up front. At the big picture level, the way we
look at it hasn’t changed that much. But we are even more attuned to the tail risks than we were
and more attuned to the need to take action if we sense that the risks are building. We are, as
are policymakers globally, more sensitive to risk. But first a little history.
Most of you will be familiar with the history of the Reserve Bank of Australia. Briefly, its genesis
was in the Commonwealth Bank of Australia, which was established by legislation in 1911. In this
early incarnation, the Bank only had the ordinary functions of a commercial and savings bank.
But over the succeeding years it gradually took on a number of activities that are typical of central
banks.  It  was  given  control  over  note  issue  in  the  1920s  and  then  progressively  acquired
exchange control powers and controls over the banking system. The Bank’s powers in relation to
the  administration  of  monetary  and  banking  policy  and  exchange  control  were  formalised  in
legislation in 1945. Then in 1959, the Commonwealth Bank was effectively split into two. The
original institution became the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose role was to carry out central
banking functions, while the commercial and savings bank functions were transferred to a new
institution that kept the name Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
Why this brief history lesson? I thought it was worth highlighting up front that the Reserve Bank
has  always  had  financial  stability  as  one  of  its  core  functions.  The  focus  on  the  activities  of
private banks and the ways in which they could be influenced or controlled grew in part out of the
experiences of the Depression in the early 1930s and the major banking crisis in Australia in the
1890s.
Since its establishment as a stand-alone central bank, there have been two key changes to the
way  the  Reserve  Bank  approached  its  financial  stability  obligations.  The  first  was  in  the  early
1980s when, following the financial system inquiry undertaken by the Campbell Committee, the
Australian  financial  system  was  deregulated.  Previously  banks  had  been  heavily  regulated  so
were limited in their ability to take risks. In the new deregulated environment, the Bank built up a
banking supervision framework. Prudential standards were introduced and the focus was on the
risk management frameworks of the banks.
The  second  key  change  followed  another  financial  system  inquiry  undertaken  by  the  Wallis
Committee. As a result of the inquiry, the banking supervision function was transferred to a new
institution – the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA). The Reserve Bank, however,
retained a role focusing on ‘overall financial system stability’. How did we interpret this? I think it
was set out well in the Bank’s 1999 Annual Report, the first year of these new arrangements. The
Bank stated that its ‘objective is to ensure that financial disturbances in any part of the financial
system do not ultimately threaten the health of the economy.’ It went on to set out the foundations
for financial stability: low inflation; a safe and robust payments system; efficient and smoothly
functioning financial markets; and a sound framework of prudential supervision.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since then, we haven’t changed the way we interpret our mandate for financial stability. We are
somewhat  more  explicit  about  recognising  the  potential  human  cost  of  financial  instability  in
terms  of  financial  distress  and  unemployment  and  are  more  attuned  to  the  behavioural  risks
associated with risk cultures and financial innovations. But we have substantially increased our
communication on financial stability issues. For example, in 1999, when we first started reporting
formally on financial stability, we published 10 pages in the Annual Report, of which only around
half were actually an assessment of financial stability. There were six charts – credit spreads in
overseas bond markets, credit to GDP, credit growth, house prices, banks’ impaired assets and
risk-weighted capital ratios. In March 2004 when we first published the Financial Stability Review,
the assessment was around 40 pages, including over 40 charts, and it is now routinely between
50 and 60 pages with upwards of 60 charts. We also give a lot more speeches covering financial
stability  issues,  such  as  this  one.  But  while  we  publish  much  more  detailed  analysis,  the
substance of the core issues has not changed substantially. The global financial environment
was  considered  in  the  1999  assessment  as  was  credit,  household  balance  sheets,  property
prices, and the resilience of the banks.
So  how,  if  at  all,  has  the  GFC  changed  the  way  we  look  at  financial  stability?  It  hasn’t
fundamentally  changed  the  way  think  about  financial  system  stability,  though  we  now  have  a
deeper understanding of the nature of the risks and the potential channels of contagion. We have
also built significant capacity to better monitor risks both in the banking and non-bank sectors.
Overall, I would say that policymakers around the world have become more alert to system-wide
risks.
Prior to the GFC, there was a common, but not universal, view that the system was fairly stable.
While there were some concerns about growth in credit and asset prices, there were a number
of  plausible  explanations  suggesting  that  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system  would
continue. Among these were the long period of global macroeconomic stability and low inflation
that  was  expected  to  continue  and  that  low  yields  were  a  natural  consequence  of  the  flow  of
savings from Asian economies. There were alternative, more pessimistic views centred around
the view that investors were seriously underestimating risk and taking on too much leverage. But
the more prevalent view seemed to be that the diversification of risk made possible by financial
innovation, and the relative strength of capital and liquidity levels, would stand the system in good
stead. You could say it had a ‘this time is different’ flavour.
While recognising these arguments, policymakers in Australia never entirely bought into this. The
experience with losses in commercial property in the late 1980s, the collapse of HIH in 2001 and
the  housing  boom  in  the  early  2000s  perhaps  made  Australian  regulators  a  little  more
circumspect.  APRA  had  therefore  maintained  a  strong  supervisory  focus  on  the  Australian
financial institutions. But we were also fortunate in Australia that the boom in commodity prices
and  substantial  rise  in  the  terms  of  trade  through  the  2000s  produced  a  very  favourable
economic environment at a time when many of the major economies moved into recession. It
was probably also fortuitous that there had been a bit of a shake-out in the housing market in
Australia in 2004/05 so we were not in a boom phase when the GFC hit. All of these factors
resulted in the Australian financial system coming out of the GFC in relatively good shape.
Post-GFC,  however,  policymakers  globally  (including  Australia)  are  more  exercised  about
system-wide  risk.  This  has  resulted  in  three  changes:  more  scrutiny  of  the  global  financial
system, strengthened regulation and a greater willingness to respond when risks appear to be
rising.
One concrete outcome of this at the global level was the creation of the Financial Stability Board
(FSB) in 2009, successor to the Financial Stability Forum (FSF). The FSF had been set up by
the  G7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  in  1999  to  enhance  international
cooperation to promote stability in the international financial system. Australia was a member of
the FSF. Following the GFC, the G20 called for the FSF’s membership to be broadened and its
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
effectiveness to be strengthened. This resulted in the establishment of the FSB with a broader
membership  and  mandate.  Specifically,  it  was  to  promote  international  financial  stability  by
coordinating national financial authorities and international standard-setting bodies as they have
worked toward developing strong regulatory, supervisory and other financial sector policies. This
involved assessing vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system and proposing actions to
address  them,  promoting  implementation  of  financial  sector  regulation  and  policies  and
monitoring implementation of the agreed reforms. This has taken the FSB into such areas as
supervision, resolution regimes, derivatives markets, shadow banking, compensation practices,
data and disclosure, and legal and accounting issues. And the FSB is actively looking for the next
potential source of systemic risk. At its most recent meeting, for example, it considered issues
raised by FinTech, misconduct and climate-related financial exposures.
On the regulatory side, the international standard-setting bodies looked to lessons learnt from the
crisis and in some cases revised their standards. The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
introduced a significantly strengthened capital and liquidity framework for banks, with additional
requirements  for  the  global  systemically  important  banks,  or  G-SIBs.  Minimum  capital  levels
were  increased,  capital  buffers  incorporated,  and  leverage  ratios  and  liquidity  requirements
introduced.  Disclosure  requirements  in  banking  and  the  financial  markets  increased. Australia
has  followed  this  international  move.  APRA  increased  capital  requirements,  and  applied  the
liquidity  coverage  ratio  (from  2015)  and  net  stable  funding  ratio  (to  commence  from  2018)  to
larger  and  more  complex  Authorised  Deposit-taking  Institutions  (ADIs).  And  it  is  working  on
implementing the recommendation of yet another financial system inquiry, undertaken by David
Murray, that Australian banks’ capital ratios should be ‘unquestionably strong'.
Standards  covering  financial  market  infrastructure  were  also  strengthened  and  supervisory
oversight increased. Central counterparties (CCPs) and securities settlement facilities generally
performed well through the GFC. CCPs in particular withstood the default of Lehman Brothers,
although  the  complete  resolution  was  complicated  and  took  some  time.  This  resulted  in
increasing regulatory pressure for securities and derivatives to be cleared through CCPs, making
them even more systemically important. Regulatory oversight increased along with this increase
in  importance,  with  attention  focused  on  risk  management  and  loss  absorbance  capability  of
CCPs,  recovery  plans  and  resolution  in  the  event  that  the  CCP  was  unable  to  recover.
International work in this area is ongoing, with the FSB releasing a consultation paper on CCP
resolution  in  February.  As  overseer  of  the  stability  of  central  counterparties  in  Australia,  the
Reserve  Bank  has  been  applying  these  new  standards  to  domestically  operating  CCPs,  the
most prominent ones being the ASX CCPs for equities and derivatives.
Finally, there seems to be more willingness for regulators and policymakers to take action if they
see  risks  building.  Prior  to  the  GFC  there  was  a  school  of  thought  that  because  asset  price
bubbles could not be detected in advance, it was better to clean up after any bust, rather than
lean against the cycle with policy. This was not the only view, however, and some policymakers
had argued for a number of years that there were indicators that could be used to detect financial
imbalances and that in some circumstances policy settings should take these imbalances into
1
account.
Post-GFC, there has been some swing to this latter view. There is now more acceptance of the
need to take action when system-wide risks are rising. This is reflected in the increasing use of
what are commonly known as macroprudential policies.
As my colleagues David Orsmond and Fiona Price note in a Bulletin article in December 2016,
there is no universally accepted definition of macroprudential policy.  They define it as ‘the use of
prudential actions to contain  risks  that,  if  realised,  could  have  widespread  implications  for  the
financial system as a whole as well as the real economy.’ They also note that the use of such
tools has increased in a number of countries post-GFC.
2
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
In Australia, we see macroprudential policy as part and parcel of the financial stability framework.
As we have set out on other occasions, the essence of macroprudential policy is that prudential
supervisors  recognise  potential  system-wide  risks  in  their  supervision  of  individual  institutions
and react accordingly.  APRA can and does take an active supervisory stance, modifying the
intensity of its prudential supervision as it sees fit to address institution-specific risks, sectoral
risks or overall systemic risk. A recent example might help to illustrate this.
3
In 2014, the Australian regulators took the view that risks were building in the residential housing
market that warranted attention. There was very strong demand for residential housing loans,
particularly by investors. Price competition in the mortgage market had intensified and discounts
on advertised variable rates were common. There also seemed to be a relaxation in non-price
lending terms. The share of new loans that were interest only was drifting up and the growth of
lending  for  investment  properties  was  accelerating.  Unsurprisingly  in  this  environment,  the
4
growth in housing prices was strong, particularly in Melbourne and Sydney.
The regulators judged that more targeted action was needed to address the risks – to put a bit of
sand in the gears. So APRA tightened a number of aspects of its supervision. It indicated that it
would be alert to annual growth in a bank’s investor housing lending above a benchmark of 10
per  cent.  It  also  set  some  more  prescriptive  guidelines  for  serviceability  assessments  and
intensified its scrutiny of lending practices. ASIC also undertook a review of lending with a focus
on whether lenders were complying with responsible lending obligations.
There  is  no  doubt  that  the  actions  did  address  some  of  the  risks.  Nevertheless,  the  early
experience  suggests  that,  while  the  resilience  of  both  borrowers  and  lenders  has  no  doubt
improved, the initial effects on credit and some other indicators we use to assess risk may fade
over  time.  We  are  continuing  to  monitor  their  ongoing  effects  and  are  prepared  to  do  more  if
needed.
Where  to  from  here?  With  the  GFC  close  to  10  years  ago  now  and  a  substantial  amount  of
regulatory  reform  having  been  undertaken,  the  focus  is  turning  to  implementation  and  taking
stock of the effectiveness of the reforms. This is reflected in the FSB’s current agenda. But there
is  also  some  thinking  to  be  done  about  how  monetary  policy  considerations  should  factor  in
financial  stability  issues,  and  the  role  that  macroprudential  policies  might  play  in  addressing
system-wide risks in a low interest rate environment.
In conclusion, I would like to return to the question I posed at the beginning of this talk, and in fact
the question I posed myself when I first came into this area a few months ago – has the way we
look  at  financial  stability  changed  since  the  GFC?  While  the  basic  way  we  look  at  financial
stability has not changed, experience with the GFC reinforced the need to focus on system-wide
issues.  We  need  to  spend  time  analysing  them  and  thinking  about  whether  policy  responses
might be required. We are still learning how best to do this. 
1
2
3
4
Bloxham,  P,  C  Kent  and  M  Robson  (2010), Asset  Prices,  Credit  Growth,  Monetary  and  Other  Policies: An
Australian Case Study, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2010–06.
Orsmond, D and F Price (2016), ‘Macroprudential Policy Frameworks and Tools’, RBA Bulletin, December, pp
75–86.
Ellis L (2012), ‘Macroprudential Policy: A Suite of Tools or a State of Mind? ’, Speech at Paul Woolley Centre for
the Study of Capital Market Dysfunctionality Annual; Conference, Sydney, 11 October.
RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2014), Financial Stability Review, September.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
