Gent Sejko: Judging the progress achieved regarding reforms and
economic policies
Opening address by Mr Gent Sejko, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the the presentation of
the EBRD's Transition Report 2016-2017, Tirana, 27 January 2017.
Dear EBRD representatives,
Dear participants,
 It  is  a  special  pleasure  for  us  to  host  this  event  again  and  offer  our  cooperation  for  the
presentation  of  the  Transition  Report  2016–2017,  compiled  by  the  European  Bank  for
Reconstruction and Development.
While  only  one  year  has  passed  since  the  last  presentation,  the  challenges  facing  the  global
economy have been numerous. They are rather complex, creating the perception that we are
before a new era.
The existing problems, combined with the political, economic, and social developments in recent
years, have contributed to the insofar convergence process. Nonetheless, the Transition Report
evidences  and  documents,  professionally  and  reliably,  the  economic,  legal  and  institutional
progress  made  in  terms  of  transition  and  convergence,  providing  the  appropriate  space  and
priority for the future reforms.
This  is  notably  an  independent  assessment  and  a  contemporary  standard  that  helps  us
objectively  judge  on  the  progress  achieved  regarding  reforms  and  economic  policies
implemented by the authorities in the relevant country. Figuratively, it sets the pace with which
the society may assess the responsibility and accountability of the authorities to the public and
the market.
In this context, the report assesses as positive the reforms and economic policies undertaken by
the Albanian authorities. Moreover, the conclusions of the report on economic developments and
monetary  and  financial  situation  are  similar  to  the  analyses  and  conclusions  of  the  Bank  of
Albania at the end of 2016. In concrete terms, the Albanian economy has accelerated the growth
pace  driven  mainly  by  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  its
effective  pass-through  to  the  economy.  These  factors,  coupled  with  the  further  recovery  of
domestic  demand  will  play  a  significant  role  in  the  further  growth  of  economic  activity  during
2017.
The Report points to the important fact that the banking system is liquid, well capitalised and
capable to withstand shocks that may come from the external sector. It identifies non-performing
loans as the main risk not only to the system’s soundness but also to the monetary policy pass-
through in credit growth for the private sector. The report assesses positively the coordinated
plan  of  actions  by  the  Bank  of  Albania  in  cooperation  with  the  Government  of  Albania  and
international  institutions,  to  address  comprehensively  and  definitively  the  issues  of  non-
performing loans.
The action plan of the Bank of Albania is a broad and complex process, which consists in legal
and institutional regulations and decisions. I am happy to see that the EBRD has reached the
conclusion that this legal, regulatory and institutional process will contribute to reducing the non-
performing loans, in the long term. It is also encouraging to note that the report makes a similar
positive assessment for a group of reforms undertaken by the Albanian government and other
authorities in the area of market liberalisation, privatisations, energy sector and infrastructure.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Looking  ahead,  the  report  assesses  objectively  the  global  macroeconomic  environment  as
overall  favourable.  The  nature  and  origin  of  capital  flows  toward  the  transition  economies  is
immune from the adverse effects from the Brexit or increase in interest rates in the US economy.
For the Central and Southeastern Europe, during 2017, the economy is expected to grow faster,
driven  by  domestic  factors  and  a  slight  and  stable  improvement  of  the  economic  situation  in
foreign trading partners. The main risks relate to the performance of commodity prices, and in
particular to geopolitical and global economic developments.
The deepening social inequality is an issue of particular concern that has been present across
the board in transition countries. The report evidences that inequality in the economy, in terms of
opportunities  and  financial  inclusion,  has  been  expanding,  contributing  negatively  to  economic
welfare in transition countries. Finding solutions is a difficult challenge, with financial education
and financial inclusion considered as tools for addressing this issue successfully.
I would like to take advantage of this opportunity to emphasise that the Bank of Albania and the
banking  system  are  paying  particular  attention  to  these  two  topics.  Our  financial  education
programmes, informative publications on banking products and services, coupled with regulation,
licencing,  introduction  and  support  for  new  payment  and  financial  services  technology  and
instruments, are aimed at enhancing financial inclusion and generating opportunities for financial
access for all groups of the society.
The  Bank  of Albania  deems  that  more  may  be  done  with  regard  to  designing  and  promoting
financial products that satisfy better the needs of such groups. In addition, we think that there is
more space for faster growth of credit to the private sector, particularly for certain sectors, in
which inequality is more notable. More concretely, agriculture is a good example to illustrate this
point. While it contributes a significant share to the gross national product, it only gets a small
share of credit and other financial products.
Beyond  these  policies  and  strategies  for  developing  financial  products,  the  real  fight  against
poverty and inequality in the long term should be based on accomplishing structural economic,
legal and institutional reforms, designed in the framework of the European integration process.
The  priorities  of  our  economies  should  focus  on  maintaining  macroeconomic  and  financial
stability, continuing structural reforms in infrastructure and the labour market. Creating favourable
conditions  for  doing  business  and  for  honest  investors,  by  fighting  informality,  should  be
accompanied with the creation of human capital and preparation of the workforce in accordance
with the actual technological developments and challenges.
Dear participants,
The Transition Report 2016–2017 of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development is
an important document for all of us. Regardless of our status – decision-makers, policy makers,
researchers, academia or journalists – the report provides abundant information for furthering our
analyses and conclusions. I invite you all to read it, and rationally and responsibly materialise its
conclusions in your analyses for the present and the outlook of the economy.
Thank you!
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
