Andreas  Dombret:  The  future  of  global  economic  cooperation  -
Brexit, Basel III and beyond
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at a reception to welcome Olga Wittchen, Financial Attaché, as the Bundesbank's representative
in London, London, 23 February 2017.
 1. Introduction
Dear Sam Woods 
Ladies and gentlemen
It is wonderful to be back in London, a city so full of British, European and international flair. I am
happy to see many familiar faces and numerous influential stakeholders from the City.
On one of my last visits to London, I heard someone say "The Germans like the British more
than the British like the Germans." I hope that is not the reason behind the Brexit vote. In any
case, it may not even be true – I have always felt there is a great deal of mutual respect between
our two nations.
Actually, I am rather convinced that the British and the Germans put an equal emphasis on the
mutual friendship and partnership. Yet, in times of Brexit and stalled international cooperation, we
have  to  find  new  grounds  for  continued  friendship  and  cooperation.  When  politics  becomes
emotional and confrontational, close personal ties and an understanding of where the other side
is coming from are more important than ever. That’s why today’s event is important to me.
Tonight we are celebrating the arrival of our new Bundesbank representative in London. To mark
the  occasion,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  on  how  we  can  stabilise  and  improve  global
cooperation, and discuss two current sets of negotiations: Brexit and Basel III.
 
2. What is the future of global cooperation?
When  talking  about  global  market  liberalisation  and  economic  cooperation,  we  hear  extreme,
ideologically  motivated  solutions  all  too  often:  for  instance,  populist  nationalism  promises  that
everything will get better if we build new walls between our societies. At the other extreme are
those  who  favour  hyper-globalisation,  that  is,  no  borders  to  economic  activity  at  all  and  full
harmonisation.
History  has  proven  that  both  solutions  are  mere  ideologies.  The  theories  of  both  sides  have
proven to be unrealistic and in considerable part, plain wrong.
So what form of international economic coordination is actually viable?
To answer that – without giving a long lecture – we can borrow a simple yet powerful analysis:
the globalisation trilemma. Dani Rodrik, a well-known economist from Harvard University, argues
that  we  face  the  following  trilemma:  we  cannot  have  all  three  things  at  once:  (a)  full,  global
market liberalisation, (b) national sovereignty, and (c) democracy. We must choose two of these
1
three, and give one up.
If we choose full economic globalisation, without any obstacles to free trade, then we must give
up either our national sovereignty or our democratic ability to oppose global rules. For example, if
we give up democracy, an autocratic ruler could decree that everyone has to accept the global
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
rules. If we give up national sovereignty, we could have a global democracy. I think it is fair to say
that we would rather not give up democracy or national sovereignty.
What remains is to limit market liberalisation, where our societies deem this necessary. This is
not a convenient truth, because it means we have to look for answers in less clear waters: we
need to find those areas where global cooperation and harmonisation is sensible, and how far it
can  go.  This  strategy  must  then  go  hand  in  hand  with  more  national  autonomy  for  finding
domestic solutions to national challenges.
Given  these  constraints,  a  realistic  middle  ground  would  be  focused  global  cooperation:
continuing to cooperate and to harmonise regulations, where possible – but also focusing and
improving our efforts. Focused global cooperation would also offer greater scope for solutions
that respect the legitimate interests of countries wanting to run their economies independently.
 
3. Brexit
I’d like to discuss briefly what focused cooperation would mean for Brexit negotiations and the
future relationship between the European Union and Britain.
I think it is fair to say that we are searching intently for a workable solution that ensures friendly
collaboration.  Yet  the  scope  of  possible  solutions  is  limited  by  the  British  decision  for  a  hard
Brexit, as well as by the EU’s understandable prerogative to prevent cherry-picking.
One of the possible scenarios we now have to imagine is making cooperation possible in two
legally distinct jurisdictions, with different legal frameworks. This would mean that firms would
have  to  comply  with  partially-differing  rules.  To  continue  serving  their  clients  in  the  other
jurisdiction, it might be wise for banks to check if it is viable to open branches or subsidiaries in
the respective economic area.
In such a scenario, close coordination between supervisors becomes crucial. When regulations
differ,  it  is  our  responsibility  as  supervisors  to  facilitate  cross-border  activity  without  imposing
undue operational burdens. The fact that Sam Woods and I are both here tonight may serve as
proof that we both take this very seriously.
Let me give you a concrete example: when EU supervisors investigate a bank’s internal model to
calculate regulatory capital requirements, they could build – for the time being – on the findings of
the  Prudential  Regulatory Authority;  likewise,  the  PRA  could  build  on  the  verdict  of  the  EU’s
Single  Supervisory  Mechanism.  For  that  to  be  viable,  both  the  PRA  and  the  ECB  or  the
Bundesbank would need detailed information on each other’s decisions. We would need a close,
responsible cooperation between supervisors.
 
4. Basel III
Now  for  something  completely  different:  the  finalisation  of  Basel  III  –  that  is  the  final  piece  to
complete global regulatory reforms after the financial crisis. A globally harmonised standard for
all banks would be the welcome result.
Yet  one  obstacle  remains  in  the  way:  that  of  regionally  balanced  capital  requirements.
Harmonisation is important, but so is a regionally balanced outcome. However, I am confident
that we can find a solution that is acceptable to all Basel Committee members. I just hope that
recent  opposition  to  the  Basel  reforms,  voiced  by  members  of  the  US  Congress,  are  simply
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
political rhetoric, and that the US remains committed to harmonised standards for global banks.
Please rest assured that we remain dedicated to making Basel III a success.
 
5. Racing to the bottom?
But let me make one thing very clear: focused cooperation and more national autonomy must not
be abused as a scapegoat for special interest policies. It must not result in a race to the bottom.
I am deeply troubled by recent efforts to water down post-crisis reforms of financial regulation,
whether  it  is  the  US  presidential  decree  to  cut  back  Dodd-Frank,  the  UK’s  "financial  centre
strategy", or the European Commission’s sometimes overzealous approach to reducing burdens
on European banks.
Such policies may seem to be in the best national interest, but ultimately they are special interest
politics  –  the  very  kind  of  policies  which  strengthened  populists  in  the  first  place.  We  must
expose these policies for what they really are: threats to financial stability.
 
6. Fostering cooperation
A few years down the road, I very much hope that we will be living in a world in which the close
friendships between Britain and Germany, between the European Union and Britain and between
the United States and Europe still form the bedrock of international cooperation.
In such a world, we would still be close trading partners and our financial centres would retain
their  close  ties  –  our  supervisors  would  work  together  to  ensure  high  regulatory  standards,
without imposing undue burdens on firms.
Let’s not be unrealistic: achieving such cooperation is highly challenging. We need to define the
areas in which we want to cooperate, and to what degree we want to cooperate – this will be
difficult politics. But it is worth trying to save the post-war order – by developing it further.
We  can  all  further  that  cause:  by  finding  solutions  that  respect  the  legitimate  interests  of
countries  wanting  increased  national  autonomy  and  the  need  to  continue  global  economic
cooperation.
The Bundesbank’s representative in London furthers that cause. Ms Julia Becker has done an
excellent job over the past two and a half years: she played a vital role in the exchange between
the  Bundesbank  and  the  Bank  of  England,  and  she  was  instrumental  in  shaping  our  Brexit
analysis. I am pleased that after a short family break, she will continue to perform an essential
role at our Frankfurt headquarters.
I am also confident that Ms Olga Wittchen will continue this successful track record. Coming
from  our  Directorate  General  for  Banking  and  Financial  Supervision,  she  is  an  expert  in
international  banking  regulation.  I  have  worked  with  her  on  several  projects  on  the  Financial
Stability Board – and I am convinced that she will put her skills towards fostering cooperation
between Britain and Germany.
 
7. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Henry L Mencken, an influential American writer of the early twentieth century, once said: "For
every complex problem there is an answer that is clear, simple, and wrong."
Let’s search for answers that are right – and let’s expose oversimplified, misleading ideologies –
neither nationalist populism nor hyper-globalisation will lead to prosperity and security.
Global  economic  cooperation  has  helped  us  to  build  a  more  prosperous  society.  However,  it
does have side effects. Only by reducing and managing these side effects can we foster global
cooperation in the long term.
Focused global cooperation promises a way forward. We should all put our minds together to
decide how this can be best achieved.
Thank you for your attention. Sam: the floor is now yours.
1
D Rodrik (2000), How far will international economic integration go? in Journal of Economic Perspectives: 14(1):
pp 177-186.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
