Jens Weidmann: The financial crisis, ten years on - what have we
learned?
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  Ruhr  University  Bochum,
Bochum, 22 May 2017.
 1. Introductory remarks
Professor Paul
Professor Roos
Ladies and gentlemen
Students
 I’m well aware that I’m not the first central banker to speak before you in the “ikf impulse” series.
Indeed, my predecessor Axel Weber delivered his third-to-last speech as Bundesbank President
here in April 2011.
I, too, will deliver my third-to-last speech today - but that’s just for the month of May.
Incidentally,  his  speech  was  titled  “The  role  of  economic  policy  after  the  crisis",  which,  from
today’s perspective, seems somewhat premature - after all, the euro area had not yet put the
crisis behind it at that time. Quite the opposite, in fact - the crisis had yet to come to a head in the
euro area. As the situation in Greece and other member states progressively worsened, some
even went as far as to question the continued existence of monetary union.
With that in mind, “after the crisis” is more likely referring to the global financial and economic
crisis,  which  began  in  2007  and  reached  its  crescendo  in  autumn  2008  with  the  collapse  of
Lehman  Brothers  and  the  severe  economic  downturn  that  followed.  To  that  extent,  it  is  not
premature to talk to you here today about the financial crisis ten years on and to ask what we
have learned.
However, I will scarcely be able to do justice to the complexities of the crisis, complete with its
causes,  implications  and  the  lessons  we  can  learn  from  it,  in  just  over  45  minutes.  I  would
therefore like to focus on aspects that are especially relevant from my perspective as a monetary
policymaker, while noting that the observations I am about to make are not exhaustive.
2. The significance of the liability principle
Ladies and gentlemen
If you give some thought to the causes of the crisis, it becomes clear that the financial crisis and
the later euro-area crisis follow a common theme: the liability principle was undermined in the
run-up to both events.
Walter  Eucken,  founder  of  the  Freiburg  school  and  a  pioneer  of  the  social  market  economy,
condensed the liability principle into a simple formula: “Whoever reaps the benefits must also
bear the liability."
This tenet was so dear to him that he declared it a constitutive principle of our economic order -
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
for, in his view, economic agents will make responsible decisions only if the liability principle is
enforced.
For instance, when banks become so big that their failure could bring the entire financial system
to its knees, they can rely on politicians to throw them a lifeline if they run into difficulties. Thanks
to this implicit insurance policy against the risk of insolvency, the banks benefit from a funding
advantage even in normal times, as investors perceive the risk of default to be lower, and the
capital market, deeming them too big to fail, therefore cuts them a certain amount of slack.
Furthermore, complex financial market products and confusing market structures had caused a
fog to descend on the financial markets, with the resulting lack of transparency likewise serving
to help drive the mispricing of risk. As a result, many banks were therefore undercapitalised in
terms of their balance sheet risk.
But  the  rules  that  apply  to  enterprises,  banks  and  investors  must  ultimately  apply  to
governments, too. Their purse strings also tend to be loosened if they are absolved, either in part
or  in  full,  from  bearing  the  financial  consequences  of  their  projects.  In  a  monetary  union,  the
impact of one country’s debt - felt in the form of rising interest rates – becomes more widespread
across all of the other member states, not only because of the single capital market but also,
similarly  to  the  response  to  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  it  makes  sense  for  member  states  to
come to each other’s rescue during times of crisis. To this extent then, too, there is a greater
incentive to run up debt.
Of  course,  the  founding  fathers  of  monetary  union  were  well  aware  that,  as  a  general  rule,
unsound public finances are an Achilles’ heel to a monetary union in which a single monetary
policy has been put in place while fiscal policy remains a matter of national responsibility. For this
reason,  the  framework  of  monetary  union  is  actually  designed  to  safeguard  sound  public
finances.  In  addition  to  setting  out  annual  budget  deficit  and  debt  ceilings,  it  highlights  the
member states’ individual fiscal responsibility. A no-bailout clause was introduced precisely to
prevent  euro-area  countries  from  stepping  into  the  breach  for  another  member  state  and
providing financial aid.
The  thrust  of  both  measures  is  keep  in  check  those  financial  risks  to  which  the  euro-area
countries  may  be  exposed  as  a  result  of  participating  in  monetary  union. At  the  same  time,
however, the no-bailout clause is designed to help enforce the liability principle on the market for
government debt. The no-bailout clause also served as a warning to private creditors that the
member states are solely responsible for their finances, even in times of crisis, meaning that
government bonds do not constitute a risk-free investment.
Now, these two pillars have clearly not been enough to safeguard sound public finances. One
reason for this is the weak binding effect of the fiscal rules, with repeated breaches leaving them
permanently impaired. Germany was one of the primary culprits here, having worked together
with France in the first half of the 2000s to water down the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact.
On balance, however, the second pillar was also too weak: the capital markets’ disciplinary effect
on euro-area countries proved to be inadequate.
The capital markets had assumed that the euro area was a union with a common destiny and
that, despite the existence of the no-bailout clause, its member states would provide financial
assistance to one another in the event of a crisis. Despite the huge disparity in economic power
and indebtedness between the member states, they therefore paid similar levels of interest on
their debt prior to the crisis.
However,  it  is  also  worth  remembering  that,  although  some  of  the  countries  that  later  found
themselves  in  need  of  financial  assistance  were  indeed  experiencing  rising  macroeconomic
imbalances prior to the crisis, their public finances were only actually thrown off track when the
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks were bailed out.
It’s worth keeping these root causes of the crisis in mind as I now look back at how the crisis has
unfolded since 2007 and later ask what remains to be done in order to put an end to the crisis
once and for all.
3. Flashback
Ladies and gentlemen
In 2007, we Germans became acquainted with a term that, at most, only financial market experts
had  previously  ever  heard  of  -  and  even  they  were  likely  unaware  in  many  cases  of  the  risk
involved. I’m talking about subprime mortgages.
This was the name given to mortgages issued to borrowers in the United States with low - in
other words, not “prime" - credit ratings. It goes without saying that the term “subprime” was a
euphemism,  as  loans  were  granted  en  masse  to  households  whose  credit  ratings  could  be
charitably described as questionable.
The subprime boom was boosted by three developments: low interest rates, a property bubble
and the securitisation of subprime mortgages.
The interest rate environment led to a “search for yield". What’s more, thanks to the low interest
rates,  low-income  households  were  also  able  to  shoulder  the  debt.  At  the  same  time,
homeowners’ debt levels were falling as a result of ever-rising property prices, irrespective of
their  mortgage  repayments.  In  the  United  States,  many  homeowners  used  this  opportunity  to
refinance and take out additional mortgages. Borrowers became all the more vulnerable to rising
interest rates and falling property prices, culminating in the subprime crisis of 2007.
The ability to securitise and re-securitise subprime mortgage created an incentive to issue as
many subprime mortgages as possible, as various links in the “value chain” turned a profit from
processing fees. In the end, the risk attached to such loans did not remain with the banks that
had made the credit decision but was rather passed on. As a result, not only were risks created
on a large scale - the seeds for the subsequent spread of the crisis were also sown.
And so the subprime crisis quickly spilled over to Germany and Europe, where some financial
institutions  that  had  invested  particularly  heavily  in  the  corresponding  securities  found
themselves in financial distress.
This is yet another demonstration of the fact that, if it is possible to take risks for which one is
ultimately not liable, misincentives will be created. Credit assessments will no long be carried out
with the necessary due diligence and the risks taken will be too high.
The financial markets were then left well and truly paralysed by the bankruptcy of US investment
bank Lehman Brothers on 15 September 2008. Lehman had been a major cog in the subprime
mortgage securitisation business and suffered critical losses in the wake of the crisis.
I know from my conversations with my US counterparts at the time what a tough decision it was
to opt against saving Lehman using taxpayers’ money. At the end of the day, a bail-out would
have further eroded the liability principle and given additional credence to the implicit too-big-to-
fail assumption held by many senior bank executives and market participants. And so, with the
fall of Lehman, it was necessary to accept potentially sweeping contagion effects in the financial
system.
An important lesson learned from this experience is undoubtedly the fact that it is only possible to
resolve an institution without triggering major financial market turmoil if the contagion effects are
contained and the other financial market participants are sufficiently resilient.
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  this  was  not  the  case  at  the  time:  following  the  Lehman  bankruptcy,  financial  market
participants sought refuge from risk and continued to invest only in the safest of assets, primarily
the  government  bonds  of  certain  countries.  The  decline  in  the  price  of  risky  securities
accelerated, and the uncertainty that this triggered regarding the financial shape of many banks
ultimately meant that financial institutions had to be rescued using taxpayers’ money in order to
avert a meltdown of the global financial system.
In Germany, the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) was set up to help either rescue or
resolve  several  banks,  Hypo  Real  Estate  being  the  most  significant  and  arguably  best-known
example.
Despite  the  enormous  amount  of  government  aid  provided  to  the  world’s  banks,  it  was  not
possible to prevent the global financial crisis from spreading to the real economy. The period
covering the fourth quarter of 2008 and first quarter of 2009 was subsequently marked by a sharp
contraction  in  world  trade  and  a  massive  economic  slump  in  many  countries.  In  the  G7
countries, real GDP declined by 3.8 % in 2009, with this figure even hitting 4.5 % in the euro area.
Many  countries  launched  debt-financed  economic  stimulus  packages  designed  to  partially
compensate for the shortfall in demand and thereby avoid a downward spiral. Some of you will
no doubt still be able to remember the car scrappage scheme in Germany.
Incidentally, one factor that should not be overlooked here is the G20 states’ joint commitment at
this time to not strive for unilateral advantages and to refrain from protectionist measures.
While the appetite for risk had been excessively high prior to the crisis, the crisis led to a drastic
reassessment  and  a  growing  aversion  to  risk  in  the  financial  markets.  This  was  particularly
evident in the market for government bonds of some euro-area countries.
At the same time, it was now becoming increasingly clear that some economies in the euro area
were  not  exactly  in  the  best  of  shape.  Countries  were  vulnerable  in  the  face  of  pronounced
current account deficits and high reliance on capital inflows from abroad. A large part of the funds
they received had also previously been used for non-productive purposes, be it high government
spending, private consumption or excessive housing investment. To put it bluntly, some euro-
area countries were living beyond their means prior to the crisis.
To make matters worse, the bursting of the property price bubble in countries such as Ireland
and Spain shook the banking system, which had helped to finance the construction boom on a
large  scale.  Negative  feedback  effects  of  government  support  measures  included  a  drastic
deterioration  in  public  finances,  which  intensified  the  banking  crises  in  these  countries  even
further. This was because banks held sizeable amounts of bonds from their own countries.
This sovereign-bank nexus is a particularity of the euro crisis, in which troubled banks and ailing
states mutually dragged each other down further and further.
Above all, this episode shows how quickly the risk assessment of the market participants can
change. This is partly because the fundamentals had worsened, but also because the overblown
expectations were corrected and have now been reversed. One of the main issues debated by
regulators after the crises was therefore how buffers can be created to make the banking system
more resistant, not only to such turnarounds in sentiment but also to adverse developments in
general,  by  ensuring  a  more  solid  liquidity  position  or  a  more  robust  financing  structure.
Moreover,  the  severing  of  the  unhealthy  ties  between  sovereigns  and  banks  is  still  seen  by
many - and rightly so - as an urgent necessity.
At  first,  however,  controversial  emergency  measures  were  taken  to  prevent  the  crisis  from
spreading throughout the euro area: in April 2010, Greece, which had become heavily indebted,
was practically unable to obtain any further loans on the capital markets and had to ask the other
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
countries in the euro area for financial assistance. Together with the IMF, the donor countries
provided fiscal support to the ailing country and, as you all know, this was not the only “financial
assistance package” that Greece was to receive.
Following this ad hoc measure, the euro-area member states drew up a rescue package to be
made  available  to  all  countries,  which  was  initially  temporary  but  later  became  a  permanent
fixture. A total of five countries (Ireland, Portugal, Greece, Spain and Cyprus) received financial
assistance from this fund.
In doing so, the euro-area member states, for all practical purposes, established a kind of joint
liability. This, in itself, increased the incentive for these countries to run up debt. To prevent this
from happening, the ESM rescue package may only be activated as a measure of last resort to
thwart an immediate threat to the stability of the euro area as a whole. Furthermore, assistance
may only be provided to help with liquidity problems, but not solvency problems, as the liability
principle  would  require  the  creditors  to  be  bailed  in,  ie  a  restructuring  of  debt.  The  no-bailout
clause would also clearly exclude such aid.
Moreover,  the  granting  of  financial  assistance  is  subject  to  strict  conditions,  true  to  the  motto
“solidarity  against  solidarity".  Assistance  loans  should  therefore  only  be  paid  if  the  recipient
countries have met the previously agreed conditions. Ultimately, ESM funds can only finance the
necessary  adjustment  process,  and  thus  “buy  time".  Only  economic  policy  in  the  affected
country itself can treat the root cause.
As  a  result,  the Bundesbank  came  to  the  conclusion  at  the  time  that,  given  the  threat  to  the
stability  of  the  European  monetary  union,  the  assistance  fund  that  was  created  and  the  aid
programmes,  with  their  strict  fiscal  and  economic  conditionality,  were  by  and  large  justifiable
from an economic perspective – provided that the restrictions and conditions are actually met.
Ladies and gentlemen
As we all know, the Eurosystem was also compelled to take measures to prevent the crisis from
escalating. Yet these measures, too, only acted as strong painkillers. Although they did manage
to alleviate the symptoms, such as banks’ liquidity squeeze and the sharp rise in risk premiums
for individual euro-area countries, they did not tackle the actual root causes of the crisis.
And just like any other medicines, you should read the package insert carefully, because the side
effects can sometimes be quite nasty. The Bundesbank was therefore very critical of some of
the measures taken.
Here  I  am  referring  to  the  government  bond  purchase  programme  in  May  2010.  Under  the
Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP),  Greek  bonds  were  initially  purchased;  the  programme
was  later  extended  to  include  Irish  and  Portuguese  government  bonds.  From  the  summer
of 2011, Spanish and Italian bonds were also added to the programme.
I  am  also,  however,  thinking  of  the  OMT  programme  adopted  in  the  summer  of  2012,  which
replaced the SMP and which still exists today. Unlike the SMP, the OMT programme potentially
envisages  unlimited  purchases,  which,  however,  are  conditional  on 
the  successful
implementation of an adjustment programme.
As a result of the targeted purchase of bonds from countries with a poor credit rating, their risk
premiums  were  offloaded  onto  the  capital  markets.  The  Eurosystem  and  its  bond  purchases
therefore had a significant impact on the government bond interest rates of these countries and
consequently encroached deep into the realms of fiscal policy. It therefore also exposed itself to
the danger of coming under political pressure to ease the burden on fiscal policy time and time
again and consequently weakened the disciplinary function of the capital markets.
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Moreover,  the  purchases  resulted  in  sovereign  liability  risks  being  mutualised  via  the
Eurosystem’s balance sheet. However, the mutualisation of sovereign liability risks is inherently a
political  decision.  Governments  and  parliaments,  and  not  the  central  banks,  have  the  task  of
determining  which  burdens  the  taxpayers  in  the  member  states  should  ultimately  shoulder  in
order to stabilise the euro area.
The independence of the central banks requires a narrow mandate and a clear separation from
fiscal policy.
Ladies and gentlemen
Just like so many others, Queen Elizabeth II also asked the simple, yet not so easy to answer
question during a visit to the London School of Economics in the spring of 2009: “Why did no one
see it coming?"
The reputation of economists has undoubtedly suffered as a result of the crisis.
In his book “The Art of Thinking Clearly", the Swiss author Rolf Dobelli writes: “in 2007, economic
experts painted a rosy picture for the coming years. However, twelve months later, the financial
markets imploded. Asked about the crisis, the same experts enumerated its causes: monetary
expansion  under  Greenspan,  lax  validation  of  mortgages,  corrupt  rating  agencies,  low  capital
requirements, and so forth. In hindsight, the reasons for the crash seem painfully obvious, and
yet not a single economist (...) predicted how exactly it would unfold. On the contrary: rarely have
we seen such a high incidence of hindsight experts."
"The hindsight bias", Dobelli goes on to write, “is one of the most prevailing fallacies of all. We
can aptly describe it as the ‘I told you so’ phenomenon."
In my opinion, however, most (serious) economists do not claim to have always known it would
happen. Rather, many would agree that the risks in the financial system were underestimated for
far too long. Dobelli is, however, right in the sense that the logical ex post facto explanation of the
crisis should not lull us into a false sense of security.
Economists who study history, such as Kindleberger, Galbraith or Reinhart and Rogoff, would in
any  case  argue  that  financial  crises  are  always  recurring  phenomena.  They  write  about
speculative bubbles which occurred a long time ago, such as the Tulip Mania in Holland in the
17th  century  or  the  South  Sea  bubble  in  the  18th  century.  And  just  a  few  years  before  the
subprime crisis, the New Economy bubble burst.
And so the recent financial crisis will not have been the last crisis that we encounter. This is
assured by the “This time is different” syndrome, as described by Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth
Rogoff. Its core consists “of the firm belief that financial crises only happen to other people in
other countries; a crisis cannot occur here and now in our country. We are doing things better,
we are smarter, we have learned from past mistakes."
But even if we do not fall for the “This time is different” trap, even the best economists in the
world are not exactly sure what will trigger the next crisis.
Maybe  the  next  crisis  will  be  triggered  by  cyber  attacks  or  hacker  attacks  and  not  by  risks  in
banks’ loan books. After all, the increasingly digitalised nature of financial market infrastructures
is leaving our financial system increasingly exposed to such risks. And in contrast to the usual
credit risks, where the default of a single creditor does not as a rule profoundly shock a bank, it
may even be enough under certain circumstances for one of the many cyber attacks carried out
on a daily basis to succeed and to paralyse the activities of a bank for a while, thereby throwing
the financial system into disarray.
And that is why it is so important to place a greater focus on the potential dangers associated
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
with  cybercrime  than  has  been  the  case  to  date.  The  Federal  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the
Bundesbank have therefore put cyber security on the G20 agenda. And last week’s events have
underscored the wisdom of this decision. But perhaps a new crisis is brewing elsewhere.
However,  knowing  how  difficult  it  is  to  accurately  predict  a  crisis  certainly  does  not  give  us  a
licence to just sit back and do nothing about it. The very least we can do is to draw the right
conclusions from past crises. The aim is not only to eliminate individual risk factors but to make
the  financial  system  more  robust  as  a  whole,  so  that  future  crises  no  longer  result  in  such
dramatic consequences.
And so we now come to the question “What have we done to reduce our vulnerability to crises
and to strengthen the resilience of the financial system?"
4. Consequences of the financial and debt crisis
First and foremost, the stricter financial market regulation is particularly worthy of mention. Its
fundamental  objective  was  to  restore  greater  validity  to  the  principle  of  liability  in  the  financial
markets.
First of all, the root causes of the subprime crisis were tackled. Obvious moral hazard in the
securitisation  business  was  corrected,  for  example  by  introducing  a  mandatory  deductible  for
securitisation  transactions  in  the  EU.  In  addition,  rating  agencies  are  now  more  closely
supervised and are obliged to be more transparent.
The  more  stringent  capital  requirements  under  the  Basel  III  framework  also  mean  that  the
owners, and thus those who are ultimately responsible for taking entrepreneurial decisions, now
have  to  bear  greater  responsibility  for  their  actions. After  all,  more  money  is  now  at  stake  for
them.  At  the  same  time,  the  institutions  have  “greater  room  to  manoeuvre”  in  the  event  of
negative developments, and their loss-absorbing capability increases.
The  average  tier  1  capital  ratio  of  the  major  German  banks  improved  from  5.4  %  in  2011  to
12.1 % in the middle of last year.
The  major  banks  in  Germany  and  the  other  euro-area  countries  have  also  been  directly
supervised by the ECB, in cooperation with national supervisors, since November 2014. The less
significant  banks  -  around  3,500  in  the  euro  area  as  whole  -  are  supervised  by  the  national
supervisors according to uniform standards.
This  is  also  an  important  step  on  the  road  to  a  more  stable  banking  system,  especially  as
national supervisors occasionally tended to see “their” banks through rose-coloured glasses. The
creation  of  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  (SSM)  should  also  be  used  as  a  means  of
counteracting  regulatory  arbitrage,  ie  the  targeted  relocation  of  business  to  countries  with  the
least strict supervisory regimes.
But  the  SSM  is  just  one  pillar  of  the  European  banking  union.  The  other,  at  least  equally  as
important,  pillar  is  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  for  banks,  or  SRM.  This  mechanism  is
designed to facilitate the resolution of a failed bank and ensure that there is a clear hierarchy of
liability in place, with the taxpayer as the last possible port of call, in line with the “bail-in instead of
bail-out” principle.
To a certain degree, bail-ins are the implementation of something Martin Luther had demanded of
lenders  497  years  ago:  “If  you  want  to  have  an  interest  in  the  gains,  you  must  also  have  an
interest in the losses."
To be able to shoulder major losses, there naturally has to be bail-inable capital in excess of
other  capital  as  well,  which  is  why  minimum  requirements  for  bail-inable  liabilities  were
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
developed at both the global and European level. For the large, systemically important banks,
these  requirements  play  a  role  in  curbing  the  too-big-to-fail  problem.  The  same  is  true  of
additional capital surcharges for this group, which are intended to form part of an even larger
buffer, but also to help reduce the size-related funding advantage of these institutions.
Admittedly, the crisis showed that monitoring the stability of individual financial institutions does
not suffice when it comes to safeguarding a stable financial system. Anyone who thinks financial
stability can be preserved in this way can’t see the forest for the trees. Or, as Janet Yellen once
put it: before the crisis, “we looked closely at the trees and not as intently as we should have at
the forest".
The approach of looking at “the forest” in the sense of financial stability has come to be termed
“macroprudential" - in contrast to “microprudential” supervision, which looks specifically at the
individual trees.
And with regard to the macroprudential approach, considerable progress has since been made
here, too. Institutions that have analytical capabilities and are designed to identify risks to financial
stability have been set up at the global, European and national level. Moreover, special tools were
created, such as borrowing limits for real estate loans.
Yet  the  interactions  in  which  microprudential  and  macroprudential  instruments  intervene  are
always complex, and good intentions do not always produce good results, as history has shown
with the cobra effect.
The concept is named after a British governor’s failed attempt to tackle a plague of cobras in
India. Because of the bounty for each dead cobra, the Indian population began to breed and kill
cobras  in  order  to  cash  in  on  the  reward. And  after  the  bounty  was  scrapped,  the  remaining
captive cobras were released, so that in the end there were even more cobras than there had
been originally.
Or, to put a less dramatic and more nuanced spin on it, you could say that every measure can of
course have side effects alongside the intended effects. At the end of the day, the costs and
benefits of regulation have to be analysed and the efficacy of the measures already implemented
needs to be evaluated. This is precisely what we have agreed upon as part of our ongoing G20
presidency and we have entrusted the Financial Stability Board with the related tasks. 
Aside from the creation of the banking union and macroprudential supervision, there have been
other  institutional  reforms  in  the  euro  area  aimed  at  making  the  monetary  union  more  crisis-
resistant.
The Stability and Growth Pact was reformed, for instance, and a fiscal compact was agreed.
This  should  facilitate  the  more  automatic  enforcement  of  sanctions  when  the  deficit  and  debt
limits are breached. After all, sound government finances are the best protection against the risk
of a sovereign debt crisis.
Because  experience  showed 
to  crises,  a
macroeconomic  imbalance  procedure  was  also  established,  which  looks  at  current  account
developments in the individual countries, for example.
that  undercompetitiveness  can  also 
lead 
Furthermore, the ESM stands at the ready as a permanent crisis resolution mechanism that can
ward off threats to the euro area as a whole. It is important, though, that the ESM is not misused
as a means of circumventing the no-bailout clause. If crisis-hit countries look unlikely to be able
to  repay  their  financial  aid,  the  ESM  is  not  permitted  to  grant  assistance  loans.  In  addition,
assistance  can  only  be  paid  out  –  as  I  mentioned  –  subject  to  strict  fiscal  and  economic
conditionality.
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
That was the legal situation.
In  practice,  however,  this  is  still  a  challenge,  for  reasons  of  political  expediency  and  due  to
concerns  about  remaining  contagion  effects,  but  also  because  differentiating  between  liquidity
and solvency problems in real time is not a trivial matter.
One  thing  can  be  said  for  certain,  though:  the  assistance  loans  have  paved  the  way  for  the
required adjustment programmes in the recipient countries. Without them, a much more abrupt
adjustment would have been needed.
And in actual fact, the countries that were especially hard hit by the crisis have made noticeable
progress in dismantling macroeconomic imbalances over the past few years. Current account
deficits have shrunk significantly and have even turned into surpluses in most countries.
In  the  five  countries  that  have  received  fiscal  assistance,  unit  labour  costs  have  fallen  since
2010, making these economies more competitive. Additionally, labour market reforms and other
structural reforms, some of them extensive, were undertaken. And as the World Bank’s Doing
Business report shows, the business environment has also seen a marked improvement.
The interim conclusion we can make, therefore, is this: extensive measures have already been
taken in the wake of the financial and debt crisis, most of which have suitable potential to restore
greater validity to the liability principle.
5. What remains to be done
But is everything thus resolved? I would argue: no, not yet.
To  return  immediately  to  my  last  point:  the  extensive  reform  efforts  in  the  former  crisis-hit
countries  mustn’t  obscure  the  fact  that  local  conditions  in  those  places  should  be  improved
further.
The fact that youth unemployment is still very high in a number of countries, say, highlights the
need to continue dismantling barriers to employment. Low productivity in many countries is also
an argument to invest more in education and training. And public administration and the legal
system must become more efficient in some countries.
It certainly is not as if all other countries still have homework to do while we in Germany can just
lean  back  and  rest  on  the  laurels  of  the  successful  labour  market  and  social  reforms
implemented in the first half of the last decade. These measures helped Germany - christened
the  “sick  man  of  Europe”  by  the  Economist  back  in  1999  -  to  now  post  one  of  the  lowest
unemployment rates in the euro area.
The Eurogroup President Jeroen Dijsselbloem hit the nail on the head when he said, “Structural
reform isn’t something that is undertaken every ten or twenty years".
OECD forecasts predict that, of all 42 OECD countries, Germany will see the second-slowest
growth rate up to 2030 and the slowest until 2060. The reason for these weak growth prospects
is  unfavourable  demographic  developments,  which  will  squeeze  the  potential  labour  force
considerably in the coming years.
Added  to  this  are  other  challenges,  such  as  providing  a  speedy  digital  infrastructure  and
affordable energy given a changed energy mix, and integrating refugees into the labour market.
So there is a need for economic policy action here in Germany, too. We have to invest more in
education  and  training  so  that  the  opportunities  presented  by  globalisation  and  technological
progress can be better harnessed for all.
Ladies and gentlemen
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  principle  of  individual  national  responsibility  and  the  liability  principle  are  enshrined  in  the
framework of the monetary union. Member states have retained responsibility for their fiscal and
economic policy.
But as I have already noted, for all practical purposes elements of joint liability were established
while  we  were  combatting  the  crisis.  And  many  additional  reform  proposals  boil  down  to
extending  joint  liability,  for  example  by  way  of  a  European  unemployment  insurance  fund,  a
European deposit protection scheme, or by introducing Eurobonds. What most of these kinds of
proposals have in common is that they do not envisage a material transfer of sovereignty to the
European Union level.
That’s not surprising given  that  most  countries  have  little  desire  to  relinquish  sovereignty.  But
without  mutualising  further  policy  areas  or  at  least  introducing  stringent  coordination,  the
mismatch between actions and liability would grow in the face of even greater joint liability.
It therefore seems to me that it would be more expedient for the time being to strengthen the
Maastricht framework and the attendant principle of individual national responsibility.
Strengthening the Maastricht framework means, first and foremost, eliminating its weaknesses.
The  first  step  in  doing  so  would  have  to  be  increasing  the  binding  force  of  the  fiscal  rules.
Admittedly, that was precisely the objective of the last reform of the Stability and Growth Pact.
But  as  it  turned  out,  the  implementation  by  the  European  Commission  entailed  broad
discretionary scope, a great deal of flexibility and numerous exceptions.
Torn in two directions in its dual role as a political institution and guardian of the treaties, the
Commission is evidently frequently inclined to compromise at the expense of stringent and rule-
based implementation.
It almost seems as if the Commission has taken as its role model the US comedian Groucho
Marx, who said of himself, “Those are my principles, and if you don’t like them ... well, I have
others."
As I see it, it would be crucial to fundamentally strengthen the fiscal rules as well as their binding
force.  While  deficits  have  been  pared  back  significantly  since  the  peak  of  the  crisis,  the  debt
ratios  in  many  countries  are  still  extremely  high  and  are  seeing  only  moderate  decreases,  at
most.
The  rules  should  be  refocused  more  clearly  on  the  objective  of  sound  public  finances.  Their
formulation  and  implementation  have  to  be  more  transparent  and  logical,  and  involve  fewer
exceptions.
A more rigorous implementation of the rules could also be achieved by giving responsibility for
fiscal surveillance and compliance with the rules to an independent authority, such as the ESM,
instead of the Commission. An institution with a clear mandate concerning sound public finances
would come into less conflict with numerous other European policy objectives.
Obviously, that alone would not ensure that all member states maintain solid budgets, which is
why  it  is  vital  that  the  disciplining  forces  of  the  financial  markets  also  come  into  play.  The
architects of monetary union already knew this, as I’ve said.
But the financial markets only have an incentive to price member states’ varying solvency risks
appropriately  if  the  “no-bailout”  principle  fundamentally  enshrined  in  the  EU  Treaty  is  also
credible. That, in turn, is contingent on investors retaining liability and sovereign default also being
a realistic option in an extreme scenario – or not being ruled out, at the very least.
In order for the capital market to fulfil its function, investors have to be more credibly informed in
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
future that there are risks involved in buying bonds from sovereigns with unsound finances. And
this  is  why  the Bundesbank  has  been  proposing,  for  some  time  already,  that  the  terms  of
government bonds should provide for an automatic maturity extension for said bonds as soon as
a government applies for assistance loans. This has two key benefits.
When the maturity is extended, the original creditors, such as investment funds, would still be on
the hook, even in cases involving an assistance programme, and could still be held liable in the
event of a debt restructuring later on. In other words, unlike today, they will not be repaid with
taxpayers’ money from other member states when assistance programmes are in place. This
boosts their incentive to be more aware of risk when investing.
In  cases  where  no  assistance  loans  need  to  be  used  to  repay  original  creditors,  a  country’s
financing needs are also still limited to the current deficit. The assistance loans are therefore
significantly  smaller.  And  this  boosts  the  ESM’s  firepower  considerably.  The  burden  will  be
removed from taxpayers in the other member states and potential moral hazard created by the
ESM rescue package will be limited. 
Above and beyond this, it has to be generally assured that the default of a sovereign does not
immediately rattle the entire euro-area financial system. Doing this means, in particular, severing
the nexus between banks and sovereigns that I mentioned earlier. In other words, sovereigns in
crisis cannot be permitted to jeopardise the national banking system and problems in the banking
sector should not be allowed to pose the same risk to sovereigns. It is precisely in times of crisis
that banks have a huge appetite for government bonds, preferably domestic ones. And we ought
to curb this appetite.
It would already help if banks were required to hold capital against government bonds and if large
exposure limits were introduced, as is the case for loans to the private sector, which is to say, if
the preferential treatment of government bonds were discontinued.
6. The role of monetary policy
But  there  are  other  ways,  too,  to  ease  the  burden  on  monetary  policy;  notably  by  making  the
framework of monetary union more resilient to crisis. This could be achieved by stepping up the
binding force of joint rules, making the no-bailout principle credible and, especially, increasing the
stability of financial markets.
Then central banks could get back to doing their actual job rather than having to keep stepping in
and doing the dirty work for all those that claim that their hands are tied.
Monetary policy’s main mandate is ultimately to keep prices stable. The Governing Council of the
ECB deems this goal to have been achieved when the euro-area inflation rate is below, but close
to, 2 % over the medium term.
Domestic price pressures are currently subdued. We should not be blinded by the sharp rise in
consumer  price  inflation  over  the  last  few  months.  This  was  mainly  driven  by  movements  in
energy prices, which were much lower twelve months ago. Further proof can be found in the fact
that core inflation - ie the inflation rate excluding energy and unprocessed food - tends to be at
around only 1 %.
However, forecasts indicate that both core and headline inflation are set to return to the target
level of below, but close to, 2 % in the medium term. This is because, by virtue of the sustained
economic upswing and the gradual decrease in unemployment in the euro area, wages - and
therefore domestic price pressures – are likely to pick up again. If this development continues
and is sustainable, we will be one step closer to normalising monetary policy.
While there is currently  no  doubt  that  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  stance  is  appropriate,
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
there are many different views on just how accommodative monetary policy should be and which
instruments  should  be  used.  This  is  especially  true  because,  since  2015,  the  rather
expansionary monetary policy stance has included the purchase of government bonds under a
new  purchase  programme.  And  such  purchases,  as  I  have  already  mentioned,  are  not  just
another instrument.
Unlike  the  previous  SMP  and  OMT  purchase  programmes,  the  current  programme  does  not
focus on lowering risk premiums of crisis-hit countries. In principle, the national central banks are
buying  only  bonds  from  their  own  country  and  loss  sharing  is  largely  ruled  out.  Yet,  such
purchases are still blurring the boundaries between monetary and fiscal policy.
Another worrying aspect of the purchases is that a large part of general government debt is no
longer  subject  to  the  disciplining  effect  of  the  capital  markets.  The  present  low-interest-rate
environment is providing notable relief for finance ministers, especially those of highly indebted
countries.  Compared  with  the  interest  rate  level  back  in  2007,  euro-area  countries  have
collectively  saved  around  €1,000  billion  in  interest  payments.  And  you  don’t  need  to  be  a
“nattering  nabob  of  negativism”  to  fear  that  there  may  be  political  pressure  on  the  ECB’s
Governing Council to postpone any normalisation of monetary policy out of concern for public
finances.
On top of that, maintaining an ultra-accommodative monetary policy stance for any length of time
poses risks for financial stability. A zero interest rate policy impairs the profitability of commercial
banks  and  with  it  their  ability  to  build  up  capital  buffers  for  bad  times.  And  it  can  lead  to
speculative  bubbles  on  financial  markets  and  other  financial  imbalances  which,  in  turn,  can
generate long-term risks for price stability, as the crisis made abundantly clear.
It is therefore essential that central banks tighten the monetary policy reins as soon as this is
necessary  for  price  stability.  We  must  not,  out  of  consideration  for  public  finances  in  certain
countries  or  for  any  losses  sustained  by  individual  financial  market  players,  delay  the
normalisation of monetary policy.
7. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
A lecture should exhaust the topic and not the listener. In the time available, I can only partially
achieve the former, but I will stop now before I fully achieve the latter. Let me conclude with a few
remarks.
I believe that the path to a stable monetary union depends on the following key points.
1.  Even if we cannot forecast with any certainty the precise shape and form that the next crisis
will take, a few things are sure: Undermining important economic principles, such as that of
liability, generally has a price tag attached to it.
2.  Central banks must not be overburdened; they should not be forced to pick up the pieces for
political errors. Instead they should be allowed to focus on fulfilling their mandate.
3.  The euro-area countries must persistently live up to the responsibilities of membership of a
monetary  union.  They  have  to  use  smart  economic  policymaking  to  ensure  that  they  are
successful and do not drift apart. They have to give people the opportunity to make the most
of  globalisation  and  technological  advances  and  offer  them  employment  prospects.  The
framework of monetary union needs to be designed in such a way that actions and liability
for their consequences are aligned.
4.  The  financial  crisis  has  demonstrated  just  how  dangerous  it  can  be  if  regulation  of  the
financial  markets  is  insufficient  and  loses  sight  of  the  principle  of  liability.  Thanks  to
fundamental  reforms,  the  global  financial  system  is  now  more  robust.  Given  the  many
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
possible causes of a crisis, a focus on individual agents and markets falls far too short of the
mark. It is essential to increase the resilience of the financial system as a whole. This should
stop a crisis from developing into a systemic problem and endangering the functioning of the
entire financial system. It would be a mistake to turn back the clock on regulation.
In his book “A short history of financial euphoria", the Harvard economist John Kenneth Galbraith,
who  died  in  2006,  lamented  the  “...  extreme  brevity  of  the  financial  memory,”  adding  that  “In
consequence, financial disaster is quickly forgotten.” He believed that the world of finance was
one of the few fields of human endeavour in which history counted for so little.
Ten years on from the outbreak of the subprime crisis and with a decade of crisis behind us -
especially  here  in  the  euro  area  -  I  don’t  think  we  can  yet  talk  about  the  crisis  having  been
forgotten; most people’s memories are not that bad.
But I see a certain danger that lessons learned from the crisis may be increasingly thrown to the
winds.
That makes it all the more important not to put the crisis to the back of our minds or postpone the
necessary consequences.
But  you  of  all  people,  about  to  embark  on  your  working  lives  -  and  maybe  some  of  you  will
choose to work in the “world of money” – should take heed. Maybe some of you know what Mark
Twain said about young people. “We love the young, with their fresh ideas, just as long as these
ideas are the same as ours."
Thank you for your attention. I look forward to our discussions.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
