  ADDRESS DELIVERED 
AT 
  10TH ANNIVERSARY BALL OF FIDELITY BANK GHANA LIMITED 
BY 
                                   DR JOHNSON P. ASIAMA 
SECOND DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
AT 
AT THE MOVENICK AMBASSADOR HOTEL 
ON 
FRIDAY, APRIL 28, 2017 
  Mr. President of the Republic of Ghana, 
Board Chairman and Group CEO of Fidelity Bank Ghana Limited, 
Captains of the Banking Industry, 
Management and Staff of the Bank,   
Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
Introduction 
1. 
It is a pleasure for me to join you this evening as we mark the 10th anniversary 
of Fidelity Bank Ghana Limited (FBL). Indeed, ten years is a major milestone for 
an institution as it is for an individual. The celebration is not so much a festivity 
but  an  opportunity  to  pause  and  assess  the  journey  so  far.  It  is  a  moment  to 
look  forward  and  to  devise  strategies  to  overcome  particularly  some  of  the 
emerging challenges facing in this technologically dynamic financial world.  
2. 
In my address this evening, I will briefly recount the progress that Fidelity Bank 
Ltd has made over the years, and then I will discuss a few regulatory issues that 
are  under  discussion.  These  would  include  some  brief  remarks  on  risk 
management  in  the  banking  industry,  developments  in  the  payments  system 
landscape, and lastly the emerging risks with electronic fraud. 
3. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  been  with  the  Central  Bank  long  enough  to 
acknowledge  the  significant  impression  FBL  has  left  on  the  Ghanaian  banking 
landscape  and  the  niche  it  is  charting  particularly  in  the  areas  of  growth, 
transformation, innovation and corporate social responsibility.  
4. 
The Fidelity brand has evolved and expanded overtime; thanks to all the gallant 
men  and  women  who  have  held  the  fort,  including  its  loyal  customers  from 
inception till now.  
5. 
On the occasion of this special 10th anniversary therefore; permit me to add my 
voice  in  congratulating  the  management  and  staff,  for  your  efforts  in  creating 
such a strong and unique identity for Fidelity Bank.  
Progress made by Fidelity Bank Ltd 
6. 
Since  2006  when  FBL  joined  the  banking  fraternity  after  evolving  from  the 
former Fidelity Discount House, Fidelity Bank Limited has grown both organically 
and  inorganically  in  size,  expanding  its  branch  network,  staff,  and  service. 
Indeed, the performance of Fidelity Bank has been satisfactory with total assets 
steadily increasing at end-March 2017 to GH¢4.10 billion, up by 4.71% from the 
corresponding period last year. The bank has grown its deposits base to GH¢2.58 
billion and has extended credit to the tune of about GH¢1.47 billion.  
7. 
According  to  our  records,  Fidelity  Bank  Limited  has  invested  in  more  than  115 
ATMs and operates 75 branch networks with presence in 8 out of the 10 regions 
of  the  country.  Today,  Fidelity  Bank  can  boast  of  establishing  two  subsidiaries, 
the Fidelity Asia Bank Limited, its offshore banking hub and the Fidelity Securities 
Limited, the investment banking arm.  
8. 
One  of  the  strongest  points  I  have  taken  notice  of  during  your  ten  years  of 
existence  as  a  bank  relates  to  the  smooth  acquisition  of  ProCredit  Savings  and 
Loans  Company  Limited  in  October  2014  and  the  effective  manner  you  have 
exploited  the  prospects  of  synergy  to  your  advantage.  The  transition  was 
effectively  done,  with  less  tension  and  limited  staff  layoffs,  and  I  congratulate 
the board and management for that.  
9. 
Product design and service development is yet another area I see Fidelity Bank’s 
competitiveness. FBL effortlessly run promotions and models reaching out to its 
customers and hitherto the un-bankable populace. The financial inclusion models 
such  as  agency  banking,  mobile  and  digital  banking,  microfinance  and  strategic 
partnership  are  but  a  few  examples  of  such  developments  which  have 
contributed  to  building  customer  loyalty  and  expanding  banking  business  in  the 
country.  
 Risk Management in the Banking Industry 
10.  As  regulators,  we  welcome  such  dynamism  in  the  industry  and  will  continue  to 
play  our  supervisory  roles  in  a  way  that  facilitates  financial  sector  development 
and  at  the  same  time  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system.  As  you 
are  aware,  the  Bank  of  Ghana  has  recently concluded  the  Asset  Quality  Review 
(AQR)  exercise,  and  prescribed  remedial  measures  both  general  and  specific  to 
the risk exposure of each bank to help consolidate the existing resilience of the 
industry and restore the affected banks.  
11.  We have subsequently issued Supervisory Letters to this effect, (I believe Fidelity 
Bank  has  received  theirs)  with  strict  timelines  for  compliance  by  all.  The  AQR 
exercise highlighted impairment in banks’ loan books, capital deficiencies, credit 
concentration  in  the  energy  sector  and  some  latent  vulnerability  in  the  banking 
industry. Banks are thus required to reclassify all downgraded facilities and book 
the  appropriate  provisions.  For  banks  which  suffered  capital  erosion  leading  to 
breaches  in  solvency  and  single  obligor  limits,  they  are  required  to  furnish  the 
Bank  of  Ghana  with  an  acceptable  capital  plan  that  would  restore  them  to  the 
prescribed capital adequacy benchmark and/or plans to wean them off exposure 
limit breaches.    
12.  The Bank of Ghana is  also working  to enhance the credit infrastructure further. 
We have been working in consultation with the Ghana Association of Bankers, to 
review  the  existing  Base  Rate  model.  As  you  will  recall,  the  idea  behind  the 
model was to bring transparency to base rate setting and hence lending rates in 
the economy; and also to promote uniformity in the definition of determinants of 
the Base Rate in the industry generally. The Committee has completed its work, 
and hence a draft notice would be issued soon for implementation. 
13.  Another key effort is also underway to increase the effectiveness of the Collateral 
Registry and the Credit Reference Bureaux. In this direction, the Bank of Ghana 
is  developing  a  central  Data  Hub  for  use  by  data  providers  to  ease  their  data 
submission to credit bureaus. Also, proposed amendments to the Borrowers and 
Lenders  Act,  Act  773  have  been  drafted  with  the  aim  of  strengthening  the 
Secured Transaction Regime in the creation, perfection, priority and enforcement 
of security interests on both movable and immovable property.  
14. 
It  is  our  hope  that  the  availability  of  information  on  the  credit  history  of 
borrowers will have a positive impact on the pricing of credit products across the 
financial sector. These developments will further deepen financial inclusion in the 
country. 
15. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while working to promote an accelerated development of 
the financial sector, we must remain cognizant of the emerging risks. We want to 
emphasize that strengthening financial service operations with risk management 
in the financial sector is a shared responsibility.  
16.  We  as  regulators  are  encouraging  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  put  in 
place measures that will ensure a sound and safe banking sector where risks are 
commensurate  with  the  rewards.  In  particular  the  full  implementation  of  the 
Basel II and III  framework  which  seeks  to  minimize  systemic  risk  in  the 
financial  sector.  Also,  the  recent  passage  of  the  Banks  and  Specialised  Deposit-
Taking  Institutions  Act,  2016  (Act  930)  and  the  Ghana  Deposit  Protection  Act, 
2016  (Act  931)  in  particular,  were  to  provide  a  suitable  legal  framework  for 
banking  supervision,  a  framework  that  addresses  issues  of  emerging  risks  and 
vulnerabilities  in  the  banking  system,  while  nurturing  innovation  and  financial 
inclusion, powers of supervision and control, receivership and liquidation, among 
others. 
Payment Systems Developments 
17. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware,  information  and  communication 
technology (ICT) is transforming the financial services industry with rapidity. ICT 
is challenging the traditional banking model by providing alternative channels for 
banking and payments.  
18. 
In  response  to  the  changing  banking  and  payment  landscape,  we  initiated  a 
process  to  review  the  Electronic  Money  Issuers  and  Agents’  Guidelines  (2015) 
and  the  Payment  Systems  Act  2003  (Act  662)  with  the  view  to  consolidating  it 
into one piece of legislation called, Payment Systems and Services Bill, 2017.  
19.  We have consulted widely with stakeholders in drafting the bill, and the draft is 
currently with the Ministry of Finance, ready to be forwarded to Cabinet. 
20.  Clearly, the improvement in regulatory environment has drawn interest of banks 
and non-bank institutions in the digital financial space. We are seeing increasing 
collaboration  between  banks  and  non-bank  institutions  such  as  telcos  and 
financial  technology  firms  for  financial  service  delivery,  hence  there  is  no  doubt 
that  technology  is  promoting  innovative  financial  products  and  a  more  inclusive 
financial system in Ghana.  
21.  We are also working with the banking industry to migrate all payment cards from 
magnetic  stripe  standard  to  Europay,  MasterCard  and  Visa  (EMV)  chip  and  PIN 
standard this year to enhance security and reduce fraud in the industry.  
22.  Clearly,  the  use  of  electronic  payments  will  reduce  payroll  fraud,  improve 
government  revenue  collection  efforts  and  enhance  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism.  
23.  Notwithstanding the progress made in payments systems development over the 
last  couple  of  years,  there  remains  a  lot  more  to  be  done.  It  is  against  this 
background  that  stakeholders  of  the  payment  systems  are  being  brought 
together  under  the  Payment  Systems  Council  to  guide  the  orderly  development 
of the payment system. 
Electronic Fraud 
24.  Generally,  technology-driven  payment  products  are  prone  to  attacks  by  cyber 
criminals. Cyber-attacks on financial service providers are becoming increasingly 
sophisticated and  the recent attack on the Central Bank of Bangladesh is signal 
enough  for  us  to  take  precautionary  measures  to  avert  attacks  on  our  financial 
infrastructure  by  hackers.    As  a  result,  I  urge  financial  institutions  to  work  with 
financial  technology  firms  to  deploy  security  systems  with  threat  intelligence 
capabilities to assist in preventing cyber threats to financial infrastructures.   
25.  We  therefore  enjoin  all  financial  institutions  and  payment  systems  operators  to 
obtain  international  security  certifications  such  as  the  ISO  27001  and  the  PCI 
DSS. These requirements are necessary to promote the integrity of the financial 
and payment systems.  
 Conclusion 
 26. 
It  is  always  a  good  thing  to  mark  accomplishments.  Celebrations  of  this  nature 
afford  us  all  an  excellent  opportunity  for  self  introspection,  reflecting  on  our 
achievements  and  challenges,  and  preparing  for  the  opportunities  that  lie 
ahead. I  am  confident  that  Fidelity  Bank  Limited  would  continue  to  manage  its 
journey well as it strives forward, with the collective efforts of its stakeholders.   
27. 
I congratulate them for this significant milestone, and I wish them every success 
for the future and a memorable night for tonight.  
 Thank you for your kind attention.  
 