“The Thai Economy: The Current State and The Way Forward”  
Speech by Dr. Veerathai Santiprabhob 
Governor of the Bank of Thailand 
Japanese Chamber of Commerce (JCC) Thailand Dinner Talk 
13 March 2017 
 Mr. Shingo Sato, President of the Japanese Chamber of Commerce, 
Members of the JCC Board, JCC members, 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
A very good evening to you, 
First of all, I would like to thank the Japanese Chamber of Commerce for inviting me again to 
share with you my thoughts on the prospect of the Thai economy. Last year, I truly enjoyed 
the exchange of views, ideas, and information with all of you and certainly hoped many of 
you did so too. 
With more than 5,000 Japanese firms actively operating in Thailand across various industries, 
Japan is certainly one of Thailand’s most important business partners in both the real and the 
financial sectors. Indeed, as Thailand is trying to move towards more innovative and high 
value-added industries, it is encouraging to see Japan continuing to be at the top among 
countries that applied for privileges under the new BOI investment promotion scheme in 2016. 
This would not happen if Japanese professionals already on the ground like yourselves did 
not have strong confidence in the long-term prospect of the Thai economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
My talk this evening will consist of two parts. In the former part, I will briefly discuss the current 
state of the Thai economy, paying special attention to its resilience and growth momentum. 
In the latter part, I will share with you my thoughts on the way the Thai economy is moving 
forward as well as opportunities for Japanese businesses. 
Let me start with the first part, by reviewing what we went through last year. I believe 
you all agree with me that 2016 was full of unexpected events and turns. On the domestic front, 
we faced with a severe drought early in the year followed by a historic flood in the South 
around the end of the year, and of course the passing of His Majesty the late King Bhumibol, 
which caused all Thai people the greatest sorrow. Also, the government’s crackdown of illegal 
tour operators led to temporary yet significant effects on the tourism industry which had been 
a major growth driver of the economy in the past few years. On the external front, we saw 
the Bank of Japan’s adopting a negative interest rate policy in January of last year, an unease 
 1 
over the fate of European financial institutions, the Brexit vote, and the unexpected outcome 
of the U.S. presidential election. 
Yet the Thai economy was able to weather these storms, one after another, and ended 
up with a 3.2 percent growth with all stability intact. The resilience reflected the underlying 
strength of the economy which owed partly to preemptive policies to create shock absorbers 
for the economy such as ample international reserves and ample banks’ capital base and 
loan  loss  provision.  In  addition  to  these  buffers,  the  government  responded  swiftly  once 
adverse shocks occurred especially with additional fiscal measures, including, soft loans for 
farmers and low-income earners and allowing travelling and shopping expenses to be tax 
deductible temporarily. 
So, what about 2017—when uncertainty appears to loom even larger than last year especially 
on the global front?  
Against the backdrop of improving global economy, risks to global growth continue to 
run  high.  The  number  one  risk,  in  my  assessment,  is  the  direction  of  global  trade  and 
investments after the U.S. Presidential election. Yet there are others that cannot be ignored. 
These  include  China’s  highly  leveraged  corporate  debt  problem  and  financial  stability 
concerns,  political  developments  in  Europe,  the  deep-rooted  problems  in  the  European 
banking sector, and geopolitical risks in Northeast Asia and the South China Sea. All these 
factors  could  result  in  significant  financial  market  volatility  and  easily  derail  the  global 
economic recovery. 
Even so, I believe the Thai economy and the Thai financial system will remain resilient 
to withstand these challenges. As you have seen, the impacts of adverse external shocks on 
Thai financial markets have so far been limited, unlike many emerging market economies, 
thanks to our robust external position. We have international reserves greater than three times 
of short-term external debt. Compared with more than 30 percent on average in emerging 
markets in this region, foreign ownership of Thailand’s public sector bonds amounts to less 
than 9 percent1. Thailand is, therefore, relatively less prone to capital flight, should foreign 
investors change their sentiments and expectations. Moreover, Thailand’s corporate sector 
has relatively low external debt financing. External corporate debt amounts to around 13 
percent of total corporate debt, with a majority belonging to large corporations for financing 
overseas investment, and these firms tend to manage exchange rate risks well. 
On top of these external buffers is the fact that our growth engines in 2017 are firmer 
and more balanced than last year. Most importantly, both exports and to a lesser extent 
private investment have shown signs of a more broad-based and sustained pickup in recent 
                                                           
1 Including Bank of Thailand bonds 
 2 
months. Given that the export recovery is now a regional phenomenon, we expect the trend 
to continue. On exports of services, the tourism sector, which was temporarily affected by the 
crackdown of illegal tour operators in the fourth quarter of last year, has recovered faster than 
expected.  
At the same time, fiscal stimulus remains an important growth driver with the additional 
mid-year  budget  and  the  implementation  of  the  medium-term  public  infrastructure 
investment program. Apart from improved government disbursement, the government has 
proposed the supplementary budget for fiscal year 2017 amounting to 190 billion baht, which 
is over 1% of GDP on top of the originally planned budget deficit of 2.6% of GDP. In addition, 
fiscal policy will continue to be expansionary with a budget deficit of 2.9% of GDP proposed 
for the fiscal year 2018.  
Despite  the  continued  sizable  budget  deficit,  there  are  fiscal  buffers  to  cushion  against 
unexpected difficulties ahead. The public debt to GDP ratio currently at 43 percent is projected 
to stand well below the sustainability ceiling under the ongoing fiscal reform. 
In  coordination  with  the  expansionary  fiscal  policy,  monetary  policy  remains 
accommodative  to  reinforce  the  economic  recovery.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC) has decided to keep the policy interest rate on hold at a low level since April 2015. Yet 
the  MPC  deems  that  monetary  conditions  should  remain  conducive  until  the  economic 
recovery becomes more broad-based and more robust. For the future, the MPC’s decision on 
monetary policy will be carefully balanced between accommodating economic recovery and 
avoiding financial stability risks that could result from an extended period of low interest rates.   
Ladies and gentlemen, 
To wrap things up before I move to the second part of my talk, the Thai economic recovery 
has become more broad-based with a firmer momentum compared with last year while 
our economy has relatively strong buffers compared to emerging-market peers in the region. 
Now let me turn to the way forward for the Thai economy. With the short-term trajectory 
of the Thai economy holding up well thanks to the first two ‘arrows’ as in the Abenomics 
terms, namely fiscal stimulus and monetary easing, Thailand’s long-term future depends 
critically on the success of the third arrow of ‘structural reforms’. This brings me to the 
second part of my talk tonight on the way forward for the Thai economy, and how we and 
our  partners  like  Japanese  businesses  may  work  together  towards  sustainable  economic 
prosperity. 
While dealing with short-term issues, we need to pay attention to long-term challenges 
that could restrain our competitiveness, productivity, and growth potential. The rising 
trend of disruptive technology will also come into play as it brings both opportunities and 
 3 
threats. To tackle these long-term challenges, structural reforms are underway to upgrade and 
unlock our economic potential in the long term.  
The government has made structural reform a national agenda and has launched several 
important  initiatives. One of our main focuses is to upgrade connectivity  infrastructure 
within Thailand and within the region, including roadways, railways, waterways, power lines, 
air networks, and digital networks. This strategy will establish Thailand as a center for regional 
transportation and logistics, connecting the Indian Ocean with the Pacific Ocean, as well as 
connecting Thailand with South China and neighboring CLMV countries. 
Beyond building physical infrastructure, the government is pushing forward to restructure the 
Thai economy towards a high-value and innovation-driven economy under the ‘Thailand 
4.0’ theme. This policy focuses on promoting targeted industries, including the ‘new S-curve’ 
industries. As many of you are well aware, the Board of Investment (BOI) revised the criteria 
for investment promotion privileges to be based on the value added content of the project 
rather than on its location as in the past. Thailand’s economic model will be geared towards 
sophisticated high-valued manufacturing, innovative manufacturing, and modern services. This 
can  be  done  by  focusing  on  promoting  technology,  creativity,  research  and  innovation, 
especially with respect to IT-based services. 
In addition, the government is undergoing an overhaul of the legal frameworks, which need 
to catch up with the fast changing world, and new business practices. In my view, legal reform 
is the area that has not been well appreciated or perhaps well communicated to the foreign 
investor community. Let me take this opportunity to inform you of some significant legal 
amendments. In so doing, I would like to briefly categorize the ongoing legal reform into 
three broad groups. 
The  first  group  is  to  improve  governance  and  distribution  of  economic  opportunity.  For 
instance, the amended Securities and Exchange Act will boost governance and fairer trading 
environment in the Thai capital market with more effective enforcement mechanism to punish 
market misconduct as well as broader coverage of wrongdoings to prevent malpractices. The 
new bill on the governance of state-owned enterprises, or SOEs in short, aims to tackle the 
governance within the SOEs system, as government agencies involved with SOEs often assume 
multiple, and sometimes conflicting, roles – namely, being policymaker, regulator, operator, 
and owner at the same time. The bill will set principles to dismantle these distinct roles into 
separate governing entities. The revision of the Trade Competition Act will ensure a fairer 
and more competitive environment among business. Lastly, the Business Securities Act helps 
improve credit access for small and medium sized firms to funding by allowing inventories, 
machineries, and intellectual property as collateral. 
 4 
The second group of legal amendments aims to enhance productivity. There are four laws 
that might be of your interest. The Licensing Facilitation Act helps acquiring permits easier 
and  more  transparent  for  all  businesses.  The  Royal  Decree  on  Review  of  Laws  and 
Regulations requires that all laws and regulations be reviewed once every five years to ensure 
that necessary adjustment be made to accommodate dynamic changes in business practices. 
The Payment System Bill is meant to replace the old governing laws and regulations that are 
dispersed under many different authorities, especially electronics and digital payments, and 
allow the  Bank of  Thailand  to  be  the sole regulator  in  this  field.  The  Eastern  Economic 
Corridor  Bill  will  establish  a  special  economic  zone  across  three  provinces  to  attract 
investment in industries of the future with extensive infrastructure investments to support 
transport, logistics, and public utilities. 
The  last  group  of  legal  reform  is  to  strengthen  long-term  sustainability.  The  Fiscal 
Responsibility  Bill  will  impose  fiscal  discipline  through  improvement  in  public  spending 
transparency  and  governance  of  overall  fiscal  management.  More  importantly,  future 
governments will find it very difficult to conduct open-ended populist policies, as the law will 
require  the  government  to  calculate  costs  and  identify  sources  of  fund  ex-ante.  The 
introduction of the Inheritance Tax Act and the Land and Building Tax Bill will augment 
prudent spending by expanding the government’s ability to collect revenue and ensure a 
better tax structure to deal with future liabilities, promote greater fiscal balance, and reduce 
wealth inequality. 
All  these  developments  will  promote  administrative  efficiency  and  improve  ease  of 
doing  business  in  Thailand.  Putting  the  aforementioned  laws  into  practice  will  change 
Thailand’s  business  and  financial  landscape  regardless  of  which  political  party  steps  into 
power after the next election. They will contribute to better governance and equality, higher 
productivity, and long-term sustainability of the country. However, I should point out that, as 
for all reform initiatives, effectiveness in execution will be the bottom line of their success. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As for the Bank of Thailand, we also play an important role in upgrading Thailand’s financial 
infrastructure and regulatory reform within our responsibility. In the pursuit of the digital 
economy, the government aims to involve all stakeholders to transform Thailand to a less-
cash society under the National e-Payment master plan. In conjunction with the Ministry of 
Finance and the Thai Bankers’ Association, we have recently launched the PromptPay system, 
which is an electronic faster payment system. It helps facilitate payment transactions and save 
costs for businesses and consumers. This morning I also witnessed the signing of an agreement 
with  two  banks;  consortium to  roll out  EDC  machines to  560,000  shops  and  government 
agencies all over the country to promote the use of debit cards on a nation-wide basis. 
 5 
The Bank of Thailand also aims to promote competition, innovation, and digital financial 
services  among  financial  service  providers  (including  FinTech).  This  move  will  benefit 
financial institutions, businesses as well as Thai citizens. In addition, we will encourage niche 
players to help narrow gaps in access to financial services. In this regard, we have recently 
announced the regulatory regime using a “Sandbox” approach. The Regulatory Sandbox will 
allow FinTech firms and financial institutions to test the viability of their products and services 
in a well-defined space and duration, without being fully subject to all regulatory requirements 
that are normally applicable. This approach helps us assess risks arising from the proposed 
products and services, and provide sufficient consumer protection. 
The Bank of Thailand also recognizes that regulatory reform is crucial for competitiveness of 
firms operating in Thailand. To this end, we are in the process of streamlining regulations using 
the Regulatory Guillotine concept to review and simplify many sets of regulations, starting 
with those governing capital flows and foreign exchange transactions. This reform is currently 
in the process of public consultation. 
Lastly, in addition to upgrading our physical, financial, and legal infrastructure through 
structural  reforms,  the  ability  to  reach  out  to  regional  economies  given  Thailand’s 
strategic  position will be important. For our part, the Bank of Thailand promotes greater 
‘financial’ connectivity, for example through promoting local currency usage in the region 
and  regulatory harmonization,  particularly with  CLMV,  our  neighboring  countries  with  high 
growth potential. Such initiatives will lower financial transaction costs, spur more trade and 
investment and deepen regional financial integration. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I hope my talk tonight has provided you with an overview of where Thailand is heading in 
both the near future and the longer term. In the world of volatility and uncertainty, you can 
be assured that the Bank of Thailand will do our best to  minimize adverse impacts from 
unexpected shocks that may prevent us from reaching our goal of sustainable and inclusive 
economic growth.  
Again,  it  is  my  great  honor  to  be  here  with  our  partners who  have  supported  Thailand’s 
economic and financial advancement. Going forward, we are confident that Japan, Thailand, 
and the region will collectively benefit from broader and deeper linkages both economically 
and financially. Thank you very much for your friendship, commitment, and contribution to 
the Thai economy. I look forward to our enhanced collaboration for many years to come. 
 6 
