Muhammad bin Ibrahim: A broader view of compliance in banking
and financial sectors
Remarks by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank Negara
Malaysia),  at  Bank  Negara  Malaysia's  Compliance  Conference  2017,  Kuala  Lumpur,  18  May
2017.
 The topic of compliance has become a widely discussed topic in recent times, often headlined
by  massive  regulatory  fines  slapped  on  financial  institutions  for  compliance  failures.  Banks
globally are estimated to have paid over USD320 billion in regulatory penalties since the global
financial crisis for multiple failures ranging from market manipulation to money laundering and
conduct failures.
On the bright side, these fines signal a continued, if not increased, priority given by authorities to
strong enforcement. But the fact that such failures occurred at all, and were allowed to reach
such extensive proportions to the detriment of the public, should worry us.
There is no doubt that the compliance burden has increased significantly. And for good reason.
Even  though  the  debate  will  continue  to  rage  on  over  the  relative  benefits  and  costs  of
compliance, it is unlikely this question will be settled in the foreseeable future.
Given  our  experiences  from  the  various  discoveries  that  institutions  continue  to  push  the
boundaries of what constitutes a fair and ethical practice, there is clear evidence that we need to
do more to improve compliance.
The industry has made some important strides. In earlier times, the compliance function was
largely left to a  single,  usually  mid-level,  individual  within  the  organisation,  whose  principal  job
was to serve as a contact point with the regulator, or to handle matters relating to anti-money
laundering  and  counter  financing  of  terrorism.  Today,  almost  all  financial  institutions  have  a
compliance function, staffed with whole teams dedicated to all aspects of a firm’s compliance
with relevant laws, regulations and internal policies. Indeed, we have progressed.
Many  efforts  have  been  taken  to  continuously  strengthen  the  supervisory  framework.  Bank
Negara Malaysia has identified the compliance function as one of the key control functions in a
financial  institution  –  right  up  there  with  senior  management,  risk  management  function,  and
finance  and  reporting  functions.  In  2015,  we  issued  the  compliance  standard  for  financial
institutions, which raised our expectations of boards and management to address the full breadth
of  structural,  operational,  resource  and  process  issues  that  go  into  assuring  compliance.  We
also issued strengthened corporate governance standards which reinforce the accountability of
the boards in overseeing an effective compliance function.
While  it  should  be  obvious  why  compliance  is  so  important,  I  think  it  bears  repeating.  If
motivations  for  an  increased  focus  on  compliance  are  exclusively  driven  by  the  avoidance  of
regulatory  fines,  then  we  are  missing  the  big  picture.  We  should  be  aware  that  a  strong
compliance function and culture makes good business sense. Today I would like to address the
following matters:
i.  The role of compliance in supporting the integrity of regulatory frameworks;
ii   The larger social and economic consequences that can arise from compliance lapses; and
iii.  The impact on public confidence and trust in an environment where financial intermediation is
no longer the exclusive domain of banks.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Regulation, particularly for banks, has become significantly more complex as banks grow in size
and sophistication. In the face of these growing complexities, global standard setters continue to
develop standards that can best manage this issue. In general, Bank Negara Malaysia has been
supportive of moves to make regulation simpler and less costly. Even so, some complexity in
regulation is inevitable due to rapid advancements in the business of banking, compounded by
the process of globalisation and changes in the banks’ operating landscape and interactions with
other components of the financial system. Continuous regulatory changes are necessary and will
be the norm as efforts are continuously taken to safeguard financial stability.
If you observed carefully over the last few years, it is not just banking rules that are becoming
more complex. Developments in financial reporting standards are adding to this complexity as
well, in ways that we may not even fully contemplate yet.
Regulation has also evolved from detailed prescriptions to “standards”, which focus on principles
and  outcomes.  With  this  evolution,  substantial  value  judgement  and  discretion  are  required  in
such an approach. Banks need to determine and decide on how to reflect these standards in
their day-to-day operations. Financial reporting standards now work in much the same way, with
considerable management discretion required. This is a sensible approach, given that operating
models and business strategies differ from one bank to another. Prescriptive rules, especially if
they are rigid, are always ill-suited if intended for all institutions, as they often lead to numerous
exemptions, waivers or perverse outcomes. So, even if we exhaustively pursue prescriptive rules
to  secure  financial  stability,  there  will  inevitably  be  areas  where  allowance  for  judgement  is
necessary.
Regulators have a keen interest in the development of a strong compliance function within banks
given  the  more  complex  rules,  combined  with  the  wider  use  of  principle  or  outcome-based
regulations. The compliance function plays at least three critical roles.
First, to ensure a bank’s operational frameworks are consistent with the intentions of regulatory
standards.  Second,  to  provide  a  level  of  independent  assurance  on  the  processes  behind
detailed  calculations  of  regulatory  ratios  and  limits. And  third,  to  support  consistent  and  well-
reasoned applications of management discretion and judgement.
The existence of a strong compliance function, therefore, protects the integrity of the regulatory
framework.  We  should  be  mindful  that  when  banks’  internal  functions  cannot  be  relied  on  to
achieve financial stability objectives, experience shows that regulation will then tend to be more
intrusive. In the process of intervening to remedy such gaps in the stability framework, tensions
often surface over the delicate balance in regulation. The degree of intrusiveness in regulatory
requirements will swing from one end of the pendulum to the other, before settling somewhere in
the  between.  This  process  can  often  be  disruptive  and  unproductive,  not  only  to  financial
institutions, but also to the wider economy.
This  leads  me  to  my  next  point  on  the  broader  social  and  economic  consequences  of  weak
compliance. In most banks, the compliance function has mainly served to ensure that a bank is
operating  within  permitted  legal  and  regulatory  boundaries.  In  such  cases,  the  compliance
function effectively does little more than constrain a bank from activities that increase compliance
risks. So rather than work with business units and customers to close gaps that contribute to
heightened risks, compliance officers are seen as gatekeepers rather than partners.
This is an important distinction with potentially significant consequences for a bank’s risk-taking
activities. I can give you at least three examples of this.
When we issued revised standards on loan provisioning, one of the requirements was for banks
to  classify  loans  as  “impaired”  if  the  loans  were  restructured  or  rescheduled  following  an
increase in credit risk. Rather than focus on how banks might strengthen internal assessments
to better identify and  measure  changes  in  credit  risk,  many  banks  simply  withdrew  altogether
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
from entertaining requests from borrowers to restructure and reschedule their loans. SMEs were
hit the hardest, requiring Bank Negara Malaysia to intervene.
For a period, our banks were also caught up in the global de-risking phenomenon which saw
banking relationships with legitimate businesses indiscriminately terminated across  the  board.
Money  changers,  remittance  service  providers  and  even  well-established  and  managed  non-
government organisations, which were providing legitimate services to the community, had their
accounts unilaterally closed without any effort made to establish legitimacy.
Another  example  is  in  the  area  of  responsible  financing.  Despite  broad  flexibility  provided  on
income verifications, some banks were initially quick to reject loan applications from borrowers
based on a set of very narrowly defined documents that were accepted to prove incomes. This
largely excluded non-salaried individuals from accessing loans. This was only later reviewed by
banks  to  accept  other  forms  of  documentation  and  borrower  engagements  to  demonstrate  a
borrower’s ability to repay.
In certain circumstances, it is entirely appropriate for a compliance function to draw a clear line in
the  sand,  where  further  risks  should  not  be  taken.  For  example,  where  there  are  reasons  to
suspect that firms or individuals may be involved in illegal activity, banks must not deal with such
parties  and  must  work  with  the  authorities  to  limit  public  harm.  Despite  being  a  first  line  of
defence against illegal activities through banking relationships, banks have often been too slow to
react.  This  has  resulted  in  heightened  risks  of  losses  to  investors,  not  to  mention  substantial
damage to the reputation of the banking industry at large.
But given that banks are in the business of risk-taking, compliance functions can and should also
provide the means by which a bank can take reasonable business risks based on more informed
judgements. In other words, compliance doesn’t only serve to constrain risk-taking, it can help
banks assume legitimate business risks more responsibly and with greater confidence.
Our economy still relies strongly on bank intermediation. An excessive aversion to risk by banks
has  dire  consequences  on  economic  growth. A  strong  and  effective  compliance  function  can
redress this by assisting banks to form better judgements about risks taken by their institutions.
In a 2017 survey of 28 countries including Malaysia, the financial services sector was ranked as
the  least  trusted  industry,  coming  in  last  after  the  technology,  food  and  beverage,  consumer
packaged goods, and energy sectors. I recently shared that popular polls also show that most
people do not hold banks in high regard in terms of ethics and honesty. This is, indeed, a very
unfortunate state of affairs.
This brings me to my third point on the impact of compliance on public confidence and trust in
the financial industry. When things go wrong, two questions inevitably get asked. Were there any
rules to prevent this from happening, and if so, why were they not followed? And if this could
happen, how far can we really trust banks to act in the public’s interests?
Today, banks remain dominant players in many aspects of financial services. While this may not
change  dramatically  in  the  very  short  term,  we  cannot  preclude  a  significant  share  of  bank
revenues being eroded by new entrants into the financial sector. We are already seeing this in
the retail lending and payment segments of the market.
FinTech  will  most  likely  change  our  banking  landscape  as  the  public  at  large  becomes  more
predisposed to the use of technology. The intermediation role of banks may totally change, and
may no longer be the sole domain of the banking industry. So it is in the banks’ interest that any
public disillusionment with banks be addressed preemptively.
The  role  of  compliance  is  very  much  a  part  of  this  conversation.  It  has  to  be,  since  the
compliance function exists not only to ensure that rules are followed by banks. It can be used to
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
maintain public trust and to shape the cultural norms and values for an organisation.
The  compliance  function  complements  enforcement  and  supervisory  actions  in  upholding  the
sanctity  of  rules  that  safeguard  public  interests.  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  will  continue  to  take
strong enforcement actions against institutions with significant lapses in controls that might lead
to risks in the financial system.
We recognise that compliance is not an easy task. It is not possible to police every minute detail
of a bank’s operations. Hence, a key priority should be to foster a culture of compliance within the
inherent  norms  and  values  of  an  organisation.  Culture  can  be  an  abstract  concept,  but  the
simplest  way  to  describe  it  is  how  a  bank  employee  will  behave  when  there  is  little  threat  of
“being caught”. This is also sometimes referred to as “soft laws”.
The  compliance  function  can  help  to  shape  and  internalise  “soft  laws”  through  an  effective
monitoring and assessment framework. With a pulse on the ground, it also provides an important
feedback loop to senior management and the board on actions that can be taken to reinforce a
strong  tone  from  the  top.  Compliance  officers  can  also  galvanise  broader  industry  initiatives,
working with bodies like the Financial Services Professional Board to develop constructive codes
of ethics and conduct for the industry and encouraging their adoption.
Earlier, I alluded that the compliance function can be a strategic business proposition. But this
can  only  be  achieved  through  sufficient  investment  in  capacity  building  in  the  compliance
function, in terms of both systems and resources.
One  aspect  that  tends  to  be  overlooked  by  institutions  in  managing  compliance  risk  is  the
importance  of  effective  channels  for  communication  and  information  flows  between  various
control  functions  and  the  business  departments.  The  closer  the  cooperation  between  various
functions within the bank, the easier it is to share relevant information and the higher the chances
for  an  early  identification  of  risks.  This  will  improve  the  quality  and  promptness  of  the  bank’s
response to any occurrence of risk or non-compliance.
It is also crucial that institutions invest sufficiently in talent development within the compliance
function.  At  the  board-level,  this  priority  is  often  overlooked.  However,  cultivating  a  group  of
professional  compliance  officers  within  a  bank  is  essential.  They  must  be  fluent  with  the
business  operations  of  the  bank,  plugged-in  to  organisational  developments,  and  have  the
authority  and  network  to  engage  effectively  throughout  the  bank.  Possessing  professional
qualifications also play a key role in this, such as the certification in regulatory compliance offered
by  the Asian  Institute  of  Chartered  Bankers,  in  conjunction  with  the  International  Compliance
Association.
Today,  banks  are  realising  how  important  it  is  for  them  to  get  in  front  of  compliance  issues.
Failure to realise this is an expensive error. Banks need to invest and build systems; and create
a  culture  that  ensures  that  they  are  the  first  to  identify  and  address  compliance  failures,  and
proactively communicate them to the regulators and other authorities.
Beginning next year, we will be raising the stakes further by publishing enforcement actions taken
by Bank Negara Malaysia. Specifics will be mentioned, including the name of the banks, nature of
breaches  and  remedial  actions  taken.  In  addition,  we  are  also  working  towards  introducing  a
mandatory employment reference process for the industry. This will require banks to keep and
share records of misconduct by employees to facilitate informed recruitment decisions.
Conclusion
My aim here is to provoke a much broader view of compliance, one that is strategic as opposed
to operational.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Compliance  supports  smart,  efficient  and  balanced  regulation.  This,  in  turn,  builds  trust  and
confidence among the public, which is the very foundation of the banking industry. Only with a
strong and reliable banking industry can we serve the economy and the overall well being of our
people.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
