Sabine Lautenschläger: Cyber resilience - a banking supervisor's
view
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, at
the High-Level Meeting on Cyber Resilience, Frankfurt am Main, 19 June 2017.
 This week I learnt that the first computer virus dates back to 1971. It spread via the ARPANET,
which  was  a  precursor  of  today’s  internet.  The  ARPANET  connected  about  two  dozen
universities  and  government  hosts  in  the  United  States.  The  virus  had  been  written  for
experimental purposes and was not malicious. It just displayed a simple message on infected
computers: “I’m the creeper: catch me if you can”.
Things are a bit more complex today, and the outcome of cyber incidents much worse: they can
disrupt  business,  cost  a  lot  of  money  and  destroy  reputations. And  indeed,  the  potential  for
damage is great, as so much relies on IT and so much happens online – the financial sector is a
case in point. As you all know, banks have always been attractive targets for criminals.
Although  the  damage  has  been  limited  so  far,  we  banking  supervisors  take  cyber  risk  very
seriously. And we insist on banks doing the same.
Cyber  risk  has  been  a  priority  for  ECB  Banking  Supervision  from  day  one.  In  2015,  we
established a working group that had three goals. First, to get an overview of how supervisors
deal with such risks both at national and international level. Second, to get an overview of how
prepared  banks  are  for  cyber  risk. And  third,  to  propose  to  the  Supervisory  Board  a  strategic
direction and a dedicated work plan on cyber risk.
We  have  learnt  a  lot  over  the  past  two  years. And  we  have  used  it  to  address  this  risk  from
several different angles.
For  us,  one  of  the  first  steps  was  to  establish  a  cyber  incident  reporting  framework.  We
conducted a successful pilot phase in 2016. And now we will implement a long-term solution for
all those banks that we directly supervise. As from this summer, they will be required to report all
significant cyber incidents. This will help us to assess more objectively how many incidents there
are  and  how  cyber  threats  evolve.  It  will  also  help  us  to  identify  vulnerabilities  and  common
pitfalls.
In addition to our ongoing supervision we also perform thematic reviews on cyber security and IT
outsourcing. These reviews help us to assess the risks facing each bank as well as the risks
that might affect the entire sector. And they also help to raise awareness of cyber risk at Board
level.
The insights that we obtained in 2015 and 2016 were applied in three ways. First, they informed a
dedicated section in our methodology for on-site inspections. Second, they were used to create
new analytical tools for our off-site supervisors. And third, they were used to produce a cyber risk
profile of each bank.
So we are working to obtain a comprehensive picture of what is happening out there. But how to
deal with cyber risk?
Well, the World Health Organization says that the best way of stopping diseases from spreading
is basic hygiene: washing your hands. And the same is true for IT. Basic IT “hygiene” can take
banks a long way. Have the latest updates been installed? Are passwords strong enough? Have
backups been made and their restoration tested? Such simple things are so important, but often
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
neglected.
So  we  are  taking  a  close  look  at  our  banks  to  see  whether  they  are  following  the  relevant
standards and best practices. And there are plenty of these; I cannot stress this enough. We
also work with the European Banking Authority, the EBA, on how to supervise cyber risk in an
effective and harmonised manner across Europe.
As for the euro area, we plan to issue our supervisory expectations on how banks approach IT
risks  in  general. And  what  we  expect  clearly  goes  beyond  basic  IT  hygiene.  This  will  be  an
important step for two reasons. First, it will help to forge a common understanding of IT risks
between supervisors and banks. And second, it will help to ensure a harmonised treatment. To
increase  awareness  and  to  communicate  our  expectations,  we  will  organise  seminars  and
discussions with banks.
And we also look beyond the euro area, of course. We cooperate with supervisors worldwide to
align priorities and exchange best practices.
To sum up, we take cyber risk very seriously, and we approach it from various angles. My advice
to banks is to do the same. It is vital to be alert and ready to react.
Thank you for your attention.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
