Viral V Acharya: A case for public credit registry in India
Theme talk by Dr Viral V Acharya, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 11th
Statistics Day Conference, Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 4 July 2017.
 Valuable insights provided by Dr. O. P. Mall and Shri Anujit Mitra are gratefully acknowledged.
Good Morning Governor, Deputy Governors S.S. Mundra, N.S. Viswanathan and B. P. Kanungo,
our Chief Guest, Speakers and the team!
Introduction to the Annual Statistics Day
Taking off from Shri Chetan Bhagat’s address in the pre-conference dinner last evening, I hope
you  are  all  ‘alive’  today,  rather  than  just  ‘existing’  or  ‘fading’.  Thank  you  for  coming  in  large
numbers for the Annual Statistics Day Conference of the Reserve Bank of India. This auditorium
has  a  limited  capacity  and  many  of  our  younger  colleagues  are  watching  this  through  video-
conferencing at three other venues in this building.
2.  This  conference  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  eleventh  in  the  series  but,  for  me,  it  is  the  first
Statistics  Day  Conference.  I  am  eagerly  looking  forward  to  being  around  and  witnessing  the
deliberations.
3. Statistics Day in India is celebrated on the birth anniversary of Late Prof P.C. Mahalanobis,
who graduated with honours in Physics in 1912 and was subsequently attracted to the realm of
Statistics. In modern management parlance, Prof. Mahalanobis was an “out of the box” thinker.
All his contributions emanated while studying statistical problems of immediate importance. As
the Governor mentioned in his inaugural remarks, Prof Mahalanobis set up the Indian Statistical
Institute (ISI) and the survey lab there subsequently blossomed into the present National Sample
Survey  Office  (NSSO).  The  Reserve  Bank  has  benefitted  immensely  over  the  years  from  its
collaboration with the ISI on statistical issues and the NSSO on measurement issues.
4.  In  today’s  conference,  we  are  privileged  to  have  with  us  several  distinguished  guests.  Dr.
Martine  Durand,  our  keynote  speaker  today  is  the  Chief  Statistician  and  Director,  OECD
Statistics  Directorate,  and  a  leading  voice  on  global  statistical  issues.  She  has  flown  in  early
morning  today  from  Paris.  A  warm  welcome  to  India  and  to  the  Reserve  Bank,  Martine  –
Namaste!
5. Let me also welcome Prof. Chetan Ghate of the ISI-Delhi, who is a member of the Monetary
Policy  Committee  (MPC)  and  a  regular  teacher  at  the  RBI  Academy,  as  well  as  Prof  N.
Balakrishna of the Cochin University of Science and Technology, who will both deliver special
talks later today.
6. Prof. Dilip Nachane, who would join us in the afternoon, is Professor Emeritus, IGIDR-Mumbai
and was a member of the Reserve Bank’s Technical Advisory Committee on Monetary Policy
(TAC-MP) and the Prime Minister’s Economic Advisory Council (PMEAC) for a long time. He will
be chairing the Panel Discussion on the Conference-Theme. Let me also welcome Dr D.K. Joshi
of CRISIL, Ms. Pranjul Bhandari of HSBC, and Dr. Samiran Chakraborty of the Citibank, who are
the other distinguished panel members. Thank you panelists for devoting your valuable time to
the Statistics Day.
7.  Let  me  now  move  to  the  Theme  of  today’s  conference,  viz.,  ‘New  Frontiers  on  Statistical
Methods and Information Base for Central Banks’. Statistical techniques are an integral part of
economic  analysis.  An  interesting  acknowledgement  of  this  is  the  good  share  of  “method
awards” in award of the Nobel Prize for Economic Sciences. The first Nobel in Economics in
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
1969 went to Ragnar Frisch and Jan Tinbergen for their pioneering work on econometric model
building,  i.e.,  for  their  integration  of  economic  theory  and  statistical  methods.  Over  the  years,
Nobel  “method  awards”  have  also  been  awarded  for  input-output  method,  national  accounts,
micro-econometrics,  co-integration  and ARCH  (to  Rob  Engle,  colleague,  co-author  and  dear
friend when I was at NYU Stern).
8. The central role of statistical methods in economic analysis is also reflected in their constantly
growing share in the curriculum for students in economics and finance. The global financial crisis
and its aftermath has been a big structural break to explain which new approaches and methods
are gaining ground. Macroeconomic forecasters have faced interesting questions during this last
decade, as the outbreak of banking and sovereign crises has led to the most basic assumptions
behind forecasts being violated. This has also necessitated further effort towards methodological
refinements, not just in economic theory but also in statistical methods to test the theory. In many
ways, this is an exciting time in my view to be studying economics.
9. The meeting of the G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors in 2009 endorsed the
G-20 Data Gap Initiatives (DGI), which focuses on (a) build-up of risk in the financial sector; (b)
cross-border  financial  linkages;  (c)  vulnerability  of  domestic  economies  to  shocks;  and  (d)
improving  communication  of  official  statistics.  After  the  first  phase  of  DGI  was  largely
implemented, the second phase commenced in 2015 with the objective to strengthen the global
statistical systems so as to aid deeper economic analysis. India’s progress in this regard has
been good so far and we are taking further strides, recognizing that such initiatives help individual
countries and also the global economic system.
The Case for a Public Credit Registry in India
10. I will focus in the rest of my remarks on a topic which I feel is vital for the Indian economy at
this  juncture  and  where  I  expect  the  Reserve  Bank,  and  more  specifically,  the  Statistics
Department,  to  play  a  rather  important  role.  It  concerns  the  setting  up  of  a Public  Credit
Registry (PCR), an extensive database of credit information for India that is accessible to all
stakeholders.  Generally,  a  PCR  is  managed  by  a  public  authority  like  the  central  bank  or  the
banking  supervisor,  and  reporting  of  loan  details  to  the  PCR  by  lenders  and/or  borrowers  is
mandated by law. The contractual terms and outcomes covered and the threshold above which
the  contracts  are  to  be  reported  vary  in  different  jurisdictions,  but  the  idea  is  to  capture  all
relevant information in one large database on the borrower, in particular, the borrower’s entire set
of borrowing contracts and outcomes.
11. A PCR, if put in place for India, will help in a) Credit assessment and pricing by banks; b)
Risk-based,  dynamic  and  countercyclical  provisioning  at  banks;  c)  Supervision  and  early
intervention by regulators; d) Understanding if transmission of monetary policy is working, and if
not, where are the bottlenecks; and, e) How to restructure stressed bank credits effectively. The
extensive and incisive work of Professor José-Luis Peydró of Universitat Pompeu Fabra on such
issues using the Spanish Credit Register is a testimony to the tremendous value a PCR can
bring to clear understanding of the underlying economy. I encourage you to check out his work.
12.  Let  me  start  by  explaining  the  motivation  for  creating  such  a  database.  A  vast  body  of
academic  literature  advocates  transparency  in  credit  markets,  arguing  that  it  improves  the
efficiency of the market and helps creditors as well as borrowers. One of the reasons the credit
information is termed as a ‘public good’ is its utility to the credit market at large and to the society
in general. In the absence of a central database of credit information, the creditors are restricted
to  the  information  they  have  about  their  clients  based  only  on  their  limited  transactions  or
interactions with the clients, and this could lead to suboptimal outcomes.
13. A central repository, which, for instance, captures and certifies the details of collaterals, can
enable the writing of contracts that prevent over-pledging of collateral by a borrower. In absence
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
of the repository, the lender may not trust its first right on the collateral and either charge a high
cost  on  the  loan  or  ask  for  more  collateral  than  necessary  to  prevent  being  diluted  by  other
lenders. This leads to, what in economics is termed as, pecuniary externality – in this case, a
spillover of one loan contract onto outcomes and terms of other loan contracts. Furthermore,
absent  a  public  credit  registry,  the  ‘good’  borrowers  are  disadvantaged  in  not  being  able  to
distinguish  themselves  from  the  rest  in  opaque  credit  markets;  they  could  potentially  be
subjected to a rent being extracted from their existing lenders who enjoy an information monopoly
over  them.  The  lenders  may  also  end  up  picking  up  fresh  clients  who  have  a  history  of
delinquency that is unknown to all lenders and this way face greater overall credit risk.
Current Credit Information Systems in India
14. Let us now have a look at the current credit information systems in our country. The private
Credit  Bureaus  (CBs)  operating  in  India  are  regulated  by  RBI  under  the  Credit  Information
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 and include Credit Information Bureau (India) Limited (CIBIL),
Equifax, Experian, and CRIF Highmark. Each one of these focuses on data analytics to provide
credit scores, and allied reports and services. These analytics are useful for the member banks
for issuing credit cards as well as for taking decisions (primarily on retail loans) as of now.
15.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  set  up  the  Central  Repository  of  Information  on  Large  Credits
(CRILC) in 2014–15. It is now one of the most important databases for offsite supervision. Here
the  Scheduled  Commercial  Banks  (SCBs)  in  India  report  credit  information  of  their  large
borrowers,  i.e.,  those  having  aggregate  fund-based  and  non-fund  based  exposure  of  INR  50
million and above. It covers around sixty per cent of the loan portfolio and around eighty per cent
of  the  non-performing  loans  of  SCBs.  The  reporting  is  done  on  a  quarterly  basis  but  the
slippages are required to be reported in another format on as-and-when basis. The CRILC is
designed entirely for supervisory purposes and its focus is on the reporting entities’ exposure to
the borrower (as individual and/or as a group) under various heads, such as bank’s exposure to
a  large  borrower;  the  borrower’s  current  account  balance;  bank’s  written-off  accounts;  and
identification  of  non-co-operative  borrowers,  among  others.  However,  CRILC  captures  only
limited detail about the borrowers such as the industry to which they belong and their external
and internal ratings. The pooled information under CRILC is shared with the reporting banks but
is not shared with the Credit Bureaus, larger lender community, or researchers.
16.  My  colleagues  in  DSIM  are  familiar  with  the  Basic  Statistical  Return  –  I  or  BSR1,  where
account level credit information (an “account” being a specific loan or facility between a bank and
a borrower) is reported by banks. As the name suggests, it is a statistical return which captures
some metadata for the account such as district and the population group of the place of funds
utilisation;  type  of  account  such  as  cash  credit,  overdraft,  term  loan,  credit  cards,  etc.;
organisation type such as private corporate sector, household sector, microfinance institutions,
Non-Profit Institutions Serving Households (NPISH) and non-residents; and occupation type such
as agriculture, manufacturing, construction, and various financial and non-financial services. The
interest rate charged along with the flag for floating vs fixed is also reported here. These details
are not present in CRILC which is a borrower-level dataset rather than an account-level dataset.
Though  BSR1  contains  a  “health  code”  for  each  account,  it  is  not  comprehensive  enough  to
cater to the supervisory needs as it is not feasible to aggregate all accounts maintained by a
borrower in the absence of a unique identifier across the reporting banks. Due to a number of
reasons, even bank-level aggregation of delinquency in BSR1 will not in general match with that
reported  through  CRILC. Aggregated  statistical  information  with  spatial,  temporal  and  sectoral
distribution  from  BSR1  is  shared  in  the  public  domain  for  researchers,  analysts  and
commentators. Account-level data is, however, kept confidential but is shared by the Reserve
Bank with researchers on a case to case basis under appropriate safeguards.
17. These databases maintained in the Reserve Bank are not available to individual banks in real
time  to  take  credit  decisions  at  the  micro  level.  They  do  not  capture  fully  the  credit  data  at
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
origination  level.  In  particular,  the  360  degree  view  is  not  available  to  creditors  in  any  of  the
systems discussed. Individually, some of these systems can be swiftly strengthened with just a
few additional fields. For example, capturing in BSR1 the unique account-holder identifier in the
form  of Aadhar  for  individuals  and  Corporate  Identification  Number  (CIN)  for  companies  may
make it possible to view all accounts of each borrower across banks.
18. Next, I would like to draw your attention to the company finance databases available with the
Reserve Bank and with the MCA. These contain the audited or unaudited financial results of the
corporates submitted by them at various frequencies. Here again the key identifier is the CIN.
The power of the information can be substantially enhanced if we can make BSR1 and CRILC to
talk to each other and further link them both with the MCA database containing financial results of
the corporate sector.
International Experience with Public Credit Registers
19.  Let  me  now  turn  to  the  international  scenario.  A  survey  conducted  by  the  World  Bank
reported that as of 2012, out of 195 countries that were surveyed, 87 were having Public Credit
Registers  –  the  number  must  have  increased  by  now.  The  private  credit  bureaus  are  also
functioning well in many of the developed countries and they co-exist with the PCRs. In US, the
Dealscan by Thomson Reuters is a prime example which covers the syndicated loan origination
data including information on arrangers; price and maturity terms; credit lines or term loans; and
loan characteristics such as covenants. Since banks voluntarily provide credit data at the time of
origination itself, it is almost a real-time dataset and one gets to know in a week or two weeks’
time whether there is a change in the credit market conditions.
20. Dun & Bradstreet or DNB in short, is nearly two centuries old and has perhaps the largest
commercial database in the world. Their website claims that they track over 265 million company
records  which  they  derive  from  30,000  data  sources  and  is  updated  5  million  times  per  day.
DNB’s own correspondents gather data on firms by visiting and telephoning the firm’s principals.
It is interesting to note that in the 19th century, these correspondents who were often lawyers,
included such luminaries as Abraham Lincoln, Woodrow Wilson and Calvin Coolidge (ref. J.G.
Kallberg, G.F. Udell / Journal of Banking & Finance 27 (2003) 449–469).
21.  Let  me  give  a  real  life  example  to  illustrate  the  utility  of  such  information  systems.  In  the
aftermath of the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, there were economists who
asserted that the credit flow in the United States was unaffected by pointing out to the robust
credit  growth  in  bank  loans.  But  a  deeper  analysis  of  the  Thomson  Reuters  Dealscan  data
quickly revealed that the credit growth was almost entirely attributable to the corporates drawing
down (a form of a “bank run”) on the existing credit lines. The origination of new loans had indeed
dried up.
How a Public Credit Registry can help in India
22. Let us now envisage how exactly a public credit registry can help in India. Firstly, it is required
to improve the credit culture in our country. It has been demonstrated in the ‘Doing Business
2017’ report that credit information systems impart transparency in the credit market, following
which access to credit improves and delinquencies decrease. At present, several Indian banks
burdened  with  mounting  NPAs  appear  less  confident  in  taking  credit  decisions. A  transparent
public credit registry would help the bankers to rely on objective data for making credit decisions
and also enable them to defend their actions with market evidence when subjected to scrutiny.
23. Second, large borrowers get a preference in credit markets due to their existing credentials in
the public space. They have established credit history, brand value, and supply of collateral. In
contrast, small and marginal aspirants, start-ups, new entrepreneurs, and small businesses in
micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME) sector are disadvantaged as they lack many of
those  desired  qualifications  for  credit.  Transparency  of  credit  information  would  serve  as  a
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
“reputational collateral” for such borrowers. This would not only help promote financial inclusion,
but also reward the good borrowers thereby imparting credit discipline. We just have to look at
our  willingness  to  transact  on  eBay  to  understand  how  reputation  builds  up  for  effectively
anonymous sellers from their transaction records captured on a website. Similarly, public credit
registry would help create a level-playing field among different sizes of borrowers.
24. Third, public credit registers in many countries have gone beyond the credit relationship of
borrowing  entities  with  financial  institutions.  They  tap  other  transactional  data  of  borrowers
including payments to utilities like power and telecom for retail customers and trade credit data
for businesses. Why might such data help? Lenders in the formal sector often hesitate to extend
a line of credit to new customers due to the lack of credit scores. Regularity in making payments
to utilities and trade creditors provides an indication of the credit quality of such customers. In
turn, credit from the formal sector can become accessible to new borrowers, boosting financial
inclusion. As  a  side  benefit,  the  extent  of  financial  inclusion  will  likely  become  more  precisely
measurable for policy makers.
25.  Finally,  public  credit  registry  can  have  a  profound  impact  for  regulatory  purposes.  In  its
absence, only fragmented images are available of credit behaviour and indebtedness. PCR will
help  in  getting  to  a  complete  picture  that  is  necessary  for  supervisors  and  policy  makers  to
assess  credit  risk  of  the  entire  system.  To  facilitate  this,  the  PCR  must  cover  the  following
aspects of the credit data: First, the bank-borrower loan-level data detailing loan terms at time of
origination along with data on borrower’s economic and financial health. Second, the internal and
external  ratings  (or  credit  scores)  and  their  evolution,  and  where  applicable,  market-based
measures of firm-level and sector-level credit risks. Third, bank-borrower loan-level restructuring
data with all details. Fourth, secondary loan sales and price information. Fifth, borrower-debt level
Default and Recovery (LGD) data. This would be a good start!
Who should operate the Public Credit Registry?
26. Large Public Credit Registers are operated either by the central banks or state authorities in
various countries. They are typically not operated by the private sector, though Credit Bureaus in
some jurisdictions capture many of the items discussed above. In some jurisdictions, the raw
data collected by the central PCR is shared with the CBs, which in turn make value addition by
pooling  data  from  other  sources  and  come  up  with  further  analysis  such  as  credit  scores  /
reports to their clients, typically commercial lenders. Since we are talking about a large database
containing  lots  of  private  information,  it  also  needs  to  be  handled  by  an  authority  which  is
trustworthy in the public eye as well as backed by appropriate judicial powers to ensure timely
and accurate data gathering. Therefore, it is found internationally that with rare exceptions the
Public Credit Registries are managed by central banking or banking supervisory authorities.
In Summary…
27. Let me conclude by restating that a transparent and comprehensive public credit register is
the need of the hour in India. More and more countries are moving towards this with a view to
improving the credit culture in their jurisdictions. Such registers help in enhancing efficiency of
the credit market, increase financial inclusion, improve ease of doing business, and help control
delinquencies. Incorporating unique identifiers for the borrowers (Aadhar for individuals and CIN
for  companies),  Reserve  Bank’s  BSR1  and  CRILC  datasets  can  quickly  be  converted  into  a
useful PCR covering customers of SCBs to start with. It can then be expanded to cover other
financial institutions in India. A comprehensive PCR down the road will be even more effective.
28. Setting up a comprehensive PCR will, however, require much team work and vision. It will
demand  expertise  to  handle  large  volumes  and  varieties  of  data  assembled  from  diverse
sources.  It  will  require  working  with  several  stakeholders,  other  regulators  and  international
agencies with expertise in helping set up such registers. That’s a worthy challenge for the pool of
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
statisticians assembled here on the eve of the 11th Statistics Day. Governor and I hope we can
set up, as a matter of priority, a high-level task force that can provide a roadmap for attaining this
goal of developing and unleashing a powerful credit information system for our country.
29.  There  are  several  other  “information  base”  challenges  for  the  long  horizon  for  the  team:
Employment Statistics; Household Inflation Expectation Survey in rural and informal economy;
Big-data real-time indicators of prices and consumption; Google images and mobile-phone data
for economic activity indicators; to just a list few. Having a go at some of these will be a fitting
tribute to Prof. Mahalanobis whose contributions were truly long-term and have lived far beyond
his immediate life-span.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
