Claudia  Buch:  Welcome  speech  at  the  G20  Workshop  on  Data
Sharing
Welcome speech by Prof Claudia Buch, Deputy President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the
G20 Workshop on Data Sharing, Frankfurt am Main, 31 January 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen
 A warm welcome to all of you participating in the G20 Workshop on Data Sharing. The workshop
is part of the second phase of the Data Gaps Initiative and co-organised by the IMF, Eurostat and
the Deutsche Bundesbank.
I am very happy  to  welcome  participants  from  G20  and  non-G20  countries,  from  international
organisations, central banks, statistical offices and finance ministries. Many of you have travelled
long distances, which shows how important data sharing is for our analytical work. 
As you know, Germany fully supports the second phase of the G20 Data Gaps Initiative (DGI-2)
and will fulfil all recommendations within the agreed timeframe (FSB and IMF 2016). The initiative
provides key statistical inputs for analysing the economy and financial stability. The initiative is
well on the way to realising its objectives within the envisaged five-year horizon. This has been
achieved  through  excellent  cooperation  between  international  agencies  and  G20  economies,
implementation of thematic workshops – like today’s – and concrete timetables.
This  workshop’s  topic  is  Recommendation  #20  on  promoting  data  sharing.  We  believe  this
recommendation has a lot of potential. Aggregate datasets provide only limited information on the
drivers  and  effects  of  changing  structures  in  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector.  The
recommendation  is  therefore  explicitly  concerned  with  sharing  of  granular  data.  This  is
necessary to understand global developments and in particular differences across countries.
Take  the  decline  in  cross-border  banking  activities  since  the  global  financial  crisis  as  an
example. This development raises many questions:
Which banks have withdrawn from foreign markets?
Has the withdrawal been driven by regulation, by macroeconomic factors or by bank-specific
factors?
Are these patterns similar across countries?
What have been the effects on bank risk and lending?
These questions cannot be answered without combining datasets from different sources:
Bank income statements and balance sheets
Reports on external positions
International data
Combining datasets, looking beyond aggregate statistics into heterogeneous developments – all
this  is  required  to  transform  “data”  into  “knowledge”.  Yet,  legal  constraints  make  it  difficult,  or
often practically impossible, to link micro datasets from different jurisdictions, even for research
and financial stability analysis. Better accessibility and sharing of granular data would open up
new possibilities for analysis by providing new insights into the effects of policies.
Let me give you an example. In order to analyse issues pertaining to global banks with granular
data,  the  International  Banking  Research  Network  was  founded.  This  network  brings  together
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
researchers  from  around  the  world.  They  use  micro-level  data  to  better  understand  the
consequences of global banking: country teams work on the same topic in parallel, using their
distinct, bank-level data sets to help develop comparable cross-country evidence. Although the
underlying regulatory data cannot be made public, the results of the common analysis can be
shared to inform the policy dialogue.
tools, 
One  example  is  the  latest  research  effort  on  the  impact  of  changes  in  prudential  policy
instruments on lending of global banks (Buch/Goldberg 2016 and Buch/Bussière/Goldberg 2016).
This  project  uses  a  new  database  that  focuses  on  changes  in  the  intensity  of  the  usage  of
several  widely  used  prudential 
into  account  both  macroprudential  and
microprudential objectives. It finds that international spillovers vary across prudential instruments
and are heterogeneous across banks. Bank-specific factors like balance sheet conditions and
business  models  drive,  both  the  amplitude  and  direction  of  spillovers  to  lending  growth  rates.
Spillovers into lending growth from prudential tightening are positive in some cases, and negative
in others. Spillovers are most likely to occur via the affiliates of foreign banks hosted in a country,
although some evidence exists of inward transmission through home-country global banks. This
would be in line with an attempt of domestic banks to preserve market shares and to protect the
domestic market from international policy spillovers. 
taking 
This example shows: The availability and flexible use of granular data early on is an integral part
of any structured process of policy evaluation. Other examples are easy to find: one can think of
information on channels of transmission of monetary policy across different institutions, sectoral
and  firm-level  drivers  of  productivity,  the  build-up  of  risks  to  financial  stability  and  the  causal
impact of regulatory and monetary policies. 
To put it in a nutshell, we need to implement a new paradigm in statistics, moving away from
traditional, aggregate statistics towards the flexible use of (standardised) micro data. Micro data
are collected only once and can be used for multiple purposes, which has the added advantage
of  a  lower  statistical  reporting  burden  (Deutsche  Bundesbank  2016).  In  order  to  develop  this
benefit immediately, we need a close cooperation between bankers and statisticians.
We, therefore, welcome the work done so far. Let me name just a few milestones that have been
reached over the last year in the G20 context.
After the regional conferences, a Global Conference of the G20 Data Gaps Initiative was held
in Basel in June 2016. This conference agreed on concrete action plans for implementing
the DGI-2 recommendations.
The decision was taken to establish an informal G20 working group on data sharing, chaired
by the IMF and Eurostat in cooperation with the Deutsche Bundesbank.
Building on this, a meeting was held in Washington D.C. in November of last year to take
stock of G20 countries’ experiences. First ideas were developed for a common terminology
for granular and micro data, and suggestions were made on how to balance confidentiality
and user needs in times of the internet.
  All  these  elements  built  the  basis  for  the  draft  recommendations  on  data  sharing  and
accessibility, which will be discussed in detail at this workshop. 
This  workshop  offers  the  possibility  for  an  in-depth  discussion  of  the  draft  recommendations,
together with best practices. The final version should be agreed by the DGI contact group and the
IAG by the end of February 2017. This document will serve as a deliverable for the meeting of
the  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  in  March  2017  to  be  reflected  in  the
Communiqué.  Furthermore,  the  workshop  should  debate  the  next  concrete  steps  to  be  taken
after adoption of this Communiqué.
I wish you fruitful and stimulating discussions and every success developing your ideas. 
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
References:
Buch, C M, and L S Goldberg (2016), “Cross-Border Prudential Policy Spillovers: How Much?
How  Important?  Evidence  from  the  International  Banking  Research  Network",  NBER  Working
Paper no. 22874.
Buch,  C  M,  M  Bussière,  and  L  S  Goldberg  (2016),  “Prudential  policies  crossing  borders:
Evidence  from  the  International  Banking  Research  Network",  VOX,  CEPR’s  Policy  Portal,  09
December 2016.
Deutsche  Bundesbank  (2016),  Microdata  –  paradigm  shift  in  central  banks’  statistics, Annual
Report 2015, Frankfurt a.M., pp 47–59, February 2016.
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  (2016),  The  Financial
Crisis  and  Information  Gaps,  Second  Phase  of  the  G-20  Data  Gaps  Initiative  (DGI-2)  –  First
Progress Report, September 2016.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
