Mario  Draghi:  The  interaction  between  monetary  policy  and
financial stability in the euro area
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  First
Conference on Financial Stability, organised by the Bank of Spain and the Centro de Estudios
Monetarios y Financieros, Madrid, 24 May 2017.
Introduction
 Price stability and financial stability are inherently interlinked. They tend to be mutually reinforcing,
and in the long run each is a necessary, albeit insufficient, condition for the other. As the crisis
showed, periods of heightened financial turbulence can impair the transmission mechanism of
monetary policy. Similarly, the failure of price stability – periods of deflation or hyperinflation – has
also been accompanied in the past by periods of financial instability.
These interactions have been visible in the euro area during the crisis. The combined effects of
the  financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises  resulted  in  a  protracted  period  of  low  growth  and  low
inflation. The severity of the recession in turn contributed to episodes of financial turbulence. By
2014, it had left its mark in the form of a very challenging situation both for price stability and
financial stability in the euro area. Accordingly, the policy response has involved decisive action
aimed at both policy domains.
The  ECB  has  taken  a  series  of  unconventional  measures  to  enhance  the  transmission  of
monetary policy and secure its mandate. Important changes have also been made to the policy
framework for financial stability in the euro area. Together, these actions have been instrumental
in  stimulating  and  sustaining  the  economic  recovery  while  limiting  the  possible  side-effects  of
unconventional policies. They have enabled a longer period of low interest rates unmarked by any
significant negative side-effects on financial stability.
Policy responses to the crisis
The crisis in the euro area has been characterised to a large extent by feedback loops between
the financial and real sides of the economy. In the early phases of the crisis, we witnessed a
severe disruption in the transmission of monetary policy in parts of the euro area as the interbank
market fragmented along national lines. Later, as the economy deteriorated, a number of national
banking  sectors  saw  a  sharp 
the
macroeconomic situation created a strong incentive to deleverage by reducing lending.
in  non-performing 
loans  and, 
in  some, 
increase 
The ECB took a number of measures to respond to financial fragmentation within the euro area.
But by the start of 2014, the provision of bank credit to the real economy had dried up, shrinking
at an annual pace of 1.7% in the first quarter. The euro area found itself in a vicious circle: as
credit tightened, the economy worsened and risk perceptions rose, causing credit to tighten still
more.  The  economic  outlook  at  the  time  was  marked  by  the  risk  of  a  further  recession  and
potentially even deflation – a combination that would likely have resulted in worse outcomes for
financial stability.
So in 2014 and thereafter, the ECB took further decisive action to counteract these forces and
comply with its price stability mandate. We introduced a number of unconventional measures
including  negative  deposit  facility  rates,  targeted  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (TLTROs)
and an expanded asset purchase programme. These measures – known as our “credit easing”
package – were aimed at combating the impairment of the transmission mechanism caused by
bank deleveraging, and thereby ensuring the even transmission of our policy decisions across all
euro area countries and along the yield curve.
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
But at the same time as these measures were being deployed, two important regulatory changes
took  place  which  had  profound  implications  for  financial  stability.  The  more  resilient  financial
system in turn bolsters the ability of monetary policy to achieve its price stability objective.
First, in 2014 the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) Regulation came into force, under which
the ECB became responsible for the direct supervision of significant credit institutions in the euro
area. This has helped produce a more resilient financial system than in 2014, with higher capital
ratios and lower leverage. Indeed, one of the first steps of European banking supervision was to
perform a “health check”, namely a Comprehensive Assessment of bank balance sheets. The
announcement  alone  of  the  Comprehensive Assessment  encouraged  banks  to  frontload  their
deleveraging  and  strengthen  their  balance  sheets,  by  over  €200  billion  in  advance  of  the
outcome.
The  second  important  regulatory  change  was  the  SSM  Regulation  conferring  macroprudential
powers  and  responsibilities  upon  the  ECB.  Macroprudential  measures  are  now  a  shared
responsibility between national authorities – which have the power to implement them – and the
ECB, which has the power to tighten the measures set out in the EU legal texts (i.e. in the Capital
Requirements Directive IV and the Capital Requirements Regulation).
The ECB can therefore counter any inaction bias if national authorities do not take adequate and
prompt  actions  to  implement  macroprudential  measures.  It  can  lead  analysis  of  cross-border
effects,  helping  to  avoid  cross-border  arbitrage  and  spillovers  via  large  and  interconnected
banks. And  it  can  promote  a  common  basis  for  analysis,  the  sharing  of  information  and  the
adoption of best practices, contributing to the consistency and coordination of macroprudential
1
policies across the SSM area.
This new policy framework supports both the implementation of our monetary policy and helps
build  resilience  in  the  financial  system.  Financial  and  business  cycles  can  potentially  be  de-
synchronised,  meaning  financial  imbalances  can  grow  in  an  environment  characterised  by
relatively muted inflation. And in such an environment, the use of monetary policy to counteract
financial  imbalances  may  not  be  optimal,  since  it  may  result  in  substantial  deviations  of
aggregate output and inflation from their desirable levels. In this situation, macroprudential policy,
2
addressing financial imbalances, can complement the long-run objective of monetary policy.
The  unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  and  the  improvements  to  the  regulatory
architecture have put the euro area banking system in a stronger position to transmit the ECB’s
credit  impulse  to  firms  and  households  across  the  monetary  union  and  to  ensure  sufficient
financing to sustain the recovery – which is exactly what we have seen. In the first quarter of
2017, annual loan growth to euro area households stood at 2.6% and non-financial corporations
at 1.6%, up from respective troughs of –0.6% in the second quarter of 2014 and –3.6% in the
third quarter of 2013. Bank lending rates for both firms and households have dropped by around
110 basis points over the past three years and are now at historical lows. 
As a result, the euro area is now witnessing an increasingly solid recovery driven largely by a
virtuous circle of employment and consumption, although underlying inflation pressures remain
subdued.  The  convergence  of  credit  conditions  across  countries  has  also  contributed  to  the
upswing becoming more broad-based across sectors and countries. Euro area GDP growth is
3
currently 1.7%, and surveys point to continued resilience in the coming quarters.
Challenges for financial stability in the current environment
With  the  resilient  recovery  underway,  the  tone  of  the  debate  in  Europe  surrounding  financial
stability has shifted. Some have expressed concerns that monetary policy measures are having
unwanted side effects on financial stability. This is not a new subject for academics or central
bankers: monetary policy always has side effects. But the use of unconventional measures by
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
central banks has generated greater awareness of the issue.
Of course, the monetary policy measures taken in recent years can have positive side effects on
financial  stability.  Lower  interest  rates  across  the  curve  reduce  the  debt-servicing  costs  of
households and businesses. Furthermore, by sustaining the recovery and the consequent lower
unemployment, monetary policy bolsters the earnings of households and businesses, reducing
the likelihood of default, which in turn supports bank profitability.  Banks also benefit from capital
gains on assets held, and from a short-term reduction in overall funding costs. Finally, banks
accessing the Eurosystem funding via the TLTRO-II can borrow at rates as low as the deposit
facility rate, provided that they exhibit strong performance in loan origination.
4
Yet the current environment also suggests that close monitoring is necessary in the following
three areas: the effect on risk-taking in bank lending, the impact on bank profitability and the
impact on institutional investors.
The so-called risk-taking channel of monetary policy transmission is where changes in interest
rates may also affect banks’ incentives to bear risks.  In particular, low interest rates may lead to
a search for higher yields, encouraging banks to soften their credit standards, thereby increasing
both the volume and average riskiness of supplied loans.  If credit growth and additional risk-
taking became excessive, this could lead to a build-up of imbalances and endanger the stability
of the financial system.
5
6
Of  particular  concern  is  the  development  of  so-called  credit-fuelled  bubbles,  which  previous
experience has shown to be particularly detrimental to financial stability.  Such bubbles, which
typically plague real estate markets, are characterised by an adverse spiral between asset price
and  credit  growth.  Positive  growth  in  the  market  value  of  real  estate  supports  credit  growth,
which at the same time contributes to inflating the value of real estate. When the resulting bubble
bursts, the collateral underlying the credit loses value, impairing the lending and borrowing ability
of lenders and borrowers, respectively.
7
The  second  challenge  arising  from  the  current  environment  is  that  a  reduction  in  the  spread
between short and long-term rates may compress banks’ net interest margins and thus exert
pressure on their profitability. Since banks carry out maturity transformation by borrowing short
and lending long-term, both the slope of the yield curve and its level matter for profitability. This, in
turn,  could  reduce  their  accumulation  of  capital  via  retained  earnings  and  make  them  more
fragile.
Finally,  the  protracted  low  interest  rate  environment  also  puts  pressure  on  the  profitability  of
financial institutions that provide long-term return guarantees, such as life insurance or pension
funds.  To  meet  their  challenging  return  targets,  such  institutions  could  be  prone  to  engage  in
search-for-yield behaviour and take on excessive risks.
Monitoring financial stability developments
Our  current  assessment  is  that  there  is  no  widespread  emergence  of  imbalances,  but  there
remain some localised areas that require continued close monitoring and vigilance.
In keeping with our institutional framework, macroprudential policy has been appropriately active
in  mitigating  the  build-up  of  risk  in  these  localised  areas.  In  terms  of  the  banking  sector,
authorities have taken decisions to identify global and domestic systemically important financial
institutions,  requiring  them  to  hold  additional  capital  buffers.  Moreover,  authorities  have  taken
decisions to calibrate the systemic risk and countercyclical capital buffers, as well as sectoral
capital requirements for real estate and housing.
In terms of risk-taking by banks, we see no evidence of a widespread development of credit-
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
fuelled  bubbles.  In  the  last  quarter  of  2016,  euro  area  bank  lending  for  house  purchases
increased by around 2.7% a year – well below the growth rates of up to 12% a year recorded in
the run-up to the crisis. In the same quarter, nominal residential real estate prices in the euro
area  grew  by  3.8%  a  year.  Although  residential  real  estate  price  dynamics  are  gaining
momentum, valuation estimates suggest that, in the euro area as a whole, there are no signs of
8
imbalances in such markets.
Nevertheless, there is considerable heterogeneity across the euro area, and we closely monitor
countries with more robust developments in real estate. We also closely monitor developments
in  the  commercial  real  estate  markets,  especially  where  prices  in  the  prime  segment  have
departed from their long-term averages.  It is also worth noting that this is an area where national
macroprudential authorities are already quite active, with many countries in the euro area having
introduced prudential measures, such as caps on loan-to-value ratios, to counteract emerging
risks.
10
9
Moreover, there are few signs of banks in aggregate taking on excessive risk in their lending.
According  to  the  ECB’s  euro  area  bank  lending  survey,  banks  have  certainly  decreased  on
average their lending rates and softened their credit standards in the wake of our monetary policy
measures. The availability of loans to small and medium-sized enterprises has improved since
October  2014.
  But  a  closer  inspection  of  the  drivers  of  changes  in  credit  standards  is
informative.  Heightened  “risk  perceptions”  and  low  “risk  tolerance”  contributed  to  a  sharp
tightening  of  credit  standards  in  the  years  that  followed  the  crisis.  Yet  while  banks’  “risk
perceptions” have gone down since 2014 in line with general economic conditions and the overall
pick-up in the flow of bank credit, “risk tolerance” remains restrained, and has even tightened
somewhat since 2015.
11
This  suggests  that  banks  remain  prudent  when  deciding  to  extend  credit.  Indeed,  euro  area
banks are less likely overall to grant loans than they have been on average since 2003.
 This
evidence  is  reinforced  when  looking  at  the  composition  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  where  we
observe a broad-based decline in probability of defaults by exposure class and a shift towards
less risky credit exposures in the past few years.
12
13
There is an important role here for microprudential supervision. Under the SSM Regulation, the
ECB became responsible in 2014 for the supervision of significant credit institutions in the euro
area,  permitting  a  more  harmonised  approach  to  supervision.  Microprudential  supervision  can
mitigate excessive risk taking by applying institution-specific measures to the banks that invest
the  most  in  risky  assets.  Risks  at  individual  institutions  are  regularly  assessed  as  part  of  the
Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP).  Based  on  the  outcome  of  this
comprehensive analysis, supervisors can implement additional capital and liquidity requirements
or other measures targeted at banks’ specific weaknesses.
What about overall banking sector profitability? Certainly return on equity (RoE) – a frequently
used measure of profitability – is lower now than it was pre-crisis. In 2016, aggregate RoE stood
at 5%, compared with close to 20% in 2006. Yet such a comparison may be misleading for two
reasons.  First,  bank  capital  ratios,  particularly  core  equity,  are  higher  and  overall  leverage  is
lower  than  pre-crisis.  Higher  leverage  can  flatter  measured  profitability,  but  as  we  saw  in  the
crisis  it  comes  with  a  greater  risk  of  financial  instability.  The  balance  sheet  repair  that  banks
undertook  after  the  crisis  pushed  their  leverage  down.  The  resulting  decline  in  banks’  RoE
relative to the pre-crisis years needs to be put into perspective and forms part of a transition
towards a more sustainable “new normal”.
Second,  the  correct  comparison  is  the  counterfactual  of  what  profitability  would  be  like  in  the
absence of our measures. As I noted earlier, the prospect in 2014 of renewed recession and the
risk of deflation was one that brought its own risks to financial stability. Research by the ECB that
takes into account the effect of the improvement in macroeconomic conditions and asset prices
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
resulting from our monetary policy measures shows that the overall impact of our measures on
bank profitability was positive.
14
Let me also underline that there remains ample room for a large part of the financial sector to
improve  profitability  by  increasing  efforts  to  improve  operational  efficiency  via  organic  cost-
cutting: euro area banks’ cost efficiency has not improved since 2010 and, by standard metrics,
compare unfavourably with many of their international peers.
15
Finally,  what  about  the  effects  on  institutional  investors?  Our  latest  Financial  Stability  Review,
which  was  published  today,  states  that  over  the  past  few  years  some  institutional  investors,
including insurance corporations, pension funds and investment funds, have shifted their asset
allocation from higher to lower-rated debt securities.
 Such developments need to be closely
monitored. To mitigate their risks, these institutions may have to adapt their business models, for
instance by continuing to reduce their reliance on guaranteed-return schemes.
Conclusion
16
17
Let me conclude.
The macroeconomic environment is improving. The monetary policy measures put in place in
recent  years  have  proven  to  be  effective  at  sustaining  a  resilient  recovery  that  is  increasingly
broad-based across countries and sectors. This recovery in turn contributes to greater financial
sector resilience.
The breadth of our monetary policy measures and the length of the time they are in place are
necessary for achieving our objective of price stability. These policy settings have been made
possible  because  the  financial  system  is  more  resilient  than  in  the  past.  Today  we  have  a
suitable  –  and  active  –  macroprudential  framework  to  address  potential  negative  side  effects.
This, together with stronger banks and stronger supervision, has enabled us a longer period of
low  interest  rates  unmarked  by  a  build-up  of  financial  stability  risks.  Nonetheless,  we  remain
vigilant.
When we introduced unconventional policy instruments in order to secure a return of inflation
towards  our  objective,  we  were  aware  that  those  new  instruments  could  result  in  somewhat
more pronounced side effects than conventional instruments. These side effects have remained
contained, but we take them into account in the formulation of our policy, in the sense that we try
to minimise them, without prejudice to our ability to achieve our objective.
18
And this is reflected also in the logic underpinning our forward guidance about the sequencing of
the  withdrawal  of  monetary  stimulus.  Indeed,  as  I  said  in  my  speech  at  the  ECB  Watchers’
conference,
 in a multi-country monetary union such as the euro area, made up of segmented
national  financial  markets,  asset  purchases  are  inevitably  more  difficult  to  calibrate,  more
complex to implement, and more likely to produce side-effects than other instruments, including
moderately  negative  rates.  Negative  rates  may  also  have  unwarranted  side-effects,  but  those
have so far remained limited. Our current assessment of the side effects suggest therefore that
there  is  no  reason  to  deviate  from  the  indications  we  have  been  consistently  providing  in  the
introductory statement to our press conferences.
More  generally,  our  monetary  policy  actions  in  pursuing  our  mandate  will  benefit  from  the
completion of the banking union, through the creation of a European deposit insurance scheme,
the third pillar of the banking union, as well as a common backstop for the Single Resolution
Fund.
Moreover  as  we  move  towards  capital  markets  union,  which  is  likely  to  further  increase  the
importance of market-based finance in the euro area, the relevant EU and national authorities
 5 / 6
19
BIS central bankers' speeches
should be endowed with tools to address risks arising from non-bank financial intermediation. 
19
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
 See, e.g., European Central Bank (2016), Macroprudential Bulletin, Issue 1 / 2016, Chapter 1 – Topical issue:
The ECB’s macroprudential policy framework.
See, e.g., Hanson, S., A. Kashyap, and J. Stein, (2011), “A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation”,
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 25(1): 3-28.
See Draghi, M. (2017), “Monetary policy and the economic recovery in the euro area,” speech delivered at The
ECB and Its Watchers XVIII Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 6 April.
See, e.g., Cœuré, B. (2016), “Assessing the implications of negative interest rates,” speech delivered at the Yale
Financial Crisis Forum, Yale School of Management, New Haven, 28 July.
See Borio, C. and H. Zhu, (2012), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing link in the
transmission mechanism?”, Journal of Financial Stability, 8(4): 236–251.
For empirical evidence, see e.g. Jiménez, G., Ongena, S., Peydró, J.-L., and Saurina, J., (2014), “Hazardous
Times for Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans Say about the Effects of Monetary Policy on
Credit  Risk-Taking?”, Econometrica,  82(2),  463–505;  Maddaloni, A.,  and  Peydró,  J.-L.,  (2011),  “Bank  Risk-
Taking, Securitisation, Supervision and Low Interest Rates: Evidence from the Euro-area and the U.S. Lending
Standards”, The Review of Financial Studies, 24(6), 2121–2165.
See, e.g., Reinhart, C., and Rogoff, K., (2009), “This Time Is Different”, Princeton University Press, or Schularick,
M. and A. Taylor (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises,
1870–2008”, American Economic Review, 102(2): 1029–61.
See European Central Bank, (2017), “Financial Stability Review”, May 2017.
See European Central Bank, (2017), “Financial Stability Review”, May 2017.
See  for  instance  Constâncio,  V.  (2017),  “Macroprudential  policy  in  a  changing  financial  system,”  speech
delivered at the second ECB Macroprudential Policy and Research Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 11 May.
See European Central Bank (2016), Survey on the Access to Finance of Enterprises in the euro area – April to
September 2016, November.
See European Central Bank, (2017), “The euro area bank lending survey – first quarter of 2017”, April.
See European Central Bank, (2017), “Financial Stability Review”, May 2017.
See Rostagno, M., Bindseil, U., Kamps, A., Lemke, W., Sugo, T. and T. Vlassopoulos, (2016), “Breaking through
the  zero  line:  The  ECB’s  negative  interest  rate  policy”,  Brookings  Institution,  Washington  DC,  6  June.
Presentation available on the Brookings Institution website.
European Central Bank (2017), Financial Stability Review, May 2017, chapter 3.
European Central Bank (2017), Financial Stability Review, May 2017, chapter 3.
See final report of the joint Task Force of the ESRB Advisory Technical Committee, the ESRB Advisory Scientific
Committee and the ESCB Financial Stability Committee on “Macroprudential policy issues arising from low
interest rates and structural changes in the EU financial system”, November 2016.
Draghi (2017), op.cit.
See  European  Central  Bank  (2016),  “ECB  contribution  to  the  European  Commission’s  consultation  on  the
review of the EU macroprudential policy framework”, published on 12 December.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
