Ravi Menon: MAS' Annual Report 2016/17
Remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at MAS'
Annual Report 2016/17 Media Conference, Singapore, 29 June 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning. Welcome to MAS’ annual report media conference.
GLOBAL ECONOMY
The global economy is in better shape than it has been in a long while.
Economic growth is on a positive momentum.
IMF has projected global GDP growth for 2017 to hit 3.5%, a marked improvement from the
3.1% last year.
Growth is more broad-based, across both advanced and emerging economies.
Growth in the major markets — the US, Eurozone, Japan and China — is experiencing a
synchronised upturn.
For the first time since 2014, all the major regions of the global economy — making up more
than  90%  of  world  GDP  —  are  poised  for  a  stronger  growth  outturn  compared  to  the
previous year.
Global trade is recovering, on the back of a pick-up in manufacturing activity and bottoming of
commodity prices.
World merchandise trade volume is projected to grow by 2.4% this year, almost double last
year’s growth rate.
The  JP  Morgan  Global  Manufacturing  Purchasing  Managers’  Index  (PMI)  has  been
registering readings of above-50 for 15 consecutive months now.
Economic expansion in the US is becoming more entrenched.
The IMF has forecast GDP growth of 2.1 %. 
This is a credible projection, based on the resilience of private consumption and an incipient
pick-up in private investment; it does not assume a large fiscal stimulus.
Domestic demand in the Eurozone has made a remarkable recovery.
GDP  growth  this  year  is  projected  at  1.7%,  underpinned  by  private  consumption  and  the
ongoing recovery in the labour market.
Business confidence has improved and political risks have dissipated somewhat in the wake
of pro-business election results in the Netherlands and France.
China is on a steady growth path.
GDP is expected to grow by around 6.5%.
Underlying private demand is recovering, with retail sales growing at about 10%.
Profits have improved, industrial prices have started to recover, and export orders are rising.
These should set off a virtuous cycle of stronger business confidence and capital spending.
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
The region is also holding steady.
External demand has strengthened among the ASEAN-4 and NEA-3 economies, driven by
the improving China and G3 economies. 
Notably, regional trade is on the rise again, on the back of an increase in machinery and
equipment exports.
The most keenly watched macroeconomic development this year – the normalisation of
US monetary policy – has so far been largely benign. 
The global economy should be able to absorb the ongoing gradual increase in US interest
rates, as the rise in rates is itself a response to strengthening economic activity.
But  vigilance  is  still  called  for:  economies  and  markets  have  been  accustomed  to  low
interest rates for a very long time. They could be thrown off balance if rates rise faster than
expected.  
And debt levels in emerging market economies are much higher than they were before the
crisis.  This is a source of potential vulnerability as interest rates rise.
Downside  risks  around  baseline  growth  forecasts  have  declined  –  there  is  more
consensus now about growth outcomes. But tail risks arising from economic policy and
geopolitical uncertainties persist.
One, trade protectionism. An escalation of trade tensions could disrupt global supply chains
and curtail international trade, with an outsized impact on many small open economies in
Asia, including Singapore.
Two, disorderly Brexit negotiations could weigh on consumption and investment in the UK,
with spillover effects on the Eurozone’s exports and growth. Trade and banking channels
could transmit these shocks to Asia. 
Three, rising populist and nationalist sentiments could compel politicians to take measures
that unnerve investors and depress economic growth.
SINGAPORE ECONOMY
Against this backdrop, the Singapore economy is forecast to grow by 1-3% this year, with
a strong likelihood that it would be higher than the 2% registered last year.
Growth has been somewhat uneven across sectors but this is to be expected in the
initial stages of an external-led pickup. Growth is expected to gradually broaden to the
rest of the economy over the course of the year.
It  is  useful  to  look  at  the  sectoral  distribution  of  growth  from  the  perspective  of  the  three
broad clusters in the economy.
The trade-related cluster has been a major driver behind the rebound in the economy
since Q4 last year.
This  cluster  comprises  the  manufacturing,  transport  &  storage,  and  wholesale  services
sectors.
These activities comprise some 43% of the economy and, on average, contributed slightly
over two-thirds of sequential GDP growth in Q4 2016 and Q1 2017.
Electronics manufacturing firms expect business conditions to remain favourable in the next
six months, albeit slightly slower than in H1 2017.
MAS expects higher growth in this cluster to flow-through more broadly to the rest of the
 2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy and gain momentum over time.
The modern services cluster recorded mixed outcomes over the last two quarters but is
poised for higher growth in the second half of this year.
This cluster, comprising financial, business, and ICT services, accounts for about 30% of
GDP.
Financial services saw a strong outturn in Q4 last year but a sequential pullback in Q1 this
year, reflecting heightened political and geopolitical uncertainties globally which dampened
investor sentiments.
The performance of modern services is likely to improve as the global economy recovers
and the upturn in the trade-related cluster raises business confidence and investments.
The  pickup  in  regional  growth  and  trade  should  help  anchor  growth  in  lending  and  trade
financing activities.
Demand for ICT services will be boosted by government initiatives, as well as general IT
deepening that is occurring in Singapore and the regional economies.
The  domestic-oriented  cluster  has  had  lacklustre  growth  and  some  segments  are
expected to remain weak.
This  cluster,  accounting  for  17%  of  GDP,  comprises  retail  and  food  services  as  well  as
construction activities.
The real estate and retail segments will be weighed down by subdued consumer sentiment
and the shift to overseas retailers via e-commerce.
Public  construction  will  be  supported  by  infrastructure  projects,  such  as  the  ongoing
extensions to the rail network, but private construction is likely to remain subdued.
Inflation  has  come  in  within  expectations.  Both  core  and  headline  inflation  are  on  a
modest uptrend but underlying price pressures remain benign.
MAS Core Inflation is projected to average 1-2% in 2017, up from 0.9% in 2016.
The  rise  in  core  inflation  since  Q4  2016  has  largely  reflected  higher  prices  of  oil-related
items.
Domestic sources of inflation remain contained partly because the pass-through of business
costs to consumer prices has been quite weak.
CPI-All Items inflation is expected to come in at 0.5-1.5%, up from −0.5% last year. 
Accommodation cost will likely continue to exert a drag on headline inflation
Generalised demand-induced price pressures have been relatively muted for some time.
But MAS is closely watching developments for the rest of this year, especially if upside risks
to GDP growth materialise.
MONETARY POLICY
The current neutral stance of monetary policy has helped to stem disinflation pressures
in the economy.
MAS has adopted a 0% p.a. appreciation path for the S$NEER policy band since April 2016.
This  neutral  stance  has  facilitated  a  turnaround  in  headline  CPI  inflation,  which  had  been
negative for 24 consecutive months.
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Current monetary policy stance remains appropriate for an extended period in view of
the stable inflation and growth prospects for 2017.
The neutral policy stance should anchor inflation on a gradual ascent towards its historical
norm and ensure medium-term price stability. 
This policy is of course predicated on domestic inflation and growth prospects keeping to
their projected trajectories.
PROPERTY MARKET AND MACROPRUDENTIAL POLICY
The government has implemented macroprudential policy measures – commonly known
as property cooling measures – since 2009 to promote a sustainable residential property
market and financial prudence among households.
The property market has substantially stabilised over the last three years.
Private residential property prices have declined by nearly 12% over the last 14 quarters. 
This follows an increase of close to 60% over 17 quarters.
Growth in housing loans, which used to be about 20% year-on-year in 2010, has moderated
to 4% in Q1 2017. 
The risk profile of housing loans has also improved, as borrowers now tend to have lower
loan-to-value (LTV) and total debt servicing ratios (TDSR). 
Only a negligible share of housing loans is in negative equity. 
It is, however, not time yet to ease the cooling measures.  They remain necessary.
First,  underlying  demand  for  private  residential  properties  remains  firm  amidst  a
continued low interest rate environment.
Recent project launches have seen relatively good take-up.
Transaction activity in Q1 2017 increased by close to 40% compared to average quarterly
transactions since the implementation of the TDSR in 2013.
At the same time, notwithstanding rate hikes in the US, mortgage rates in Singapore remain
very low.
The risk of a renewed unsustainable surge in property prices is not trivial. 
Second, investors continue to search for yield and safety in property markets across the
world.
Regional property markets have been buoyant and their respective authorities have, in the
past six months, introduced further property cooling measures.  For instance:
 - China, Hong Kong, South Korea, and New Zealand have tightened prudential requirements
such as housing loan-to-value ratios and debt servicing ratios.
  -  In Australia,  New  South  Wales  will  be  doubling  the  stamp  duty  surcharges  for  foreign
investors.  
We must be vigilant that tightening measures elsewhere do not lead to spill-over of investor
demand into the Singapore market.
Easing the measures now would send a wrong signal.
The calibrated adjustments by the government earlier this year do not signal the start of
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
an unwinding of the property cooling measures, as some commentators have suggested.
MOF, MND, and MAS stated this very clearly in their joint announcement in March and this
remains the position.  
The statement also said that the current Additional Buyer’s Stamp Duty (ABSD) rates and
Loan-to-Value (LTV) limits would be retained.
MAS has, on a few occasions, emphasised that the TDSR is a structural measure to ensure
financial prudence and not a cyclical tool to be adjusted periodically.
The adjustments in March were made for very specific reasons and purposes.
The  Sellers  Stamp  Duty  (SSD)  holding  period  was  shortened  and  the  rates  lowered
because speculative flipping of properties had declined significantly. 
Mortgage  equity  withdrawal  loans  (MWLs)  with  LTV  ratios  of  50%  or  less  were  excluded
from  the  TDSR  framework  to  give  home  owners  greater  flexibility  to  monetise  their
properties for retirement needs.
-  This  is  for  a  very  small  category  of  people:  we  estimate  that  MWLs  excluded  from  the
TDSR framework made up just 1% of new private housing loans granted in the last three
months.
Over the medium-term, property prices should be aligned with broader income trends in
the economy.
Ultimately, residential property purchases are financed out of buyers’ income. 
In  turn,  income  growth  depends  on  GDP  growth.  If  property  prices  increase  faster  than
nominal GDP growth on a sustained basis, buyers would end up taking on more leverage
than they can reasonably repay out of their incomes.
Such highly-leveraged households will be particularly vulnerable when interest rates rise or
their incomes fall.
Therefore,  market  participants  –  owner-occupiers,  investors,  developers  –  need  to  set
realistic expectations regarding future property price increases.
MAS, together with MOF and MND, will continue to keep a close watch over developments in the
property market. 
MAS’ FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE
After contribution to the Consolidated Fund, MAS made a net profit of S$24.3 billion for
FY2016/17.
This is a record profit but as I have often reminded at these briefings, MAS’ profit and loss
outcomes are subject to sharp swings.
They do not reflect the underlying investment approach of the MAS which is conservative
and emphasises steady, long-term returns.
The  profit  outturn  for  the  last  FY  reflects  positive  currency  translation  effects  and  higher
investment gains.
MAS’  underlying  foreign  investment  gains  remain  fairly  stable  at  S$10–12  billion  on
average.
In FY2016/17, MAS made a gain of S$30.1 billion from its investment of the official foreign
reserves.
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Currency translation effects, reflecting the depreciation of the Singapore Dollar against some
major currencies, amounted to S$8.2 billion.
Foreign investment gains therefore amounted to S$21.9 billion, compared to S$5.2 billion the
previous FY.
The increase was due to higher interest and dividend income, higher realised capital gains
and lower valuation provisions made as global markets rose over the period.
In fact, taking the two FYs together, the foreign investment gain averaged S$13.5 billion, not
much higher than the average of S$10–11 billion recorded in previous years.
A CLEAN AND TRUSTED FINANCIAL CENTRE
Last year, I spoke about how the growth of Singapore’s financial centre has been underpinned by
its reputation as a clean and trusted jurisdiction. 
Upholding high standards of integrity in the financial industry is an absolute priority for
MAS.
That  is  why  we  took  very  seriously  the  lapses  in  anti-money  laundering  controls  among
some of our financial institutions with respect to suspicious 1MDB-related transactions. 
Working  closely  with  the  Commercial  Affairs  Department  and  the  Attorney-General’s
Chambers,  MAS  undertook  a  rigorous  probe  of  these  transactions  which  were  part  of  a
large, complex, cross-border money laundering scheme.
Last year, I said that the findings on the 1MDB-related transactions that flowed through here had
made a dent in our reputation as a clean and trusted financial centre. 
I believe we have begun the process of restoring that reputation.  We have taken tough
and unprecedented enforcement actions and sent an unequivocal message that MAS will
not tolerate the criminal abuse of Singapore’s financial system.
Just last month, we announced the completion of an intensive two-year long review of banks
connected to 1MDB-related transactions known to-date. 
All  in,  we  have  closed  2  merchant  banks  and  fined  8  banks  nearly  S$30  million  –  the
heaviest aggregate financial penalties to-date. 
We have also issued prohibition orders (POs) against 4 individuals and served notices of
intention to issue POs against 3 others for various regulatory breaches. 
MAS also issued lifetime bans, for the first time, against 2 of these individuals.
MAS’ regulatory actions so far are based on what we know to-date. 
Thanks  to  excellent  co-operation  we  have  had  with  overseas  jurisdictions,  Singapore
authorities were able to obtain good intelligence and piece together most of the significant
flows from end to end. 
We have found nothing new in the latest filing by the US Department of Justice that warrants
further action by us.
But if any new relevant information or leads arise from ongoing investigations in Singapore or
elsewhere, rest assured MAS will re-open the files and pursue the matter.
At the same time, MAS has intensified its supervision of financial institutions that have
higher  inherent  money  laundering  risks  or  control  areas  found  wanting  from  past
inspections.
The  inspections  go  beyond  rules-based  compliance  to  focus  on  risk  understanding  and
 6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
management. In our inspections, we examine:
-  whether  the  Board  and  senior  management  have  effective  oversight  of  money
laundering/terrorism financing risks;
-  whether  the  financial  institution  takes  timely  action  to  properly  resolve  risk  control
concerns; and
- whether there is good risk understanding, adequate risk culture and systems throughout
the organisation, to support the proper execution of risk controls.
Sustained effort and unstinting vigilance will be needed on the part of industry players
to manage the risk of illicit finance and keep our financial centre clean.
CREATING VALUE FOR THE ECONOMY
MAS  is  reputed  as  a  tough,  “no-nonsense”  regulator.    But  we  also  seek  to  be
progressive  and  proactive  in  developing  the  financial  sector  –  to  be  dynamic,
innovative, and purposeful.
We  have  said  much  before  about  our  strategies  to  help  grow  various  activities  in  the
financial sector.
We  have  also  shared  on  many  occasions  our  FinTech  agenda  and  efforts  to  facilitate
innovation in the financial sector.
Today, I will speak about how we are working closely with the industry to ensure that our
financial sector remains purposeful for the economy –
- financing the growth of local and Asian companies; and
- creating good jobs for the Singapore workforce.
FINANCING GROWTH OF LOCAL AND ASIAN COMPANIES
MAS has been working with the industry to deepen the financing ecosystem for regional
and local companies in three ways.
First,  we  are  working  to  strengthen  the  venture  capital  and  private  equity  financing
ecosystem to serve Asian growth companies.
The  next-generation  Asian  growth  companies,  with  their  new  ideas  and  models,  have
injected vibrancy to our corporate landscape. 
Venture capital and private equity (VC/PE) play an important role in supporting the growth of
such companies and stimulating innovation. 
We have a small but thriving VC/PE industry.  VC/PE assets under management has grown
at a compound annual growth rate of 28% over the past 5 years. 
But we need to do more – given the growing numbers of Asian growth companies and their
tendency to stay private for longer and not go the IPO route.
We are simplifying the regulatory framework for VC managers. 
We are working with the industry to foster a deeper and more comprehensive ecosystem
for venture capital and private equity. Initiatives include:
anchoring more regional and global VC and PE players in Singapore;
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
deepening the talent pool;
enhancing ancillary professional services to better support VC activity; and
building a pipeline of alternative market platforms that can facilitate private market exits for
PE/VC investors.
Second,  we  are  working  to  strengthen  Singapore’s  value  proposition  for  Asian
companies to issue bonds.
The growth potential for Asian bonds remains strong, particularly as companies in the region
are looking to fund their growing operations and raise longer term capital.
Let me mention three schemes that MAS has put in place to make Singapore the choice
location for regional bond issuance.
To  attract  new Asian  issuers  to  Singapore’s  bond  market,  MAS  introduced  the Asian
Bond Grant scheme earlier this year.
Under the grant, MAS will co-fund up to S$400,000 of issuance-related expenses for first-
time Asian issuers.
To  support  bond  issuers  adopting  environmentally  sustainable  practices,  there  is  a
Green Bond Grant scheme.
The scheme will offset up to S$100,000 of the costs relating to the external review required
of a green bond.
And the latest – To encourage issuers to be rated and to nurture a healthy credit rating
culture  in  the  SGD  bond  market,  MAS  will  soon  be  introducing  a  SGD  Credit  Rating
Grant.
Issuers can claim 100% of their credit rating expenses, up to S$400,000 per issuer.
Details  will  be  released  shortly.    We  strongly  encourage  regular  domestic  issuers  to
consider obtaining ratings.
Third,  we  are  working  to  expand  the  industry’s  capacity  to  finance Asian  companies’
international trade activities.
Trade financing needs will grow as Asian companies expand and internationalise.
We need innovative solutions to make trade finance an investible asset, so as to attract a
broader  pool  of  investors  and  provide  banks  the  capacity  to  originate  new  trade  finance
lending.
One  such  innovation  is  the  Capital  and  Credit  Risk  Manager  (CCRM),  an  electronic
trading platform for trade finance assets.
Launched just last month, with 16 financial institutions globally participating, the CCRM aims
to enhance efficiency, improve transparency, and augment the risk management of trade
finance assets distributed among financial institutions.
If it is successful, it will help deepen the pool of trade financing available to companies.
CREATING GOOD JOBS FOR SINGAPORE WORKFORCE
Finally,  beyond  managing  wealth,  financing  companies,  providing  insurance,  and  creating
markets, the financial sector must create good jobs for our workforce.
 8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
In 2016, we saw a net increase of 2,800 financial sector jobs despite the slowdown in
financial sector growth to 0.7% from 5.7% in 2015.
Of course, this net figure masks much larger gross employment flows – of jobs created as
well  as  jobs  displaced.    Let  me  talk  about  jobs  displaced  first,  then  jobs  that  are  being
created.
Digitisation  and  automation  are  gathering  pace  and  many  global  financial  institutions
have been downsizing and restructuring their operations. 
The Singapore operations of these global banks have retrenched some staff, mainly in back
office functions such as operations, IT and technical support.
In relative terms, the scale of the cuts has been much smaller in Singapore than in other
markets.
While  some  financial  institutions  have  laid  off  staff,  others  have  continued  to  hire;
sometimes, the same financial institution lays off workers in one function but has vacancies
in other functions.
Most retrenched finance professionals have been able to find alternative employment,
sometimes within the financial industry, sometimes in other industries like ICT.
But  a  small  number  face  difficulties  finding  jobs  again,  and  this  is  something  we  are
concerned about and working on actively. 
For those who have been laid off, we have stepped up efforts to facilitate redeployment.
The Financial Industry Career Advisory Centre  (FiCAC) was launched last year to provide
guidance  to  those  keen  to  join  the  financial  sector  or  those  looking  to  move  to  new  jobs
within the industry.
FiCAC is a tripartite collaboration among NTUC, the financial industry, and MAS and other
government agencies.
Over  1,200  finance  professionals  have  since  tapped  on  the  services  of  FiCAC,  which
include outreach on job opportunities, training support, and career coaching.
MAS and our partner stakeholders are working to strengthen FiCAC in two areas:
First, providing fuller advisory services drawing on a network of professionals, community
leaders, and partners as career coaches and industry mentors;
Second, enhancing job-matching capabilities through the use of digital platforms, such as
virtual career fairs.
It is important to intervene upstream in the process well before retrenchments take place.  MAS
is working with financial institutions to identify early on jobs that might be at risk in the
future. 
We  then  work  with  these  financial  institutions  to  proactively  up-skill  these  workers
through professional conversion programmes.
These are all early efforts still and will take time to bear fruit.
On  the  positive  side  of  the  jobs  equation,  we  continue  to  see  good  demand  for
professionals in several areas of finance.
These include compliance, risk management, insurance underwriting, and asset and wealth
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
management.
Within  the  technology  area,  there  continues  to  be  strong  demand  for  expertise  in  cyber
security, data analytics, network architecture, artificial intelligence, and machine learning.
MAS is working closely with the industry to build the relevant skills and competencies at
all levels within our financial institutions. 
To ensure graduates are  job-ready,  we  are  partnering  with  institutes  of  higher  learning  to
develop curriculum in new growth areas, for example risk analytics for insurance.  
To support mid-career finance professionals deepen their specialist skills so that they stay
relevant, we have launched the SkillsFuture Study Awards, with a total of 170 awards to be
granted this year. 
To  equip  capable  Singaporeans  to  take  on  regional  or  global  leadership  roles  in  financial
institutions,  we  are  co-funding  leadership  programmes  at  NUS  and  SMU  focusing  on
international exposure, Asian market insights, and professional networks.
Jobs and skills have moved to front and centre of MAS’ financial sector development
agenda. 
The sector will disrupt many existing jobs no doubt, but will also create many good ones.
Working with the industry, we are resolved to help our workforce seize the opportunities that
a thriving financial centre at the heart of a dynamic Asia presents.
On that note, let me stop here and I look forward to your questions.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
