   The Value of Forecasting in an Uncertain 
A speech delivered to the New Zealand Manufacturers and Exporters 
Association (NZMEA) in Christchurch 
By Dr John McDermott, Assistant Governor and Head of Economics 
World 
On 15 May 2017 
     
2 The Terrace, PO Box 2498, Wellington 6140, New Zealand 
Telephone 64 4 472 2029 Online at www.rbnz.govt.nz  
    2 
 "We are all forecasters." Tetlock and Gardner, Superforecasting.1 
 
It has often been said that there is no escaping forecasting. Every decision we make 
in life involves forming a view about what the future might hold. Likewise, there is no 
escape for the Bank. We have a Policy Targets Agreement that requires us to keep 
future  inflation between  1  and  3  percent and  therefore  we  need  to form a  view  of 
where we currently are, how future developments might influence the path of output 
and inflation, and thus how we should respond.2  
 
We use our forecasting to establish a clear and well-founded plan for what monetary 
policy settings are necessary to achieve our inflation target, to communicate this plan 
to the public and to support the effectiveness and transmission of monetary policy. 
We present our forecasts in the quarterly Monetary Policy Statement. A great deal of 
effort goes into producing these forecasts.  
 
More  often  than  not,  the  world  does  not  turn  out  as  we  forecast.  However, 
forecasting  is  still  a  valuable  and  necessary  part  of  the  monetary  policy  process. 
Producing forecasts and allowing them to be publically subject to challenge enables 
us  to  build  a  solid  foundation  for  policy  decisions,  learn  from  developments,  and 
improve our policy outcomes. Forecasting is not supposed to be prophecy; rather, it 
is about being precise about our thinking.  
 
 
Uncertainty and the challenges for forecasters 
 
A  major  challenge for  forecasters  is  ‘radical  uncertainty’,  that  is, we  fundamentally 
don’t  know  what  the  future  holds.  Examples  of  this  uncertainty  are  ‘black  swan’ 
events  that  fall  outside  any  existing  experience.  The  term  is  derived  from  the 
northern  hemisphere  belief  that  all  swans  were  white,  based  on  the  empirical 
 1 Philip Tetlock and Dab Gardner (2015), Superforecasting: the art and science of prediction, Cornerstone 
Digital. 
2 Our specific mandate is established by the RBNZ Act (1989) and the Policy Targets Agreement (PTA) 
which state that the Bank should use monetary policy to maintain price stability in the New Zealand 
economy. We have considerable flexibility around how we do this, reflecting the tradeoffs necessary to 
protect the overall economy (for example the impact on the volatility of the exchange rate or output), and 
acknowledging the range of relevant factors outside the Bank’s control. It also recognises that judgements 
are a necessary part of the task, for example, providing the Bank with discretion around how quickly it 
seeks to return inflation to target in the future.  
   3 
 evidence that every swan ever observed was white.3 For the first European migrants 
to  Australia,  discovering  black  swans  was  a  completely  unexpected  event,  lying 
outside of all evidence and experience up until that point.  
 
For  forecasters,  such  unpredictable  events  are  a  particular  challenge.  We  have  a 
wide range of information about the past and current state of the economy, and are 
setting policy to influence the future direction of the economy. But the economy is 
populated  with  thousands  of  households  and  businesses  responding  to  their  own 
particular circumstances and opportunities, so it is never certain how the economy 
will  evolve  over  time.  Even  without  black  swan  events,  the  chain  reactions  of 
economic activity are so complex and so changeable that the range of possible – let 
alone probable – outcomes is vast.  
 
Tetlock  and  Gardner  argue  that  the  best  forecasters  understand  that  the  world  is 
uncertain  and  therefore  react  to  it  flexibly.4  Good  forecasters  are  careful,  curious, 
and  comfortable  with numbers, and,  crucially,  when  the facts  change  they  change 
their  minds.  And  that  is  how  we  strive  to  be.  Conversely,  the  worst  forecasters 
remain  dogmatically  attached  to  their  forecasts,  unchanging  in  the  face  of  the 
evidence.  
 
 
Forecasting in uncertainty: dynamic programming and conditional forecasts  
 
So  how  do  we  make  policy  for  an  uncertain  future?  The  approach  that  the  Bank 
takes is to develop forecasts that are highly conditional on the information currently 
available. That is, our forecasts are subject to revision when additional information 
comes to light. These forecasts are then used in what Alan Blinder would describe 
as  a  ‘dynamic  programming’  plan.5  This  means  thinking  about  what  you  want  to 
 3 Nassem Taleb (2007), The Black Swan: The Impact of the Highly Improbable, Random House. Taleb 
defines these black swan events as outside of previous experience, with an extremely significant impact, 
and that we have a tendency to try to explain it after the fact. Examples relevant to monetary policy in 
New Zealand include the 9/11 attacks or the Canterbury earthquakes. 
4 Tetlock and Gardner, op.cit. The authors demonstrate that the best forecasters blend technical expertise 
and mastery of the data with judgement and humility. In addition, teams of forecasters can produce better 
results when the team is open to sharing and constructive debate. 
5 Alan Blinder (1998), Central Banking in Theory and Practice, MIT. 
   4 
 achieve  in the future and  working  backwards  to form  a  plan  today  that  will  deliver 
that goal. In our case the goal is inflation near 2 percent in two or three years’ time, 
and  the  plan  is  given  by  the  forecast  of  the  Official  Cash  Rate  (OCR).  If  events 
broadly unfold as envisaged then we carry out that plan, if not, then we adjust the 
plan. 
 
A feature of our inflation forecasts are that they always end up at the mid-point of the 
target band. When planning our actions we necessarily plan to succeed in achieving 
this  target.  If  we  thought  we  would  not  achieve  this  we  would  modify  our  OCR 
forecasts.  
 
As such, the forecasts show our judgement of the highest probability path to achieve 
the goal, but this path is not fixed. As new information becomes available, we assess 
it  and  where  appropriate  incorporate  it  into  our  understanding  and  our  plans. 
Consequently,  our  policy  settings  are,  and  should  be,  responsive 
to  any 
developments  that  might  occur,  and  should  move  rapidly  when  required.  For 
example,  the  sharp  fall  in  inflation  expectations  in  March  2016  (amongst  other 
developments) led to us substantially revise our 90-day interest rate projection6 and 
move away from a neutral stance to an easing bias (figure 1).7  
 
Figure 1: Inflation expectations and selected 90 day interest rate projections 
 Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 
 
 
                                                
6 Since November 2016 this has been replaced by the OCR projection. 
7 For further detail see Rebecca Williams, ‘Business cycle review: 2008 to present day’ RBNZ Bulletin 
80(2) March 2017.  
   5 
 The  value  of  producing  quantitative  forecasts:  internal  discipline  and  the 
learning process 
 
So why do we produce specific forecasts given that our forecasts are conditional and 
subject to radical uncertainty? Being numerically precise about our view of the future 
allows us to test ideas, which in turn accelerates our ability to learn and understand 
what is going on. Over time, this helps to ensure that our forecasts are as robust as 
possible and form a solid basis for monetary policy decisions, minimising potentially 
costly forecast errors and supporting good policy outcomes. 
 
Testing  is  an  integral  part  of  robust  analysis.  As  Nate  Silver  puts  it,  "The  more 
eagerly  we  commit  to  scrutinising  and  testing  our  theories,  the  more  readily  we 
accept  that  our  knowledge  of  the  world  is  uncertain,  the  more  willingly  we 
acknowledge that perfect prediction is impossible, the less we will live in fear of our 
failures, and the more freedom we will have to let our minds flow freely."8 
 
When an outturn is different from that forecast, the Bank seeks to discover why, what 
it means for the outlook for monetary policy, and what we could do to make a better 
forecast next time.9 We use our depth of experience to examine the data, distinguish 
the  signal  from  the  noise,  and  identify  where  to  adapt  our  approach  or  where  to 
maintain our existing views.   
 
For  example,  residential  investment  at  the  end  of  2016  was  considerably  weaker 
than the Bank had forecast. In seeking to understand this forecast error, the Bank 
considered the composition of residential investment. We found that a sharp fall in 
transfer costs (based on decreasing house sales) was the cause of weak residential 
investment, rather than weakness in actual construction activity. Accounting for this 
information should support better forecasts for this part of the economy in the future 
(figure 2).  
 
                                                
8 Nate Silver (2012), The Signal and the Noise: Why So Many Predictions Fail—but Some Don’t, Penguin 
Books. 
9 For example see: Kirdan Lees, ‘Assessing Forecast Performance’, RBNZ Bulletin 79 (10) June 2016; C J 
McDermott,  ‘Understanding low inflation in New Zealand’, a speech delivered to the Bay of Plenty 
Employers and Manufacturers Association (EMA) in Rotorua, 11 October 2016; and Geordie Reid, 
‘Evaluating the Reserve Bank’s forecasting performance’, RBNZ Bulletin 79(13) August 2016. 
   6 
 Figure 2: Residential building activity and house sales 
$m
1700 
1600 
1500 
1400 
1300 
1200 
1100 
1000 
900 
000s
28 
26 
24 
22 
20 
18 
16 
14 
House sales
Residential building
work put in place
 12 
2006      2008      2010      2012      2014      2016
800 
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 
 
Producing forecasts: avoiding biases and supporting robust outcomes 
 
Forecasting can also help reduce human biases that are often present in decision 
making. Our brains are designed to react to surprises by making sense of them. In 
seeking to do so, we often rewrite our perceptions from prior to these events.10 Even 
black swans may feel retrospectively predictable. This is known as ‘hindsight bias’ or 
the ‘knew it all along effect’.11  
 
As  forecasters,  we  need  to  be  particularly  aware  of  this  bias.  To  learn  from  our 
errors,  we  need  to  recognise  that  they  are  errors.  By  recording  our  quantitative 
forecasts  and  accompanying  reasoning,  we  prevent  ourselves  from  rewriting  our 
original position and ensure we take on the full insights from any forecast errors we 
make.  Over  time  the  Bank  has  built  an  extensive  institutional  knowledge  base  of 
New Zealand economic data and experience of monetary policy formulation. Each 
time we forecast, we examine the latest data, identify where new information should 
lead  us  to  change  views,  and  incorporate  lessons  learned  to  ensure  that  our 
 10 Daniel Kahneman (2011), Thinking, Fast and Slow, Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
11 Baruch Fischhof and Ruth Beyth, ‘I knew it would happen: Remembered probabilities of once-future 
things’, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance 13(1), August 1975. 
   7 
 forecasts  keep  evolving  and  are  as  accurate  as  possible.12  To  use  Kahneman’s 
terminology, our forecasts force us to think more slowly.  
 
Forecasting is not the only essential part of monetary policy formulation. The Bank 
has  a  well-defined  process  for  monetary  policy  decisions,  based  on  a  Monetary 
Policy  Committee  (MPC)  that  provides  advice  to  the  Governing  Committee.13  The 
MPC  includes  two  external  members  to  add  to  the  Committee’s  diversity  of 
backgrounds  and  views.  These  external  members  provide  a  ‘reality  check’  on  the 
Bank’s thinking, and subject us to valuable independent scrutiny.14 
 
The  MPC  structure  is  supported  by  a  set  of  working  practices  that  ensure  that 
colleagues closest to the data and forecasting processes present their work to the 
MPC,  and  that  subsequent  discussions  are  broad-ranging  and  unconstrained  in 
order  to  avoid  groupthink  or  other  biases.15  This  means  that  the  analytics  of  our 
Economics and Financial Markets Departments are blended with the experience of 
senior staff and Committee members, achieving better results through incorporating 
judgement in the forecasting process. 
 
 
How do we create forecasts at the Reserve Bank? 
 
The Bank monitors a wide range of data to gauge the current state of the economy, 
distilling  the  underlying  trends  and  signals  from  the  noise  and  assessing  what  the 
emerging  picture  means  for  the  stance  of  monetary  policy.  In  addition  to  formal 
model-based analysis, monetary policy formulation is supported by the feedback we 
 12 In essence, this is a Bayesian approach combining priors with new information using judgement. For a 
readable introduction see James V. Stone (2015), Bayes’ Rule with Matlab: A Tutorial to Bayesian Analysis, 
Sebtel Press. 
13 The Governor retains statutory responsibility for OCR decisions, but the Bank has in practice delegated 
the decision on the appropriate policy settings to the Governing Committee. 
14 The MPC has included external members since 2001. External members are limited to serving a 1 to 3 
year term to ensure that they remain truly external.  The two current and previous members are: Tony 
Caughey; Conor English; Richard Townshend; Luke Moriarty; Pip Dunphy; Earl Rattray; Liz Coutts; 
Bronwyn Monopoli; Terry McFadgen; Malcolm Bailey; Kerrin M Vautier; and Brent Layton. 
15 For more detail see C J McDermott, ‘How the Bank formulates and assesses its monetary policy 
decisions’, a speech delivered to the Manawatu Chamber of Commerce in Palmerston North, 13 July 2016; 
and Adam Richardson, ‘Behind the scenes of an OCR decision in New Zealand’, RBNZ Bulletin 79(11) July 
2016. For example, by convention the Governor speaks last in MPC meetings so as not to unduly influence 
the direction of the debate before a diverse range of views are heard from staff. 
   8 
 receive  from  regular  meetings  with  private  businesses,  industry  associations  and 
government agencies. We also undertake longer-term research projects to improve 
our understanding of specific features of the economy.16 
 
At the heart of our forecasting is our structural model, the New Zealand Structural 
Inflation  Model  (NZSIM).  This  is  a  theoretically  rich  framework  that  describes  key 
behavioural  relationships  in  the  New  Zealand  economy  and  how  they  influence 
inflation.  NZSIM  generates  the  core  forecasts  for  informing  monetary  policy 
decisions,  and  helps  us  identify  the  fundamental  economic  drivers  and  empirical 
relationships to explain the observed economic data.17 
 
The  information  collated  over  the  forecast  round  is  fed  into  NZSIM,  and  the 
theoretical  structure  of  the  model  ensures  that  our  forecasts  are  consistent.  For 
example, the national income accounting discipline is preserved, we can distinguish 
between domestic and imported inflation which sum up to CPI inflation, and we are 
able to trace the forces driving economic growth.  
 
During the monetary policy decision-making process, the NZSIM forecasts are cross-
checked with other modelling, and where appropriate modified to take into account 
additional information not directly represented in the model. That is, our forecasts are 
‘model-assisted’ rather than ‘model-produced’.18 NZSIM also can consider alternative 
scenarios,  meaning  that  we  can  test  competing  ideas  and  assess  how  monetary 
policy should respond if circumstances develop differently. 
  
NZSIM necessarily abstracts from reality, and (as with any modelling) requires some 
difficult tradeoffs to be made, balancing the amount of detail that can be incorporated 
without sacrificing the ease of interpretation and resulting policy recommendations.  
 16 For examples of recent papers see the RBNZ’s Analytical Note series, available at 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research-and-publications/analytical-notes. 
17 For more detail on the NZSIM model, see Neroli Austin and Geordie Reid, NZSIM: A model of the New 
Zealand economy for forecasting and policy analysis, RBNZ Bulletin 80(1) January 2017. 
18 An example of how we modified our forecasting framework to capture insights from analysis was when 
we moved to an adaptive (backward looking) inflation expectations measure from a survey measure of 
inflation expectations. This adjustment was to reflect the findings of Karagedikli and McDermott (2016), 
who found that more backward looking measures of inflation expectations were able to explain the low 
level of inflation since 2011 better than surveyed measures.  See Özer Karagedikli and C J McDermott, 
‘Inflation expectations and low inflation in New Zealand’ RBNZ Discussion Paper 2016/09. 
   9 
 The  combination  of  tractable  model  outputs  and  the  expert  judgement  of  Bank 
colleagues  and  Committee  members  forms  the  basis  for  building  nuanced  and 
detailed policy recommendations. 
 
Over the last few decades, increases in computing power have enabled the Bank to 
vastly  expand  its  modelling  and  research  capability,  including  making  NZSIM 
possible.  However,  one  significant  limiting  factor  to  forecast  improvement  is  data: 
macroeconomic  statistics  have  not  fundamentally  changed  over  the  30  years  we 
have been using inflation targeting.19 For instance, New Zealand is one of only two 
advanced countries that use a quarterly consumer price index rather than monthly. 
This is likely to be a fruitful avenue for future improvement that would greatly improve 
the Bank’s forecasting ability. 
 
 
The  benefits  of  publishing  our  forecasts:  improving  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy  
 
The  RBNZ  Act20  requires  the  Bank  to  publically  set  out  its monetary  policy  stance 
and underlying reasoning, including a review of previous decisions. This information 
is  published  in  our  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Statement,  along  with  our  economic 
forecasts  and  accompanying  explanation.  The  Bank  was  the  first  central  bank  to 
publish its planned interest rate path, starting in 1997, and we continue to rank as 
one  of  the  most  transparent  central  banks.21  Publishing  these  macroeconomic 
forecasts  and  our  planned  OCR  path  provides  a  clear  ‘line  in  the  sand’  as  to  the 
Bank’s thinking. It also helps synthesise our views in a more approachable format, 
enabling  commentators,  market  participants,  and  others  to  understand  the  Bank’s 
monetary policy stance. 
 
 19 New Zealand still lacks a complete set of national accounts, for example we do not have quarterly 
income GDP or flow of funds data. 
20 Section 15 of the RBNZ Act 1989. 
21  Nergiz Dincer and Barry Eichengreen Transparency Index 2014, available at 
http://eml.berkeley.edu/~eichengr/Dincer-Eichengreen_figures&tables_2014_9-4-15.pdf. 
   10 
 Communication is a key part of the monetary policy transmission mechanism as it 
helps people to understand the Bank’s thinking and expected policy direction.22 By 
building  people’s  understanding  of  how  the  Bank  is  likely  to  react  to  news,  the 
predictability  of  monetary  policy  decisions  is  enhanced  and  policy  uncertainty  is 
reduced.  We  are  a  long  way  from  the  days  when  central  bankers  cultivated  their 
ability to “mumble with great incoherence”.23 
 
To  inform  the  market  about  the  uncertainty  inherent  in  projections,  some  central 
banks publish fan charts showing the range of possible outcomes around the highest 
probability scenario. While this approach shows the extent of uncertainty, it does not 
help people understand how the central bank’s forecasts may evolve if some of the 
contingencies change. Consequently, in recent Monetary Policy Statements we have 
published  a  range  of  potential  scenarios  to  help  people  understand  how  the 
forecasts would change should the economy develop differently. We believe that this 
approach is potentially more helpful. 
 
Figure 3 illustrates how market participants understand the way the Bank is likely to 
incorporate  economic  and  financial  information  into  its  projections.  The  market 
revisions (red line) are generally good at anticipating changes to our 1-year ahead 
90-day interest rate projection (blue line), which suggests that they understand the 
conditional  nature  of  the  forecasts  and  the  Bank’s  likely  response  (or  ‘reaction 
function’) to new information.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                
22 C J McDermott, ‘Policy uncertainty from a central bank perspective’, Australian Economic Review,  
March 2017 discusses how policy uncertainty, or ‘instrinsic uncertainty’, is reduced by having a clear 
policy framework and structure for decision-making. 
23 Alan Greenspan in his often-quoted testimony to Congress in 1987. Another fun quote of Greenspan is: 
“I know you think you understand what you thought I said but I'm not sure you realize that what you 
heard is not what I meant”. 
   11 
 Figure 3: MPS and market revisions 
 
  
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
 
 
Case Study: the increase in the OCR in 2014 
 
The increase in the OCR in the first half of 2014 provides a good case study of our 
conditional  approach  to  forecasting  in  a  ‘radically  uncertain’  world.  At  the  start  of 
2014 the global economy appeared to be recovering from the 2008/9 global financial 
crises,  with  the  IMF  asking  whether  the  “tide  was  rising”.24  The  New  Zealand 
economy was growing strongly: the terms of trade had reached their highest level in 
40  years;  construction  activity  was  robust;  immigration  was  boosting  housing  and 
consumer  demand;  and  monetary  policy  was  providing  substantial  stimulus  to  the 
economy. Under these circumstances, we judged that there was a high probability 
that  inflationary  pressures  were  rising,  contingent  on  the  global  and  domestic 
economy  developing  as  forecast  and  our  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  economic 
relationships.  This  view  about  rising  inflation  pressures  was  shared  by  the  private 
sector  forecasters  and  the  IMF.  Consequently,  the  OCR,  which  was  set  at  an 
accommodative level of 2.5 percent, was raised by a total of 1.0 percentage points at 
successive OCR reviews in the first half of 2014. 
 
However,  by  September  2014 
forecast 
contingencies  were  not  developing  as  expected.  Firstly,  uncertainty  around  the 
central scenario had risen: the global economy was not strengthening as anticipated 
it  had  become  apparent 
that 
the 
 24 IMF, World Economic Outlook update, ‘Is the tide rising?’, January 2014. 
   12 
 and  New  Zealand  terms  of  trade  had  fallen  by  about  7  percent  since  the  start  of 
2014.  Secondly,  uncertainty  about  the  structure  of 
the  domestic  economic 
relationships  was  becoming  apparent  as  CPI  inflation  remained  moderate  despite 
the inflationary pressures. Under these circumstances the Bank judged it appropriate 
to put a hold on interest rates, await the flow of new economic data, and investigate 
the evolution of domestic economic relationships.  
 
In the event, this decision proved correct. Global economic growth continued to be 
sluggish  through  2015  and  2016.  The  Bank’s  analysis  of  the  domestic  economic 
relationships  concluded  that  resource  pressures  were  not  as  strong  as  previously 
estimated, in part due to the record level of migration that the New Zealand economy 
was  experiencing.25  Low  inflation  had  also  changed  the  price-setting  behaviour  of 
New Zealand businesses, who were placing a greater weight on recent low inflation 
(rather  than  expectations  of  future  inflation)  in  their  wage-setting  and  pricing 
decisions.26 Incorporating these lessons into our forecasting framework meant that 
by  mid-2015  the  most  probable  scenario  had  changed  to  a  continuation  of  low 
inflation (figure 4). The Bank commenced a new cycle of reducing the OCR, to an 
eventual low of 1.75 percent in November 2016. Today, in May 2017, the most likely 
scenario is for the OCR to remain stable for some time, although uncertainty remains 
high. 
 
Figure 4: selected 90-day forward rates 
 
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
                                                
25 See December 2017 Monetary Policy Statement, Box C. 
26 Özer Karagedikli and C J McDermott, “Inflation expectations and low inflation in New Zealand”, RBNZ 
Discussion paper 2016/09. 
    13 
  
Conclusion 
 for 
the 
future,  make  well-founded  policy  decisions,  communicate 
Forecasting is a valuable part of the monetary policy process, helping the Bank to 
plan 
its 
understanding  and  intentions,  and  accommodate  new  information  as  it  appears.  It 
requires  the  Bank to be  rigorous,  unbiased,  and  open to  new  ideas  in formulating 
and implementing monetary policy.  
 
Because we operate in a world of radical uncertainty, we do not know what might 
happen  in  the  future;  we  are  not  fortune  tellers.  However,  because  we  want  our 
forecasts to be relevant and useful, we present them numerically, an approach that 
comes with risks. As Tetlock and Gardner put it, “use the number and you risk being 
unfairly blamed. Stick with phrases as fuzzy as a puff of smoke and you are safe”.27 
We do not want to be safe in this context as we welcome scrutiny, both internally and 
externally, as it builds understanding and fosters accountability. 
 
Finally, good forecasting happens when the numbers are supported by evidence and 
reasoning, and subject to public scrutiny. When things – inevitably – do not turn out 
as projected we seek to learn from those episodes and continually work to improve 
our forecasts and policy-making. 
 
 
 
 27 Tetlock and Garnder, op.sit. 
  