Mario Draghi: The Monnet method - its relevance for Europe then
and now
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, for the Award of the Gold
Medal of the Fondation Jean Monnet pour l'Europe, Lausanne, 4 May 2017.
 “The problems that our countries need to sort out are not the same as in 1950. But the method
remains  the  same:  a  transfer  of  power  to  common  institutions,  majority  rule  and  a  common
1
approach to finding a solution to problems are the only answer in our current state of crisis”.
Many would see this quote as a fair representation of how to approach the numerous challenges
that our governments face in 2017, and which no country can realistically address on its own.
But those words were not spoken with our current situation in mind. They were spoken by Jean
Monnet in 1974.
They  illustrate  that  if  his  leadership  has  been  so  powerful,  it  is  not  just  because  of  what  he
achieved in his lifetime: it is because Jean Monnet developed a method of government whose
effectiveness  extends  beyond  the  special  circumstances  in  which  he  lived.  His  method  was
applicable to the very different circumstances of 1950, of 1974 and today – and indeed, to the
years in between and still to come.
I emphasise this not to revisit Monnet’s extraordinary contribution to the history of our continent. It
is because there are aspects of his method which remain crucial to guide our action in Europe
today:  namely,  its  focus  on effectiveness,  its  insistence  on subsidiarity,  its  sense  of
direction, and its concern for democratic backing.
I would like to explain why Monnet’s approach to integration remains as relevant for Europe now
as it was then, and how his ideas can still guide us in making integration a success.
1. The principles of the Monnet method
Faced  with  challenges  that  overwhelmed  their  own  capacity,  Monnet’s  fundamental  objective
was to put governments back into a position to discharge their remit – meaning their capacity to
2
ensure security, guarantee freedom, and create the conditions for the prosperity of their people.
His focus, in other words, was on effectiveness – and this goes a long way towards explaining
why  he  moved  away  from  the  intergovernmental  model  of  international  cooperation  that  had
dominated the first half of the twentieth century and proposed, for the first time, a supranational
model.
Intergovernmental solutions, he believed, had not just failed spectacularly in the interwar years,
but inevitably failed to take account of the common interest. As he wrote, “cooperation between
nations,  however  important  it  may  be,  does  not  resolve  anything.  What  one  has  to  seek  is  a
fusion  of  the  interests  of  European  people,  not  just  to  preserve  a  balance  among  those
3
interests”.
Thus he promoted his supranational method of decision-making based on common institutions
and majority rule for two reasons. First, because such institutions could execute and decide in
the  common  interest;  and  second,  because  they  could  produce  economies  of  scale  via  the
pooling of resources, thereby increasing the effectiveness of policymaking.
In  this  way,  his  approach  to  sovereignty  was  essentially  positive.  He  did  not  conceive  of
sovereignty so much in terms of normative rights as in terms of power and efficacy. And for that
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
reason, if transfers of sovereignty to a supranational body were the best way to deliver peace,
wealth and security, then he did not see that as constraining the sovereignty of nations, but rather
as merging and extending it.
But Monnet was nonetheless anxious to ensure that such transfers were perceived as legitimate
by the people. It is interesting in this context that he preferred not to use the word “supranational”,
perhaps because it was too susceptible to being misunderstood as a policy that removes control
4
from citizens.
He therefore deliberately opted for a gradual approach based on the principle of subsidiarity –
what he called initiatives in a limited, but decisive area. Precisely because pooling sovereignty
had  to  be  seen  not  just  as  effective,  but  also  under  democratic  control,  European  integration
could only happen if it focused on areas where there was an immediate need and where it could
augment the existing governmental or intergovernmental policies.
Yet this pragmatism should not be mistaken for a random approach to integration. Monnet also
argued that a clear sense of direction was vital to the overall trajectory – that “the route that we
5
take is less important than the direction we travel in”.
Indeed, the fact that union in Europe began in the limited area of economic cooperation – coal
and steel – does not mean that it was not intended to be a political union. For Monnet, economic
integration was always a foundation of political union, with the single market leading to the single
currency and eventually a federation.
Thus  from  the  very  start  he  affirmed  the  political  nature  of  the  European  project,  and
consequently  the  importance  of  the democratic underpinning of its institutions  –  insisting
that  the  new  pan-European  executive  be  subject  to  the  double  scrutiny  of  a  parliamentary
assembly and a fully-fledged court of justice. He also advocated that the new institutions have the
6
“transparency of a house of glass”.
2. Why working together remains essential
Since  then,  the  Monnet  method  of  common  decision-making  within  common  institutions  has
spread across several fields in Europe. A growing number of countries have pooled sovereignty
in  a  broad  range  of  areas,  including,  as  regards  my  own  institution,  money  and  banking
supervision.  Democratic  controls  have  increased  in  tandem,  not  least  through  the  role  of  the
European Parliament.
But we know that European integration still raises doubts. Some question whether, with war in
Europe now unthinkable, working together within common institutions remains the best solution
to the nature of the challenges we face. Yet if we apply Monnet’s rationale for common action – to
make states more effective in delivering their remit – the answer to that question is clear. His
approach is even more necessary now than it was then. And this is for three key reasons.
The first is the relative decline in the weight of European countries in global affairs.
In motivating the case for a common approach, Monnet wrote in 1954 that “our countries have
become  too  small  for  today’s  world,  faced  with  the  … America  and  Russia  of  today  and  the
China and India of tomorrow”.  This was at a time when Europe represented 37% of global GDP
and 13% of the world’s population. Today, the figures are 24% and 7%. It has therefore become
even  more  important  that  European  countries  are  able  to  pool  their  resources  and  exploit
economies of scale.
7
The second reason is changes in the structure of international relations linked to technology and
the environment.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Over  the  last  60  years,  the  increased  power  of  technology  and  the  impact  of  humans  on  the
natural environment have created an increasing number of areas where traditional borders are
being eroded. These include the spillovers of climate change, the effects on government budgets
of more mobile capital, and terrorist threats that transcend physical and virtual borders. In each
case, governments can only take effective action by acting together as a union.
The third reason is our commitment to open trade.
Open trade is not imposed on us by nature or technology. But it has now become so profoundly
crucial  to  our  prosperity  that  no  country  can  close  itself  off  from  trade  without  committing  a
profound  act  of  self-harm:  indeed,  two-thirds  of  EU  imports  are  raw  materials,  intermediary
goods and components needed for firms’ production processes. This means that – since trade
has both benefits and costs like other types of cross-border challenges – it is a condition that we
have to manage together.
Here  again  we  are  more  effective  acting  as  a  union:  at  the  European  level,  because  we  can
generate more wealth through a deep and integrated market, while putting in place arrangements
to  contain  unwanted  spillovers  and  temper  some  of  the  redistributive  consequences  of
openness; and at the global level, because our large single market gives us greater leverage in
setting global rules.
This is true in the World Trade Organization, in bilateral trade agreements and even in the setting
of global regulatory standards – the so-called “Brussels effect” means that the EU has a great
influence on the global rules across a range of areas, such as food, chemicals and the protection
8
of privacy, and thereby exports its values.
The point is clear: in a world where Europe’s relative size is shrinking and where technology, the
environment and the market are permeating national borders, the case for acting together as a
way  to  regain  capacity  is  stronger  than  ever.  European  action  has  expanded  so  much  since
Monnet’s day precisely because it has proved its necessity. And in the light of the new challenges
we are facing, acting together as a union remains vital to delivering in the true interest of citizens.
This is an important point to remember when one hears opposition to the EU couched in terms of
regaining control. Monnet and his contemporaries conceived the EU precisely as a way to take
control of events that national states acting alone could no longer influence. And that remains the
case today.
3. Conditions for European integration to succeed
So why, if the case for European integration is only growing stronger, is anxiety about it growing
stronger too?
In  part,  such  feelings  are  a  result  of  misplaced  blame  –  that  is,  the  EU  being  wrongly  held
responsible for decisions that belong to the Member States.
A case in point is monetary union, which is sometimes claimed to be the cause of low growth in
parts of the euro area. Yet we have seen that for countries that implemented structural reforms
and ran sound fiscal policies, the single currency has been no barrier to success. In fact, those
that pursued the right policies have been able to reap the benefits of the euro in a more effective
way.
Still,  this  is  clearly  not  a  sufficient  explanation  for  anxiety  about  Europe:  we  also  have  to  ask
ourselves if the integration process is delivering as much and as well as expected. Making the
case for acting together is, after all, only one half of building support for the European project.
The other half is to do it well. And this is where the other key insights of the Monnet method are
essential.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
If we listen to what citizens in Europe are saying, there are three areas where improvements are
needed.
The first is to provide clarity of purpose to the European project. What citizens seem to be asking
for is a clearer sense of what the EU is for and how it benefits them – that is, how it expands their
life choices and empowers them.
The second is to ensure delivery. If EU citizens are to endorse the notion that common action
can improve their lives, they have to see that in areas where the EU does act, it is effective. And
this requires, in areas of EU competence, that powers are delegated to the Union that allow it to
do its job properly.
In several instances, however, we have launched “half-built houses” – common projects with an
incomplete  transfer  of  powers.  This  shifts  expectations  onto  the  EU  only  for  it  to  lack  the
instruments to fulfil them.
Yet it is also clear that legitimacy for EU action comes not only from delivery – it also requires a
proper democratic process that allows decisions to be challenged. And this leads to the third
area:  even  where  the  EU  succeeds  in  delivering  its  objectives,  there  is  a  sense  that  citizens
would like to feel more in control of the process.
Put another way, it is not enough for the EU to give people more control over events. People also
need to feel in control of its policies.
In different ways, each of these three areas for improvement map onto the principles that Jean
Monnet laid out. For example, if there are questions today about the EU’s clarity of purpose, then
one  answer  is  to  be  more  rigorous  in  how  we  apply  the  principle  of subsidiarity  when
considering future steps towards integration.
9
As  Monnet  said,  “we  need  a  Europe  for  that  which  is  essential  …  a  Europe  for  what  nations
cannot do alone”,  because this ensures that EU action always augments that of the Member
States – and makes it clearer to citizens how joining together adds to their lives. So the Union
should only act in areas where it can meet a clear need of citizens and where it can provide an
effective platform for doing so.
But if we are rigorous in applying the subsidiarity principle, then we also need to be rigorous in
giving each level of government the powers it needs to perform its tasks successfully. So when
we  entrust  tasks  to  the  Union,  we  should  make  sure  that  it  has  the  instruments  and
competencies it needs to be effective. In this way, subsidiarity – properly applied – should be
seen as empowering the Union method, not weakening it.
Similarly, if there are doubts about the EU’s capacity to deliver, then the first thing we need to do
is  finish  the  projects  we  start.  But  to  do  so  requires,  as  Monnet  always  emphasised,  a  clear
sense of direction for the European project – a sense of what the end goal of the integration
process  should  be.  Simply  put,  to  avoid  being  stuck  in  half-built  houses,  we  need  their  final
blueprints.
For example, it is widely agreed that Economic and Monetary Union remains incomplete. But it
will be hard to move forward unless we have a shared vision of what a complete monetary union
should look like. And this is not only because such a vision would help orient the steps we are
taking today – it is also because it would make the process fully transparent to citizens.
And  this  leads  to  the  last  point  emphasised  by  Monnet:  the  need  for accountability  and
transparency.
There is much that could be said here, but I will limit my remarks to the institution that I head. The
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB has been acutely aware that, as its monetary policy has become more far-reaching and it
has taken on a wider range of powers, it cannot justify its actions solely in terms of outcomes.
We  have  needed  a  higher  degree  of  transparency  and  accountability  so  that  citizens  can
understand how we make our decisions and subject them to greater scrutiny.
This  is  why  we  now  publish  accounts  of  our  monetary  policy  meetings.  We  visit  national
parliaments  to  explain  our  policy  in  more  detail.  We  agreed  to  the  request  of  the  European
Parliament  to  be  informed  about  discussions  held  in  the  Basel  Committees.  And  this  is  in
addition  to  our  regular  press  conferences,  appearances  before  the  European  Parliament,  and
regular visits by MEPs to Frankfurt.
I  do  not  claim  that  these  initiatives  will  be  enough  to  answer  all  the  concerns  that  European
citizens have. But we are fully committed to demonstrating that we are answerable to them.
4. Conclusion
So in sum, what is on trial today is not – and should not be – the method of integration pioneered
by Jean Monnet.
It is beyond question that we face challenges today that can only be addressed by countries in
Europe acting together. It is beyond question that, in the right areas, Monnet’s method has helped
European governments regain control over events and exercise effective sovereignty. And it is
highly likely that the number of challenges that require such an approach will rise.
What is being tested, however, is our ability to manage integration in a way that not only delivers
output legitimacy, but also a European affectio societatis. And that should encourage us to listen
to the questions that are being asked of Europe and to be ambitious in responding to them.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Monnet, Jean (1974), L’Europe et la nécessité, Archives de la Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe, May.
This  understanding  of  Jean  Monnet’s  thinking  draws  on  Grin,  Gilles  (2017), Shaping  Europe:  The  Path  to
European Integration according to Jean Monnet, Jean Monnet Foundation for Europe, Debates and Documents
Collection, Issue 7, Lausanne, March.
Monnet, Jean (1976), Mémoires, Fayard, Paris.
ibid.
Monnet, Jean (1955), Téléphoner Volf… Mon cher ami, …, Archives de la Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe,
May.
Monnet, Jean (1976), Mémoires, Fayard, Paris.
See Grin, Gilles, op. cit.
Bradford, Anu (2012), “The Brussels Effect”, Northwestern University Law Review, Vol. 107, No 1.
Reflection  paper  by  Monnet,  Jean  (1965), Les Portes, Archives de la Fondation Jean Monnet pour l’Europe,
August.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
