    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  WELCOME ADDRESS BY GOVERNOR OF THE RESERVE BANK OF FIJI, BARRY 
WHITESIDE, AT THE OFFICIAL LAUNCH AND UNVEILING OF FIJI RUGBY 7s 
COMMEMORATIVE BANKNOTE AND COIN  
Grand Pacific Hotel, Suva, 20th April, 2017 
    Salutations 
Hon. Prime Minister 
Hon. Ministers, Hon. Speaker and Members of the Parliament 
The Tui Suva 
Chief Justice 
Board Directors of the Reserve Bank of Fiji 
Ben Ryan, Osea Kolinisau and Members of our Olympics Gold Medal Winning Team  
Distinguished Guests 
Reserve Bank of Fiji colleagues 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
 
Introduction and Welcome 
Bula vinaka and a very good evening to you all on this very special occasion!  An occasion when 
we  once  again  come  together  to  relive  a  truly  great  moment  in  our  small  nation’s  history  and 
thank  those  special  people  who  brought  us  so  much  joy  through  their  tremendous  feat  in  Rio 
back in August last year.  I must also say a special warm welcome “home” to Ben! We were so 
pleased when you accepted our invitation. 
It  would  be  remiss  of  me  not  to  recognise  Gareth  Baber  and  our  current  7’s  gladiators,  who 
reminded us just how good we are by demolishing South Africa in Hong Kong just 12 days ago!  
Despite  the  slight  hiccup  against  a  very  focused  USA  team  last  weekend  in  Singapore,  you 
continue to spread the joy across our nation and we thank you. 
Honoring the Gold Medal Win 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  even  before  the  Olympic  Games  we  at  the  Reserve  Bank  were  excited 
about  our  medal  chances.    Some  of  us  came  up  short  of  saying  it  would  be  gold,  but  we  were 
quietly confident it would be so.  
 1 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
So we were already thinking how we could honor such a feat by our team.  As a central bank the 
only  way  we  could  think  of,  apart  from  taking  money  from  our  vault  and  handing  it  to  the 
players (which would land us all in gaol!), was to honor them on our currency.  You will recall 
we  did  this  in  celebrating  Iliesa  Delana’s  great  win  in  the  F42  High  Jump  event  and  our  first 
Para-Olympic gold medal in London back in 2012.  So when the Rio Rugby 7s title became ours, 
the deal was sealed and we put in train the processes which led us to today’s event! 
Many  may  ask  why  so  late?    This  is  nearly  nine  months  after  Rio.  I  would  like  to  say  even 
though this may be the case, the euphoria still has not died down, at least not in my mind.  I also 
remind us all that we are Olympic champions until Japan in 2020.  No but really, the delays are 
technical  and  we  would  certainly  have  loved  to  complete  this  task  much  sooner.    But  please 
allow me to explain a little. 
Once  the  go  ahead  was  given  by  our  Board  then  the  complexities  began,  firstly  in  the  design 
process and then the actual production.  Within the design stage we needed to get a consensus of 
what  or  whom  to  feature  –  not  an  easy  task  when  we  all  have  personal  favorites  in  mind,  and 
especially when people are going to be featured.  Once this is done then we need actual pictures 
and approvals to use those pictures.  Sometimes we need to negotiate royalty payments.  At this 
point  I  would  like  to  thank  Bruce  Southwick  for  some  really  great  pictures  and  ideas  and  for 
joining us in the spirit of celebration by holding back on his charges!  
Ladies and Gentlemen these pictures are then translated by the mint or note printer onto moulds 
or first cuts and we go back and forth until satisfied that we have what we want.  All the while 
we are trying to keep the designs a secret, something which in Fiji is extremely difficult to do as 
you well know!  While media speculation has been active, I have to say that the majority of our 
Reserve Bank staff still do not know what the final products look like.  I also personally think a 
degree of secrecy makes this event more exciting. 
So once the designs are signed off we move along to the production process, with the mint and 
note  printer  having  to  acquire  the  right  material  and  the  slotting  in  of  actual  production  times 
alongside all the other jobs they may have. From our past experience this process can easily take 
between 12 and 18 months – so I think we have done ok with our time frame and we have the 
Royal Canadian Mint and Oberthur Fiduciaire to thank for working so closely with us. I must say 
both companies came to our “party” and were so enthusiastic to be doing the job. 
So today we honor our Rugby 7s Gold Olympians by delivering what we trust will be an iconic 
banknote and coin that we hope will be loved by all Fijians, young and old alike, whether they 
are here in Fiji or abroad.  But not only by Fijians, but also by people who love sports, who love 
collecting banknotes and coins and those who have Fiji at heart. 
Fijian Currency and our Commemorative Note and Coin 
Ladies and Gentlemen, Fiji has in the recent past modernised its currency in very unique ways. 
In  2012,  we  introduced  our  flora  and  fauna  design  banknotes  and  coins  replacing  the  long-
 2 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
serving  portrait  designs.    Each  banknote  and  coin  now  has  its  own  distinctive  designs  on  the 
obverse (front) and the reverse (back).  This is indeed very unique if you were to compare other 
currencies of the world where portraits are still in vogue.  
In the collectors market, Fiji coins have their own emblem - the Fijian Coat of Arms - which is 
now internationally recognised.  Today will mark another unique achievement for our currency; 
something which no other country in the world has done.  However I will not let the “cat out of 
the bag” just yet.  
At this point, and without revealing all, I would like to give you a little background of our new 
note and coin. 
Many will recall that soon after the gold medal win in Rio, the Reserve Bank had announced that 
a coloured (or painted) circulation coin would be released in limited quantities commemorating 
this first ever achievement for us.  We were happy, and with the euphoria anything was possible 
at that time.  Also I might reveal that, over the past few years, issuing a coloured coin has been 
very much on our minds.  We were looking for the opportune time to have our first ever painted 
circulation  coin  and  it  came  in  Rio!    Designs  were  selected  for  both  the  obverse  and  reverse, 
quantities decided, productions slots locked in and many reviews of the designs undertaken along 
with the appropriate colours (one of them being red! I wonder why?).  
Unfortunately technological limitations began to “bite” us and we were told that only one side of 
the  coin  could  be  painted.    Our  wish,  of  course,  was  to  have  both  sides  painted.    We  even 
explored painting equal  quantities of each side of the coin.   But despite  our best efforts, it was 
not to be and we were advised that there was high possibility that the paint would come off the 
coins  with  constant  circulation.    We  wanted  to  deliver  to  the  people  of  Fiji  a  coin  that  would 
keep  them  proudly  reminiscing  of  our  victory  in  Rio  and  I  must  apologise  that  this  earlier 
promise of a painted coin will not come to fruition at this time.  
So we were then compelled to re-think this pledge.  Rather than totally forsaking the project, we 
decided to have at least something for everyone at the lowest cost possible - something that our 
children could get their hands on and hold on to.  For that reason, we had to temper our wishes 
and  settle  to  issue  non-painted  coins  in  the  same  elegant  designs  that  were  earlier  selected.    I 
acknowledge that many would be disappointed at not having the painted coin, like we ourselves 
are.  However, I hope what will be unveiled today will be to the liking of all Fijians. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  an  iconic  banknote  denomination  will  also  be  unveiled  today, 
synonymous with the abbreviated code of rugby, a sport that is loved by all Fijians, a sport that 
we  excel  in  and  a  sport  that  unites  us.    You  will  witness  the  unveiling  of  a  denomination  that 
would not only be a first for Fiji but one, which we have on good authority, will be the only note 
of  its  kind  in  the  entire  world.    Not  only  will  this  be  an  iconic  banknote  denomination,  the 
designs, the orientation and the layout of the banknote are also different.  Traditionally, we have 
 3 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
always had horizontal note designs on both the obverse and reverse.  We are now breaking away 
from this tradition.  
For  the  first  time,  we  will  have  a  note  which  will  be  vertically  orientated,  complementing  the 
design and theme chosen on the obverse.  The reverse will continue to be horizontally oriented, 
again complementing the design.  This has been carefully thought out, ensuring there is synergy 
between the obverse and reverse.  
We  Fijians  love  to  do  things  differently  in  our  little  paradise.    After  all,  being  the  Rugby  7s 
Olympic Champions, things have to be a little bit different now.  We may be a small nation but 
we have the ability to think big and punch above our weight in many of the things we do.  So at 
the Bank we wanted to deliver something very unique.   I am hopeful we have delivered this to 
the people of Fiji and that this banknote will be loved by all.  
While  the  designs  on  the  banknote  and  coin  will  speak  volumes  once  unveiled,  there  are  other 
design elements which are also exceptional.  For instance, on the note, different inks have been 
used to bring out certain special effects.  We have used Optically Variable Ink (OVI) in  a gold 
colour  representing  the  gold  medal,  which  also  contains  embossed  features  in  the  shape  of  our 
logo,  the  tagaga,  for  the  visually  impaired.    This  effect  can  be  felt  by  gradually  moving  one’s 
fingers over it.  This embossing gives depth and lends itself perfectly to the depiction of a gold 
medal.  
When placed under an ultra violet light source, as a security feature designs that represent gold 
medals around the necks of each player depicted on the note are revealed, as well as a set of goal 
posts  with  a  try  being  converted.    There  are  also  play-elements  that  depict  how  two  of  the 
winning tries were master-minded and scored. In addition, there are  design  elements  which are 
very sharp and lifelike and which portray an inspirational player on the front, elated and happy 
on his way to scoring a try, with our Fiji flag in the background.  I am told that this iconic image 
is the favourite of the player being depicted.   It is a true trait of Fijian rugby players that when 
they are happy, they play their hearts out and there’s no stopping them.  We saw that in Rio and 
again in Hong Kong just recently! 
There are elements of design that shows the coach and mentor in very pensive thought mode, no 
doubt thinking of the battles ahead.  We have also broken away from the traditional watermark 
of an i-taukei warrior as seen on our regular circulation banknotes.  Instead, as a watermark we 
have  included  a  player  from  the  Olympic  gold  medal  winning  team  who  is  a  warrior  himself.  
The watermark is oval shaped to depict a rugby ball in motion.  The serial numbers are also laid 
out in a unique manner – one set in horizontal and one set in vertical format.  All serial numbers 
have  their  prefix  as  AU,  the  chemical  symbol  for  gold.    There  is  also  a  2  millimeter  security 
thread with words dedicated to our gold Olympians.  
The colours of the banknote are vibrant and sharp and match our noble banner blue with a hint of 
gold  on  the  numerals.    And  then  there  are  elements  of  Fijian  masi  designs  to  complete  the 
 4 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
aesthetics.    Such  has  been  the  level  of  intricate  detail  on  this  special  banknote  and  we  thank 
Oberthur  Fiduciaire  for  the  great  work  they  did  in  taking  our  ideas  and  raw  images  and 
expanding on them to produce what you will see shortly.  From what I have described I am sure 
you have painted your own picture of what will be unveiled shortly. 
The coins have also been engraved remarkably well considering the small surface area we had to 
work with.  Included on the obverse is  the denomination, Coat  of Arms and issuing  year.  The 
main  design  is  that  of  a  visionary  mentor  and  coach  in  a  backdrop  training  ground  considered 
one  of  the  toughest  to  endure.    On  the  reverse  is  an  image  of  our  7s  heroes  bonded  as  a  team.  
The  coin  has  been  intricately  designed  in  every  aspect  and  I  am  thankful  to  the  design  and 
engraving team from the Royal Canadian Mint. 
Acknowledgements 
Ladies and gentlemen before I finish, allow me to acknowledge a number of key players in the 
whole process, some of whom are with us today. 
From  Oberthur  Fiduciaire  we  have  Victor  De  Sousa  Passos,  Executive  Director  Sales  & 
Marketing,  Jonathan  Garside,  Director  Business  Development  and  Antony  Duckels,  Senior 
Banknote Designer.  
From  the  Royal  Canadian  Mint  we  have  David  Butler,  Managing  Director  Sales,  Foreign 
Business Line.  
Thank  you, Gentlemen,  for travelling all the way from  France and Canada respectively.   I  also 
acknowledge  the  hard  work  and  contribution  of  the  Mint’s  International  Sales  Director,  Jeff 
Hanke,  who  has  worked  very  closely  with  our  team  on  this  project,  but  could  not  be  with  us 
today.  Jeff now has something to brag about with his Canadian team’s exceptional performance 
in Singapore. 
I also recognise Brooke Banks of De La Rue, printers of our currency for the past 103 years, for 
being here to celebrate this win with all of us and show us their continued support.  
There are  a number of people who have also helped us during our journey  to today’s event.   I 
have already mentioned Bruce Southwick, of Zoom Fiji Photography, for providing the precious 
images and allowing us to use them for the designing of the banknote and coin.  This is a man 
who  truly  loves  his  rugby.    The  video  that  many  of  you  saw  before  we  started  the  programme 
was also his.  Thank you, Bruce.  We are truly appreciative of your contribution.  
I  also  thank  the  Fiji  Times  Ltd  and  Fiji  Sun  for  providing  us  the  various  other  images  that  we 
have used during the design phase, and Fiji Airways and Tour Managers for bringing Ben back 
to Fiji especially for this launch.  
Much work has gone into this banknote and coin. I am thankful to the Reserve Bank Board for 
giving  us  the  go  ahead  and  to  our  in-house  Currency  Technical  Committee  for  the  guidance 
 5 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
received  during  the  designing  phase.    And  in  particular,  I  would  like  to  single  out  our  Chief 
Manager  Currency  &  Corporate  Services,  Susan  Kumar,  and  our  Manager  Currency  Ravi 
Kamoda,  for  working  tirelessly  around  the  clock  to  ensure  these  banknotes  and  coins  were 
completed  on  time  and  delivered  safely  to  our  vault.    I  am  also  very  thankful  to  our  launch 
committee and everyone else who played a part in putting together today’s event.  Vinaka vaka 
levu to you all. 
Circulation  
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Fiji Rugby 7s commemorative banknote and coin will be issued into 
circulation through the commercial banks from tomorrow and they will be legal tender, just like 
any  other  banknote  or  coin.    However  for  those  of  you  who  have  just  got  to  take  one  home 
tonight, our currency team can assist you - for a small fee of course!  
Stocks of these special notes and coins are limited but we are hopeful that every Fijian will get 
one or the other should they want them.  The Reserve Bank has printed 2 million banknotes and 
minted 1 million coins and at this time we do not envisage adding to this number. Clearly they 
will become collectors’ items.  While members of the public can visit their nearest commercial 
bank  and  purchase  the  notes  and  coins  at  face  value,  to  satisfy  the  numismatic  collectors  the 
Reserve Bank will also have a limited number of the notes in special covers and uncut sheets for 
sale at our Pratt street building.  Please feel free to visit us during office hours.  
Closing 
In  closing  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  recognising  truly  great  performances  by  our  fellow  Fijians 
(including  adopted  Fijians)  on  our  banknotes  and  coins  is  the  highest  recognition  we  at  the 
Reserve Bank can give.  We were privileged to have recognised Iliesa Delana in 2012 and now 
we  are  just  as  privileged  to  recognise  Ben  Ryan,  Osea  Kolinisau  and  our  magnificent  rugby 
sevens Olympians.  You bring us together as a truly proud nation and serve as an inspiration to 
us all.  
Thank you again Ben for travelling so far just to join us for this evening.  We wish you and all 
our players the very best going forward and to our current coach and team just continue to show 
the world how magnificent you are!  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  on  behalf  of  the  Board,  Management  and  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
Fiji, I once again extend my sincere gratitude to the Honourable Prime Minister for agreeing to 
be our Chief Guest  and to  you  all  for kindly  accepting our invitation  to join  us on this  historic 
occasion.  We are truly humbled by your presence. 
God bless us all and God bless Fiji. 
I now have much pleasure in inviting our Prime Minister to address us before unveiling our Fiji 
Rugby 7s Commemorative Banknote and Coin.  
 6 
    RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  
Prime Minister Sir. 
 END. 
 7 
