Dimitar  Radev:  Addressing  underlying  issues  of  cross-border
investment in the EU
Publication  by  Mr  Dimitar  Radev,  Governor  of  the  Bulgarian  National  Bank,  in  "Views  The
EUROFI  Magazine".  The  magazine  were  disseminated  during  The  Eurofi  High  Level  Seminar
2017 before ECOFIN, Malta, 5-7 April 2017.
 We are witnessing a downward shift in cross-border investment in the EU, while the EU current
account  moved  to  positive  territory  in  recent  years.  The  savings-investment  mismatches,
therefore, are at the heart of the conundrum we face in developing the cross-border investment
in the EU.
Several initiatives to address this issue have been launched, including the Investment Plan for
Europe,  and  the  European  Long-term  Investment  Fund.  A  large-scale  new  initiative  is  the
establishment of the Capital Markets Union intended to further enhance the mobilization of capital
and its channeling to companies and infrastructure projects offering new opportunities for savers
and  investors  across  the  EU.  A  few  other  initiatives  are  under  consideration,  including  the
creation of a European Savings Investment Fund.
However, the results of all initiatives have been mixed so far, and cross-border investment is
stagnating. Before moving forward we need to better understand the underlying factors behind
recent developments.
The  current  initiatives  look  technically  sound,  but  the  lack  of  sufficient  progress  in  their
implementation  reveals  a  number  of  remaining  underlying  issues.  These  include:  (i)  the
unfinished  agenda  with  regard  to  banking  and  financial  integration;  (ii)  slow  progress  in  real
convergence; and (iii) limited availability of adequate infrastructure and innovation projects.
Priority  actions  should,  therefore,  focus  on  addressing  the  underlying  issues,  and  efforts  at
further expanding the already established toolkit come next. This would require bold steps at both
the EU and national levels to regain confidence in the future of EU integration.
At  the  EU  level,  there  are  institutional  issues  to  be  addressed  concerning  the  future  of  the
integration  process.  The  five  scenarios  recently  proposed  by  Commission  President  Jean-
Claude  Juncker  shed  light  on  the  possible  patterns  of  integration  between  the  EU  members.
However,  there  remains  a  potential  conflict  between  the  prospects  of  “multiple-speed”
developments and advancing real convergence between the euro area and the rest of the EU.
The EU needs to move promptly on this issue, in order to address uncertainties.
The national authorities, at their end, should promote financial stability and fiscal solvency, and
address structural weaknesses and bottlenecks. The experience of Bulgaria may be indicative of
what can be done by an EU member state that is not yet member of the euro area. From the
central bank perspective this involves: (i) a sound banking sector; (ii) fiscal consolidation; and (iii)
structural reforms.
Good progress has been made in Bulgaria with regard to the first two areas. A comprehensive
asset  quality  review  in  2016  helped  restore  confidence  in  the  banking  sector.  Bank  lending  is
recovering, the overall profit is near historical highs and a process of market-based consolidation
in the sector is underway, including a recent deal with a strategic investor from the euro area.
Furthermore,  the  public  finances  of  Bulgaria  remain  sound  and  the  successful  fiscal
consolidation is illustrated by the budget surplus last year and the third lowest government debt
to GDP ratio in the EU. As for the structural reform agenda, much more remains to be done in
order to resolve remaining issues and help attract increased capital flows from the EU.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
We at the central bank have already planned the next steps, which will build on recent progress.
Among other things, we  plan  to  further  strengthen  our  banking  supervision,  develop  the  crisis
management framework for the banking sector, and reduce the level of nonperforming loans.
To  conclude,  decisive  actions  are  required  at  both  the  EU  and  national  levels  to  address  the
current  saving-investment  mismatches  within  the  EU.  While  expending  the  available  toolkit  is
important,  priority  should  be  given  to  resolving  the  remaining  underlying  issues  with  regard  to
banking and financial integration, real convergence, and quality of project management.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
