Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour: Shaping the future starts now
Speech by Mr Encik Abdul Rasheed Ghaffour, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  launch  of  the  Financial  Management  for  Retirement  Module
"Shaping the future starts now", Kuala Lumpur, 7 April 2017.
Importance of financial literacy
 There  is  a  growing  concern  on  the  low  financial  literacy  level  of  Malaysians  as  measured  by
financial knowledge, attitudes and behaviours. Based on the Financial Capability and Inclusion
Demand Side Survey conducted by Bank Negara Malaysia in 2015, the main observations on the
state of financial literacy of Malaysians can be described by:
a. First – the majority of Malaysians have inadequate knowledge on financial matters to
enable  them  to  make  informed  financial  decisions,  particularly  among  the  vulnerable
groups;
b. Second – a significant majority of Malaysians display short-sighted tendencies and are
inclined to ‘live for the moment’ – that is to only focus on instant gratification at the expense
of long-term financial planning;
c.  Third  –  more  than  75%  of  Malaysians  find  it  difficult  to  even  raise  RM1,000  to  meet
emergency needs;
d. Fourth – only a quarter of Malaysians have any form of investment; and
e. Fifth – most Malaysians indicated that they will face financial pressure should there be a
loss of income.
Therefore, building the financial capability and literacy of Malaysians is certainly a priority for the
nation. What we want to achieve is to improve people’s ability – to manage money well – through
their entire life cycle, and their ability to handle periods of difficulties. Financially literate population
–  will  help  to  improve  the  well-being  of  individuals  and  households;  ensure  a  sound  and
competitive financial system; as well as contribute to the sustainable growth of the economy.
Let me explain further on the importance of elevating financial literacy:
a. For individuals and households – financial literacy has become a key life skill. Those
who go through life by making sound financial decisions – will potentially be more resilient
and end-up with a much higher standard of living throughout their lifetime, including during
retirement. With the right knowledge and skills – individuals can live within their means;
manage  finances;  and  improve  chances  of  achieving  their  ultimate  financial  goals.  A
financially  literate  Malaysian  –  would  be  aware  of  the  importance  of  long-term  financial
planning and will actively save for the future.
b.  Empowered  financial  consumers  –  is  an  important  element  in  enhancing  market
discipline and promoting financial stability. Financially literate consumers can collectively
influence the behaviour of financial institutions to operate in a responsible, transparent and
efficient  manner.  Financial  institutions  would  be  more  competitive  and  motivated  –  to
provide  proper  advice  and  offer  suitable  products,  including  that  can  support  long-term
financial planning.
c. Successful channelling of savings into productive investment opportunities – will also
promote better economic growth. Greater use of financial products; as well as prudent use
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
of credit among households – would promote wealth creation. A nation with a more literate
population – can achieve greater financial inclusion through the access and appropriate
use of financial products and services. Such households would facilitate in achieving the
intended outcomes of macroeconomic policies.
Let me focus on three areas that are relevant towards shaping a better future in the context of
financial literacy:
1.  First – long-term financial planning begins at young age and relevant at each key life stages.
2.  Second – on the individual responsibility to take charge of its own financial decisions and
well-being; and
3.  Third – building financial capability and enhancing literacy – is a shared responsibility. I will
share  the  on-going  collaborative  efforts  undertaken  to  raise  financial  literacy  among
Malaysians.
Talking about long-term financial planning
Based on Bank Negara Malaysia’s observation – there is a continuing concern – on the lack of
attention to long-term financial planning among a majority of Malaysians. Only 40% of Malaysians
are financially ready for retirement. A recent focus group discussion with retirees – shows that
they would still rely on their children or purchase using credit in the event of emergency or for
higher value items. This could be a result of lack of financial planning when they were younger.
Generally, the younger population aged between 20–35 years old – perceive long-term financial
planning apply to a time horizon of only the next 10 to 20 years.
Therefore, financial education introduced from an early age and throughout life events is certainly
essential.  With  sufficient  basic  financial  knowledge  and  relevant  skills  –  ingrained  into  the
younger individuals’ behaviour and attitude – they will be more prepared and empowered to lead
a  healthier  financial  lifestyle  as  they  move  into  adulthood.  Financial  education  from  young  –
serves  as  a  firm  foundation  to  influence  behaviour  for  a  more  sustainable  life-long  financial
planning. Towards this end, Bank Negara Malaysia, in collaboration with the Ministry of Education
–  has  successfully  integrated  basic  financial  education  elements  into  the  school  curriculums
beginning 2014, which will be expanded to all primary and secondary school levels by 2021.
Similarly, greater attention should also be accorded to long-term financial and retirement planning
from  young,  or  when  entering  the  workforce.  There  should  be  greater  awareness  on  the
importance  of  saving  for  the  future.  As  most  of  us  here  represent  employers  throughout
Malaysia, I would urge that financial education and planning aspects should be embedded in our
training modules, including the retirement module developed by AKPK and KWSP.
Moving on the second focus area on – individual responsibility to take charge of its own
financial decisions and well-being.
The  Financial  Capability  and  Inclusion  Demand  Side  Survey  2015  –  also  suggests  that
Malaysians are not adequately taking charge of their own financial decisions and well-being. For
example,  with  regard  to  retirement  –  one-in-three  Malaysians  are  very  worried  about  their
retirement. Despite the worries, Malaysians adopt a passive strategy for their retirement planning
–  such  as  relying  mainly  on  the  government  or  statutory  bodies  such  as  KWSP  to  fund  their
retirement needs. As mentioned earlier, many of KWSP’s contributors have insufficient funds for
their retirement. This brings us to another question – what are their fall back plans? Apparently,
nothing concrete. The top three plans indicated in the survey are:
a. First – to rely on passive savings, which may not be sustainable;
b. Second – to rely on children or family members; and
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
c. Third –  to always continue working.
Most financial decisions are influenced greatly by a person’s behaviour and attitude. Notably, this
will require behavioural change from within, which can be harder to initiate but not impossible to
achieve. When equipped with the relevant knowledge and skills – an individual would acquire a
positive attitude and be able to make financial decisions – rationally and responsibly, for his well-
being in the short and long-term. The positive behavioural change includes prudent use of money
and credit; not easily influenced by emotions; actively seeking of information for financial product
comparison; as well as making adequate provisions for old age.
The  third  and  final  focus  area  –  building  financial  capability  and  elevating  financial
literacy is a shared responsibility
Government agencies, schools, families, workplaces and the financial service industry – all play
an important role in building financial capability and elevating financial literacy of our population.
This  is  a  long-haul  journey  and  requires  significant  resources  and  perseverance  by  various
parties. Hence, inter-agency collaboration -providing various touch points at different platforms –
is needed to increase the impact of financial education initiatives for the Malaysian public.
This motivates the establishment of the inter-agency Financial Education Network – which was
set up in November 2016. Apart from Bank Negara Malaysia, AKPK and KWSP, the Financial
Education Network – also comprises representatives from the Securities Commission, Ministry
of  Education,  Ministry  of  Higher  Education,  Perbadanan  Insurans  Deposit  Malaysia  and
Permodalan Nasional Berhad. I believe all members of the FE Network are here today to lend
support  to  this  important  initiative,  and  potentially  to  further  boost  its  impact  for  the  benefit  of
Malaysians.
The FE Network has the objective of co-ordinating and driving the National Strategy for financial
education in Malaysia. The National Strategy – will identify key target groups; define priorities; set
measureable  and  realistic  goals;  and  conduct  regular  assessment  on  financial  education
initiatives. Long-term financial and retirement planning would be one of the key priorities under
the proposed National Strategy.
The collaboration between AKPK and KWSP – to establish the retirement planning module is
indeed timely and in line with the FE Network’s objective. Today – we have a total of 80 trainers
from all over Malaysia, who have completed the Train-the-Trainers programme by AKPK and will
graduate as facilitators for this module. I would like to congratulate you and wish to emphasise
that you now have an important role – as change agents in creating awareness and promoting
behavioural change in the long-term financial and retirement planning, among Malaysians.
We  also  have  representatives  from  the  various  government  and  private  sector  agencies  here
today. With such a comprehensive module in place, I would like to urge all of us to implement
this module as internal training packages at our organisations for the benefit of our employees,
including the younger employees during on-boarding programmes.
In  conclusion,  it  is  our  aspiration  to  see  a  brighter  future,  with  all  Malaysians  being
knowledgeable;  forward  looking  and  achieve  financial  well-being  throughout  their  entire  life
stages. Hence – it is important for us to shape the future and make a difference, starting from
now! On this note, I hereby officially launch the “Financial Management for Retirement Module”.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
