Amando  M  Tetangco:  The  transformation  of  the  Philippine  retail
payment system
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the National Retail Payment System (NRPS) Event - Signing
of PSMB Charter and ACH Agreements, Manila, 31 March 2017.
 We are pleased that you have joined us this morning to witness two ground-breaking events that
will  transform  the  Philippine  Retail  Payment  System  to  become  truly  inclusive  and  eventually
serve all payments transactions across the country.    
The  first  is  the  signing  of  the  Charter  of  the  “Payment  System  Management  Body”  or  PSMB
under the National Retail Payment System framework. 
The PSMB is a critical and unique entity that will serve as a strong foundation of a modern, digital
retail payment system in the Philippines. It is industry-led, bringing together and organizing all
direct clearing participants in all important retail payment systems, into a self-governing body that
will assist the BSP in overseeing the national payments system.
As  a  fine  example  of  public-private  partnership,  the  BSP  and  the  payments  industry  will  work
together to promote the sound development of the payment system based on the principles of
cooperation, good governance, healthy competition and consumer protection.
The second is the signing of the Expression of Interest to establish and activate within this year
two specific Automated Clearing Houses (ACHs) that are being prioritized because of their huge
potential to immediately provide digital payment solutions to current payment challenges being
encountered by government, by businesses, and by ordinary consumers.
The first ACH will be called “PESO Net” which is a batch electronic fund transfer credit payment
scheme. This can be the electronic alternative to the paper-based check system but it will also
be  more  inclusive  in  terms  of  participants  and  users.  The  PESO  Net  supports  bulk  payment
transactions of various users. For instance, it will enable companies, including the government,
to conveniently pay salaries and invoices to the bank account of choice of their employees and
suppliers.  Employees and suppliers will therefore no longer be compelled to open and manage
several accounts just so they can receive and make payments affordably. 
The  second  ACH  will  be  called  “InstaPay”,  a  real-time  low-value  push  payment  scheme  for
transaction amounts up to P50,000. This is a new retail payment system designed to facilitate
small value payments that will be especially useful for paying for toll fees and tickets, and for e-
commerce to enable MSMEs. 
Payment products can be built on InstaPay that will enable merchants to accept digital payments
from both e-money and bank accounts even without a POS.  By using digital payments, MSMEs
will  be  able  to  build  a  rich  digital  transaction  history  which  can  help  establish  their
creditworthiness and provide them access to credit from formal lending institutions at a price that
reflects  their  good  risk  profile.    This  shows  that  the  benefits  of  using  electronic  payments
especially by MSMEs go beyond convenience and affordability. Electronic payments can even
provide greater access to other financial services.
These concrete developments mark a significant milestone in our journey towards modernizing
the  retail  payment  system  in  the  country  —-  an  accomplishment  that  would  not  be  possible
without  the  cooperation  of  the  payments  industry  players  with  the  BSP.  We  also  recognize
USAID which has provided the technical assistance for this strategic initiative.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
This journey officially began in December 2015 when we launched the National Retail Payment
System Project or the NRPS. As a policy framework, the NRPS lays down the principles and
necessary elements of our envisioned safe and efficient retail payment system.
Let me just highlight for a moment the concept of efficiency. Efficiency in the retail payments is
essentially  about  speed,  convenience  and  affordability.    These  are  features  and  requirements
that can clearly be supported by a shift to electronic payments.  And that is why a key outcome of
the NRPS is the increased adoption of electronic retail payments. 
When we decided to embark on this journey, we knew from the get-go that we have our work cut
out for us. As it stands, the share of electronic payments in the estimated 2.5 billion monthly
payment transactions in the country is a measly 1% based on a baseline survey conducted in
2013. We want to bring this to 20% within the next 3 years, or by 2020.  Some might think this as
quite  an  ambitious  target.   And  perhaps  it  is.  But  realizing  how  important  a  shift  to  electronic
payments is for the country, we knew we had to embrace this target and buckle down to achieve
it.
So  what  is  at  stake?  Aside  from  the  considerable  cost-savings  and  productivity  that  it  can
generate for businesses, the government and the financial sector at large, a safe and efficient
retail  payment  system  can  potentially  transform  the  economy  by  enabling  greater  financial
inclusion. As  it  facilitates  low-cost  and  convenient  transactions,  our  envisioned  retail  payment
system supports the viable and sustainable delivery of a wide range of financial products that
cater to the needs of all users, especially the small-value, high frequency transactors of the low-
income segment.  A well-designed retail payment system serves as a pillar of an inclusive and
expansive digital finance ecosystem – one that is able to meet the diverse needs of all users in a
manner that is convenient, sustainable, affordable and reliable.
Just  as  it  is  a  goal,  financial  inclusion  is  also  a  tool  for  achieving  an  efficient  retail  payment
system. As more people participate in this system, greater economies of scale are secured –
thereby making the system even more efficient.  The unserved market of the payments industry
is still huge, considering that based on the latest World Bank Findex report, only 31.3% of adult
Filipinos  have  a  transaction  account    which  enables  them  to  participate  in  the  retail  payment
system.  By enabling its user to store funds and use electronic payments, a transaction account
can  provide  the  unbanked  the  means  to  eventually  avail  of  more  sophisticated  products,  like
credit,  insurance  and  investments.    Providing  a  transaction  account  to  the  remaining  69%
untapped  potentially  high-volume  market  therefore  presents  opportunity  for  financial  service
providers to expand their customer base and add new income streams.
Clearly, therefore, we cannot overemphasize the importance of establishing a safe and efficient
payment system which the NRPS aims to achieve. The NRPS provides the framework for our
deliberate  approach  to  securing  the  promised  gains  of  modernizing  retail  payments  for  the
benefit of the consumers, the industry and the economy as a whole.  This approach is built on
three core principles: interoperability, inclusivity and “coopetition”. 
Interoperability  is  defined  as  a  state  in  which  customers  can  transfer  funds  from  their  own
account  to  any  BSP-regulated  transaction  account  using  any  device.  This  means  that  a
customer need only maintain one account – whether a bank or an e-money account – to be able
to conveniently and affordably transact with anyone in the system.
The inclusivity principle, on the other hand, demands that all qualified financial service providers
must  be  able  to  effectively  participate  in  the  system  –  regardless  of  their  size  and  type  of
transaction  accounts  offered.  This  fosters  greater  competition  and  spurs  innovation  to  better
support the diverse needs of the consumers.  
The third core principle espoused by NRPS is “coopetition” – a portmanteau (combination) for
“cooperation”  and  “competition”.  NRPS  promotes  both  cooperation  and  competition  in  the
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
industry.  The industry is expected to cooperate in matters that directly impact on our shared
objectives of system efficiency and resilience.  This includes clearing and settlement rules and
standards, industry governance and risk management.  Product features such as end-user fees,
delivery channels and customer service fall outside the cooperative sphere and will be used as
basis of competition.
The formation of the PSMB and the PESO Net and InstaPay ACHs essentially sets in motion the
operationalization of these NRPS principles. The PSMB serves as the industry-level cooperation
and governance body composed of qualified banks and e-money issuers.  By organizing as a
formal  body,  participants  can  effectively  identify  and  drive  strategic  initiatives  to  promote  the
efficiency and resilience of the system and promote the sustained growth of the industry. 
The multilateral ACHs, on the other hand, lays down the clearing and participation rules for a
particular payment stream to facilitate electronic fund transfers among its participants. Payment
streams  that  are  covered  by  a    multilateral  ACH  promotes  greater  efficiency,  better  risk
management  and  interoperability  compared  to  those  that  are  covered  by  separate  bilateral
agreements as currently practiced.
Our journey towards a modern retail payment systems is just beginning but we can take pride in
the significant progress we have made thus far.
We couldn’t have gotten to this point if not for the willingness of the key stakeholders present
here today to collaborate, dialogue, and commit to the NRPS vision.  
And so let me conclude by expressing our deep appreciation for your support to the NRPS. With
the same commitment and cooperation, we shall move forward with the full implementation of
the NRPS and realize its vision of establishing a safe and efficient retail payment system in the
country, a vision of a highly digital financial system in the Philippines that serves the interest of all
financial consumers. 
Mabuhay po tayong lahat!
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
