 Ensuring Stability in Turbulent Times1  
 
 
 
Your Excellencies, Distinguished Guests, 
Sabah-al-khair and a very good morning. 
 
I  am  very  delighted  to  be  here  today  and  I  am  grateful  to  H.E.  Dr. 
Abdulrahman  A.  Al  Hamidy  for  inviting  me  to  speak  before  this  august 
gathering.  Thanks  to  the  active  collaboration  of  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision,  Financial  Stability  Institute,  and  the  Arab  Monetary 
Fund, these high-level meetings provide a valuable forum for exchange of 
views for the regulators and supervisors in the region. 
 The  agenda  of  this  conference  adequately  captures  key  developments, 
issues,  and  challenges  that  we  need  to  focus  our  attention  on.  Today,  I 
would  like  to  touch  upon  two  major  forces  that  have  swept  across  the 
financial world. First is the tech-driven revolution, which has brought its own 
set of risks and rewards. Second is the wide range of measures that have 
been introduced to strengthen the resilience of our banking systems. 
 Let me start with innovations first. 
 Innovation; opportunities and risks 
Tech-driven  innovations  have  unleashed  drastic  changes  in  the  way  we 
conduct  business,  interact  with each other,  or  consume  various products 
and  services.  Financial  sector,  essentially  an  ‘information  industry’,  is 
experiencing  a  major  transformation,  fueled  by  advances  in  technology. 
Though the imprint of modern technologies is now ubiquitous, let me briefly 
highlight  a  few  areas  of  finance  where  the  developments  are  particularly 
significant. 
                                                           
1 Keynote speech delivered by His Excellency Dr. Mohammad Y. Al-Hashel, Governor, Central Bank of Kuwait in the 12th 
High Level Meeting for the Middle East & North Africa Region, jointly organized by the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision, the Financial Stability Institute and the Arab Monetary Fund, held on December 7, 2016 in Abu Dhabi, UAE. 
 
 
1 
 To  start  with,  technology  is  supporting  the  outreach  of  formal  financial 
services to the millions of otherwise unbanked customers. According to the 
World Bank, the poorest 20% of the world population is more likely to have 
access to a mobile phone than to clean water and sanitation. Capitalizing 
on this opportunity, a number of countries have managed to swiftly expand 
access  to  finance  in  recent  years.  Globally,  number  of  adults  who  were 
previously out of formal financial system has dropped by 20% during 2011-
14  alone.  As  these  encouraging  trends  suggest,  digitalization  offers  an 
unprecedented opportunity to improve access to finance to the millions of 
people who have remained financially excluded so far. 
 Likewise,  programing  breakthroughs 
like  blockchain  are  potentially 
transforming  the  way  we  verify  transactions  and  enforce  contracts.  By 
allowing parties to transact without central intermediaries, blockchain can 
strip off costs, reduce inefficiencies, and enhance customer services. 
 Host of other innovations are reshaping the way we transfer money or obtain 
credit. For instance, mobile wallets are enabling payments by smart phones, 
peer-to-peer  lending  is  providing  new  sources  of  financing,  and  robo-
advisors are offering financial advice. 
 While undoubtedly exciting, these developments bring in their own unique 
risks and challenges. I would like to flag a few of them, particularly from the 
standpoint of financial stability. 
 First, cyber security risk is becoming an increasingly major part of banks’ 
operational  risk  landscape.  As  various  hacking  episodes  illustrate,  now 
fraud can be perpetrated swiftly, remotely, and on a massive scale. Though 
such occurrences are still uncommon, the impact is substantial, given the 
high degree of interconnectivity of our systems and markets. 
 Second, fintechs are unbundling parts of the finance value chain, offering 
financial services directly to customers. Apart from increasing competition, 
and  squeezing  banks’  profits,  fintechs  are  moving  part  of  the  banking 
business  to  shadow  banking  which  remains  lightly  regulated,  if  at  all. 
Likewise, tech-enabled peer-to-peer lending and crowdfunding can further 
 2 
expand  the  scale  of  shadow  banking,  and  may  also  exacerbate 
procyclicality. 
 As this discussion indicates, innovations are by nature a disruptive force, 
causing  a  considerable  degree  of  instability.  Therefore,  regulators  face  a 
daunting task of keeping financial systems safe and stable while continuing 
to ensure the convenience and efficiency that modern technologies offer.  
 To ensure that, we must strengthen our own capacity to identify, monitor, 
and  mitigate  the  risks  from  technological  innovations.  This  would  require 
closer cooperation with the banking industry as well as among regulators, 
both  within  a  country  and  across  the borders.  Yet  that  is  not  enough;  we 
also need to leave our comfort zone and engage with other stakeholders, 
primarily the tech firms themselves. 
 Ultimately,  as  regulators,  we  wish  neither  to  stifle  innovation  nor  to 
undermine financial stability – and it is indeed a very delicate balance to 
achieve. Similar to when navigating unfamiliar domains, we need to remain 
agile,  adaptive,  and  proactive  –  this  will  ensure  reaping  the  enormous 
benefits of financial innovations, yet limiting their downside. 
 Let me now turn to the second part of my speech. 
 Regulatory reforms; costly but essential 
Banking  regulation  has  been  another  major  area  witnessing  far-reaching 
reforms.  Driven  by  the  experience  of  global  financial  crisis,  banking 
regulation,  under  the  able  leadership  of  the  Basel  Committee,  has 
witnessed a major overhaul. Strenuous efforts have been made to improve 
resilience of banking systems across the globe. 
 These  measures  are  vitally  important,  given  the  increasing  uncertainty  of 
when or where the next shock would emanate from. Consider the stress that 
financial markets had to face in recent years. In 2013, it was the US taper 
tantrum, in 2014 it was the collapse in oil prices, in 2015 it was rebalancing 
in China, and this year it was Brexit, just to quote a few examples. These 
events were markedly different in geographical origin and root causes but 
were common in rattling the global markets. 
 3 
Against  this  backdrop,  ensuring  a  resilient  banking  system  capable  of 
withstanding a variety of shocks is no easy task. And these shocks are not 
only exogenous; the banking system itself is in a state of flux amid evolving 
risks, in part due to the very financial innovations I just talked about. 
 This calls for continuously upgrading our regulatory regime. Accordingly, we 
in Kuwait, like our colleagues in the region, have not only refined our existing 
regulations to reflect the best global practices, but have also introduced a 
host of new measures. 
 This journey brought its own set of challenges, and I would like to point out 
one in particular, to benefit from the presence of our esteemed colleagues 
from the BIS.  Similar to other jurisdictions with dual banking system, we 
have a sizeable presence of Islamic banks in Kuwait. Yet we found limited 
relevant  guidance  for  the  application  of  Basel  III  on  Islamic  financial 
institutions, if at all. For the most challenging aspects of Basel III reforms, it 
has been left to the discretion of individual regulators to figure out how best 
to apply the proposed rules to Islamic banks. 
 However,  the  use  of  discretion,  though  well  intended,  is  bound  to  create 
differences  across  countries,  and  more  so  in  the  case  of  Islamic  finance 
where the lack of consistency in Sharī`ah interpretations makes the task 
even  harder.  Consequently,  we  may  witness  diverging  approaches  to 
regulation of Islamic banks across jurisdictions, with the risk of regulatory 
arbitrage. 
 Going  forward,  we  also  need  to  recognize  that  ensuring  stability,  of  a 
constantly  adapting  banking  system,  cannot  be  left  to  regulation  alone. 
Therefore,  we  need  to  strengthen  our  supervisory  capacity,  to  suitably 
complement  our  revamped  regulatory  regimes.  Only  through  effective 
supervision  can  we  ensure  that  banks  are  truly  compliant  with  our 
regulations. Moreover, better supervisory oversight would also give us the 
agility to mitigate emerging risks before they materialize. 
 Having  said  that,  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  we  can’t  regulate  every 
aspect  of  the  banking  system.  Ultimately,  banks  should  assume  prime 
responsibility  for  their  actions  and  behaviors.  Being  dependent  on  public 
confidence, banks can ill afford to operate with weak corporate governance 
 4 
or poor risk culture. This necessitates that banks maintain robust corporate 
governance  standards,  duly  supported  by  strong  internal  controls,  and 
prudent risk management. 
 We are fully cognizant that these regulatory measures are costly for banks; 
nonetheless, costs of any financial crisis, both in financial and social terms, 
are far more substantial. Therefore, it is only wise and rational to strengthen 
the capacity of our banks in benign times. I believe our proactive approach 
has actually paid off, as banks in our region generally entered the low oil 
price environment from a position of strength. 
 Yet banks’ resilience is not infinite and may come under severe pressure if 
necessary economic and structural reforms are dropped - or even delayed. 
Hence, we should not lose sight of the broader economic context in which 
our  financial  systems  operate.  After  all,  the  banking  sector  is  just  a 
component of the overall economic landscape, though a very crucial one. 
While ensuring banking stability is critical, it is only a necessary condition 
for overall economic stability – and not a sufficient one. 
 Given  the  strong  feedback  loop  between  the  overall  economy  and  the 
financial  sector,  regulation  can’t  be  the  ‘only  game  in  town’  to  maintain 
financial stability. Equally critical are economic and structural reforms that 
are  essential  for  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment  where  financial 
sector can flourish. 
 Towards that end, we, as central bankers, must continue to provide sound 
policy advice to our governments, supporting them in better addressing the 
challenges  that  our  economies  face,  as  only  broader  economic  stability 
would ensure financial soundness and cement the gains of our regulatory 
reforms. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
  7/12/2016 
 5 
