Vítor Constâncio: Effectiveness of Monetary Union and the Capital
Markets Union
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the EUROFI
Conference, Malta, 6 April 2017.
Introduction
 In my remarks today I will link the role of monetary policy with the project of the Capital Markets
Union (CMU). Monetary policy has played a vital role in bolstering euro area resilience to the large
shocks  that  have  occurred  over  the  past  decade.  Indeed,  it  is  the  only  expansionary
macroeconomic  policy  in  support  of  the  resilient  recovery  now  underway  in  the  euro  area.
Nevertheless, we have not yet completed the task of attaining our goal of a sustained path of
inflation close to but below 2%.
But while monetary policy has been successful at sustaining the area-wide recovery, it is unable
to  significantly  counteract  the  effects  on  individual  countries  from  asymmetric  shocks,  which
have been substantial in recent years. There is an important role here for capital markets. By
permitting households and businesses to draw on cross-border income streams and lending,
deeper financial integration reduces the impact of asymmetric shocks.
The degree of financial integration in the euro area is currently insufficient. Indeed, in the recent
crisis,  the  degree  of  financial  integration  fell,  as  interbank  markets  fragmented  along  national
lines.  This  fragmentation  exacerbated  the  overall  impact  of  the  shocks  on  the  euro  area,
deepening the recession, lengthening the recovery and increasing the need for unconventional
monetary  policy  measures.  The  single  currency  area  provides  fertile  conditions  for  deeper
financial  integration  and  that  deeper  integration  in  turn  helps  build  resilience  to  shocks  and
strengthens  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  by  means  of  a  more  homogenous
transmission. Monetary policy and CMU are thus linked.
Let  me  start  by  discussing  the  current  situation  and  the  contribution  of  monetary  policy  in
sustaining  the  current  recovery  before  returning  to  discussing  how  CMU  can  help  generate
greater resilience to future shocks.
The current economic conjuncture
The euro area recovery is gaining momentum, broadening across sectors and countries. This is
evidenced by 15 consecutive quarters of positive real GDP growth, unemployment at its lowest
level since 2009 and over four and a half million more people employed now than was the case
three years ago. Growth in manufacturing also reached its highest rate since 2011.
Moreover,  the  current  recovery  has  shown  considerable  resilience  amid  an  environment  of
uncertainty. Typically, euro area activity closely co-moves with world trade, so if the latter slows
this acts as a headwind for growth. However, the strength of domestic demand has enabled euro
area growth to continue to expand, despite the marked slowdown in global trade (Chart 1).
 1 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 What, then, is supporting domestic demand? Employing a range of econometric models, ECB
staff show that the current recovery has been very reliant on two factors: the exceptionally low oil
prices in 2014–15 and our monetary policy measures. This monetary support can for the most
part be traced back to the measures which the ECB started introducing in June 2014 in order to
arrest the downward drift in inflation at the time and the risk of a self-sustained period of deflation.
These  measures  have  had  a  considerable  impact  on  euro  area  financing  conditions.  Bank
lending rates for both firms and households are currently at historical lows, and lending volumes
experiencing an upward trend. Borrowing costs in vulnerable countries have been significantly
reduced,  reducing  fragmentation  and  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises  are  especially
benefitting  from  the  increasing  pass-through  of  policy  rates  to  lending  rates.  In  this  regard,
monetary policy has had some success in mitigating the asymmetric impact of shocks.
To give an example of the contribution of monetary policy to this easing in financing conditions,
ECB staff estimate that lending rates to non-financial firms would be about 70 basis points higher
absent  our  policies  (Chart  2).  In  combination  with  other  factors,  lending  rates  to  non-financial
firms dropped by 120bp from June 2014 to date.
  2 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 The effectiveness of our measures is also visible from a more micro perspective, by examining
the lending behaviour of individual banks in the context of our TLTROs. Incentives underpinning
the TLTROs (Targeted Long-Term Refinancing Operations) are resulting in the cheaper funding
costs being passed-on to customers, particularly in vulnerable euro area countries (Chart 3).
 3 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 4 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 Euro  area  activity  has  been  improving  against  this  backdrop  of  easing  financing  conditions.
Higher employment has boosted labour incomes and consumption, and investment has begun a
cyclical  recovery.  Global  growth  prospects  are  showing  signs  of  strengthening  and  may  well
further  support  the  recovery.  Indeed,  despite  the  waning  support  from  oil  prices,  growth  has
continued to broaden and gain momentum. While risks to the outlook remain on the downside,
they are less pronounced than before.
Our latest staff macroeconomic projections were revised slightly upwards, with annual real GDP
is  expected  to  increase  by  1.8%  in  2017,  1.7%  in  2018  and  1.6%  in  2019.  The  impact  of
monetary policy measures on euro area GDP growth is sizeable, adding a cumulative 1.7% over
the period 2016–2019 (Chart 4).
 5 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 But  while  significant  progress  has  been  made,  it  is  too  soon  to  declare  complete  success.
Headline inflation has increased, but has yet to sustainably converge towards our objective. The
increase mostly reflects rising energy and food price inflation, with underlying inflation pressures
still subdued (Chart 5). The flash estimate for March shows that headline inflation has dropped to
1.5% from 2% in February and that underlying inflation decreased from 0.9% to 0.7%. We had
previously warned that headline inflation could decline after March-April as a result of the reduced
statistical base effect of comparing this year’s price levels of oil and other commodities with their
value a year ago.
The decrease in underlying inflation, however, is disappointing. The domestic drivers of inflation,
namely wages, are not yet responding to the recovery and the narrowing output gap. According
to our latest projections, inflation is expected to move towards 1.7% in 2019 (Chart 5), predicated
on underlying inflation and wage growth of 1.8% and 2.4%, respectively. Without the foreseen
increase in wages, the baseline scenario of our staff projections for growth and inflation will not
materialise  in  2019.  At  early  stages  of  its  recovery,  the  US  also  faced  the  same  subdued
behaviour of underlying inflation and wages that accelerated only later.
To  achieve  our  goals  concerning  self-sustained  inflation,  we  have  to  be  sure  that  domestic
drivers of inflation are behaving accordingly. In this perspective, it is worth mentioning that the
projections  rely  on  the  continued  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation. Absent  our
policy package, inflation would on average be almost 0.5% lower than currently projected in each
year over 2016–2019 (Chart 4). In other words, inflation is not yet self-sustaining. For this reason,
the Governing Council at its last meeting confirmed the appropriateness of the current monetary
policy stance. As ever, we are data dependent; we recognise that there has been improvement in
the situation and if inflation gives signs of a sustained path towards our aims, we will reassess
our present policy stance.
  6 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
 
Improving future resilience
To recap, monetary policy is successfully sustaining a resilient recovery from the large shocks
that have hit the euro area over the past decade. Our unconventional measures introduced since
June  2014  are  working.  But  that  is  not  to  say  that  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in
completely  eliminating  the  effects  of  those  shocks  on  individual  countries.  That  is  beyond  the
ability of monetary policy. What other options are there, then, to build resilience in the euro area
against future shocks?
First, it is worth noting the absence of other macroeconomic policies in sustaining the recovery.
There has been little support from fiscal policy, and the progress on structural reforms has not
been  completed.  We  have  frequently  discussed  how  a  greater  counter-cyclical  role  for  fiscal
policy  and  more  flexible  economies  can  help  reduce  the  impact  of  shocks  and  buttress  the
efforts of monetary policy. Those views remain true today. But there is a role, too, for deeper
financial integration through the CMU to build resilience.
 7 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Well-functioning  political,  economic,  and  monetary  unions  are  normally  characterised  by  high
levels  of  risk-sharing  across  regions.  For  example,  evidence  suggests  that  three  quarters  of
shocks to the per-capita gross product of individual states in the United States are smoothed,
and  that  capital  markets  and  credit  markets  together  account  for  around  two-thirds  of  that
smoothing, dwarfing the contribution from federal transfers (13%).  Similarly, in post-unification
Germany around 69% of region-specific shocks to GDP growth are smoothed through capital
2
markets and credit markets, and only about 11% through fiscal tools.
1
In  comparison,  the  overall  contribution  of  markets  to  risk  sharing  in  the  euro  area  has,  on
average, been limited (chart 6).  At present, little more than 20% of the idiosyncratic shocks to a
country’s economy are smoothed, with changes in relative prices contributing the most to risk
sharing.
3
 Note:  The  Chart  summarizes  the  five-year  cumulative  contributions  of  capital  markets,  credit
markets, fiscal tools, and relative prices to the smoothing, in terms of consumption growth, of a
1-standard-deviation shock to GDP growth. Each bar thus measures the parts of the shock to
country-specific GDP that are absorbed by the respective channels. The remainder is interpreted
as the unsmoothed portion of a GDP shock, i.e., the part of a shock to country-specific GDP
growth that is reflected into country-specific consumption growth. Contributions sum up to 100
percent, and a negative contribution corresponds to dis-smoothing of consumption growth. The
respective contributions are estimated over rolling ten-year backward-looking windows, based on
annual  data  and  applying  the Asdrubali  and  Kim  (2004)  approach  enhanced  for  relative  price
adjustments in the spirit of Corsetti, Dedola, and Viani (2011).
  8 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
Risk-sharing  via  cross-border  ownership  of  assets  increased  substantially  following  the
introduction of the euro, smoothing between 30% and 40% of country-specific shocks to GDP by
the mid-2000s. But the contribution of capital markets declined substantially during the financial
and  especially  during  the  sovereign  debt  crisis.  The  contribution  of  credit  markets  has  been
lower, and it even  became  negative  during  the  financial  crisis  when  European  banking  sector
was particularly hit.
In the absence of a European supra-national system of taxes and transfers, it is more pressing
than  ever  to  boost  Europe’s  risk-sharing  potential  through  financial  market  mechanisms.  The
risk-sharing benefits of integrated financial markets could in principle be large.
Another  major  benefit  of  the  CMU  is  the  contribution  to  convergent  growth  among  member
countries, resulting from the improved circulation and allocation of savings across the Union. In
this perspective, Brexit makes it more crucial that the CMU is effectively implemented and that
European  growth  can  avail  itself  of  the  services  of  an  integrated  financial  system.  This  is
particularly  true  of  a  CMU  focused  on  stimulating  equity  financing.  Indeed,  equity  and  foreign
direct investment (FDI), and longer-maturity debt in general, are leading to a more resilient form
of financial integration. Deeper equity markets constitute an unquestionable advantage to the US,
notably in relation to the role of venture capital in promoting innovation. For the expansion of such
an activity it is important to create a deep equity market that can provide significant returns in
successful IPOs (Initial Public Offers) that can offset losses incurred by failing risky projects.
The CMU is aimed at completing the single market for capital by building integrated markets for
equity  and  bond  finance.  This  should  be  achieved  through  both  regulatory  and  non-regulatory
actions, including the harmonisation of key legislation and policies related to financial products,
such as investor protection and bankruptcy procedures.
A number of concrete measures are set out in the Commission’s Action Plan to underpin the
further development of large capital markets in the EU.  The same applies to improving financial
literacy and to stimulating a shift in household savings from bank deposits to equity holdings.
4
We  need  a  CMU  that  is  ambitious;  it  should  come  with  a  roadmap  in  terms  of  goals  and
milestones  to  be  achieved.  Broad  objectives  such  as  deepening  financial  integration  and
achieving risk sharing should be matched with specific proposals such as facilitating funding for
corporates in general and for SMEs in particular. Key areas such as securitisation, insolvency
regimes,  and  tax  legislation  need  to  be  prioritised.  Cross-border  barriers  to  clearing  and
settlement should be removed.
Financial  stability  concerns  also  need  to  be  addressed,  including  an  assessment  of  whether
additional macro-prudential instruments should be developed. The proper regulation of financial
products and supervision of financial entities, such as insurers and pension funds, as well as full
transparency of new financial products, should be put in place as they are essential to convincing
households to switch to more market-based forms of saving. In this respect, enhanced powers
for the European Securities Markets Authority (ESMA) and better coordination with the national
competent authorities will help strengthen the implementation and enforcement of rules.
Conclusion
Allow me to conclude.
The euro area is experiencing a resilient recovery, sustained by monetary policy. Outturns for
high-frequency data so far this year point to continued momentum. But it is too soon to declare
complete success: we have yet to secure a sustained convergence in inflation towards our goal
of close to but below 2% over the medium term.
With the recovery underway, we should aim to build euro area resilience to future shocks. In this
 9 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
regard, clear progress on CMU will help put in place the right conditions to encourage a greater
degree of financial integration in the euro area.
This in turn will help dampen the asymmetric effects of future shocks, bolster the effectiveness
of monetary policy and enhance the welfare of our citizens.
1
2
3
4
Asdrubali,  P.,  Sorensen,  B.  and  Yosha,  O.,  “Channels  of  interstate  risk  sharing:  United  States  1963–
1990”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, 1996, pp. 1081–1110; Athanasoulis, S. and van Wincoop, E.,
“Risk sharing within the United States: What do financial markets and fiscal federalism accomplish?”, Review of
Economics and Statistics, Vol. 83, 2001, pp. 688–698. See also Del Negro, M., “Asymmetric shocks among US
States”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 56(2), March 2002, pp. 273–297.
Hepp, R. and von Hagen, J., “Interstate risk sharing in Germany: 1970–2006”, Oxford Economic Papers  65,
2013, pp. 1-24.
Balli, F. and Sorensen, B., “Risk sharing among OECD and EU countries: The role of capital gains, capital
income, transfers, and savings”, MPRA Working Paper No 10223, 2007.
See “Action Plan on Building a Capital Markets Union”, Commission Communication, Brussels, 30 September
2015.
 10 / 10
BIS central bankers' speeches
