Philip R Lane: Macro-financial risk management
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland Economics Roundtable, Dublin, 8 September 2017.
 It  is  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank  for  the  annual  economics  roundtable.    Our
interactions with the external economics community help us in shaping our analysis and policy
positions; I hope the roundtable also enables the participants to gain an improved understanding
of the work of the Bank.  This afternoon’s thematic sessions promise to provide new insights on
the  topics  of  labour  market  conditions,  non-performing  loans,  and  the  European  monetary
environment.
In these opening remarks, I will first review current macro-financial conditions. Subsequently, I
will discuss some current policy issues in relation to macro-financial risk management, focusing
on  the  potential  stabilising  contributions  from  counter-cyclical  macroprudential  and  fiscal
policies.  My discussion of fiscal policy reflects the content of the pre-Budget letter that I recently
sent to the Minister of Finance, which is published today.
The macro-financial environment
The near-term and medium-term projections for the Irish economy are for significant expansion.
  The  economy  continues  to  grow  at  a  strong  pace,  supported  by  the  buoyancy  of  domestic
economic  activity.  Underpinning  the  recovery  has  been  broad-based  growth  in  employment,
which  has  helped  incomes  recover  and  supported  solid  growth  in  consumer  spending,  while
domestic investment has gained traction. Modified domestic demand, a measure of domestic
spending which excludes investment in intangibles and aircraft leasing, grew by 4.7 per cent in
2016.
Looking  ahead,  the  outlook  is  favourable,  although  external  uncertainty  persists.  The  main
impetus to growth will continue to come from domestic demand, driven by continuing gains in
employment  and  incomes.  Reflecting  this,  prospects  for  consumption  and  investment  remain
positive and modified domestic demand is forecast to grow by 4.5 per cent this year and by 4.0
per  cent  next  year.  Although  the  pace  of  employment  growth  is  projected  to  moderate,
unemployment is set to fall towards 5 per cent, with growth in compensation likely to average
around 3 per cent.
At  the  same  time,  there  are  clear  downside  risks  to  the  growth  outlook  at  both  global  and
domestic levels. At a generic level, Ireland is especially exposed due to the sensitivity of small,
highly-open economies to international shocks.  In particular, the state of global economic and
trading conditions and the configuration of major exchange rates are important determinants of
Irish economic performance, given the dominant role of global firms in our tradable sector.
In  addition,  the  legacy  of  high  public  and  private  sector  debt  levels  means  that  Ireland  is
vulnerable to shifts in funding conditions.  The low interest rate environment that has persisted in
recent years has generated a positive financial terms of trade shock for debtors.  In the other
direction,  any  upward  shifts  in  policy  rates,  term  premia  or  risk  premia  will  pose  adjustment
challenges for indebted sectors and may have a material impact on asset valuations.
Finally,  disorderly  versions  of  Brexit  would  disproportionately  affect  Ireland  relative  to  other
European economies.  As the EU-UK negotiations proceed, scenarios in which trading frictions
between  the  EU  and  UK  are  increased  would  be  damaging  for  the  productivity  of  the  Irish
economy.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Macro-financial risk management:  policy issues
There  are  two  basic  elements  in  macro-financial  risk  management.    First,  the  capacity  to
withstand adverse shocks is enhanced by improving the resilience of the macro-financial system
through the strengthening of sectoral balance sheets and the design of a legal and regulatory
architecture that lowers the costs associated with dealing with unsustainable debts and failing
institutions.    Second,  counter-cyclical  policy  measures  can  dampen  cyclical  fluctuations  in
conditions. 
At global, European and domestic levels, financial regulatory reforms in recent years have been
directed  at  improving  the  resilience  of  banking  systems.      Banks  are  now  required  to  satisfy
tougher  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  while  recovery  and  resolution  regimes  have  been
introduced to make it easier to deal with distressed institutions.  These regulatory reforms are
backed  by  a  more  intrusive  supervisory  system,  including  more  extensive  on-site  inspections
and  enhanced  enforcement  powers.  Legal  systems  have  also  been  reformed  to  improve
insolvency frameworks, even if much remains to be done.
In  addition,  under  the  domestic  implementation  of  the  European  macroprudential  policy
framework,  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  now  sets  additional  capital  buffers  for  banks  and  also
specifies  borrower-based  measures  to  mitigate  the  risks  associated  with  boom-bust  financial
cycles. 
In  relation  to  capital  ratios,  the  Bank  sets  an  additional  buffer  for  each  systemically-important
institution (the so-called O-SII buffer).   In addition, the counter-cyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is a
policy tool that can be activated in response to cyclical credit dynamics by raising the minimum
capital ratio for banks during periods of above-normal credit growth and lowering it during periods
of  below-normal  credit  growth.   A  primary  objective  is  to  increase  the  resilience  of  banks  to
unexpected reversals in credit dynamics; in addition, depending on circumstances, it is possible
that the credit cycle might also be dampened by such counter-cyclical measures.
1
While new lending is picking up, our assessment is that the credit cycle remains subdued, which
is  reflected  in  the  current  zero  value  for  the  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer.    Still,  since  the
counter-cyclical capital buffer is reviewed on a quarterly basis, this policy tool provides a high-
frequency (compared to the typical duration of financial cycles) mechanism to respond to cyclical
shifts  in  credit  conditions.    A  small  but  increasing  number  of  EU  countries  have  raised  the
counter-cyclical capital buffer in recent times.
Of  course,  the  bedrock  of  our  macroprudential  policy  framework  is  formed  by  the  borrower-
based  measures  we  have  introduced  in  relation  to  mortgage  loans.  We  view  our  mortgage
measures that put ceilings on loan-to-income (LTI) and loan-to-value (LTV) ratios as essential in
limiting  systemic  financial  risk  emanating  from  the  mortgage  market,  while  acting  to  protect
consumers from the risks associated with overborrowing.
Such borrower-based measures are intended to improve the resilience of the financial system
and the overall economy by improving the sustainability of mortgage loans, leading to a lower
probability of default and smaller losses in the event of defaults.  Moreover, such measures are
reinforced  by  the  higher  capital  requirements  facing  banks,  which  improves  their  capacity  to
absorb loan losses.
An  important  property  of  the  mortgage  measures  is  that  the  LTI  rule  acts  as  an  automatic
stabiliser in relation to house price dynamics:  house prices cannot persistently rise faster than
the income levels among the pool of potential purchasers. In addition, the differential LTV ratios
for first-time and second-and-subsequent buyers recognises the asymmetric impact of house
price increases on these different groups: whereas a rise in house prices requires extra savings
to meet the deposit requirement for a first-time buyer, an incumbent house owner experiences a
decline in the LTV ratio on her existing property which expands her borrowing capacity in further
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
housing market transactions.
In similar vein, the additional LTV requirement for buy-to-let (BTL) investors limits the feedback
loop  between  house  price  rises  and  the  conversion  of  increases  in  home  equity  values  into
borrowing capacity in the BTL category.  The operation of these mechanisms means that the
combination of the LTI ceiling and the ladder of differentiated LTV ceilings provides some in-built
brakes in housing price dynamics.
A further stabilising mechanism is that our macroprudential regulations can be tightened if there
is evidence of materially-elevated risks in the mortgage market, especially in relation to adverse
feedback loops between the rate of credit growth and house price increases. Our commitment to
an  annual  review  process  ensures  that  a  rigorous  evaluation  of  the  mortgage  measures  is
conducted  each  year,  such  that  indicators  of  a  combination  of  excess  credit  growth  and
unsustainable house price levels can be met by a revision in the rules.   Given this policy regime,
participants in the housing market can be confident that the feedback loop between credit growth
and house prices will no longer operate in an unbounded fashion.
It is critically important to appreciate that our framework sets limits on the size of mortgages: the
LTI and LTV ratios are not targets but ceilings. In buying a home, a household should take into
account the protections offered by putting down a higher deposit in terms of limiting repayment
burden and risks associated with excessive debt levels. Equally, lenders are required to assess
the loan-bearing capacity of each mortgage customer and restrict the size of the mortgage if
indicated by the analysis of the borrower’s credit risk.
While the November 2016 revisions to the mortgage rules did raise the maximum loan size for
first-time  buyers  seeking  to  buy  homes  above  €220,000  in  value,  it  is  important  to  take  into
account several considerations.  First, borrowers also have to satisfy the LTI requirement, which
remains unchanged at a cap on loans of 3.5 times income. For many households, this will limit
the capacity to increase the mortgage size. Second, the scope for exemptions to the LTV limit for
first-time  buyers  has  been  restricted  to  just  5  percent  of  lending  to  this  group,  whereas  the
previous regime allowed 15 percent of lending above the LTV ceilings and did not restrict the
allocation of exemptions between the first-time and second-and-subsequent buyer pools:  in our
analysis,  many  first-time  buyers  above  the  €220,000  threshold  were  receiving  exemptions  (or
were looking for loans below the LTV ceiling) so that previous rule was not fully binding.  Third, to
the extent that the revision is contributing to an increase in aggregate mortgage credit volumes,
this should be interpreted in the context of the subdued level of lending in recent years.
Finally, it is important to appreciate that many factors influence the dynamics of house prices. 
Moreover, there is no fixed relation between credit conditions and the evolution of house prices: 
the  importance  of  credit  conditions  is  clearly  diminished  in  settings  in  which  a  significant
proportion of purchasers do not require mortgage finance. 
While  rising  incomes,  low  interest  rates,  high  rents  and  post-crisis  adjustment  dynamics  are
currently contributing to significant house price pressures, the prospect of future expansion in
housing supply should restrain house prices over the medium term.  In particular, an expansion
in  the  housing  stock  would  simultaneously  relieve  pressure  in  both  the  rental  and  home
ownership categories.
In addition, as discussed earlier, the highly-open nature of the Irish economy means that income
and  employment  levels  are  highly  sensitive  to  external  shocks.    For  instance,  slowdowns  in
global output growth, major currency movements, adverse shifts in international trading regimes
and a tightening in funding conditions could trigger a reversal in the currently benign growth and
employment environment.  Given these considerations, there are no one-way bets in the housing
market and our macroprudential framework is fundamental to mitigating these risks.
A resilient macro-financial system also depends on stable public finances, especially in view of
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  feedback  loops  between  fiscal  stability,  financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  stability.    In
terms  of  the  public  finances,  a  long-term  public  debt  target  can  provide  an  important  anchor.
Indeed, the greater the commitment to attaining a long-term debt target, the more is it possible to
run a flexible, counter-cyclical fiscal policy in response to temporary shocks.   The case for a
prudent  target  for  public  debt  is  further  reinforced  by  the  trend  implications  of  an  ageing
population for expenditure on pensions and healthcare.
While the European fiscal framework prescribes a target ceiling for the stock of public debt (at 60
percent of GDP), there are compelling reasons to develop a national target for the stock of public
debt.    In  this  respect,  I  welcome  the  commitment  in  the Summer  Economic  Statement  to
maintain a long-term debt target of 45 percent of GDP. At the most basic level, the new CSO
calculations indicate that the underlying size of the Irish economy (as captured by GNI*) is about
one-third smaller than GDP, such that a debt ratio of 60 percent of GNI* maps to a debt ratio of
40  percent  of  GDP.    More  generally,  the  prudent  stock  of  public  debt  naturally  varies  across
countries  in  line  with  different  risk  exposures:  the  volatile  nature  of  the  Irish  macro-financial
system  and  the  history  of  crises  suggests  a  debt  target  that  should  be  materially  below  the
appropriate level for a larger, more stable economy.  Of course, a target for the stock of public
debt should be appropriately interpreted in the context of the wider public sector balance sheet,
with  due  allowances  for  the  dynamics  of  various  types  of  financial  and  non-financial  assets
(including public capital) and the range of contingent and implicit liabilities.
In relation to the cyclical budgetary stance, the pursuit of macro-financial stability requires that
the government runs a counter-cyclical fiscal policy. In addition to the mechanical operation of
the automatic stabilisers that are embedded in the dynamics of tax revenues and transfers, a
government may need to take further discretionary measures to tighten budgetary policy during
phases of robust economic growth. The development of a counter-cyclical fiscal strategy should
also strike the balance in the allocation of surplus revenues between the proposed rainy day fund
and reducing the gross stock of public debt.  In addition to ensuring that the fiscal balance is set
at a cyclically-appropriate level, the government can use additional tools to mitigate overheating
pressures, including the deployment of cyclically-varying expenditure taxes.
Determining the optimal counter-cyclical fiscal stance may soon be quite relevant for budgetary
policy if the economy hits full employment. For instance, the macroeconomic implications of the
projected  further  expansion  in  public  investment  during  2019–2021  that  is  signalled  in  the
Summer  Economic  Statement  depend  on  whether  and  when  the  economy  attains  full
employment. While additions to the public capital stock can be expected to raise the productive
capacity of the economy and/or assist in the attainment of social objectives over the medium
term, the process of public investment acts to raise aggregate demand in the near term.  While
the demand-raising impact of public investment can be stimulative during periods of economic
slack, a surge in public investment under conditions of full employment requires counter-vailing
measures to limit the risk of costly over-heating dynamics. Alternatively, stretching out a planned
public  investment  programme  over  a  longer  horizon  can  limit  pressures  on  the  absorptive
capacity of the economy.
2
Finally, it is important to note the complementarities between counter-cyclical macroprudential
and fiscal policies.  In one direction, a robust macroprudential policy framework mitigates credit-
driven cyclical shocks, easing the burden on fiscal policy.  In the other direction, counter-cyclical
fiscal  policy  moderates  the  income  volatility  that  is  an  important  source  of  credit  shocks,
reducing the strain on the macroprudential stance. 
Conclusions
At the current juncture, Ireland faces two types of risks.   In one direction, there remain many
legacy  issues  from  the  crisis,  with  the  elevated  stocks  of  private  and  public  debt  implying
significant vulnerability to adverse shocks to incomes or interest rates.  In the other direction,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
upside shocks may provide a new type of challenge in addressing potential overheating risks in
the  economy.    The  responsibility  of  policymakers  is  to  maintain  a  vigilant  and  agile  stance  in
order to ensure that Ireland can cope with either type of shock.
1
2
The acronym O-SII stands for Other Systemically Important Institutions.
See  Philippe  Martin  and  Thomas  Philippon  (2017),  “Inspecting  the  Mechanism:  Leverage  and  the  Great
Recession in the Eurozone,” American Economic Review 107(7), 1904–1937.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
