John Iannis Mourmouras: Introductory remarks at a meeting with
members of the European Parliament's ECON Committee
Introductory  remarks  by  Professor  John  Iannis  Mourmouras,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of
Greece,  at  a  meeting  with  members  of  the  European  Parliament’s  ECON  Committee  FAWG
fact-finding mission (with an Appendix on the Greek economy), Athens, 27 June 2017.
 1. Introduction
Mr. Vice President of the European Parliament,
Mr. Chairman of the ECON Committee of the European Parliament,
Distinguished members of the European Parliament,
Advisors and other staff,
Kalimera,
Good morning to all of you,
I, an unelected official, am very delighted today to welcome a group of elected representatives of
the  European  Parliament,  the  guardian  of  democratic  accountability  and  a  major  pillar  of  the
European  Union  governance  system.  Gleaning  the  latest  news  for  prime  examples  of  the
European  Parliament’s  influence  and  great  contribution  to  current  European  affairs,  the  list  is
unlimited, I will name but a few such issues: from the successful abolition of roaming charges, to
the Paris agreement, to Brexit, and even the latest developments in Turkey, I try to follow your
actions as closely as I can, given my busy schedule.
At a global level, leaving behind us the second worst global financial crisis of the last century and
its  significant  fallout  around  the  world  (economic  stagnation,  high  levels  of  unemployment,  a
widespread risk of deflation, etc.) and, sooner or later, all the relevant policy responses including
fiscal  austerity  and  unconventional  monetary  policies,  the  world  is  growing  faster  and  a  new
global economic policy agenda is taking shape, determined, among others, by the UK’s decision
to leave the European Union (Brexit), a differentiated policy framework in the US, the rebalancing
of  the  Chinese  economy,  divergent  monetary  policies  and  a  declining  role  of  globalisation.
Growth in the eurozone was more than twice faster in the first quarter of 2017 than in the US.
Of course, we meet at a fortunate moment for my country. We now have a completion of the
second  review,  perhaps  not  the  best  one,  but  I  consider  the  completion  of  it  very  important,
because it can stabilise expectations and can trigger, as I am going to explain in a minute, a
positive narrative for my country and mark a real turnaround.
Procedurally, I am going to offer a few introductory remarks, then perhaps the head of mission or
the Vice President may like to say a word or two and then I am happy to answer your questions
and  have  a  productive  discussion.  Finally,  we  will  take  a  group  photo  to  send  it  to  Governor
Stournaras, who is away in Portugal for Bank commitments.
I have three messages to you, ladies and gentlemen, two on the upside, one on the downside.
 Message#1: Getting Greece into ECB’s QE is a feasible scenario and there is still time to get the
benefits of it, as I am going to explain in a minute.
Message#2: The return to the markets is also within reach, subject to a number of qualifications,
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
which  I  will  refer  to  later  on.  This  may  imply  the  end  of  an  era  for  Greece,  the  end  of  the
Memorandums, as we know them today, but some sort of conditionality will be with us for many
years ahead.
And Message#3: I am going to wear my professorial hat for the third message and underline a
long-run risk for the country which is coming from the brain drain and the depreciation of human
capital and the huge disinvestment over the last 8 years that took place in this country, namely I
worry about the long-run growth prospects for my country.
2. Greek economic and financial outlook
2.1 Some initial remarks
Greece today is again at a crossroads, but this time may be different. Under some preconditions,
which I will discuss later on, a case could be made for a strong turnaround of the economy. If the
Greek authorities remain vigilant with no complacency (no delays, no back-tracking) and we ALL
roll up our sleeves and stick to structural reforms and the privatisation agenda, and, on the other
hand, our lenders, deliver on their promises about debt relief sooner rather than later, the ‘pacta
sunt servanda’ principle that our President Pavlopoulos likes to remind all of us, should apply to
both lenders and borrowers. Then, I’m quite optimistic that the return to European normality after
the completion of the current programme in August next year is within reach.
2.2 Adjustment progress
The  Greek  economy’s  progress  during  the  last  eight  years  of  adjustment  has  been
unprecedented,  both  in  terms  of  fiscal  and  external  adjustment  of  more  than  15  percentage
points of GDP. The huge twin deficits turned into surpluses. Last year, the primary surplus was
4.2% of GDP, outperforming the target of 0.5%. The current account during the last two years
had effectively been in balance from a 15% deficit eight years ago.
At the same time, sweeping structural reforms have been implemented, covering the pensions
system, the health system, labour markets, product markets, the business environment, public
administration, etc. Recapitalisation and restructuring have taken place in the banking system
and significant institutional reforms have been initiated aiming at reducing the volume of NPLs.
Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  the  economy  has  been  undergoing  a  rebalancing  towards
tradable, export-oriented sector: the share of exports of goods and services in GDP increased
from 19% in 2009 to 28.2% in 2016, with most of the increase coming from exports of goods.
2.3 Recent economic and financial developments
See Appendix for an update on the macroeconomy and the banking sector.
3. BoG proposal - a mild debt relief exercise
 See Appendix for details.
4. Major pending issues
Two quotes from the latest Eurogroup statement (15.06.2017):
i) “The Eurogroup stands ready to implement, without prejudice to the final DSA, extensions of
the weighted average maturities (WAM) and a further deferral of EFSF interest and amortization
by between 0 and 15 years. As agreed in May 2016, these measures shall not lead to additional
costs for other beneficiary Member States”.
ii) “In view of the ending of the current programme in August 2018, the Eurogroup commits to
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
provide  support  for  Greece’s  return  to  the  market:  the  Eurogroup  agrees  that  future
disbursements should cater not only for the need to clear arrears, but also to further build up
cash buffers to support investor's confidence and facilitate market access”.
4.1 Getting Greece into QE
The person speaking before you was the first Greek economist to talk about the modalities and
the benefits of getting Greece into ECB’s QE programme, in October 2015 talking to international
investors in New York, and the programme – let me remind you that the QE programme started
in March 2015.
President Draghi, when asked about the eventuality of Greece’s participation in the ECB’s QE
programme [on many occasions in fact, right after many Governing Council press conferences
with Q&As, but also at his regular hearings before the European Parliament (his last hearing was
on the 29th of May before your Committee), if I am not mistaken, he was also asked on this by
Vice-President  Papadimoulis],  gave  two  preconditions: 1.  The  full  completion  of  the  second
review and stick with the implementation of the programme, and 2. A DSA report by the ECB
itself. Of course, the last precondition depends on the IMF’s role and report due on the 27th of
July  (next  month)  (rumours  say  that  this  will  be  delayed  after  the  German  elections  in
September). However, we have something in our hands: the last Eurogroup statement, which
sets out a roadmap for this, not very much in detail, but it is a step forward compared with the
decisions taken on 25 May 2016.
I expect – sooner or later – perhaps sometime after the German elections, there is still time, that
some sort of debt relief will be given to my country, along the lines of the Eurogroup statement of
15 June (“extension of maturities between 0 and 15 years”), here at the Bank of Greece, I just
gave  you  the  cut-off  figure,  8.5  years  according  to  our  own  DSA,  which  makes  our  debt
sustainable and will be an enormous help for ECB President Draghi.
In terms of timing, when could all this happen, given that the QE programme officially ends in
December this year? The crucial parameter here is ‘tapering’, which means that for the first six
months  or  perhaps  more  in  2018,  the  ECB  will  keep  buying  government  bonds,  but  at  a
diminishing rate (from €60, to €50, to €40 billion, etc.) and during this period, it could – provided
that the above preconditions are met – include GGBs.
Why is it so important, you may say, to get Greece into QE? For one simple reason: because it
is going to affect the cost of sovereign borrowing on capital markets. It is not so much the real
demand  issue,  this  is  going  to  be  around  €3-4  billion,  but  it  is the  signalling  effect  that  it  is
included in Draghi’s umbrella and the best evidence for what I am saying is the next figure (see
page 18) that shows the powerful impact of signalling.
[As you know,] the most powerful Roman after Julius Caesar and his three famous words “veni,
vidi, vici” is President Draghi with his famous three words “whatever it takes” (to save the euro)
announced in July 2012 in a speech in London, thereafter quantified with the announcement of
the OMT programme in September of the same year, which resulted in a huge drop in Italian and
Spanish yields as you can see from the following Figure (page 18). And you know how much
money the ECB has spent for this?? 0€!!
4.2 Return to international capital markets
There are two different issues here: one is a tentative return which may take place within this
year, for instance, the recycling of the three-year bond issue of September 2014 or the reopening
of the existing five-year bond issue which matures in 2019. For this, given the low interest rate
environment and that Greece’s future is now firmly secured within the eurozone and there is so
much liquidity out there and the recent upgrade in Greece’s ratings, this is something feasible,
ladies and gentlemen. The government doesn’t need QE for this, probably, or the medium-term
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
debt-relief measures. This is useful, as you understand. And the current financial outlook in our
sovereign bond market is favourable – it compares to the outlook of 2014, when Greece for the
first time returned tentatively to international capital markets (see Appendix).
However, for a permanent return to the markets which would signal the end of an era for Greece,
namely the end of adjustment programmes of this sort, and no need for a 4th Memorandum,
which has various aspects and requires a number of small, steady positive steps, which might
include a successful and timely completion of the third review, the full implementation of reforms
and  the  privatisation  agenda  but,  last  but  not  least,  as  described  in  the  last  paragraph  of  the
Eurogroup statement (15 June), which talks about the building up of cash buffers, or as it is also
known a precautionary credit line, to facilitate market access during the first year after the end of
the 3rd programme in August next year, to support investors’ confidence. This amount of money
is there, will be given to Greece as part of the third and final review of the current programme,
and of course, quite plausibly, it will come with some sort of conditionality; not perhaps a 4th
Memorandum per se, not perhaps with any involvement of the IMF, it will be a first for the ESM,
but we have every confidence as Europeans in Klaus Regling and his excellent team that they
will do a brilliant job.
Closing remarks
In closing, I would like to stress that Greece belongs to the core of Europe. Its future is within the
eurozone,  within  the  group  of  solidary  countries,  to  the  people  of  whom  we,  the  Greeks  are
grateful for their financial support. Despite all these years of uncertainty and austerity, this is the
overwhelming wish of the majority of the Greek people still today, within the core of Europe. This
is  our  legacy  as  a  nation  that  goes  back  to  our  history  and  our  tradition  and,  more  recently,
expressed by a visionary Greek politician, a great European statesman, who stood above political
parties, Konstantinos Karamanlis, who showed the Greek people the way forward, the European
way.
I would now like to invite the Committee Chairman and head of this mission or the Vice President
of the European Parliament to say a few words and then have a productive discussion with all of
you on the Greek programme and beyond.
Thank you very much.
Appendix: The risks and prospects for the Greek Economy - June 2017
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
