François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  The  euro  -  25th  anniversary  of  the
Maastricht Treaty
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Osservatorio
Permanente Giovani-Editori, Florence, 7 February 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 
 I wish to sincerely thank the Osservatorio Permanente Giovani-Editori and its Chairman, Andrea
Ceccherini, for inviting me. I am delighted to be with you this afternoon, with the young people of
Italy, in a country that I love. A country that is at the heart of Europe and that has often marked its
history,  as  illustrated  by  your  magnificent  city  of  Florence,  and  the  glory  of  its  Quattrocento,
cradle  of  the  whole  European  Renaissance.  But  a  country  that  currently  has  doubts  about
Europe. I stand before you, following in the footsteps of Ignazio Visco, Jean-Claude Trichet, Jens
Weidmann and Klaas Knot, as both a central banker and a committed European. And, on this
7th of February, I want to speak to you about the euro: today is the 25th anniversary of the signing
of the Maastricht Treaty. The euro has existed now for 18 years and for the past 15 years it has
replaced the Italian lira and the French franc in our wallets. I want to start by saying what the
single currency has brought, in concrete terms, to the Europeans and then reply to four doubts
that we often hear about the euro. Lastly, I want to talk about what remains to be done collectively
in the future. 
*   *   *
I. The euro has brought us all four main benefits 
Maastricht  and  the  euro  are  naturally  part  of  a  broader  history:  the  history  of  Europe,  and  its
singular achievement of making the transition from war to peace. This history is just as topical in
the highly uncertain world of 2017. Great Italians have counted among its key players, and not
least  Alcide  de  Gasperi  or  Altiero  Spinelli.  But  I  would  also  like  to  cite  an  almost  unknown
German, Josef Müller, founder of the Bavarian CSU, who was deported to a concentration camp
during World War II; In 1946, he was one of the first to say: “We need a European currency,
because countries that share a currency will never be at war”. In 1990–1992, the time had come:
because German reunification required more European Union; and because the disintegration of
the Soviet bloc brought the European continent back to the global arena. And so, from Rome in
1990 where we launched the intergovernmental conference – I remember the Palazzo Madama
–  to  Maastricht  in  1992,  we  created  the  euro.  And  others  Italians  have  continued  to  be  key
players, from Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa to Mario Draghi today.
Our foundations are therefore partly political; but the European edifice also has sound economic
foundations. And I now wish to discuss its four tangible and concrete benefits. These are the
three  advantages  of  a  sound  currency:  price  stability;  financing  stability;  and  exchange  rate
stability. And, this results in the euro being an internationally recognised currency. 
Price stability, a prerequisite for purchasing power
First, the euro makes it possible to genuinely maintain price stability, i.e. to control inflation. This
is crucial to preserving household purchasing power and, in the face of uncertainties, to building
confidence in the value of the currency.
Before  the  euro,  inflation  sometimes  reached  very  high  levels  in  Europe.  In  the  14  years
preceding the euro (1985–1998), inflation gradually declined but remained above 3% on average,
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
with major disparities across countries: 5.1% in Italy and 2.6% in France for example. In the 14
years since the creation of the euro, inflation has come down significantly – in the period between
1999 and 2012 inflation averaged 2% – but the disparities across countries also narrowed: over
the same period, inflation in Italy was only 2.2%. We forget all too often the erosion of value – and
thus of confidence – that inflation generates. Over the last 14 years of the lira, cumulative inflation
had reached 98%; over the same length of time, with the euro, it is almost three times lower. As
of 2013, inflation has even been too low in the euro area, and this is why the ECB has been
successfully conducting an active monetary policy since 2014.
In practice, the ECB’s target is an inflation rate below, but close to, 2% over the medium term.
This definition has not changed since it was adopted in 2003 and is broadly shared today by all
the  main  central  banks  of  developed  countries,  including  the  United  States  and  the  United
Kingdom. In the current environment, it is important to recall that monetary policy has an internal
aim (keeping inflation under  control),  not  an  external  aim  (devaluing  the  exchange  rate,  which
could trigger negative chain reactions). Why 2% and not 0%? In order to keep a safety margin, as
inflation that is too low is as bad as inflation that is too high: it creates the risk of deflation, i.e. a
general and lasting downward spiral of prices, which generates a fall in economic activity and a
rise in unemployment. Furthermore, slightly positive inflation oils the wheels of the economy, for
example when there are labour market rigidities or differences between regions of the euro area.
The stability of financing via the decline in interest rates
Controlled inflation results in a fall in market risk premia: this leads to lower interest rates in the
euro area, and especially narrower spreads between countries. Let us take the example of our
respective countries. . Before Maastricht, between 1986 and 1992, the spread between Italy and
Germany was 5.1% on average, while it was just 1.4% in 2016. Admittedly there were pressures
in 2011–2012, stemming directly from temporary doubts over the sustainability of the euro area.
For France, the spread has also narrowed, from 1.9% between 1986 and 1992 to 0.3% in 2016.
The French spread may also temporarily react to political uncertainties, but remaining in the euro
over the long term continues to be our best protection. All economic players are benefiting from
lower interest rates: households – when they purchase a property – and companies that invest,
as well as governments and hence taxpayers. Some critics would like to leave the euro to let
deficits  rise  without  being  constrained  by  European  rules.  But  that  is  wishful  thinking:  the
financing  of  deficits  would  be  much  more  costly  for  euro  area  countries  leaving  the  single
currency, if we were to return to the spreads before the euro. 
Exchange rate stability and the strength of the single market
The  euro  also  helps  consolidate  the  single  market,  which  the  European  Member  States  have
constructed step by step since the Treaty of Rome in 1957, 60 years ago. In order to achieve
greater  trade  integration,  it  was  necessary  to  reduce  currency  fluctuations:  Europe  first
attempted this, as of 1979, with the European Monetary System, built on a common currency,
the ECU. But this  mechanism  was  insufficient  to  ward  off  speculative  attacks:  remember  the
severe crisis of September 1992 which forced the Italian lira out, making it lose 21% of its value,
and which destabilised the European economy. The single currency put an end to these serious
disruptions. It also considerably simplifies day-to-day life: there are no longer any conversion fees
for individuals, or any more uncertainties relating to exchange rate volatility for companies. For
many  firms,  including  Italian  imprenditori,  their  market  naturally  expanded  from  their  domestic
market to the whole of the euro area. According to empirical studies, the euro has thus led to a 5
to 15% increase in trade between Member States. 
An internationally recognised currency
The economic size of the euro area and the stability of its currency allow the euro to play an
international role.  Before the euro, in 1995, only the Deutsche Mark was an international reserve
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
currency, with a share of 15% of global reserves. Today, our shared currency accounts for 20%
of  international  reserves,  in  second  place  behind  the  dollar.  An  internationally  recognised
currency  generates  economic  gains:  the  financial  markets  are  more  attractive  for  foreign
investors, more liquid, and therefore more efficient. But it also carries a political weight: I know
that  when  Mario  Draghi  speaks  at  the  G7  or  at  the  G20,  the  whole  world  listens  to  Europe
attentively. In the global financial arena, which has become turbulent, this union is our greatest
chance;  none  of  our  countries  would  have  such  clout  in  insolation.  Our  sovereignty  relies
necessarily on European sovereignty.
 The  euro  makes  us  more  robust,  and  gives  us  more  confidence  in  our  currency:  this  is  a
considerable asset amidst so much uncertainty. The euro has naturally also provided us with a
strong symbol of unity among European nations. Moreover, from 12 at the start, the number of
participating countries has risen to 19 today: 7 countries decided democratically to join the euro,
and none has wanted to leave it. These are the concrete economic benefits that make the 340
million  citizens  of  the  euro  area  attached  to  their  currency,  to  our  currency.  This  attachment,
which  has  been  measured  since  the  outset,  has  remained  strong  throughout  the  crisis.  70%
support  the  euro  today,  i.e.  the  highest  level  since  2008;  a  large  majority  of  French  citizens
support the euro (68%). Support remains strong in Italy, albeit at a lower level (53%). The euro is
not a technocratic utopia: it is a political and democratic decision, supported 25 years on – with
hindsight – by a clear majority of citizens. 
II. However, there are four doubts about the euro.  
I will address them seriously, even though I think that these ideas are erroneous. 
a) The euro is enemy of growth and employment
Some say that the euro acts as a brake on growth, employment, and competitiveness. However,
at 1.7% in 2016, growth in the euro area was higher than US growth (1.6%) and above all there
are major economic successes among euro area countries. Out of the 35 OECD countries, that
with the second highest real GDP growth was Ireland at 4.3% in 2016, and Spain is also growing
strongly,  at  3.2%;  the  country  with  the  lowest  government  debt  at  end-2016,  was  Estonia,  at
9.5% of GDP; several countries in the area, including Austria and Germany, boast almost full
employment, at between 4% and 6% in 2016; Estonia and Finland are among the top 3 countries
in terms of science scores in the PISA test. So the euro is not to blame, it is the different national
policies.
Admittedly, with the euro we have lost the tool of currency devaluation. Devaluation can have
positive effects in the short term as it lowers the price of exports, but, in the medium term, it can
have significant negative effects: it can exert inflationary pressure via the rise in import prices; it
can  make  the  country  poorer,  via  the  reduction  in  the  value  of  its  assets,  and  conversely  the
increase  in  its  external  debts;  and  lastly,  it  creates  the  risk  of  a  trade  war,  with  chain
devaluations, as was the case in the 1930s. On average, we have a suitable exchange rate with
the euro. But no lasting success in economic history has been built on a weak currency; all have
been  built  on  a  good  structural  environment,  corporate  innovation,  and  a  high  level  of
specialisation among firms. Italian creativity, your commercial ingenuity, dating back to Venice,
Genoa and Florence, count much more than the facility of a weak lira.
b) The euro is an “all-risks insurance” for all Member States
This view appears to be the opposite of the preceding one; in fact it stems from an equally false
perception: attributing excessive evils or benefits to the euro. A currency is an essential nominal
value; but this alone does not determine the real performance of the economy. In the first part of
the  2000s,  once  it  had  acquired  the  collective  gain  of  the  euro,  France  and  Italy,  like  many
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Southern European countries, wrongly believed that it was possible to let up on competitiveness
efforts, which are nonetheless an ongoing imperative – “there is no free lunch”. Today we are
suffering the consequences:  we have lower economic growth and employment than some of
our  neighbours,  such  as  Germany  and  Spain,  which  succeeded  in  carrying  out  the  reforms
necessary for enterprise (corporate sector), employment, education and expenditure reduction
(public sector). 
Contrary  to  what  some  say,  our  lag  in  growth  is  not  due  to  excessive  fiscal  discipline.  The
government debt to GDP ratio has more than doubled in Italy since 1980, and it has risen fivefold
in France. When my generation was 18 years old, debt stood at 20% of GDP in France. For your
generation today, it verges on 100% of GDP in France and in Italy stands at over 130%. We have
failed when it comes to intergenerational solidarity and sustainable development. And as far as I
am aware, neither France nor Italy has become a champion of growth in Europe. France and
Italy are lagging behind today because of a lack of national reforms. The euro cannot and will
never be able to replace them. And this is good news since it means that there remains much
room for our domestic policies, our collective debates, and our creative efforts.
c) European monetary policy fosters inequality 
For some, the ECB’s current low rates are generating social inequalities: savers who have put
their money in fixed-rate products are being penalised by lower returns, while those who own
shares or property are benefiting from the rise in asset prices. The reality is very different. First,
because  savers  and  asset  holders  are  generally  one  and  the  same.  Second,  and  most
importantly,  because  this  very  piecemeal  analysis  ignores  the  macroeconomic  impact  of
monetary  policy,  which  benefits  us  all.  Our  measures  create  very  favourable  financing
conditions, which are stimulating demand via consumption and investment, and speeding up the
decline in unemployment. All this helps to reduce inequality, as unemployment tends to hit the
poor and less-qualified the hardest. According to estimates, as a result of our actions, euro area
economic growth was boosted by 1.5 percentage points between 2015 and 2018. 
With  regard  to  inequality,  now  is  precisely  the  time  for  us  Europeans  to  talk  about  our
experiences.  We  all  share  the  same  social  model  –  to  which  we  are  strongly  attached  –
combining a high volume of public services with markedly less inequality than in other countries –
for example in the United States. The right response to inequality, therefore, is not a change of
monetary policy. And it is not more protectionism, even though the rules of global trade need to
ensure the benefits are spread more widely. The correct response to inequality is to develop the
right social model.
d) The euro is controlled by technocrats in Frankfurt
Yes, Frankfurt is in Germany… just as Brussels is in Belgium. But yes, despite this, the ECB
belongs to us all: not just to the Germans – as the Italians tend to think – and not just to the
Italians – as the Germans tend to think. With the Eurosystem, that is the ECB and the 19 national
central banks, we have had a genuine federal system, one that works, since 1999. We take our
decisions collegially, within the Governing Council, and then apply them in each of our member
countries.  ECB  staff  –  at  the  heart  of  the  system  –  only  account  for  5%  of  total  Eurosystem
headcount. France and Italy thus have much more say in decisions today: before the advent of
the euro, de facto our monetary policies closely followed that of Germany. 
In  addition,  to  guarantee  that  we  act  in  the  general  interest  of  the  euro  area,  and  not  that  of
individual countries, the central banks of the Eurosystem are all completely independent and free
from  political  influence.  This  independence  is  sometimes  questioned,  but  it  is  a  strength:  we
have to commit over the long term to serving the mandate entrusted to us – price and currency
stability. This independence is  therefore  governed  by  a  strict  framework:  a  clear  objective;  an
obligation to report results regularly to our citizens and to their elected representatives; and a
democratic process for the appointment of all senior figures.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
III. What remains to be done, tomorrow, collectively
The euro has brought great benefits, in the form of soundness, confidence, unity and sovereignty
– as I have endeavoured to remind you. However, it also raises questions, which I have tried to
answer,  while  at  the  same  time  underlining  that  the  euro  cannot  be  held  responsible  for
everything that happens. But we have not yet come to the end of the road. We cannot ignore the
rising tide of Euroscepticism in Europe, and the extreme case of Brexit. I particularly like this
saying, attributed to Dante, one of the great citizens of Florence: “Some wait for time to change,
others seize the moment and act.” But what direction should we take? Less Europe? That would
be  a  mistake  if  we  want  to  take  collective  control  of  our  destiny  in  this  new  world  –  a  world
marked by direct criticism and unilateral action on the part of the new President of the United
States. What we need is not necessarily more Europe, but rather a “better” Europe: a Europe
that is less caught up in the detail, more focused on a few key priorities, and more efficient. A
Europe that talks less and acts more: “Little, well, until the end.”
Of course, there are some non-economic areas: youth training – like Enrico Letta, I believe in the
benefits of an Erasmus-pro programme for apprenticeships – climate change, defence and the
protection  of  our  borders,  for  example.  On  the  economic  level,  we  should  be  proud  of  our
successes  –  our  single  currency,  our  single  market  and  our  shared  social  model.  But  to
complete the success of our monetary union, it is vital that we make progress on our economic
union. There are two concrete levers for achieving this .
A “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation”
The first immediate step is a “Financing Union for Investment and Innovation” (FUII). Why? In
those economies that are close to the so-called technological frontier, as is the case with France
and Italy, innovation is the key to economic growth, and not just for start-ups. The problem is that,
today in Europe, there are companies that want to invest and innovate, but that cannot find the
right financing, notably equity capital. And yet it is not for lack of resources: the euro area has a
savings surplus of more than EUR 350 billion, equivalent to more than 3% of GDP. That is huge.
The FUII must make it possible to channel that abundance of savings more effectively towards
investment. 
To achieve this, we naturally need to build on the initiatives already in place at European level: the
Capital Markets Union, the Juncker Investment Plan and the Banking Union. But we also need to
foster synergies between them and go even further. 
More reform at national level and a better collective economic strategy
When each State acts without worrying about its neighbours, we end up in a situation that is sub-
optimal for everyone. There is no doubt that growth and employment would be stronger in the
euro area if its  members  committed  to  implementing  more  structural  reforms  where  they  are
needed, such as in France and in Italy, and to providing more fiscal or wage support where there
is room to manoeuvre, such as in Germany. But for that to happen, we need to rebuild the trust
between member countries. First by accelerating reforms at home – in France and in Italy – and
let me be clear, it is in our national interest. And then, in order for this collective strategy to exist,
the  euro  area  needs  an  institution  that  inspires  confidence,  one  that  embodies  and  brings  to
fruition  the  shared  commitment  of  our  Member  States.  This  institution  could  consist  of  a
democratically  legitimate  euro  area  “Finance  Minister”.  It  could  also  –  subject  to  certain
conditions – have a European stabilisation budget to enable it to cushion any economic shocks in
Member  States;  one  possible  solution,  which  remains  to  be  discussed,  could  be  a  shared
unemployment insurance scheme, as suggested by Finance Minister Pier Carlo Padoan.
 Allow me to conclude with the words of Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, that great Tuscan and President of
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
the Italian Republic, who unfortunately passed away just recently. “What has been achieved [in
Europe], in both the economic and political spheres, seems too important each time to be put at
risk:  it  is  so  important  to  give  governments  and  citizens  the  courage  to  make  further  steps
forwards […]. In this sense, the creation of the euro is not only an end point but also a starting
point.”  The  euro  has  never  been  easy  but  it  is  not  a  self-imposed  straitjacket  –  rather  it  is  a
political and historical ambition. In these troubled times for Europe, we need both to buttress this
vital asset and to build on it for the future. We have to do it for your generation, because you are
the hope for Italy and for Europe. But more than that, we need to do it with your generation. Thank
you for your attention. 
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
