Peter Praet: Is secular stagnation the new economic reality?
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, for
the policy panel entitled "How to deal with potential secular stagnation?" at the Secular Stagnation
and Growth Measurement Conference, Bank of France, Paris, 16 January 2017.
 1
The term “secular stagnation” was coined by Alvin Hansen before World War II.
Among the driving factors of the slowdown he predicted were limited population growth and lack
of innovation. A decade or so later, we had the baby boom and one of the strongest economic
expansion  the  world  has  ever  experienced  –  in  French,  “Les  Trente  Glorieuses”  started.  This
experience  should  certainly  invite  all  of  us  to be  prudent  with  the  concept  of  “secular
stagnation”. Let’s not forget that a similar panel ten years ago would have been discussing “the
Great Moderation”.
Over the past 10 years, euro area growth has been particularly weak, with the level of GDP
only  having  surpassed  its  pre-crisis  peak  level  in  the  third  quarter  of  2015.  Short-term
growth  prospects  were  periodically  revised  downwards,  and  recent  estimates  of  euro  area
potential growth are approximately 1%, compared to 1.5%-2% in the pre-crisis period.
These developments have raised the question of whether this low growth environment is in
fact  the  new  economic  reality.  Central  to  this  debate  is  whether  the  slow  growth  can  be
attributed  to  cyclical  –  and  hence  ultimately  transitory  –  factors  related  to  the  financial  crisis,
longer-term structural factors, or a combination of both, whereby cyclical factors have over time
turned into permanent factors, for example via hysteresis effects.
Longer-term  structural  factors  have  certainly  been  at  play  in  the  euro  area.  The  decline  in
potential output growth pre-dates the financial crises, in fact going back to the mid-1990s, and
reflects a long-term slowdown in the growth of total factor productivity. This decline went largely
unnoticed. To some extent this oversight can be explained by the fact that in the decade leading
up  to  the  crisis  the  overall  macroeconomic  environment  had  been  stable.  Remember  our
debates during the Great Moderation and all the good reasons that were put forward to explain
macroeconomic stability!
Today we can look back at this period and see the expectation gaps that we could not clearly
identify in real-time. In various parts of the euro area, firms’, households’ and governments’ future
income  expectations  had  become  disconnected  from  underlying  growth,  leading  to  an
accumulation of excess debt. Those over-optimistic expectations were in turn reinforced by this
renewed, yet complacent sense of economic prosperity.
So  when  the  cycle  did  finally  turn  in  2008,  several  euro  area  countries  were  confronted  with
pronounced “balance sheet recessions”: downturns created by the need for both private and
public sectors to deleverage. This has produced a set of circumstances – a protracted slump –
that are observationally equivalent to those that one would associate with secular stagnation. But
it is important that we distinguish this from the longer-term slowdown in potential output, since it
remains ultimately a cyclical phenomenon and hence amenable to different policy tools.
So  how  should  policymakers  respond  to  this  mix  of  challenges?  To  be  effective,  the  policy
response should be comprehensive, consistent, well-sequenced and incentive-compatible.
Monetary,  fiscal,  structural  and  macro-prudential  policies  all  have  a  role  to  play.  With  such  a
policy mix, I see no reason why we cannot lift both actual growth and trend growth back to more
satisfactory levels.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
Given  the  distance-to-frontier  of  many  euro  area  economies,  there  is  significant  scope  for  a
productivity  catch-up  with  the  right  supply-side  policies. And  insofar  as  demand-side  policies
support the cyclical recovery, and thereby address the headwinds created by protracted balance
sheet adjustments, they can prevent further damage being done to the productive side of the
economy through hysteresis effects. In this sense, secular stagnation is not predestined, but is a
possible outcome of bad macroeconomic policies.
In fulfilling its role in this comprehensive response, monetary policy is confronted with three key
challenges. These challenges are related to measurement uncertainty, policy instruments and its
relationship with other policy areas.
First, measurement uncertainty.  In  theory,  monetary  policy  should  track  the  equilibrium  real
interest rate. The equilibrium real interest rate can be viewed as the interest rate consistent with
saving and investment being in balance and output being at potential, with neither upward nor
downward  pressure  on  inflation.  In  practice,  however,  the  equilibrium  real  interest  rate  is  an
elusive  concept,  or  more  precisely  an  unobservable  variable  –  like  the  output  gap  –  whose
estimates are subject to significant uncertainty.
ECB staff estimates of the equilibrium real interest rate point to a significant decline over the past
10  years,  even  into  negative  territory. At  face  value,  such  estimates  are  consistent  with  the
secular stagnation hypothesis. But as policymakers, can we really base our actions on such an
intangible variable? My answer is no. This is why the ECB has always followed a comprehensive
monetary  policy  strategy,  based  on  two  pillars,  and  has  in  practice  always  looked  at  a  broad
range of indicators to assess its monetary policy stance.
Second, policy instruments. Proponents of the secular stagnation hypothesis typically argue
that a low equilibrium real interest rate makes monetary policy ineffective, since interest rates
cannot  fall  low  enough  to  absorb  the  excess  of  saving  over  investment. And  though  several
central banks have shown the zero lower bound is not, in fact, a constraint to the interest rate
instrument, there is an effective lower bound on interest rates, which is probably not too far from
zero.
So does that mean central banks have reached the limit of their actions? Again my answer is no.
Instead we have used non-standard measures to flatten the term structure of interest rates and
lower financing costs in the economy directly. And the ongoing economic recovery is testament
to their effectiveness. What this shows is that theoretical constraints can be lifted in practice,
because the economy is much more complex than models can capture.
Third, the relationship of monetary policy with other policy areas. This is the thorniest issue.
There is always a risk for a central bank of becoming the only game in town, even though large
parts of the growth challenge are clearly beyond its remit. The drivers of long-term growth are
innovation, technology diffusion, which is to say, productivity growth. To manage this risk, central
banks should always staunchly stick to their mandate. This is the only way for them to do their
part  effectively  while  ensuring  that  the  overall  policy  response  remains  comprehensive,
consistent, well-sequenced and incentives-compatible.
1
This is the full text of remarks delivered in an abridged form in Paris on 16 January 2017.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
