CLOSING ADDRESS DELIVERED 
BY 
 MR. MILLISON NARH 
FIRST DEPUTY GOVERNOR, BANK OF GHANA 
AT 2017 CONTINENTAL SEMINAR OF THE ASSOCIATION OF AFRICAN CENTRAL 
BANKS (AACB) 
AT 
MOVENICK AMBASSADOR HOTEL 
ON 
MAY 05, 2017 
The Executive Secretary, AACB, 
Colleague Central Bankers, 
Distinguished Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Introduction 
1. I  am  delighted  to  be  part  of  the  2017  continental  seminar.    I  am  reliably  informed
that the deliberations were very fruitful. 
2. Effective  communication  has  now  emerged  as  one  of  the  most  crucial  and  latest
addition  to  the  menu of  monetary  and  financial  stability  policy  tools  at  the  disposal  of 
central banks in our modern era. Within the framework of inflation targeting and market 
based, prudential regulation of financial institutions, the need to have an effective, well-
coordinated  and  targeted  communication  strategy  cannot  be  ignored  by  any  central 
bank  that  wants  to  succeed  in  delivering  the  twin  mandate  of  price  and  financial 
stability.    
3. As  was  mentioned,  the  importance  of  having  a  carefully  planned  communication
strategy is well captured in the statement by a Deputy Governor of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  New  Zealand,  that  ‘central  bank’s  pronouncements  have  economic  and  social 
impact.’ 
4. To this end my colleague, the Second Deputy Governor of Bank of Ghana, challenged
you to find answers to three important questions at this seminar: 
a. How should central banks manage communication in times of financial crisis?
b. How does effective communication enhance central bank credibility and effectiveness 
of monetary policy and for maintaining stability in the financial sector? and 
c.  What  lessons  should  we  learn  from  cross-country  experiences  in  central  bank 
communications strategies?  
 5.  I  hope  the  various  expert  presentations  and  the  plenary  sessions  have  helped  you 
enhance  your  knowledge  and  understanding  of  these  and  other  pertinent  issues 
bordering on communication in the central bank.  
6.  Some  of  the  key  points  gathered  at  this  seminar  include  but  not  limited  to  the 
following: 
a.  That  effective  central  bank  communication  requires  a  consciously  designed  strategy 
in line core mandates, the adoption of the most suited medium, and with specific target 
audience in mind; 
b.  There  is  also  the  need  to  have  specific  strategies  for  monetary  policy  and  financial 
stability.  But  the  effectiveness  of  adopted  strategies  should  be  assessed  regularly 
through surveys and feedback in order to adjust to the changing circumstances; 
c.  Finally,  the  issue  of  consistency  in  message,  proper  coordination  and  adequate 
funding of communication activities must not be underestimated.   
 7.  Colleague  Governors  and  I  would  surely  be  expecting  to  receive  the  communique 
from this seminar to help us consider the needed interventions aimed at improving the 
use of communication as a tool, not only for managing crisis but also to prevent them. 
 8.  On  behalf  of  the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Ghana,  I  wish  to  thank  the  AACB  for 
choosing  Ghana  to  host  this  seminar.  I  believe  through  this  seminar,  our  international 
delegates  have  had  the  opportunity  to  taste  Ghanaian  culture  and  hospitality.  Yet,  I 
would  still  encourage  you  to  stay  longer,  if  possible,  or  return  to  Ghana  on  your  next 
vacation  to  explore  more  of  the  marvellous  sights  and  sounds  unique  to  our  country, 
Ghana.  
 9. Finally, may you carry our warm felicitation to your Governors and colleagues in your 
central banks. I also expect you to share the experiences, the gains and the take-away 
points from this seminar with my fellow Governors so that we can expand the coverage 
of the intended impact beyond this year’s seminar.   
 10. I wish you all safe flight back home. 
         Thank you for your attention 
