Benoît Cœuré: European CCPs after Brexit
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Global Financial Markets Association, Frankfurt am Main, 20 June 2017.
 Thank you for inviting me here today. In my short remarks I would like to say a few words about a
topic  that  has  received  much  attention  lately:  central  clearing,  and  its  importance  for  central
banks in the context of Brexit. The extensive coverage of central counterparty (CCP) clearing in
the press and other media these days shows how critical these infrastructures have become
since the financial crisis.
It is easy to see why CCPs have become so important for financial stability. They helped fix a
major defect in our financial system, namely the reliance on, and associated counterparty risk of,
opaque  bilateral  over-the-counter  trading  of  derivatives.  In  our  highly  interconnected  markets,
CCPs have thus become effective vehicles for reducing systemic risk in our financial system.
And in doing so, they play a key part in ensuring that central banks are in a position to pursue
their primary objective: price stability.
Our challenge today is to ensure that CCPs do not themselves become a risk to financial stability
and, hence, generate potential impediments to the transmission of monetary policy. CCPs have
grown in scale and scope to the extent that a disruption affecting a major CCP would have a
significant impact on banks, markets and the instruments we rely on to perform our core central
1
banking activities.
For example, many of our key monetary policy counterparties in the euro area are participants in
CCPs around the world, and are thus directly exposed to potential strains in centrally cleared
markets.  Asset  classes  such  as  repos,  which  play  a  direct  role  in  our  monetary  policy
operations,  are  increasingly  being  cleared  through  CCPs. Any  closure  of  certain  repo  market
segments due to a CCP failure would therefore inevitably limit our ability to align money market
conditions with our monetary policy intentions.
Moreover, financial stress resulting from a struggling CCP could have a knock-on effect on the
smooth operation of payment systems, with obvious and probably serious consequences for the
real economy. In a severe crisis, we might even be expected to extend emergency lending to a
failing  CCP  or  to  its  participants  although  this  would  only  be  done  at  our  own  discretion:  an
automatic right to central bank liquidity could create serious moral hazard concerns.   In short,
the safety and soundness of CCPs matters for central banks, and it matters a lot. And this is
why, both at global and European level, the contribution of central banks to CCP supervision has
been  fully  recognised.  The  current  global  standards  for  CCP  risk  management  were  issued
jointly by central banks and capital markets commissions under the auspices of the Committee
on  Payments  and  Market  Infrastructures  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities
Commissions,  CPMI-IOSCO.     Furthermore,  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation
(EMIR)  requires  central  banks  –  in  their  capacity  as  central  banks  of  issue  (CBI)  of  an  EU
currency  –  to  be  represented  in  the  CCP  supervisory  colleges  and  to  endorse  supervisory
decisions taken by national authorities. Central banks are key knowledge centres for furthering
the understanding of central clearing and its implications for financial stability.
2
3
I  believe  I  speak  for  many  central  bankers  in  saying  that,  as  things  stand  today,  these  global
standards and the EU regulatory framework provide us with appropriate tools, on the whole, for
monitoring  and  addressing  potential  risks  stemming  from  central  clearing.  We  should  not  be
reticent about recognising the overall progress made since the financial crisis in increasing the
safety and resilience of financial market infrastructures in general, and CCPs in particular.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Nonetheless,  there  is  no  room  for  complacency.  CPMI-IOSCO  and  other  international  bodies
have  been  working  tirelessly  to  address  the  gaps  in  the  global  requirements  for  CCP  risk
management. Certain jurisdictions are more advanced than others in establishing cooperative
oversight arrangements and in inviting relevant authorities from other jurisdictions to participate.
Authorities  around  the  world  have  also  recently  started  thinking  seriously  about  supervisory
stress  testing  for  CCPs.     But  there  is  still  much  to  understand  about  the  interdependencies
between central counterparties and the broader financial system: international standard setting
bodies  will  shortly  be  publishing  the  results  of  the  global  study  group  on Central  Clearing
Interdependencies, which should shed some more light on this topic. This is also an issue we
need  to  keep  in  mind  when  discussing  the  recovery  and  resolution  of  CCPs  –  a  point  being
considered by international fora as we speak  , as well as in the context of the forthcoming EU
regulation, for which we will shortly be publishing an ECB opinion.
4
5
More  fundamentally,  of  course,  the  UK’s  decision  to  leave  the  EU  is  prompting  a  significant
rethink of the European approach to the supervision of systemically important global CCPs. The
major clearing houses in the UK provide key services to continental banks active in securities
and derivatives markets. According to our estimates, UK CCPs clear approximately 90% of the
euro-denominated interest rate swaps of euro area banks, and 40% of their euro-denominated
credit default swaps.   These figures should give you a sense of how relevant these CCPs are
for the stability of the euro.
6
Over  the  years,  we  have  concluded  cooperative  arrangements  with  the  UK  authorities  that
ensure  we  are  appropriately  involved  in  monitoring  and  assessing  the  risk  management
practices  of  these  entities.  These  arrangements,  which  are  based  on  both  EU  law  under  the
scrutiny of the EU Court of Justice and on a dedicated memorandum of understanding between
the ECB and the Bank of England, give us the confidence that in a serious crisis we would have
timely access to all the information needed to take action.
What concerns us today in the context of Brexit is that the current EU regime regarding third-
country CCPs was never designed to cope with major systemic CCPs operating from outside
the  EU.  Indeed,  this  regime  relies  to  a  large  extent  on  local  supervision,  and  provides  EU
authorities  with  very  limited  tools  for  obtaining  information  and  taking  action  in  the  event  of  a
crisis. Reviewing this regime has therefore become urgent in the current environment. We need
to  ensure  we  can  preserve  a  framework  that  ensures  the  safety  and  stability  of  the  financial
system when the UK is no longer a member of the EU.
In this regard, we think the recent European Commission proposals to amend EMIR are a step in
the right direction. If adopted, they would provide the supervisors and the relevant central banks
of issue with the guarantees they need in order to monitor and address risks to the EU’s financial
system. I therefore welcome the fact that the Commission has referred to the role that we should
play  as  central  bank  of  issue:  we  certainly  need  to  play  a  strong  role  here,  using  all  the
instruments required to exercise our CBI competence.
It is also worth noting that most of the proposals presented by the Commission merely replicate
the approaches already followed by many other major jurisdictions. In that sense, they should
seem familiar to authorities and lawmakers on other continents.
We  are  aware  that  Brexit  is  a  cause  for  concern  in  the  future  regulatory  treatment  of  central
clearing.  In  this  regard,  we  know  that  there  has  been  significant  focus  on  one  aspect  of  the
recent Commission proposal, namely the ability of the Commission to deny recognition to a CCP
that poses excessive risks to the financial stability of the EU, and to require it to establish itself in
the EU if it wishes to provide clearing services in the Union. This would be just one of the tools
available to EU authorities under the revised EMIR proposal. I believe that such an approach will
be justified in case EU authorities are unable to adequately control risks and fulfil their mandates
through other means. Ultimately, however, it will be up to the Commission and the EU legislators
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
to  decide  on  the  specific  conditions  for  triggering  such  a  requirement,  in  the  context  of  the
forthcoming legislative discussions. The ECB and other central banks of the EU are, of course,
carefully examining the Commission’s proposal and the ECB will issue an opinion on it in the
coming months.
Looking beyond the current political discussions, we have clear objectives, and they are shared
by the entire regulatory community: namely, making sure we continue to improve the safety and
resilience  of  the  global  clearing  landscape,  avoiding  market  fragmentation,  and  fostering
cooperation between authorities.
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
See,  e.g.,  Cœuré,  B.  (2017), Central  clearing:  reaping  the  benefits,  controlling  the  risks,  Financial  Stability
Review, Banque de France, April 2017.
 See, e.g., the ESCB report on the access of CCPs to central bank liquidity facilities.
 See CPMI and IOSCO (2012), Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (PFMI), April 2012; and CPMI and
IOSCO (2014), Recovery of financial market infrastructures, October 2014.
 See also the 2016 ESMA stress test.
 A final CPMI-IOSCO guidance on CCP resilience and recovery will be published in July 2017. For earlier work,
see CPMI and IOSCO (2016), Resilience and recovery of central counterparties (CCPs): Further guidance on the
PFMI – consultative report, August 2016.
 ECB calculations based on 2016Q4 data from trade repositories.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
