Jens  Weidmann:  Digital  finance  -  Reaping  the  benefits  without
neglecting the risks
Welcoming  remarks  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and
Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  G20
conference "Digitising finance, financial inclusion and financial literacy", Wiesbaden, 25 January
2017.
 1. Introduction
Your Majesty
Your excellencies
Honourable members of the G20 delegations
Ladies and gentlemen
Welcome to Wiesbaden and specifically to the G20 conference on “Digitising finance, financial
inclusion and financial literacy"!
We are deeply honoured and privileged to have with us today Queen Máxima of the Netherlands.
Thank you, Your Majesty, for joining us at this conference.
It is a coincidence, but a very apt one, that this conference is being held at Schloss Biebrich. This
baroque castle served as the ducal residence for the independent Duchy of Nassau between
1816 and 1866. The House of Nassau, in turn, is the parent house of the Dutch Royal Family, as
you can tell from the dynasty’s name, which is Huis van Oranje-Nassau.
That being said, Queen Máxima most certainly did not come here today to visit a castle that once
belonged to her husband’s ancestors.
Rather, she is here to deliver a speech in her capacity as the United Nations Secretary-General’s
Special Advocate for Inclusive Finance for Development.
 
2. The German G20 presidency
Financial  inclusion  is  without  doubt  an  important  topic  because  it  can  influence  the  extent  to
which financial services and innovations can improve our lives. And that’s an aim we should all
be interested in.
In  an  effort  to  improve  the  long-term  global  economic  conditions  for  all,  the  agenda  of  the
German  G20  presidency  is  geared  towards  three  objectives:  building  resilience,  improving
sustainability, and assuming responsibility. To this end, Germany has set three main priorities for
discussions between finance ministers and central bank governors and among the G20 working
groups.
1.  Strengthening the resilience of national economies
2.  Shaping digitalisation
3.  Promoting investment, particularly in Africa
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
We would like to invite you to discuss all these topics in an open and constructive atmosphere of
mutual  trust  and  cooperation.  In  our  view  the  success  of  the  G20  process  depends  on  the
conviction that international cooperation and an open markets approach provide benefits for all
countries and peoples involved.
It is key for our policy to provide new chances for everybody in our societies by driving forward
inclusive global growth. Let’s keep this in mind.
Coming  back  to  this  year’s  programme,  I  would  like  to  mention  three  additional  conferences
which will provide a forum for analysing background topics and fostering an exchange of views
between academics, practitioners and official bodies. Our conference today is one of them.
Unlike  the  main  meetings,  conferences  like  today’s  are  an  opportunity  to  take  a  broader
perspective – not only in terms of topics but also with regard to countries’ experiences. They
allow us to invite representatives from non-G20 countries and to learn from them.
Over the conference dinner this evening, for example, we will be hearing a speech from Deputy
Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki of Poland, which is a very advanced economy in the field of
electronic banking. And in a workshop tomorrow, Patrick Njoroge, governor of the Central Bank of
Kenya, will share with us his country’s broad experience in matters of digital financial inclusion.
 
3. Opportunities and risks of digital finance
Ladies and gentlemen
More  than  20  years  have  passed  since  Bill  Gates  famously  said  that  “Banking  is  necessary,
banks are not".
While banks still exist – and I am sure they will continue to do so -, recent developments have
shown that non-banks are just as capable of providing bank services. And that is not least due to
the huge strides made in the field of information and communications technology (ICT), which
has opened up a whole new world of possibilities for designing and distributing financial services.
And this has even transformed traditional banking business. Online banking, for example, has
become the main point of access for many bank customers.
Digital finance, and the fintech industry in particular, have experienced very rapid growth in recent
years on the back of both supply-side and demand-side forces.
On the supply side, technological progress plays an important role, but so, too, do efforts to drive
down  the  costs  of  financial  services.  These  forces  are  being  propelled  by  the  increasing
availability of ICT infrastructure, the provision of unique access points to financial services, and
the growing number of digital natives.
And on the demand side, “always on” customers are increasingly expecting to be able to bank
with a minimum of fuss, whenever and wherever they like.
Digital finance opens up a host of opportunities, but we should not neglect the risks it entails. But
how can we capitalise on these opportunities without losing sight of the potential risks? That is a
key question of this conference – one that will be addressed by a panel discussion and also by
Bank of England governor Mark Carney in his keynote speech this afternoon.
From an economic point of view, digital finance can deliver a wealth of benefits. First of all, digital
financial  services  can  bring  about  significant  efficiency  gains.  Digitalisation  can  also  stoke
competition within the financial system and raise the contestability of financial markets. Some
 2 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
commentators even argue that digitalisation has the potential to revolutionise financial services
and infrastructure.
The key buzzword here is “disruptive". And many believe the most disruptive potential is to be
found  in  blockchain  or  distributed  ledger  technology,  which  promises  to  allow  payment
transactions and securities settlement to bypass banks and central counterparties altogether.
Originally developed for the bitcoin virtual currency, this distributed ledger technology, it would
appear, has turned out to be a multi-purpose tool. And even central banks – which aren’t typically
known for being early adopters of new technologies – are currently doing experimental research
on the potential use of blockchain.
The Bundesbank,  for  example,  has  recently  launched  a  joint  project  with Deutsche  Börse  to
develop a blockchain-based prototype of a securities settlement system.   
But even apart from radically transforming the payments and securities settlement infrastructure,
digitalisation enables newcomers to mount a challenge against incumbent market players.
Data-driven technologies can boost the transparency of the financial system and thus reduce
information asymmetries. Big data analysis, for example, can improve the estimation of default
risks even in the absence of a longstanding bank-customer relationship.
An increasing number of suppliers of financial services is particularly good news for households
and enterprises lacking access to traditional sources of finance. In the end, this might drive up
the number of projects that receive financing.
Online crowdfunding or peer-to-peer lending platforms might enable investment projects which
would otherwise be too risky or too small for traditional banks, to go ahead.
In general, digital finance facilitates access to financial services. And this benefit is not confined
to tech-savvy consumers in advanced economies. Indeed, digital technologies can be key drivers
of financial inclusion in less developed countries, too.
In Kenya, for example, the share of people with a financial account rose from 42 % in 2011 to
75 % in 2014. Over the same period, the respective global figure rose from 51 % to 61 %.
In  tandem  with  the  mounting  ubiquity  of  cell  phones,  mobile  money  accounts  have  gained
popularity, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. In some countries, there are even more adults with
1
a mobile money account than a conventional bank account.
Financial  inclusion  is  thought  to  be  conducive  to  promoting  economic  growth  and  lowering
inequality.  Financially included people are in a better position to start and develop businesses, to
invest in their children’s education, to manage risks, and to absorb financial shocks.
2
On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  trade-off  between  financial  inclusion  and  financial  stability.
Expanding access to financial services – especially to credit – at too fast a pace and with too
little  control  exposes  economies  to  stability  risks,  and  households  to  the  risk  of  over-
indebtedness. The Indian microfinance crisis in 2010 showed us what can happen if too many
households have access to credit despite being subprime borrowers.
And  that  is  why  financial  literacy  is  so  crucial.  People  with  access  to  finance  need  a  basic
understanding of financial concepts like compound interest and risk diversification.
Surveys, however, provide some worrying results. According to an International Survey of Adult
Financial  Literacy  Competencies,  which  was  commissioned  by  the  G20  and  published  by
the OECD, overall levels of financial literacy, as indicated by knowledge, attitudes and behaviour,
3
are relatively low.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
And another study, the S&P Global Financial Literacy Survey, which was supported by the World
Bank, reveals that two out of three adults are not financially literate, albeit with major variations
across countries.  While more than half of adults are financially literate in most of the advanced
economies,  that  goes  for  fewer  than  one-fifth  of  people  in  some  developing  or  transformation
countries.
4
Tomorrow’s  workshop  on  “Digitising  finance  and  financial  literacy”  moderated  by  Annamaria
Lusardi, who is one of the authors of the S&P Survey, will discuss how financial literacy could be
improved.
Another OECD report on financial literacy among G20 economies will be prepared for release
during the course of the German G20 presidency in 2017.
Financial literacy is of key importance for individuals, for societies, and even for central banks.
Effective monetary policy communication relies on a basic grasp of concepts such as inflation
and interest rates. You can only really follow the monetary policy debate, say, if you understand
the  idea  of  the  real  rate  of  interest,  because  real  interest  rates  determine  investment  and
consumption decisions.
Surveys  show  that  a  basic  understanding  of  economic  concepts  and  a  degree  of  knowledge
about  monetary  policy  are  essential  for  inspiring  trust  in  central  banks. And  trust,  ladies  and
gentlemen, is the core asset of central banks.
Central banks also rely on people’s appreciation of price stability, because, ultimately – as Otmar
Issing, former chief economist at the Bundesbank and the ECB, once put it – “every society gets
the rate of inflation it deserves and basically wants".
Central banks, then, would be well-advised to promote economic and financial literacy. And let
me also mention in this regard that the Bundesbank extensively overhauled and revamped its
Money  Museum  recently.  Our  museum  provides  information  about  money,  its  history  and  the
tasks facing today’s central banks in straightforward, generally understandable language.
Incidentally, one of the most popular exhibits at the new Money Museum is a 12.5 kg bar of gold
from the Bundesbank's vaults, which visitors are invited to touch and feel. While this exhibit may
be  of  minimal  educational  value,  it  does  show  that  even  in  the  age  of  digital  finance  and
dematerialised money, people still appreciate tangible values.
 
4. The potential impact of digital finance on financial stability
Ladies and gentlemen
There are, of course, other aspects of digital finance which have a bearing on financial stability.
Herding behaviour, for example, could be amplified by automated advisory services in portfolio
management. Robo advisors might exacerbate financial volatility and pro-cyclicality if the assets
under management reach a significant level, which is not yet the case.
Traditional banks in many countries are currently suffering from dwindling profitability due, most
notably,  to  the  low-interest-rate  environment.  Disintermediation,  however,  could  intensify  the
problems  of  narrow  profit  margins.  This  might  be  the  flipside  of  the  mounting  competition
unleashed by the more widespread use of digitised financing. 
And decentralisation might make it more difficult to tell who is exposed to whom, and to detect
where financial risks ultimately lie.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
Another point worth noting is that fintech business models have not yet run through an entire
credit cycle. Experience with digital finance in economic downturns is very limited.
That being said, it is quite obvious that regulating fintechs and the entire digital financial industry
smartly  without  hindering  financial  innovation  is  warranted.  That’s  why  the  objectives  of  the
German G20 presidency include taking stock of the different regulatory approaches. Our aim is
to develop a set of common criteria for the regulatory treatment of fintechs.
Fintechs should not base their business models on regulatory loopholes. Using lax regulation to
attract business is a mistake that was already made before the latest financial crisis. Whatever
we do, we need to avoid a regulatory race to the bottom. Rather, we should go for a level playing
field.
To quote the words of the former ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet who said in 2010: “(…) the
crisis  has  exposed  the  risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage,  shedding  a  more  negative  light  on  the
competition among different systems and rules."
Getting a clearer picture of fintechs’ business activities is essential if we are to better understand
whether and in what way they might pose a threat to financial stability. It is therefore an important
endeavour  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  to  further  investigate  and  promote  data  availability.
Without reliable data, any assessment of risks is unfeasible.
Another threat - and certainly not just to financial stability - comes from cyber risks.
The  more  market  infrastructures  rely  on  digital  technologies,  the  more  vulnerable  our
interconnected  global  financial  system  becomes  to  criminal  attacks,  be  it  from  computer
hackers, cyber saboteurs or even terrorists.
Cyber criminals have repeatedly targeted financial institutions around the world, including central
banks.  There  are  plenty  of  financial  institutions  I  could  name  whose  defences  have  been
successfully breached. The damage unleashed by successful attacks goes beyond the financial
loss incurred. Cyber-attacks can potentially undermine peoples’ trust in the financial system.
So to avoid jeopardising the positive impact of digital finance, it will be crucial to address these
risks and for banks to manage their IT and cyber risks with as much diligence as they do their
traditional banking risks.
Cybersecurity risks will be a major item in a talk this afternoon with Thomas de Maizière, German
Federal Minister of the Interior. And a research dialogue tomorrow will also address the topic of
cyber security.
 
5. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
The history of information technology is strewn with bad predictions.
IBM chairman Thomas Watson, for example, is alleged to have said in 1943, “I think there is a
world  market  for  maybe  five  computers".  Ken  Olsen,  co-founder  of  Digital  Equipment
Corporation, said in 1977 that “There is no reason anyone would want a computer in their home".
And Bill Gates, one of whose predictions I quoted earlier in my speech, promised at the 2004
Davos meeting, “Two years from now, spam will be solved."
So bearing these remarks in mind, I am a bit reluctant to make any projections of my own about
the future of digital finance. But still, it wouldn’t seem foolish to predict that digital technologies
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
and fintechs have the potential to fundamentally change the market for financial services with
their innovative business models.
Central bankers and regulators, then, need to carefully monitor the changing market environment
and respond, as and when appropriate, to new and different types of risk in order to ensure that
the benefits of digital innovation are fully reaped.
How  can  we  harness  the  benefits  of  digitalisation  and  simultaneously  mitigate  the  risks  it
involves?
This is the key question of this conference. And I am pleased that so many leading experts have
agreed  to  take  part.  I’m  absolutely  certain  that  our  exchange  of  views  will  provide  important
stimulus for discussions at our official G20 meetings.
And  now  it  is  a  great  privilege  for  me  to  give  the  floor  to  Her  Majesty  Queen  Máxima  of  the
Netherlands.
Queen  Máxima  has  served  as  the  United  Nations  Secretary-General’s  Special  Advocate  for
Inclusive Finance for Development (UNSGSA) since 2009.
In this capacity, Queen Máxima, an economics graduate with a professional track record in the
financial sector, advises the Secretary-General and works worldwide to make financial services
more accessible.
In  2011,  she  was  invited  to  become  honorary  patron  of  the  Global  Partnership  for  Financial
Inclusion  (GPFI).  The  GPFI  is  an  inclusive  platform  for  all  G20  countries,  interested  non-
G20 countries and relevant stakeholders to carry forward work on financial inclusion, including
the implementation of the G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan.
On that note, Queen Máxima, we very much look forward to hearing what you have to say and
thank you for joining us today.
Your Majesty, the floor is yours.
1
2
3
4
A Demirguc-Kunt et al (2015), “The global findex database 2014: measuring financial inclusion around the
world", World Bank Group Policy Research Working Paper, No 7255.
R Sahay et al (2015), “Financial inclusion: can it meet multiple macroeconomic goals?", IMF Staff Discussion
Note 15/17, International Monetary Fund, Washington.
OECD (2016), “OECD/INFE international survey of adult financial literacy competencies".
L Klapper, A Lusardi and P van Oudheusden, “Financial literacy around the world: insights from the Standard
and Poor’s Ratings Services global financial literacy survey".
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
