Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Bloomberg TV
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Bloomberg TV, conducted by Ms Francine Lacqua on 12 June 2017.
 Benoît Cœuré, thank you so much for speaking to Bloomberg TV. Now, the ECB seems
to be in a rush to exit this accommodative stance. How dangerous is lower for longer?
Thank you for inviting me. Basically the thrust of what the Governing Council decided last week is
to  acknowledge  the  improving  economic  circumstances,  to  translate  it  into  a  revised  forward
guidance, because we have to adapt to economic reality, but also to give a sense of patience
when it comes to rates being low: we are still not seeing inflation where we would like it to be;
we’re still not seeing the criteria that we’ve set for inflation to be sustainable all being met. So you
need a sense of patience here.
How much of a nightmare is stronger GDP on QE?
Stronger GDP is good news. It’s unqualified good news. This has been acknowledged by the
Governing  Council  last  week,  and  that’s  why  we  changed  our  communication  to  adapt  to  the
changing reality. It also shows that our monetary policy measures are working. All the jobs that
have been created in the eurozone over the last three, four years or so, a lot of them have been
created thanks to the accommodative monetary policy stance, so it is working very well. Now, we
have an inflation mandate, so when it comes to the next steps we’ll have to focus on inflation.
Why was tapering not discussed last week?
That wasn’t discussed at all. It is too early to discuss it. We have to acknowledge the changing
reality.  We  discussed  a  lot  the  economic  situation;  we  discussed  the  prospects  for  inflation.
There was a sense of progress also when it comes to inflation where, in spite of the inflation
being revised downwards, if you look carefully at the staff forecast, you’ll see that inflation is also
less dependent on our monetary policy measures, which is one step in the right direction, but it’s
not yet quite enough to start discussing tapering. We’re not there yet.
When do you think tapering needs to be discussed? Even to just accustom the markets
to the idea of tapering.
I don’t want to give dates here. I don’t think it serves a purpose. The reason being that we’re very
much  data-driven.  We’re  driven  by  facts.  So  we’ll  discuss  tapering  whenever  we  see  the
economic situation and the prospects for inflation are right for discussing it.
Do you have in your mind a perfect idea – and I’m not going to press you on it, but do you
have a perfect idea of when tapering should be discussed and what it would look like?
No, again, that will depend a lot on the economic numbers; it will depend a lot on inflation. We
obviously have to discuss it before the end of the year. That’s obvious given what we’ve said on
buying bonds until the end of the year and later if necessary. So that discussion will take place,
but it will take place when the data supports it.
Is July a live meeting? I know we were talking about it, but is it a live meeting given that
it’s July so there’s actually usually low volatility in the markets, and given that you’re not
actually doing any new forecasts?
Well, we do work in July. It may look nice around, but we do work in July. And as I said, the
discussion last week was very much about taking stock of the progress in the economy, taking
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
stock of the progress that will support an improved path for inflation, and that’s a discussion that
we’ll have again and again. So one lesson of what we’ve decided last week, is that the Governing
Council wants to keep our forward guidance aligned with reality, and that’s going to continue.
You’re one of the brightest minds when it comes to academic economics. Why is inflation
so low? Is it structural, or is it just that we may be counting things differently?
No, I don’t think it’s that much about the statistics. That may play a role, but it’s a lot about the
changing structures of the labour market, in particular. This is a recovery which is jobs-rich. A lot
of jobs have been created and are being created in the eurozone economy, but it’s a different
kind  of  jobs. A  lot  of  them  are  on  temporary  contracts,  a  lot  of  them  are  part-time,  and  this
produces  less  inflationary  pressures.  There  will  be  a  time  where  they  are  consolidated  into
permanent,  full-time  contracts,  and  then  nominal  wages  will  start  growing,  but  we’re  not  yet
there. So it has a lot to do with the structure of the job market, and that’s certainly an area where
we’re paying a lot of attention, to understand in detail the nature of the jobs being created.
Do you think the market understands all of these nuances quite well, especially when it
comes to when you talk about tapering and exactly what kind of potential roads that may
take?
I think it’s very well understood. The markets have the example of the Fed in the US; it has to be
different  here,  because  we  are  operating  on  different  markets,  but  we  have  a  successful
experience  with  policy  normalisation.  We’ve  been  able  to  communicate  our  intentions.  The
market reaction to the Governing Council last week was very positive, very smooth. So I’m not
very worried here.
Yes, but that’s because you didn’t announce much. Is there a danger that when you do
announce something a little bit more substantive that the markets go haywire?
Well,  we  did  change  our  communication,  and  that  was  a  significant  change,  and  the  market
understood very well, I think.
Give me a sense of, when you talk about forward guidance, and we talked about the data
points, and everything seems very, very clear: are there parallels with the Fed when it
comes to inflation just not being as strong as you were hoping it would be?
I don’t think so, because the economies are different. I was mentioning the labour market earlier
on: the labour market has been very different in the US and in Europe. In the US the participation
rate  has  fallen,  so  a  lot  of  workers  have  been  detached  from  the  labour  market,  or
disenfranchised from the labour market. They’re just staying at home, and have lost any hope to
find a job. That is not the case in Europe. So we’ll have also to account for these differences.
On a trade-weighted basis, the euro is that much stronger compared to the dollar: is that
a concern at all? Do you think about it, or not?
Well, we don’t have an exchange rate target, and insofar as exchange rate movements do reflect
the economic fundamental situation, that’s fine, so there’s nothing to comment at the stage we’re
at.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Compared to six months ago, what is the risk that you still perceive – forecasts are a lot
better, right? So it seems that things are getting rosier.
Well, the Governing Council has judged last week that risks were now balanced, and also added
that we see downside risks mostly coming from the outside. So we see risks surrounding the
future course of US economic policies, we see risks in emerging market economies, and these
are the risks we want to focus on. Risks coming from the inside, that is, from within the eurozone
economy, are much less than they used to be.
How would you qualify tensions within the Governing Council? I know there are different
views,  but  is  that  healthy?  It  seems  like  you’re  becoming  more  like  an  MPC  BoE
monetary style…
It is healthy to have different views. We are working for 19 countries, so we need different views
to be reflected. Different economies inside the eurozone are running at different paces, and that
has to be reflected. So, so far so good, as long as the Governing Council can form a consensus.
And  what  we’ve  decided  last  week  was  very  much  a  consensus,  which  is  good  and  gives
strength to our communication.
How do you rate political concerns? Is there a danger that because France is out of the
way and it was an outcome that the markets like, that we now underestimate political
risk?
Well,  political  risk  is  there.  It’s  not  for  us  to  decide  on  political  risks.  We’re  not  a  political
institution; we don’t decide based on political outcomes. We decide based on economic facts,
and political timelines should certainly not be in our way when we have to decide on monetary
policy. That said, it’s true that political uncertainty has held back consumption and investment to
some extent in the eurozone. I very much hope that in France this will not be the case any more.
That will certainly support the strength of the French economy. I also very much hope that the
outcome  of  the  French  election  can  support  a  momentum  of  reform,  starting  in  France,
obviously, but also in Europe, that will support our monetary policy. We want a stronger eurozone
for our monetary policy to be effective, and France has a key role to play here.
When it comes to fiscal policies, Mario Draghi has been asking for fiscal policies for as
long as I can remember: why would it be different this time?
It’s  not  that  much  about  fiscal  policies;  it’s  a  lot  about  structural  policies.  It’s  about  improving
labour markets, and, as I said, it’s about making the eurozone work better, which is a political
discussion,  which  the  ECB  cannot  lead,  and  should  not  lead,  because  we  are  not  a  political
institution. We don’t have a mandate to do that. So we need eurozone Member States, starting
with Germany and with France, to lead the discussion, and I very much hope, I’m very confident
now, that that discussion will start.
Does the UK election last week make your job harder or easier?
Well, the UK is not so important for the eurozone economy. I wish the best for the UK economy; I
certainly trust the Bank of England to steer the economy through this political uncertainty, but at
the end that’s not a major risk for us.
What does it mean for clearing houses?
Clearing  houses  is  an  important  discussion.  That  discussion  has  to  be  led  by  the  European
Commission, because that’s about law-making in Europe. The European Commission will, within
days, I guess, make new proposals when it comes to derivatives and to clearing houses, with an
objective to ensure the safety and soundness of clearing across the EU when the UK leaves. So
far, we’ve been able to ensure the safety and soundness of euro-denominated clearing through
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
very robust arrangements that we have with the Bank of England and with the CCPs located in
London, and that works very well. The basis for the arrangements will fall in 2019, when the UK
leaves,  and  so  we  need  an  alternative.  Different  alternatives  are  considered  by  the  European
Commission, and they have to lead that discussion. So I would defer to the Commission here.
Right, but countries want basically sovereignty over that, and the ECB, the Governing
Council, I believe, the best person to regulate that is yourselves. How do you think it will
end up?
The Governing Council, the ECB has a stake in that discussion, insofar as financial stability is
concerned, and insofar as monetary policy transmission is concerned, and we have a statutory
role as central bank of issue for euro-denominated transactions, and I welcome the fact that the
Commission  has  referred  to  the  role  that  we  should  play  as  central  bank  of  issue,  and  we
certainly need to play a strong role here. But when it comes to requirements which will be hard-
wired into European law – so say, for instance, location: do we need location? – that’s for the
Commission to have a say. That’s not for us to decide.
Give me a sense of what happens with Greece.
Greece will be discussed in the Eurogroup in Luxembourg on Thursday this week. That’s another
of a long series of meetings. I very much hope, and the ECB very much hopes, that this will be
the concluding meeting that will make more precise the way the Greek debt will be addressed by
the Eurogroup. The Greek government has done its part. They have done their part in terms of
policies, in terms of the MOU, and now it’s for Eurogroup ministers to deliver when it comes to
confirming the sustainability of Greek debt. As I said earlier, it wouldn’t serve a purpose to keep
the Greek economy in limbo for one more year. We need a decisive act by the Eurogroup that
will create confidence in the Greek economy. It’s time for investors to come back in Greece, it’s
time for depositors to bring back their money to Greek banks, and it’s for the Eurogroup to give
the signal that will make it possible.
So you think the resolution this week will be something that’s acceptable to the ECB?
Well, another discussion will be about the monetary policy consequences and inclusion of Greek
debt into QE. That’s a different discussion. It is a monetary policy discussion. So the Governing
Council  will  take  whatever  will  come  out  of  the  Eurogroup,  and  this  will  be  considered  and
assessed against our rules. We’re certainly not going to be part of a political quid pro quo with
the Eurogroup. These are two different discussions.
I know we’re going round the world in 15 minutes. Give me a sense of banks and how
concerned  you  still  are  about  Italian  banks.  The  resolution  last  week  that  we  had  in
Spain, is it a blueprint for how you think Italian bank problems should be resolved?
I’m  very  hesitant  to  pass  judgment,  or  even  pass  a  comment,  on  Italian  banks.  I’m  not  a
supervisor, and we have a separation principle that it’s for my colleagues on the supervisory side
to assess and communicate. So Danièle Nouy and Sabine Lautenschläger will do that. When it
comes to the resolution of Popular last week, the main lesson is that we have a system that
works, so that is a positive test for the institutional set-up that we have, with the Single Resolution
Board, European Commission, Single Supervisory Mechanism, and ECB in its monetary policy
function: that cooperation has worked very well, in a very swift way, which is what you want to
see in the case of resolution. Would that be the case for any other bank? I don’t know. All banks
are different, and, well, you know that quote from Leo Tolstoy, who said that all happy families are
alike, and every unhappy family is different. So every failed bank is different.
Very diplomatic. One very last question, because we haven’t talked about China at all:
when it comes to external factors, how should we look at China?
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
China remains a major area of interest for us. I would not say of concern, or risk, because so far
the Chinese authorities have been able to steer the transition in the Chinese system very well,
and  to  provide  stability  to  the  world  economy.  That  said,  there  are  issues  to  be  addressed:
shadow  banking,  corporate  debt,  transition  towards  domestic  demand,  transition  towards  a
decarbonised  economy.  These  are  daunting  challenges  that  will  stay  with  us  in  the  years  to
come, but so far the Chinese authorities have been very successful in steering the economy and
not making China become an issue for the global economy. We’ve got enough issues, so we
don’t want China to become one of them.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
