Amando M Tetangco: In pursuit of sustainable and inclusive growth
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the MAP General Membership Meeting and First Economic
Briefing for 2017, Makati, 28 March 2017.
 Thank you for inviting me to speak at MAP’s General Membership Meeting and First Economic
Briefing of 2017.
“Working Together to Achieve Inclusive Prosperity”
This is MAP’s guiding principle for 2017.  It is sensitive to recent developments where we witness
moves by nations to leave economic unions; when countries speak of closing off their borders to
neighbors and refugees; when societies are fighting back against public institutions.  All in the
hope of raising their own standards of living.
The MAP therefore has to be commended for resolutely putting the themes of cooperation, social
responsibility, and inclusion at the heart of its activities for this year.
The MAP could not have chosen a more appropriate theme.
I say this because the world has taken unexpected turns in the past couple of years, driven by a
general sense of discontentment and a brewing distrust in public policies and institutions. How
did we get to this point?
If you look closely at the trend of the Global Policy Uncertainty Index , two things jump out.
1
The first is that it has been nearly a decade since the global financial crisis broke out. And yet, we
continue  to  live  with  high  uncertainty  and  its  aftermath  of  heightened  volatility  and  uneven
economic growth.
The second is that these are truly uncertain times. Rising inequality has given traction to anti-
globalization  and  populist  sentiment  across  the  globe.  Even  as  these  protectionist  tendencies
have seen some resistance, public policy has become less certain on the whole. This tension
has cast a heavy cloud over global economic prospects.
Indeed,  the  rise  of  protectionist  pressures  reflects  a  growing  belief  among  countries  that  the
benefits of growth need to be shared more equally and equitably. For public policymakers, this
means that the goals of inclusivity and growth should always go hand in hand.
This brings us to our theme and challenge today: How do we sustain our growth momentum
while also creating a more inclusive society?
Let me structure the rest of my talk as follows:
I’ll  continue  with  the  world  outlook,  and  the  risks  and  challenges  we  see  from  these  global
impulses.
Then I’ll discuss our own domestic market dynamics, paying particular attention to the country’s
sources of resilience that have allowed us to sustain positive growth and make notable headway
towards greater inclusion.
Finally, I’ll relate these developments to emerging challenges for policy and the role the private
sector can play in promoting inclusive growth.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Global outlook and risks
In terms of the world economic outlook, global growth is projected to improve modestly over the
next two years, with upward adjustments to the projections of the IMF for the US, EU, UK and
Japan  for  2017.  Note,  however,  that  these  forecasts  are  still  lower  than  the  actual  growth
2
outcomes prior to the global financial crisis.
Meantime,  the  outlook  for  emerging  markets  is  still  mixed.  In  particular,  economic  activity  in
China has held firm, while growth projections for India and Brazil in 2017 were cut. A downside
risk  to  this  outlook,  however,  is  potential  political  discord  and  heightened  inward-oriented
sentiment, both of which could undermine global trade and dampen financial market sentiment.
Meanwhile, an offshoot of the evolving upward momentum in global growth is the possibility of
reflation, or that global inflation may be at a turning point.
This positive momentum is reflected in the shift in policy stances of a number of central banks.
As you all know, the US Fed raised its target Fed Funds rate by 25 bps last week. Furthermore, it
is widely expected to continue on this path, with at least two more hikes anticipated in 2017.
A review of recent  monetary  policy  decisions  suggests  that  central  banks  have  largely  turned
neutral—they see less urgency for further accommodation and would rather stay on hold. This
phenomenon has been described as “watchful pause”.
The prospect of higher interest rates in advanced economies could cause capital outflows from
emerging market economies (EMEs) as investors search for yield.    The retreat of funds away
from EMEs could lead to tighter dollar funding conditions in emerging markets. For firms with
significant dollar-denominated liabilities, these developments could pose a risk to their balance
sheets and profitability, unless of course these exposures have been adequately hedged.
In the case of the Philippines, we have seen some incipient signs of capital flow reversals as
early as last year. Fortunately, the risk to businesses was mitigated by robust domestic liquidity
and  credit  growth  and  by  an  adequate  supply  of  foreign  exchange.  Debts  of  nonfinancial
corporations  in  the  Philippines  also  remain  mostly  peso-denominated,  which  provides  some
measure of insulation from external shocks.
Meanwhile, with the potential for capital outflows from EMEs, some emerging-market currencies
could also see depreciation pressures and volatility in the near term. We have seen that kind of
depreciation effect on the Philippine peso in recent periods. However, if we take a longer-term
view  on  the  movements  of  the  peso,  we  can  see  that  the  peso  has  been  broadly  stable  and
competitive  over  the  medium  term.  Looking  ahead,  we  expect  the  peso  to  continue  to  draw
strength from the steady stream of remittances from overseas Filipinos and of foreign exchange
receipts from tourism and the BPO sector.
One  other  thing  that  we  must  be  watchful  of  is  the  evolving  dynamics  of  the  international  oil
market. Oil prices rebounded right after the OPEC members agreed to cut output. However, the
subsequent upswing in supply, due partly to renewed shale oil production in the US, has raised
questions on the sustainability of the oil price rally.
Keeping a close eye on all these developments is crucial because they have direct implications
on business costs and consumer sentiment. On the latter point, we note from the BSP’s latest
Consumer Expectations Survey that consumers hold a slightly less favorable outlook for the year
ahead, owing to expectations of higher prices of goods, the depreciation of the peso, as well as
concerns over poor harvests and an overall slowdown in business activity.
For  policymakers,  tracking  these  dynamics  closely  will  therefore  allow  for  a      pre-emptive
response,  if  needed,  to  protect  the  interests  of  businesses  and  consumers.  On  the  part  of
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
central banks, they will need to ascertain the implications on future inflation, and particularly on
inflation expectations, to see if adjustments in the monetary policy stance will be warranted.
In sum, ladies and gentlemen, we see three major trends in the global environment:
1) a modest but uneven recovery in global economic activity;
2) a tentative turning point for oil prices and inflation; and
3)  heightened  financial  market  volatility,  owing  to  a  hazy  outlook  on  potential  shifts  in
macroeconomic policies.
Banking on sound macroeconomic fundamentals
With  these  uncertainties  in  the  external  environment,  we  expect  the  year  ahead  to  be  just  as
challenging  as  the  last  one,  if  not  more.  The  good  news  is  that  we  can  bank  on  solid
macroeconomic fundamentals to keep the economy moving along on its path of robust growth.
We  have  a  broader  base  for  growth,  a  manageable  inflation  environment,  a  sound  banking
system, and a healthy external payments profile. How can these buffers sustain the Philippine
growth engine, and how sustainable is the Philippine growth story?
Over the last two decades, the country has weathered just as many financial crises—the Asian
financial crisis in the late 90s, and the global financial crisis in the late 2000s. Throughout this
period,  the  country  managed  to  register  72  consecutive  quarters  of  output  expansion.  To  put
things into perspective, we are referring to a span of 18 years.
Barring any significant shock, we are on track to extending this streak, as recent indicators of
activity point to a strong growth impulse.  The National Government expects growth to average
6.5-7.5 percent this year, higher than last year’s target of 6-7 percent.
3
This  mirrors  buoyant  business  sentiment,  as  indicated  in  our  latest  Business  Expectations
Survey. The optimistic outlook is anchored on expectations of stronger job orders, the potential
expansion of businesses and product lines, as well as the ongoing infrastructure projects of the
government.
One reason for this sustained growth impulse is that growth has become more broad-based.
On the demand side, growth has historically been anchored by robust household consumption.
In recent years, investments have also become a significant growth driver. In 2016, for instance,
the  contribution  of  capital  investments  to  overall  GDP  growth  even  outstripped  that  of  private
consumption. Meanwhile, on the supply side, the shares of manufacturing and construction have
also been increasing. This complements the steady contribution from services such as trade,
real estate, and financial intermediation.
In short, the country now has more diversified domestic sources of growth. They should also
serve  as  ample  cushions  against  external  shocks,  particularly  if  protectionist  sentiment
continues to gain traction overseas and dampen the country’s export-oriented sectors.
It also bears noting that this sustained growth in output was achieved under a stable inflation
environment.  Going  forward,  we  see  average  inflation  will  be  within  the  target  range  of  2-4
percent  for  2017–2018. A  closer  scrutiny  of  the  monthly  inflation  path  will  show  that  inflation
imprints will be rising until sometime in Q3 2017, when the monthly rates are expected to be very
close to the upper band of the target range.  Even so, our forecast path suggests that monthly
inflation  will  slow  down  thereafter,  resulting  in  within-target  full-year  averages  over  the  policy
horizon or the next two years.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  addition,  money  supply  remains  ample.  Even  at  double-digit  growth  rates,  we  do  not  see
overheating in credit conditions, as credit continues to be channelled to key production sectors.
More  importantly,  the  intermediation  of  these  funds  is  expected  to  remain  safe  and  efficient,
owing  to  our  sound  and  stable  banking  system.  Key  indicators  continue  to  reflect  solid  asset
growth and  improving quality of loans. Capitalization also remains strong and above prescribed
domestic and international standards.
4
On  the  external  front,  the  country’s  current  account  has  been  in  surplus  for  14  consecutive
years,   due  to  the  sustained  increase  in  overseas  Filipinos  (OFs)  remittances,  as  well  as
business process outsourcing (BPO) revenues and tourism receipts. We saw a narrowing of the
current account surplus in recent months.  This trend may continue, as imports of capital goods
are seen to further pick up.   Such importation, we note, is necessary to support the expansion of
the economy in the medium term.
Steady foreign exchange (FX) inflows from OF remittances and BPOs, however, will continue to
allow  us  to  maintain  adequate  FX  reserves.  We  expect  our  gross  international  reserves  to
continue to be more than sufficient to meet the country’s FX liquidity requirements.
Reaping dividends from growth
To reiterate, our macroeconomic fundamentals remain strong. On the one hand, these give us
enough buffers to ward off the challenges posed by a difficult external environment. On the other
hand, how secure are we against homegrown challenges?
Political noise here as well as overseas is a manifestation that the benefits of growth may not
have trickled down fairly to all sectors of society. The rise in populist sentiment globally suggests
that inequality in society also poses a threat to prosperity.
In essence, what we’re saying is that it is not enough for growth to be just fast and sustained. For
growth to be truly meaningful, It must also be inclusive.
We can take heart in knowing that the Philippines has made noteworthy progress and intends to
see more headway moving forward.
labor  and  employment  conditions  have  shown  marked 
For  one, 
improvements.  The
unemployment rate has declined steadily from 7.4 percent in 2010 to 5.5 percent in 2016. The
government aims to reduce it further to between 3 and 5 percent by 2022 through its various
social programs and sustained economic growth.
Poverty  incidence  and  income  inequality  among  Filipinos  have  also  been  on  an  appreciable
downtrend,  with  the  incidence  of  poor  population  declining  from  49.5  percent  in  1988  to  21.6
percent in 2015. The new Philippine Development Plan aims for this to fall further to 14.0 percent
by 2022.
Also, income inequality has been reduced. The Gini coefficient inched down from 0.49 in 1997 to
0.44 in 2015.
Finally, inflation for the lowest 30 percent of households is also lower now than in prior years.
From 5.1 percent in 2009, it has fallen to only 1.4 percent as of end-2016, suggesting that these
households are now less vulnerable to price shocks.
Policy thrusts
All these support the belief that with the right policies and programs in place, it is possible to
achieve sustainable and inclusive growth. But for the engine of inclusive growth to keep running,
both the public and private sectors must share in the responsibility of making sure that no Filipino
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
is left behind. There is much to be done towards this end, so I reiterate the question I posed at
the beginning: How do we create a more inclusive society?
In this regard, let me provide some highlights of the initiatives for public policy.
On  the  part  of  the  BSP,  we  reaffirm  our  commitment  to  maintain  price  and  financial  stability
conducive  to  balanced  and  sustainable  growth.  Our  latest  projections  indicate  that  inflation  is
likely  to  settle  within  the  target  range  of  2-4  percent  for  2017–2018—at  the  moment,  our
forecasts are at 3.4 percent for 2017, and 3.0 percent for 2018. Inflation expectations also remain
well-anchored. Therefore, the current stance of policy is deemed appropriate.
The balance of risks surrounding our inflation outlook is, however, tilted toward the upside. The
transitory  impact  of  the  proposed  tax  reform  program  as  well  as  possible  adjustments  in
transportation fares and electricity rates could raise the inflation trajectory. However, uncertainty
over the prospects of the global economy and potential macroeconomic policy shifts overseas
continue to pose a key downside risk.
Turning to financial stability, the BSP will remain steadfast in working to strengthen the banking
system,  improve  risk  management  standards,  and  align  our  financial  regulations  with
international best practices.
Amid turbulence in the global economy, maintaining a market-determined exchange rate will help
ensure the stability of the Philippine financial system and the economy as a whole. We are an
inflation  targeter,  and  therefore  do  not  target  specific  exchange  rates.  That  is  why  the  BSP
participates in the FX market only to limit volatility, or when movements are becoming misaligned
with fundamentals.
Other measures include deploying liquidity provision measures to address any potential tightness
in funding conditions; and enhancing macroprudential measures and other surveillance tools in
targeting risks arising from capital flows and other vulnerabilities.
Let  me  also  take  a  moment  to  highlight  the  BSP’s  ongoing  campaign  for  greater  financial
inclusion,  an  advocacy  that  I  hold  close  to  my  heart. As  outlined  in  the  National  Strategy  for
Financial Inclusion (NSFI), our work will revolve around three major areas: enhancing access to
financial services, promoting financial education,   and upholding financial consumer protection.
5
On enhancing access:  Only about 64 percent of cities and municipalities nationwide have
banking presence .  By  allowing  micro-banking  offices  (or  MBOs)  and  alternative  financial
service  providers  such  as  pawnshops  to  enter  underserved  markets,  88  percent  of
municipalities and cities would have access to financial services. We have also put in place
regulations that leverage on financial technology (“fintech”) such as e-money transactions,
6
as well as programs aimed at improving access to financing for our small entrepreneurs .
On  promoting  financial  education:  We  will  continue  with  our  Economic  and  Financial
Learning Programs targeting OF families, the youth, and entrepreneurs. To date, we have
conducted EFLPs in 79 of the 81 provinces in the country.
On financial consumer protection: We enacted BSP Circular No. 857 to ensure that BSP-
supervised  financial  institutions  (BSFIs)  adhere  to  the  highest  service  standards.  We  will
continue to promote regulations that will encourage BSFIs to embrace a culture of fair and
responsible dealings with the public.
Finally, we recognize that to enable the country to springboard toward a higher and sustainable
growth path, it needs more infrastructure to increase the economy’s productive capacity and to
redistribute the benefits of faster growth. Road networks, air and sea transport systems, facilities
for  health  and  other  social  services—all  these  should  help  address  the  congestion  in  Metro
Manila and other urban areas, and in the process help distribute opportunities for employment
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
and access to other public services to the rest of the regions. There is fiscal space to do all
these,  and  the  National  Government  has  committed  to  capitalize  on  that  space  and  ramp  up
infrastructure spending.
Concluding remarks
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  hope  that  in  the  last  half  hour  or  so,  I  have  been  able  to  paint  a  fair
picture  of  the  outlook  for  the  Philippine  economy. All  told,  domestic  sources  of  resilience  will
allow us to weather a difficult global environment and sustain growth amid a manageable inflation
environment.
We owe this resilience largely to our continued investment in reform. The Philippines has made
significant  strides  in  strengthening  its  institutions  and  enhancing  its  competitiveness  over  the
past years, and our efforts have not gone unnoticed.
Beyond the recognition, these reforms have also begun to yield dividends for more Filipinos by
encouraging  private-sector  participation  and  investments;  ensuring  fiscal  sustainability;  and
promoting  innovation  and  competition—all  of  which,  in  turn,  have  helped  reduce  poverty  and
income inequality. But this is not to say that the job is done. Far from it. What it means is that we
have a big job ahead of us.
However, as recent global events have shown us, there is no guarantee that these benefits of
growth will be shared fairly.
The challenge, therefore, remains. Promoting sustainable and inclusive growth will require much
work and the concerted efforts of both the public and the private sector.
As a final remark, let me say that the private sector remains a vital cog in the country’s growth
engine through investments, financing, and knowledge transfer. Your role in pursuing sustainable
and  inclusive  growth  is  to  provide  opportunities  for  employment,  and  access  to  finance  and
expertise, especially to the sectors and regions where they are most needed. 
The MAP, in particular, is moving in the right direction. You have your Top Five Priority Programs
for  2017:  Traffic  Management,  Ease  of  Doing  Business,  Entrepreneurship,  Employment
Generation, and Women Empowerment. All these initiatives should provide a solid springboard
towards your goal of promoting inclusive prosperity.
As we push forward in 2017, I hope that the MAP and BSP can work more closely together in this
shared responsibility of pursuing sustainable and inclusive growth. Let me also wish the MAP
continued success in its endeavors in the year ahead.
Thank you, and good afternoon.
1
2
3
4
5
The  Global  Economic  Policy  Uncertainty  index  measures  policy-related  economic  uncertainty  using  media
coverage and professionals’ forecasts of macroeconomic variables.  The index peaked in January following the
anti-immigration  policy  pronouncements  of  the  Trump  administration  in  the  US.    The  rising  acceptance  of
populism in Europe also continues to cause unease, with upcoming major elections in Germany and France
remaining a source of uncertainty.
Compare these to their respective average annual growth rates prior to the global financial crisis (i.e., 1998–
2007: US (3.0 percent); Euro Area (2.4 percent); UK (2.9 percent); and China (9.9 percent). (Source: IMF World
Economic Outlook, October 2016).
The average capacity utilization rate of the manufacturing sector stood at 83.8 percent in January 2017.
Following  the  BPM6  format,  the  current  account  has  been  in  surplus  from  2005–2016.  (Current  account
surpluses were also recorded in 2003 and 2004, following the BPM5 concept)
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
5
6
As of 2016, 88.2 percent of cities and municipalities have at least one financial service access point, up from 87
percent in 2015.  Of this number, 63.8 percent have banking presence in 2016 (63% in 2015). (Source: BSP
Financial Inclusion Initiatives 2016 Report)
Republic Act No. 10744 (“Credit Surety Fund Cooperative Act of 2015”) was passed into law on 6 February 2016.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
