  Committee on Budget, Finance and Administrative Modernisation 
Initial Address by Governor Carlos da Silva Costa1 
23 March 2017 
 Madam Chair, 
Members of Parliament, 
 I called for this hearing following a series of reports on television about the 
monitoring work undertaken by Banco de Portugal – as supervisory authority – 
on Banco Espírito Santo (BES) in the months leading up to its resolution in August 
2014.  These  reports  gravely  misrepresented  the  reality  of  that  monitoring, 
explicitly discrediting Banco de Portugal's exercise of the supervisory function. 
As I stated in my letter to this Committee, it is my responsibility as Governor 
of Banco de Portugal to defend the reputation of the  institution and protect 
public confidence in the effectiveness of banking supervision. I see it as my duty to 
restore  the  truth  behind  these  facts  and  to  clarify  what  the  reports 
deliberately  ignore,  making  myself  accountable  to  the  Assembly  of  the 
Republic.  
In my view it is undeniable that, from the outset, Banco de Portugal was committed 
to  being  accountable  to  the  Assembly  of  the  Republic,  transparently  and  in  good 
time, in regard to the resolution of BES. Banco de Portugal actively collaborated with 
the  Parliamentary  Committee  of  Inquiry  in  fact-checking,  by  providing  several 
depositions, and an immense set of documents that was requested.  
                                                                        
1 Version prepared for presentation. 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     1   
 In this initial address, I see it as important to clarify three questions raised in these 
reports and explored intensely in the ensuing public debate.  
 First question: Why was the Board of BES not removed sooner? 
The law assigns responsibility to Banco de Portugal, as supervisory authority, for 
assessing  whether  the  members  of  the  management  and  supervisory  boards  of 
credit institutions meet conditions of: 
– reputation; 
– availability; 
– and professional qualification, suitable for guaranteeing sound and prudent 
management of the credit institutions.  
In  carrying  out  that  function,  Banco  de  Portugal  permanently  monitors  all  the 
information that is relevant for verifying those requirements. 
In the specific case of assessing the suitability of members of the Board of Directors 
of Grupo BES, the note mentioned in the reports in question, dated November 
2013,  is  part  of  this  permanent  monitoring  exercise  of  all  the  relevant 
information,  and  was  drafted  on  request  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Banco  de 
Portugal.  
This note involves personal information which is subject to the right of privacy 
and  which  came  to  Banco  de  Portugal's  knowledge  as  a  result  of  its 
supervisory function, and is thus subject to the duty of professional secrecy by 
law. For this reason, access to the document in question could only be provided to 
the  Parliamentary  Committee  of  Inquiry  with  the  authorisation  of  the  people 
referred to therein. This was the only reason why this note was not submitted 
to the Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry.  
Thus,  contrary  to  what  has  been  insinuated,  this  note  serves  to  prove  that 
Banco  de  Portugal  was  analysing  all  situations  that  could  influence  the 
suitability assessment of members of the Board of Directors of BES.   
 www.bportugal.pt  
     2   
 However, as I have been constantly emphasising and is already on record, namely 
within  the  scope  of  the  Parliamentary  Committee  of  Inquiry,  Banco  de  Portugal's 
decisions  to  prevent  the  carrying  out  of  professional  functions  are  subject  to 
stringent  legal  conditions.  These  conditions  effectively  lay  down  specific  factual 
prerequisites and, at the same time, the observance of general rules of procedure, 
proof and reasoning, governing the work of the public authority. 
At the end of 2013, in relation to the problems coming to light and receiving 
news coverage for the first time, Banco de Portugal did not have the necessary 
factual proof that – within the legal framework then applicable and given the very 
restrictive  jurisprudence  of  the  higher  administrative  courts  –  would  allow  a 
formal process to be opened to reassess the suitability of the members of the 
Board of Directors in question. This is made clear in the note quoted in the report, 
when it mentions that the information existing at that time had to be duly verified 
and confirmed for the purposes of any actions in terms of suitability. At no time did 
that information warrant the immediate removal of any member of the Board 
of Directors of BES, or even the immediate opening of a process to that end. 
What should be emphasised here, to remove all doubt, is that as a result of that and 
other  information,  the  competent  services  in  Banco  de  Portugal  undertook 
work  to  obtain  confirmation  of  potentially  relevant  facts  for  the  suitability 
assessment, both regarding those concerned – namely through the exchange of 
written communications and through face-to-face meetings – and regarding other 
entities.  
In this assessment process (as was fully outlined to the Parliamentary Committee of 
Inquiry), Banco de Portugal did not approve the registration requests to carry 
out functions in other Grupo BES entities, which culminated in  – after calling 
for  successive  explanations  and  clarifications  from  the  members  of  the  Board  in 
question, both written and face-to-face – the withdrawal of those requests by the 
individuals themselves in March and April 2014. 
In  parallel,  Banco  de  Portugal  implemented  actions  to  ensure  the  close 
involvement of all members of the Board of Directors and Board of Auditors 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     3   
 of BES, as well as external auditors, in fulfilment of the determinations issued as 
a result of the supervisory exercise. I would like to re-emphasise that the Board of 
Directors of BES comprised 25 members, the large majority of which had vast 
experience in the banking sector, and included representatives of other major 
shareholders in addition to Grupo Espírito Santo. 
Among these actions, I would like to point out the various interactions with 
Crédit Agricole – BES’s key shareholder – requiring a succession plan for the 
Board  of  Directors,  with  the  appointment  of  an  independent  Board.  This 
process led to the presentation by Mr. Ricardo Salgado, in mid-April 2014, of a 
schedule  for  his  succession,  and  a  plan  based  on  the  departure  of  the  family 
members from the executive body of BES. 
This was all clearly documented in information provided to the Parliamentary 
Committee of Inquiry. 
 Second  question:  Was  the  document  delivered  by  BPI  to  Banco  de 
Portugal on GES’s financial situation followed up? 
On 1 August 2013, BPI delivered to Banco de Portugal an economic assessment of 
GES, with special focus on Espirito Santo International (ESI).  
The claim that Banco de Portugal ignored this document and shelved it is false. 
In fact, the information contained in BPI’s document was incorporated: 
– In the scope of supervisory investigations undertaken on Grupo ESFG; 
and 
– In the context of ETRICC2 – the review of the major economic groups that 
are the banking system’s debtors – which was under preparation by Banco 
de Portugal in early August 2013. 
I would also like to remind Members of Parliament that, as a result of the conclusions 
of  the  three  horizontal  supervisory  initiatives  undertaken  since  2011,  Banco  de 
Portugal decided to deepen the evaluation of the business plans of major economic 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     4   
 groups that were the banking system’s debtors, with a view to confirming that they 
were  based  on  solid  assumptions  –  the  so-called  ETRICC2.  I  must  add  that  this 
exercise  –  which  may  now  seem  common  or  trivial  –  was,  at  the  time, 
unprecedented  in  Europe,  in  terms  of  its  breadth  and  depth  in  the  field  of 
supervision.  
The non-financial arm of Grupo Espírito Santo was among the 12 economic groups 
selected. At the end of November 2013, this exercise detected that the accounts 
published up to then by the Group’s holding company – ESI – did not reflect 
their actual financial  nature.  I must  stress that this  accounting noncompliance 
had not yet been reported by anyone – neither the Board of Directors of BES, 
nor  audit  firms,  nor  any  other  regulator  or  supervisor,  nor  any  creditor 
institution of GES, nor any other individual. 
Again, I would like to stress that all this, including the evaluation of BPI, was 
in  due  time  shared  with  the  Assembly  of  the  Republic,  in  the  context  of  the 
Parliamentary Committee of Inquiry. 
Third and last question: How did Banco de Portugal act regarding 
the internal control problems in ESFG’s subsidiary in Dubai? 
Considering  that  ES  Bankers  Dubai  is  a  subsidiary  of  ESFG  in  Dubai,  Banco  de 
Portugal  had  no  mandate  to  exercise  its  supervision  on  an  individual  basis, 
although  the  subsidiary  was  included  in  the  perimeter  of  supervision  on  a 
consolidated basis. The subsidiary was solely subject to supervision by Dubai’s 
supervisory  authority  (Dubai  Financial  Services  Authority  –  DFSA),  both  in 
prudential terms and regarding money laundering prevention. 
However,  within  the  scope  of  the  cooperation  process  between  supervisory 
authorities,  Banco  de  Portugal  took  the  initiative  to  establish  various 
interactions with DFSA.  
As part of these interactions, DFSA informed Banco de Portugal of a number of 
shortcomings  in  the  internal  control  mechanisms  implemented  in  Dubai’s 
subsidiary, also referring to doubts about the origin of the funds invested in 
 www.bportugal.pt  
     5   
 GES entities. In addition, DFSA informed Banco de Portugal of the corrective 
measures imposed.  
In view of this information, Banco de Portugal called on ESFG to be informed on 
the  state  of  implementation  of  the  corrective  measures  imposed  on  said 
subsidiary and of the underlying implementation timeline. 
 In parallel, contact was maintained with DFSA, in order to stay informed about 
the implementation of the corrective measures imposed.  
 Before concluding, let me note that, despite the constraints existing at the time 
regarding  Banco  de  Portugal’s  powers  to  withdraw  the  suitability  status  (arising 
both from the law and jurisprudence), Banco de Portugal at each moment was 
strongly  committed  to  making  rigorous  and  careful  use  of  the  means 
permitted  by  law.  A  posteriori,  and  benefitting  from  the  knowledge  and 
information currently available, it is easy – and tempting – to question supervisory 
action  and  to  claim  that  supervision  could  have  been  carried  out  differently. 
However, I firmly believe that, under the extreme complexity of the context in 
which  it  had  to  be  conducted,  supervision  deserves  recognition  for  always 
having been carried out in a diligent and decisive manner. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
 Thank you. 
      www.bportugal.pt  
   6   
