Erkki  Liikanen:  On  the  digitalization  of  financial  services  –
opportunities and risks
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 2017 RiskLab/BoF/ESRB
Conference on Systemic Risk Analytics, Helsinki, 28-30 June 2017.
1. Introduction
 Advances  in  information  and  communication  technologies  have  shaped  the  development  of
financial services already for several decades. Digitalization of financial services is a new name
for  this  development.  But  undoubtedly  the  new  name  also  reflects  significant  turns  in  recent
developments, which have opened entirely new avenues.
A central phenomenon is that digitalization of information has recently been spreading to almost
all areas of human activity. One result of that is the availability of ‘Big Data’, to use the well-known
catchword. It is possible to combine information between sectors and activities more efficiently,
often  in  surprising  and  productive  ways.  This  is  having  an  impact  on  all  areas  of  economic
activity from production and working patterns to leisure.
At  the  same  time,  techniques  to  handle  and  analyze  the  vast  new  data  resources  are  in
increasing  demand.  Prospects  for  technological  applications  which  were  once  considered
utopian, are coming a real possibility.
All this has opened new opportunities also to financial services. Both the incumbent institutions
and  new  players  are  seizing  these  opportunities.  Great  benefits  are  available,  but  not  without
risks. Ideally, new technologies and players can increase competition which may lead to better
and cheaper financial services to the end users: households, companies, and the public sector.
Today I want to share with you some thoughts regarding digitalization and financial services. I
want rather raise questions and leave the search for answers to you, researchers.
Given  that  this  is  a  conference  on  systemic  risk  analysis,  I  will  discuss  risks  that  might  be
gathering strength as digitalization continues. But I will start by discussing the benefits available,
which will help us understand the drivers of new developments in financial services.
Second, I will discuss the role of regulation. Important regulation has already been launched to
help reap the benefits made available by digitalization. New legislation needs to be technology-
neutral.
To safeguard the benefits, regulation also needs to keep pace with the potential new risks. But
therein lies a challenge: the speed of development has become so fast that it may easily exceed
the speed with which regulation can adapt. So this is a new paradigm also for the legislators.
Finally, and what might come closest to the concrete issues dealt with in this conference, I will
consider the potential role of new data and data analytics in helping us measure and manage the
risks – both old and new – to financial stability.
2. Outlook for the future: digitalization
Fundamental shift in consumer expectations
Let us start with consumer expectations. How are they shaping financial services?
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Customers, especially, expect that services are available when they are needed. They are used
to 24/7 world.  The immediacy of services is the new normal.
As to the user experience provided by a bank, consumers no longer necessarily use other banks
as a benchmark. User experiences provided by tech companies in other services also shape
expectations in banking services.
These  shifts  pose  a  challenge  to  traditional  banks’  infrastructure  and  organizational  setup,
perhaps  even  their  mindset.  In  contrast,  the  opportunities  opened  up  by  digitalization  has
spawned fintech start-ups that strive to be customer oriented, providing immediacy of services,
and being available 24/7 by design. Many banks try to meet this challenge, not without difficulty.
Fragmentation in payment services
Payments are an area where the new products and players are already quite visible.
If a decade ago we had the choice of whether to pay with credit card or cash, now we also have
mobile apps for making payments, and in some rare cases even virtual currencies. Similarly for
a merchant, the choice, what payment methods to accept has become more complex. At least in
the short run this fragmentation of payment choices will likely continue.
  Another  phenomenon  is  that  payment  becomes  embedded  into  other  services.  This
emphasizes  the  need  for  sufficient  financial  literacy  as  it  may  become  more  difficult  for
customers to keep track of their spending. This is coupled with the fact that instant consumer
credit decisions can be incorporated into these services.
Regulators need to stay alert at least from two perspectives: first, to ensure sufficient consumer
protection,  and  second,  to  monitor  the  development  of  consumer  credit  aggregates  from  the
viewpoint of financial stability.
It is worth noting that most of the new applications are still based on the existing infrastructure.
This may impose restrictions on what can be achieved in terms of innovation. It also stresses the
importance of thinking about the current systems in the background.
New business models
Fintechs  typically  challenge  the  most  profitable  parts  of  banking  business  by  offering  targeted
services and using lean organizations. Competition may hence lead to lower margins in banks. In
the short run, this may put a strain on profits in some incumbent institutions, given their heavier
organizational structures.
In the longer run, the entry of fintechs could induce a change of business models also in the
incumbent  institutions.  Who  will  eventually  provide  the  new  services?  Synergies  between
different  services  would  seem  to  be  the  key  question.  If  there  are  no  synergies  between  two
services, then they will not necessarily be offered by the same institution. This could even have
implications for bank structures.
A separate question is: How many companies which are providing payments services alone, will
be profitable.
3. Regulating the digitalizing financial industry
3.1 Regulation as a catalyst to reaping the benefits
The  changing  landscape  in  the  financial  industry  raises  the  question  how  the  new  digitalized
financial services should be regulated. The goal is always to provide efficient but safe services
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
for households and businesses. Regulation should facilitate this and not be an impediment. It can
help reap the benefits available from new technologies.
Comparison with regulatory development in telecom and payments
As  a  background,  it  can  be  useful  to  look  at  another  industry  that  has  experienced  a  similar
change not too long ago. The telecommunication industry went through such a process in the
early 2000s.
In Europe, one of the most important steps was to unbundle services from infrastructure. Until
then, whoever owned the copper wire going into the household, had monopoly over the services
offered to that household. New EU regulation ensured that new market entrants were given the
possibility to offer services regardless of who owned the infrastructure.
The effect that this regulatory reform together with technological development had on households
was truly significant. The prices of both devices and of services decreased significantly. As data
connections  became  faster,  cheaper  and  more  common,  also  the  demand  for  devices  and
services grew at a rapid pace. To use Finland as an example, 20 years later, 95% of households
now have an internet connection, 90% have a computer, and 85% have a smart phone.
The industry structure and business models also changed. Telecom operators had to choose
between becoming pure infrastructure providers or to widen their service offerings. Regardless
of how each company chose, the industry consolidated. Companies were bought and merged,
and  there  was  a  surge  of  investments.  Occasionally  investments  resulted  in  failures:  for
instance,  some  technologies  turned  out  to  be  victims  of  hype.  For  handset  makers,  value
creation moved from devices to ecosystems.
Standardization played an important role in this development. Standards accelerated innovation
and encouraged competition within the market.
Open banking (Payment Services Directive 2)
The  telecom  industry  provides  a  useful  learning  case  for  the  financial  industry,  especially
payments. Telecom and payments are both network industries and share many similarities. EU
regulation in payments, of which the Payment Services Directive 2 (PSD2) is the most recent
case, is similar in spirit to what was done in telecoms earlier.
Regulation  and  de-regulation  are  needed  to  enable  competition  and  innovation.  This  means
opening markets to new entrants and reducing monopolistic market power. It also means that
common standards are needed. The goal should be better and cheaper services for consumers
and households. Everyone should have access to financial services at reasonable prices.
But  PSD2  is  not  only  about  payments.  It  affects  the  financial  industry  more  widely,  since
payments and other financial services are intricately connected. For banks, payments are the
most  frequent  touchpoint  to  their  customers.  PSD2  forces  banks  to  open  their  payments
infrastructure  to  all  kinds  of  service  providers.  Customers  are  free  to  choose,  and  will  retain
control of, who can access their accounts.
3.2 New types of risks – regulatory and macroprudential challenges
Let  me  next  consider  examples  of  risks,  which  need  special  attention  as  the  digitalization
process goes along.
Competition and financial stability
First, it is essential to facilitate competition, as I described above. But we must also mind the
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
potential  trade-off  between  competition  and  stability.  It  is  much  debated  and  researched.  In
particular,  when  profit  margins  get  tighter,  the  incentive  for  risk-taking  may  rise.  One  way  to
control such adverse incentives is to insure sufficient capitalization of financial institutions, so
that their owners have sufficient ‘skin in the game’. In this regard, regulators have done much
after the Global Financial Crisis. But supervisors need to stay constantly alert.
Cyber security
Second, there is the issue of cyber security.
The  European  financial  system  is  highly  interconnected  and  interdependent.  This  constantly
keeps the potential for financial contagion at the center of financial stability considerations. But
the  highly  interconnected  network  of  institutions  also  implies  that  cyber-attacks  may  pose  an
increasingly serious concern to the Eurosystem’s financial stability.
The  issue  with  cyber-attacks  is  further  accentuated  due  to  its  dynamic,  constantly  evolving
nature and because cyber-attacks are borderless.  We may still lack sufficient pan-European law
enforcement capability to fully monitor the potential for cyber-attacks. However, work has been
started  to  enhance  cyber  resilience  of  the  Eurosystem.    For  instance,  promoting cyber  best
practices  for  financial  market  institutions,  conducting cyber surveys  to  monitor  progress,  and
establishing a framework for testing procedures would be important operational objectives in the
short term.
Shadow banking, shadow markets and new unregulated players
Third, are there specific macroprudential issues that the digitalization development would raise?
One  implication  of  the  new  technologies  is  that  they  may  provide  a  way  to  move  financial
activities to less regulated areas. This would clearly be counterproductive because the goal of
regulation should be to safeguard financial stability in the broad sense. It is therefore important
that  sufficient  macroprudential  measures  are  available  to  counteract  potential  excesses
regardless of where they originate within the financial system. (Bank of Finland and SUERF are
co-organizing a conference on shadow banking in September in Helsinki, which will provide a
forum to discuss these issues further.)
4. Contribution to macroprudential analysis
My  final  question  today  is  whether  the  new  ample  data  resources  and  techniques  to  analyze
large-scale  data  can  help  us  tackle  financial  stability  risks  in  general.  For  instance,  are  new
powerful early warning indicators to be discovered by utilizing these data and techniques? This is
clearly a question for which you in the audience can provide better answers. I hope that also this
conference has given you opportunities to discuss these issues.
I  believe  that  after  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  there  is  an  emerging  consensus  on  a  few
principles.  One  is  that  so  called  nonlinearities  matter  much  for  understanding  and  modelling
crises.
As an example of a nonlinear relationship, a shock to asset values of a certain size may not
cause much harm if leverage in financial institutions is moderate. However, the same shock can
lead to a devastating feedback effect on asset prices if the initial leverage is high.
Consequently, there is a high demand for innovative modelling of nonlinearities. Regarding the
early  development  of  such  techniques  using  data-intensive  analysis,  we  have  an  interesting
history in Finland. Professor Teuvo Kohonen is a key developer of a well-known type of neural
network algorithms, the Self-Organizing Maps (SOM). Professor Kohonen is widely cited for that.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
What are the challenges in modelling non-linear behavior of financial instabilities?
Financial crises are rare events. Hence, it is a statistical challenge to test theoretical models that
can generate financial crises.
Likewise, it is difficult to know whether we really capture true invariant relationships when we use
data-driven empirical models to trace the likelihood of financial instabilities.
You are the experts in these matters, but it seems to me that the big challenge in this research
area would be to find a way to combine the power of data-intensive nonlinear analytics to uncover
hidden  relationships  in  the  data  with  a  proper  understanding  of  the  underlying  economic
mechanisms at work.
In any case, given the limited number of crisis observations, it might be advisable to also use
clever theoretical models to gauge future risks. The models could be used to produce scenarios
of adverse developments, even such that may not have yet happened in the past.
To adapt the idea of a famous physicist in the opera Dr. Atomic, written by Peter Sellars, perhaps
experts in financial stability analysis should regularly “indulg(e) in controlled fantasies, trying to
dream up new … phenomen(a) that (are) not contrary to our knowledge, but perhaps beyond our
experience”.  
5. Conclusions
To conclude, let us not forget that trust remains the necessary precondition for well-functioning
financial  markets.  Building  and  maintaining  trust  will  ultimately  determine  the  success  of  the
developers of financial services based on new technologies.
Regulation and supervision are necessary backstops to the new developments, and they must
evolve with the times.
Thank you for your attention!
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
