Andreas  Dombret:  The  challenges  currently  facing  the  German
banking sector
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at  the  annual  reception  of  the  Regional  Office  in  Bremen,  Lower  Saxony  and  Saxony-Anhalt,
Hanover, 6 March 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Mr von Stenglin
As well as the chance to eat, drink and be merry, a reception such as this is always a good
opportunity to take stock of events and to look ahead at what the future might hold. Today, I would
like to do just that, with a specific focus on the German banking sector.
Nine years on from the outbreak of the financial crisis, the overall economic situation in Germany
is relatively positive. Activity is robust, and the German economy recorded growth of almost 2 %
last  year  –  its  best  performance  since  2012.   Germany’s  unemployment  rate  has  also  fallen
every year since 2010.
1
Many sectors in Germany are feeling the benefit of the economic recovery, not least the banking
industry. Lending to the real economy has been back on the rise since 2013. And in any case,
German banks and savings banks weathered the crisis comparatively well, owing, among other
things, to the highly diverse nature of the German banking sector. What is more, the post-crisis
period has seen credit institutions strengthen their capital base and scale back the risks on their
balance sheets.
Things are looking pretty rosy, you might think. But a glance at the current sentiment within the
industry  reveals  that  things  most  certainly  are  not  rosy.  Banks  and  savings  banks  are  facing
momentous challenges. The reasons for this vary from one institution to the next. But there are
some challenges that affect them all in equal measure.
As I see it, three key factors are at play here.
First, the persistent low-interest-rate environment, which is bringing to light the weak profitability
afflicting many German institutions.
Second, the global regulatory efforts embraced after the crisis, which still haven’t been wrapped
up and will force us to make substantial adjustments here in Germany, too.
And last but not least, the advance of digitalisation, which, perhaps more than any other factor,
represents both a challenge and an opportunity.
These  three  challenges  deserve  particularly  close  attention  because  if  institutions  are  to
overcome them, they will have to start taking decisive action today. But to do so, they first need
to get a sound grasp of the situation. So let’s take a closer look at what exactly these challenges
consist of.
2. Low interest rates mean additional provisioning
Let’s start with the first major challenge – the low-interest-rate environment. This is felt to be a
burden among credit institutions and savers alike. And the pressure is mounting by the day. The
 1 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
public  debate  surrounding  this  topic  can  be  broadly  summarised  as  follows:  while  banks’
earnings shrivel, savers have no choice but to accept practically no interest on their savings.
This view is certainly not entirely off the mark, and I think that we need to take the debate and the
widely-held  concerns  it  articulates  very  seriously.  But  in  some  respects,  this  viewpoint  is
overblown and not always completely accurate. Let us therefore delve deeper into the issue.
Shrinking  earnings  from  interest  business  are  a  fundamental  problem  for  banks  and  savings
banks. In prolonged periods of low interest rates, maturing loans with high rates of interest are
replaced with new, lower-yielding loans. To counteract a decline in interest income, banks tend to
increase the average maturity of the loans they issue. But this only goes so far to remedy the
malaise in the current environment because longer-term interest rates are very low, too. So to
continue  earning  money  from  interest  business,  banks  need  to  cut  back  on  their  interest
expenditure. Until now, however, the de facto deposit rate floor for retail investors has been 0 %.
This is making classic deposit business increasingly unattractive for many banks and savings
banks,  and  for  many  of  them  it  would  be  cheaper  to  raise  funding  in  the  money  and  capital
markets.
In a recently published discussion paper, we examined the impact of a prolonged period of low
interest  rates  on  German  credit  institutions’  interest  business.  Our  analysis  indicates  that,  if
interest rates remain constant for the next four years, net interest income will fall by a total of
16 %  - a huge cut given the key importance of interest business.
2
You might therefore be forgiven for thinking that nothing could be better for institutions right now
than a rapid return to higher interest rates. And even though that’s probably right in the long term,
rising interest rates create significant risks in the short and medium term.
What  happens  if  interest  rates  climb  sharply  within  a  short  space  of  time?  Persistently  low
interest  rates  have  driven  up  what  is  known  as  maturity  transformation  business  at  German
banks and savings banks. The narrow spread between short and long-term interest rates means
that institutions are now seeing stronger inflows of short-term deposits. If, at the same time, they
originate  more  long-term,  fixed-interest  loans,  they  increase  their  exposure  to  the  liquidity  and
rate interest risk accordingly.
Persistent low rates are a particular challenge for institutions whose business models are driven
primarily by deposit and lending business - and there’s quite simply a particularly high number of
them in Germany. In 2014, German banks and savings banks derived almost three-quarters of
their operating income from net interest income.  Smaller institutions face an extra hurdle in that
they can only hedge against unexpected changes in interest rates to a very limited extent in the
capital market. Thus, we have seen a clear increase in interest rate risk at savings banks and
cooperative banks, in particular, since 2011.
3
Those of you who watched the presentation of our annual financial statements for 2016 will know
that the DeutscheBundesbank, too, is readying itself to face the risk of an interest rate reversal.
This was the reason why we significant increased our general risk provisions last year. Central
banks use different accounting standards than banks and savings banks, of course, but they,
too, need to act today and equip themselves to deal with the risks stemming from a turnaround in
interest rates.
Having a sound capital base is one good way of achieving this. It is gratifying to note that German
institutions have substantially increased their tier 1 capital over the last few years. We have seen
the  tier  1  capital  ratio  rise  from  9.1  %  in  2008  -  the  year  that  marked  the  start  of  the  global
financial crisis - to as much as 15.8 % in September last year. But in the face of mounting risks,
banks would do well to strengthen their capital base further, by setting aside reserves from taxed
profits, for instance.
It is vital for banking supervisors to keep a close eye on institutions’ profitability, which is why we
 2 / 6
4
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
will again be conducting a survey on low-interest-rate and stress scenarios this year.
3. New regulation - a challenge for banks and banking supervisors alike
But  it  is  not  just  lower  earnings  and  higher  risks  stemming  from  the  current  low-interest-rate
environment  that  are  weighing  on  institutions  -  changes  in  the  regulatory  landscape  are  also
posing a challenge.
5
My colleague Sam Woods, Deputy Governor for Prudential Regulation at the Bank of England,
recently described the overhaul of global regulatory standards in the wake of the financial crisis
as  a  revolution,   which  I  think  hits  the  nail  on  the  head.  Through  the  Capital  Requirements
Directive implemented in 2013 and the associated Regulation, we are setting new capital and
liquidity standards in Europe. The most recent reforms, which implement major aspects of the
Basel III framework already agreed upon, have made a major contribution to boosting the long-
term stability of the European financial system.
The banking lobby never tires of saying that additional regulatory requirements put considerable
pressure on their institutions. I’d like to say two things here.
First, the reforms are not an end in themselves – and they are certainly not the result of blindly
taking action for the sake of it. Quite the opposite: they are necessary and consistent. Necessary
because the global financial crisis cast serious doubt on the functional viability of our financial
system. “Carrying on” as we were is simply not an option. And the reforms are consistent in that
they specifically address the aspects that were exposed as being particular vulnerabilities by the
crisis.  This  is  why  we  cannot  and  will  not  water  down  fundamental  regulatory  principles  and
requirements.
But  on  the  other  hand,  the  following  point  is  equally  important  in  my  eyes.  Supervisors  are
keeping a very close eye on the effects that changes in regulatory requirements are having on
banks and savings banks. And, indeed, we are seeing a considerable need for adjustment for
many  institutions,  particularly  in  terms  of  their  IT  infrastructure.  This  poses  a  challenge  for
smaller institutions, in particular, as they cannot exploit economies of scale to the same extent
as their larger competitors. At the same time, the staff involved in implementing regulatory tasks
are being asked to meet ever higher qualitative and quantitative requirements.
To name just one example, let’s take a look at a study carried out by the Federal Reserve Bank in
Minneapolis on the effects of regulation on small American banks. The thrust of this study was to
find out the extent to which these institutions could cope with rising personnel costs resulting
from stricter regulation. The results are sobering. An additional requirement of just two full-time
positions would send around 25 % of these small institutions into the red.  This example shows
that  we,  as  supervisors,  also  need  to  be  careful  that  regulation  does  not  fundamentally
overwhelm any group of institutions - either in the United States or here in Germany. For one
thing is very clear: a healthy system of banks and savings banks depends in part on its diversity
– and this includes smaller institutions just as much as the large ones.
6
This is quite simply why regulatory reform is not just a challenge for the banking industry, but also
for supervisors. And we supervisors should examine, where it is possible and prudent to do so,
whether we can implement targeted relief measures for small banks. Regulatory proportionality
is the name of the game here. It’s something we already apply today in some respects, such as
in the distinction between standard and model approaches. Nevertheless, we should urgently put
more thought into how we can embed the principle of proportionality even more firmly in future.
The  development  of  a  dedicated  regulatory  regime  for  smaller  banks  and  savings  banks  is
another conceivable option. And even if this is still far off, no topics should be off-limits to us at
this stage.
 3 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
4. Digitalisation - a challenge and an opportunity
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  can  see,  low  interest  rates  and  new  prudential  standards  are
making  life  anything  but  easy  for  institutions  at  the  moment.  Of  course,  these  repercussions
ripple out into the real economy as well. And if that weren’t enough, there has been a peculiar
shadow lingering over the German banking landscape for many years, with no one really being
able to tell if it will ultimately prove to be a blessing or a curse.
The shadow I am referring to is digitalisation. I am aware that this topic could easily fill a whole
lecture series - but I wouldn’t wish to impose this burden on our annual reception today. That
said, there are a few key points I would like to mention.
In contrast to the other challenges I’ve mentioned today, digitalisation is, from the perspective of
credit institutions, also an opportunity, as it provides a wealth of potential for driving down costs
and tapping into new sources of income. Banks and savings banks must, nevertheless, always
keep an eye on the risks presented by this brave new world.
Let’s look, first of all, at the possible cost savings. These can mainly be harnessed in two ways.
The first is by automating processes. Take, for example, lending and the scoring methods this
requires. Automating these processes promises to drive down staffing costs substantially. The
second way of cutting costs is through virtualisation. For banks and savings banks, this could
mean no longer having to produce and sell services in the same place. Think of a virtual branch,
for example. Thanks to net-based applications, an employee in Braunschweig can now advise
customers across the whole of Germany – and, in principle, he or she can do so around the
clock. Across the industry, this opens up a wealth of potential to cut material costs.
In  both  cases,  this  raises  the  question  of  whether  services  and  the  infrastructure  that  these
require  need  to  be  provided  and  operated  in-house,  or  whether  these  should  be  hived  off  to
external  providers.  Even  though  outsourcing  can  deliver  considerable  cost  advantages,  it’s  a
decision  that  should  always  be  carefully  considered.  This  is  because  responsibility  for  all
processes always remains with the outsourcing institution.
What  about  the  income  side,  meanwhile?  Here,  too,  digitalisation  opens  up  new  possibilities.
Virtualisation, which I have already touched upon, provides more than just cost benefits. It also
allows  banking  services  to  be  adapted  to  suit  the  changed  expectations  of  customers.
Customers nowadays are accustomed to banking whenever and wherever they want and expect
their  bank  to  be  highly  flexible. And  German  institutions  have  already  responded  to  this.  With
banking apps on their smartphones, the younger generation, especially, are effectively carrying a
bank branch around with them in their pockets. In other areas, too, such as wholesale banking,
digitalisation has already opened up new possibilities. And it’s safe to say that a lot more will
change in the foreseeable future.
Nor, when it comes to developing new services, should banks shy away per se from cooperating
with external service providers. Enterprises specialised in IT-based financial services, known as
fintechs, are no longer seen by established institutions solely as rivals, which was their original
concern. On the contrary, I think there is still considerable potential for reaping efficiency gains
here. It is now a question of bringing together digital know-how and innovative power, on the one
hand, and established brands and mature customer bases, on the other.
But let’s not forget the risks presented by digitalisation. What happens, say, when IT systems are
down  for  a  time?  If  this  disrupts  automated  processes,  the  losses  can  be  substantial;  for
example,  if  payment  systems  come  to  a  standstill  because  individual  payments  cannot  be
executed. But also because news of such incidents now travels around the world in a matter of
minutes, leading to a considerable reputational risk. The same is true in the case of cybercrime,
where criminals target vulnerabilities in IT infrastructure for personal gain or to inflict damage. As
you can see, in the area of digitalisation, too, adequate risk provisioning is absolutely essential.
 4 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
5. Tackle reforms decisively
Ladies and gentlemen, the challenges facing German banks and savings banks are not minor in
nature. The persistent low-interest-rate environment is squeezing earnings, while the incomplete
regulatory reforms are causing uncertainty and entail considerable costs for many institutions.
Moreover, the advance of digitalisation, while promising fresh opportunities, also harbours risks.
Making strategic decisions under these conditions can feel like having to lay the tracks for a train
journey without knowing where the destination is.
And this is precisely where the difficulty lies, because one thing is certain: it will not be enough for
German  banks  and  savings  banks  to  rely  solely  on  precautionary  measures.  Take  the  low
interest  rates,  for  example.  Building  up  additional  capital  buffers  is  necessary  for  cushioning
short and medium-term losses,  and  institutions  would  be  wise  to  significantly  shore  up  these
defences. But those who think that they can simply wait out the storm are mistaken. Banks and
savings banks must additionally initiate fundamental reforms and pursue these decisively. This is
the  only  way  that  the  banking  industry  can  overcome  today’s  problems  and  also  prepare  for
tomorrow’s challenges.
The German banking industry has already taken decisive action in some areas. Many institutions
carried out a thorough review of their business models after the crisis and have thus learned
from  their  own  mistakes.  Banks  and  savings  banks  are  also  facing  up  to  the  structural
challenges of a changed market environment. For example, there has been a steady reduction in
branches over a period of many years now. In the case of savings banks and cooperative banks,
there have also been numerous mergers. At the beginning of 2016 there were roughly 30 fewer
credit institutions in Bremen, Lower Saxony and Saxony-Anhalt than ten years earlier.  This is a
decline of 12 %. So you see, the banking industry has risen to the challenge, whether in terms of
realigning business models, embracing consolidation or through other effective instruments.
6. Conclusion
7
Ladies  and  gentleman,  the  economic  situation  of  the  German  banking  industry  is  a  topic  that
certainly occupies me.
Let me therefore summarise my main points, before I draw to a close. Low interest rates and a
change  in  regulatory  requirements  are  presenting  banks  and  savings  banks  with  a  major
challenge.  The  same  is  true  of  advancing  digitalisation.  They  all  harbour  risks,  and  credit
institutions need to respond appropriately. Those who place their hope in superficial reforms or
mere cosmetic changes run the risk of falling by the wayside in future. Even when times get
tough  –  and  especially  then  –  institutions  must  therefore  stick  to  the  reform  path  they  have
embarked upon. Their willingness to do so is not just in the interests of the individual institutions.
For it is only when banks and savings banks in Germany fare well as a whole that they can fulfil
their central economic function – and when they do that they ultimately serve us all.
Thank you for your attention. 
1
2
3
4
5
6
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, February 2017.
Dombret, 
capital?", Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 01/2017.
Gündüz, 
Rocholl 
(2017): 
"Will 
German 
banks 
earn 
their 
cost 
of
Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, September 2015.
results  of 
The 
at: www.bundesbank.de/348250.
the 
last  survey,  carried  out 
in  September  2015,  are  available  online
"The revolution is over. Long live the revolution!", speech by Sam Woods at the City Banquet, Mansion House,
London, 26 October 2016.
 5 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
6
7
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  Economic  Policy  Paper  13-3:  "Quantifying  the  Costs  of  Additional
Regulation on Community Banks." Quoted in The Economist (11 February 2017): "The Litter of the Law."
Deutsche Bundesbank, bank office statistics 2007, 2015.
 6 / 6
BIS central bankers' speeches
