Benoît Cœuré: Interview with Radio Classique
Interview with Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
and Radio Classique, conducted by Mr Nicolas Pierron on 23 January 2017.
 Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  is  to  be  investigated  by  the
Ombudsman of the European Union, following a complaint from an NGO. He is suspected
of entrusting the private sector with insider information in the context of a group called
the G30. How do you respond to these allegations?
The mere fact that those questions are being asked shows that we are transparent, since all
meetings of the members of the Executive Board of the ECB with representatives of the private
sector, whether bankers or not, are made public. As a matter of fact, my calendar, my diary, is
published every month on the ECB’s website. As for the substance of your question, for us to be
able to understand what is happening in the economy we have to meet private sector actors,
including bankers. And yet, this has to be done in a transparent way, which is the case with the
G30.
So this won’t go any further?
The Ombudsman of the European Union is pursuing the matter, she’s doing her job and we shall
see what she has to say. But the same Ombudsman, Ms O’Reilly, acknowledged that the ECB
had made significant progress in its transparency and its communication policy, notably with the
publication of the minutes of Governing Council decisions and also, as I said, with the publication
of our calendars. So the ECB has made great efforts to be more transparent and to make its
contacts with the private sector public. This is not a matter of pride, it’s completely normal.
Donald Trump was sworn in on Friday in the United States. His programme includes a
sizeable fiscal stimulus, which is already pushing up interest rates in the US, bond rates.
Will this have an impact on Europe?
It  is  undoubtedly  too  early  to  judge  the  decisions  of  the  new  administration  as  it  is  only  just
beginning,  but  I  would  draw  two  conclusions.  The  first  is  that  it  is  very  important  for  us  that
financial conditions in the euro area remain appropriate for the euro area economy, i.e. that the
euro area is protected from external financial shocks. For example, the rise in long-term interest
rates observed since the end of last year has had a fairly limited impact on the euro area, thanks
to  our  monetary  policy.  We  will  watch  closely  to  make  sure  that  financial  conditions  are
appropriate for the state of our economy. And the second conclusion, which is more general,
more  political,  if  you  will,  is  that  we  are  in  a  world  full  of  uncertainties  (economic,  political);  a
framework  for  international  cooperation  is  needed.  So  whatever  decisions  Mr  Trump  and  his
administration  may  take,  what  we  want  is  for  them  to  be  analysed  and  discussed  in  an
international context, particularly in the context of the G20, which is really the forum where such
discussions should take place.
Aren’t  you  worried,  however,  about  the  protectionist  measures  that  Donald  Trump  is
planning in the months, the years, to come?
Again, nobody knows, it’s too early to know what he’s going to do exactly, but protectionism, right
now, is clearly a bad idea. We live in a world where productivity and innovation (the output of
innovation,  the  spread  of  innovation)  are  what  matters  to  ensure  prosperity.  It  is  difficult  to
imagine  that  a  world  in  which  borders  are  closed  to  both  goods  and  capital,  and  to  the  free
movement of people, would favour innovation. So, economically speaking it’s a bad idea, yes.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
Protectionism  is  a  bad  idea.  Inflation  has  also  returned  to  Europe,  but  the  European
Central Bank is at the moment refusing to increase its interest rates. Why?
Inflation is increasing, but for a reason which is very simple and easy to identify, which is the
increase  in  commodity  prices,  or  rather  the  end  of  a  period  marked  by  sharp  falls  in
commodities.  So  it’s  our  job  to  understand  to  what  extent  that  increase  in  the  price  of  raw
materials and food will have a lasting impact on inflation. At the moment, that is not the case. It’s
something that we are watching and will watch carefully in the coming months. But for the time
being,  this  increase  is  temporary  and  does  not  justify  ending  the  ECB’s  policy,  particularly
quantitative easing.
In  other  words,  very  low  rates,  almost  at  zero,  and  liquidity  injections  through  the
markets, through asset purchases on the market.
Precisely.  That  day  will  come,  the  day  when  we  have  that  discussion  will  come,  and  I  will
welcome it because it will be a sign that the economy is healthier, but today it’s still a little too
early.
When will that be? In 2018?
It’s  a  discussion  we’ll  have  on  the  basis  of  the  economic  indicators.  You  know  we  are  very
pragmatic people, we look at the figures and then we’ll see how inflation is being passed on to
what we call underlying inflation and also how inflation is being passed on to wages, i.e. we’ll see
if wage negotiations are taking account of price increases. At the moment, that’s not really the
case.
In any case, it won’t be in 2017, there will be no increase in the ECB’s interest rate in
2017.
It’s something we’ll examine in the light of the economic indicators, sorry to disappoint you.
Germany is becoming impatient. There’s talk of inflation which could exceed 2% on an
annual  basis  in  Germany  this  year.  Inflation  which  hurts  German  savers.  Wolfgang
Schäuble, Minister of Finance, is calling on the ECB to act this year. What do you say to
him?
First, Mr Schäuble has always been very respectful of the Treaties and the independence of the
central bank, so I am not too worried on that front. And in general, Germans understand very well
that the European Central Bank has an inflation mandate for the euro area. They understand that
inflation in the euro area should return towards 2% and I think they also understand that to have a
strong economy in the euro area is in the interests of Germany. And that’s what we are working
on.
Doesn’t  this  difference,  at  least  between  Germany  and  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  in
respect of inflation, illustrate the inability of monetary policy to act when faced with a
currency area which is still heterogeneous, the euro area?
That’s quite true. That’s quite true. It’s a problem we had before the financial crisis, with a large
divergence  in  labour  costs  in  the  euro  area,  which  incidentally  the  central  bank  at  the  time,
headed by Jean-Claude Trichet, spoke out against (without much of a result, but we did speak
out).  As  a  central  bank  we  can  only  work  effectively  if  the  economies  of  the  euro  area  are
sufficiently convergent. Convergence is needed in the euro area for monetary policy to function
well, but also if you want to pave the way for a further strengthening of the euro area, because
the various Member States have to trust each other, and for that their economies need to be
comparable. This also applies to France, incidentally.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
And the convergence you’re talking of – what does it mean for France?
French growth is now picking up but it remains lower than that of Germany and the euro area, so
the  reforms  in  France  have  to  continue  in  order  to  consolidate  growth.  And  that  will  allow
France’s voice to be heard in the euro area.
What are these reforms?
I am not going to enter into a debate which is now an election debate. The reforms are...
Is it necessary to copy what Germany has been doing for a decade, wage moderation
alongside a more flexible labour market?
Yes, there is a need for a labour market which works in a more flexible way, but there must also
be productivity, innovation and education enhancement policies, notably in higher education, to
ensure that France remains at the forefront of innovation.
And Germany, for its part, must it also make efforts?
Yes, Germany has implemented major reforms in the past from which it benefits today, but its
demographic  prospects  are  more  difficult  than  those  of  France,  so  it  too  must  continue  with
reforms, and in particular it must invest.
Last question, on the budget deficit. Should Europe be more tolerant of the sacrosanct
3% objective?
I don’t believe that this is an issue that concerns Europe. Indeed, France has been above 3% for
many years now, so it clearly shows that the problem doesn’t lie so much with Europe, and it
shows that there hasn’t really been austerity in France. France today, in 2017, is on the threshold
of being able to pass below 3%.
Do you think it will achieve that?
France can achieve it. It will depend on the new government’s policies. I think it is important that
France achieves it. I’m concerned, by the way, by the declarations of various candidates, on both
left and right – this is not a question of politics – which envisage bouncing back, returning, to
above3%. What does that mean? It means that France’s public debt will continue to grow and I,
as a French taxpayer (because I am also a French taxpayer), do not want France’s debt to rise
to 120% or 130% of GDP.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
