 February  16,  2017 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Building a More Robust Financial System:   
Where Are We after the Global Financial Crisis and   
Where Do We Go from Here? 
Speech at the DICJ-IADI International Conference 
 Haruhiko Kuroda 
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
 Introduction 
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to the DICJ-IADI International Conference and to 
address all of you. Thank you very much for this opportunity. 
 It is almost ten years since the onset of the Global Financial Crisis. At this juncture, I would 
like to look back on the efforts and results at the global level with the aim of preventing the 
return of the Crisis, and offer my thoughts on the challenges ahead if we are to maintain the 
stability of the global financial system. 
 In  retrospect,  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  was  triggered  by  problems  in  the  U.S.  subprime 
mortgage market. Initial losses incurred by financial institutions and investors in that market 
led  to  a  severe  liquidity  shortage  through  loss  of  confidence  among  market  participants. 
Subsequently,  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  we  had  a 
full-blown crisis that destabilized the whole global financial system. 
 Responding  to  the  ever  worsening  situation,  economies  around  the  world  unleashed 
aggressive macroeconomic measures, injected massive liquidity into financial markets, and 
provided  taxpayers'  support  to  financial  institutions,  including  capital  injection,  and  these 
measures  prevented  a  contagious  amplification  of  the  Crisis.  These  efforts  were 
complemented with measures developed through international cooperation so as to prevent 
the incidence of another crisis. As a result, the robustness of the global financial system has 
been  greatly  enhanced  by,  for  example,  higher  capital  and  liquidity  reserve  levels  at 
financial institutions, more options for liquidity provisioning by central banks, better legal 
frameworks  for  resolving  financial  institutions,  and  enhanced  communications  and 
cooperation among authorities. 
 In  the  meantime,  many  central  banks  in  the  developed  economies  are  pursuing  extremely 
accommodative  monetary  policy,  including  unconventional  policy  measures,  in  order  to 
extricate  economies  from  low  growth  and  low  inflation. While  these  measures  themselves 
are utterly essential responses to the conjunctural macroeconomic challenges, the resulting 
"low for long" environment is eroding lending margins, which are the sources of profits for 
financial  institutions.  Considering  that  financial  institutions  in  the  developed  economies 
have  faced  increasing  pressures  on  their  revenue  streams,  reflecting  structural  changes  in 
 1 
 the  financial  system,  the  low  profitability  of  financial  institutions  has  become  a  global 
problem to be reckoned with. 
 Building  on  these  observations,  for  the  rest  of  the  time  that  I  have  today,  I  would  like  to 
explain how I understand the efforts aimed at strengthening the financial system following 
the Global Financial Crisis and what the remaining issues are, from three perspectives: (a) 
international financial regulation, (b) macroprudential policy, and (c) the "lender of the last 
resort" function of central banks. I will then conclude by offering my views on an emerging 
challenge regarding the stability of the financial system; that is, the profitability of financial 
institutions. 
 Stronger International Financial Regulations 
Let  me  start  with  international  financial  regulations  (Chart  1).  In  the  period  leading  up  to 
the Global Financial Crisis, the financial sector, especially in Europe and the United States, 
took on excessive leverage and the quality and level of capital were in decline. At the same 
time, many financial institutions depended on short-term market funding, which was also a 
contributing factor to the Crisis. These experiences led to the adoption of the Basel III set of 
rules, the main thrust of which was to oblige internationally active financial institutions to 
enhance their capital levels and to hold safe liquid assets. The final details of the framework 
are still being worked out. 
 Furthermore, from the lesson of the dangers of moral hazard emanating from implicit public 
support  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions,  the  so-called  too-big-to-fail 
problem,  these  institutions  are  now  required  to  hold  additional  capital  to  maintain  total 
loss-absorbing  capacity  (TLAC)  and  to  draw  up  recovery  and  resolution  plans  (RRPs)  in 
case they face financial difficulties. 
 These  enhanced  rules  I  have  just  described  clearly  have  made  the  global  financial  system 
more  robust.  For  example,  looking  at  capital  levels  of  financial  institutions,  the  capital 
ratios of major European and U.S. banks have increased significantly (Chart 2). 
 Japanese financial institutions, while they did not directly suffer much from the Crisis, also 
have increased their capital levels, in line with the stricter requirements at the global level. 
 2 
 Under the powerful monetary easing by the Bank of Japan, they are actively taking risks in 
lending and securities investment, thereby positively influencing the Japanese economy and 
prices, which reflects in part their increasingly robust capital base. This clearly shows that 
the stability of the financial system is essential for monetary policy to be fully effective. 
 Having said this, I also should stress that stronger regulation ought not to lead to excessive 
restrictions on financial intermediation. As I said, details of Basel III are still being worked 
out, and I recognize that the discussions should be wrapped up as soon as possible so as to 
minimize  uncertainties  over  the  business  environment  surrounding  financial  institutions. 
Any final agreement on the level of required capital, however, needs to balance the need to 
maintain the stability of the financial system and the functioning of financial intermediation. 
Keeping  this  in  mind,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  participate  in  the  international  deliberations 
leading to the finalization of Basel III. 
 If and when there is an international agreement, the main thrust of international efforts will 
turn to evaluating the effects of the strengthened rules, ensuring that such rules are working 
as  initially  envisioned  and  there  are  no  unintended  consequences  --  for  example,  whether 
liquidity  in  financial  markets  is  impaired  as  a  result  of  stricter  rules  such  as  the  leverage 
ratio,  and  whether  entities  beyond  the  scope  of  regulation  in  the "shadow  banking"  sector 
are expanding. In addition, it is important to review whether the whole set of rules has not 
brought about overregulation or inconsistency, notwithstanding the desirability of individual 
rules. Whenever it becomes apparent through these assessments that there are problems in 
the rules, it is appropriate to make necessary adjustments. 
 Developing a Macroprudential Policy Framework 
I will now move on to macroprudential policy (Chart 3). During the Global Financial Crisis, 
the  issue  of  procyclicality  became  evident;  i.e.,  the  interactions  between  the  financial 
system and the real economy amplifying the instability of the financial system. In response, 
macroprudential policy instruments have been introduced; for example, the countercyclical 
capital  buffer  (CCyB),  which  adjusts  the  level  of  required  capital  in  accordance  with  the 
degree  of  excesses  in  the  financial  system,  and  the  loan-to-value  (LTV)  regulation,  which 
regulates the level of the minimum haircut for real estate collateral according to the state of 
the real estate market. 
 3 
  Moreover, we also see the development of institutional frameworks for the implementation 
of  macroprudential  policy.  For  example,  in  jurisdictions  with  multiple  regulatory  and 
supervisory  authorities  involved  in  the  safeguarding  of  financial  stability,  there  has  been 
establishment  of  interagency  committees  that  aim  to  coordinate  the  views  of  relevant 
authorities,  to  make  policy  decisions,  and  to  implement  any  decisions.  In  this  regard,  in 
Japan,  the  Financial  Services  Agency  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  created  the  "Council  for 
Cooperation  on  Financial  Stability"  in  2014  and  have  been  holding  semiannual  meetings 
since then. In the meetings, the two authorities have been exchanging views on the state of 
the  financial  system  and  financial  markets,  and  through  such  interactions,  the  Financial 
Services Agency and the Bank of Japan are reinforcing their ties regarding macroprudential 
policy. 
 As  I  have  just  noted,  we  are  now  seeing  the  development  of  macroprudential  policy  tools 
and  institutional  frameworks,  but  ensuring  effective  and  timely  implementation  of  policy 
measures in real life would be challenging. For that to happen, supervisory authorities and 
central  banks  must  first  be  able  to  properly  observe  the  signals  that  point  to  excessive 
activity  or  inactivity  in  the  financial  system.  Once  moving  into  action,  there  are  still 
unresolved  issues,  such  as  the  following:  the  lag  between  the  imposition  of  measures  and 
the manifestation of the effects of those measures; leakage of the effects into sectors that are 
outside  the  scope  of  macroprudential  measures;  and  the  necessity  of  taking  into  account 
other public policy areas, such as residential tax policy, in the case of the real estate market. 
All  in  all,  the  effects  of  the  newly  introduced  macroprudential  policy  measures  have  not 
been  fully  verified,  and  we  need  to  enhance  our  understanding  through  application  and 
review. 
 In  any  case,  supervisory  agencies  and  central  banks  charged  with  macroprudential  policy 
must  make  every  effort  to  improve  their  analyses  of  macro-level  risks  in  the  financial 
system  and  be  on  the  lookout  for  any  symptoms  of  financial  instability  evident  in  the 
activities  of  individual  financial  institutions.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  of  Japan  will  be 
enhancing 
its  micro-  and  macro-level  diagnostic  capabilities 
through 
its  on-site 
examinations and off-site monitoring of financial institutions and analyses published in the 
Financial System Report. 
 4 
  A New Horizon for the "Lender of the Last Resort" Function 
As the third perspective regarding developments since the Global Financial Crisis, I would 
like  to  touch  upon  the  "lender  of  the  last  resort"  function  of  the  central  bank  (Chart  4). 
Traditionally, the "lender of the last resort" function of the central bank has been a tool to be 
used  when  systemic  risk  manifests  itself  through  contagion;  in  other  words,  the 
deteriorating  health of  one  financial institution  tainting  other  financial  institutions  through 
inferences made by depositors and/or links in payment networks. Generally, it was regarded 
as  an  operation  to  provide  domestic  currency  funding  to  "solvent  but  illiquid"  financial 
institutions. 
 In  contrast,  during  the  recent  Global  Financial  Crisis,  systemic  risk  manifested  itself  in  a 
different  way:  increasing  concerns  over  counterparty  risk  among  market  participants 
resulted in a dramatic contraction of market activities. In response, central banks of major 
economies  injected  liquidity  to  financial  markets  through  purchases  of  commercial  paper 
and  corporate  bonds,  and  thus  supported  the  continued  functioning  of  markets.  In  this 
regard,  the  "lender  of  the  last  resort"  function  of  central  banks  morphed  into  something 
broader by incorporating the "market maker of the last resort" function. 
 Meanwhile,  it  also  became  evident  during  the  Crisis  that  liquidity  shortages  in  foreign 
currencies -- for example, resulting from the freezing of the currency swap market -- were 
extremely  problematic,  as  the  expanding  global  reach  of  financial  institutions  promoted 
financial  intermediation in  foreign  currencies.  Accordingly,  in  2007,  the European  Central 
Bank  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank  each  entered  into  a  swap  arrangement  with  the  U.S. 
Federal  Reserve,  enabling  the  two  European  central  banks  to  supply  U.S.  dollar  funds  to 
financial institutions in their jurisdictions. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the Bank 
of  Japan,  the  Bank  of  England,  and  the  Bank  of  Canada  also  entered  into  swap 
arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve,  and  in  2011,  the  individual  arrangements  evolved 
into  a  multilateral  arrangement  covering  not  only  U.S.  dollars  but  also  other  major 
currencies. One can say that, with the development of such a multilateral swap arrangement 
to  supply  foreign  currency  liquidity,  the  "lender  of  the  last  resort"  function  has  developed 
into a "global lender of the last resort" function. 
  5 
 This quick overview shows that the central bank is playing a bigger role with its "lender of 
the last resort" function. It could be safely said that we now have a more robust backstop as 
regards  liquidity  provision  in  the  major  currencies  during  market  turmoil.  The  challenge 
ahead  is  to  devise  frameworks  to  deal  with  the  case  where  a  financial  institution  with  a 
global  reach  faces  foreign  currency  liquidity  shortages  for  idiosyncratic  reasons  and  the 
case  involving  non-major  "local"  currency  liquidity  shortages.  For  the  Bank  of  Japan, 
potential  systemic  instability  caused  by  shortages  of  foreign  currency  liquidity  is  an  issue 
that  requires  prompt  attention,  in  view  of  the  fact  that  Japanese  financial  institutions  are 
expanding  their  global  businesses,  including  in  Asia,  while  these  institutions  are  still 
broadly enjoying good access to foreign currency funding. 
 Reflecting  on  these  challenges,  the  Bank  of  Japan  has  decided  to  provide  U.S.  dollar 
liquidity to individual banks facing temporary dollar funding difficulties utilizing the Bank's 
U.S.  dollar-denominated  assets.  As  to  local  currencies,  the  Bank  established  swap 
arrangements for Australian and Singaporean dollars with the respective central banks last 
year,  which  should  enable  the  Bank  to  supply  Australian  and  Singaporean  dollar  liquidity 
secured  through  these  arrangements  to  Japanese  financial  institutions  facing  funding 
difficulties  in  these  two  currencies.  Though  the  Bank  must  be  careful  in  avoiding  moral 
hazard at financial institutions, it will continue to develop backstop frameworks for foreign 
currency funding in conjunction with relevant authorities. 
 The New Challenge of Low Profitability at Financial Institutions 
As we have seen today, much has been learned from the Global Financial Crisis and various 
measures have been put in place to prevent the return of the Crisis. While there are still gaps 
to  be  filled  in  every  area,  I  should  say  that  the  global  financial  system  has  become 
significantly more robust than before the Crisis. 
 However,  this  does  not  mean  that  there  are  no  more  areas  that  require  attention  regarding 
financial stability. Over the longer term, it is becoming important to cope with the potential 
risk of low profitability at financial institutions eroding financial stability. 
 Faced with low growth and low inflation in the years following the Global Financial Crisis, 
many central banks of major economies adopted extremely accommodative monetary policy, 
 6 
 including unconventional measures. As I noted at the beginning, such a policy stance itself 
reflects  macroeconomic  necessity,  but  the  resulting  plunge  in  nominal  interest  rates  is 
negatively  impacting  profits  at  financial  institutions  through  compression  in  interest  rate 
margins. 
 At  this  very  moment,  financial institutions  around  the  world  are  still  reporting  respectable 
levels of profits, benefiting from lower credit costs in an improving economy and increased 
profits from selling securities for which prices appreciated as interest rates fell. Having said 
this, if the low interest rate environment persists, interest rate margins will be further eroded 
and  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions  will  suffer  as  a  result.  In  Japan,  for  example, 
financial  institutions  face  structural  headwinds  including  an  aging  and  decreasing 
population (Chart 5). In Europe, low profitability is regarded as a risk to financial stability 
in the context of a non-performing loans problem at some financial institutions. This shows 
that the problem is more or less global. 
 There  are  various  channels  through  which  low  profitability  at  financial  institutions  could 
adversely  affect  financial  stability.  One  channel  is  the  inability  of  financial  institutions  to 
accumulate sufficient capital due to low profitability. That would heighten the risk of banks' 
capital  being  eroded  when  large  credit  losses  occur  or  when  securities  investments  incur 
large  losses  in  a  volatile  market.  With  thin  capital  buffers,  financial  institutions  could 
become too risk averse and not effectively perform their function as intermediaries. On the 
other hand, if financial institutions try to avoid such a predicament by taking excessive risks 
to increase revenues, such actions themselves would introduce new sources of instability to 
the financial system. All in all, in order for the financial system to ensure future stability, it 
is becoming more and more important in the long term to think about possible responses to 
low profitability at financial institutions. 
 The starting point would be to have individual financial institutions accurately recognize the 
business  environment  that  they  are  in,  and  formulate  business  models  that  appropriately 
take account of the environment. Financial institutions have a range of options and can, for 
example, step up efforts to find new SME and household lending opportunities, take risks in 
the  securities  markets,  strengthen  fee-collecting  business  lines,  and  cut  costs  including 
extensive restructuring of the branch network. Individual financial institutions must choose 
 7 
 approaches  that  are  best  suited  to  their  individual  needs.  In  some  cases,  mergers  or 
consolidation between financial institutions could be an option. 
 In  order  for  financial  institutions  to  enhance  profitability,  authorities  would  play  an 
important  role.  In  that  context,  given  that  the  business  environment  of  each  financial 
institution  is  different,  and  that  forward-looking  responses  regarding  the  changing 
environment  are  essential,  it  may  not  be  appropriate  to  adopt  one-size-fits-all  regulatory 
measures.  Instead,  a  "soft"  approach  through  supervision  and  guidance  may  be  more 
effective  in  encouraging  financial  institutions  to  apply  individually  tailored  solutions.  In 
view  of  this,  the  Bank  of  Japan,  through  its  on-site  examinations  and  off-site  monitoring, 
aims  to  encourage  financial  institutions  to  step  up  their  risk  management  efforts  in  areas 
where  the  institutions  are  taking  on  increasing  risk,  and  to  deepen  discussions  with 
institutions regarding profitability enhancement. In addition, the Bank will actively support 
the efforts of financial institutions through the hosting of seminars targeted at enhancing the 
value of financial services. 
 Concluding Remarks 
Today, I have taken a look at the efforts and results at the global level in aiming to prevent 
the  return  of  the  Global  Financial  Crisis,  particularly  in  terms  of  policy  areas  that  are 
closely related to the role of the central bank. Specifically, these are international financial 
regulation, macroprudential policy, the "lender of the last resort" function of central banks, 
and  low  profitability  at  financial  institutions.  Of  course,  I  must  admit  that  this  is  not  the 
whole story: laws and regulations to deal with a failure of systemically important financial 
institutions  have  been  greatly  improved,  and  the  international  cooperative  framework  for 
crisis management has been significantly strengthened. In the meantime, deposit insurance 
schemes, which will be extensively discussed at this conference, now insure higher amounts 
under  strengthened  financial  foundations,  thereby  contributing  significantly  to  a  more 
robust financial system. 
 All  in  all,  over  the  last  ten  years  or  so,  the  robustness  of  the  global  financial  system  has 
been steadily enhanced in many areas. Accordingly, the risk that we could fall into the same 
kind of crisis as the last one is probably lower to a considerable degree. Having said that, I 
must  point  out  that  the  environment  surrounding  the  financial  system  is  undergoing  rapid 
 8 
 changes, including the development of FinTech and the rapid growth of the shadow banking 
sector.  In  addition,  as  I  just  noted,  a  new  challenge  has  emerged  in  the  form  of  low 
profitability  at  financial  institutions.  These  developments  suggest  that  a  different  kind  of 
financial crisis could happen in the future. There will always be room for efforts to enhance 
the stability of the financial system, and authorities must continue to respond to changes in 
the environment. 
 Fortunately, we now have a framework for global cooperation built up during the ten years 
since the Global Financial Crisis, and that framework was successfully applied to enhance 
the robustness of the financial system. There will be challenges ahead, but  we are prepared 
to meet them with confidence. 
 Thank you for your attention. 
 9 
 Building a More Robust Financial System:  
Where Are We after the Global Financial Crisis and  
Where Do We Go from Here? 
Speech at the DICJ-IADI International Conference 
  February 16, 2017 
Haruhiko Kuroda   
Governor of the Bank of Japan 
International Financial Regulations 
Chart 1 
Basel III 
Dealing with the "too-big-
to-fail" problem 
Strengthening the quality and  
quantity of capital (numerator) 
✔ Quantity: introducing the Common 
Equity Tier 1 capital and raising the 
minimum requirement 
✔ Quality: adopting a stricter definition 
of bank capital 
banking book 
✔ Credit risk 
✔ Operational risk 
Improving risk coverage 
(denominator) 
 Additional capital charge for G-
✔ Interest rate risk in the  
SIBs (G-SIB surcharge) 
 Effective bank resolution 
framework for G-SIBs 
  Development of legal 
framework 
 Establishment of recovery and 
resolution plans (RRPs) 
Leverage ratio 
requirement 
 Introduction of total loss-
absorbing capacity (TLAC) 
Capital ratio ＝  
          Risk-weighted assets 
       Bank capital 
Regulations on 
large exposure 
Supplementary tools:  
three new regulatory measures 
Liquidity measures 
✔ Liquidity coverage ratio (promoting the 
short-term resiliency under stressed scenario) 
✔ Net stable funding ratio (securing stable 
funding structure for long-term investments) 
Capital Adequacy of Financial Institutions 
Chart 2 
in Major Countries 
Japan 
United States 
Europe 
Notes: 1. Figures for Japan are weighted averages of internationally active banks.  
            2. Figures for the United States are simple averages of five U.S. banks (Bank of America Merrill Lynch, Citi, Goldman Sachs, J.P. Morgan, and Morgan Stanley). 
            3. Figures for Europe are simple averages of six European banks (Barclays, BNP Paribas, Credit Suisse, Deutsche Bank, HSBC, and UBS). 
Sources: Bank of Japan; Bloomberg. 
Macroprudential Policy 
Chart 3 
 Macroprudential policy tools 
    ✔  Countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) 
      ✔   Loan-to-value (LTV) regulation, etc. 
   
     Institutional frameworks for the implementation of 
macroprudential policy 
   ✔  Establishment of interagency committees in jurisdictions with multiple regulatory and supervisory 
authorities, etc. 
    ✔   Creation of the "Council for Cooperation on Financial Stability" in Japan 
   A New Horizon for the "Lender of Last Resort" Function 
Chart 4 
  The traditional "Lender of Last Resort" function 
    ✔  Responding to the risk of the deteriorating health of one financial institution tainting other  
            financial institutions through inferences made by depositors, etc. 
       
"Market Maker of Last Resort" function 
     ✔  Responding to the contraction of market activities resulting from concerns over counterparty   
            risk among market participants 
   "Global Lender of Last Resort" function 
    ✔  Responding to foreign currency liquidity shortages faced by globally active financial institutions 
   Core Profitability of Japanese Financial Institutions 
Chart 5 
Operating profits from core business 
Major banks 
Regional banks 
Shinkin banks 
Lending margins 
 Source: Bank of Japan. 
