Sabine Lautenschläger: Banks business models - keeping pace?
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the Single Supervisory Mechanism, at
the Seventeenth Annual Conference on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector, Washington
DC, 1 June 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 There are 19 countries in the euro area. They all share one currency, but differ in many other
respects.  Their  economic  structures, 
frameworks  differ.  Their
macroeconomic characteristics, such as growth, inflation and employment, also differ.
tax  codes  and 
legal 
This mix of economies requires a mix of banks. And in the euro area, banks are indeed varied.
There are large banks that operate on the global stage and small ones that focus on domestic
business; there are banks which are profitable and there are banks which have not earned their
cost of capital for several years now.
All these banks face similar challenges.
First, they have to deal with geopolitical risks, that is, with higher uncertainty.
Second,  they  have  to  deal  with  a  challenging  macroeconomic  environment;  and  that
includes low interest rates. Hence, banks have to adjust. They have to become more cost-
efficient and diversify their revenues.
Third, they have to deal with overcapacities in the European banking market; many banks
compete for the same customers.
Fourth,  they  have  to  deal  with  technological  change,  such  as  digitalisation.  That  change
attracts new competitors to the market, the famous fintechs. This makes the market even
more competitive.
And  fifth,  they  have  to  deal  with  tougher  rules.  That  includes  higher  capital  requirements,
more  reporting  and  higher  demands  with  regard  to  the  scope  and  quality  of  risk
management – just think of the BCBS 239.
So banks are important, and they face challenges. That’s why we take a very close look at how
banks in the euro area make profits and how their business models work. That is a core element
of our annual Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process, or SREP as we call it.
When we assess business models, we combine two things: an analysis of hard data and the
judgement  of  experienced  supervisors.  This  helps  us  to  be  unbiased,  holistic  and  forward-
looking.
And  we  benefit  from  our  European  viewpoint,  of  course.  Unlike  national  supervisors,  we  can
compare  and  benchmark  125  banking  groups  across  the  entire  euro  area.  That  is  a  big
advantage.
Altogether,  we  have  defined  nine  different  categories  of  business  model,  ranging  from  large
universal banks and domestic lenders to specialised asset managers. We then place each bank
in one of these categories and can thus compare it to its European peers.
Like all supervisors, we ask one very general question: can a bank generate sufficient returns
within a framework of suitable risk appetite and on the basis of a clear and sustainable funding
structure?
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
For us, a business model is viable if it can generate such returns over the year ahead. And it is
sustainable if it can generate such returns over a three-year period and through a full business
and economic cycle.
The first step we take when we analyse a business model is to map out the general strategy of
the  bank.  We  try  to  understand  its  main  sources  of  profit  and  how  they  might  be  affected  by
economic developments. We then refine the map by comparing the bank with its peers across
the  euro  area.  As  I  just  mentioned,  this  is  one  of  the  main  benefits  of  European  banking
supervision.
The next step is then to derive an automated score. This score is based on indicators such as
the return on assets and the cost-to-income-ratio. And as I already said, we then complement
the scoring with expert judgement.
In doing so, we take a forward-looking approach. And what we look for are key vulnerabilities. We
assess how profits might evolve over time. We analyse the bank’s strategic plan; we take into
account  its  financial  forecasts  and  assess  how  it  might  be  affected  by  internal  and  external
factors.
In the light of this assessment, we might adjust the score. The final result then feeds into the
SREP and guides us when we determine supervisory capital add-ons and other measures.
As the ECB is still a young supervisor, we still need to learn more and dig deeper. That’s why, in
2016,  we  launched  a  thematic  review  of  banks’  profitability  drivers  at  firm  level  and  across
business models. That review is still ongoing and will provide some more tools to support us
when we analyse business models and monitor profitability. It will strengthen our ability to identify
banks with structurally low profits; and it will examine in depth how banks respond to weak profits
– now and in the future. The thematic review will conclude at the end of this year.
Are we satisfied with the business models of banks in the euro area? Are we satisfied with the
progress banks have made by learning the lessons of the crisis? In all honesty, have you ever
met a supervisor who was satisfied with anything? I haven’t – that is just not in our DNA.
It  is  true,  of  course,  that  many  European  banks  have  made  a  lot  of  progress.  They  have
significantly raised their capital and liquidity buffers, they have got rid of a lot of bad assets, they
have refocused their business, and they have streamlined their cross-border activities. So far so
good!
But even though banks have started doing their homework, they haven’t finished yet. There are
some banks that still have a long to-do list. And a few banks even have to improve the contents
of their list. So again, the banks in the euro area paint a very mixed picture.
The good news is that there are about two dozen larger banks that have successfully navigated
the  choppy  waters.  These  banks  come  from  many  different  countries  and  have  different
business  models.  What  sets  them  apart  is  that  they  generate  more  income  than  their  peers.
Many of them outperform in terms of interest income, but other factors also play a role.
To sum up: banks in the euro area differ in terms of size, business model, legacy issues and
their preparedness for whatever the future may hold. Quite a few banks still have homework to
do or need to implement what they have already decided to do in order to cope with the new
challenges. This variety makes life a bit more difficult for investors and supervisors.
But as diverse as the banks might be, they all play an important role – and by and large, they are
the ones, and not so much the capital markets, who keep the European economy running and
growing.  Thus,  we  need  performing  and  stable  banks  in  Europe  to  provide  loans  and  other
services. We need banks that are not held back by the mistakes of the past, but which have
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
been cleaned up and are able to do business.
We also need tough rules and tough supervisors who challenge banks’ business models. In the
long  run,  only  banks  that  make  profits  can  be  stable.  And  only  stable  banks  can  handle
uncertainty, deal with a changing environment and reliably serve the economy.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
