Peter  Praet:  Unconventional  monetary  policy  and  fixed  income
markets
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the Fixed Income Market Colloquium, Rome, 4 July 2017.
 Well-functioning fixed income markets are at the heart of modern market economies. There are
several reasons for this:
they provide information to market participants and policymakers concerning the state of the
economy and how it is expected to develop;
they  signal  monetary  policy  expectations  and  investors’  expectations  regarding  future
inflation;
they offer benchmarks for pricing other assets.
In times of unconventional monetary policy, fixed income markets acquire an extra dimension:
they become key channels through which the central bank seeks to influence long-term interest
rates  directly  –  through  expanded  guidance  about  its  intentions  for  future  policy,  or  through
purchases  of  long-dated  securities  –  in  an  attempt  to  ease  financial  conditions  beyond  what
would be feasible with conventional tools, and thereby support economic activity and the central
bank’s inflation objective.
Is  there  a  tension  between  these  two  functions  of  fixed  income  markets  in  times  of
unconventional monetary policy: as aggregators of information, and as a channel of additional
stimulus?
In the ECB’s experience, this tension has been less than anticipated. First, as we started to offer
forward guidance and, later, as we signalled the beginning of active interventions in long-dated
securities,  fixed  income  markets  were  still  distorted,  to  a  certain  extent,  by  the  illiquidity  and
excess risk aversion that had influenced price formation in those markets at the height of the
sovereign  debt  crisis.  Under  those  conditions,  fragmentation  of  relative-value  relationships
across yield curves had made it harder to identify forward interest rates and break-even rates of
inflation. In other words, the role of those markets as collectors and aggregators of information
was already compromised. Our interventions contributed to restoring market functioning. In doing
so, we eliminated the substantial noise that was blurring the information signals emanating from
fixed income markets.
Second, fixed income markets don’t seem to have lost their capacity to discern and express their
views on the creditworthiness of financial assets. The last few months have demonstrated that,
despite the ECB’s continuing presence in the market as a large investor, market prices have
tended to reflect investors’ evolving views about the prospective standing of sovereign issuers’
credit.
Building on these observations, in my remarks today I would like to outline the rationale behind
our interventions in recent years and how effective they have been.
 For some years, major central banks have been intervening in fixed income markets with the
intention  of  providing  substantial  amounts  of  stimulus  to  their  respective  economies  and
delivering on their mandates. Their interventions ultimately rest on the same premise: when the
overnight money market rate typically used by central banks as a policy instrument reaches a
level that cannot be further reduced to any meaningful extent, the natural progression is to extend
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the maturity range of interest rates that the central bank seeks to influence.
This  can  be  done  in  two  ways,  which  strongly  complement  each  other.  First,  by  influencing
expectations  of  short-term  interest  rates  via  signalling  channels,  and  second,  by  central  bank
purchases  of  long-dated  securities  which  crowd  out  private  demand  for  such  instruments,
making them more expensive and thereby encouraging portfolio rebalancing. Both instruments
have  the  same  purpose  –  exerting  downward  pressure  on  long-term  yields.  This  is  why  they
complement  each  other  and  rely  on  one  another  to  be  effective.  Asset  purchases  almost
certainly enhance the credibility of a central bank’s signals that it will follow a certain course of
action for setting policy rates in the future, as these purchases are a concrete demonstration of a
desire  to  provide  additional  stimulus.  So,  the  anchoring  of  rate  expectations  is  reinforced  by
asset  purchases.  And,  conversely,  the  net  stimulus  provided  by  asset  purchases  through
compression  of  the  term  premia  depends,  in  part,  on  expectations  of  how  policymakers  will
adjust short-term interest rates in the future in response to the stronger real activity and inflation
sparked  by  lower  term  premia.  If  short-term  interest  rate  expectations  are  not  well  anchored
throughout the life of the asset purchase programme and are allowed to creep upwards, then the
entire  exercise  to  ease  financial  conditions  becomes  self-defeating.  This  is  why  anchoring
interest  rate  expectations  is  a  key  condition  for  asset  purchases  to  deliver  accommodative
monetary policy.
From  this  perspective,  the  ECB  has  been  very  effective  in  designing  and  implementing  its
programme. As demonstrated by the overnight index swap forward rate curve, once we launched
our  monetary  policy  package  in  mid-2014,  the  short-to-medium  segment  of  the  curve,  which
arguably reflects investors’ rate expectations most clearly, shifted down and became flatter (see
Chart  1).  This  reaction  is  especially  striking  when  compared  to  the  US  experience  during  the
period in which the Federal Reserve carried out its large-scale asset purchases. One reason
why interest rate expectations have been well-anchored in the euro area is that the introduction of
the  negative  interest  rate  policy  has  been  effective  in  making  the  signalling  channel,  which  is
implicit in our forward guidance, more compelling and credible.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Importantly, in order to anchor short and medium-term interest rates at levels that are close to
the lower bound, this portion of the curve had to be insulated from flows of news that otherwise
would have entailed an unwarranted change in the monetary policy stance. The conceptual basis
for this is exactly the same as the one that, in ordinary times, justifies the tight control that central
banks exert on the overnight rate. Ordinarily, the central bank “targets” the overnight interest rate,
which implies that it seeks to protect that rate from shocks – say, originating in the interbank
market for liquidity or elsewhere – that, if not offset, would nudge the monetary policy stance in
directions  that  would  not  be  appropriate,  given  the  state  of  the  economy. As  I  said  before,  in
unconventional monetary policy times, as the overnight rate becomes increasingly constrained to
the downside, the notion of the “operating target” is generalised to encompass a whole range of
interest rates with longer maturities. Consequently, insulating those interest rates, to the extent
possible,  from  the  impact  of  external  surprises  that  should  not  alter  the  stance  becomes  an
important precondition for a successful reflation strategy.
In this regard, over the past three years one could say that we have been effective in shielding
short-to-medium term interest rates from shocks that could have weakened the stimulus that the
euro area needed to consolidate the recovery (see Chart 2).
Anchoring the short and intermediate segments of the yield curve around levels consistent with a
very accommodative monetary policy stance has been even more critical for us at the ECB than
for  other  central  banks  engaging  in  similar  policies.  The  reason  for  this  reflects  the  unique
structure of the euro area’s monetary policy transmission mechanism. Compared with the United
States, for example, transmission in the euro area is much more reliant on banks. And short-to-
medium term rates are very important benchmarks that euro area banks use for pricing loans,
notably to non-financial corporations. One way to see the connection between euro area credit
markets and different segments of the yield curve in the euro area is to look at the interest rate
fixation  periods  for  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  and  households  (see  Chart  3).  Interest
rates on loans to non-financial corporations are, by and large, based on shorter-duration interest
rates, even in countries in which the rate fixation period for bank credit is generally longer. As
regards setting mortgage interest rates, the picture is more dispersed, with short and medium
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
maturities  being  the  relevant  benchmark  in  some  euro  area  countries,  and  long-term  interest
rates in others.
From  this  perspective,  the  complementary  nature  of  our  instruments  –  with  forward  guidance
anchoring the short-to-medium term segment of the curve, and the asset purchase programme
acting on the long-term segment – has given our monetary policy strategy an extra edge over the
last few years. It has made it more targeted and thus more impactful.
 As the economic prospects brighten, higher expected returns on business investment will make
borrowing conditions increasingly attractive. This, in and of itself, will reinforce accommodation
and make sure that inflation sustainably converges towards our objective of below, but close to,
2% over the medium term.
But our mission is not yet accomplished. We need patience and persistence. We need to be
patient,  because  inflation  convergence  needs  more  time  to  show  through  convincingly  in  the
data. The euro area’s economic environment is improving, and the fat negative tail to inflation
expectations, which was so visible at the start of our asset purchase programme, has virtually
disappeared (see Chart 4). This strengthens our confidence that headline inflation will gradually
move  towards  the  Governing  Council’s  objective.  But  measured  inflation  remains  exceedingly
volatile and metrics of underlying price pressures continue to be subdued. The entire distribution
of inflation expectations still needs to shift a fair distance to the right.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
And we need to be persistent, because the baseline scenario for future inflation remains crucially
contingent  on  very  easy  financing  conditions  which,  to  a  large  extent,  depend  on  the  current
accommodative monetary policy stance.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
