BANK OF UGANDA 
  Remarks by 
Louis Kasekende (PhD.) 
Deputy Governor, Bank of Uganda 
     At the Public Dialogue on Higher Education in Uganda  
Office of the President Main Auditorium, Kampala 
May 23, 2017 
 1 
    The Link Between Higher Education and Development: Myth or Reality? 
1. Introduction
The  theme  of  my  remarks  today  is  that  Uganda’s  economic  development 
requires workers with higher education, but that our higher education system 
serves those needs poorly. Too many people receive higher education given the 
demands of the labour market, both currently and in terms of how it might 
plausibly develop in the future. In addition, owing to the enrolment numbers in 
our institutions of higher learning relative to their capacity, the average quality 
of graduates of higher education is sub-optimal.  I will later come back to this 
point in my presentation. 
There is no doubt that human capital development plays a very important role in 
economic development. In essence, economic development entails shifts in the 
way  in  which  people  earn  their  living,  away  from  self-employment  in 
agriculture,  artisanal  manufacturing and services to wage labour in modern, 
formal sector businesses. These shifts in the composition of employment enable 
increases in labour productivity which allows incomes per capita to rise. Unlike 
the traditional informal sectors, modern formal sector industries require a labour 
force which is both much better educated and which has specialist vocational 
skills;  it  also  requires  a  relatively  small  cadre,  compared  to  the  overall 
2 
workforce, of very highly educated and trained workers to perform professional 
and managerial functions. 
 
The  key  contribution  which  the  education  system  can  make  to  economic 
development is to provide young people who are entering the labour market 
with the education and vocational skills which the economy will need in the 
years in which they will participate in the workforce. A shortage of relevant 
skills will hold back the development of the economy; if the supply of labour 
with particular skills cannot meet demand for that labour, firms which require 
these  skills  will  be  deterred  from  investing  to  expand  or  even  maintain 
production levels. However, that does not mean that simply boosting the supply 
of skills in a particular field will, by itself, generate the economic development 
that  will create demand for these skills.  For example, for a  country  with a 
growing software industry, a shortage of workers with IT skills would hold back 
the development of that industry. But training people in IT will not, by itself, 
create a software industry to employ these workers, because many other factors 
besides the appropriate labour supply affect the viability of investment in each 
particular industry.  
 
The viability of the financing of education depends on the contribution which 
educated people will make to the economy once they enter the labour force. 
Education should enable the people who receive it to increase their productivity, 
  3 
relative  to  what  would  be  the  case  if  they  had  not  been  educated.  Higher 
productivity  will  result  in  higher  economic  output  which  will  generate  the 
resources to enable the cost of the education to be recouped. This is applicable 
whether the education is paid for entirely by the student or paid for in full, or in 
part,  by  the  taxpayer. However,  if  the  costs of higher education exceed  its 
discounted benefits, no system of financing will be sustainable without subsidy 
from some other sectors of the economy.         
 
2.  How well does the Ugandan higher education system meet the country’s 
developmental needs? 
 
Unfortunately, there are grounds to believe that higher education in Uganda is 
ill  suited  to  supporting  the  developmental  needs  of  the  country.  Uganda 
educates far more people at tertiary level than can be productively absorbed by 
the economy, given its current level of development. This is both a waste of 
financially 
resources  which 
unsustainable.  Furthermore,  the  excessive  numbers  of  students  in  higher 
education, and the very low entry standards, have degraded its quality. The 
result is that the quantity of university graduates is too large for the needs of the 
economy but the quality of these graduates is too low. It is also possible to 
argue that the education system fails to provide a sufficient supply of entrants to 
the job market with vocational skills, or with vocational skills of only poor 
impedes  economic  development  and 
is 
  4 
quality, although that is not the fault of the education system alone, as these 
types  of  skills  are  often  best  learnt  through  on  the  job  training,  such  as 
apprenticeships, yet there is dearth of employers who can provide this type of 
training in Uganda.  
 
In 2014 there were 180,000 students enrolled in Ugandan universities and a 
further  69,000  students  enrolled  in  other  institutions  of  higher  education 
(colleges of business and commerce, teacher training colleges, etc); hence there 
was a total of 249,000 students enrolled in higher education (see table 1). If we 
assume that students pursue a three year course, this implies that, for each single 
year cohort of university age students, there are 60,000 students enrolled in 
universities  and  about  83,000  students  in  all  types  of  higher  educational 
institutions. The 2014 Population and Housing Census revealed that there was 
3.18  million  people  in  the  20-24  age  cohort  (the  relevant  age  cohort  for 
participating in higher education), an average of 638,000 people for each single 
year in that age cohort (table 1). 
  
These data imply that, of the total population in the age cohorts relevant for 
participating in higher education, 9.4 percent attend university and 13 percent 
attend a university or some other type of higher educational institution (table 1). 
The numbers enrolled in higher education have risen very rapidly, by almost 10 
percent per annum between 2002 and 2014, compared to annual growth of 3.3 
  5 
percent in the 20-24 age cohort during this period. As a share of the relevant age 
cohort, those enrolled in higher education more than doubled between 2002 and 
2014, from 6 percent to 13 percent.  
 
Table 1 
Numbers,  and  percentage  of  relevant  age  cohorts,  enrolled  in  higher 
education: 2002 and 2014 
9.4 
4.4 
2002 
 
79,862 
57,144 
2.15 
6.2 
2014 
 
249,049 
180,560 
3.18 
13.0 
 
 
Number of students enrolled in higher education 
  o/w enrolled in universities 
Population age 20-24 (millions) 
Percentage of applicable age cohort participating in 
higher education (percent) 
  o/w in universities (percent) 
  Notes: students are assumed to be enrolled on three year courses 
Sources:  Student  enrolment  numbers  are  from  the  Ministry  of  Education  Management 
Information System; Population data are from the 2002 and 2014 Population Census  
 
What job market opportunities are available for graduates of higher education in 
Uganda? The 2014 Population and Housing Census give a breakdown of the 
working  population  by  age  cohort  and  by  type  of  occupation.  The  type  of 
occupation to which most graduates aspire falls into two categories covered by 
the census: i) professionals and ii) technicians and associate professionals. None 
of the other categories of occupation require workers with higher education. 
 
In the age cohort most relevant for graduates beginning their careers – 25-29 
years of age – professionals account for 0.5 percent of the working population 
6 
  while technicians and associate professionals account for 2.6 percent. Hence the 
two categories combined account for only 3.1 percent of the working population 
in the age cohort to which most graduates will belong to in the early years of 
their working lives. Given that approximately 13 percent of the relevant age 
cohort  receives  higher  education,  this  implies  that  less  than  one  in  four 
graduates  of  higher  education  will  be  able  to  find  work  in  a  professional, 
associate professional or technical  occupation.1  Furthermore, the time series 
data  available  do  not  indicate  that  the  share  of  professional,  associate 
professionals and technicians in the workforce is increasing over time, which 
suggests that demand in the labour market for these categories of occupation is 
unlikely to rise substantially in the foreseeable future.  
 
Table2:  Working  population  age  25-30  in  professional,  technical  and  associate 
 
 
Working population age 25-29 
   ow in professional occupations 
   ow 
and 
technical 
professional occupations 
Percent share of professional occupations 
in working population age 25-30 
Percent  share  of  technical  and  associate 
professional  occupations 
in  working 
population age 25-30 
Source: National Population and Housing Census 2014 Main Report, tables 2.1, 4.9 and 4.11  
 
2014 
 
2,167,000 
10,800 
67,200 
0.5 
3.1 
professional occupations, 2014 
associate       
in 
                                                             
1 This conclusion is based on two assumptions. First, that all, or virtually, all graduates enter the labour market, 
which appears a reasonable assumption to make. Second, that no more than a negligible share of workers in the 
professional, associate professional and technical occupations are not graduates of higher education. If a non 
negligible share of technicians are non graduates of higher education, the employment prospects of higher 
education graduates are even bleaker. 
  7 
The  stark  implication  of  these  numbers  is  that  Uganda  educates  too  many 
people – by a factor of about 4 - in higher education than is needed by the 
economy, given its current state of development. Why is demand for graduate 
level occupations low in Uganda? The main reason pertains to the structure of 
the economy. Outside of the public sector, workers with higher education are 
employed  by  medium  and  large  scale  private  sector  firms,  which  need 
managers, accountants, engineers, IT specialists, etc. But these firms make up a 
small share of the economy and an even smaller share of employment. The 2010 
Census  of  Business  Establishments  found  that  formal  sector  enterprises 
(enterprises employing 5 or more workers) employed only 3.3 percent of the 
entire  workforce  (this  includes  all  categories  of  employment  of  which 
professionals are only a small share).  
 
The Ugandan  economy still predominantly comprises household and  micro-
enterprises, mainly engaged in agriculture, artisanal manufacturing and informal 
services; these enterprises do not require professional workers. Until there is 
radical change in the structure of the Ugandan economy, with employment in 
formal sector private enterprises replacing employment in household and micro-
enterprises,  the  demand  for  graduate  level  employment  as  a  share  of  total 
employment is unlikely to rise. Structural change of this nature will eventually 
occur in Uganda, but it will be a slow process, probably taking several decades, 
not least because of the very rapid growth of the population. 
  8 
 
3.  What are the implications for the financing of higher education? 
 
To evaluate the sustainability of the financing higher education we need to 
compare  the  true  costs  of  education  with  the  projected  benefits,  properly 
discounted.  
 
The  true  costs  of  higher  education  comprise  the  full  cost  of  tuition  and 
examinations (cost of teaching staff, teaching materials, facilities and utilities, 
administrative support, etc) plus the foregone earnings of the student during his 
or her period of study.2   
 
Unfortunately I only have a very rough estimate of tuition costs, and I would 
welcome  more  accurate  estimates  if  these  are  available.  There  were  some 
estimates of the unit costs of university education made for the Auditor General 
in 2010 which indicated that the costs of arts degrees were between Shs 2 and 
Shs 3 million, with degrees such as medicine being much more expensive. The 
National Council for Higher Education made separate estimates which were 
higher, by a factor of around 50 percent, for the period 2008/09.3 Obviously 
costs must have risen over the last 7 years. Given the fees charged by Makerere 
University for an arts degree, unit costs are probably now in the region of Shs 
                                                             
2 The costs of accommodation, food etc should not be included because non students also have to eat and sleep. 
3 Both sets of estimates are reported in The State of Higher Education in Uganda, 2010, p34.  
  9 
7.5  million  per  degree.  This  is  very  low  by  international  standards  when 
compared to costs in comparable countries including those in Africa such as 
South Africa. Further, this amount of money spent per student seems rather too 
low to deliver university education of an international standard.  
 
The foregone earnings during the years a student spends in higher education can 
be proxied by the earnings of a worker with secondary education. The 2012/13 
Uganda National Household Survey (UNHS) provides data on median monthly 
earnings by level of education. Workers with secondary education had median 
monthly earnings of Shs 160,000 (table 3). If we allow for wages to rise at the 
same  rate  as  headline  inflation,  their  earnings  would  be  approximately  Shs 
210,000 in 2017, which over three years amounts to just over Shs 7.5 million. 
Allowing for other expenses, such as books, etc the total cost of a three year 
university arts degree should be (very roughly) in the region of Shs 17 million. 
 
From the standpoint of the economy, the cost of university education should be 
fully  covered  by  the  increased  lifetime  earnings  of  graduates,  appropriately 
discounted,  if  that  education  is  to  generate  positive  gains  to  the  economy 
(assuming  that  a  worker’s earnings equal his or her  marginal productivity). 
Furthermore, if higher education generates positive returns to the economy, it 
ought  to be  financeable in principle, because either the state or the student 
should be able to borrow against future taxes or earnings. In practise, it may be 
  10 
Median Monthly Salaries by level of Education of Worker, 2012/13 
difficult for a student to borrow against his or her future earnings because of 
financial  market  imperfections  but  that  could  be  rectified  though  policy 
measures such as student loan guarantees.  
 
Let us assume that the discount rate for the economy is 15 percent, which is 
approximately equal to the Government’s average borrowing costs. This implies 
that,  if  the  cost  of higher  education  is  spread over the  working  life  of  the 
graduate, graduates of higher education must earn approximately Shs 3 million 
more per annum than workers with only secondary education.  
 
Table 3 
Education level 
 
Secondary 
Post-secondary specialisation 
Degree and above 
Source: Uganda National Household Survey 2012/13 table 4.7 
 
The 2012/13 UNHS revealed that workers with a degree had median monthly 
earnings  of  Shs  610,000  which  adjusting  for  inflation  is  equivalent  to  Shs 
800,000 in 2017  prices (table 3). Comparing  this with the median  monthly 
earnings  of  Shs  210,000  (in 2017  prices) of  a  worker with only  secondary 
education indicates that a graduate earns Shs 590,000 extra by virtue of having a 
higher education degree, The annual increment to income of higher education 
per worker is, therefore, Shs 7 million. Hence the annual gain in productivity 
and  income  arising  from  higher  education  is  more  than  double  its  costs, 
Median Monthly Salary (Shillings) 
 
160,000 
310,000 
610,000 
  11 
discounted  over  a  working  life.  This  means  that,  in  principle,  it  should  be 
possible to finance the costs of higher education by borrowing against future 
earnings  provided  that  all  of  the  graduates  of  higher  education  can  find 
employment in graduate level jobs. 
 
Unfortunately,  as  I  have  already  discussed,  less  than  a  quarter  of  higher 
education graduates are likely to be employed in graduate level occupations. 
This reverses the cost benefit ratio for higher education. If three quarters of 
graduates cannot find graduate level employment, the discounted benefits of 
higher education, in terms of increased productivity and incomes, are likely to 
be only about half of the total costs of providing higher education. In these 
circumstances, it is impossible to finance in full the costs of higher education 
from the future productivity and income gains to the economy of those who 
receive  higher  education.  As  such,  the  cost  of  higher  education  must  be 
subsidised  from  other  sectors:  i.e.  from  people  other  than  the  graduates 
themselves or from sectors of the economy other than those in which graduates 
work. That is neither efficient nor equitable, and will impede development. 
 
4.  What are the solutions for the future of higher education? 
 
There  is  no  rationale  for  providing  higher  education  to  13  percent  of  the 
relevant age cohort when the economy can provide graduate level employment 
  12 
for only a quarter of these students, upon graduation. It is a waste of scarce 
resources, which could be used more optimally on other areas of the education 
system. It is damaging for the higher education system, which does not have the 
staff or teaching facilities to cope with the huge numbers of students which now 
attend  higher  educational  institutions.  Furthermore,  given  the  very  low 
admission  standards,  with  students  able  to  enter  university  with  only  two 
principal  passes  at  UACE  level,  it  must  be  doubtful  whether  many  of  the 
students have the academic aptitude to pursue a university degree. They would 
be better off pursuing a less academically demanding form of training. 
 
A more rational approach to higher education would involve raising steeply the 
academic requirements for students to enter higher education, so that only the 
most academically able gain entry. This would reduce the numbers of university 
students and ensure a better match between graduates and the demands of the 
labour market. It would also ensure that the average quality of graduates would 
rise, both because of the higher entry requirements and because smaller classes 
will allow teaching to be more effective. Higher quality graduates will benefit 
employers; the graduates themselves will be more productive and so employers 
will have greater incentives to employ them in graduate level jobs.  
 
As an alternative to higher education, secondary school leavers who have not 
achieved very good UACE grades should be encouraged to undertake post-
  13 
secondary vocational training. Boosting the supply of job market entrants with 
vocational  skills  will  be  much  more  useful  for  potential  employers  than 
oversupplying the market with graduates for two reasons. First, the operations 
of  most  enterprises  require  far  more  workers  with  vocational  skills  than 
professional staff. Second, the quality of vocational skills is poor in Uganda, 
which  impedes  the  productivity  and  thus  the  competitiveness  of  Ugandan 
enterprises.  As  can  be  seen  from  table  3,  workers  with  a  post-secondary 
specialisation earn almost 50 percent more than workers with only secondary 
education.     
 
To  conclude,  the  title  of  this  public  dialogue  is:  “the  link  between  higher 
education and development: myth or reality?”. There is a real link between 
higher education and development; but the number of higher education students 
must  be  consistent  with  the  demands  of  the  economy  given  its  level  of 
development and the likely trajectory of its development over the medium to 
long term. Higher education would make a stronger contribution to economic 
development  if  it  produced  fewer,  but  better  quality  graduates.  A  smaller 
number of students in higher education would allow a larger share of the costs 
to be borne by the taxpayer, thus allowing larger numbers of intelligent students 
from poor backgrounds to attend university. This is on assumption that the 
quality of primary and secondary education is greatly improved evenly across 
  14 
the  country  to  allow  students  from  poor  economic  backgrounds  to  fairly 
compete. 
  15 
