   Address by Daniel Mminele,  
Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the Bundesbank regional office in Hamburg, Germany 
26 January 2017 
German G-20 presidency in 2017: 
opportunities and challenges for South Africa 
 1. 
Introduction 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen.  
 Thank  you  to  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  and  to  Dr  Arno  Bäcker,  President  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank  regional  office  for  Hamburg,  Mecklenburg  Western  Pomerania 
and  Schleswig-Holstein  for  the  kind  invitation  to  speak  to  you  today  in  this 
great Hanseatic city.  
 This  is  certainly  an  intriguing  city,  often  referred  to  as  ‘the  gateway  to  the 
world’ and ‘the Venice of the North’, names derived from the fact that Hamburg 
is home to  one of the largest harbours in  Europe, and therefore the centre of 
German  trade.  Interestingly,  it  has  more  bridges  than  Venice.  We  also  know 
that  Hamburg  has  a  vibrant  cultural  life  when  it  comes  to  art  and  music, 
including its unique association with the Beatles.  
 South Africa takes a keen interest in Germany and Europe at large, given the 
substantial  trade  linkages  and  therefore  significant  implications  for  our 
economic  prospects.  Not  only  is  Germany  the  second-largest  trading  partner 
for  South  Africa,  but  also  one  of  the  biggest  investors  in  the  domestic 
economy,  with  close  to  600  German  companies  located  in  South  Africa  and 
Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
1 
 providing  over  90  000  jobs.1  Such  a  presence  contributes  significantly  to 
employment and skills development, but also to technological advancement in 
South Africa. 
 
I  thought  that  since  I  am  in  the  G-202  host  country,  it  may  be  useful  to  share 
some  thoughts  with  you  on  the  G-20  in  general  and  more  specifically  insofar 
as South Africa and the South African Reserve Bank have experienced it thus 
far,  and  highlight  some  of  the  opportunities  and  challenges  as  we  perceive 
them.  
 Indeed, Germany has assumed the G-20 presidency at an important juncture, 
a  time  when  countries  are  increasingly  turning  inward,  with  anti-globalisation 
sentiment and populist rhetoric growing stronger. As Chancellor Angela Merkel 
noted  a  few  months  back,  the  current  environment  is  marked  by  a  strong 
emphasis  on 
the  nation  state.  She  cautioned 
that  withdrawing  and 
concentrating on one’s own country has never been of benefit to anyone in the 
end,  instead,  this  has  always  caused  harm.  As  such,  Germany’s  motto  of 
‘shaping  an  interconnected  world’  is  certainly  appropriate  as  it  talks  to  the 
benefits  of  globalisation  and,  along  with  it,  the  need  to  ensure  that  the  fruits 
thereof are shared in a manner that is more inclusive.  
 2.  G-20 track record  
 Germany played a leading role in the formation of the G-20. It was in the wake 
of  the  1997  Asian  financial  crisis  and  during  the  1999  German  presidency  of 
the  G-73  that  the  G-20  was  launched  as  a  new  forum  on  ‘key  economic  and 
financial  policy  issues  among  systemically  significant  economies’4.  Ten  years 
later, and coincidentally after yet another financial crisis, the status of the G-20 
                                                      
1 www.southafrica.diplo.de  
2 Group of Twenty 
3 Group of Seven (industrialized democracies) 
4 http://www.g20.org  
 
Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
2 
 was  elevated  to  that  of  a  Leaders’  Summit;  it  has  become  the  premier  forum 
for  international  economic  and  financial  cooperation.  Prior  to  this,  the  G-20 
initiative had been at the level of finance ministers and central bank governors.  
 Almost a decade on from the 2007 global financial crisis, perhaps it is prudent 
to ask: does the G-20 remain the premier forum for international engagement 
and cooperation on global economic and financial affairs, as it purports to be? 
How much has it achieved? Is it still relevant and effective?  
 I  think  it  can  be  argued  that  the  G-20  has  achieved  a  number  of  successes,  
certainly  remains  relevant,  and  many  would  agree  that  it  is  indeed  the  most 
appropriate  forum  given  its  representation,  and  as  such  is  well  placed  to 
address issues of global economic and financial importance. However, we can 
never  become  complacent  since  there  is  little  doubt  that  there  is  much  more 
that  can  and  should  be  done,  especially  given  some  criticism  voiced  that  the 
G20  was  a  good  crisis  manager,  but  may  be  less  successful  as  a  forum  for  
coordinating crisis prevention.  
 The  purpose  of  the  G-20  forum  is  to  enhance  cooperation.  Cooperation  is 
about  collaboration,  partnerships,  unity  and  compromise,  which  ultimately 
means  working  and  acting  together  for  a  common  purpose.  The  German 
Federal  Finance  Minister,  Wolfgang  Schäuble,  could  not  have  put  it  in  a 
simpler  and  more  concise  way  when  he  said  the  following  at  the  first  G-20 
meeting  under  the  German  presidency  in  Berlin  in  December  2016:  “We  will 
only be able to solve the problems of the world if we work together.” He went on to 
mention that “global solutions are needed for global challenges”.  
 During  the  first  Leaders’  Summit  in  2008,  the  G-20  focused  primarily  on 
strengthening economic growth, dealing with the economic and financial crisis, 
and  laying  the  foundation  for  much-needed  reform  of  the  financial  sector. 
There was a drive to reform the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World 
Bank  and  other  multilateral  development  banks,  coupled  with  initiatives  to 
resist  trade  protectionism  and  work  towards  the  conclusion  of  the  Doha 
Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
3 
 Development  Round,  the  objective  of  which  was  to  lower  trade  barriers  and 
facilitate increased global trade. The London Summit of April 2009 focused on 
coordinated  fiscal  and  monetary  stimulus  measures  to  avert  the  threat  of  a 
global  depression.  Leaders  agreed  on  additional  resources  of  up 
to 
US$1 trillion  for  the  IMF  to  assist  countries  in  weathering  the financial  crisis. 
The Financial Stability Forum at the Bank for International Settlements,  which 
at  the  time  was  only  represented  by  advanced  economies,  was  transformed 
into the Financial Stability Board (FSB), with key emerging market economies 
represented on the FSB. In September 2009, the G-20 leaders also agreed on 
the  implementation  of  a  framework  for  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced 
growth. 
 By  the  time  of  the  Toronto  Summit  in  June  2010,  fears  were  escalating  over 
the deteriorating fiscal health  of various  advanced economies  as they tried to 
support  growth.  Advanced  economies  with  large  deficits  agreed  to  at  least 
halve  their  fiscal  deficits  by  2013  and  to  stabilise  or  reduce  sovereign  debt 
ratios  by  2016.  These  commitments  included  ongoing  structural  reforms 
across  all  G-20  members  to  rebalance  and  strengthen  global  growth.  An 
agreement  to  conclude  work  in  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision 
on a new global regime for bank capital and liquidity was also reached.  
 By  2012,  the  European  banking  and  sovereign  debt  crisis  received  much 
attention,  with  the  spillover  effects  to  other  member  countries  in  a  globally 
interconnected world and the need for policymakers in Europe to take decisive 
and credible action featuring strongly. With this in mind, and with the potential 
for  increased  instability,  the  G-20  leaders  pledged  over  US$450 billion  in 
financial  resources  to  boost  the  IMF  firewall  at  the  June 2012  Los  Cabos 
Summit.  In  2014,  the  G-20  adopted  the  2-in-5  objective,  committing  to 
collectively  raise  G-20  output  by  an  additional  2  per  cent  over  a  five-year 
period, by 2018.  
   Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
4 
 The  contribution  of  central  banks,  within  their  mandates,  has  largely  been 
through  supportive  monetary  policies,  reforms  to  the  international  financial 
architecture,  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  sector,  leading  the 
dialogue  on  global  regulatory  reform,  playing  a  key  role  on  the  FSB,  and 
assisting  in  developing  strategies  for  sustainable  economic  growth.  Without 
too  much  chest-beating  for  my  own  guild,  I  do  think  that  the  contribution  of 
monetary policy in addressing the economic challenges is beyond question. In 
fact,  it  has  been  widely  recognised  that  there  has,  at  times,  been  an  over-
reliance on monetary policy to address the binding growth constraints in many 
economies. 
 It  is  thus  clear  that  the  G-20  has  taken  much  action  over  the  years,  but  the 
global  economic  recovery  has  nevertheless  been  less  than  inspiring.  Hence, 
we  are  now  witnessing  a rise in anti-globalisation rhetoric, a rise in populism, 
and  countries  developing  greater  nationalist  tendencies.  The  G-20  has  an 
important leadership role to play in unpacking and addressing the reasons for this 
change in sentiment and highlighting the negative ramifications of an inward bias. 
We need to emphasise the positive spillovers of globalisation, but also accept that 
we may have underestimated the number of people were left behind and who did 
not share in the spoils of globalisation. It is with this in mind then, that Germany’s 
focus  on  ‘shaping  an  interconnected  world’  and  enhancing  resilience  is  very 
pertinent.  
 Germany’s  three  main  pillars  for  the  G-20  presidency  –  of  ensuring  stability, 
improving  viability  for  the  future,  and  accepting  responsibility  –  reflect 
continuity of the G-20 agenda over the years and also aim to tackle the issues 
I have just spoken of. The issue of accepting responsibility is borne out by the 
new  agenda  item,  ‘Compact  with  Africa’,  which  speaks  directly  to  achieving 
sustainable economic progress in Africa as part of addressing some of the root 
causes for the various migration crises we have been observing. I will return to 
this later. 
 Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
5 
 I  must  add  that  we  certainly  welcome  the  more  streamlined  agenda  that  the 
German  presidency  has  put  together,  particularly  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the 
agenda  of  the  G-20  had  become  more  bloated  over  the  years,  with  the 
increasing risk of detracting from the effectiveness, efficiency and credibility of 
this forum. We are looking forward to Germany’s G-20 leadership during 2017, 
and I am convinced that the forum will greatly benefit from some of the virtues 
that Germany is famous for, such as thoroughness, efficiency and punctuality. 
Some  of  our  colleagues  have  already  had  a  taste  of  this  at  our  meetings  in 
Berlin during December.  
 3.  South Africa’s participation in the G-20: opportunities and challenges 
 How  does  a  small,  open  economy  such  as  South  Africa  fit  into  the  G-20?  South 
Africa  has  a  high  level  of  interconnectedness  to  Africa  and  within  the  global 
economy,  not  only  through  trade  links  but  also  because  of  our  deep  and 
sophisticated  financial  markets.  Our  membership  of  the  G-20  forum  provides 
South Africa with the space to participate in shaping key international policies that 
could  have  an  impact  on  our  own  economy,  the  region  and  the  continent  as  a 
whole.  
 Our  network  of  contacts  from  our  interactions  in  various  G-20  forums  provides 
great opportunities to enhance South Africa’s international profile and reputation. It 
also  allows  us  to  keep  pace  with  global  best  practice  and  learn  from  others, 
helping  us  to  make  more  informed  and  therefore  better  policy  decisions.  South 
Africa’s  participation  in  the  G-20  helps  to  leverage  its  voice  and  effectiveness  in 
other 
international  standard-setting  bodies, 
including 
the  FSB, 
the  Basel 
Committee on Bank Supervision, and the Financial Action Task Force, to name a 
few. South Africa has already adopted international best practice in areas such as 
financial regulatory reform, including being an early adopter of Basle III.  
    Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
6 
 It  is  important  to focus  on  the  underdevelopment  of  various  regions  in  the  global 
economy, including sub-Saharan Africa, and to ensure that the issues of relevance 
to  these  regions  are  on  the  table  of  the  global  policy  agenda.  At  the  Toronto 
Summit  in  June  2010,  the  G-20  leaders  confirmed  the  inclusion  of  ‘development’ 
as  a  key  agenda  topic,  and  at  the  Seoul  Summit  later  that  year  they  agreed  to 
establish a Working Group on this issue.  
 Building  on the  development  theme,  we  welcome  the  initiative  that  Germany  has 
placed  on  the  table,  namely  ‘Compact  with  Africa’,  through  which  it  hopes  to 
encourage  private-sector  investment,  including  in  infrastructure,  to  increase 
employment  and  foster  sustainable  growth  on  the  continent.  Under  this  initiative, 
African  countries  are  being  encouraged  to  discuss  and  agree  on  individual 
compacts, committing to concrete actions to enhance investment opportunities. As 
we  know,  the  investment  financing  gap  in  Africa  is  huge,  and  closing  its 
infrastructure gap is a top priority in order to put the continent on a path of higher 
and more sustainable growth and development. The ‘Compact’, which should tune 
into  other  African  initiatives  already  underway  on  the  continent,  should  help  to 
make  private  investment  in  Africa  more  attractive  by  making  it  more  secure, 
thereby  reducing  the  barriers  to  investment.  South  Africa  has  the  potential  to 
contribute significantly to the growth and development agenda of the G-20 and to 
the  ‘Compact’,  and  we  look  forward  to  this  initiative  gaining  momentum  in  the 
coming months and beyond. 
 South  Africa’s  participation  in  the  G-20  and  other  international  forums  is  not 
without  its  challenges.  These  include  constraints  related  to  human  and  other 
resources  to  fully  and  effectively  participate.  The  breadth  of  the  G-20  agenda 
requires  careful  prioritization,  which  invariably  involves  compromises  and  trade-
offs, sometimes affecting important agenda items. Another challenge relates to the 
‘small  country  problem’,  which  in  effect  means  that  much  energy  needs  to  be 
devoted  to  ensure  that  issues  of  relevance  to  both  emerging  market  and 
developing  countries  receive  appropriate  attention.  Then  there  is  the  issue  of 
countries being at different stages of development, which requires country-specific 
circumstances  to  be  taken  into  account,  and  which  needs  to  find  expression  in 
Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
7 
 such a manner so as not to compromise international standards. 
 As  the  only  African  country  at  the  G-20  table,  South  Africa  also  endeavours  to 
highlight  regional  and  continental  issues  whenever  the  opportunity  arises,  albeit 
without any formal mandate. In this regard we are supported by the African Union 
Commission and the NEPAD Secretariat as invitees to G20 meetings. 
 4. 
 Opportunities and challenges for the G-20 as a forum 
 It seems that while the G-20 has moved beyond its teething problems and idealism 
as  a  forum  for  cooperation  and  coordination  and  has  actually  produced  tangible 
outcomes, we have now reached the stage where we  run the risk of being viewed 
as a forum where process issues have become more prominent and actions  more 
difficult to agree on or implement. Indeed, at the  start of the global financial crisis, 
the  level  of  cooperation  and  coordination  within  the  G-20  was  impressive,  as  an 
array  of  appropriate  measures  was  implemented  to  deal  with  the  crisis  and  to 
improve resilience. Besides the achievements already referred to earlier, other very 
important  actions  were  taken  in  the  midst  of  the  crisis,  such  as  swap-line  facilities 
among major advanced economies and a few select emerging markets, revisions to 
the IMF lending toolkit to make it more flexible and relevant, and adapting views on 
capital 
flow  management  measures 
in  reaction 
to 
the  changed  operating 
environment.  However,  this  desire  to  cooperate  seems  to  have  faded  somewhat 
and some G-20 countries have since become or are becoming inwardly focused.  
 Last  year  we  witnessed  various  unexpected  political  developments  which  could 
have a bearing on the work of the G-20. In 2017, there could be more surprises in 
store  as  far  as  voter  choices  are  concerned,  and  thus  major  political  shifts  with 
potentially  significant  economic  consequences.  Much  uncertainty  currently  exists 
with  regard  to  the  future  policy  direction  in  some  of  the  major  economies,  which 
brings with it the possibility of increased financial market volatility.    
   Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
8 
 The pushback against globalisation has become a popular theme, as an increasing 
number  of  voters  believe  that  there  is  not  much  to  gain  from  the  current  system. 
Instead, many believe that globalisation has benefited a small privileged elite. There 
are  indications  that  policies  most  likely  to  be  enacted  in  reaction  to  this 
phenomenon 
include 
increased 
restrictions 
to 
immigration  and 
trade. 
Simultaneously,  greater  political  tensions  globally  are,  making  it  harder  for 
governments to pursue the structural reforms needed to encourage investment and 
so boost productivity and growth. 
 The G-20 needs to intensify its communication and highlight that with globalisation 
comes  more  trade,  more  wealth,  more  investment,  and  ultimately  more  jobs.  It 
means  lower-cost  goods  from  abroad,  which  increases  spending  power  and 
results in a higher standard of living. Competition from abroad forces local firms to 
become more efficient and to use resources more efficiently. Clearly, globalisation 
is good, but we need to acknowledge the challenge that everyone should share in 
its  fruits.  We  need  to  ensure  that  globalisation  is  accompanied  by  greater 
inclusiveness and reduced inequality. 
 Regarding  the  G-20  structural  reform  agenda  and  the  2-in-5  objective,  we  have 
made progress and implemented reforms, but, once again, we could do more. The 
structural  reforms  implemented  thus far  have  contributed  to  supporting  economic 
growth and have therefore contributed to the collective growth ambition set by the 
Brisbane  Summit.  However,  we  know  that  potential  growth  remains  low,  so  we 
need  to  step  up  our  implementation  efforts,  reassess  on  a  continuous  basis 
whether  we  are  still  on  the  right  path  with  our  structural  reform  initiatives,  and 
review and change course where necessary  
 A final issue that I would like to point out relates to outreach. It is important to bear 
in mind that, while as a group the G-20 makes up about 80 per cent of global trade 
and approximately 90 per cent global GDP5, it consists of only 19 countries, which 
effectively  excludes  more  than  160  countries.  Only  one  African  country  is 
                                                      
5 Gross Domestic Product 
Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
9 
 represented in the forum. Hence, the G-20 needs to do significantly more outreach 
to  ensure  that  the  views  and  interests  of  these  countries  are  not  unduly 
compromised by a member-focused G-20 Agenda.  
 It  is  important  to  recognise  that  amidst  the  challenges,  there  are  always 
opportunities.  Digitalization  is  one  such  opportunity,  and  we  know  that  Germany 
intends to focus more on digital transformation in a bid to make economies  ‘fit for 
the future’. Digitalization has immense benefits, ranging from improved access to 
financial services to cost savings from efficiency gains. A more financially inclusive 
global  economy  could  help  to  support  real  economic  activity  and  the  growing 
importance of financial  technology  is  a  key  contributor  towards  the  common  goal 
of  financial  inclusion.  In  a  2014  report,  the  World  Bank  mentioned  that  mobile-
money accounts can drive financial inclusion in sub-Saharan Africa and that there 
are big opportunities to expand financial inclusion – particularly among women and 
the poor – through financial innovation. Once more, the G-20 is the ideal platform 
to  jointly  discuss  digitalization  and  devise  means  of  using  it  responsibly  to  our 
advantage.  However,  it  is  important  that  in  doing  so  we  do  not  lose  sight  of  the 
financial  stability  considerations  associated  with  the  evolving  digital  world.  Thus, 
South  Africa  welcomes  the  proposal  that  the  G-20  take  action  to  improve 
cybersecurity  in  the  financial  sector  to  address  financial  stability  risks.  Continued 
investment in the ability to detect and respond to cybersecurity threats is needed 
to ensure that we remain in a proactive rather than a reactive mode to counter the 
potential threats posed by cybercrime. 
 Another opportunity advocated by Germany is the development of a holistic policy 
framework to measure the effects of financial reforms. We must remain sensitive 
to the potential unintended consequences of the implementation of these reforms, 
especially  given  the  differing  levels  of  financial  sophistication  in  different 
jurisdictions.  A  lack of  international  consistency  among  and  within  regulators  and 
central banks regarding roles, policies, directives and guidance could pose risks of 
instability, especially where cross-border flows are affected.  
  Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
10 
 How do we make the best of the opportunities presented? How do we react to and 
deal  with  these  challenges?  Only  through  cooperation  and  collaboration  for  a 
common  purpose,  since  by  so  doing,  we  contribute  to  the  creation  of  a  more 
equitable world, both in terms of geographical distribution as well as within national 
boundaries.  
 5. 
 Conclusion 
 Let me then conclude by saying that we are very excited about the year ahead and 
the promises it holds. We believe that much can be gained if we work together, if 
we tackle the difficult issues of exclusion and inequality, if we make the most of the 
opportunities  presented  to  us.  We  appreciate  Germany’s  desire  to  use  its 
presidency  to  intensify  international  cooperation  and  ensure  that  globalisation 
benefits  everyone.  This  is  not  an  easy  task, but  it  is  necessary  to ensure  strong, 
sustainable, balanced and inclusive growth. South Africa is fully supportive of this 
objective and will contribute wherever appropriate.  
 Thank you.  
 Disclaimer: There may be minor differences between this version of the speech and the delivered German version 
11 
 