RESERVE BANK OF FIJI  
  PRESENTATION TO THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON ECONOMIC 
AFFAIRS BY ACTING GOVERNOR MR ARIFF ALI 
 RESERVE BANK OF FIJI JANUARY-JULY 2016 
REPORT 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
1. 
 
• 
Thank  you  Honourable  Chair  and  Honourable  Members  for  the  invitation  to 
present  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji’s  January-July  2016  Report  to  the  Standing 
Committee on Economic Affairs. 
 
• 
Governor  Whiteside  and  the  management  team  made  a  presentation  to  the 
Committee  on  20  September  last  year  on  the  Bank’s  annual  reports  for  2014  and 
2015. 
 
• 
Let  me  begin  by  saying  that  central  banks  are  unique  institutions.    Each 
country  has  only  one  central  bank  or  monetary  authority  with  similar  but  distinct 
monetary policy objectives. 
 
• 
Honourable Chair, central banks are high impact organisations.  Our decisions 
or indecisions and our actions or inactions have major and far reaching repercussions 
and  consequences  on  the  economic  well-being  of  the  public  at  large  and  the  entire 
spectrum  of  businesses  in  the  nation.    The  responsibility  and  accountability  is 
immense and central banking is therefore not for the faint of heart. 
 
• 
Section  4  of  the  RBF  Act  lists  down  the  core  functions  of  the  Bank.    In 
addition,  section  153  of  the  2013  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Fiji  includes 
provisions on the primary objectives of the Bank.   
 
• 
preservation of three aspects of stability: 
 
 
 
 
 
2. 
 
• 
year of the Bank shall coincide with the financial year of the Government”.   
 
• 
December, in line with the recent change in Government’s fiscal year.   
 
[i]  
[ii]  
[iii]   Financial stability.  
Section  54  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  Act  [1983]  states  that  “the  financial 
Honourable Chair, central banking, in very simple terms is responsible for the 
Therefore,  the  financial  year  of  the  Bank  now  ends  on  31  July  instead  of  31 
Price stability; 
External (currency) stability; and 
BACKGROUND 
  KEY OUTCOMES 
In  addition,  section  56  of  the  RBF  Act  states  that  the  audited  accounts 
• 
must  be  completed  within  three  months  following  the  end  of  the  year.    In  this 
regard, I am pleased to inform the Honourable Members of the Committee that 
the  Board  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  confirmed  and  signed  off  on  the  Bank’s 
annual audited financial statements for the seven months ending 31 July 2016 on 
29  September  2016.    This  means  that  our  annual  audited  financial  accounts  were 
completed within two months after the end of the financial year.   
 
• 
Following the signing of the audited accounts and in line with the provisions 
of  the  RBF  Act,  the  Bank  provided  to  the  Honourable  Minister  for  Economy,  Mr 
Aiyaz  Sayed-Khaiyum,  a  certified  auditor’s  copy  of  the  accounts  along  with  the 
operations report of the Bank for the seven months period ending 31 July 2016.   
 
• 
Previously  when  the  Government’s  financial  year  was  the  calendar  year,  the 
RBF’s  Annual  Report  would  be  submitted  to  the  Minister  by  March  31  each  year.  
Last  year  was  the  first  time  that  the  audited  accounts  and  operations  report  were 
presented for the period 1 January 2016 to 31 July 2016.  Both the accounts and report 
only  cover  the  first  seven  months  of  the  2016  financial  year  as  the  last  five  months 
(August to December 2015) are accounted for in the Bank’s 2015 Annual Report. 
 
3. 
 
• 
The  objective  of  central  banks  is  not  to  maximise  profit.    Its  key  role  is  to 
support  economic  growth  by  ensuring  that  there  is  price  stability,  external  stability 
and financial system stability.  I will shortly highlight the key outcomes in relation to 
these three KPIs. 
 
Financial Performance 
 
• 
highlight our financial performance for the seven month period ending 31 July 2016. 
 
• 
The  RBF  made  a  profit  of  $13.9  million  for  the  seven  month  period.  
However, the total amount transferred to Government was $16.9 million as it included 
$3.0 million of the revaluation reserve account (RRA). 
 
This  is  in  accordance with  sections 8(3) and 34  of the RBF  Act  which states 
• 
that  one  fifth  of  the  RRA  is  to  be  transferred  to  the  Government  along  with  our 
profits. 
 
• 
month period ended 31 December 2015. 
 
It  may  not  be  appropriate  to  compare  the  Bank’s  financial  performance  in 
• 
2016  with  2015  as  the  periods  covered  are  not  the  same  i.e.  seven  months  in  2016 
against 12 months in 2015. 
 
• 
five years totalled $160.0 million. 
 
The total profit and revaluation reserve transferred to Government in the past 
This compares with a transfer of $32.2 million to Government for the twelve 
Before I elaborate on the three stability objectives, please allow me to quickly 
 2 
  All  central  banks  have  the  same  mandate  to  ensure  that  inflation  is  low 
For  those  of  us  who  don’t  drink  kava,  our  inflation  was  effectively  around  3 
Price Stability 
 
• 
and stable.  This is no different even for small central banks like us. 
 
• 
As  you  are  well  aware,  Fiji  was  hit  by  Tropical  Cyclone  (TC)  Winston  in 
February 2016.  Consequently, the supply of fresh fruits and vegetables and for some 
of  us,  the  supply  of  our  favourite  national  drink,  kava,  was  affected.    Consequently, 
inflation  rose  to  5.5  percent  at  the  end  of  July  2016  from  1.6  percent  at  the  end  of 
December 2015. 
 
• 
Honourable  Members,  you  may  be  surprised  to  know  that  almost  2.0 
percentage  points  of  the  5.5  percent  inflation  outcome  at  July  end  was  driven  by 
higher kava prices.  Even though kava constitutes only 2.5 percent of our Consumer 
Price  Index  (CPI)  basket,  it  contributed  substantially  to  the  inflation  out-turn.  As  a 
result, while  yaqona farmers benefitted from  the high prices, kava consumers had to 
fork  out  significantly  more  for  their  favourite  brown  label  drink  as  prices  almost 
doubled by July and rose three-fold by January this year. 
 
• 
percent. 
 
External Stability 
 
• 
As a small open economy dependent on imports of a variety of goods such as 
medicine, food, fuel, machinery, etc. we need to maintain a sufficient level of foreign 
reserves otherwise there will be pressures on our exchange rate.  
 
• 
reserves which states that it should be sufficient to cover 3 months of import. 
 
• 
For Fiji, we like to build in an additional buffer above this benchmark as we 
are prone to natural disasters, which can affect our export sector including tourism as 
well  as  external  shocks  which  can  significantly  increase  our  import  bill,  and  in  turn 
significantly impact our foreign reserves. 
 
Honourable  Members,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  that  in  regards  to  external 
• 
stability,  Fiji’s  foreign  reserves  remained  well  above  the  benchmark  throughout  the 
review period.   
 
• 
At  the  end  of  July  2016,  our  foreign  reserves  were  $1,982  million,  just  $18 
million shy of the $2 billion mark and was sufficient to cover 5.5 months of retained 
imports. 
 
• 
These foreign reserves are what the RBF holds in its accounts.  In addition, we 
have  allowed  a  number  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  to  invest  offshore.    At  the 
end  of  July  2016,  foreign  reserves  held  by  other  institutions  amounted  to  more  than 
$500 million. 
 
 
The International Monetary Fund has set a benchmark on the level of foreign 
 3 
  As  at  31  July  2016,  the  banking  sector  accounted  for  53  percent  of  the  total 
Financial Stability 
 
• 
Honourable  Members,  it  is  paramount  that  our  financial  system  is  safe 
and sound whereby depositors, pensioners, policyholders and unit holders’ funds 
are protected.  The safety and soundness of our financial system is also crucial in 
ensuring the confidence of investors and international agencies. 
 
In this regard, I am pleased to inform the Committee that the Fijian financial 
• 
system  remains  safe  and  sound  supported  by  a  growing  asset  portfolio  which  rose 
marginally from the end of 2015 to July 2016 to just over $16 billion.  This is almost 
twice our GDP. 
 
• 
assets, followed by FNPF at 31 percent and the insurance industry at 9 percent.  
 
• 
The  RBF  uses  international  best  practices  and  standards  to  assess  the  safety 
and  soundness  of  the  financial  system,  based  on  a  composite  index  of  a  number  of 
indicators  such  as  earnings,  capital  or  solvency,  liquidity,  quality  of  management, 
asset quality, governance and risk management.  A primary objective of the prudential 
supervision  role  of  the  RBF  is  prevention,  rather  than  rectification,  so  a  risk-based 
approach  to  supervision  is  undertaken  where  risks  to  the  operations  of  individual 
institutions and the financial system as a whole are closely monitored. 
 
• 
The RBF undertakes offsite and targeted onsite examinations of all supervised 
institutions in the system, and continuously reviews prudential supervision policies in 
line  with  recent  developments  and  international  best  practices.    We  have  also 
produced an annual Financial Stability Report on Fiji’s financial system. 
 
What is the outcome of this? 
 
• 
Honourable Members, by meeting its KPIs the Bank is effectively contributing 
towards  sustainable  economic  growth.    We  estimate  that  the  economy  grew  by  2.0 
percent in 2016 despite the substantial damage caused by TC Winston and we forecast 
further economic expansion in the coming years.  Economic growth in turn translates 
to more income, more jobs, more tax revenue for Government, a reduction in poverty 
and increased standards of living. 
 
• 
points for your noting: 
 
Honourable  Members,  before  I  end  I  wish  like  to  highlight  a  number  of  key 
[1]  
[2]  
Inflation at the end of May this  year was down to 2.5 percent  and we 
expect  inflation  to  be  around  similar  levels  for  the  remainder  of  the 
year; 
Foreign reserves reached a number of new highs recently and peaked at 
$2.25 billion last week; and 
[3]    We  project  the  economy  to  grow  for  an  8th  consecutive  year  in  2017 
and the growth rate was recently revised upwards to 3.8 percent. 
 
• 
Finally Honourable Members, I would like to acknowledge the great team that 
we have at the Bank and I wish to thank them, including Governor Whiteside and the 
 4 
 RBF Board for their leadership and guidance, and for the efforts  that went  into 
producing  the Bank’s January-July 2016 Report. 
  
• 
I hope those remarks are helpful background for the Committee’s review 
of the Reserve Bank of Fiji’s January-July 2016 Report and we would be happy 
to answer your questions. 
 
Thank you 
 
 
 
8 June 2017 
  5 
 