Lawrence  Schembri:  Monetary  policy  framework  issues  -  toward
the 2021 inflation-target renewal
Remarks by Mr Lawrence Schembri, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Bank of
Canada  workshop  "Monetary  Policy  Framework  Issues:  Toward  the  2021  Inflation-Target
Renewal", Ottawa, Ontario, 14 September 2017.
Good morning everyone, et bonjour à tous.
 Bienvenue à la Banque du Canada. Je m’appelle Larry Schembri. Je suis un sous-gouverneur ici
à la Banque.
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  open  this  workshop  on  issues  central  to  the  monetary  policy
framework and its implementation.
Given  the  significant  challenges  central  banks  have  faced  in  achieving  their  monetary  policy
goals since the global financial crisis, this is a propitious moment to step back and re-examine
these fundamental issues from a variety of perspectives.
As  many  of  you  know,  the  current  monetary  policy  framework  in  Canada  consists  of  two
components:
a consumer price index (CPI) inflation target of 2 per cent, the midpoint of a control range of
1 to 3 per cent; and
a flexible, market-determined exchange rate.
While the second component has been in place for almost 60 of the past 70 years, our inflation-
targeting regime was implemented in 1991 and the current specification has existed since 1995.
This  framework  has  served  Canada  well  in  the  face  of  significant  movements  in  commodity
prices and Canada’s terms of trade, as well as other shocks, including the Great Recession.
Inflation has averaged just below 2 per cent since we implemented the target, and both output
growth and inflation have been much more stable relative to before 1991.
In  addition,  two  important  features  of  our  inflation-targeting  regime  have  drawn  favourable
international recognition:
first, the price stability policy goal of the regime is founded on a joint agreement between the
Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada; and
second, the agreement is reviewed regularly on a five-year basis.
The joint agreement with a democratically elected government enhances the legitimacy of the
price  stability  objective  and  thereby  boosts  its  credibility.  It  also  gives  the  Bank  of  Canada
operational independence to achieve this goal.
The  regular  five-year  review,  meanwhile,  affords  the  Bank  the  opportunity  to  revisit  many
important aspects of our monetary policy framework and its implementation.
While the framework has worked well in the past, improvements should always be considered—
especially  given  the  changing  economic  environment,  the  lessons  learned  from  experience  in
Canada and elsewhere, and pertinent research findings.
In the past, the Bank has used this opportunity to organize and give visibility to its monetary policy
research program, which has examined various dimensions of our monetary framework—well
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
beyond the relatively narrow scope of the joint inflation-control agreement and the goal of price
stability.
The regular five-year review also presents the opportunity to engage various stakeholders in this
process to provide us with helpful ideas and useful feedback on our work. This workshop is a
case in point. It has been organized early in the current five-year review cycle, so we can draw
from  a  wide  range  of  perspectives—from  academics,  economic  journalists  and  other  central
bankers and policy makers—well before we begin to develop the key questions for our research
program that will culminate in the 2021 renewal and publication of our background document.
In addition to striving to obtain a wide range of perspectives, the workshop has been organized in
a fairly open-ended manner to stimulate dialogue on a broad span of issues. And in keeping with
our desire to be open and transparent about this process, and to include all Canadians, today’s
conference  is  being  webcast  and  we  will  post  running  commentary  on  our  social  media
channels.
We have divided the workshop into four panels:
one on the role and objectives of monetary policy in Canada;
two panels on more operational issues, namely the scope and effectiveness of monetary
policy tools, and monetary policy communication; and
a panel on lessons learned from other central banks.
In the past, we have considered several important framework questions, most notably:
whether to lower or raise the inflation target;
whether to adopt a price-level path target, instead of an inflation target; and
what  would  be  the  implications  for  monetary  policy  of  financial  stability  vulnerabilities  and
risks.
These issues were considered primarily during the last two review cycles, which ended in 2011
and 2016, respectively.
In recent years, discussions of monetary policy frameworks have focused on the impact of a
number of significant economic developments. These include:
the decline in the equilibrium real interest rate and thus in the “neutral” policy interest rate,
which limits the scope for use of countercyclical changes in the policy interest rate;
the  decline  in  potential  output  growth—especially  in  advanced  economies—driven  by
demographic trends and lower labour productivity growth, forces that monetary policy has
limited or no ability to counteract; and
the  elevated  level  of  indebtedness  of  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  which  raises
concerns about financial stability, fiscal space and central bank independence.
And, looking ahead, new financial technologies could affect the implementation and transmission
of monetary policy.
So,  we  are  most  fortunate  to  have  with  us  today  a  very  distinguished  group  of  speakers  to
enlighten us with their thinking on these and other challenging issues. Please let me close by
thanking them, and all conference participants, especially those who have come some distance
to be with us today.
It promises to be a very stimulating workshop, and my colleagues and I are very much looking
forward to listening and discussing with you. Bonne journée.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
