Mario Draghi: ECB press conference - introductory statement
Introductory statement by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, and Mr Vítor
Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 27 April 2017.
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to our press
conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council,
which was also attended by the Commission Vice-President, Mr Dombrovskis.
Based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  keep  the key  ECB
interest rates unchanged. We continue to expect them to remain at present or lower levels for
an  extended  period  of  time,  and  well  past  the  horizon  of  our  net  asset  purchases.
Regarding non-standard monetary policy measures, we confirm that our net asset purchases,
at the new monthly pace of €60 billion, are intended to run until the end of December 2017, or
beyond, if necessary, and in any case until the Governing Council sees a sustained adjustment
in the path of inflation consistent with its inflation aim. The net purchases will be made alongside
reinvestments  of  the  principal  payments  from  maturing  securities  purchased  under  the  asset
purchase programme.
Our  monetary  policy  measures  have  continued  to  preserve  the  very  favourable  financing
conditions that are necessary to secure a sustained convergence of inflation rates towards levels
below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Incoming data since our meeting in early March
confirm that the cyclical recovery of the euro area economy is becoming increasingly solid and
that  downside  risks  have  further  diminished. At  the  same  time,  underlying  inflation  pressures
continue  to  remain  subdued  and  have  yet  to  show  a  convincing  upward  trend.  Moreover,  the
ongoing volatility in headline inflation underlines the need to look through transient developments
in HICP inflation, which have no implication for the medium-term outlook for price stability.
A  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for  underlying  inflation
pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term. If the outlook becomes
less favourable, or if financial conditions become inconsistent with further progress towards a
sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation,  we  stand  ready  to  increase  our  asset  purchase
programme in terms of size and/or duration.
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. Euro
area real GDP increased by 0.5%, quarter on quarter, in the fourth quarter of 2016, following a
growth  rate  of  0.4%  in  the  third  quarter.  Incoming  data,  notably  survey  results,  bolster  our
confidence that the ongoing economic expansion will continue to firm and broaden. The pass-
through  of  our  monetary  policy  measures  is  supporting  domestic  demand  and  facilitates  the
ongoing  deleveraging  process.  The  recovery  in  investment  continues  to  benefit  from  very
favourable financing conditions and improvements in corporate profitability. Employment gains,
which  are  also  benefiting  from  past  labour  market  reforms,  are  supporting  real  disposable
income  and  private  consumption.  Moreover,  the  signs  of  a  stronger  global  recovery  and
increasing  global  trade  suggest  that  foreign  demand  should  increasingly  add  to  the  overall
resilience of the economic expansion in the euro area. However, economic growth continues to
be dampened by a sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms, in particular in product
markets, and by remaining balance sheet adjustment needs in a number of sectors. The risks
surrounding the euro area growth outlook, while moving towards a more balanced configuration,
are still tilted to the downside and relate predominantly to global factors.
Headline inflation has been recovering from the very low levels seen in 2016, largely owing to
higher  energy  price  increases. After  reaching  2.0%  in  February  2017,  euro  area  annual  HICP
inflation stood at 1.5% in March. This reflected mainly lower energy and unprocessed food price
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation,  but  also  a  decline  in  services  price  inflation.  Looking  ahead,  on  the  basis  of  current
futures prices for oil, headline inflation is likely to increase in April and thereafter to hover around
current levels until the end of this year. However, as unutilised resources are still weighing on
domestic  wage  and  price  formation,  measures  of  underlying  inflation  remain  low  and  are
expected  to  rise  only  gradually  over  the  medium  term,  supported  by  our  monetary  policy
measures,  the  expected  continuing  economic  recovery  and  the  corresponding  gradual
absorption of slack.
Turning to the monetary analysis, broad money (M3) continues to expand at a robust pace, with
an annual rate of growth of 4.7% in February 2017, after 4.8% in January. As in previous months,
annual  growth  in  M3  was  mainly  supported  by  its  most  liquid  components,  with  the  narrow
monetary aggregate M1 expanding at an annual rate of 8.4% in February 2017, unchanged from
the previous month.
The  recovery  in  loan  growth  to  the  private  sector  observed  since  the  beginning  of  2014  is
proceeding. The annual growth  rate  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations  declined  to  2.0%  in
February  2017,  from  2.3%  in  the  previous  month,  while  the  annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to
households remained broadly stable at 2.3% in February. At the same time, the euro area bank
lending survey for the first quarter of 2017 indicates that net loan demand has increased and
bank lending conditions have further eased across all loan categories. The pass-through of the
monetary  policy  measures  put  in  place  since  June  2014  continues  to  significantly  support
borrowing conditions for firms and households and credit flows across the euro area.
To  sum  up,  a cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with the signals coming
from  the  monetary  analysis  confirmed  the  need  for  a  continued  very  substantial  degree  of
monetary accommodation to secure a sustained return of inflation rates towards levels that are
below, but close to, 2% without undue delay.
In order to reap the full benefits from our monetary policy measures, other policy areas must
contribute  much  more  decisively  to  strengthening  economic  growth.  The  implementation  of
structural  reforms  needs  to  be  substantially  stepped  up  to  increase  resilience,  reduce
structural  unemployment  and  boost  productivity  and  potential  output  growth.  Regarding fiscal
policies,  all  countries  should  intensify  efforts  towards  achieving  a  more  growth-friendly
composition of public finances. A full and consistent implementation of the Stability and Growth
Pact and of the macroeconomic imbalances procedure over time and across countries remains
crucial to enhance the resilience of the euro area economy.
We are now at your disposal for questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
