Vítor Constâncio: Effectiveness of Monetary Union and the Capital
Markets Union
Contribution  of  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the
magazine of the Eurofi conference in Malta (5-7 April 2017), 4 April 2017.
 The  euro  area  recovery  is  continuing  at  a  moderate,  but  firming  pace,  and  is  broadening
gradually across sectors and countries. The ECB’s monetary policy measures have been a key
contributor to these positive developments, and the only expansionary macroeconomic policy in
support of the recovery.
Real GDP growth has expanded for 15 consecutive quarters, growing by 0.5% during the final
quarter  of  2016.  Dispersion  in  growth  rates  across  euro  area  countries  has  fallen.  Economic
sentiment  is  at  its  highest  level  in  nearly  six  years.  The  unemployment  rate  is  back  down  to
single-digit  figures  and  over  four  million  more  Europeans  are  employed  now  than  three  years
ago.
Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the  ECB  has  put  in  place  a  number  of  conventional  and
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures  to  stimulate  the  economy  and  rehabilitate  the
monetary transmission mechanism, which had become impaired at the height of the crisis. This
comprehensive range of measures has worked its way through the financial system, leading to a
significant  easing  of  financing  conditions  for  consumers  and  firms.  Together  with  improving
financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets,  this  has  strengthened  credit  dynamics  and
supported domestic demand.
Bank lending rates for both euro area households and non-financial corporations have fallen by
over 110 basis points since June 2014. Lending rates for small and medium-sized enterprises,
which provide two-thirds of total private sector employment in the euro area, have declined by
over 180 basis points.
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as recent ECB surveys on bank lending and access to finance have shown. But it is not just
lending  rates  that  are  more  favourable.  Bank  lending  volumes  have  also  been  gradually
recovering  since  early  2014.  Annual  growth  in  credit  to  euro  area  households  increased  in
January to 2.2% and growth in credit to businesses remained at 2.3% – the highest growth rates
in  more  than  four  years.  Market-based  funding  conditions,  too,  have  improved  significantly  in
response to the corporate sector purchase programme launched in June 2016.
While monetary policy has been the mainstay of the recovery, there are other potential sources
of macroeconomic stabilisation. Given the heterogeneity of countries across the euro area, the
lack of synchronisation of business cycles, and the absence of fiscal transfers between Member
States, capital markets play an important role in mitigating the income effects of region-specific
shocks.
For example, evidence suggests that capital markets and credit markets together help smooth
around two-thirds of a shock to regional GDP in the United States, dwarfing the 13% contribution
of federal transfers. In comparison, the overall contribution of markets to risk sharing in the euro
area  has,  on  average,  been  limited.  There  was  a  brief  period  in  the  early-to-mid  2000s  when
capital markets smoothed between 30 and 40 percent of country-specific shocks to GDP, but
this  declined  substantially  during  the  crisis,  and  region-specific  shocks  remain  mostly
unsmoothed (see Chart).
Given  the  importance  of  risk-sharing  through  capital  markets  for  macroeconomic  stability  and
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
welfare, we need a Capital Markets Union (CMU) that is ambitious. To be truly effective, CMU will
require  harmonisation  in  a  number  of  sensitive  areas,  including  key  legislation  and  policies
related to financial products, such as investor protection and bankruptcy procedures.
The CMU should come with a roadmap in terms of goals and milestones to be achieved. Broad
objectives such as deepening financial integration and achieving risk sharing should be matched
with  specific  proposals  such  as  facilitating  funding  for  corporates  in  general  and  for  SMEs  in
particular.
Chart: The channels of risk sharing in the euro area, 1991—2015.
Note:  The  Chart  summarizes  the  5-year  cumulative  contributions  of  capital  markets,  credit
markets, fiscal tools, and relative prices to the smoothing, in terms of consumption growth, of a
1-standard-deviation shock to GDP growth. Each bar thus measures the parts of the shock to
country-specific  GDP  that  are  absorbed  by  the  respective  channels.  The  remainder  is
interpreted  as  the  unsmoothed  portion  of  a  GDP  shock,  i.e.,  the  part  of  a  shock  to  country-
specific  GDP  growth  that  is  reflected  into  country-specific  consumption  growth.  Contributions
sum  up  to  100  percent,  and  a  negative  contribution  corresponds  to  dis-smoothing  of
consumption growth. The respective contributions are estimated over rolling ten-year backward-
looking  windows,  based  on  annual  data  and  applying  the Asdrubali  and  Kim  (2004)  approach
enhanced for relative price adjustments in the spirit of Corsetti, Dedola, and Viani (2011).
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
