Andreas Dombret: Current challenges in the euro area. A view from
Germany
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at Columbia University, New York City, 20 April 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  Columbia  University  today.  It  is  an  excellent  occasion  to
cherish the transatlantic exchange of ideas – something that has accompanied me throughout
my entire career and from which I personally have always benefited.
For the next half an hour, I am going to talk about the current challenges in the euro area. I hope
that the subjects I have chosen will be of interest to you from a transatlantic perspective.
1. Current challenges in the euro area
From  a  central  banker,  engaged  in  banking  supervision,  you  might  expect  a  focus  on  issues
concerning banks and financial regulation. I must disappoint you in that respect, as I only wish to
briefly touch on the European banking sector: Undeniably, the health of the banking sector and
the health of the overall economy are mutually dependent. In the euro area, banks play a much
larger role in financing the economy than, for example, in the US.
And the banking sector is, indeed, facing several challenges. For example, in some euro area
member states, banks have a high ratio of non-performing loans. This ultimately has the potential
to become problematic from a macroeconomic perspective, as institutions that have a high ratio
of non-performing loans tend to be preoccupied in dealing with these and have less time and
energy to spend on financing the economy. Another structural challenge is the profitability of euro
area banks. While banks are markedly better capitalized today than in the wake of the financial
crisis, their rather low profitability might hamper their resilience in the future.
To be honest, these two challenges imply a lot of work ahead, not only for euro-area banks, but
also  for  their  supervisors.  What  I  would  like  to  assure  you  is  that  the  ECB  and  its  national
partners  are  fully  committed  to  keep  up  with  these  challenges.  And  also  banks  and  their
management are fully aware of the homework laid upon them.
Therefore, instead of talking to you about financial regulations, I would like to use this opportunity
to comment on more fundamental issues.
Whether it be Brexit or the election in France in three days’ time, Europe is experiencing serious
headwinds  with  regard  to  its  most  ambitious  project:  European  integration.  Populism  is  at
worrying  levels,  accompanied  by  a  growing  skepticism  toward  many  forms  of  transnational
cooperation, not least in the United States.
One of the drivers of rising skepticism has certainly been the euro area crisis – which has been a
crisis of confidence – and its negative economic impact. Meanwhile, the euro area economy is in
much better shape. Last year, euro area GDP grew at 1.7 percent – faster than potential GDP.
This has also had a positive effect on employment. Unemployment in the euro area is still higher
than before the crisis, but it’s at its lowest level since 2009. The average unemployment rate
currently stands at 9.5 percent.
But this evidently does not provide the full story when it comes to the state of the euro area. The
challenges are complex. As H.L. Mencken, an American journalist with German roots, once said,
“to every complex problem there is an answer that is simple, clear and wrong". In line with this, I
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
will take a closer look at two major issues of the euro area and the European project, namely
1.   The quest for a suitable institutional framework, and
2.   The question as to whether the cooperative framework underpinning the European project
and international arrangements is outdated.
2. Towards a suitable institutional design
The  institutional  arrangements  of  the  euro  area  remain  its  key  challenge.  The  euro  crisis,  in
particular, revealed severe structural flaws. Let me briefly summarize the main lessons learned
to give you a better understanding of the current reform challenges.
The crisis demonstrated how much the euro area requires a framework that is able to absorb
shocks and deal with heterogeneous issues across regions and member states. A key part of
this  challenge  is  that  member  states  tend  to  be  exposed  to  divergent  regional  developments
while  at  the  same  time  the  single  currency  makes  currency  appreciation  or  depreciation  no
longer  available  as  an  economic  policy  tool.  Principally,  member  states  may  address  their
regional issues by employing independent fiscal and economic policies. In a currency union, the
burden  of  excessive  debt  can  be  partially  shifted  to  other  member  states.  This  increases  the
incentive for member states to avoid politically difficult decisions in the short term by borrowing
more.
It  is  important  to  remember  that  this  problem  had  been  foreseen  from  the  very  outset.  The
founding fathers of the European monetary union put rules in place to prevent negative spillovers.
However, in practice, the rules have not always been followed, not least because of the short-
term incentives that I have already mentioned.
The  current  challenge  is  not  only  about  solving  this  institutional  imbalance,  but  also  about
achieving this in a politically, economically and socially feasible way. In other words, Europe is
struggling between easing short-term pain and committing to long-term reforms.
Let me give you a brief idea of the two options for long-term reforms. In both cases a stable,
long-term solution for Europe can only be achieved if actions can once again be reconciled with
responsibility for their consequences.
The first option would be a bold institutional step forward and would shift responsibility for fiscal
and economic policy to the supranational, or European, level. In other words, the creation of a
fiscal union.
A fiscal union would undoubtedly be the largest step in the European integration process since
the  launch  of  the  euro.  However,  transferring  sovereignty  to  the  European  level  would  prove
impossible without extensive Treaty amendments and referendums all over the EU. Appointing a
European finance minister or establishing a joint ministry of finance would be two possible ways
of enshrining fiscal control at the European level. Admittedly, there is currently little prospect of
finding political support for a fiscal union.
The second option would be to eliminate the flaws and inconsistencies of the current framework.
That would imply a restoration of the core principle of national responsibility. What this means,
above all, is that the repercussions of national decisions on economic and fiscal policy must no
longer be capable of jeopardizing the financial stability of the euro area as a whole.
Experience has shown us the need to focus on a set of credible policy rules in the euro area – in
other  words  rules  that  do  not  provide  governments  with  incentives  to  flout  them. And,  equally
important, rules need to fit together – creating a consistent incentive structure.
Let me demonstrate this reasoning with respect to the so called sovereign-bank nexus. This is
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  unhealthy  relationship  between  countries  and  their  banks,  whereby  banks  lend  on  a  large
scale and without a capital charge to their home countries, while governments simultaneously
find they must support struggling banks in order to prevent an immediate crisis. The sovereign-
bank  nexus  still  persists  in  many  euro-area  countries  and  is  an  important  impediment  to  a
credible no bail-out clause. If banks are too strongly exposed to their own governments, this can
hinder a market-based regime of public debt, namely the possibility of restructuring government
bonds without jeopardizing financial stability. To tackle the sovereign-bank nexus, one important
step is to reduce the existing incentives for banks to lend to their governments on an unhealthy
scale.
As you see, there is no easy way to tackle the institutional imbalances in the euro area. If we
want a feasible and durable solution, we have to get into the nitty-gritty of individual policy fields.
3. Cooperation between sovereign countries
Let me now turn to another fundamental challenge that we are currently facing in the euro area –
as well as globally, I might add. I am referring to the questions raised about the value added by
international  and  transnational  cooperation.  Cooperation  used  to  be  the  fuel  for  the  engine  of
European  integration.  Today,  Brexit,  nationalist  movements  in  Europe  and  the  resurgent
protectionism are giving us pause for thought: Might we have put too much stock in cooperation?
Are the benefits it brings insufficient to justify its costs?
The added value of international trade is at the core of this debate.
For a long time, the utility of international trade was undisputed, and international politics thus
concentrated on ever-more detailed arrangements and standards. But all of a sudden, debates
have been not about the degree of economic integration anymore, but about whether we should
cooperate at all. Even mercantilism, dead for centuries, has found its way back into politics. I
think this trend is leading us down the wrong path and will not help us find tangible solutions. The
social and economic issues that countries across Europe and across the world are facing are
not  at  odds  with  the  conventional  wisdom  regarding  international  trade.  But,  as  ever,  it’s
complicated...
What  globalization  statistics  show  is  that  economic  integration  does  indeed  raise  aggregate
wealth. Worldwide exports and imports have reached roughly 60 percent of global GDP   and
global economic integration has surged in recent decades. At the same time, real income has
2
grown globally and across the income spectrum since the 1980s.
1
These  developments  are  not  accidental  side  effects.  Indeed,  trade  theory  predicts  a  more
efficient  allocation.  This  happens  for  a  variety  of  reasons,  such  as  comparative  advantage  or
economies of scale. Economic integration also facilitates knowledge transfer, bringing innovation
to places that would otherwise not have benefited from these technologies.
At the same time, just because trade leads to gains overall does not mean there won’t be some
left worse off. This has been studied since the early days of international economics. Recent
surveys  have  identified  groups  that  have  suffered  from  international  trading  arrangements,  at
least relative to their national peers.  These effects are not proof that international trade theories
have failed – indeed they are part of the evidence that the theories are right.
3
Accepting  trade  theories  thus  demands  accepting  that  negative  side  effects  may  –  and  most
probably will – occur. There is a broad consensus among internationally active politicians that
those side effects need to be met with appropriate counteractive policies.
But  beyond  the  theoretical  disputes,  what  can  actually  be  done  about  these  side  effects  of
economic integration? Jurisdictions may, in principle, wish to employ tailored social policies to
target  unwanted  inequalities  and  cases  of  social  hardship.  However,  there  are  political
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
economists that have challenged the compensatory “menu” of national politics. One important
contribution in that field stems from Dani Rodrik. He has even labeled international integration as
a “golden straightjacket” that allows for increased overall wealth at the cost of fewer options for
local politics. Allow me, if you will, to read out one of his quotes: “Governments today actively
compete with each other by pursuing policies that they believe will earn them market confidence
and  attract  trade  and  capital  inflows:  tight  money,  small  government,  low  taxes,  flexible  labor
legislation, deregulation, privatization, and openness all around.” I think his observations on the
matter can hardly be ignored.
So how constricting is the golden straightjacket of globalization? Do we perhaps even need to
take a step back from current international integration in order to allow for a broader range of
national policies? I, personally, take a more optimistic approach for several reasons.
First  of  all,  we  should  not  expect  protectionist  policies  to  lead  to  fewer  constraints  for  local
politics.  Instead,  these  policies  reduce  the  size  of  the  overall  pie  available  for  distribution.
Countries  withdrawing  from  international  cooperation  will  very  likely  see  the  size  of  their
respective pies shrink. Even more importantly, impediments to trade do not address major root
causes  of  social  imbalances  such  as  technological  innovation  and  the  vital  role  of  job
qualifications. Admittedly,  we  cannot  fully  disentangle  the  role  of  technological  improvements
from the role of international trade in explaining economic growth – or widening income inequality.
However, innovation does have a major impact on the social structure of a country. Endorsing
protectionist  policies  will  not  enable  politicians  to  evade  issues  of  social  cohesion  within  their
countries.
Secondly, extensive participation in international trade does not preclude social benefits. In fact,
the member states of the euro area provide social benefits that are quite “competitive” – so to
speak. 
Thirdly, we should value the positive effects of international standards. They may help to maintain
a level playing field and to prevent a regulatory race to the bottom in policy fields that serve the
whole of society.
Therefore,  I  do  not  entirely  follow  Rodrik’s  reasoning.  Still,  what  I  see  as  his  most  important
message  is  that  we  should  not  artificially  separate  international  economics  from  national  or
regional politics.
4. Outlook
Ladies and gentlemen
With regard to the complex challenges facing the euro area, I have certainly not presented you
with a solution that Mr Mencken would have regarded as simple, clear and wrong. Instead, I have
tried to show why solutions to these challenges have not yet been found.
Let me highlight two key messages.
1.  Regarding  the  two  challenges  that  I  have  discussed,  their  complexity  results  from
interactions  between  the  economic  and  the  political  sphere.  Solutions  cannot  be  found
merely  by  treating  the  symptoms;  instead,  we  need  to  tackle  the  underlying  causes.  For
academics  and  policy  makers  alike,  it  remains  imperative  to  continue  to  study  these
interactions and further our understanding of them. In doing so, we should not ignore issues
of inequality.
2.  Faced with complex problems, we can achieve a lot by correcting erroneous beliefs. Our
reality  is  complex,  so  we  should  not  attempt  to  present  it  in  an  oversimplified  manner.
Politicians and other experts are thus reminded of their responsibility to inform the public,
especially on matters that are complicated.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
These are all reasons not to question the entire project at sight of simplistic alternatives. Instead,
we need to search for convincing, long-term solutions.
Thank you.
1
2
3
Source: Penn World Tables Version 8.1.
Source: Milanovic, B. (2013). Global income inequality in numbers: In history and now. Global policy, 4(2), 198–
208.
On  domestic  distributional  consequences  of  international  trade,  see  e.g.  Acemoglu  et  al.  (2016).  Import
competition and the great US employment sag of the 2000s. Journal of Labor Economics 34(S1): 141–198;
McKinsey  (2016),  Poorer  than  their  parents?  A  new  perspective  on  income  inequality.  Available  online:
www.mckinsey.com/global-themes/employment-and-growth/poorer-than-their-parents-a-new-perspective-on-
income-inequality.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
