23rd ASSIOM FOrex Congress
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Modena, 28 January 2017
Recent economic developments 
The moderate acceleration in global growth under way since the summer may continue this 
year  and  the  next,  bolstered  by  the  expansionary  stance  of  the  fiscal  policies  announced  in  the 
United States and by the effects of those enacted in China and in Japan, where monetary policy is 
also highly accommodative. The outlook, however, remains subject to a high degree of uncertainty.  
The scale and components of the new US administration’s policies remain unclear. So far, the 
increase in medium/long-term interest rates in the United States, also spurred by anticipation of such 
policies  in  an  economy  with  close  to  full  employment,  has  been  transmitted  to  the  other  main 
countries to a limited extent owing to divergent monetary policy stances. Adverse effects on the world 
economy  could  arise  were  a  further  increase  in  yields,  linked  to  higher  risk  premiums,  not  to  be 
accompanied by a parallel improvement in growth prospects and were capital outflows from emerging 
economies to become more intense. The US administration’s declared intention of slowing down or 
reversing  trade  liberalization  processes,  and  the  steps  it  has  already  taken  in  this  direction,  risk 
triggering tit-for-tat measures in other countries, with negative repercussions for world growth.  
In the euro area the economic recovery is proceeding slowly. The measures adopted by the 
ECB Governing Council have greatly curtailed the risk of deflation and paved the way for a gradual 
return to monetary stability. The rise in inflation in December is, however, largely ascribable to the 
energy  components  of  the  HICP  and  to  other  highly  volatile  items;  there  are  as  yet  no  clear 
indications  of  any  inversion  of  trend  in  the  core  components  driving  developments  in  consumer 
prices  and  wage  growth,  even  in  countries  where  unemployment  is  lower.  The  Eurosystem’s 
projections put inflation at barely above 1.5 per cent in 2019.  
To  bring  inflation  back  to  a  path  consistent  with  medium-term  price  stability,  monetary 
conditions must continue to be highly accommodative. The Governing Council accordingly decided 
to extend the expanded asset purchase programme until end December 2017, or beyond, if necessary, 
and  to  trim  monthly  purchases  back  to  €60  billion  starting  in  April.  At  the  end  of  this  year  these 
purchases will amount to around €2,300 billion. The Council expects official rates to be held at levels 
equal to or below the current ones for a period that extends well beyond the programme’s horizon.  
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  continuing  its  purchases  of  public-sector  bonds,  ensuring  orderly 
conditions  on  the  secondary  market,  including  through  securities  lending  operations;  for  covered 
bank and corporate bonds we also intervene during the placement of new issues, thereby increasing 
the availability of funds. There has been intensive and increasing interaction with market operators; 
since  April  purchases  of  asset-backed  securities,  previously  also  concluded  by  external  asset 
managers, will be made entirely by national central banks. 
In  the  euro  area  too,  uncertainties  abound  regarding  developments  in  the  real  economy. 
Growth  in  productivity  continues  to  be  insufficient.  Capital  investment  still  needs  reinforcing. 
Strengthening output and at the same time addressing the effects – though positive overall – of new 
technologies  on  employment  requires  the  contribution,  not  only  in  Italy,  of  other  policies  and 
interventions in addition to monetary policy measures. 
In Italy the production of goods and services continues to increase, though the pace of the 
recovery  is  slow  and  lags  behind  average  rates  in  the  euro  area.  Labour  market  conditions  have 
improved; business confidence remains solid while the decline in consumer confidence came to a 
halt in the autumn. The data for the last two months largely confirm our projections. In the most 
recent  scenario  outlined  in  last  week’s  Economic  Bulletin,  gross  domestic  product  is  forecast  to 
grow by around 1 per cent on average per year in 2017-19.  
Nevertheless,  the  scenario  is  susceptible  to  risks.  It  assumes,  aside  from  favourable 
conditions  worldwide,  that  medium  and  long-term  yields  will  remain  low  and  that  the  pace  of 
growth in lending will continue to pick up in an economy in which alternative forms of financing to 
banks are struggling to gain a foothold.  
The  maintenance  of  orderly  market  conditions,  consolidation  of  growth,  recovery  of 
investment and further improvement in the labour market assume above all that Italy will press on 
with its reforms of recent years. The consequences of greater uncertainty over the political will to 
pursue  an  indispensable  modernization  agenda  must  not  be  underestimated.  So  far,  and 
notwithstanding  the  less  favourable  assessments  of  credit  rating  agencies,  the  effects  on  the 
financial market have been limited. However, the spread between the yield on ten-year BTPs and 
the corresponding German Bund is around 50 basis points higher than the average observed in early 
2016 and has widened considerably with respect to Spain. 
Banks and credit risk 
The economic recovery is being reflected in the indicators of credit quality, which continue to 
show an improvement. In 2016 the flow of new non-performing loans (NPLs) reached its lowest level 
since  2008;  from  the  end  of  2015  the  stock  of  outstanding  NPLs  also  began  to  diminish,  albeit 
gradually. Nonetheless, they continue to weigh heavily on the balance sheets of Italy’s banks and there 
have been repeated calls for better, firmer and more comprehensive management of these exposures.  
Last June bad loans and other NPLs on the balance sheets of Italian banks amounted to €191 
billion net of write-downs, that is 10.4 per cent of total loans. Including write-downs, NPLs came to 
€356 billion, a figure frequently quoted in debates, which refers to the face value of the exposures 
and accordingly does not represent their actual weight in banks’ balance sheets. Out of €191 billion 
of NPLs, net bad loans, i.e. exposures to insolvent debtors, amounted to €88 billion or 4.8 per cent 
of  loans.  The  remaining  €103  billion  pertained  to  situations  in  which  regular  repayments  may 
resume, especially if the recovery gains momentum. 
The bad loan recovery rate effectively recorded by Italian banks averaged 43 per cent over 
the ten years 2006-15, a proportion largely in line with banks’ balance sheet figures. Our studies 
point  to  a  wide  dispersion  of  recovery  rates:  for  many  banks  the  margin  for  improvement  is 
considerable and must be rapidly exploited. The first two rounds of new bad debt reporting received 
and analysed by the Bank of Italy last year revealed that there is still some way to go in creating 
detailed and easy-to-access databases.  
In the two  years 2014-15, recovery rates dropped to an average of 35 per cent. This was 
partly  due  to  an  increase  in  the  number  of  positions  closed  following  ‘en  bloc’  market  sales  to 
specialized investors: in the ten years considered, the average recovery rate for these sales was 23 
per cent, against 47 per cent for positions closed following standard procedures. The market prices 
of exposures should be assessed bearing in mind that they reflect the very high yields demanded by 
oligopolistic buyers, which also factor in the possibility of long recovery times; in some cases the 
existence of a large proportion of long-standing bad debts, already amply written down, explain the 
particularly low selling prices. 
The large volume of Italian NPLs has drawn the close attention not only of the supervisory 
authorities  but  also  of  international  markets  and  observers.  It  requires  careful  management.  The 
majority of bad loans are held by banks in a sound financial position that therefore do not need to 
sell them immediately. For the more problematic banks, ridding themselves of a legacy of bad loans 
is an essential step towards recovery. The best trade-off between sales on the market and internal 
management  is  a  matter  for  individual  assessment.  From  this  perspective,  the  draft  guidance  on 
NPLs  recently  issued  by  the  ECB’s  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  advises  banks  to  actively 
manage  these  exposures  and  calls  on  those  with  a  large  proportion  of  NPLs  to  draw  up  suitable 
plans to reduce them. 
Numerous  well-known  factors  have  contributed  to  Italy’s  high  level  of  NPLs.  The  most 
important  by  far,  however,  is  the  long  and  deep  recession,  which  has  undermined  many  firms’ 
ability  to  repay  debts,  which  were  not  always  granted  with  sufficiently  careful  assessment.  The 
length of credit recovery procedures has also played a part: if recovery times in Italy were in line 
with the European average, the ratio of bad debts to total outstanding loans would be about half 
what it now is.  
Furthermore,  setting  up  an  asset  management  company  with  public  funding,  as  other 
countries have done in the past, has now become impossible owing to the new European rules on 
State  aid  introduced  in  2013  and  their  rigid  interpretation.  Previously,  during  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis, given serious market concerns about the sustainability of Italy’s public debt, any action by 
the State was unlikely to be successful. Moreover, in contrast to the situation in countries where real 
estate bubbles burst, the deterioration in bank lending was not confined to specific sectors of the 
economy; the international institutions and leading forecasters projected a far more rapid exit from 
the crisis than was actually the case. 
Many of the necessary conditions for solving the problem of non-performing loans are now 
in place. As I mentioned earlier, the economic recovery is being reflected in the quality of credit; as 
it gradually gains pace, the banks will be able to repair their balance sheets. The reforms of the last 
two years should also improve the credit recovery process. It is still too early to see the full results 
as the greatest impact will be on ‘new’ bad loans. However, some of the measures, especially those 
relating to out-of-court solutions for corporate debt restructuring and the transfer of ownership of 
real guarantees, are already in place and could make a difference to the stock of NPLs: they should 
be activated without delay. 
Recovery  procedures  could  be  further  speeded  up  by  implementing  the  other  tools 
offered by the new rules: the portal for public auctions (now being trialled); the online register 
of non-possessory liens and that of foreclosures and bankruptcy proceedings; the extension to 
consumers of the Marcian Pact forfeiture clause. Further improvements might include additional 
specialization of judges in bankruptcy proceedings and reducing regional differences in courts’ 
performance. 
An important contribution on the European front could come from a regulatory provision 
eliminating or limiting the measures that discourage banks with advanced internal ratings-based (A-
IRB) models from selling their NPLs ‘en bloc’. Including the impact of such sales in estimates of 
the loss given default (LGD) parameter automatically raises capital requirements considerably on 
all performing loans and consequently reduces capital ratios. Analyses based on a sample of Italian 
banks  show  that  this  reduction  could  be  significant.  The  measure  would  take  account  of  the 
exceptional  nature  of  the  present  economic  situation  and  the  need  to  combine  supervisory  with 
macroprudential objectives.  
Banks’ capital and support measures  
An exceptionally deep and protracted recession such as the one experienced by the Italian 
economy has undoubtedly had serious repercussions for the banks. Nevertheless, at the origin of the 
worst crises we also find corporate decisions that were undermined by misconduct and distortions in 
the allocation of credit. The fact that the greatest difficulties involve banks which taken together 
account  for  a  relatively  small  share  of  the  industry’s  total  assets  is  an  indication  of  the  overall 
resilience of the system. Since the onset of the financial crisis, and partly as a result of pressure 
from  the  supervisory  authorities,  Italy’s  banks  have  almost  doubled  their  CET1  ratios  and  are 
continuing to increase them, including by raising funds on the market. 
The  national  and  European  supervisory  authorities  have  been  monitoring  the  most  critical 
situations  for some time.  The measures  adopted  were designed  to  reach  orderly  solutions and  avoid 
repercussions for the stability of the banking system, within a rapidly changing regulatory environment 
that  precluded  any  recourse  to  the  instruments  successfully  used  in  the  past  and  before  the  new 
instruments became fully available. Various measures were taken to deal with the different situations.  
With the help of the National Resolution Fund, to which all banks contributed, four banks at 
risk of failure were placed under resolution at the end of 2015, thus avoiding any need for a publicly 
funded recapitalization, although to cover the losses it was also necessary to reduce the value of 
subordinated bonds to zero. The only alternative to resolution was to wind them up, which would 
have cost their creditors even more and involved others in addition to shareholders and subordinated 
bond  holders.  Different  types  of  protection  were  introduced  for  the  subordinated  bond  holders 
according  to  their  individual  situations  and  the  Interbank  Deposit  Protection  Fund  has  started 
disbursing compensation. 
Despite  the  difficulties  of  the  current  regulatory  and  market  environment,  there  have  been 
important developments in recent days as regards the sale of the four bridge banks. The agreement for 
the sale of three of these banks to UBI Banca has been signed and the negotiations for the sale of 
Nuova Cassa  di Risparmio di  Ferrara to  Banca Popolare  dell’Emilia Romagna are at an advanced 
stage.  The  sizeable  cost  of  these  operations  has  been  borne  by  the  National  Resolution  Fund  and 
therefore by the banking system. The greatest care has been taken to keep costs down, including by 
means of an open and transparent sales process conducted in close collaboration with the Ministry of 
Economy and Finance and the European Commission, which assessed all valid offers on the table 
from Italian and foreign interested parties. The special purpose vehicle that bought the bad loans of 
the four banks is continuing its efforts to arrange a sale at the best possible terms and conditions, with 
the help of independent experts; this requires the information on the loans to be vastly improved. 
The experience gained in the months since the start of the resolution procedure for the four 
banks should, however, also lead us to reflect on the potential systemic significance, in a closely 
interconnected market, of regional banks with a limited catchment area.  
The measures taken in Italy in 2016 have made it possible to deal constructively with other 
crisis situations, with the contribution of both the public sector, including as a facilitator, and the 
private sector, through recourse to various instruments: precautionary recapitalization by the State 
(recently requested by Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena); private funds specifically raised to buy 
NPLs  and  to  strengthen  the  capital  of  banks  in  difficulty,  used  in  the  case  of  two  banks  (Banca 
Popolare  di  Vicenza  and  Veneto  Banca);  and  the  voluntary  component  of  the  deposit  guarantee 
funds (to support smaller banks).  
In full compliance with European rules and to guarantee financial stability, public resources 
have  recently  been  allocated  (up  to  €20  billion)  to  support  the  liquidity  and  capital  positions  of 
solvent banks which, despite achieving a positive result in the baseline scenario of a stress test, must 
deal  with  shortfalls  found  in  a  hypothetical  adverse  scenario  that  is  part  of  the  same  test.  This 
measure is an important one for Italy as it emerges from the crisis that buffeted its economy and 
banking sector.  
State intervention is much more limited in Italy than in almost all other European countries, 
helping to remove the market’s perception of a risk considered high for the entire banking system. 
The  costs  for  the  public  purse  will  be  reduced  by  burden  sharing  among  equity  holders  and 
subordinated bond holders. It will be possible to offset them against the proceeds of future sales of 
shareholdings. A necessary condition for benefiting from public precautionary recapitalization is the 
approval by the European Commission of a restructuring plan drawn up by the bank.  
The injection of public funds into Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena will presumably use up 
about a third of the €20 billion set aside by the Government. There is more than enough room to 
address the recapitalization needs of any other Italian banks that meet the conditions laid down in 
the decree, in the first place those relating to the results of a stress test. However, for other measures 
to  be  implemented  the  banks  must  be  willing  to  apply  for  public  support  and  to  deal  with  the 
ensuing commitments. 
Following  the  capital  strengthening  carried  out  under  the  Fondo  Atlante,  the  senior 
management  of  Banca  Popolare  di  Vicenza  and  of  Veneto  Banca  have  been  drawing  up  an 
industrial plan for their further recapitalization and relaunch, which will soon be presented to the 
supervisory authorities. The feasibility of a merger will be examined with a view to achieving cost 
savings and synergies capable of ensuring a return to profitability.  
The challenges for the banking system 
Aside from the difficulties of some banks in particular, the banking system as a whole is 
called  on  to  face  new  and  demanding  technological  and  market-related  challenges,  on  which  we 
have often reflected. This is not only a necessity for Italy: a return to higher and lasting profits is a 
must for all European banks. The way in which branch networks are structured, services provided, 
and technologies used, must all be reviewed in a bold and innovative spirit. Value creation in the 
banking  industry  has  changed  and  continues  to  do  so;  Italian  banks  can  no  longer  put  off  much 
needed  restructurings  and  strategic  reviews.  Only  in  this  way  can  they  continue  to  successfully 
attract investors; only then can they continue to compete effectively and maintain their stability. 
In  some  cases  capital  strengthening  on  the  market  will  need  to  continue,  as  is  already 
happening for some large banks; experience has shown that if requests for new capital are based on 
clear, ambitious and, at the same time, credible plans, then they are likely to be successful, even in 
tough market conditions. In other cases, especially for medium-sized banks, mergers are necessary 
to achieve cost savings and increase operational efficiency. The success of these mergers crucially 
depends on the ability to streamline banks’ organizational arrangements and to improve corporate 
governance, also in terms of market perception.  
The reform of cooperative banks (banche popolari), which pursues the goals of efficiency, 
transparency and stability, is almost complete: eight out of ten of those with assets exceeding €8 
billion – the threshold established by law – have become joint stock companies. The merger of two 
of them has created a banking group of significant size. Other mergers can be achieved and may act 
as catalysts for the restructuring of the entire banking system.  
Last December the State Council requested that the Constitutional Court rule on a number of 
questions regarding the reform’s constitutionality; the deadline of end 2016 for compliance with the 
new rules was suspended, as were some parts of the implementing provisions issued by the Bank of 
Italy as mandated by law. The reform is necessary as it will facilitate capital strengthening for the 
banks  concerned  and  contribute  to  improving  their  governance.  The  limitation  of  the  right  to 
reimbursement in the event of withdrawal aims to preserve the integrity of capital levels and draws 
inspiration from the European rules, which are not currently under consideration by the Court.  
At the beginning of this month the supervisory authority sent a communication to the mutual 
banks  (banche  di  credito  cooperativo)  and  their  central  institutions  urging  them  to  carry  out  the 
reform of their sector rapidly and effectively. Only a swift transition to the new set-up will enable 
mutual  banks  to  strengthen  their  capital  position  where  necessary  and  continue  to  provide  their 
traditional support to local economies in the best way possible, also in view of banking union. 
Returning to a level of profitability that enables stable capital strengthening is a fundamental 
objective  for  banks,  particularly  those  currently  on  a  weaker  footing.  A  determined  and  incisive 
approach  to  keeping  administrative  and  labour  costs  down,  including  for  management,  must  be 
adopted using all the tools currently available.  
The  density  of  Italy’s  banking  network  and  its  productivity  do  not  diverge  greatly  from 
those of other euro-area countries. According to the latest ECB data on 2015, average assets per 
bank employee in Italy (€13.1 million) are lower than the euro-area average (€15.3 million). In Italy 
there is one bank branch for every 1,993 inhabitants, against an average of 2,170 for the euro area; 
there  are slightly fewer  branches in Germany,  with one for every 2,397  inhabitants, but more in 
France  and  Spain,  with  one  for  every  1,770  and  1,493  inhabitants  respectively.  There  is 
considerable scope for rationalization across the board: though the financial system in the United 
States  has  different  characteristics  from  the  European  one,  there  are  still  far  fewer  branches  per 
inhabitant there (one for every 3,900). It is vital to continue reviewing the network and increasing 
its productivity, by exploiting rather than being a victim of changes in technology, the market and 
customers’ habits.  
   The recovery continues in Italy, albeit gradually, thanks to the improvement in the global 
economy and to the expansionary stance of monetary policy. Credit quality is benefiting as a result. 
All the banks need to take decisive steps to tackle the problem of NPLs: the solutions should be 
assessed  individually.  The  foundations  have  now  been  laid  for  solving  the  particularly  serious 
problems  of  some  banks,  thanks  to  the  instruments  developed  and  the  measures  adopted  by  the 
authorities.  
To  improve  their  profits  and  contribute  efficiently  to  financing  the  economy,  banks  must 
make  further  progress  in  containing  costs,  upgrading  technologies,  and  streamlining  their 
organization and branch network. Updating their business model is also essential in order to provide 
customers  with  a  broad  and  innovative  range  of  services  for  asset  management  and  corporate 
finance. 
A stronger recovery and sounder banking system are closely connected and also depend on 
firms,  households  and  international  markets’  confidence  in  Italy’s  ability  to  carry  forward  the 
reforms begun in recent years. To prevent this confidence from being undermined, the country must 
continue resolutely on this path: by improving the efficiency of the State and of the entire public 
sector in lawmaking, administration, and the delivery of services to citizens; by creating a business-
friendly environment; and by promoting research and innovation. 
Stability and reform are essential for development. There are no shortcuts, particularly for a 
country  burdened  with  such  a  large  public  debt  and  such  persistent  structural  problems.  Second 
thoughts, delays and resistance, not uncommon in some sectors including banking, risk affecting 
market  conditions  and  undermining  the  progress  achieved  during  the  long  economic  crisis  from 
which we are now, though slowly and laboriously, emerging. 
  by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
