OFFICIAL LAUNCH OF BANK GABORONE MAUN BRANCH 
 Keynote Speech 
 
by 
 Moses D Pelaelo 
Governor, Bank of Botsw ana 
 September 11, 2017 
  Good  morning  and  thank  you  all  for  being  part  of  the 
official opening of the Maun branch of Bank Gaborone.  
 Today marks yet another important milestone in the history 
of  Bank  Gaborone  in  Botsw ana.  Last  year,  on  March  22, 
the  bank  opened  its  doors  to  the  resident s  of  Palapye,  that  
w as  just  tw o  years  after  the  opening  of  the  Kang  branch 
(in  2014)  in  Kgalagadi  North,  w here,  by  the  w ay,  to  date, 
Bank  Gaborone  is  t he  only  bank  in  that   village.  It   is, 
therefore,  commendable  that  in  a  period  of  three  years, 
Bank  Gaborone  has  added  three  new   branches,  to  take  the 
total  to  9  and  17  Automated  Teller  Machines  (ATMs).  This 
becomes  even  more  significant   if  w e  consider  the  fact  that  
Bank  Gaborone  started  its  operations  in  Botsw ana  in  2006  
and,  in  a  relatively  short  period  of  11  years,  it  has 
expanded  its  netw ork  of  branches,  comparable  in  number 
to,  or  even,  surpassing  some  of  the  older  banks  in  the 
country. 
  The  bank  also  provides  electronic  banking 
services,  w hich  further  extends  its  coverage  and  footprint .   
I  should  also  recognise  that ,  Bank  Gaborone  employs  261 
people,  mostly  Batsw ana,  hence,  contribut ing 
to 
the 
economic  and  social  w ell-being  of  the  employees  and  their 
families.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  w hat  I  have  just   said  about  Bank 
Gaborone,  demonstrates  a 
clear 
commitment   and 
contribution  to  Botsw ana’ s  financial  inclusion  agenda.  The 
strategy  of  expanding  t he  branch  netw ork  beyond  cities, 
potentially  opens  up  access  to  banking  services  to  a 
greater  number  of  individuals  and  businesses,  including 
small  and  medium  scale  enterprises  and, 
indeed, 
t he 
informal  sector.    By  so  doing,  Bank  Gaborone  is  adding  to 
the inputs and resources needed to enhance productivity of  
economic  pursuits,  and  for  the  community  to  harness  and 
profit  from  business  opportunities.    The  extended  outreach 
of  financial  services  being  undertaken  by  Bank  Gaborone 
accords  w ell  w ith 
the  nation’ s  Financial  Sector 
Development  St rategy  and,  ultimately,  contributes  to  the 
aspiration of  inclusive economic grow th.  
 Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen, as you may be aw are, 
Bank  Gaborone  is  a  member  of  the  Capricorn  Group  -  a 
financial  services  group  w ith  its  roots  in  Namibia,  offering 
banking,  insurance  and  asset   management   services  in 
 2 
Botsw ana,  Namibia  and  Zambia.    In  Botsw ana,  the  bank’ s 
financial  position  has  grow n  st eadily  since  commencement 
of  operations,  in  2006.    Total  assets  increased  from  P268 
million  in  June  2007  to  P4.6  billion  in  June  2017;  lending 
increased  from  P197  million  to  P3.2  billion  in  June  2017; 
w hile  deposit s  grew   from  P188  million  to  P3.9  billion  in 
June  2017.    The  bank  has,  therefore,  in  a  relatively  short  
period, mobilised approximately P4 billion w orth of financial 
resources.  These 
resources  have  been  productively 
employed  and  distributed,  in  the  form  of  loans  and  other 
credit   facilities,  to  support  real  economic  activit y  in  diverse 
sectors across Botsw ana, including consumption spending.  
 As  a  regional  bank  and  being  relatively  new ,  it   is  expected 
that the bank and its design of products  w ill continue to be 
w ell 
aligned 
to 
contemporary 
domestic  market  
requirements.  Notably,  for  the  area  around  Maun,  this 
branch  of  Bank  Gaborone  is  invariably  expected  to  support 
the  various  facets  and  business  value  chains  in  the  tourism 
and  agricultural  sectors  associat ed  w ith  this  region.  In  t his 
w ay,  Bank  Gaborone  w ould  be  contribut ing  to  sust ainable 
economic  activity  and  inclusive  grow th  in  this  part  of  
Botsw ana.  
  3 
It  is  w orth  pointing  out  that  the  tourism  industry,  of  w hich 
Maun  is  a  signif icant  player,  accounted  f or  3.9  percent  of  
the  country’ s  Gross  Domestic  Product  (GDP)  in  2016, 
through 
industries  such  as  hotels,  rest aurants, 
travel 
agents,  airlines  and  other  passenger 
t ransportation 
services.  The  same  industries  contributed  2.6  percent  to 
total employment in 2016.  
 It  is  therefore  expected  t hat  the  provision  of  additional  or 
enhanced  financial  services,  in  the  form  of  transactional 
account s,  savings  products,  credit  ext ension,  payments 
and  other  banking  services  off ered  by  Bank  Gaborone,  as 
w ell  as  other  players  of  course,  should  help  sustain  the 
contribution  of   the  tourism  sector  to  GDP.  In  turn,  this 
should  foster  economic  diversification  and  broad-based 
private  sector  development ,  both  of  w hich  are  critical  for 
endurable  economic  grow th  and  raising  living  standards  of 
our people.   
 To  the  Maun  resident s  and  North  West  community,  in 
general, w e should recognise that the Maun branch of Bank 
Gaborone  is  a  business  that  needs  a  good  and  durable 
customer  base 
in  order 
for 
it 
to  be  profitable  and 
sustainable.    Therefore,  you  are  all  encouraged  to  use  the 
branch  and,  of   course,  all  ot her  licensed  banks  in  your 
 4 
area, 
to  save  money  and  undertake  ot her 
financial 
transactions.  Similarly,  it  is  my  expectation  that  Bank 
Gaborone  w ill 
take 
full  advantage  of 
the  Botsw ana 
payments  and  other  public  infrastructure,  partnership  w ith 
mobile  operators  and  other  Electronic  Payments  Syst ems, 
to  enhance  financial  inclusion;  and  this  includes  providing 
the  much-needed  support  f or  the  informal  businesses  in 
Botsw ana in general and Maun, in particular.  
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen,   
In  addition  to  w hat  I  have  just  said,  I  w ish  t o  implore  the 
Maun  community  to  engage  banks  w ith  viable  borrow ing 
proposals 
that   are  sust ainable  and  can  yield  positive 
returns.    Equally,  important,  and  having  obtained  loans  and 
other  credit  
f acilities,  borrow ers  should  honour 
their 
obligations  by  adhering 
to 
the  repayment  programme 
agreed w ith banks.  Distinguished Guests, I am making this 
point  because  t he  Bank  of  Bot sw ana  is  concerned  about  
the  recent  observed  upw ard  trend  in  non-performing  loans.  
While  this  trend  could  be,  in  part,  due  to  sluggish  global 
economic  activity  and  idiosyncratic  business  performance 
and  environment, 
there 
is  some  evidence  of 
lack  of  
financial discipline  on the part of some individuals  and poor 
management  practices  by  some  businesses.    There  is  also 
an  undesirable  creeping  cult ure,  on  the  part  of  some 
 5 
customers  of  banks,  of  failing  to  repay  their  obligations  to 
banks according to the agreed schedule.   
 Let  me,  theref ore,  take  this  opportunity  to  remind  you, 
Distinguished  Guests  that,  in  the  main,  banks  in  Botsw ana 
are  funded  mainly  by  depositors/savers’   funds.  Therefore 
the Board and management of a bank have a fiduciary duty 
and  responsibility  to  ensure  t hat  the  lending  and  credit 
underw riting  standards  are  sound;  the  bank  is  managed  in 
a  safe  and  prudent  manner,  to  safeguard  depositors’   funds 
and  ensure  that   these  borrow ed  funds  are  not  lost  through 
uncollect able  loans.  In  this  context,  I  should  therefore 
caution  that ,  w here  a  borrow er  is  in  default,  the  bank  is 
entitled  to  instit ute  law ful,  procedural  and  ethical  recovery 
procedures including attachment  and liquidation of property 
pledged  as  collateral  to  recover  its  money.    Moreover, 
providing  for  a  loss  or  w riting  off  a  loan  in  the  bank’ s 
books,  as  a  non-bankable  asset,  does  not   ext inguish  t he 
debt the customer ow es to the bank. In this case, the bank 
is  only  being  prudent  and  adhering  to  sound  accounting 
and 
international 
financial 
reporting  standards.  The 
defaulting  customer  continues  t o  be  obliged  to  repay.    In 
this  context ,  let  us  alw ays  remember  that  a  safe,  sound 
and  stable  banking  system  is  a  necessary  condition  for 
sustainable economic development.    
 6 
Director of Ceremonies, Distinguished Guests,  
I am reliably informed that Bank Gaborone, w hich identifies 
w ith  the  mission  statement :  “ t o  make  banking  a  rew arding 
experience  for  all  st akeholders” ,  has  a  strong  customer-
focus  orientation  that  should  make  it  a  good  business 
partner. 
I  am  also  aw are 
that  
customers  have 
demonstrated 
t heir  confidence 
in 
the  bank’ s  service 
delivery  by  voting  it  t he  “ Best   Bank  in  Customer  Care” , 
during  a  customer  service  survey  carried  out  by  KPM G  in 
2013  and  2016.    This  is  commendable  and  trust  that  the 
Maun  communit y  w ill  soon  have  a  reason  to  validate  these 
accolades.  
 In  terms  of  Corporate  Social  Responsibility,  Bank  Gaborone 
qualifies to be called a good corporate citizen, as evidenced 
by 
its  participation 
in  charitable  activities, 
including 
Financial  Literacy  Programme,  through  w hich  the  bank 
educat es  Bat sw ana  on  financial  matters.    Other  Corporat e 
Social  Responsibility  initiatives  include  support  for  youth 
football  development;  involvement  in  the  Diabetes  Apple 
Project  and  Journey  of  Hope  for  raising  breast  cancer 
aw areness;  and  sponsoring  Lady  Khama  Charitable  Trust , 
UB Foundation and Kang Primary School.  
  7 
Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  allow   me  to 
comment  on  a  few   other  issues  of  topical  interest .    First, 
the status of liquidity in the banking system; one of the key 
economic  functions  of  a  bank  is  to  manage  and  provide 
liquidity  to  firms  and  other  economic  entities.    As  many  of 
you  w ill  be  aw are,  liquidity  and  maturity  transformation  is 
the essence of banking.  In this regard, banks should ensure 
that,  at  all  times,  they  have  adequat e  funds,  including 
contingency 
funding  sources, 
to  meet 
their 
financial 
obligations.    These  obligations  typically  include  customer 
w ithdraw als and draw dow n of loan facilities, as w ell as the 
capacity  t o  accommodate  grow th  and  profit  opportunities, 
such as new  credit  requirements by their clients. Therefore, 
liquidity  is  a  critical  and  int egral  component  of  a  bank’ s 
operations, strat egy and governance framew ork. 
 Consistent  w ith  our  principal  objectives,  as  the  central 
bank  and  regulatory  authority,  namely,  “ to  promote  and 
maintain  monetary  stability,  an  efficient   payments 
mechanism  and 
the 
liquidit y,  solvency  and  proper 
functioning  of  a  soundly  based  f inancial  system” ,  the  Bank 
of Botsw ana monitors banks on an ongoing basis to ensure 
that 
they  continually  meet  
the  minimum  prudential 
thresholds, in this case, liquidity ratios; and that  there is no 
constraint  t o  transmission  of  t he  monetary  policy  stance.  
 8 
It  is  for  this  reason  that ,  the  Bank  of   Botsw ana  stands 
ready  to  inject  and/or  w ithdraw   liquidity  from  the  banking 
system  and,  also,  provide  overnight  credit  f acilities  to 
solvent   banks,  if  needed,  to  meet  temporary  liquidity 
shortfalls.    These  form  of  support   by  central  banks  is 
common  across  the  w orld,  as  it  is  central  to  the  primary 
objective  of  “ fostering  monetary,  credit  and 
financial 
conditions  conducive 
to 
the  orderly,  balanced  and 
sustainable  economic  development”   of  the  country.  As 
regards  the  current  status  and  healt h  of  t he  banking 
system,  I  can  report  that  banks  have  sufficient  liquidity, 
totalling  approximately  P19  billion,  inclusive  of  Bank  of 
Botsw ana  Certificates  and  balances  held  abroad,  both  of  
w hich  could  be  liquidated  in  case  of  need,  w ith  minimal 
capital loss, to  f inance  any eff ective and viable demand for 
credit .  How ever, it should be noted that the distribution of  
liquidity amongst banks w ill vary from time to time.  
 Distinguished  Guests,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  second 
issue  relat es  to  the  conduct   of   banks  in  accepting  foreign 
currency 
denominated 
deposits.  Consist ent   w ith 
international  norms,  and  as 
is 
the  case 
in  many 
jurisdictions,  Botsw ana’ s  banking  and  other  law s  permit  
non-residents  t o  open  account s  in  local  banks.    I  should 
note  here  that,  similarly,  Botsw ana  residents  do  open  and 
 9 
operate  account s  in  other  count ries,  subject   to  compliance 
w ith  Botsw ana  tax  and  other  applicable  law s.    How ever, 
there  is  a  legal  requirement   t o  declare  any  cross-border 
transfers,  including  cash  in  any  currency  equivalent   to    
P10 000 and above.  
 In  opening  accounts  and  accepting  deposit s  by  foreigners 
(non-resident   account s),  the  local  banks  are  doing  so  in 
compliance  w ith  Botsw ana  law s.    Banks  are,  how ever, 
required  to  consistently  undert ake  effective  due  diligence, 
including  strict   application  of   the  Know   Your  Customer 
procedures  for  any  such  transactions  and/or  customers. 
These 
include  obtaining  customer 
identity  documents, 
residence status, address, business location and sources of 
income; this is done at account  opening and on an ongoing 
basis.  Banks  also  need  t o  ensure  that  any  cross-border 
cash deposits and similar inw ard transfers are supported by 
duly  completed  and  valid  documents,  w hen  processing 
such transactions. 
 It  is  also  important   to  indicate  t hat   banks  have  a  screening 
process  to  ensure  that  entities  and  individuals  on  the 
International  Sanctions  List s  do  not  use  the  Botsw ana 
banking  system  as  a  conduit   for  illegal  activities  and  ot her 
forms  of  financial  crime.    Banks  also  routinely  monitor 
 10 
account s 
for  suspicious  activity  and 
file  Suspicious 
Transactions  Reports  (STR)  w ith  the  Financial  Intelligence 
Agency.    While  it  is  not  evidence  of  illegality,  the  Report  
triggers  appropriate  steps,  including  follow   up  action  by 
relevant   authorities,  such  as  the  Bank  of   Botsw ana,  Non-
Bank  Financial  Institutions  Regulatory  Authority  and  other 
law  enforcement  agencies. 
 Having  said  that ,  I  can  confirm  that  both  the  Financial 
Intelligence  Agency  and  the  Bank  of  Botsw ana  continue  to 
monitor  and  enforce,  in  line  w ith  their  respective  mandate, 
local  banks'   compliance  w ith  applicable  law s,  business 
conduct  
requirements,  as  w ell  as 
the  Anti-Money 
Laundering  and  Combatting  t he  Financing  of  Terrorism 
protocols. 
 This  leads  me  to  the  third  t opical  issue,  namely,  cyber-
crime  and  related  other  financial  crimes.    Distinguished 
Guest s, technology is the future of banking and many of us 
w elcome 
the 
benefits 
of  
new  
information 
and 
communication  technologies,  in  various  facets  of  our  lives, 
including  enhanced  cost-ef fective  access 
to 
financial 
services  and  t he  associated  convenience  of   conducting 
banking  and  ot her  transactions.    How ever,  in  as  much  as 
these  technologies  increase  efficiencies  and  bring  other 
 11 
economic  benef its,  the  speed,  scale  and  the  cost  of   any 
fraudulent  activity  perpetrated  t hrough  these  channels  can 
be  enormous,  ruining  the  lives  of  many  and  causing  major 
harm to institutions and society, in general.   
 These  financial  crimes  can  take  many  forms  including 
unauthorised  cash  w ithdraw als 
from  customers’   bank 
account s  at  Automated  Teller  Machines  (ATMs),  identity 
theft,  scanning  and  cloning  of  bank  cards,  disruption  or 
compromising  business  processes,  internal  fraud  and,  more 
broadly,  cyber-crime.    If  not  properly  mitigated,  these 
crimes  can  discourage  members  of 
the  public 
from 
entrusting 
their  savings  w it h  banks  and 
this  could 
undermine  public  confidence  and  trust  in  t he  banking 
system.    Consequently,  w e  need  to  be  on  guard,  as 
institutions,  businesses  and  individuals  to  mitigate  cyber-
crime  and  other  forms  of  financial  crime  risks.    The 
National  Banking  Week  message  by  the  Bank  of  Botsw ana, 
in  2011,  articulated 
the 
issue  w ell  as 
follow s 
that; 
“ combating  fraud is an on-going shared responsibility by all 
interested  parties;  it   requires  the  involvement  of   the  Bank 
of  Botsw ana,  banks  and  the  vigilance  of  members  of  the 
public.    Vigilance  is  all  the  more  important  as  the  banking 
system  diversifies  and  competition  intensifies  by  w ay  of 
new   entrant s  t o  the  market,  increased  branch  netw ork, 
 12 
new   products,  and  progressive  globalisation  of  banking 
services” . 
 I trust , in closing, that  the presence of Bank Gaborone here 
in  Maun,  w ill  add  value  t o  the  community  and  t he  broader 
region,  by  expanding  banking  services  and  that  there  w ill 
be  a  mutually  rew arding  and  enduring  bank-customer 
relationship.    Mr  Coetzee,  once  again,  and  through  you,  I 
w ould  like  to  t hank  the  Board,  Management  and  st aff  of  
Bank  Gaborone,  for  inviting  me  to  be  part  of  this  occasion. 
I  w ish  Bank  Gaborone  every  success  and  hope  that  it   w ill 
continue  t o  grow   and  expand  its  services  across  t he 
country.  
 Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  now   my  honour 
and privilege to declare t he  Maun Branch of Bank Gaborone 
officially open. 
 I thank you for your kind att ention.   
  13 
