SPEECH 
     DATE: 
SPEAKER: 
VENUE: 
31 January 2017 
First Deputy Governor Kerstin af Jochnick 
Centre for Business and Policy Studies, Stockholm 
     S V ERI G ES  RI KS BA NK 
SE-103 37 Stockholm 
(Brunkebergstorg 11) 
 
Tel +46 8 787 00 00 
Fax +46 8 21 05 31 
registratorn@riksbank.se 
www.riksbank.se 
The completion of Basel III – the start of 
something new* 
The work of the Basel Committee is important and 
affects Sweden 
Good morning. Thank you to the Centre for Business and Policy Studies for inviting me 
here to talk about Basel III and what it may entail for Sweden. 
 
Recently there have been several attempts by different parties to analyse how the 
Basel Committee’s completion of the Basel III Accord may affect the global financial 
system. Some people question whether it is really necessary for the regulation of 
banks’ capital requirements to be amended yet again, and wonder how this will 
affect, for instance, the Swedish banks. As I have recently, in my capacity as member 
of the Basel Committee, been involved in discussing various parts of Basel III, I would 
like to give my own views on the subject today. I hope this will answer some of the 
questions now being raised.  
 
However, I would like to point out from the start that no final agreement on the 
finalisation of Basel III has yet been achieved. Still, the main features of the 
agreement are relatively clear at this point, and the Basel Committee is now working 
on the final details. However, I do not intend to focus on the details today, as they are 
many, but instead on the fundamental blocks on which Basel III is built. 
 
The reforms of banking regulation that lie ahead will strengthen global financial 
stability and this will be good and important for Sweden, which is a small and open 
economy. Moreover, it is largely Swedish authorities that determine how, more 
exactly, Basel III will affect the Swedish banking system. 
 
But I shall begin by providing some perspective on banking regulation in general and 
the work of the Basel Committee in particular. And let me point out that what I will 
talk about today is neither the first nor the last amendment to the regulatory 
framework for banking operations to see the light of day. The work on developing and 
revising the bank regulations is a continuous operation and should be so. I usually 
 
* I would like to thank Tomas Edlund for his help with this speech.  
 
 1 [12] 
   compare this task with cycling; if you stop pedalling then sooner or later you will fall 
off. One reason for this is that society is developing and changing over time. New 
values gain ground and new experiences are added to old. This is a general feature of 
standards and rules in society and it also applies to banking regulation.   
 
To be a little more specific. Sixty years ago, anyone wanting to start a bank was forced 
to get permission to do so from His Majesty the King.  This was a system that was 
probably considered reasonable and well-balanced bearing in mind the environment 
in which the banks then operated. Today it is natural that Finansinspektionen should 
give Swedish banks licence to conduct their operations, but the number of new 
banking regulations has also increased over the past 35 years. The banks’ change in 
significance for society, internationalisation and the complexity of both financial 
markets and financial instruments have all meant that the Riksdag (the Swedish 
parliament), the Government and Finansinspektionen need to both adapt existing 
regulations and develop new ones. It is a major challenge for society and a complex 
balance to ensure that regulation of the banks safeguards financial stability at the 
same time as contributing to efficient markets, good competition and good consumer 
protection.  
 
But as I mentioned earlier, it is not only values that change over time, but we also gain 
new experiences and draw conclusions from these. One event that forms a base for 
modern banking regulation took place in the 1970s. This is when the system with fixed 
exchange rates was abandoned, the Bretton Woods system that had been agreed on 
decades earlier by the world's leading economies. In the wake of this, a number of 
internationally-active banks became insolvent due to losses linked to transactions in 
foreign currencies.  The most famous of these is probably the West German bank 
Herstatt, which I expect many of you have heard of. 
 
As a result of the ensuring financial unease, the central bank governors of the G10 
countries agreed to form what would later be known as the Basel Committee. This 
committee had its first meeting at the beginning of 1975 and its purpose was then 
and still is that the representatives of the member countries shall cooperate on issues 
regarding the supervision and regulation of internationally active banks.  This is to 
reduce the risk of global financial crises occurring.  
Sweden has been a member of the Basel Committee since its start. I myself have been 
the Riksbank's representative in this context for some years now. Finansinspektionen 
also takes part in the Basel Committee meetings.  
Smoothly-functioning international cooperation between central banks and financial 
supervisory authorities is very important to financial stability in a small and open 
economy like Sweden’s. We know from experience that other countries’ problems can 
soon become our own. It is thus extremely important that we are involved in 
influencing the work in these international contexts in the right direction. It also 
creates good conditions for the banks to conduct their operations in several countries, 
if the regulation in these countries meets certain minimum standards and the 
supervisory authorities are in tune with one another.  
The changes in the Swedish credit markets at the end of the 1980s and EU 
membership in 1995 made it easier for Swedish banks to expand onto an 
international market than it had been before. With hindsight, we can observe that 
  2 [12] 
   this took place at the same time as the existing bank regulation was not always able 
to adapt to new situations sufficiently fast.   
Financial crises are costly and affect us all 
Reducing the risk of financial crises is something the Basel Committee has worked on 
from the start. This work is important to all of us, as financial crises lead to substantial 
costs for society and often to permanent falls in GDP and employment. All too often it 
takes a very long time to recover from such crises.  Even today, almost 10 years after 
the most recent financial crisis broke out, many countries are struggling with low 
growth, high unemployment and excessively low inflation.  
Looking at the historical development of GDP in Sweden, we see two clear falls: 
during the financial crisis in the early 1990s and during the most recent global 
financial crisis. The size of the fall after the most recent financial crisis corresponds to 
the total expenditure of all of Sweden’s county councils during one year. 1 Having said 
this, the conclusion is of course that the work on avoiding financial crises in the future 
is very important, not least to safeguard essential functions in society such as care and 
welfare, which we often take for granted.  
Given this, there is a lot of international work on trying to alleviate the consequences 
for the economy when the banking system is subject to shocks. For instance, several 
countries have developed a framework within the Financial Stability Board (FSB) for 
how banks in distress can be wound up without too much impact on taxpayers. This 
framework has been introduced through an EU directive into Swedish legislation in 
the act on resolution. I welcome these standards.  
But in addition to these standards regarding resolution, it is important that we 
conduct global crisis prevention work that reduces the risks that banks will suffer 
problems. And as I mentioned, this work is largely done within the scope of the Basel  
Committee. 
Why are globally-harmonised capital requirements a 
good idea? 
Much of the Basel Committee's more than forty years of work has concerned capital 
levels in the banks, and for good reasons. Then as now, our assessment is that well-
capitalised banks benefit financial stability and contribute to a positive development 
in society. Banks that are well-capitalised are more resilient to losses and have greater 
capacity to obtain market funding during times of financial unease. In other words, 
the risk of a financial crisis declines if the banks are well-capitalised. 
Up until the end of the 1980s, the regulatory frameworks for banks’ capital levels 
were relatively different in different countries. In many areas, the existing capital 
requirements were considered outdated and in need of revision. The various national 
regulations also contributed to limiting the banks’ possibilities to compete on equal 
terms.  
 
 1 SEK 310 billion, according to the Swedish Association of Local Authorities and Regions. 
(https://skl.se/ekonomijuridikstatistik/ekonomi/sektornisiffror.1821.html) 
  3 [12] 
   Consequently the Basel Committee presented the so-called Basel I Accord in 1988. 
This was implemented into Swedish legislation in the early 1990s. Basel I was the first 
internationally-agreed minimum standard for capital levels to be held by 
internationally-active banks. It is worth noting here that the Basel Committee agrees 
on minimum standards. All countries are free to introduce stricter national 
requirements regarding their banks’ capital levels if they find it appropriate. This is 
something the Basel Committee encourages its members to do. 
 
The idea behind Basel I was, somewhat simplified, that the banks with assets assessed 
as less risky had a lower capital requirement than the banks with assets assessed as 
more risky. The regulations were simple and consisted of only a few risk categories. 
But this meant that one could take into account that the risk of losses was greater for 
banks with more risky assets than for banks that had more assets that were less risky. 
The banks’ capital could thus be distributed through regulation in a way assessed to 
increase efficiency in the economy. 
 
Basel I lead to the introduction of some new concepts, such as risk weights and risk-
weighted assets. Risk-weighted assets were calculated, to put it simply, by first giving 
the banks’ different assets risk weights of between 0 and 100 per cent, depending on 
how risky they were assessed to be. For instance, the banks’ mortgages were given a 
risk weight of 50 per cent.  A bank’s risk-weighted assets were then calculated by 
multiplying the value of the respective type of asset by the respective risk weight.  
 
Basel I meant that the banks should have capital exceeding eight per cent of the 
bank's risk-weighted assets. This requirement still applies, although the content of 
both the banks’ capital and their risk-weighted assets have changed over time.  
Basel II and III entailed more risk-sensitive capital 
requirements and increased model risks 
At the beginning of the 1980s, several countries deregulated parts of their credit 
markets. As a result, the banking systems in many countries rapidly became more 
complex and even more internationally interlinked than before. New types of more 
complex financial instrument were introduced. Moreover, new and more advanced 
methods for measuring risk and risk management were developed and refined by 
most of the banks.  
 
Many agents, including the Basel Committee, assessed that Basel I needed to be 
reworked to become more risk-sensitive and to better reflect developments in the 
banks and in society. The banks were keen on pushing this question as they wanted to 
use their own methods for calculating capital requirements. In 2004, the so-called 
Basel II Accord was published. This regulatory framework was incorporated into 
Swedish law and in many other countries at the beginning of 2007. 
 
One of the main differences with regard to Basel I, was that Basel II made it possible 
to apply different methods to calculate risk-weighted assets and capital requirements. 
As you probably know, some banks were able, after approval by the financial 
supervisory authority, to use so-called internal models to calculate their risk-weighted 
assets. This reform was intended to increase the link between the banks’ capital 
requirement and their actual risks, which was also largely the case and thus generally 
improved the banks’ risk management.  
  4 [12] 
    
However, the use of internal models also entailed a risk that the banks’ calculation of 
the capital requirements would not reflect the actual conditions. The risk that the 
banking system would not have sufficient capital to manage the risks arising from the 
banking operations thus increased. As the banks themselves were given the 
opportunity to influence their capital requirements, their incentives to underestimate 
the risks and thus reduce the capital requirements, increased. It is also difficult to 
determine how much capital a bank actually needs to manage a crisis situation. 
 
Soon after the Basel II Accord had been reached, the major international financial 
crisis broke out with the bankruptcy of the US bank Lehman Brothers. It then became 
clear that many banks lacked sufficient resilience to the sudden changes in the 
financial markets. It also became clear that the current regulations for the banks did 
not sufficiently manage the risks to which the banking system was exposed. One 
conclusion drawn by the Basel Committee was that some banks had neither  enough 
capital nor sufficiently good quality of capital to be able to manage the losses that 
arose. Another conclusion was that global regulation was needed regarding the banks’ 
liquidity risk management. 
 
A new reform work aimed at remedying these shortcomings and supplementing Basel 
II was begun by the Basel Committee. In 2010, a package of new reforms was 
presented in the form of what is usually termed the Basel III. The main aim was to 
strengthen the bank´s capital and to introduce new requirements regarding their 
liquidity management. 
 
The work on finalising Basel III is now being completed. When this work is done, what 
remains is for the Basel Committee members to incorporate the new regulations into 
their national legislation. This will probably be a time-consuming process. Sweden will 
be dependent on how this will be incorporated into EU regulations and directives and 
we will of course be involved in this work.  
 
I will now turn to some of the changes the coming bank regulation will entail. 
A leverage ratio requirement counteracts unhealthy 
build-up of debt 
One lesson from the financial crises we have experienced is that most of them have 
their origins in one or more actors having borrowed far too much money. The larger 
the debt, the more serious the problems will be in a crisis situation.  
 
It is in this context that it is important that we are now introducing a requirement that 
is not risk sensitive to complement the risk-weighted capital requirement. The 
leverage ratio requirement is a simple and transparent measure that will limit the 
banks’ capacity to borrow too much regardless of what operations they conduct. 
More specifically, a bank’s leverage ratio is its capital in relation to its total assets. The 
Basel Committee has previously agreed on a lowest leverage ratio requirement for 
banks of three per cent and for global systemically important banks an even higher 
leverage ratio requirement.  
 
For the last two years, the Riksbank has been recommending that a leverage ratio 
requirement of five per cent should be introduced gradually for the four major 
  5 [12] 
   Swedish banks. However, it is not self-evident what level the leverage ratio 
requirement should have. There are several academic studies in this field which 
indicate that a leverage ratio requirement should be much higher than the levels now 
being discussed. One reason for this is that the risk-weighted requirement plays less 
of a role in a crisis situation. It is then the value of the assets that is important, 
together with the quality and size of the equity capital.   
 
The Riksbank, like the IMF and the OECD, has pointed to several reasons why a higher 
level than the minimum requirement should be applied.  The Swedish banking system 
is large from an international perspective and Swedish banks have extensive 
operations in the Nordic and Baltic countries. Further, the banking system is 
concentrated to a few large banks and these are tightly interconnected. This means 
that financial unease can spread and problems in one major bank can affect not only 
the Swedish financial market, but our entire region. Several other countries with large 
banking systems have introduced or are planning to introduce leverage ratio 
requirements of around 5 per cent.   
 
So the introduction of a global leverage ratio requirement is a step in the right 
direction, but we on the Basel Committee have agreed that further measures are 
needed to reinforce global financial stability and reduce the risk of future financial 
crises.  
The internal models have caused confidence to 
decline... 
In recent years, confidence in the banks’ internal models and calculations of risk 
weights has declined. Regulators as well as banks and market participants have begun 
to doubt whether the capital requirements reflect the banks’ risks in a correct way 
and whether they enable comparable capital relations between different banks. In 
many countries the banks’ risk weights have fallen substantially over time. This has 
been evident with regard to the major Swedish banks over the past ten years. It is 
largely because the use of internal models has increased during this period.2 
...and have led to major differences between the 
banks, so now the framework will be changed... 
Around three years ago, the Basel Committee published several reports where they 
analysed several globally-active banks’ capital requirements calculated using internal 
models.3 One conclusion from the work was that there are major differences in the 
banks' risk weights that cannot be explained by differences in underlying risk. 
 
As a result of this, among other things, the Basel Committee has discussed reducing 
the degree of freedom given to the banks with regard to some of the models. This 
concerns, for instance, the banks’ exposures to large corporates and other banks. In 
addition, they have discussed further measures in the framework for the banks’ 
internal models to reduce the differences in risk weights and capital requirements 
                                                           
2 See Finansinspektionen’s report ”Stability in the Financial System, December 2014”, 
http://www.fi.se/upload/43_Utredningar/20_Rapporter/2014/stab2_2014ny.pdf 
3 See for instance the BIS publication “Analysis of risk-weighted assets for credit risk in the banking book”, 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs256.pdf 
  6 [12] 
   between different banks.  Let me make myself clear here. There is no doubt that the 
banks’ internal models will continue to be an important component when 
determining the banks’ capital requirements. 
 
The constraints I have mentioned here will, if they are introduced, limit the banks’ 
freedom with regard to using internal models. At the same time, they will increase 
confidence in the banks’ capital levels and make it easier to compare the banks.  
 
Nevertheless, there still remain a number of challenges for banks and financial 
supervisory authorities with regard to internal models. For instance, the calculation of 
a bank's risk-weighted assets may mean that several thousand parameters must be 
calculated. Therefore, it is almost unnecessary to point out that the complexity of the 
calculations of the banks’ capital requirement can be considerable. It is then natural 
that some form of safety net is needed, to ensure the banks’ risk weights do not fall 
too low. 
...and a floor for risk-weighted assets will be 
introduced 
The Basel Committee has therefore discussed introducing a new floor for risk-
weighted assets that prevents them from falling too low. The Basel II Accord 
contained this type of floor, but it has been implemented in different ways in different 
countries and now needs to be revised. The new floor will in practice mean that no 
bank is allowed to have risk-weighted assets below a percentage of what they would 
have been if the Basel Committee's standardised methods had been used. Within the 
scope of these standardised methods, the banks are not given the opportunity to use 
internal models to determine risk weights. These standardised methods are currently 
used by smaller banks that do not use internal models. 
 
There are several other reasons for this proposal as well. In addition to the fact that a 
floor would contribute to increased transparency it will make it easier to compare 
banks’ capital levels over time. This will enhance confidence in bank’s capital ratios. 
Moreover with the introduction of a floor for risk weighted assets, small banks could 
compete with large ones on more similar terms. This is because small banks generally 
use standardised methods and not internal models. It is therefore a good idea to have 
a floor for how low the banks’ internally-calculated capital requirements may be in 
relation to the capital requirements for small and medium-sized banks. This is a 
reasonable balance to ensure that competitiveness is not disrupted. 
 
So the future regulation of the banks’ capital levels will probably contain a leverage 
ratio requirement, a risk-weighted capital requirement and a floor for risk-weighted 
assets. 
 
Some of you may wonder why so many different types of capital requirement are 
necessary and the answer is quite simple: because each individual requirement has its 
own strength that offsets the weaknesses in the others. Let me give some examples. 
As I mentioned earlier, a floor for risk weighted assets is needed to prevent the risk 
weights declining too much. In addition, a leverage ratio requirement is needed to 
limit the banks’ capacity to take on too much debt. If only a leverage ratio 
requirement were present, this could give the banks an incentive to move to higher 
  7 [12] 
   risk assets. To counteract this, we need the current risk-based framework that 
compensates with a higher capital requirement for higher risk assets.  
How much capital do the major Swedish banks have? 
Let me now finally discuss what all this may entail for the four major Swedish banks 
and discuss some of the claims in the debate on the Basel Committee's work. To do 
this properly, we need to know something about the banks’ current capital situation. 
Figure 1. Sweden has a large share of national special requirements 
 Source: Sveriges riksbank 
 
One can describe the major Swedish bank's capital levels in a number of different 
ways. The banks themselves usually state their CET 1 capital ratios as a percentage of 
risk-weighted assets. The four major Swedish banks currently have a total of around 
SEK 2,800 billion in risk-weighted assets. In comparison, their total assets amount to 
more than SEK 13,000 billion. The risk-weighted assets are largely calculated with the 
aid of the internal models I mentioned earlier. Finansinspektionen's total CET 1 capital 
requirement of the major Swedish banks is around 18 per cent of their risk-weighted 
assets, or around SEK 510 billion. The major Swedish banks currently meet these 
capital requirements. All in all, they have a CET 1 capital ratio of around 20 per cent of 
their risk-weighted assets, or SEK 550 billion.  
 
SEK 550 billion may seem a lot, but in relation to the banks’ total assets it corresponds 
to just over 4 per cent. This does mean that the major Swedish banks now meet the 
future leverage ratio requirement of 3 per cent that I mentioned earlier. However, 
they all have some way left to reach the leverage ratio requirement of 5 per cent that 
the Riksbank has recommended Finansinspektionen to introduce. 
How can a floor for risk-weighted assets change the 
capital requirements? 
The change now being discussed and which will have the greatest impact on the 
Swedish banks’ capital requirements is probably the introduction of a floor for risk-
weighted assets (often called a capital floor). To understand how this may affect the 
major banks’ future capital requirements, we need to know that more than half of the 
SEK 510 billion in CET 1 capital requirement that I mentioned earlier is comprised of 
so-called special national requirements. This means that Finansinspektionen itself or 
  8 [12] 
   in consultation with other Swedish and international authorities has determined that 
the Swedish banks must meet these requirements. This part is thus the specific 
national Swedish requirement over and above the requirements the Basel Committee 
has agreed on. An example of these specific national requirements is the risk-weight 
floor for Swedish mortgages that Finansinspektionen introduced a few years ago. The 
capital requirements for major Swedish banks in the form of systemic risk buffers that 
the Riksbank, the Swedish Ministry of Finance and Finansinspektionen agreed on in 
November 2011 are also part of these special national requirements. 
 
The other part, slightly less than half of the current CET 1 capital requirement, is the 
internationally-agreed minimum requirement from the Basel Committee. 
Figure 2. Sweden’s special requirements need to be reviewed 
 Source: Sveriges riksbank 
 
Without saying anything about what a future floor for risk-weighted assets may look 
like, I will simply assume in my example that no bank’s risk-weighted assets may be 
less than 75 per cent of what they would have been if the Basel Committee's 
standardised methods had been used. I would like to point out that this 75 per cent 
should not be seen as an indication of any future calibration of a floor for risk-
weighted assets. I have chosen this figure because 75 per cent lies between the 60 
and 90 per cent that the Basel Committee mentioned in its consultation document in 
March 2016.4 Given this assumption, our most recent calculations indicate that the 
major banks’ aggregated risk-weighted assets would increase from the current SEK 
2,800 billion to around SEK 4,500 billion. 
 
This would mean an increase in the current risk-weighted assets of more than 50 per 
cent. If, and I would like to emphasise if, Sweden retains its national special 
requirements in the future, the banks’ CET 1 capital requirements will increase by 
more than 50 per cent, or around SEK 300 billion. This would of course be a significant 
increase from the current capital requirement levels. 
                                                           
4 See the BIS publication “Consultative Document -Reducing variation in credit risk-weighted assets – constraints 
on the use of internal model approaches”,  http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d362.pdf 
  9 [12] 
   Time to start a review of Sweden's special national 
requirements 
Some of the special Swedish requirements have arisen over the years following the 
financial crisis, as Finansinspektionen and other Swedish authorities have assessed 
that Swedish banks need more capital than the current minimum requirement 
supplies. These special Swedish requirements are thus not the result of international 
agreements. It is therefore reasonable that we should review our current special 
national requirements when Basel III will be introduced in full in Sweden, especially in 
the perspective that Basel III will imply higher minimum requirements of the major 
Swedish banks than before. 
  
Although no decision has yet been made on when Basel III shall be fully implemented 
in Sweden, my assessment is that we will have plenty of time to review our special 
national requirements and assess what level they should be at when Basel III is 
introduced in Sweden. One conclusion of this analysis may be that today’s CET 1 
capital requirement of 18 per cent of risk-weighted assets for the major Swedish 
banks in total needs to be changed in future.  
 
Under these circumstances it is too early to make any precise analysis of how, for 
instance, Swedish GDP will develop or how borrowers’ interest rates will be affected 
by the coming changes in the regulations. The impact that the Basel Committee's 
Accord has will depend to a great extent on how the major banks’ total capital 
requirements change going forward and how the banks choose to adapt to the new 
situation. This in turn will be affected by which national special requirements Sweden 
chooses to have in the future. 
 
One can then ask oneself why it is good that the regulatory framework is amended. 
An argument in favour of doing this is that the new regulations will become more 
transparent and that the capital requirements for Swedish and foreign banks will 
become more comparable. Multiple capital ratios and requirements will lead to a 
more robust financial system. This is something that benefits financial stability and 
therefore something I welcome.  
The banks determine a respectful distance to the 
capital requirement 
Some may claim that increased minimum requirements will cause the banks’ buffers 
to decline. By the banks’ buffers, I mean in this context the difference between the 
banks’ actual capital levels and the capital requirements, or as we sometimes call it; 
the banks’ respectful distance to the capital requirement. If the banks have 
substantial buffers over and above the requirements, it benefits us all, as it reduces 
the probability that they will not meet the requirements. However, in the end it is the 
banks themselves that decide what respectful distance to have to the capital 
requirements. Any changes in the size of the capital requirements do not affect this 
fact. And my hope is that the banks will act responsibly here. 
So to summarise... 
I welcome the amendments to the regulations regarding the banks’ capital 
requirements being discussed by the Basel Committee. Even if the final pieces of the 
  10 [12] 
   puzzle are not yet in place, the changes will most likely lead to more robust banks and 
an increased confidence and transparency in the banking system. They will also 
reduce the risks linked to internal models and lead to increased international 
harmonisation. This in turn will benefit the major Swedish banks, which compete in a 
global market. However, it is much too early to say yet exactly how the new 
regulatory framework will affect the real economy in Sweden. The effects will mainly 
depend on how Sweden's special national requirements change in the future and not 
on the Basel Committee’s global minimum standards.  
 
The time is now right to start a review our special Swedish requirements and this is 
work I welcome and to which the Riksbank would gladly contribute going forward. 
 
Thank you for listening.  
    11 [12] 
   References 
BIS (July 1988), International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital 
Standards 
BIS (June 2004), International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital 
Standards, A revised version 
BIS (December 2010), Basel III- A global regulatory framework for more resilient banks 
and banking systems 
BIS (March 2016), Consultative Document Reducing variation in credit risk-weighted 
assets – constraints on the use of internal model approaches 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis (November 2016), The Minneapolis Plan To End 
To Big Too Fail 
Finansinspektionen (November 2016), Kapitalkrav för svenska banker kvartal 3, 2016 
FSB (October 2014), Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial 
Institutions 
Goodhart, Charles (2011), The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, A history of 
the early years 1974-1997 
IMF (October 2013), Global Financial Stability Report 
IMF (August 2014), Article IV Consultation – Staff Report, IMF Country Report No. 
14/261 
Riksbanken (December 2016), Financial Stability Report 2016:2 
     12 [12] 
