Joachim Wuermeling: Cybersecurity - pivotal for central banks
Keynote speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank, at the 2nd Payments Drift Forum, Euroforum, Aschaffenburg, 7 September 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. The Payments Drift Forum is a wonderful
platform for practitioners, politicians and officials.
I highly appreciate the opportunity to address this group and to contribute to what looks like a very
interesting and comprehensive two days of dialogue around current developments in the field of
payments and banking operations.
In his keynote address, Winfried Bausback just talked about an issue that is – and will continue to
be – extremely relevant for the industry: cybercrime. Let me use this opportunity to weigh in and
address the issue of cyber security from a central banker’s standpoint.
2. There is no such thing as “absolute security"
When  it  comes  to  information  technology  there  is  no  such  thing  as  absolute  security.  The
security  expert  Gene  Spafford  hit  the  nail  on  the  head  when  he  said,  “The  only  truly  secure
system is one that is powered off, cast in a block of concrete and sealed in a lead-lined room
with armed guards".
Just  think  of  the  incident  at  the  central  bank  of  Bangladesh.  In  February  2016,  81  million  US
dollars  was  misappropriated,  and  the  shock  among  all  financial  market  players  was  painfully
clear.  This  is  understandable;  after  all,  the  last  German  report  on  the  protection  of  the
Constitution  stated  that  cyberattacks  bring  annual  losses  of  around  €55  billion  to  the  German
economy.  The  cost  to  the  global  economy  is  supposedly  €400  billion.  More  than  half  the
businesses in Germany (53%) have fallen prey to cyberattacks in the past two years. One in six
businesses (17%) had sensitive digital data stolen during this period, with the attackers primarily
getting their hands on e-mails (41%) or financial data (36%). These facts should be a reminder
for German businesses to boost their cybersecurity.
It goes without saying that these facts are also spurring us at Bundesbank to ramp up our efforts
in securing our own systems. Our infrastructure being up and running is not only crucial for us as
an institution, but it’s also critical for the financial system in Germany and the Euro area.
Let’s  look  at  TARGET2  for  instance,  a  wholesale  payment  system  operated  by Deutsche
Bundesbank, Banca d’Italia and Banque de France. More than 1,000 banks all over Europe are
directly connected. The service ensures the speedy and final settlement of national and cross-
border  payments  in  central  bank  money.  Each  working  day,  an  average  of  around  350,000
payments with a value of about 1.7 trillion Euro – which equals half the German GDP last year –
are  processed  by  the  system.  TARGET2  is  just  one  example  for  critical  financial  market
infrastructure for which Bundesbank is in charge. Others include TARGET2 Securities, a service
for the settlement of securities in central bank money. Or think of our monetary policy operations,
which provide the banking system with liquidity. A proper functioning of these services is crucial
for the stability for our financial system.
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
But how does the Bundesbank interpret the term “cybersecurity"?
At the Bundesbank, we refer to cybersecurity when our focus is on protection against cybercrime
and the associated risks.
We define cybercrime in the following ways.
There is a deliberately targeted and IT-based attack on data and IT systems
which can viably impair confidentiality,
integrity, or
availability.
Additionally, the unauthorised use of internet capabilities
to spread information very quickly,
in large volumes, and
on a broad scale.
Finally,  we  understand  cybercrime  to  include  the  procurement  of  personal  information
through social engineering.
In these ways, the attackers usually gain either broad reach or access to a specific target.
To what extent has the Bundesbank been hit by attacks?
Cyberattacks also pose a risk to the infrastructures and applications of European central banks,
which is not to be underestimated. There are four reasons why central banks, in particular, are a
lucrative target for cyber espionage and cyberattacks.
1.  Because of their economic and policy mandate,
2.  Because, as a result, information is available to them at an early stage,
3.  Because of their responsibility for cash-based and cashless payment systems, and
4.  Because of their prominent role in their country’s financial system.
Last year, the Bundesbank was also the target of isolated distributed denial-of-service attacks.
These involve known systems being overloaded by a flood of requests and thus brought to a
standstill.
The Bundesbank has used its protective measures to successfully fend off the attacks aimed at
it  so  far.  Last  year  alone,  we  intercepted  around  10,000  e-mails  infected  with  malware  and
stopped a hundred thousand unauthorised attempts to access the Bundesbank infrastructure.
Possible reasons for broad reach
Cyberattacks like the one recently experienced by the central bank of Bangladesh show, on the
one hand, how vulnerable all businesses are once an attacker can take control of the internal
network.  On  the  other  hand,  a  clear  trend  is  evident  that  financially  motivated  attackers  have
significantly  enhanced  their  tactics,  techniques  and  processes,  making  it  harder  to  detect,
analyse and remedy the attacks. In targeted attacks like these, it can often be months or years
before  anyone  realises  that  their  systems  have  been  compromised  and,  in  some  cases,  that
data has secretly been siphoned out.
On  12  May  2017,  WannaCry  infected  around  200,000  systems  in  150  countries  around  the
world, according to Europol. The malware encrypted all available network data. It was spread by
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
exploiting a vulnerability in the Windows operating system (EternalBlue), which was discovered
by the NSA, and stolen and leaked by the hacker group Shadow Brokers.
More recently, attackers have also aimed to cause maximum damage within a short timeframe.
The businesses hit by NonPetya weren’t even able to react quickly enough because the damage
was already done in a short space of time by wiping parts of the hard disk. The Danish container
shipping company Maersk estimates the damage caused by the NonPetya attack at between 200
and 300 million US dollars, according to its own statements. These examples are further proof
that  businesses  have  to  manage  their  cyber  risks  at  least  as  scrupulously  as  they  do  their
traditional risks.
While  banks  can  offset  the  losses  incurred  by  the  default  of  an  average  borrower,  just  one
successful  cyberattack  can  bring  the  activities  of  a  bank  to  a  standstill,  no  doubt  causing
immense reputational damage in the process.
What’s more, the financial sector is highly interconnected, meaning that the default of a single
participant can lead to disturbances being felt throughout the entire industry. If, for instance, a
stock exchange or payment system were to default, thousands of participants would be affected
on the spot.
The  financial  sector  is  also  an  obvious  target  for  politically  motivated  attackers.  By  hitting  a
critical infrastructure, attackers would be able to not only inflict direct financial damage but also
wreak havoc on the economy at large.
For  the  financial  sector,  in  particular,  it  is  therefore  becoming  increasingly  important  to  press
ahead with measures in order to defend against cyber risk such as:
Optimise centralised and decentralised protective measures on an ongoing basis.
Foster a culture of cybersecurity.
Bolster the resilience of financial market infrastructures.
3. Cybersecurity as a quantifiable metric is feasible
Looking  at  the  examples  that  I  have  cited,  it  would  be  fitting  to  find  that  financial  market
participants were complying with a uniform security standard. But this is not the case.
What difference would such a “uniform security standard” make?
First of all, as we draw up our defensive measures, it is vital that we all borrow from established
standards such as
the international Code of practice for information security management (ISO/IEC 27002),
the US NIST Cybersecurity Framework or
the German IT Baseline Protection Catalogues of the Federal Office for Information Security.
Compliance  with  these  standards  is  important  and  guarantees  a  middling  level  of  protection.
Generally speaking, however, attackers are not interested in firewalls – they are interested in their
weak points. It is therefore important that enterprises identify their own vulnerabilities and rectify
these using standardised procedures.
Let’s take a look at the Top 20 Critical Security Controls. These standards were put together by a
large number of government and industry experts in cybersecurity and represent a prioritised,
risk-based  recommendation  for  implementation.  Such  procedures  would  help  us  increase
awareness of existing weaknesses. In addition, they would serve as a guideline for implementing
effective processes and tools to appropriately secure our systems.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In this context,
constant monitoring,
automating processes,
providing uniform evaluation metrics, and
acquiring knowledge of real attacks
are all crucially important with respect to developing effective defence systems. This is what we
can do, and I appeal enterprises to follow these procedures.  
This  is  because  we  need  to  first  reach  a  point  where  we  can  identify  the  current  state  of
cybersecurity using established risk management procedures before going on to
1.  find room for improvement and
2.  continually improve quality standards (“majority level”).
Effectively searching for and finding weak points is therefore one of our main tasks, especially
since our capabilities in this regard pale in comparison to those of the attackers. 
Liability for manufacturers
Besides  the  enterprise  itself,  what  can  others  do?  Just  like  Federal  Minister  of  the  Interior
Thomas  de  Maizière  and Arne  Schönbohm  from  the  Federal  Office  for  Information  Security,  I
expect manufacturers – no matter how short their products’ life cycles are – to be required to
identify bugs at an early stage,
report them,
close them as quickly as possible and
make security updates available for a longer period of time.
The developers of hard- and software must be forced to adhere to IT security standards and to
integrate and activate safety functions into their products.  Such a legal obligation could have a
great  impact  to  the  multitude  of  IT  products  that  are  subject  to  weaknesses.  Therefore,  in
addition  to  the  product-specific  security  requirements  regarding  product  liability  and  product
safety  laws,  the  infringement  of  technical  standards  and  rules  –  such  as  DIN  standards,
common  criteria  and  protection  profiles  –  should  lead  to  a  presumption  of  guaranty  or  the
facilitation of the affected parties.
I  myself  am  a  big  fan  of  “bug  bounty”  programmes,  which  are  run  by  many  international
companies and offer financial rewards to ethical hackers (known as “white hats”) for reporting
bugs – and that’s because vulnerabilities that we have been unaware of up to now are another
problem that we need to address. Deutsche Bundesbank therefore supports manufacturers and
suppliers conducting bug bounties. As the number of professional attackers grows – irrespective
of whether they are cybercriminals or intelligence agencies – so too does the likelihood of their
hacking  tools  becoming  the  target  of  attack.  The  Shadow  Broker  and  Vault  7  documents
released on WikiLeaks make these risks abundantly clear.
Penetration tests are helping
Penetration  tests  are  an  effective  means  of  unearthing  previously  unknown  vulnerabilities  in
systems and applications and then eliminating them. They clarify the extent to which attackers
can penetrate an organisation’s infrastructure and how much damage they can cause. A single
weak point can be all it takes for attackers to hit the jackpot.
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  my  opinion,  “red  teaming”  is  the  ultimate  in  penetrating  testing.  This  involves  a  red  team,
usually brought in from outside, working against an internal team of analysts (the “blue team”)
whose  mission  is  to  defend  the  internal  infrastructure  to  the  best  of  their  ability.  European
financial market infrastructures are to be subjected to this manner of cyber testing with the aid of
a standardised European red team testing framework. I would like to encourage you to regularly
review  the  resilience  of  your  own  infrastructure  and  processes  and  to  develop  them
successively.
In  the Bundesbank, annually a large number of vulnerability checks and penetration tests take
place. We detect and fix regularly weaknesses of the manufacturers or ourselves in systems
and applications. 
The weak link: people
Well-known hacker Kevin Mitnick – who allegedly hacked into the US Department of Defence’s
network more than one  hundred  times  and  penetrated  NSA  systems  on  multiple  occasions  –
once  said:  “Companies  spend  millions  of  dollars  on  firewalls,  encryption,  and  secure  access
devices and it’s money wasted because none of these measures address the weakest link in the
security chain: the people who use, administer, operate and account for computer systems that
contain protected information.”  
I agree with Kevin Mitnick. This stems from the fact that, in all of the cyberattacks known to us,
attackers focused their attention on people as the weak link: in other words, end users and their
behaviour. That is why I think it is essential to raise awareness among users about how to handle
data  and  IT  systems  in  a  security-conscious  manner  –  and  this  awareness  needs  to  be
conveyed to all those who work with such systems. 
Each and every one of us must
develop an understanding of the threats, yet
internalise the fact that these threats are constantly changing and
that it is possible to protect ourselves.
And this applies in both the work and the private setting. In the Bundesbank, we regularly discuss
current  threats,  organize  seminars  focusing  on  cyber-security,  or  –  like  in  the  past  year  –
perform a large-scale awareness campaign which dealt with subjects like “data classification",
“encryption", “password protection", “mobility” and “social engineering".
This  means  that  the  analysis  and  synthesis  of  vulnerabilities  are  our  tools  of  choice  when  it
comes  to  heightening  security  awareness  within  the  company  and  to  giving  management  a
deeper insight into the actual risk situation.
It  would  be  desirable  to  establish  a  system  of  measures  and  metrics  that  renders  visible  the
progress already made.
4. Is 99% security enough?
While  banks  can  absorb  the  losses  incurred  by  the  default  of  an  average  borrower,  just  one
successful cyberattack can bring the activities of a financial market infrastructure to a standstill,
causing at least immense reputational damage or in the worst case a financial crisis.
The onus is therefore on banking supervisors to keep an even closer watch than they do now on
the potential threats posed by cybercrime. And the central banks have a special responsibility to
protect themselves from cyber risks, thereby safeguarding confidence in the financial system.
That’s why we’re also working closely together at the international level to reduce cyber risks for
ourselves and for the financial market infrastructures.
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
One  example  of  this  cooperation  is  the  “Guidance  on  cyber  resilience  for  financial  market
infrastructures", which was published in 2016. The Bundesbank, in cooperation with the Federal
Financial  Supervisory  Authority  (BaFin)  as  well  as  the  central  banks  and  the  supervisory
authorities of the other G10 countries, drew up requirements for financial market infrastructures
with regard to cyber risks.
It  is  of  fundamental  importance  that  not  only  information  technology  plays  its  part.  Everyone
concerned must bear responsibility: the technical experts, every single user and the supervisors.
The  global  ransomware  attacks  have  once  again  clearly  demonstrated  how  vulnerable  digital
infrastructures are.
Last  year,  BaFin  and  the Bundesbank,  along  with  representatives  from  banks  and  banking
associations,  discussed  the  supervisory  requirements  for  information  technology.  These
requirements  were  drawn  up  to  encourage  a  more  detailed  examination  of  supervisory
expectations  on  the  technical  and  organisational  resources  specified  in  the  Minimum
requirements  for  risk  management  (MaRisk),  to  clarify  them  and  to  render  them  more
transparent. Thoughts were fleshed out on the basis of the IT strategy in place in other areas
such  as  access  management,  application  development  and  the  management  of  externally
procured IT services.
Thus,  protection  against  increasingly  sophisticated  IT  threats  is  and  remains  a  never-ending
task. The level of IT security achieved therefore has to be constantly reappraised and improved –
as it is true for every other criminal menace.
5. Cooperation and coordination are key
The examples I have just mentioned illustrate the ongoing potential for optimising the reliability
and robustness of the hardware and software we use as well as the eradication of faults.
The systems that manage our reserve assets have a high level of IT security, and the necessary
protective  measures  can  be  installed  in  near-real  time.  It  was  in  this  context  that  the  Federal
government  and 
the Bundesbank  made  cybersecurity  a  focal  point  of  Germany’s  G20
presidency. And  that  is  why  we  spoke  about  the  issue  of  cybersecurity  in  great  depth  at  the
meeting of G7 finance ministers and central bank governors. This was where, in October 2016,
the G7 Fundamental elements of cybersecurity for the financial sector were adopted. The G7
Cyber  Expert  Group  is  tasked  with  presenting  the  key  aspects  of  an  effective  assessment  of
cybersecurity by October of this year.
Together  with  the  cybersecurity  experts  of  the  other  central  banks  we  are,  moreover,
continuously monitoring the current global threat level and regularly consult with each other to
initiate any countermeasures. And last but not least, we are constantly striving to optimise our
detection  and  defence  systems,  as  we  take  every  attack  that  is  launched  against  us  very
seriously.
We  urgently  encourage  other  institutions,  too,  to  exchange  their  knowledge  and  to  liaise  with
each other at the national and international level on their critical infrastructures.
6. Attack is the best form of defence
Ladies and gentlemen, attack is the best form of defence. At least, that’s what football pundits tell
us.  But  our  turf,  the  cyberworld,  is  a  place  of  stealth  and  cunning,  and  this  particular  football
adage  doesn’t  apply.  Indeed,  the  opposite  approach  is  called  for:  protect  yourselves  against
attack and
Make IT security your goal.
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Establish a company-wide security culture.
Continue to adapt to the changing and ever-evolving threat situation.
Seek out security vulnerabilities in your company.
Optimise your risk management structure constantly.
Keep contingency plans and competence rules at the ready in case of a crisis.
Share information, thoughts and experience with each other.
And please, always bear in mind: IT security is not a product you can buy. It’s a process that has
to be embraced.  
There’s no such thing as absolute security, we are not immune to attacks. But it is our job to
prepare to the best of our ability for possible threats.
Another word of wisdom, yet again from the world of football, is the following: Attack wins you
games, defence wins you championships. So let’s make sure our defence is in good shape.
Thank you for your attention.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
