Philip  R  Lane:  Globalisation  and  innovation  in  finance  -  policy
challenges
Address by Mr Philip R Lane, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the European Financial
Forum, Dublin, 24 January 2017.
 Acknowledgements:  I  thank  Camille  Blackburn  and  Laura  Moretti  for  their  assistance  in
preparing this speech.
I  am  delighted  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  today’s European  Financial  Forum.    The
agenda for today’s event is quite broad but globalisation and innovation are two primary themes
that  are  set  to  recur  throughout  today’s  sessions.  Of  course,  the  forces  of  globalisation  and
technological disruption have wide-ranging economic, social and political implications but I will
focus more narrowly on the analysis of these themes in the context of the financial sector and
the challenges for financial regulators and central bankers.
I will first discuss financial globalisation before turning to financial innovation in the second part of
this speech.  While I discuss these topics sequentially, it is also clear that these forces interact. 
In  one  direction,  information  technology  is  a  primary  facilitator  of  financial  globalisation.  In  the
other direction, an integrated global financial system increases the potential rewards to financial
innovation, in view of the importance of scale economies in the rollout of new technologies. In
addition, internationally-diversified investors are an important source of risk-absorbing funding for
1
innovating firms.
Financial globalisation
2
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the nature of financial globalisation has shifted.  
International financial flows to and from advanced economies have been weaker than during the
pre-crisis period, especially in relation to cross-border banking activity. In contrast, international
financial  flows  to  and  from  emerging  economies  have  increased  in  importance,  which  is
reinforced by the expanding share of emerging economies in global GDP.  
Foreign direct investment (FDI) positions have continued to expand, in contrast to the portfolio
equity,  portfolio  debt  and  non-portfolio  debt  categories.  A  striking  pattern  is  that  the  recent
expansion  in  FDI  has  been  concentrated  in  positions  vis-à-vis  international  financial  centres,
suggesting that the increased complexity of the corporate structures of multinational enterprises
is playing an important role in determining the pattern and composition of direct investment flows.
More generally, the global intermediation role of international financial centres poses analytical
challenges in understanding the implications of measured international financial flows for the real
economies of individual countries.  For instance, the role of international financial centres makes
it trickier to assess the underlying interconnections between national macro-financial conditions,
national macro-financial policies and the scale and composition of international financial flows.  It
also  makes  it  more  difficult  to  interpret  measures  of  national  economic  performance,  with
indicators  such  as  gross  domestic  product  providing  insufficient  guidance  for  financially-
globalised  economies.    For  these  reasons,  it  is  vitally  important  to  improve  the  quality  and
relevance  of  international  financial  data  in  order  to  gain  a  better  understanding  of  the  links
between  the  ultimate  holders  and  ultimate  issuers  of  financial  instruments.   In  particular,  the
international  policy  community  needs 
the
recommendations of the G-20 Data Gaps Initiative (DGI).
3
implementing 
further  progress 
to  make 
in 
The  secular  expansion  of  emerging  economies  both  as  an  investment  destination  and  as  a
source of funding for the advanced economies is a central factor in thinking about many of the
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
topics  on  the  international  financial  agenda,  including  the  nature  and  number  of  international
currencies, the design of international financial safety nets and the operation and governance of
global and regional official financial institutions. 
In relation to the conduct of monetary policy, the global financial environment plays an important
role  in  determining  the  financial  conditions  facing  European  firms  and  households,  while  the
responses  of  global  investors  are  central  to  the  transmission  mechanism  for  monetary  policy
operations.    For  instance,  it  is  clear  that  medium-  and  long-term  interest  rates  include  a
substantial  common  global  component,  with  the  net  external  purchases  of  euro-denominated
bonds a basic channel by these rates are influenced by global investors.   In similar vein, the
evidence indicates that the transmission of unconventional monetary policies also operates via
the portfolio decisions of global investors. In particular, investors from outside the euro area have
been  significant  counterparties  in  the  ECB  asset  purchase  programme,  such  that  its
effectiveness  in  rebalancing  portfolios  has  in  part  worked  through  the  allocation  decisions  of
5
foreign investors.
4
Symmetrically,  adverse  shifts  in  external  financial  conditions  constitute  a  risk  factor  for  the
success of the ECB’s monetary strategy.  The exposure of the euro area to fluctuations in global
financial conditions helps to explain the flexible nature of the ECB’s asset purchase programme,
as reflected in the scaling up of monthly purchases from €60 billion to €80 billion in March 2016
and the recent decision to return to a monthly volume of €60 billion from April 2017 onwards. This
flexibility is also embedded in our forward guidance, with the introductory statement to the press
conference following last week’s monetary policy meeting of the Governing Council specifying
that:
“In  particular,  if  the  outlook  becomes  less  favourable,  or  if  financial  conditions  become
inconsistent with further progress towards a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation,
we  stand  ready  to  increase  our  asset  purchase  programme  in  terms  of  size  and/or
duration.”
More  generally,  the  high  degree  of  interconnectedness  across  currency  areas  makes  it
imperative that central banks actively cooperate in the sharing of information and analysis, so
that monetary policy decisions are based on a shared understanding of current macro-financial
6
conditions.  
7
Especially  in  view  of  Ireland’s  status  as  an  international  financial  centre,  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland  is  committed  to  playing  its  part  in  the  analysis  of  international  financial  linkages.  This
includes publishing research on the characteristics of the Irish investment funds sector, which
predominantly  consists  of  intermediation  structures  that  link  foreign  investors  and  foreign
issuers.  It also includes giving due attention to global financial conditions in our assessment of
risks to domestic financial stability. To this end, the Bank is allocating increased resources to the
monitoring  and  analysis  of  global  financial  conditions,  as  part  of  our  new  financial  stability
directorate  that  is  being  established  this  year  to  consolidate  and  reinforce  the  Bank’s  multi-
8
faceted work on financial stability.
Disruptive innovation
Technological innovation is a second force driving structural changes in the international financial
system.  In particular, disruptive types of innovation that create new markets and products and
carve out new categories of customers are especially powerful, relative to incremental forms of
9
innovation that just seek to improve the quality or lower the cost of existing financial products.
It is possible that segments of the financial sector could be arriving at a tipping point in terms of
the impact of disruptive innovation. While it would be unwise to offer strong predictions as to the
ultimate  impact  of  any  specific  innovation,  regulators  and  central  bankers  must  be  sufficiently
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
prepared to respond appropriately to a shifting financial services landscape.
In our regulatory work, technological development in the financial services sector makes us more
interested than ever in seeing evidence of prudent business management. Strong governance,
clear  strategic  planning  and  effective  and  embedded  risk  management  are  especially  critical
during phases of disruptive innovation.
Some of our key regulatory considerations include: (a) for authorisations, we need to strike the
right  balance  between  ensuring  that  firms  seeking  entry  to  the  financial  system  meet  our
expectations, while at the same time being to open to innovation; (b) for regulated firms, we are
vigilant about shifting business models and emerging risks – including ensuring that prudential
and consumer protection requirements are appropriate for new business models; (c) our orderly
resolution  regimes  are  being  adjusted  to  enable  the  financial  system  to  absorb  the  failure  of
individual  firms  as  others  grow  and  prosper;  and  (d)  we  are  strengthening  international
cooperation arrangements necessary to be able to effectively regulate in a digital environment
that may have little regard for national borders or jurisdictional reach. 
Disruptive innovation and the global unbundling of traditional financial services models in banking,
insurance, and funds management can also have implications for financial stability. International
consolidation  in  the  financial  services  market  to  maximise  the  scalability  benefits  of  new
technologies may create larger firms that are more difficult to resolve. Greater specialisation may
also foster the growth of mono-line firms that are more exposed to sectoral shocks.  It is also
important to assess the implications of new types of settlement systems and digital currencies
for the role of central banks in the domestic and international monetary systems, including the
pros and cons of digital base monies supplied by central banks.
Conclusions
10
In summary, the dual forces of globalisation and innovation are high on the research and policy
agendas for financial regulators and central bankers. An immediate challenge relates to the post-
Brexit reconfiguration of the European financial sector.  In managing the transition to the new
post-Brexit  regime,  it  is  essential  for  policymakers  to  take  a  global  perspective  in  view  of  the
importance  of  non-European  investors  and  financial  intermediaries  to  the  functioning  of  the
European financial system. Equally, financial innovators will be looking for clarity about the new
regulatory  and  trading  arrangements  between  the  UK  and  the  EU,  since  uncertainty  about
institutional frameworks is an obvious inhibitor of investment plans. 
Let me conclude by thanking the organisers of the European Financial Forum. The agenda and
lineup of speakers for the rest of today looks fascinating.
1
2
3
4
5
Philip  R.  Lane  (2011),  “Innovation  and  Financial  Globalisation,”  in Lessons  from  East  Asia  and  the  Global
Financial Crisis: Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics Global (Justin Yifu Lin and Boris
Pleskovic, editors),   309-332.
Philip R. Lane and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti (2016), “International Financial Integrationin the Aftermath of the
Global Financial Crisis”, presentation, IMF Annual Research Conference.
Philip  R.  Lane  (2014),  “Cross-Border  Financial  Linkages:  Identifying  and  Measuring  Vulnerabilities,” CEPR
Policy Insight No. 77.
Daniel Carvalho and Michael Fidora (2015), “Capital Inflows and Euro Area Long-Term Interest Rates,” Journal
of International Money and Finance 54(C), 186-204.  For related evidence for the US, see Francis E. Warnock
and  Veronica  Cacdac  Warnock  (2009),  “International  Capital  Flows  and  US  Interest  Rates,” Journal  of
International Money and Finance 28, 903-919.
Ralph SJ Koijen, Francois Koulischer, Benoit Nhuyen, and Motohiro Yogo (2016), “Quantitative Easing in the
Euro Area: The Dynamics of Risk Exposures and the Impact on Asset Prices,” Banque de France Working
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Paper No. 601.
6
7
8
9
10
Mario Draghi (2016), “The International Dimension of Monetary Policy,”speech, ECB Forum on Central Banking
(Sintra), June 28.
Dominick Barrett, Brian Godfrey and Brian Golden (2016), “New Data Collection on Special Purpose Vehicles:
Initial Findings and Measuring Shadow Banking,” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 3: 71-84; Niamh
Hallissey (2016), “Interconnectedness of the Irish Banking Sector with the Global Banking System,” Central
Bank of Ireland Quarterly Bulletin, 1: 66-82; Brian Godfrey, Neil Killeen and Kitty Moloney (2015), “Data Gaps and
Shadow Banking: Profiling Special Purpose Vehicles’ Activities in Ireland,” Central Bank of Ireland Quarterly
Bulletin, 3: 48-60; Oisin Kenny, Neil Killeen and Kitty Moloney (2015), “Network Analysis Using EMIR Credit
Default Swap Data: Micro-Level Evidence from Irish-Domiciled Special Purpose Vehicles,” IFC Bulletin 41.
The role of international financial factors in the Irish boom-bust credit cycle is analysed in Philip R. Lane (2015),
“The Funding of the Irish Domestic Banking System During the Boom,” Journal of the Statistical and Social
Inquiry Society of Ireland 44, 40-70.
Joseph L. Bower and Clayton M. Christensen (1995), “Disruptive Technologies: Catching the Wave,” Harvard
Business Review 73(1), 43–53.
Ben Broadbent (2016), “Central Banks and Digital Currencies,” speech, London School of Economics, 2nd
March; Yves Mersch (2017), “Digital Base Money: An Assessment from the ECB’s Perspective,”  speech, Bank of
Finland, 17th January. 
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
