Amando  Tetangco:  Marking  time  -  anchoring  strengths  amidst
uncertainties
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  (BSP,  the
central bank of the Philippines), at the Joint Meeting of Rotary Club of Manila (RCM) and Rotary
Club of Forbes Park (RCFP), Manila, 5 January 2017.
 I am pleased to join you today as speaker for your first general assembly of the year. It’s become
a tradition of sorts between the BSP and the Rotary Club of Manila. And today marks the 12th
consecutive year that we are doing this together. We are, as they say in a game of sport, 12 for
12.
For the Rotary Club of Forbes Park, on the other hand, our relationship is somewhat younger.
Nevertheless  this  does  not  detract  from  the  significance  that  we  put  on  engagements  with
stakeholders such as yourselves.
As I have done in my past appearances in your meetings, I shall share with you today the BSP’s
views  on  the  economic  landscape  going  forward  and  what  you  may  expect  from  the  BSP  in
terms of policy thrusts. I hope you will find this time well spent and the information I will share
useful.
A surreal 2016 in a nutshell
Last year, I opened my remarks by saying that if we were to use the first seven days of the year
as  an  indicator,  2016  was  going  to  be  “far  from  boring”.  In  particular,  I  said  that  it  could  be
“riveting and challenging”.  Well, that was just what had come to pass. In fact, Merriam-Webster
Dictionary suggested that surreal is a word that describes the events of last year.
Webster  defines  “surreal”  as  being  “marked  by  intense  irrational  reality  of  a  dream” ,  also
“unbelievable” or “fantastic”.  Being the most searched word, surreal was declared the “word of
the year” for 2016. The dictionary publisher further explained that word searches surge around
specific news events.
1
For  many  market  observers,  surreal  aptly  captures  the  occurrence  of  the  unexpected  and
seemingly  irrational  extreme  events  of  2016.  While  there  were  risks  and  uncertainties  that
persisted throughout the year, such as the worry over the possibility of a hard economic landing
in China;  the anxiety over the direction of oil prices, and commodity prices in general; and the
market meandering due to the uncertainty in the timing, pace, and magnitude of the US Fed’s
policy rate normalization, there were specific events that shocked the market.  These include the
unexpected outcome of the Brexit referendum in June, and the upset in the close race in US
Presidential  election  in  November.  Financial  markets  did  not  get  both  of  these  right.  Trading
positions betted on the other side of the table, so to speak, and underestimated the underlying
political sentiment. The surprise resulted in episodes of elevated financial market volatility.
We are mindful of these global market volatilities because the Philippines is not immune to the
repercussions of global headwinds. In addition, we also have home-grown risks and “noise” to
deal with. Indeed, the evolving nature of uncertainty in both the global and local environments 
requires that we be vigilant.
Vigilance: mapping the risks for 2017
For this afternoon therefore, let me highlight three risks and describe how the BSP sees these
panning out in 2017:
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
First, the global economy is seen to remain tentative. Growth prospects for advanced economies
continue  to  be  weak.    Among  emerging  economies,  the  growth  outlook  in  China  is  also  a
concern.  As  you  know,  China  has  moved  away  from  dependence  on  exports  to  more
domestically-oriented sources of growth such as services and consumption. While this move
has helped stave off a hard landing for China, it remains to be seen whether this rebalancing is
sustainable over the medium term.
In the meantime, we are seeing the rise of populist sentiment around the globe. Brexit and the
Trump win are manifestations of this trend. In addition, both of these events reflect a preference
for protectionist policies. Some analysts have called the latter a “retreat from multilateralism”. 
With  continued  global  growth  weakness,  this  retreat  from  multilateralism  is  encouraging
countries to also  look more towards domestic sources of growth.
If  the  shift  to  “inward-looking  policies”  gains  traction,  this  can  potentially  further  shrink  global
trade, which could lead to even lower global growth. In economics, this is a classic case of the
Prisoner’s Dilemma, wherein because of the absence of cooperation, the simultaneous actions
of economic agents lead to sub-optimal outcomes.
Closer to home, the “retreat from multilateralism” could dampen the country’s OF deployment
and  remittances,  as  well  as  cause  slowdown  in  the  BPO  sector,  thereby  hurting  domestic
consumption.
Before I move on to the next risk, let me just say that on the more specific issue of Brexit, the
direct exposure of the Philippines to the UK is relatively limited.  The bigger concern, however, is
whether the other EU economies will follow the UK’s lead; given that our trade exposure to the
EU is larger at around 12pct.
As for the Trump election, we will need to see how his campaign rhetoric translates to actual
policy. Our eyes and ears are tuned to January 20, when he actually takes over the White House.
The second risk comes from the US Fed’s future policy rate actions. At its meeting in December
2016, when the Fed raised its target rate for the first time for the year, the Fed indicated that it
would raise rates three more times in 2017. If the Fed veers from this, volatility in both the  global
and domestic FX and fixed income markets could rise.
A  steeper  than  expected  hike  in  US  interest  rates  could  lead  to  a  faster  rise  in  domestic
commercial  and  government  securities  interest  rates  also,  as  well  as  stronger  depreciation
pressures on EME currencies, including the peso. Such price movements may adversely affect
the  balance  sheets  of  domestic  corporates  and  banks,  especially  of  those  that  have  FX  and
floating-interest  rate  obligations.  This  adverse  result  would  be  magnified  if  the  markets  panic,
overreact,  and  thus  amplify  the  initial  increases  in  interest  rates  and  weakness  of  the  peso.
Moreover,  a  tightening  in  domestic  financial  market  conditions  could  also  dampen  domestic
credit activities in the near-term.
However, if the reason for Fed tightness is that the underlying US economic growth has become
stronger, then that may offset some of the near-term negative impact of the Fed tightening and
lead to over-all support for global growth in the medium-term.
On the other hand, if the Fed turns dovish (i.e., fewer or no further hikes in 2017), then that could
encourage  “risk  on”  market  behavior,  stall  domestic  interest  rate  increases  and  dampen
depreciation  pressures  in  emerging  markets.  But  such  result  is  unlikely,  as  Trumponomics,
which is reported to focus on increased fiscal spending, is widely expected to be inflationary.
Third.  In addition to these external risks, we also have risks emanating from the domestic front
such  as  political  noise  and  adverse  weather  disturbances.  Moreover,  while  the  administration
has committed to ramp infrastructure spending, they could be forced to cut back on this, should
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
revenues  from  the  proposed  tax  reform  package  fall  short  of  expectation  as  indicated  by  the
Secretary  of  Finance.  If  critical  infrastructures  are  not  built  in  time,  this  could  hold  back  the
country’s current economic growth momentum.
A sound basis for optimism
Given this outlook, how do we expect the Philippine economy to fare in 2017? For the reasons I
will share shortly, our view is that the economy should be able to weather 2017 relatively well
barring surprises that are more surreal than those in 2016.
Economic growth remains impressive. Q3 GDP growth was reported at 7.1 percent, making the
Philippines  the  fastest-growing  among  major  South  East  Asian  emerging  economies.  We
clocked in 71 consecutive quarters of positive economic growth, and we are upbeat about Q4
outcomes given the boost from holiday spending.
We also emphasize the quality of growth. Economic expansion is driven by broad-based factors.
On  the  supply  side,  while  services  has  remained  the  key  driver  of  growth  of  the  Philippine
economy, the share of industry output has been expanding.  On the demand side, growth has
been historically buoyed by robust private consumption. This is complemented by strong capital
formation as contribution of investments to overall GDP has been increasing.
Moreover, the positive alignment between growth and inflation has been a sustained narrative.
Headline inflation stands at 1.8 percent for full-year 2016. While average inflation is below the
Government’s target range, inflation is projected to rise toward the midpoint of the target range in
2017 and 2018. In other words, inflation is seen to be manageable.
The  sound  and  stable  condition  of  Philippine  banks  has  also  been  one  of  the  anchors  of  the
sustained robust performance of the domestic economy. Moreover, we have put in place reforms
to further strengthen governance and risk management in banks.
Given the external headwinds, our defense system is reliable. Our flexible exchange rate policy
provides  us  with  a  tested  tool  to  shield  the  economy  from  temporary  gyrations,  while  our
adequate  reserves  and  sustained  current  account  surplus  fundamentally  anchor  our  external
position.
Each of these strengths is a cornerstone that we stand upon. We can therefore conclude that
the economy continues to enjoy a position of strength.
An arsenal to manage the risks
Indeed,  the  economy  performed  well  in  2016  even  amidst  evolving  economic  and  financial
conditions. But having strong fundamentals is just the first step, we also need to implement the
structural reforms already in the pipeline, including capital markets reforms, to unleash further
productivity and enhance the efficiency of intermediation.
Should the risks I mentioned earlier materialize, we have ample policy space to respond. There
is  enough  room  for  monetary  policy  to  support  the  economy.  Consider,  for  example,  the
prospects  of  monetary  policy  in  the  midst  of  US  Fed  normalization.  The  present  and  future
stance  of  domestic  monetary  policy  remain  data-dependent.  We  will  therefore  act  on  (global)
developments only to the extent that it alters the domestic inflation path. Our assessment now is
that the current policy settings remain appropriate. Thus, we do not need to adjust in sync with
the Fed’s rate hikes.
The BSP also has a deeper policy toolkit now. This includes: (i) macroprudential regulations that
can  be  targeted  to  specific  sources  of  risks,  (ii)  contingency  measures  such  as  liquidity-
enhancing facilities, and (iii) rediscounting windows and regional firewalls that boost the flexibility
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
and effectiveness of our actions. We intend to further refine these tools as appropriate.
 In terms of supervision, we continue to review and align our financial regulations and policies
with international standards to improve risk management as well as ensure the competitiveness
of  our  banks  in  view  of ASEAN  integration.  We  intend  to  further  enhance  our  macro-financial
surveillance  capability  by,  among  others,  improving  coordination  and  cooperation  with  other
government agencies and regulators.
There is also elbowroom  for  fiscal  authorities  to  further  boost  public  spending  and  accelerate
aggregate demand and productivity growth.
Concluding remarks: strength in cooperation
In sum, ladies and gentlemen, the global operating environment today is certainly challenging.
But we have built buffers over time. In addition, the BSP remains committed to its mandate of
price and financial stability. 
I am sure that with a good appreciation of risks and the right amount of vigilance, the partnership
between  the  public  sector  and  private  stakeholders  (such  as  yourselves)  would  push  the
economy upward and forward even in the face of the downside risks.
At the beginning of my remarks I mentioned that this is the 12th consecutive year we are doing
this together. The number 12 has different meanings in various cultures and religions. But more
universally, 12 is a number that is used to mark time. There are 12 hours on a traditional clock,
and  there  are  12  months  in  a  traditional  calendar  year.   As  we  begin  a  new  year,  I  wish  to
encourage everyone to mark time judiciously. Time is an equalizer. Whether you are rich or poor,
in public or private sector, each of us has been given the same 24 hours each day. What we do
with it, is up to us.  Time is precious. You cannot take it back, if you have spent it.  And you
cannot recover it, if you waste it. Furthermore, if you simply stand idly by, time will also just pass
you by. As you prepare for 2017, I hope that the time that we just spent together this afternoon
has been useful.
Once again, on behalf of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I wish Rotary Club of Manila and the
Rotary Club of Forbes Park, a prosperous, successful and hope-filled 2017!  Mabuhay po tayong
lahat! Maraming salamat po!
1
“Surreal named Word of the Year.” An article in Washington Post dated 20 December 2016.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
