  Remarks by 
Prof. Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile,  
Governor, Bank of Uganda 
 UBA Informal Dinner 
  Residence of the CEO, Stanbic Bank 
Kyadondo Road, Nakasero 
 12 May 2017 
  Let me begin by thanking you all for coming to 
this 
informal  dinner.  As  always  on  these 
occasions  I  am  delighted  to  see  you  all  here.  I 
want  to  make  a  few  brief  remarks  about  the 
current  state  of  the  economy  and  the  prospects 
for the near and medium term.  
 When we  open  our  newspapers  in  the  morning 
we often read articles about how the economy is 
performing  badly.  But  much  of  what  is  written 
is either exaggerated or misconstrued.  
 It  is  true  that  real  growth  in  the  current  fiscal 
year  will  be  lower  than  was  initially  projected, 
but  that  does  not  mean  that  the  economy  is  in 
recession – which entails a contraction of output.  
There  is  a  slowdown  in  economic  growth  but 
this should prove to be only temporary.     
  Page 2 of 9 
As  we  discussed  at  the  last  UBA  meeting  in 
April, real economic growth in the current fiscal 
year  has  been  pulled  down  by  the  supply  side 
shock to agriculture, caused by the drought.  
 The  quarterly  GDP  data  from  UBOS  indicate 
that real output was about 1.5 percent below its 
trend  –  which  is  a  proxy  for  the  equilibrium 
level of output - in the first half of 2016/17, with 
most  of  the  shortfall  due  to  lower  than  trend 
agricultural output.  
 We  do  not  yet have  the  quarterly  GDP  data for 
the  third  quarter  of  2016/17,  but  the  BOU’s 
composite  indicator  of  economic  activity  – 
which is a high frequency indicator – shows that 
there was a rebound in economic activity in that 
quarter,  with  an  acceleration  of  growth  in  both 
the industrial and services sectors.  
  Page 3 of 9 
Given the trends in the third quarter of the fiscal 
year  and  the  fact  that  we  are  now  enjoying 
better  weather  for  agriculture,  I  expect  that  in 
the  second  half  of  the  fiscal  year,  the  economy 
should  claw  back  some  of  the  output  losses 
which it suffered in the first half.  
 However,  we  are  forecasting  that  real  growth 
for  the  full  fiscal  year  will  be  only  about  4 
percent,  which  is  one  percentage  point  below 
potential.  
 the 
side 
shock 
supply 
to 
Nevertheless, 
agriculture should be reversed in the next fiscal 
year,  which  will  enable  real  output  to  revert  to 
its  medium  term  trend.  This  means  that  we 
should  experience  growth  of  more  than  5 
percent in 2017/18.  
 I also want to refute the claim that the economy 
is  suffering  from  a  lack  of  demand.  Of  course, 
 Page 4 of 9 
individual 
some 
industries  may  not  have 
sufficient  demand  to  sell  all  of  their  output  – 
that  will  always  be  the  case  in  any  economy  - 
but at the aggregate level there is little evidence 
to indicate that a lack of demand has depressed 
real  economic  growth.  If  that  were  the  case,  we 
would expect to see that  the sectors most badly 
affected would be the  non-traded goods  sectors 
of  the  economy,  because  these  sectors  are 
dependent fully on domestic demand. 
 In fact the very opposite is the case. The services 
sector,  which  consists  predominantly  of  non-
traded  goods  industries,  did  much  better  than 
both industry and agriculture in the first half of 
the fiscal year, while our composite indicator of 
economic  activity  indicates  that  services  also 
grew  faster  than  the  other  sectors  in  the  third 
quarter.  That  suggests  that  a  shortage  of 
aggregate  demand  is  not  the  cause  of  the 
slowdown in growth in 2016/17.  
 Page 5 of 9 
A  sustained  deficiency  of  aggregate  demand 
would  also  lead  to  disinflation  (i.e.  falling 
inflation).  But  there  is  no  evidence  of  this 
occurring.  Core  inflation  has  been  quite  stable, 
at around 5 percent, for the last 9 months, which 
suggests  that  the  level  of  aggregate  demand  is 
about  right,  given  the  economy’s  capacity  to 
supply  goods  and  services,  which  as  I  noted 
earlier,  has  been  temporarily  depressed  by  the 
supply side shock to agriculture.       
 On the subject of inflation, our forecasts indicate 
that  core  inflation  should  be  in  line  with  our  5 
percent  policy  target  in  12  months’  time,  which 
is  the  time  horizon  for  our  monetary  policy 
decisions.  Our  12  month  forecast  for  inflation 
has  remained  largely  unchanged  since  the  end 
of  last  year.  However,  some  of  the  upside  risks 
to  core  inflation,  which  we  had  identified  six 
months  ago,  notably  the  rising  food  and  fuel 
prices,  and  the  risk  of  further  exchange  rate 
depreciation,  have abated somewhat.  
 Page 6 of 9 
Food  crop  prices  have  risen  steeply  –  annual 
food  crop  inflation  was  nearly  22  percent  in 
April – but the pass-through to core inflation has 
been  muted.  The  exchange  rate  has  also  been 
relatively  stable  in  the  first  half  of  2017.  The 
nominal  effective  exchange  rate,  which  takes 
into  account  exchange  rate  movements  of  the 
Shilling  against  all  our  trading  partners,  has 
only depreciated by 1.6 percent since the end of 
2016.  
 We also expect that the current food price shock 
should have started to ease by the third quarter 
of  this  calendar  year,  as  the  better  weather  that 
we  are  now  experiencing  boosts  harvests,  and 
that will help to lower headline inflation. 
 At  the  last  informal  UBA  dinner  I  said  that, 
provided  that  the  outlook  for  inflation  did  not 
deteriorate, the BOU hoped to further lower the 
policy  interest  rate  gradually  during  the  course 
of 2017.  
 Page 7 of 9 
Accordingly  we  reduced  the  Central  Bank  Rate 
by  50  basis  points  at  our  Monetary  Policy 
Committee  meeting 
last  month.  Given  the 
relatively  benign  outlook  for  core  inflation,  I 
believe that we should have scope to implement 
further modest reductions in the CBR in the near 
term, although again I want to stress the caveat 
that  any  further  reductions  are  contingent  on 
there  being  no  worsening  of  the  core  inflation 
forecast.  
 Finally,  I  would  like  to  re-emphasise  my  desire 
to see the reductions that we are effecting to the 
policy  interest  rate  being  passed  through  to 
bank borrowers.  
 The  data  on  Shilling  lending  rates  for  March 
indicate  that  the  average  lending  rate  was  still 
22.5  percent,  which  means  that  the  average 
lending rate had fallen by less than 3 percentage 
points  from its  most  recent peak  in  February  of 
last year.  
 Page 8 of 9 
I  hope  that  we  will  be  able  to  achieve  more 
substantial  reductions  in  bank  lending  rates  in 
the next few months. 
 Thank you for listening. 
 Page 9 of 9 
