Introductory 
Mario  Draghi: 
Representatives of the Netherlands
Introductory remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Tweede
Kamer der Staten-Generaal (House of Representatives of the Netherlands), The Hague, 10 May
2017.
the  House  of
remarks  at 
Mr Chairman,
Honourable Members of Parliament,
 This year, we celebrate the 60th and 25th anniversaries of the Treaties of Rome and Maastricht.
Despite the many challenges that we face as Europeans, we should never forget the significant
achievements of European integration in providing peace, security and prosperity. The fact that
the Treaty that gave birth to the euro was signed in this country symbolises the enduring role of
the Netherlands at the forefront of this European project.
I am therefore honoured to be invited to speak here at the Dutch Parliament. Today’s event offers
an opportunity to provide insight into the ECB’s decisions and to listen to your views.
It is indeed important for the ECB to reach out to euro area citizens and their representatives to
explain how we fulfil our mandate. The EU Treaties democratically conferred upon the ECB the
primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area as a whole. This objective binds
my colleagues and me on the ECB’s Governing Council, where our decisions are the result of
collegial debate. And we are held accountable for our decisions by all EU citizens through their
representatives in the European Parliament.
In my remarks today, I would like to expand on three points.
First,  I  want  to  show  how  a  very  severe  double  dip  crisis  required  the  ECB  to  deploy
unconventional  instruments  to  ensure  price  stability. And  our  measures  are  proving  effective:
incoming  data  confirm  that  the  cyclical  recovery  of  the  euro  area  economy  is  becoming
increasingly solid and that downside risks have further diminished.
Second, I will discuss the possible side effects of these measures. I will consider the different
dimensions  in  which  our  monetary  policy  affects  people’s  finances  and  welfare,  which  are
sometimes overlooked in the current debate.
Finally, I will outline why the ECB cannot be the only actor contributing to the recovery. Other
economic, financial and fiscal policies are essential to ensure a sustained recovery.
Recovering from the crisis: the role of monetary policy
Let me start by recalling where we came from. The Great Recession, as it is called, resulted in a
protracted period of low inflation and low growth.
Specifically, the euro area faced two interlinked and successive crises – a financial crisis in 2008
and  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  that  started  to  emerge  in  2011  and  derailed  the  rebound.  The
recovery that began in mid-2013 lost steam in the summer of 2014 as the external environment
became more uncertain. At the beginning of 2014, credit growth was contracting at an annual
pace  of  more  than  3%,  while  overall  economic  growth  was  stalling.  Since  the  start  of  2013,
inflation had drifted consistently away from the ECB’s target rate of below but close to 2% over
the medium term, reaching levels below 1%. Without counteracting measures, this low inflation
could have turned into a deflationary spiral which would have deepened our economies’ woes
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
considerably.
It  was  against  this  macroeconomic  background  that  the  ECB  took  decisive  policy  action  to
maintain price stability in the euro area as a whole, in line with its mandate.
In normal times, when inflation is above target, central banks raise the key interest rates to rein it
in. When inflation is below target, they lower the key interest rates to stimulate economic activity
and induce an increase in inflation. However, at the start of 2014, the deposit facility rate had
already been brought to zero. At the same time, financial fragmentation in the euro area was
hampering  the  transmission  of  our  policy,  as  our  monetary  policy  impulses  were  not  evenly
transmitted across countries or adequately along the yield curve. So in order to provide additional
monetary accommodation and to support the recovery in credit, the ECB used a range of non-
standard measures to meet its inflation objective. These include a negative deposit facility rate,
targeted longer-term refinancing operations, forward guidance and asset purchases. Net asset
purchases currently amount to €60 billion per month, and are intended to run until the end of
December 2017, or beyond, if necessary. These measures aim to influence short and longer-
term  interest  rates,  asset  prices  and  loan  volumes,  thereby  fostering  economic  growth  and
supporting price stability. The ECB’s actions were not unique. Central banks in the United States,
Japan and the United Kingdom also used asset purchases, while central banks in for example
Sweden and Switzerland reduced key interest rates to below zero.
Our measures have been very effective: they have led to very favourable financing conditions.
Since mid-2014, bank lending rates for both firms and households have dropped by more than
100 basis points. And we have witnessed a pronounced convergence in borrowing conditions
across both euro area countries and types of borrowers.
These  favourable  financing  conditions  have  in  turn  supported  the  economic  recovery.  For  15
consecutive quarters, euro area quarterly GDP growth has been consistently between 0.3% and
0.8%. In 2016, GDP per capita grew faster in the euro area than in any other major advanced
economy. Four and a half million jobs were created in the last three years. And unemployment in
the euro area is at its lowest point since May 2009.
Our monetary policy has successfully stabilised inflation expectations. In our March ECB staff
macroeconomic projections for the euro area, the outlook for headline HICP inflation has been
revised upwards significantly for 2017 and slightly for 2018, while remaining unchanged for 2019.
These projections foresee annual HICP inflation at 1.7% in 2017, 1.6% in 2018 and 1.7% in 2019.
The  staff  projections  are  conditional  on  the  full  implementation  of  all  our  monetary  policy
measures.
Similar  to  what  we  have  observed  at  the  euro  area  level,  the  economic  expansion  in  the
Netherlands  has  also  strengthened.  GDP  grew  at  2.2%  in  2016,  driven  by  strong  domestic
demand on account of improving business and consumer confidence and positive wealth and
real-income  effects.  In  addition,  unemployment  has  steadily  decreased,  registering  at  5.1%  in
March 2017, and the Netherlands has more jobs than before the crisis. Supported by low interest
rates and a strengthening recovery, the Dutch government ran a 2.9 billion euro surplus last year,
its  first  surplus  since  2008. And,  as  an  export-oriented  country,  the  Netherlands  is  currently
benefiting from the recovery in other euro area countries, especially as growth in global trade
remains tepid.
The side effects of our policies
I am aware that these very accommodative financing conditions have raised various concerns,
also  in  this  House.  Monetary  policy  measures  always  have  side  effects.  So  far,  the  potential
negative side effects have been limited. We are monitoring these various effects carefully, taking
into account our price stability mandate.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
To  ascertain  the  overall  impact  of  our  measures  on  citizens,  it  is  important  to  differentiate
between the various ways in which they affect economic actors, such as households, pension
funds and banks.
Let me start with households. An accommodative monetary policy means households accrue
fewer  nominal  returns  on  their  savings.  However,  an  accommodative  policy  supports  the
economic recovery, which in turn bolsters employment, income, returns on investment and tax
revenues. It therefore benefits households in their capacity as workers, entrepreneurs, investors,
borrowers and taxpayers.
Similarly, there are several channels through which our policies affect pension systems. Yes,
lower  rates  increase  the  present  value  of  future  liabilities  of  pension  schemes.  However,  the
liability side of pension schemes is only one part of the equation. What happens on the asset
side is also important. And our monetary policy has had a beneficial impact on this side of the
equation  as  the  value  of  the  investment  portfolio  has  increased. Also,  let’s  not  forget  that  our
monetary policy supports pension systems indirectly by supporting employment growth and thus
pension contributions. In any case, it is ultimately up to sound governance structures and long-
term strategies to ensure the financial health of pension systems.
Equally, monetary policy can have an impact on bank profitability through various channels. Our
assessment is that so far these effects tend to largely offset each other in aggregate terms. Low
rates might reduce bank profits through the narrowing of net interest margins. Yet, at the same
time,  by  supporting  the  recovery,  accommodative  monetary  policy  reduces  delinquencies  and
defaults,  including  on  mortgages.  Improved  credit  quality  coupled  with  higher  lending  volumes
and an improved market value of assets supports bank profitability. Of course, depending on the
strength  of  their  balance  sheet,  some  banks  may  be  more  affected  than  others. Also  banks
facing structurally high cost-to-income ratios or limited diversification of income sources might
have to revamp their business models regardless of the low interest rate environment.
Finally, let me also address the risks of overheating in some parts of the financial markets. We
do not currently see compelling evidence of overstretched asset valuations at the euro area level,
but we do see that real estate dynamics or high household debt levels in some countries signal
the  risk  of  increasing  imbalances.  Such  risks  also  exist  in  the  Netherlands:  they  relate  to  the
continued  very  high  level  of  household  indebtedness  and  the  low  level  of  mortgage
collateralisation. For this reason, we share the concerns expressed in the warning issued by the
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  in  November  2016  and  recognise  that  there  is  a  case  for
mitigating measures. That being said, monetary policy is not the appropriate tool for addressing
local and sectoral financial risks. Rather, targeted macroprudential policies, which can be tailored
1
to local and sectoral conditions, are the right answer.
The way forward
Against the backdrop of a recovery that is becoming increasingly solid, the benefits of our policy
clearly outweigh potential side effects. Also due to the pass-through of our monetary policy, there
is now more and more evidence that economic growth is firming and broadening. Incoming data
confirm that the cyclical recovery of the euro area economy is becoming increasingly solid and
that downside risks have further diminished.
Nevertheless, it is too early to declare success. Underlying inflation pressures continue to remain
subdued  and  have  yet  to  show  a  convincing  upward  trend.  The  domestic  drivers  of  inflation,
namely wages, are not yet responding to the recovery and the narrowing output gap. Maintaining
the  current  very  substantial  degree  of  monetary  accommodation  is  still  needed  for  underlying
inflation pressures to build up and support headline inflation in the medium term.
However, beyond the contribution of monetary policy, we also need measures to address the
legacy  of  the  crisis,  lift  potential  growth  and  upgrade  our  economic  ecosystem  to  increase
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
resilience to future shocks.
This requires action at the Member State level. Ambitious, country-specific, structural reforms
are  needed  to  raise  productivity,  make  economies  more  resilient,  and  address  persistent
fragilities, including those inherited from the crisis. And Member States need to pursue prudent
fiscal policies to build up buffers for difficult times. National parliaments can play a central role in
supporting such efforts. Our accommodative monetary policy provides a window of opportunity
for pursuing such policies, for example by alleviating some of the short-run costs of structural
2
reforms and allowing their benefits to materialise faster .
Action at the European level is also required. The crisis has revealed significant fragilities not only
at Member State level, but also in the economic governance of Economic and Monetary Union.
Some of the fragilities could be addressed already by applying the common rules we have all
agreed on. Others, however, need to be addressed by upgrading our governance. How? Banking
union needs to be completed by making parallel progress on risk reduction and risk sharing. This
includes  adopting  the  European  Commission’s  risk  reduction  package  which,  among  other
things, implements some of the remaining Basel III reforms and further strengthens prudential
rules  in  the  banking  sector.  At  the  same  time,  we  need  to  establish  a  European  deposit
insurance scheme and a common backstop to the Single Resolution Fund. Ambitious progress
towards a fully fledged capital markets union would also create more effective channels of private
risk sharing in the euro area and reduce the need for fiscal stabilisation. The Five Presidents’
Report   also  emphasises  the  need  to  strengthen  our  union  from  an  economic,  fiscal  and
legitimacy  perspective. And  in  a  world  tempted  by  protectionism  and  ring-fencing,  completing
Economic and Monetary Union is perhaps more urgent than ever before.
Conclusion
3
Allow me to conclude.
The  euro  area  has  certainly  faced  its  fair  share  of  challenges  in  recent  years.  But  things  are
clearly improving. In the euro area, the economic recovery has evolved from being fragile and
uneven into a firming, broad-based upswing. The ECB’s monetary policy measures have been
supporting this recovery.
We  have  established  four  criteria  to  confirm  a  sustained  adjustment  in  the  path  of  inflation
consistent with our definition of price stability in the medium term that would warrant a scaling-
back of the current degree of monetary policy accommodation. First, that headline inflation is on
a path to levels below, but close to 2% over a meaningful medium-term horizon; second, that
inflation  will  be  durable  and  stabilise  around  those  levels  with  sufficient  confidence;  third,  that
inflation will be self-sustained, meaning it will maintain its trajectory even with diminishing support
from monetary policy. And finally, the relevant metric in each case is euro area inflation, not the
inflation rates of any individual country.
However, in order to reap the full benefits of our monetary policy measures, other policy areas
must contribute much more decisively to strengthening economic growth. This depends on the
policies pursued by Member States, where national parliaments have a key role to play. But it
also  depends  on  our  collective  ability  to  further  strengthen  the  architecture  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union in a way that fully reflects the interdependence among the euro area economies.
Pursuing such policies will ensure a higher growth trajectory.
I am now at your disposal for questions.
1
2
See ECB press release of 15 December 2016: Governing Council statement on Macroprudential Policies
See Structural reforms, inflation and monetary policy, Introductory speech by Mario Draghi, President of the ECB,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, 22 May 2015.
3
The Five Presidents’ Report: Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
