William  C  Dudley:  Transcript  of  the  Cornell  College  of  Business
Annual New York City Predictions Event
Transcript of a discussion between Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer
of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  and  Ms  Maureen  O'Hara,  Robert  W  Purcell
Professorship  of  Management,  at  the  Cornell  College  of  Business  Annual  New  York  City
Predictions Event, New York City, 15 February 2017.
Maureen O’Hara: 
 Bill,  let  me  start  off  with  kind  of  the  low-hanging  fruit.  The  post-Trump  economy  has  been
confusing, with low Q4 growth, yet record-setting stock market levels. So let me just throw you
an easy one here. What does the Fed see as the outlook for the next year?
President Dudley: 
For the near-term I think more of the same. I mean, we think the economy is going to continue to
grow,  a  little  bit  above-trend.  That’s  going  to  generate  job  gains  that  put,  you  know,  more
pressure on the labor market, and as a consequence of that, we think inflation’s going to move
back towards our 2% objective.
So, you know, we could be completely wrong, but that – the data that’s come out over the last
couple of months, is very consistent with that pattern.
A lot of uncertainty in the outlook. I mean we don’t know what’s going to happen with the whole
host of policy choices: healthcare reform, immigration policy, trade policy, tax policy, fiscal policy.
So, how that, how those policy questions get answered will also be an important aspect in terms
of how the forecast actually falls.
But the baseline forecast is pretty similar in 2017 to 2016, slowly above trend growth, a little bit
more pressure on the labor market, gradual rise in inflation, back towards our 2% objective. And
if that happens, if we stay on that trajectory, I think as Chair Yellen said yesterday and today, we
would expect to gradually remove further monetary policy accommodation, snug up interest rates
a little further in the months ahead.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well I think that’s somewhat encouraging, isn’t it?
President Dudley: 
But the uncertainty around that forecast is pretty high.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Is  pretty  high.   Although,  you  know,  it’s  interesting,  think  about  the  U.S.,  um,  you  know,  our
situation in the last couple of years has clearly been improving. What’s been interesting is seeing
the news out of Japan, that, you know, Japan seems to be able to keep out of deflation, which
they haven’t for a long time. Even Europe seems to be eeking some growth out.
Do – do you think everybody’s going to be doing better or is this just a blip?
President Dudley: 
Well,  I  think  that  –  a  couple  of  things.  Just  let  me  touch  on  the  U.S.  first.  One  thing  that’s
 1 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
interesting  is  post-election  you’ve  seen  a  pretty  big  improvement  in  household  and  business
confidence, especially business confidence among smaller businesses.
Now it’s hard to say how much weight to put on that because historically consumer confidence
goes up and down, and it doesn’t just necessarily feed into consumer spending. But the increase
in business confidence is quite striking, especially for smaller businesses. And so one of the big
open  questions  that  we’re  going  to  be  assessing  over  the  next  few  months  is:  is  that
improvement  in  animal  spirits,  so  to  speak,  going  to  actually  feed  through  and  lead  to  more
spending?
So, I think where a year or two ago, I think our anxieties were more about the risks to growth to
the downside, so as that – well, a year ago, we were worried about events in China, we were
worried about uncertainties about Europe. I think now the balance of risk is gradually shifting,
where the possibility is that growth could actually be stronger than expected, rather than weaker
than expected.
The markets expect fiscal stimulus out of this Administration. That’s another factor that probably
will over time tilt the equation more to the upside.
But on fiscal policy, it’s really hard to factor into your forecast at this point because we don’t know
what it is, how big it is, or when it will happen. Other than that, we have it completely nailed down.
So, it’s really hard to sort of put that into your forecast. And so the way I think about the fiscal
policy outlook is that we’re probably going to get some fiscal stimulus at some point.  And so
that’s just another factor that maybe tilts the risk to the economy a little bit to the upside.
Maureen O’Hara: 
So, Bill, how about we think a little bit more broadly. You talked about where – it looks like interest
rates are going up, at least that’s what, you know…
President Dudley: 
Gradually, right.
Maureen O’Hara: 
What Janet Yellen indicated would happen. There’s this interesting question, though, about will
interest rates over the next year go to quote normal levels, or is there a  new  normal,  right?  I
mean we’ve struggled through how many years now of zero interest rates, and the distributional
consequences those have had, is there a “new” normal?  Do we have an idea what that “new
normal” is going to be?
President Dudley: 
Well  I  think  if  you  look  at  what  the  FOMC  publishes,  the  so-called  Summary  of  Economic
Projections, one of the things that they forecast, we forecast, is the long-run federal funds rate,
where we think the federal funds rate is going to end up in the long-run. So think five, six, seven
years out. And that estimate has come down over the last few years. So what that’s telling you is
that people on the FOMC think that the normal federal funds rate is lower now than it’s been in
the past.
And  the  idea  behind  that  is  a  very  simple  one.  One,  there’s  probably  still  some  residual
headwinds left over from the financial crisis that are going to persist for some time. Think about
how  difficult  it  is  to  get  a  mortgage  if  you’re  a  lower  credit-rated  borrower  today  compared  to
2005,  2006. And  two,  productivity  growth  in  the  economy  has  been  very  anemic,  and  I  think
generally,  most  economists  think  there’s  a  relationship  between  productivity  growth  and  the
 2 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
inflation-adjusted level of interest rates in the economy.
So,  productivity  growth  is  strong,  you  tend  to  have  high  real  rates. At  2%  inflation  you  get  a
relatively high federal funds rate. If productivity growth is weak, you have low real rates. Add 2%
inflation, you get a little bit lower level of interest rates.
So generally, if you look at the FOMC projections, people think that the federal funds rate in the
medium  term  is  going  to  more  like  3%  rather  than  the  4%  that  might  have  been  attained
historically.
Now  there’s  one  little  problem  with  this.  Economists  are  terrible  at  actually  forecasting
productivity growth. So just because productivity growth has been weak over the last few years
doesn’t mean it will necessarily be weak over the next five years.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well,  it’s  a  tricky  one.  Here’s  one  that’s  tricky,  too. Are  there  issues  connected  with  financial
market valuations that concern you? And that’s kind of the grown-up question. Here’s the one we
all want to know. Any predictions on the Dow reaching 30,000 this year?
President Dudley:
No way.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Oh, quick, call your brokers.
President Dudley: 
Let’s put it this way, if it did reach 30,000, I would be concerned about the stock market valuation.
I think one of the things that’s interesting post the election is, I think the uncertainty level about
policy has gone up enormously, yet markets have actually performed very well, especially the
equity market.
And that’s actually pretty unusual. Usually markets don’t like uncertainty. And so, one thing to ask
yourself the question is, why are markets going up even though the uncertainty level has climbed
so much?
I think one of the reasons, perhaps, is the notion that political deadlock in Washington is going to
ease. Another thing is maybe fiscal policy is going to ride in and provide some support for the
economy. But it’s an unusual environment, where uncertainty level goes up and the stock market
goes up. There’s a little tension there between those two things.
Maureen O’Hara: 
The VIX which is –
President Dudley: 
Well, that’s the other thing. Volatility in the market is extraordinarily low. So, that’s another thing
that doesn’t quite fit. You would think if uncertainty was high, you’d have a little bit more volatility. If
I was going to write something down as a prediction, I guess I would think volatility will go up. At
some point.
 3 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well,  it  is  a  confusing  structure  right  now.  I  think  it’s  hard  for  anyone  to  kind  of  predict  this
economy. But that kind of makes it fun. Let’s talk about something else that is somewhat hard to
fathom. What are your thoughts on the election? Let me make it a little more – are there lessons
from the election that you think are particularly important for the economy going forward?
President Dudley:
Well, obviously, the Federal Reserve is completely apolitical, so we don’t take sides in terms of
elections, and whether the Democrats or Republicans win. But I do think there is an interesting
lesson  in  the  election  in  the  sense  of  support  around  the  country  and  around  the  world  for
globalization,  and  why  that  support  did  not  seem  to  manifest  itself  in  terms  of  our  election
outcome.
You know, I think that globalization has lifted literally hundreds of millions of people out of poverty
over the last decade or two. And so I think net-net from my perspective it’s been a good thing. But
people have been left behind from globalization. I think a lot of people in the United States didn’t
put  enough  weight  on  those  people.  You  look  at  income  distribution  in  the  United  States  it’s
become a lot more skewed. You look at income mobility in the U.S., it’s not very good.
I think those are things that we really need to work on is the country.  I think we really want to
make it so that globalization lifts all boats rather than just some boats because if you don’t have
that, you’re not going to have support for globalization. You’re not going to have support for free
trade. And if you don’t have that, then I think that has its own set of consequences.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Yes,  well,  I  think  you’ve  raised  a  great  point,  that  there  are  both  positive  and  negative
consequences  of  globalization.  Let  me  raise  something  that  may  have  similar  negative  and
positive, and that’s the impact of technology. I think we’re all beginning to see a brave new world
in which technology is entering ways that even 10 years ago were hard to fathom. And you know,
I think that just as globalization seems to have made people nervous about the future, so has
technology.
Now, what are your thoughts on that? Is technology going to be the bigger influence over the next
decade? Is that what’s going to change our economy and the ability of people to make that leap-
up that you just talked about?
President Dudley: 
Well  I  think  technology  is  always  challenging.  I  think  it’s  been  challenging  for  decades,  even
centuries. My mom for many years lived in Westville, Massachusetts, and if I have this right, it
was the buggy whip capital of the world at one point.
Well, Westville had to make the transition from being the buggy whip capital of the world to other
things. And I think – so, I don’t think this is new. I don’t think this is a new story about technology.
What I think is what’s new is we have to do a better job in terms of retraining people, getting
people  the  mobility  they  need  so  they  can  actually  feel  that  they  have  a  place  in  the  new
economy.
I was thinking about this question about technology and you think about the U.S. farm sector. You
think about how many people in the United States worked on farms in 1900 and how few people
work on farms today. Same kind of tech, same science and process of technological transition,
but the good news is we were able to find things for those people to do.
 4 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
People always have for many, many years, talked about how technology is going to put everyone
out of work, and everyone’s just going to have a lot of leisure. That has not panned out up to now
at all, and so I’m just a little bit skeptical that now we’re at that critical turning point. I could be
wrong.  This  time  could  be  different.  But  if  you  think  about  how  long  we’ve  had  these
conversations  about 
to  massive
unemployment,  this  has  been  a  conversation  that  we’ve  been  having  for  hundreds  of  years,
literally.
Maureen O’Hara: 
technology  obsoleting  everyone’s  skills  and 
leading 
It’s tricky now, though, isn’t it? I mean in the past, I think you used to think about technology as
taking away some of the lower-skilled jobs, and yet now we’re seeing it kind of marching its way
up. I think it’ll be awhile before it gets to Fed presidents. But I know…
President Dudley: 
Well, there are some people in Washington that would like to make us conduct monetary policy
by a rule.
Maureen O’Hara: 
And there you go, a robot can do it. 
President Dudley: 
We don’t think that’s such a good idea, by the way. 
Maureen O’Hara
It’s an interesting challenging, and particularly here I saw some numbers the other day that the
high school graduation rate in New York state is somewhere in the 70 percentage points. And
again, as you think about the technology creating winners and losers, you know, obviously we’re
in  education,  all  of  us  are  committed  to  education,  you  know.  Is  that  kind  of  crucial  to  the
technology solution? What do we do with the people who don’t?
President Dudley: 
Well, I think – I mean look, I think education is absolutely essential. Giving people the skills they
need to sort of navigate in the 21st century economy.
And the second thing we need to do a better job is actually retraining people so that the only
education you get shouldn’t just be when you’re 18 to 22 years old or 25 years old. We need to
have a better system where people can sort of retool themselves.
I think a third thing we can do is a better job of matching the skills that people get in universities to
the business needs. One of the things that we’ve been talking about for a long time is that the
New York Fed has tried to have better partnerships between businesses and education, so that
the skills that people are getting when they go to the university match the opportunities when they
actually graduate.
And I think we’ve made a lot of progress on that, but that’s something that I think we could even
do better on going forward.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Can you turn us back to monetary policy again for a minute because, you know, one could argue
that one of the major forces that helped us get through the crisis was monetary policy, with its
 5 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
expansive, you know, quantitative easing with the role that the central bank took up and really
helped  keep  the  financial  markets  from  collapsing,  and  now  also  keeping  the  economy  from
collapsing.
Now we have, as you mentioned earlier, the prospect for more fiscal stimulus, which in some
ways makes it a little better…
President Dudley: 
Potentially.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Because it’s not just monetary policy, we’ll have fiscal policy. But we also have a variety of other
factors that may influence monetary policy. One of which is the possibility that we as a country
are going to become more isolationist. And that has implications, doesn’t it?  For your monetary
policy and how you implement it?
President Dudley: 
Well,  I  think  we  –  as  I  said  before,  I  think  we  have  a  lot  of  uncertainty  about  what’s  going  to
happen on immigration and trade. Most economists – the overwhelming number of economists –
think that open and free trade is a good thing, comparative advantage, you want to produce the
goods and services that you’re best at producing and let other people produce the goods and
services that they’re best at producing, and that actually generates gains for both sides. That’s
really the theory of trade.
So I think that’s – so I think we don’t want to lose sight of that. Obviously, to the extent that we – I
think it’s very – it’s way too soon to sort of see how this is going to evolve. It could evolve in the
direction where we negotiate hard and we get somewhat better trade deals for the U.S. and trade
barriers around the world don’t go up very much at all, if at all. That’s probably not a bad outcome
for the U.S., and I don’t think it’s a bad outcome for the world. Or you could go down the path that
was quite a bit more pessimistic than that.
So, I think it’s just too soon to sort of see which direction. You know, the Federal Reserve is
going to obviously take the world as it is. I mean we – our objectives are set by Congress. Very
clearly, maximum sustainable employment in the context of price stability. So we have two goals:
employment and inflation.
And if the world is a really good place, it maybe makes it a little easier to achieve those goals.
And if the world is at a more difficult place, maybe it makes it a little harder to achieve those
goals. But it doesn’t change our goals, and it doesn’t change our monetary policy mission.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Let me turn that, our focus, just a tiny bit. You’ve been a leading critic of culture in the banking
industry, and I kind of have a two-part question here. Do you think the era of bad behavior in
banking is behind us? And here’s the second part of the question:  some people would argue that
the behavior wasn’t really that bad but instead the regulators…
President Dudley: 
Who are those people?
Maureen O’Hara: 
There was Elizabeth Warren, I’ll say that, I think she’s convinced. But some people would argue
 6 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
that the regulators used the opportunity to extract excessive fines from banks for behavior that
maybe wasn’t ideal but wasn’t so horrible. There’s two different perspectives. I think no matter
how we look at it, some of the behavior of the banks was sort of unacceptable. Are we past that,
do you think?
President Dudley: 
Well, first thing I would say is a lot of the behavior was just totally egregious, totally unacceptable.
Not in the gray area. You know people talk about, well, it’s hard to know where to operate in a
gray area, I think a lot of the behavior was way over the line. 
When people are getting together in chat rooms trying to talk about how they can collude to rig a
market, that’s not in the gray area. That’s way over the line.
When people are consciously doing things to evade any money laundering rules and sanctions,
that’s not in a gray area, that’s way over the line.
So I feel that most of the things that have resulted in fines can be tied to things that are not in a
gray area. They’re just way over the line.
Now the question of whether the fines are excessive – I mean it’s hard to know how you take the
behavior and then map it back onto the fine. I think the important thing, though, is to make the
fines big enough so that the senior management of these institutions doesn’t just say, “Well, I
can just write a check, accept the bad behavior, and move on."
If the fines are substantial, then it actually gets some senior management’s attention, and I think
that’s  one  of  the  reasons  why  banks  are  working  harder  on  the  issues  of  culture  in  their
institutions.
I’ve  actually  been  very  –  you  know,  you  asked  me  the  question,  is  bank  bad  behavior  over?  I
expect not because I think there’s always people that test the limits of the law and regulation and
are always trying to see where they can go. And there are obviously going to be bad apples in
any really large organization.
What I hope is that, one, the banks will sustain their effort to improve their cultures. Banks really
are  working  on  this.  I  spoke  at  a  bank  industry  conference  about  a  month  ago,  where  they
brought in all their very high potential mid-level people to talk about culture, and it was really them
talking about bank culture and I came in for a very short period. I think I was the only person from
the official sector that spoke there.
And  I  thought  the  fact  that  they  were  taking  all  these  people  that  are  high-performers  and
spending  a  day  trying  to  inculcate  them  with  the  importance  of  culture  maybe  suggests  that
we’ve passed a tipping point. So, that’s important.
I think the other thing that I’m hoping to see is the banks start to cooperate a little bit more with
each other and share best practices on bank culture. Up to now it’s been most banks working
sort  of  on  their  own  thing  alone.  I  think  if  they  actually  shared  best  practices,  shared  survey
results, to see how they were doing relative to their peers, that would also help them perform.
And the last thing I would say on culture, I think we’ve got to continue to work on incentives. I have
a very simple mantra. Incentives drive behavior. Behavior sets social norms. And those social
norms define culture. So if you have the wrong incentives, you’re probably going to have bad
culture. If you have the right incentives, you’re probably going to have a much better culture.
One thing that Preet Bharara said when he came to a conference we had at the New York Fed,
he said one of the big challenges that he sees is that people don’t speak up early enough when
they  see  something  wrong  going  on.  He  said  that  if  people  spoke  up  early,  a  lot  of  these  big
 7 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
things would never have been big things. They would have been little things.
And so, the important thing also is to really educate people that it’s okay if you see something that
bothers you, that you’re not comfortable with, raise your hand. You’re not doing anybody a favor
by keeping silent, hoping it will go away. You’re not doing anybody a favor by thinking, well, if I
raise my hand, I’m sort of tattling on my colleagues. That is not the right way to think about it.
Bad  behavior  is  not  good  for  you,  it’s  not  good  for  the  institution. And  so,  if  you  do  see  bad
behavior,  or  something  that  you’re  not  really  sure  whether  it’s  bad  behavior  or  not,  raise  your
hand and raise it to your manager, and have a conversation about it.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well,  I  think,  I  hope  you’re  right  that  we’re  reaching  a  new  awareness  of  the  fact  that  some
behaviors just can’t be accepted. You know, I don’t care whether they’re legal or not. They’re over
any kind of ethical lines. And we shall see, it’s a new world, isn’t it?
President Dudley: 
Yeah.  It’s  very  important  that  people  understand  that  the  idea  is  not  to  just  perform  to  the
regulation and the legal law. And one of the things we have, because we have a very legalistic
system with lots of regulations with banks – people sometimes feel like, “Oh, well, given that, I
can do anything within those parameters."
Well, the world changes faster than the regulations and law can sort of keep up. And so, using
that as your guide in terms of what’s good behavior, permissible behavior, I think is a very bad,
bad guide.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well let me turn to one last question, and then we’ll open it up to all of you. Would repeal of parts
of Dodd-Frank, the Volcker Rule, be a good thing for the financial system? Any predictions about
what’s going to happen with financial regulation going forward?
President Dudley: 
Well, I think that it’s certainly going to be looked at, and obviously we’ll have to see how it makes
its way through the House of Representatives and the U.S. Senate. I’m perfectly – I think it makes
sense to look at the Dodd-Frank Act, to see which parts are working and which parts are not
working so well.
I mean, when I sort of think about the Dodd-Frank Act, I think there’s really two things that we’re
trying to accomplish here. Number one, we’re trying to make the probability of failure of large
complex financial institutions a lot lower than it was before. So that means more capital, more
liquidity, better governance, better risk management. And we want to keep all those things.
And the second thing we’re trying to do is that if a firm does get into trouble, we can actually allow
it to fail without it threatening to take down the rest of the financial system. So that means you
need good resolution regimes, and you need a financial system where you don’t have a lot of
vulnerabilities.
You  know,  one  thing,  for  example,  that  we’ve  accomplished  over  the  last  year  is  we’ve  had
money market fund reform. Money market funds were one of the accelerants of the crisis after
Lehman Brothers failed.
So,  fixing  the  financial  system  to  address  some  of  those  structural  weaknesses  is  also
important.  So  I  think  keeping  that  part  of  Dodd-Frank,  central  clearing  of  derivatives,  I  think  is
 8 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
something that makes the financial system more robust. Keeping all those parts I think makes a
lot of sense.
Volcker  Rule?  You  could  probably  do  the  Volcker  Rule  in  a  more  efficient  way  to  achieve  the
same objectives without the burden of regulation that you have right now. You know, right now, if
you’re an equity trading desk and the equity market falls very violently, you really aren’t supposed
to go in and buy equities unless you actually have customer orders. So, you actually have this
crazy situation where the equity desk can’t actually buy equities to support the market. 
So, I’d like to see the Volcker Rule looked at to see if there’s a way of doing it in a way that – if
you’re a client-facing business, and you’re trading your own asset class, you have a little bit more
freedom  to  buy  and  sell  when  markets  are  volatile  and  maybe  provide  actually  a  little  liquidity
support in the market. But also make it a lot easier, I think, to enforce the Volcker Rule.
The other thing I would say is relief for smaller banking institutions. The financial crisis was not
about  small  banking  institutions.  It  was  about  large  banking  institutions  and  particularly  it  was
about large broker-dealers. And so I think the Dodd-Frank Act imposed a lot of compliance and
regulatory costs on smaller banking institutions.
And I think – we have about 6,500 smaller banks in the United States plus a lot of credit unions
and other financial intermediaries. Relief for those guys I think would be really, really valuable
because the burden on them, they feel that burden disproportionately because they don’t have as
big an asset base to spread all those compliance costs across. And I think it has more of a real
consequence because a lot of these institutions support small business lending, which I think is
really important to have a vibrant economy.
Maureen O’Hara: 
So given the two goals you said that there were for the Dodd-Frank Act, it does make you wonder
how  the  Congo  Minerals  Relief Act  ever  got  into  the  Dodd-Frank.  But  maybe  we’ll  leave  the
Congo Minerals for another night. Well, I think the issues we’ve talked about here have covered a
wide range of areas, and let me turn it open to the audience here and see if we can come up with
some other questions. How about you? Yes.
Audience Member:
You alluded to China and the concerns we had about it last year that have now gone away. Why
do you think the narrative changed on that, why do you think China is doing better? Also, you
know, we’re seeing more about rising inflation, so is this really about rising inflation or is it about
the end of the disinflationary-deflationary scare? Thank you.
President Dudley: 
Well I think last January, early February, the markets were under a lot of distress. There was a
big flight to risk aversion and markets went down pretty hard around the globe. I think part of the
story  was  China,  but  I  think  part  of  the  story  was  also  worries  about  the  slowdown  in  China
leading  to  a  big  commodity  bust,  and  that  commodity  bust  then  putting  a  lot  of  pressure  on
especially emerging market economies that were actually selling a lot of the products to China.
China’s been on a much more sort of stable growth path this year. They’ve also clarified what
their foreign exchange rate regime is. So I think people are a lot more comfortable in terms of
how they’re managing the renminbi.
I think there are still challenges in China and they’re still trying to reorient their economy from
investment-led growth to consumption-led growth. They’re still an economy that I think that credit
is growing quite rapidly and so you sort of worry about how sustainable that is over the long-run.
 9 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
But I think it’s much less of a focus of the markets today than it was a year ago, and I think the
anxiety  about  the  emerging  market  economies  is  much  more  focused  on  individual  countries
rather than sort of broad like it was a year ago.
I mean financial conditions really, if you look at the financial markets post-election, we’ve seen
stocks up, we’ve seen the dollar a little bit firmer. We’ve seen credit spreads narrow quite a bit,
and  we’ve  seen  bond  yields  up  a  little  bit.  But  net-net,  financial  conditions  haven’t  actually
changed very much post-election. That was very different a year ago. Financial conditions were
actually tightening quite sharply a year ago. And it wasn’t really clear how far that was actually
going to run.
Maureen O’Hara: 
There we go, question?
Audience Member:
Can you talk a little bit about balance sheet normalization, how you think about that in the context
of monetary policy? In the September FOMC, you guys talked about thinking about balance sheet
normalization in terms of when your rate hikes are well under way. What does “well under way”
mean, how are you thinking about that?
President Dudley: 
I’m sure “well under way” means different things with different people. I think the — we made it
pretty clear in terms of our statements that we sort of want the active tool of policy to be short-
term interest rates. And the balance sheet to be sort of in the background. We’ve also said that
we  wanted  to  get  some  room  off  the  zero  bound  before  we  actually  start  to  normalize  the
balance sheet, to end the reinvestment.
Now I think my own personal view is, how soon you want that process to start depends not just
about how much margin you have between the current federal funds rate and zero, but also how
confident you are that you’re actually not going to need to reduce the federal funds rate in the
near-term.
So,  to  the  extent  that  we  become  more  confident,  if  we  become  more  confident  about  the
economic  outlook,  that  the  recovery  will  be  sustained,  then  I  think  that  for  me  –  speaking  for
myself,  and  only  myself  –  that  might  make  me  a  little  bit  more  comfortable  to  proceed  with
balance sheet normalization a little bit more quickly.
I think the important thing here is that when balance sheet normalization occurs and we start to
end the reinvestment, don’t think of it as an active tool of policy. Think of it as a passive tool,
number one. And number two, to the extent that we then do decide at some point in the future to
taper or end the reinvestment, that will also be a way of removing accommodation. And so that
would be a bit of a substitute for raising short-term interest rates.
So, I would guess, my own personal view, is if we move to balance sheet normalization, that
might actually stretch out the process of raising short-term interest rates a little bit because the
two are substitutes for one another in terms of removing monetary policy accommodation.
The  Chair  said  in  her  testimony  that  this  is  something  we’re  going  to  be  looking  at  over  the
coming meetings. We want to make sure that we know exactly what we want to do long before
we have to do it, and so obviously the discussion and contemplation of what the right strategy is
here needs to start relatively early, so it can be done absolutely as soon as you actually might
want to do something.
People  sometimes  think  that  when  we  start  talking  about  something  in  the  minutes  that  that
 10 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
means that we’re going to do something momentarily. Usually it takes a while for us to develop
those themes and issues, and reach a consensus.
So, I wouldn’t take a lot of signals just because it was in the minutes last time and something
here is imminent.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Well, you’ll have a few openings, too, in the FOMC that have to get filled in before you’ll get full
strength. So again, a slightly different Federal Reserve Board going forward, too.
President Dudley: 
Yes.
Maureen O’Hara: 
An excellent point, an excellent point. What have we got?  Here we go.
Audience Member:
If the new Administration continues with this isolationist policy, is able to successfully put tariffs
on imports, would that have an inflationary impact and would the Fed have to address that?
President Dudley: 
Well, again, I don’t think that’s – I don’t really think that’s the professed goal of the Administration.
I think the Administration wants better trade deals and not – I think the question is whether they’ll
get better trade deals without actually having to put, you know, higher trade barriers in place.
Obviously to the extent that trade barriers go up and that would tend to raise import prices, that
would  feed  into  price  level  in  terms  of  inflation,  and  so  obviously,  we  had  to  take  that  into
consideration in terms of how we do monetary policy.
But going to be happening in a dynamic world where a lot of other things are going on. So, I
wouldn’t want to take one thing and say, “Oh, if that happens, we’re going to do X,” because it
really depends on, one, it’s highly speculative what’s going to happen on trade policy, and two,
even if it happened, it would depend on magnitude and it would depend on a lot of other things
that are going on.
So I think it’s really hard to speculate about something like that.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Okay, I see some hands way back there. So if you can hand the microphone to someone who’s
got their hand up, way back there, that’d be great.
Audience Member:
Recently, it’s been speculated that the Trump trade policy actually will evolve into a border tax.
It’s been in the works in the Republican Party for the last several years. This would simply entail
an increase across-the-board in taxation on imports and an equal proportional across-the-board
decrease on all exports.
First  question  would  be,  what  do  you  think  of  this  type  of  proposal? And  second,  if  this  were
implemented, what do you forecast the impact to be?
 11 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
President Dudley: 
Well, there’s been a lot of discussion in Washington about this border tax adjustment. If you were
starting with a corporate tax code from scratch, it would be, I think, quite attractive in a lot of ways
because it basically eliminates a lot of the incentives to engage in games of transfer pricing. It
reduces a lot of the incentives to book your intellectual property abroad.
So, it actually has a lot of attractive features. I think the challenge is that it’s very different than the
current tax regime, and so there really would be some pretty significant adjustment costs and
frictions of moving from the current regime to that new regime.
And so, I think the question is really going to be: do people think those adjustment costs are a
price worth paying for what I would agree is probably a better corporate tax regime. Certainly, a
much better tax regime than the one we have today.
But you know, there’s going to be a lot of people that are going to be worried about how that
adjustment  is  going  to  affect  their  particular  industry.  If  you’re  an  importer,  you’re  going  to  be
worried that your price of imports is going to go up.
Some people argue that the dollar will move proportionately with the size of the import tax, so the
import prices won’t go up at all in dollar terms.
But, you know, that’s theory, and people worry about how it will actually work in practice. So, I
think this is just going to be a very heavily debated topic in Washington in the coming weeks and
months.
Maureen O’Hara: 
I think we have time for maybe one or two more. Let’s let some people in the back again.
Audience Member:
Hi, Mr. Dudley, nice to hear from you. I’ve got lots of questions, but I guess everyone gets to only
ask one.
President Dudley: 
You can ask more than one, but I’ll only answer one.
Audience Member:
Okay, so, I was going to ask some sort of structuralist post-Ricardian question, but I’ll set that
one aside.
President Dudley: 
Thank you.
Audience Member:
On a similar vein, to what degree do you think that this challenging of facts and these threats
about what is truth and, you know, journalistic integrity, to what degree did this affect the financial
system and to what degree did this confidence in what the Wall Street Journal might say or the
New York Times might say as a fact can affect confidence in financial institutions? And what
remedies do you have, or does the Fed have, to combat that?
President Dudley: 
 12 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
I don’t think I have any good real answers to that. I’ll just have to say that I’m fact-based. New
York Fed is fact-based. And I hope we stay that way.
Maureen O’Hara: 
Do you have alternative facts? Just checking, just checking.
President Dudley: 
Look, I think a healthy debate is a good thing about what facts matter and how the world works.
You know, people can have different models about how the world works and what’s important,
and what’s not. But I think that they have to be based on real evidence. So, I’m going to continue
to live in my world, which is very much fact-based.
Maureen O’Hara: 
I think we have time for one more question, and we have someone back there who’s got a mike.
Audience Member:
Yeah, Mr. Dudley, I have a question. You mentioned that there was some nefarious behavior by
banks. I heard you mention that there was some nefarious behavior going on by banks during the
financial crisis.
President Dudley: 
Well, the employees of banks.
Audience Member:
Ok,  employees  of  banks.  My  question  is,  there  was  –  some  of  the  big  banks,  including  J.P.
Morgan  and  Bank  of  America,  basically  bailing  out  the  government  and  the  FDIC,  buying
institutions like Countrywide, Merrill Lynch, Washington Mutual.
In some of these cases, they were given winks and nods by the government that they were not
going to be held accountable for let’s say the sins of these institutions that they took over.
But then what happened, they did this, and then later on, these institutions were fined billions of
dollars by the government. And I guess my question is would you call this nefarious behavior on
the  part  of  the  government  to  do  this  to  these  companies  that  basically  helped  out  the
government and the FDIC, in taking over these insolvent institutions?
President Dudley: 
Well,  I  wasn’t  part  of  any  of  those  conversations,  so  I  don’t  know  what  winks  or  nods  were
actually exchanged.
Look, I think the banks are, people are, managers are big boys and girls. And I think when they
were making these transactions, they had the ability to negotiate whatever terms and conditions
that they wanted to negotiate.
Now, I understand that there’s some bad feelings after the fact, to the extent that the sins of the
institutions that were acquired went along with those entities. But it’d be a little bit sad if you can
have institutions do lots of bad things and then have them acquired and then have their sins sort
of automatically forgiven because they were acquired by another institution. That would be a sort
of “get out of jail free” card. And so I’m not sure that’s necessarily the right approach either.
 13 / 13
BIS central bankers' speeches
