Ignazio  Visco:  Economic  and  financial  situation  of  Italy  and
prospects for economic governance in the European Union
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  an  “Open
coordinators meeting” of the ECON Committee (European Parliament) for an exchange of views
on the economic and financial situation of Italy and prospects for economic governance in the
European Union, Brussels, 11 April 2017.
Introductory Statement
Mr Chairman, Honourable Members,
 I would like to thank you for inviting me here today and offering me the opportunity to clarify my
views  on  matters  relating  to  my  institutional  duties.  I  will  start  by  focussing  on  the  role  that
monetary policy plays in the euro area at this juncture, as well as on its limitations. I will then
discuss the situation of Italian banks against the background of Italy’s economic recovery.
Over  the  last  few  years  the  euro  area  has  experienced  a  challenging  environment  indeed.
Downward risks to price stability increased sharply after mid-2014. There was a material risk of
expectations de-anchoring. The activation of ‘debt-deflation mechanisms’ would have had very
serious effects on the economy in a situation of high levels of public and private debt.
I believe we at the ECB Governing Council adopted the right set of monetary policy measures to
counter these risks. Official interest rates were progressively cut; those on the deposit facility for
banks  were  reduced  to  negative  levels,  possibly  the  most  ‘non-conventional’  element  of  our
monetary  policy.  We  supplied  base  money  in  very  substantial  amounts  through  the  asset
purchase programme. Finally, we offered banks rewarding refinancing conditions for providing
more credit to the economy.
The impact of the overall package has been considerable and is still unfolding. Without it, inflation
would  have  been  negative  in  2015  and  in  2016;  GDP  growth  would  have  been  lower  too.
According to ECB estimates, which we share, monetary policy will raise GDP by more than 1.5
percentage points over the period 2017–19. We expect the effect to be somewhat stronger for
Italy,  at  around  2  percentage  points.  The  measures  have  also  significantly  lessened  financial
fragmentation  in  the  euro  area,  favouring  a  more  homogenous  transmission  of  the  monetary
impulse and, in turn, an improvement in financing conditions for firms and households.
Although deflation risks have virtually disappeared, inflation remains subdued in the euro area as
a whole. The positive dynamics of headline inflation over recent months largely reflects its most
volatile  components,  such  as  energy  and  unprocessed  food  prices.  Net  of  these  items,  core
inflation  remains  very  low,  below  1  per  cent.  It  is  forecast  to  return  only  gradually  to  values
consistent with price stability, as economic slack is progressively absorbed.
For this reason it is of the utmost importance, for the euro area as a whole, that we maintain the
very  favourable  financing  conditions  needed  to  secure  a  durable,  self-sustained  and  broadly-
based convergence of inflation rates towards our price stability objective. The asset purchase
programme, which is set to continue at least until the end of next December, the low level of our
policy rates, and the forward guidance constitute a package of mutually consistent elements. A
reassessment of this package is not warranted at this stage. Before altering any component of
our stance, we need to be confident that a convincing and self-sustained improvement in inflation
and economic activity is taking place.
To  date,  we  have  not  seen  any  sign  that  this  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  is
causing generalised imbalances in the area. The impact of monetary policy measures on bank
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
profitability  has  in  general  been  contained.  Should  any  threat  to  financial  stability  materialise,
macro-prudential measures should be used to limit the build-up of systemic risks and to smooth
the financial cycle in particular sectors or geographical areas.
While monetary policy has been successful in warding off a deflation trap and no negative side
effects have emerged so far, when it comes to achieving a durable recovery monetary policy
cannot  be  left  to  itself. Aggregate  demand  must  be  supported  by  fiscal  policy,  whenever  and
wherever  possible.  At  the  same  time,  potential  growth  must  be  reinforced  by  adopting
appropriate reforms to foster technological progress and strengthen human capital.
The  very  magnitude  and  diffuse  nature  of  the  challenges  and  changes  we  face  –  new
technologies, global trade, demography, migration – demand a truly common strategy that goes
beyond emergency response. It is a fallacy that we can direct the course of the economy and
finance,  patently  global  phenomena,  from  within  the  limited  confines  of  individual  European
countries, but a common strategy is lacking.
As the crisis unfolded in recent years, measures to deal with the emergency were progressively
flanked  by  reform  of  the  governance  of  the  European  Union  and  especially  of  the  euro  area.
These  reforms,  which  began  with  intervention  on  public  finance  rules  and  macroeconomic
surveillance,  have  marked  further  steps  in  economic  integration:  the  European  Stability
Mechanism and the banking union are the most prominent examples. However, we seem to have
lost momentum along the way.
Today,  banking  union  –  whose  first  pillar,  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  has  been  put
together in an extremely short time and at a difficult moment – remains incomplete. The capital
markets  union  is  an  excellent  project,  but  it  is  still  at  a  very  preliminary  stage.  In  spite  of  the
efforts of many, including members of the European Parliament, moving ahead towards fiscal
union  appears  somewhat  difficult.  The  legacy  of  the  crisis  has  aroused  fears  and  prejudices
once  thought  2  long  buried.  Distrust  leads  to  disaccord;  in  the  exasperated  pursuit  of  mutual
reassurance,  looking  only  to  short-term  gain,  the  necessary  steps  are  hard  to  take.  Moving
forward based on a series of compromises is becoming more difficult. I am convinced that true
European  integration  can  only  be  achieved  through  the  carefully  considered  development  of
democratic institutions appointed to manage shared sovereignty.
The sovereign debt crisis was also a crisis of trust: interest rate spreads on sovereign bonds
increased sharply amidst fears of a euro break-up and redenomination risk. The latter accounted
for about two thirds of the increase in the interest rate differential between Italian and German
sovereign bonds at the height of the sovereign crisis in 2011.
We may now say that Italy is coming out of the worst economic crisis of its history as a nation.
From 2008 to 2013, as a result of a double-dip recession, GDP fell by almost 10 percentage
points, industrial production by about a quarter, investment by 30 per cent, and consumption by 8
per cent.
Fiscal consolidation, even if pro-cyclical, was necessary to regain the trust of markets and to
convince our partners of the country’s resolve to address its imbalances. The primary budget
balance  had  returned  to  surplus  by  2011  and  net  borrowing  was  brought  back  below  the
threshold of 3 per cent of GDP in 2012. Keeping primary current expenditure in check played an
important role: since 2010 it has recorded modest growth in nominal terms (around 1 per cent)
compared with more than 4 per cent in the previous ten years.
As tensions in the sovereign market spread to banks, the latter’s ability to access international
funding was impaired and a credit crunch ensued, which added to the contractionary impulse
coming  from  the  much-needed  fiscal  consolidation.  This  was  not  offset  by  an  acceleration  in
foreign  demand,  either  from  the  rest  of  the  euro  area  or  from  other  countries.  The  aggregate
fiscal  stance  of  the  euro  area  was  also  contractionary.  Only  monetary  policy  responded  by
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
fighting financial fragmentation and avoiding the looming financial meltdown.
Eventually, an economic crisis of these proportions could not leave Italian banks unaffected. Until
2012, the deterioration of bank loans appeared gradual and overall manageable. Still in 2013, the
International  Monetary  Fund  acknowledged  the  proven  ability  of  the  Italian  banking  system  to
contain the effects of the crisis and ensure adequate capitalisation by resorting to the market. 3
Subsequently,  as  the  level  of  economic  activity  remained  low  longer  than  forecast  by  most
national and international institutions and analysts, widespread company failures and job losses
fuelled a further rise in non-performing loans. We estimate that without the double-dip recession,
the gross stock of bad loans to non-financial firms would be about two thirds lower.
Nevertheless, at the origin of a number of banking difficulties we also find managerial decisions
undermined  by  misconduct  and  incautious  allocation  of  credit.  It  was  a  potentially  devastating
combination  of  factors.  Yet,  all  things  considered,  the  damage  to  the  banking  system  was
centred  on  few,  clearly  identified,  banks.  They  have  been,  and  still  are,  the  object  of  intense
supervisory monitoring and intervention.
Many  risks  have  been  eliminated  or  attenuated.  European  institutions  continue  to  play  a
fundamental role in solving critical cases. The stock of NPLs is slowly but steadily declining, and
the economic recovery will accelerate this trend, partly thanks to legislative and organisational
changes to speed up credit recovery procedures.
The  large  volume  of  Italian  NPLs  requires  careful  management;  the  real  magnitude  of  the
problem, however, needs to be clarified through careful scrutiny of the specific conditions of each
bank.
Last December bad loans and other NPLs on the balance sheets of Italian banks amounted to
€173 billion net of write-downs, that is 9.4 per cent of total loans. Including write-downs, NPLs
came to €349 billion, a figure which refers to the face value of the exposures and accordingly
does not represent their actual weight in banks’ balance sheets. Out of €173 billion of NPLs, €92
billion pertained to situations in which regular repayments may resume, especially if the recovery
gains momentum. Net bad loans, i.e. exposures to insolvent debtors, amounted to €81 billion or
4.4 per cent of loans.
The majority of these bad loans are held by banks whose financial position does not require to
sell them immediately. A good NPL management policy combines improving internal workout,
choosing adequate governance and incentive structures, addressing problems relating to poor
statistical information, and deciding whether to sell NPLs or externalise servicing to a specialised
operator.
Of the total of €81 billion of net bad loans, only about €20 billion are with banks, significant and
less  significant,  that  are  currently  experiencing  difficulties.  The  average  book  value  of  these
assets  is  around  40  per  cent  of  their  face  value.  This  is  about  twice  the  low  prices  currently
offered by a few market specialists. Based on these prices, the additional provisions that such
banks  may  need  to  book  could  be  estimated  at  about  €10  billion.  This  amount  of  additional
provisioning is far 4 below the €20 billion fund set up by the Italian Government at the end of last
year to support troubled banks. Moreover, it should not be forgotten that any public support would
be accompanied by some burden sharing.
The NPL legacy comes from the past. Another and even more serious challenge for all European
banks  lies  in  the  present  and  the  future  and  has  to  do  with  technology  and  the  shape  of  the
market. Current trends are compressing profitability. It is time for a change in the business model
of  many  banks.  The  extension  of  branch  networks,  the  provision  of  services,  and  the  use  of
technology must be reviewed in a bold and innovative spirit. This is essential for Italian banks if
they want to compete effectively and maintain their stability.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
The prospects for the Italian economy have been improving gradually but steadily in the last three
years; the moderate recovery is a testimony to the effectiveness of the policies put in place, but
also  to  the  need  for  further  intervention.  The  production  of  goods  and  services  continues  to
increase in the current quarter, although the pace of recovery is slow and lags behind that of
other large countries in the euro area. Domestic demand is benefiting from favourable monetary
and  financial  conditions,  as  well  as  from  a  mildly  expansionary  fiscal  policy.  Labour  market
conditions  have  improved.  Business  confidence  is  increasing.  Bank  lending  has  continued  to
expand in recent months, even though it remains heterogeneous across firms.
Our latest forecasts suggest a further moderate strengthening of GDP growth. As in the euro
area as a whole, the outlook, however, is clouded by risks, and tilted to the downside mostly by
global  geopolitical  factors.  Economic  policy  uncertainty  –  as  measured  by  the  most  popular
indicators – is at very high levels nationally, in the euro area, and outside Europe. Italy has been
on a path of reform for a number of years now. Change is beginning to pay off. The effort to
modernise the country must go on.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
