Yves Mersch: The role of cash - customer retention and tie to the
citizen
Contribution by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
to The Banker, 1 September 2017.
 There is much talk about the demise of cash. But to paraphrase Mark Twain, reports of its death
are  an  exaggeration.  Cash  remains  popular.  A  crucial  point  for  banks  to  understand,  since
respecting clients’ needs and wishes is a precondition to ensuring their loyalty and support. This
not  only  applies  to  the  relationship  between  private  banks  and  their  clients,  but  also  between
central banks and the public, where cash provides a tangible daily link. I will discuss each in turn.
Private banks: cash is a means of customer retention
The banking sector is confronted with low profitability as well as high and increasing competition
from other banks and non-banking start-ups, so-called fin-techs. In this environment, customer
retention is pivotal to staying in business: if your customer is not satisfied, he most likely will not
stay your customer. Therefore, it is important to ensure that customers’ interactions with banks
can be carried out in a way that satisfies the customers the most.
Take the use of cash and the growing shift to newer payment systems. There is a wide and ever
increasing  supply  of  non-cash  payment  systems  available,  such  as  credit  cards,  electronic
payments,  portable  wallets  and  mobile  phone  payments  to  name  but  a  few. As  more  people
adapt  to  new  payment  options,  banks’  established  business  models  can  be  disrupted.  Banks
need to remain agile and endeavour to meet their customers’ evolving desires.
In  this  context,  some  see  major  business  opportunities  arising  from  abolishing  cash,  by
eliminating  the  high  storage,  issuance,  and  handling  costs  that  the  financial  industry  currently
faces. Customers would benefit, too, as they would no longer need to carry wads of cash or
search for ATMs.
But this assumed increase in convenience would come at a cost. There are a wide range of
legal,  governance  and  operational  questions  that  need  to  be  considered  carefully  before
switching away from cash. Just as cash has a number of technological safeguards to protect
from  counterfeiting,  innovative  payment  systems  require  significant  safeguards  to  protect
individuals  from  theft  and  from  loss  of  personal  information.  That  protection  of  personal
information extends to ensuring the ability of law-abiding citizens to maintain their anonymity and
addressing legitimate concerns surrounding the use of Big Data for personal profiling.
Most importantly, empirical evidence suggests that the lobbying to abolish cash fails to respect
the  will  of  the  people:  cash  remains  popular.  Recent  research  for  the  ECB  finds  that  80%  of
transactions at point of sale are in cash. Even adjusting for the value of transactions, cash still
accounts for the majority. Indeed, the demand for cash currently outstrips the growth in nominal
GDP.
Banks  should  see  such  developments  as  a  positive  opportunity  to  engage  with  customers,
without  actively  pushing  them  away  from  cash  where  it  remains  their  preference.  Enabling
customers to manage their finances in the manner that most appeals to them encourages loyalty
and supports customer retention.
Central banks: cash is a link to the citizen
Central banks face similar questions. They are confronted with proposals to abolish cash and
replace it by digital variants. But this, too, has implications for their relationship with their ultimate
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
clients – the general public.
Central  banks  have  issued  cash  since  their  inception.  For  cash  to  carry  out  its  roles  as  a
medium  of  exchange  and  store  of  value,  the  public  has  to  have  trust  in  its  integrity. And  for
monetary policy to be effective, trust in the central bank and support by the citizens is required.
To maintain that integrity and protect the currency from counterfeiters, central banks have not
only adopted innovations at the cutting edge of printing technology, but actively driven innovation
in that area. The ECB’s recent €50 note – issued earlier this year – is no exception, incorporating
an enhanced range of security features.
But the technological developments mentioned earlier have also encouraged more radical ideas,
including the abolition of cash. Some argue in favour of overcoming the restrictions on monetary
policy arising from the zero lower bound, others aim at undermining illicit activities by eliminating
their preferred means of payment.
I am sceptical about these arguments.
First,  central  banks  worldwide  implemented  various  unconventional  measures  during  the  past
decade which were effective in meeting the challenges of low inflation. Negative nominal interest
rates  have  worked,  without  triggering  a  flight  to  cash,  especially  when  combined  with  other
unconventional  measures.  Still,  while  it  might  be  feasible  to  set  extreme  negative  rates  in  a
theoretical  model,  I  wonder  how  the  public  would  react.  Not  only  would  such  rates  be  deeply
unpopular,  there  may  be  unintended  changes  in  behaviour  that  would  dampen  their
effectiveness.
As the Bank for International Settlements recently found, there seems to be an independent role
for  nominal  interest  rates  in  the  transmission  process,  regardless  of  the  level  of  real  rates.
Monetary  policy  transmission  could  be  weakened  by  the  headwinds  that  may  arise  in  the
aftermath  of  balance  sheet  recessions.  Likewise,  inherent  non-linearities  could  kick  in  when
interest rates are persistently low and may dampen their impact on spending.
The law-and-order case for banning cash also wilts under scrutiny. By acting as a store of value
and  a  means  of  payment,  cash  fulfills  an  important  social  function  for  many  honest  citizens.
Would anyone suggest forbidding cell phones because criminals use them? Harming the law-
abiding majority in order to punish a misbehaving minority is a step too far.
Last  but  not  least,  cash  is  the  only  central  bank  liability  available  to  the  public.  Digital  claims
against central banks already exist – commercial banks and some other types of institutions hold
them in the form of deposits. But private citizens have no access to them.
Although electronic payments provided by the financial industry are used by private customers,
these methods are based on commercial bank money. From the perspective of the citizen, a
liability vis-à-vis the central bank is more valuable than one vis-à-vis a commercial bank, not least
because  of  the  different  credit  risks.  Bank  deposits  and  other  commercial  bank  liabilities  are
highly  protected,  but  they  are  not  absolutely  risk-free.  A  central  bank,  however,  can  never
become illiquid and can always honour its liabilities.
Cash therefore maintains a tangible link between the general public and the central bank, a tie
which is important for maintaining trust between the two.
But cash could be digitalised, too, given recent technological advances such as the Distributed
Ledger  Technology,  or  DLT,  a  variant  of  which  is  used  for  Bitcoin.  Central  banks  could  stop
issuing cash and shift to just providing an electronic claim on the central bank. In principle, the
introduction of central bank-issued digital currency or digital base money (DBM), as I have called
it, would be much easier and potentially less expensive than ten years ago.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
But  the  challenges  go  beyond  the  technological  sphere.  Would  DBM  involve  each  individual
having an account at the central bank, or instead a decentralised system where each individual
has an electronic wallet and the central bank is unaware of transactions that take place? Either
solution  could  be  implemented  using  distributed  ledger  technologies,  but  the  set-up  would  be
quite different in each scenario.
A  further  important  question  is  whether  DBM  would  be  remunerated  (as  excess  central  bank
reserves held by commercial banks currently are) or not, like cash. Either option has implications
for  household  behaviour.  Should  DBM  not  be  remunerated  and  the  deposit  facility  rate  be
negative, as it is now, commercial banks may try to circumvent the regulations by setting up non-
bank subsidiaries, which could in turn affect the efficacy of monetary policy.
In any case, DBM would require significant safeguards to protect individuals from theft and from
loss of personal information. In addition, any potential DBM solution needs be assessed against
some  high  level  principles,  including:  (1)  technological  safety,  (2)  efficiency,  (3)  technological
neutrality and (4) freedom of choice for users of means of payments.
The  different  options  have  potential  impacts  –  both  positive  and  negative  –  that  need  to  be
studied and considered carefully. Only when the best way of designing DBM has been identified,
can it be decided if DBM for non-banks should be introduced at all. The most important question
for the ECB is whether introducing DBM would affect our ability to honour our mandate. Adopting
untried technology that ultimately proves unreliable could seriously endanger public trust in the
currency and in the central bank.
Conclusions
There are valid reasons  for  maintaining  cash,  from  the  perspective  of  commercial  banks  and
central banks alike.
Given the widespread desire to use cash, banks should facilitate rather than obstruct customers
in using their preferred method of payment. Time will tell how the use of cash will evolve once
instant payments are introduced in the near future.
For  central  banks,  cash  is  a  tool  to  build  trust.  Cash  provides  the  general  public  with  direct
access to central bank money. For an independent institution like the ECB, maintaining that link
is  important,  which  is  why  we  place  great  emphasis  on  ensuring  people’s  continued  trust  in
cash.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
