Philip  Lowe:  Opening  statement  to  the  House  of  Representatives
Standing Committee on Economics
Opening statement by Mr Philip Lowe, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the House
of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics, Sydney, 24 February 2017.
Chair
Members of the Committee
 Thank you for the opportunity to appear today to explain how we see the Australian economy as
well as to discuss some of the work we have been doing at the Reserve Bank.
At the equivalent hearing a year ago, the tone of the global economy was pretty sombre. We had
seen  turbulence  in  Chinese  financial  markets.  Commodity  and  equity  prices  were  declining.
Some overseas central banks had pushed their interest rates into negative territory. And global
growth forecasts were being lowered again.
Twelve months on, the global economy looks to be on a firmer footing. In China, the growth target
for 2016 was achieved despite the nervousness early in the year. In the United States, growth
has strengthened and the economy is operating at close to full employment. And in Europe, the
recovery is continuing, although it has a fair way to go in some countries. The Federal Reserve
increased interest rates in December and further rises are expected this year. Elsewhere in the
major economies there is no longer an expectation of further monetary easing, although some
central banks are still continuing to expand their balance sheets. Commodity prices have moved
higher.  Long-term  bond  yields  have  also  increased  and  most  investors  are  no  longer  paying
governments to look after their money for 10 years. Headline inflation has risen in most countries,
and is much closer to target than it has been for some years. And forecasts for global growth
have been revised up over recent months. This is the first time this has happened for quite a few
years.
So, overall it is a more positive picture. That is the good news. There are, though, still a number
of significant risks on the horizon.
In  China,  the  growth  target  was  achieved  last  year  partly  through  a  further  build-up  in  debt
especially  to  finance  infrastructure  investment  and  property  development.  This  strategy  was
clearly helpful in the short run and it supported commodity prices, and Australia has benefited
from that. But it runs counter to the Chinese authorities’ goal of addressing the high levels of debt
and getting domestic finances on a more stable footing. So we can’t be sure about the longer-run
implications. Recently, the Chinese authorities have taken some steps to tighten things up a bit.
They  have  also  been  managing  a  depreciation  of  their  currency  against  the  US  dollar  and
increased capital outflows as Chinese citizens send funds abroad. It’s a difficult balancing act.
Turning to the United States, we can’t be confident about how things will play out. It is possible
that  the  new  administration’s  policies  could  boost  US  and  global  growth.  More  infrastructure
investment, tax reform and deregulation could all work to that end. On the other hand, if there
were to be a retreat from the open international trading system, that would be damaging to the
global economy, including to us here in Australia. We have much to lose if this were to occur. It is
too early to tell which way things will go. Like others, we are in ‘wait and see’ mode.
In Europe, while there have been no major problems for some time, there are still a number of
faultlines.  Some  of  these  could  be  put  under  pressure  in  the  year  ahead,  in  many  cases
depending on the outcomes of elections.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
So there are still a number of risks in the global economy, although they no longer seem tilted to
the downside. There are reasonable scenarios in which global growth picks up further and other
scenarios in which it disappoints again.
I would now like to turn to the domestic economy.
A  year  ago,  we  were  expecting  the Australian  economy  to  grow  by  around  2½–3  per  cent  in
2016. We haven’t yet received the final figures for the year, but the outcome is likely to be lower,
at around 2 per cent. The September quarter was surprisingly weak, largely reflecting temporary
factors.  We  are  not  expecting  a  repeat  of  this  for  the  December  quarter,  with  most  of  the
available indictors suggesting a return to reasonable growth in the quarter.
Looking forward, we still expect the Australian economy to grow by around 3 per cent this year
and next. For most of the time since 2012 we have been facing headwinds from declining mining
investment  and  falling  commodity  prices.  Then,  around  the  middle  of  last  year,  the  headwind
from falling commodity prices turned into a gentle tailwind as commodity prices lifted. And the
headwind  from  falling  mining  investment  should  blow  itself  out  before  too  long  as  mining
investment returns to more normal levels. We will also benefit over the next few years from large
increases in production of liquefied natural gas.
Economic conditions continue to vary significantly across the country. They are weaker in those
parts  of  the  country  adjusting  to  the  lower  levels  of  mining  investment  and  they  are  stronger
elsewhere. Nationally, measures of business conditions have picked up noticeably recently. For
some time we have been waiting for a lift in non-mining business investment. It has been a long
time coming. Encouragingly, in New South Wales and Victoria we have now seen a reasonable
pick-up in investment. However, we are yet to see this in most other states, where the unwinding
of the mining investment boom continues to affect the overall business climate. With the decline
in mining investment coming to an end, we hope to see a broader pick-up over time.
One  area  that  we  are  watching  closely  is  the  cycle  in  residential  construction  activity,  as  the
upswing has helped support the economy over recent years. The rate of new building approvals
has slowed, but there is a large amount of work still in the pipeline, particularly for apartments, so
we still expect some further growth in this part of the economy this year. There has, however,
been some tightening in conditions for property developers in some markets.
In the broader housing market, the picture remains quite complicated. There is not a single story
across the country. In parts of the country that have been adjusting to the downswing in mining
investment or where there have been big increases in supply of apartments, housing prices have
declined.  In  other  parts,  where  the  economy  has  been  stronger  and  the  supply-side  has  had
trouble keeping up with strong population growth, housing prices are still rising quickly. In most
areas,  growth  in  rents  is  low.  And  recently  we  have  seen  a  pick-up  in  growth  in  credit  to
investors, which needs to be watched carefully.
In terms of consumer prices, a year ago we had expected the inflation rate to remain above 2 per
cent. It has turned out to be lower than this last year, at around 1½ per cent. Wage growth has
been  quite  subdued,  reflecting  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market  and  the  adjustment  to  the
unwinding of the mining investment boom. We anticipate the subdued outcomes to continue for a
while yet. Increased competition in retailing is also having an effect on prices, as is the low rate of
increase in rents.
We do not expect the rate of inflation to fall further. Our judgement is that there are reasonable
prospects for inflation to rise towards the middle of the target over time. The recent improvement
in the global economy provides some extra assurance on this front. Headline inflation is expected
to be back above 2 per cent later this year, boosted by higher prices for petrol and tobacco. The
pick-up in underlying inflation is expected to be more gradual.
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Since we appeared before this Committee last September, the Reserve Bank Board has kept the
cash rate unchanged at 1.5 per cent.
At its recent meetings the Board has been paying close attention to the outlook for inflation as
well as two other issues: trends in household borrowing and in the labour market.
One of the ways in which monetary policy works is to make it easier for people to borrow and
spend. But there is a balance to be struck. Too much borrowing today can create problems for
tomorrow,  because  debt  does  have  to  be  repaid.  At  the  moment,  most  households  with
borrowings do seem to be coping pretty well. But the current high level of debt, combined with
low nominal income growth, is affecting the appetite of households to spend, and we are seeing
some  evidence  of  this  in  the  consumption  figures.  The  balance  that  is  required  is  to  support
spending in the economy today while avoiding creating fragilities in household balance sheets
that could cause problems for the economy later on. This is also something we need to watch
carefully.
Trends in the labour market are also important. As in the housing market, the picture in the labour
market varies significantly around the country. Overall, the unemployment rate has been steady
now for a little over a year at around 5¾ per cent. In a historical context this would have been
considered a good outcome, although, today, a sustainably lower unemployment rate should be
possible in Australia. The other aspect of the labour market that is worth noting is the continuing
trend  towards  part-time  employment.  Over  the  past  year,  all  the  growth  in  employment  is
accounted for by part-time jobs. There is a structural element to this, but it is also partly cyclical.
We expect that the unemployment rate will remain around its current level for a while yet.
The Reserve Bank Board continues to balance these various issues within the framework of our
flexible medium-term inflation target, which aims to achieve an average rate of inflation over time
of 2 point something. Our judgement is that the current setting of the cash rate is consistent with
both  this  and  achieving  sustainable  growth  in  our  economy.  We  will  continue  to  review  that
judgement at future meetings.
I would like to turn to some other aspects of the work we do at the Reserve Bank.
In  the  area  of  payments,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  continuing  to  work  with  industry  on  the
development of the new payments infrastructure that will allow us all to move money around and
make electronic payments more easily. The Bank is building part of the infrastructure that stands
at the centre of this new system that will allow funds to be exchanged instantaneously so that
customers can have very quick access to their funds. Our work is on schedule and is now being
used in industry testing. Financial institutions are also working hard on their internal systems so
that  customers  can  take  advantage  of  the  new  system.  Developments  look  to  be  on  track  to
allow the first payments to be made through this new system towards the end of the year.
A related focus of the Payments System Board is the important role that new technologies can
play in promoting efficiency and competition. In recent meetings the Board has discussed the
opportunities  that  distributed  ledger  technology  could  offer  in  the  payments  system  and  in
financial  market  infrastructures. And  it  is  also  interested  in  the  potential  for  fintech  to  deliver
improved customer experiences. The Board is therefore taking a keen interest in the work being
done  by  the  Australian  Payments  Council  on  digital  identity  and  customers’  access  to  their
banking and payments data.
I hope that you have all come across the new $5 banknote, which was issued by the Bank from
early September last year. The note was well received by the community. You might also have
noticed that last Friday we released the design for the new $10 banknote. Like the new $5, the
new $10 will have world-leading security features, including the clear top-to-bottom window and a
rolling colour effect that changes as the banknote is tilted. It will also have two raised bumps to
assist people with vision impairment. Just like the current $10 note, the new note will feature two
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  Australia’s  most  famous  writers,  Dame  Mary  Gilmore  and  Banjo  Paterson.  The  printing
presses are busy printing the new notes and they will be issued from September this year. We
are also finalising the design of the new $50 banknote, which we plan to issue next year.
One  other  matter  that  I  would  like  to  bring  to  your  attention  is  that  we  are  in  the  process  of
commissioning an external review of the efficiency of our operations. We want to make sure that
we  are  continuously  improving  as  an  organisation  and  we  are  seeking  outside  assistance  to
identify opportunities for improvement. The review will be focused primarily on operational and
administrative matters and not on our policy frameworks. It will commence within the next month
and I will be in a position to share the key conclusions with the Committee when we meet later in
the year.
Finally, at previous hearings members of the Committee asked about the number of women at
senior levels of the Reserve Bank. I am pleased to be able to report that we have made further
progress here. Of the three assistant governors responsible for monetary and financial policies
at the Reserve Bank, two are women. And women run over a third of the departments in the
Bank,  including  those  responsible  for  the  Bank’s  economic  analysis  function  and  for  the
implementation of monetary policy. So it’s quite a big change from days gone by when almost all
of these important positions were held by men. I want to highlight these changes in the hope that
they might provide some inspiration to women who are thinking of studying economics, finance
and business. There are fantastic career opportunities out there and it would be great to see
more women studying these disciplines, and perhaps considering a career at Australia’s central
bank.  We  are  currently  working  on  some  initiatives  to  encourage  this,  at  both  the  school  and
university level.
Thank you. My colleagues and I are here to answer your questions.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
