Peter Praet: The euro area economic outlook and monetary policy
Intervention by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
a panel discussion at the G-20 conference "The G20 Agenda under the German Presidency",
organised by the Institute of International Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 15 March 2017.
 The  euro  area  recovery  has  been  firming  and  broadening  across  sectors.  GDP  has
posted  15  consecutive  quarters  of  positive  growth.  The  unemployment  rate  has  reached  its
lowest level since 2009. The February composite output PMI stands at its maximum since April
2011.  And  consumer  confidence,  despite  a  slight  decline  in  February,  has  so  far  remained
undeterred by the elevated political uncertainty. Overall, these indicators suggest that the cyclical
recovery may be gaining momentum.
The ECB’s monetary policy has been a key contributor to this positive track record. It has
ensured supportive financial conditions and facilitated their pass-through to the borrowing costs
of firms and households. As a consequence, euro area bank lending rates hover around their
historical lows and have converged across countries. The resultant monetary stimulus has been
indispensable  to  shield  the  recovery  from  an  unsupportive  global  environment  and  strong
deleveraging pressures in the private and public sectors.
Supported  by  monetary  policy,  the  recovery  is  likely  to  continue  and  we  have  more
confidence  in  the  outlook.  The  latest  ECB  staff  projections  foresee  a  continued  stable
economic expansion over the next three years, with annual growth rates ranging between 1.6%
and  1.8%.  Moreover,  the  downside  risks  around  the  growth  outlook  have  become  less
pronounced,  albeit  remaining  tilted  to  the  downside. Accordingly,  we  are  no  longer  concerned
about deflation risks.
At the same time, the recovery has yet to translate into a durable and self-sustained pick-
up in inflation. The recent sharp uptick in headline inflation was mainly due to energy and food
price inflation. Our staff projections foresee that these price pressures will cause a hump on the
inflation path that was projected in December, with the medium-term outlook for headline inflation
largely  unaltered.  Underlying  inflation  pressures  continue  to  remain  subdued  as  unutilised
resources  still  weigh  on  wage  and  price  formation.  Inflation  rates  excluding  energy  and
unprocessed food, for instance, have remained below 1% for almost a year. Importantly, inflation
dynamics continue to be conditional on a very substantial degree of monetary accommodation.
Looking through recent volatility, the inflation outlook does not at this stage warrant a
reassessment of the current monetary policy stance. As in the past, the ECB’s monetary
policy will be forward-looking and geared towards a medium-term horizon. It will not respond to
short run fluctuations. Sustained adjustment in the path of inflation to levels below, but close to
2%  over  the  medium  term  still  requires  very  favourable  financing  conditions,  which  remain
predicated on a very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  We  still  need  to  build  sufficient
confidence that inflation will indeed converge to this aim over a medium-term horizon and will
remain there even in less supportive monetary policy conditions.
Monetary policy can support the absorption of economic slack, but it cannot strengthen
potential growth.  The  current  track  record  of  the  euro  area  economy  is  encouraging  when
judged against the subpar performance in the post-crisis years. But it is insufficient when judged
against the long-term challenges the euro area is facing due to the debt loads inherited from the
crisis and the implicit liabilities created by its ageing societies. So while short-term risks to the
economy have somewhat abated in recent times, growth-enhancing structural policies remain
warranted to tackle persisting longer-term vulnerabilities.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
