Ed  Sibley:  Non-performing  loans  –  the  Irish  perspective  on  a
European problem
Speech by Mr Ed Sibley, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the second annual
conference of the ESRB, Frankfurt am Main, 22 September 2017.
Introduction
 1
Good morning.  It is a pleasure to be invited to speak at the second annual ESRB conference.
As  the  Chair  and  previous  panellists  have  noted,  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  have  many
dimensions.  They  affect  the  credit  supply  channel,  impact  on  banks’  financing  costs,  bring
uncertainty to banks’ capital position, and block-up capital that could otherwise be used for more
economically and socially useful activities. They also cause considerable distress for borrowers.
In short, they can cause serious dysfunction for the banking system and hence its ability to serve
the economy and its customers. 
For me, as a member of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) Supervisory Board, NPLs
clearly remain one of the central challenges facing the European banking sector today.
NPLs  go  to  the  heart  of  banking  –  both  its  simplicity  and  its  complexity.  Because  credit,  like
banking more generally, ultimately requires trust. High levels of NPLs can erode that trust and
confidence in the banking system.  
In my remarks today, I would first like to reflect on this issue of trust. I will then elaborate on the
Irish  experience,  pointing  to  some  of  the  measures  and  solutions  we  took  regarding  NPLs.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  draw  on  some  of  the  key  lessons  from  the  Irish  experience,  which  are
relevant to the broader trajectory for Europe going forward.
Trust and NPLs
Both maturity transformation and credit intermediation ultimately rely on trust.
At its simplest, depositors need to trust that when they put their money into a bank they have
certainty of being able to withdraw that money in the future. Similarly, banks need to trust that
when they gather these deposits, and lend at longer maturities, they will either be repaid, or in
extremis be  able  to  enforce  collateral.  This  requires  trust  in  the  legal,  judicial  or  extra-judicial
processes.
However,  we  have  all  seen  how  trust  can  evaporate  very  quickly  in  times  of  crises. And,  as
Francis Fukuyama notes, “widespread distrust in a society….. imposes a kind of tax on all forms
2
of economic activity”.
While  trust  and  confidence  may  be  considered  intangibles,  the  quantitative  impacts  are
demonstrated through hard numbers. For example, investor mistrust will be reflected in lower
price to book ratios; banks’ mistrust will be reflected in elevated interest rates to compensate for
higher  risk;  potential  new  entrants  and  consolidators  mistrust  will  be  reflected  in  the  reduced
likelihood of entering markets with higher NPLs, and so on. 
Authorities,  including  supervisors,  therefore  have  a  critical  role  in  ensuring  trust  within  the
system.
The SSM is close to three years in operation. It is still a relatively new institution. Much has been
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
done to establish its reputation as an effective, intrusive, and independent supervisor.
This trust is hard-earned and easily lost. By taking the necessary decisions, by doing the right
things we will continue to earn the trust of the European public and market participants. And this
includes taking firm action in relation to NPLs.
But it is not easy.  We must consider financial stability issues, and perhaps less obviously for
some  prudential  supervisors  –  but  crucially  nonetheless  –  consumer  protection  matters. 
Prudential  supervision  and  consumer  protection  are  inherently  interlinked  and  mutually  self-
reinforcing. Poor outcomes for consumers are poor outcomes for the banking system.
Although the ECB does not have an explicit mandate for consumer protection, many National
Competent Authorities – such as the Central Bank of Ireland – do. Even were that not the case, it
is important that intrusive prudential supervision should not come at the cost of the consumer.
And this is particularly relevant for action on NPLs, which by its very nature relate to dealing with
distressed borrowers – that may, for example, be at risk of losing their family home, or small
enterprises that are providing local employment. 
Indeed,  ensuring  that  borrowers  are  protected  remains  at  the  heart  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland’s approach to NPLs.  This is a fundamental aim in its own right, but it is also important in
3
rebuilding trust in the Irish financial system more broadly following the crisis.
I am cognisant that there is much more to be done in this regard, and the remaining high level of
NPLs is a significant drag on rebuilding this trust across the system.
The Irish experience with NPLs
This brings me to our own experience in Ireland.   
The Irish banking sector has been transformed since the start of the crisis. Intensive supervisory
focus and pressure coupled with improved economic circumstances continue to drive reductions
in NPLs.
Nevertheless,  NPLs  levels  remain  elevated  and  their  sustainable  resolution  remains  a  key
supervisory priority.
This chart helps to illustrate this story, and the increasingly intrusive actions that have been taken
to drive NPL reduction:
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Source: Central Bank of Ireland regulatory returns. At Q3 2014 the EBA’s harmonised definition
of non-performing was introduced. Prior to this date, an internal definition was used equivalent to
impaired loans and/or arrears > 90 days.
Prior to the crash Irish bank balance sheets expanded considerably, with domestic Irish banks
more  than  tripling  their  size.   This  increase  was  heavily  driven  by  property  related  exposures
facilitated by weak lending standards and practices (e.g. high LTVs) and ultimately unsustainable
business models.
4
The economic downturn and bursting of the property bubble resulted in large bank losses (the six
largest banks lost approximately €67.8bn between 2008 and 2012).
The National Asset Management Agency (NAMA) was established in December 2009 as one of a
number of initiatives taken by the Irish authorities to address the serious problems in the banking
sector. The Agency acquired the largest commercial real estate and connected exposures held
by the Irish banks, with a nominal value of €74bn.  The objective was to deal with the largest and
most problematic loans in the banking system and to, subsequently, obtain the best achievable
financial return for the State on this portfolio over an expected lifetime of up to ten years.
Interestingly though, as the chart above shows, NPLs – amounting to €85.3bn – only peaked in
Ireland in Q4 2013, with an NPL ratio of 31.8%, more than two years after loans were transferred
to NAMA. So, although NAMA was clearly a critical part of the solution to dealing with the banking
crisis in Ireland – particularly with respect to the larger commercial real estate loans – it was by
no means the silver bullet some people may think for resolving Irish NPLs overall, as SME and
mortgage loans remained a serious and growing problem.  
Of  critical  importance  during  2010  and  2011  was  ensuring  that  the  banks  were  adequately
capitalised,  impairments  were  recognised,  and  adequately  provided  for.  The  work  involved  an
assessment of asset quality, and stress testing the banks’ balance sheets.  
An  important  milestone  was  the  work  conducted  by  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  during  the
Financial Measures Programme (FMP). Under the FMP, a balance sheet assessment and stress
test exercise was completed in 2011 and resulted in a total capitalisation requirement of €24bn
for the going-concern banks.
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Following the recapitalisation in 2011, which we must not forget was at a catastrophic cost to the
Irish taxpayer, our supervisory focus turned to banks’ NPL resolution strategies and capabilities.
 They were wholly inadequate.
The  Irish  banks  remained  too  slow  to  recognise  the  problem  and  in  many  cases  were  still
reluctant to deal with it.   Furthermore, they did not have credible strategies, nor the operational
capability  to  resolve  it.      Indeed,  there  are  short-term  incentives  for  individual  banks  and
management to try and avoid resolving large scale NPLs, in the hope that economic recovery will
deal with the problem.  But evidence shows that while this reluctance may be understandable at
an individual bank level, the macro impact of not dealing with NPLs is highly problematic for the
system as a whole.
The Central Bank of Ireland therefore became more prescriptive and expectations were clearly
set out to the banks, including: segment specific strategies, detailed implementation plans, and
enhanced board ownership.
Key elements included banks setting out clear plans on how they were going to address NPLs.
Portfolio specific NPL strategies, for example, Mortgage Arrears Resolution Strategies (MARS)
were required from the main lenders. Banks’ boards were required to approve these strategies
encompassing the fair treatment of customers and ensuring adequate capabilities to deal with
each customer.
Consumer  protection  measures  such  as  the  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears  and
enhanced SME protections ran alongside and were interlinked with the prudential measures.
We assessed each lender’s strategy and plans, and reverted with firm-specific feedback, follow
up  actions  and  timelines  in  early  2012.    While  operational  capability  had  been  improved,  we
remained  concerned  that  banks  were  overly  reliant  on  short  term  forbearance  or  “extend  and
pretend” strategies.  In other words, they were still dragging their feet.
So,  to  press  banks  to  implement  longer  term  sustainable  solutions,  we  introduced  Mortgage
Arrears Resolution Targets, underpinned by giving guidance on our view on sustainable solutions
that both protected engaging borrowers as well as driving resolution. We also introduced non-
public SME Targets for banks.
You  will  also  see  that  the  Central  Bank  introduced  and  subsequently  updated  provisioning
guidelines  to  ensure  that  there  was  consistency  and  conservatism  in  the  recognition  and
provisioning of NPLs.
Towards the end of the Programme, in 2013, we then repeated the exercise of assessing the
strength of the banks’ balance sheets, the adequacy of capital and the recognition of NPLs.
We challenged progress every step of the way, going to the outer edge of our remit to do so –
challenging the organisational structure and resource capacity, challenging skills and experience,
challenging  governance  and  oversight,  policies  and  procedures,  workout  strategies  and
execution ability.
We challenged the implementation of the plans, challenged credit management and impairment
recognition,  challenged  provision  coverage  and  collateral  valuations,  challenged  short-term  vs
sustainable resolutions.
And we continue to challenge the Irish banks today.
And while it is slower than I would like, this approach is working. This has been achieved through
better  cohort  by  cohort  borrower  engagement  strategies,  working  out  and  sustainably
restructuring loans, and some portfolio sales. Importantly, legislation has been passed to enable
borrower  protections  to  travel  with  loans  that  have  sold  outside  of  the  banking  system. 
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Accounting write-offs have not yet featured to the extent warranted.
NPLs in Ireland have reduced for fourteen consecutive quarters. It represents a 58% reduction
from  peak,  a  decrease  of  over  €50bn.    In  some  ways,  this  graph  understates  the  progress,
because the NPL ratio has been materially reduced at the same time as there has been a very
sizeable deleveraging in the system – loan books (both good and bad) in aggregate are much
reduced. 
But there remains much more to be done, primarily now on long past due mortgage arrears,
which remain a blight for distressed borrowers, banks, and the system as a whole.
The reason I am recalling recent Irish history, is that, in many respects the journey we took in
Ireland is now being followed at a European level.
Asset quality and balance sheet strength has always been a priority for the SSM, as evidenced
by  the  Comprehensive Assessment  in  2014.    When  it  took  on  supervisory  responsibility  for
Europe’s  banks,  the  NPL  outlook  was  diverse  across  the  euro  area.  While  certain  countries’
banking sectors had, and still have, low NPL ratios, it was recognised that even those countries
5
where banks were not struggling with asset quality, may be affected by spillovers.
Through  the  Comprehensive Assessment,  the  SSM  took  early  action  to  gain  assurance  that
problem loans were recognised and that the system as a whole had sufficient capital to manage
the problem, both under a base and stress scenario, in the same way as it had been done in
Ireland in 2010 / 2011.
Yet  NPLs  have  remained  stubbornly  high.    The  banks’  responses  to  the  NPL  problem  have
disappointed, in the same way as the Irish banks’ initial responses did. 
Issues regarding recognition and provisioning for NPLs persisted.  Strategies and capability for
dealing with them were inadequate.  Individually, banks did not appear sufficiently incentivised to
address  the  problem.    Furthermore,  structural  issues  in  different  jurisdictions  were  causing
significant issues.
Following the establishment of an SSM NPL Taskforce, and much work on data collection and
jurisdictional  differences  and  approaches,  in  March  this  year,  the  ECB  published  the  final
Guidance to banks on non-performing loans. The Guidance sets the SSM’s expectations on NPL
management – and prescribes that banks should implement ambitious yet realistic strategies to
reduce  their  NPLs,  using  a  very  granular,  portfolio-by-portfolio  approach.  They  must  also  set
internal targets to reduce their NPLs. This does not necessarily mean portfolio sales.  The hard
yards  of  engagement  with  distressed  borrowers,  workout,  restructuring  and  right-sizing  debt
must  also  be  cornerstones  of  successful  NPL  reduction.  Banks  should  also  be  taking  action
through their accounts to reflect the reality of the collectability of long dated NPLs.
Those strategies are currently under the scrutiny of the Joint Supervisory Teams (JSTs), and
have become the basis of the day-to-day supervisory dialogue with banks.
It  is  still  early  in  the  process  for  the  implementation  of  the  Guidance,  and  many  banks  have
submitted credible plans. However, many more still need to improve – indeed some were wholly
inadequate and in those cases, banks have been required to resubmit.
The  Supervisory  Review  and  Evaluation  Process  (SREP)  continues  to  underpin  the  SSM’s
approach  to  NPL  resolution  –  imposing  quantitative  capital  and  qualitative  remediation
requirements as part of our annual risk assessment of each significant bank.
Lessons from the Irish crisis
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
I  would  like  to  highlight  three  key  lessons  from  the  Irish  experience  that  are  relevant  from  a
European perspective.
Firstly, left  to  their  own  devices,  individual  banks  will  not  resolve  Europe’s  NPL  problem,  no
matter that it is primarily their responsibility to do so.
Intensive, courageous and outcomes-focused supervision is required.  And it is not just a one-off
effort – it needs to be continuous and persistent, driven by high quality analysis. When we get to
the end of the cycle of work we need to start again at the beginning.
The ECB Guidance to banks on non-performing loans is therefore a very important step towards
NPL resolution across the European banking system.
Secondly, it is clear from the Irish experience is that no single measure will resolve NPLs.
Supervisors  cannot  solve  it  all  alone.    What  has  helped  Ireland  is  the  combination  of  factors:
including NAMA, increasingly intrusive and prescriptive supervisory measures, and some legal
initiatives. The interplay with economic recovery is obviously hugely important also.
As highlighted by the July 2017 ECB stocktake report on national supervisory practice and legal
frameworks related to NPLs, a number of structural obstacles still prevent banks from resolving
their NPLs in a timely fashion across the euro area. These include lengthy legal procedures, tax
and indeed accounting impediments. Action on all fronts is therefore required – even if Member
States do not have high levels of NPLs.
Thirdly, the consequences of a credit boom gone bust are very severe, and can take a huge
amount of time to address.  Whilst we have made significant progress in addressing NPLs in the
Irish  banking  system,  NPL  workout  and  resolution  takes  time,  even  with  a  buoyant  economy.
Early  intervention  is  therefore  critical  in  to  achieve  the  best  outcome  for  both  borrowers  and
banks. 
Moreover, intrusive supervision of current underwriting practices as well as continually assessing
the long term sustainability of business models are crucial to prevent recurrence, even as we are
still dealing with the legacies of the past mistakes.
Conclusion
Much  work  remains  for  the  Irish  banks  to  do,  and  for  European  banks  as  a  whole.  First  and
foremost, banks must act themselves. But where they do not, or are too slow, or not ambitious
enough, it is our job as supervisors to drive them to do so.
In the Central Bank of Ireland, we continue to work tirelessly to earn the trust of the Irish people,
both  in  the  work  we  do  ourselves  and  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  –  such  that  it  is
demonstrably  serving  the  long  term  economic  needs  of  the  country  and  its  customers  in  a
sustainable way.
The Central Bank of Ireland will continue to play an active and supportive role in the SSM, as it
continues  to  build  its  reputation  and  trust  with  the  public  and  with  the  market,  not  least  with
respect to our contribution to the ECB’s work on NPLs.
Thank you for your attention, I look forward to the discussion.
1
2
3
4
I would like to thank Mícheál O’Keeffe, John Cullen and David Duignan for their contribution to my remarks.
Fukuyama, Francis. 1995. Trust: The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. New York: Free Press.
See for example the Central Bank of Ireland Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
4
5
From  January  2003  to  December  2008,  domestic  banks  balance  sheets  grew  from  €233bn  to  €806bn,
respectively. This represented an increase of 345%;
This diversity across countries is noted in Constâncio, Vítor. Resolving Europe’s NPL burden: challenges and
benefits. Bruegel, Brussels, 3 February 2017.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
