Joachim Wuermeling: Keynote speech
Keynote speech by Prof Joachim Wuermeling, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche
Bundesbank,  at  the  Mandarine  Gestion  International  Investment  Conference,  Munich,  18
September 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
I believe that most of your fellow passengers travelling to Munich did not come here for meetings,
but for the “Oktoberfest". The “Oktoberfest” started two days ago – on the 16th of September.
You  can  tell  that  people  in  Munich  think  ahead:  they’re  already  celebrating  October  in  mid-
September.
Talking of “thinking ahead", you could draw a parallel between the “Oktoberfest” and monetary
policy: celebrating the “Oktoberfest” in September is a kind of forward guidance. The Bavarians
announce very early what they expect to happen in the future – October will be here soon.
So the Bavarians are acting just like the Eurosystem, which is made up of the national central
banks  of  euro  area  countries  plus  the  European  Central  Bank.  Forward  guidance  is  now  a
regular part of the statement of the ECB President after every Governing Council meeting. But
forward  guidance  is  not  the  only  instrument  that  was  implemented  by  the  Eurosystem  in
response to the financial crisis: a whole package of non-standard measures was adopted. And
these measures have an impact on financial markets and related investment decisions.
As  portfolio  managers  and  investment  managers,  you  undoubtedly  keep  track  of  these
developments  and  the  statements  made  by  central  bankers. And  thinking  ahead,  you  will  be
probably wondering about the future implementation of monetary policy in the euro area.
Munich is located in a region of breath-taking mountain scenery, and regarding this future path a
number of references to a mountain hiking tour can be made. I shall begin by sketching a general
picture  of  the  current  financial  conditions  –  in  the  same  way  that  you  would  check  what  the
weather is going to be like before going on a hiking tour. In the second part of my speech, I shall
shine light on the implementation of monetary policy in the euro area and its instruments – or to
continue with the image of a hiking tour – the equipment and path that brought us to where we
are today. In my third part, I shall look at how things could unfold in the future. Note the use of the
word “could” – after all, the third section of my speech today will take us well and truly into the
realm of hypothesis, the world of “what ifs” – or, to continue our hiking tour metaphor, the time
after the lunch break on the summit.
2. Financial markets: The current landscape
I would like to start with the current scenery in the financial markets.
As portfolio managers and investment managers, analysing the financial markets is your day-to-
day business. The agenda for tomorrow’s conference gives you a great opportunity to exchange
views on the outlook and trends in financial markets. Therefore, I shall keep my comments on
how we as central bankers see the current financial setting as brief as possible.
For the most part, global equity markets have been developing positively lately, despite emerging
geopolitical tensions. The US S&P 500 index, for example, is chalking up one all-time high after
another. On our side of the Atlantic, the equity markets are currently also posting gains. Although
the EuroStoxx50 and DAX recorded some losses in the course of the year, they were quick to
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
recover from this setback.
The economic outlook for the euro area has improved and if the euro appreciation continues, the
euro area will be more attractive to investors. Looking at the FX market, this segment is sensitive
to  the  expectation  of  market  participants  regarding  the  future  monetary  policy.  Notably,  on  8
September – the day after the ECB press conference – a two-year-high was recorded with an
exchange rate of USD 1.206 against the euro. Since then, the exchange rate has been fluctuating
within a narrow corridor. But to be clear, the exchange rate of the euro is determined by market
forces and it is not a policy target of the Eurosystem.
Activity in the bond market is also determined by the expectations among market participants
concerning future monetary policy. The prospect that the monetary policy of the Eurosystem will
remain very accommodative and the somewhat lowered expectations of a policy hike in the US
are  leading  to  declining  yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  at  the  current  edge.  The  yield
spreads between long-term Bunds and government bonds from the rest of the euro area have
narrowed, as political risks have not materialised.
At the beginning of this year, uncertainty in the euro area was rated much higher. A turbulent year
of  elections  in  many  European  countries  lay  ahead.  One  indicator  measuring  the  economic
policy uncertainty in Europe  is currently moving around its long-term average – in spring, the
indicator was nearly three times higher. The reason for this easing is that the elections in France,
the Netherlands and Austria did not yield a positive outcome for Eurosceptic parties.
1
To sum up this first part we can say that financial markets are currently in quite good shape,
driven by an improved economic outlook, benign political developments and an accommodative
monetary policy stance.
3. The financial crisis: Monetary policy undergoing change
The mandate of the Eurosystem states quite clearly that maintaining price stability in the euro
area is our overriding priority. That is why we conduct monetary policy.
In August, the euro area annual consumer price inflation (HICP) was 1.5%. This is still below the
targeted inflation rate of less than, but close to 2% per year over the medium term. However, the
risk of deflation is now universally considered to be very low. In 2014, things looked different: the
euro area inflation was steadily declining and bottomed out at –0.6% in January 2015. But this
risk has decreased – also supported by our monetary policy measures.
The ECB Governing Council has been pursuing an accommodative monetary policy stance for a
while.  Since  June  2014,  a  move  known  as  quantative  easing  has  been  implemented  by  the
Eurosystem in order to bolster financing conditions for banks and the real economy. At the same
time credit easing has been extended. The main measures were, briefly:
targeted longer-term refinancing operations (also known as TLTROs) that provide financing
to banks for up to four years, with the amount that an individual bank can borrow being linked
to  its  loans  and  lending  patterns  to  the  private  sector,  at  extremely  favourable  (in  some
cases, negative) interest rates;
various asset purchase programmes, grouped under the umbrella acronym APP (expanded
Asset Purchase Programme): an additional covered bond purchase programme (CBPP3);
an  asset-backed  securities  purchase  programme  (ABSPP);  a  corporate  sector  purchase
programme (CSPP); and the large-scale public sector purchase programme (PSPP) as the
main instrument to address weak inflation;
the affirmation that full allotment in regular refinancing operations will continue at least until
the end of 2017;
and in terms of policy rates, a very low interest environment with the main refinancing rate,
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
which has stood at 0% since March 2016, and the negative deposit rate (negative since June
2014; currently –0.4%). These very low rates are expected to remain at their present levels
for an extended period of time, and well past the horizon of net asset purchases under the
APP.
Working in unison, the aim of these instruments is to improve financing conditions – which they
have in fact achieved, to some extent. There has been a significant pick-up in lending since it hit
its lowest point in early 2014, and the same can be said of monetary aggregates. What’s more,
prices are rising more sharply once again – especially if you look beyond the fluctuations caused
by energy prices.
But this comes at a price: all in all, the asset purchases made under the programmes launched
in June 2014 currently total around €2 trillion, with government bonds accounting for almost €1.7
trillion of this. Since June 2014, the Eurosystem’s total assets have increased from €2.2 trillion to
€4.3 trillion. Excess liquidity – in other words, surplus central bank money – currently stands at
around €1.8 trillion.
These  asset  purchases  mark  a  move  deep  into  uncharted  territory  for  European  monetary
policymakers. Eurosystem central banks are now the euro-area countries’ biggest creditors. The
boundaries  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  which  are  of  such  crucial  importance  in  a
monetary  union,  are  becoming  increasingly  blurred.  The  financing  conditions  imposed  on
governments depend to a great extent on the actions of central banks.
You  don’t  need  to  be  a  naysayer  to  fear  that  there  may  be  political  pressure  to  pursue  an
accommodative monetary policy for longer than necessary from a price stability perspective.
4. Where could it go from here?
This part of my speech is about the future path of the monetary policy in the euro area: Where
could it go from here?
The ECB Governing Council alone decides what path to take. It goes without saying that this
includes the decision on whether and, if so, when it would be appropriate to normalise monetary
policy. At its press conference earlier this month, ECB President Mario Draghi, has confirmed
that the framework for this will be re-examined in autumn.
In any case, the current environment is opening up the prospect of no longer needing to further
loosen the reins of monetary policy. Economic recovery is ongoing and risks have been broadly
offset. Political risks in the euro area, at least, are lower and the banking system has become
more stable. The Eurosystem finds itself surrounded by countries all over the world pursuing a
less accommodative monetary policy. Furthermore, prices are going up and the risk of deflation
is universally considered to be very low.
At  the  same  time,  the  marginal  benefit  of  further  purchases  is  steadily  declining,  with  market
participants already bracing themselves for a certain degree of “normalisation".
It is for the ECB Governing Council to decide when and how such a course of normalisation will
take place. I cannot, and would not wish to, speculate on this matter. But I would like to stick to
outlining what could happen from a technical point of view if the ECB Governing Council were to
decide that the time had come to normalise monetary policy.
This means that the Eurosystem in a first step would decrease its net asset purchases – not in
one fell swoop overnight, but with clear prior warning and gradually.
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Note that tapering net purchases isn’t about scaling back the high level of excess liquidity that
has been built up as a result of asset purchases and – mainly targeted longer-term – refinancing
operations.
It’s about curbing the growth rate of central bank money or, in other words, slightly reducing the
monthly amounts additionally provided. Taken by itself, tapering net purchases is not a restrictive
monetary  policy  tool.  Quite  the  opposite:  as  long  as  additional  net  purchases  take  place,  the
already  accommodative  monetary  policy  is  loosened  even  further. And  even  if  net  purchases
were discontinued, monetary policy will remain expansionary.
Concerning the impact of the purchase programme, it is ultimately the stock of assets in the
Eurosystem’s balance sheet which is essential, and less the flow of monthly purchases. Given
that reinvestments of the principal payments from maturing securities purchased under the asset
purchase  programme  take  place,  the  stock  of  securities  held  by  the  Eurosystem  will  not  be
reduced for the time being. As a consequence, and taking into account other monetary policy
instruments in place, the monetary policy stance of the Eurosystem will be accommodative for a
long time to come.
The banking sector would, all other things being equal, still have far more central bank money
than actually needed for several years. Given the abundant supply of central bank money, it can’t
be the money market that is primarily to blame for many people’s concerns about tapering. What
is it, then?
Tapering is suspected of triggering greater volatility and yield increases in those capital market
segments that are targeted by monetary policy purchase programmes, with the impact of this
then potentially spilling over to neighbouring market segments, too. Some market participants are
already anticipating that asset purchases by the Eurosystem will be scaled back in 2018.
That  said,  it’s  hard  to  predict  just  how  the  market  will  react  to  tapering. A  certain  amount  of
volatility is to be expected. But this is only natural when markets seek to rebalance themselves.
With  careful  communication,  the  Eurosystem  can  counteract  major  distortions  and  turmoil.
Furthermore,  market  forces  that  were  recently  impaired  by  the  Eurosystem  may,  to  a  certain
extent, have a stabilising impact on interest rates as net purchases are tapered. We need to
place more trust in such forces.
5. Closing Remarks
Ladies and gentlemen
To  take  up  the  mountain  hiking  metaphor  I  introduced  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  there
comes a time when every hiker wants to leave the most arduous part of the trek behind and see
that mountain hut.
We haven’t got that far yet, though. We are still on the mountain and our journey is far from over.
What’s more, the route that we will take remains unclear. But what we know is that the ECB
Governing Council is our mountain guide. It alone decides which path to take.
In autumn, the ECB Governing Council will re-calibrate the monetary policy instruments beyond
2018. It has been already assured that this will not take place in one fell swoop overnight. And in
any  case,  the  monetary  policy  stance  of  the  Eurosystem  will  be  –  due  to  the  stock  effect  –
accommodative  for  a  long  time  to  come.  This  should  be  considered  when  deciding  on  future
investments.
1
www.policyuncertainty.com/index.html.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
