François Villeroy de Galhau: The future of the euro area - from the
"impossible trinity” to the "growth triangle"
Text of the 6th Annual Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa Lecture by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau,
Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  6th  Annual  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  Brussels
Economic Forum 2017, Brussels, 1 June 2017.
 ​I am grateful to Carine Bouthevillain, Bruno Cabrillac, Laure Carrel, Pavel Diev, Marine Dujardin,
Pierre Jaillet, Eloïse Lecouturier, Céline Mistretta-Belna and Edouard Vidon for their assistance
in preparing these remarks.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a pleasure to be here in Brussels and to speak in front of such a distinguished audience. For
my generation of modest European architects – I was in Maastricht 25 years ago – Tommaso
Padoa-Schioppa  is  one  of  those  great  –  almost  mythical  –  Italian  figures  who  engaged  in
this “Kantian quest for European unity” . So I am honoured to give a lecture named after him. He
would certainly have been very pleased that the majority of French people clearly expressed their
attachment  to  the  euro  on  the  occasion  of  the  French  presidential  election.  Giving  fresh
momentum to the European project is indeed one of the priorities of the new French President.
And  although  I  was  invited  several  months  ago,  and  although  the  Banque  de  France  is  fully
independent of the government, I like to think that my presence here this morning is a sign that
there is renewed interest for the voice of France in Europe.  
1
Europe is once again standing at a crossroads. The 2007–2008 global financial crisis and the
2011  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  the  euro  area  have  left  a  legacy  of  foregone  growth,  high
unemployment, and massive public debts. On top of that, Europe’s security has been directly
affected by the scourge of terrorism that targets our population and our values, and moreover we
have not yet found lasting solutions to the refugee crisis.
2
And yet, despite all these challenges, support for the euro and the European Union is still high:
according to the Eurobarometer survey, 72% of euro area citizens support the euro, the highest
level since 2004 , and more than half of EU citizens feel attached to the European Union . The
clearest signs of this continued support for the European project – despite Brexit, beyond Brexit –
are  the  recent  defeats  of  the  nationalist  parties  and  their  euroscepticism  in  a  number  of
European  countries.  Whenever  the  temptation  of  reverting  to  nationalism  arises,  we  should
remember  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa:  he  liked  to  remind  us  that  the  founding  fathers  of  the
European Union – among whom Robert Schuman, Konrad Adenauer and Alcide de Gasperi –
shared the same motto: “never again a war among us.” In the very uncertain world of 2017, and
with the dangerous hesitations of the new American administration, this is sadly very relevant:
peace remains the first European promise.
3
This is the reason why our common responsibility is to persevere along the path of European
integration. But we cannot continue as before. People expect concrete results. What we need is
not  necessarily  more  Europe,  but  rather  a  “better”  Europe:  less  words,  more  action.  Europe
must be more focused on a few projects, and more efficient. To put it briefly: “let’s do little, but
well, and until the end”. There are naturally some non-economic priority areas such as defence,
border  security,  climate  change  as  well  as  youth  education  and  training  –  for  example  an
Erasmus-pro programme for apprenticeship for the unqualified and unemployed youth. But I will
focus today on the economic field. This is obviously my area of expertise as a central banker.
More  importantly,  there  is  a  strong  relationship  between  economic  prosperity  and  citizens’
attachment to Europe. The policy orientations that I will propose today build and elaborate further
on some ideas that I presented here in Brussels just over a year ago. I am very pleased that the
 1 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
 European  Commission’s  future  of  the  Eurozone  paper  published  yesterday  goes  in  the  same
direction, although with some understandable caution... In my view, this is an additional sign that
we now have a unique momentum in Europe, that we should not let wane.
I  would  like  today  to  elaborate  on  what  I  like  to  see  as  three  economic  triangles.  First,  we
resolved a first incompatibility triangle 18 years ago by achieving our monetary union. Now, we
are  confronted  with  a  second 
the  weaknesses  of
our economic union. Therefore, I think that we now need to implement a compatibility triangle to
boost Europe’s growth and revive the European project.
1.  The  European  monetary  union  has  been  a  successful  answer  to  the  “impossible
trinity” challenge
incompatibility 
triangle,  due 
to 
The first triangle I’d like to dwell on is the famous incompatibility triangle derived from the Mundell-
Fleming  model  of  the  1960’s,  also  known  as  the  “impossible trinity”  or  the  “trilemma”.  This
triangle has been used to argue that it is impossible to reconcile fixed exchange rates, full capital
mobility and national autonomy of monetary policy.
 4
the 
term 
“inconsistent
As  early  as  1982,  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  coined 
quartet”  (quartetto inconciliabile), thereby enlarging the impossible trinity to a fourth goal, free
trade – a pillar of the Treaty of Rome. Let me quote here an analysis by Banca d’Italia : “At first
sight this may appear to be a puzzling choice, since from the strictly analytical standpoint the
inconsistency between the other three elements holds regardless of the presence or absence of
free trade. But in a deeper economic sense, taking trade into consideration was essential, since
the costs and benefits of different positions along that three-way trade-off depend crucially on the
degree of trade integration.” And as Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa wrote in 1988: “ In the long term,
the  only  solution  to  the  inconsistency  is  to  complement  the  internal  market  with  a  monetary
union. [Otherwise] it would be unrealistic to expect the Community to be able to square a circle
that has never been squared.”  The early 1990’s were indeed difficult times for the European
monetary system: several countries were forced to realign their exchange rate or to withdraw
5
6
 2 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
from the mechanism, like for instance Italy in 1992. It was that same year, with the Maastricht
Treaty, that Europe chose to move forward towards a European monetary union.
 Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  was  right  in  his  belief  and  in  his  recommendation  to  create  the
euro. The euro has proven to be a great success which has delivered material benefits.
First, price stability, which is the main objective assigned to the Eurosystem, and which directly
benefits euro area citizens’ purchasing power. In the 18 years since the introduction of the euro
(1999–2016),  inflation  has  stood  at  1.7%  on  average,  compared  with  4.6%  in  the  18  years
preceding the introduction of the euro (1981–1998). Second, lower interest rates, which are the
corollary to the confidence that investors place in our currency, and which can be measured by
the decrease in long-term interest rate spreads vis-à-vis Germany, amounting to between –1.5%
for France and –3.7% for Italy. Third, internal exchange rate stability, and a greater international
role. Today, the euro accounts for 20% of international reserves, second only to the dollar. And
an  internationally  recognised  currency  generates  economic  gains:  financial  markets  are  more
attractive  to  domestic  and  foreign  investors,  more  liquid,  and  thus  more  efficient.  But  it  also
carries a political weight: when Mario Draghi speaks at the G20, the whole world listens to what
Europe has to say.
2. Yet, despite the success of monetary union, Europe’s economy is now confronted with
a new trilemma.
Weaknesses  have  materialised.  Addressing  people’s  expectations  requires  identifying  the
flaws  of  our  Union  in  an  open  and  honest  manner.  Regarding growth,  we  must  distinguish
between the snapshot of the present and the full movie that we have lived through. The present
snapshot is positive: euro area growth is accelerating, and is now up to speed with the United
States or the United Kingdom. However, this is not sufficient to make up the cumulative shortfall
of past years: the full movie until today is that since 2011, the cumulated EU growth trajectory is
7.5 GDP points below the US’. Even when measured per capita, this underperformance amounts
to  5  percentage  points.  And  we  see  the  same  contrast  regarding convergence between
countries. The present snapshot, which is positive, shows that intra-area divergences have been
significantly  reduced  and  are  at  their  lowest  level  since  1999.  But  the  full  movie  up  to  today
 3 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
shows rather wider disparities in income per capita, as a result of the 2009–2012 crises.
To  make  matters  worse,  all  too  often,  Member  States  tend  to  act  in  isolation,  not  taking  into
account  the  externalities  and  the  impact  that  their  policies  have  on  others.  This  leads  to  a
collective suboptimal situation: according to a study by Banque de France staff , the opportunity
cost  of  not  sufficiently  coordinating  our fiscal policies  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  may  have
amounted to 1 to 2 GDP points in the euro area. Moreover, taken together, deficiencies in the
coordination  of  both  our fiscal and structural policies  may  have  cost  between  2  and  3  GDP
points between 2011 and 2013. Although our common monetary policy works well, it cannot be a
substitute for economic policy coordination or for the lack of reforms. In Maastricht, our aim was
to build an Economic and Monetary Union. We have succeeded in Monetary Union, but we have
not delivered on Economic Union.
7
And  so,  in  a  nutshell,  a new  trilemma  has  emerged.  It  now  seems  impossible  for  euro  area
countries to achieve their full growth potential – the first point of the triangle –, if they wish at the
same time to achieve the two other points of the triangle: on the one hand, keeping the autonomy
of their economic policies at the national level; on the other hand, keeping the “Euro framework”
of coordination unchanged, that is to say maintaining the status quo, with a cooperation between
countries based only on rules without institutions and without a common strategy. We have to
drop one of the points of this triangle in order to achieve the other two. To me, the solution is
obviously  for  euro  area  countries  to  refuse  the  status  quo  and  amend  the  “Euro  framework”
towards enhanced policy cooperation. Let me outline what I see as the possible way forward.
3. To boost European growth, this new trilemma has to be turned into a “growth triangle”
We  have  to  get  Economic  Union  moving  forward  again,  thanks  to  what  I  call  the “growth
triangle”.  The  peculiarity  of  this  triangle  is  that  it  is  not  an  incompatibility  triangle  but  a
compatibility triangle. This means that the three goals can and have to be pursued at the same
time  to  deliver  economic  gains.  These  goals,  or  levers,  are:  national  structural  reforms;  the
Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation;  and  a  euro  area  policy-mix  based  on  a  better
coordination of macroeconomic policies. They can be implemented quickly, as at least many of
 4 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
them do not require changing the Treaties.
As  a  central  banker  and  steadfast  European,  this  is  what  I  believe  is  needed  for  a  “better
Europe”. But of course, the decision does not fall to us but to political leaders. Our responsibility
as the Eurosystem is to deliver a monetary policy that is in line with the mandate entrusted to us,
and to make proposals for improving the efficiency of other economic policies.
The first point of my growth triangle is: national structural reforms. They are a prerequisite
for each country to regain credibility in Europe and for unleashing our collective economic growth
potential. Obviously, their intensity should vary depending on the countries.  France and Italy for
instance are lagging behind and have to catch up, whereas other countries like Germany, Spain
or the Netherlands, among others, have succeeded in carrying out in-depth reforms and are now
reaping  the  benefits  in  terms  of  GDP  growth  and  employment.  I  wish  to  stress  that  these
examples show that economic success is fully compatible with the European social model that
we share, which combines high standards of public services and low levels of inequality – much
lower than in American society for instance. And clearly we can now expect an acceleration of
reforms in France: this will be welcome not only for my country, but for Europe as a whole.   
The success of national reforms would be amplified if combined with two European reforms –
the  two  other  points  of  my  triangle. The  first  one  is  microeconomic:  the  creation  of  a
Financing Union for Investment and Innovation (FUII). The need for such a Financing Union
comes both from a weakness, which is the persistent financial fragmentation in the euro area,
and from an opportunity, which is the euro area savings exceeding investment by EUR 350 billion
per  year. An  obvious  way  to  boost  growth  is  therefore  to  better  steer  our  abundant  savings
towards the financing of investment and innovation across borders. And this implies providing
businesses with more equity financing solutions. Europe is lagging far behind in this area: such
financing only represents 68% of GDP in the euro area compared with 128% in the United States
in the fourth quarter of 2016. Creating the Financing Union would magnify the impact of national
reforms:  whereas  they  foster  firms’ willingness to  invest,  the  Financing  Union  would  foster
firm s ’ ability to  invest,  and  they  would  together  foster  microeconomic  dynamics  and
competitiveness.
 5 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  efforts  so  far  are  going  in  the  right  direction,  but  work  should  now  be  accelerated.  The
building  blocks  already  exist:  the  Juncker  investment  plan;  the  Capital  Markets  Union  (CMU),
which supports the diversification of private financing; and the Banking Union, which tackles the
fragmentation  issue.  These  initiatives  have  to  be  brought  together  into  the  FUII  in  order  to  go
beyond administrative or bureaucratic borders, create synergies, and therefore give new impetus
to this agenda. Think for instance of a real European venture capital.
To  be  more  concrete,  progress  towards  a  Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation
requires fleshing out proposals in four key areas:
First, completing the Banking Union. This means, as a priority, finalising the Banking Union’s
second pillar, namely the single resolution. Within a strong Banking Union framework, banks
in the euro area will thus be able to engage in cross-border consolidations on a sound and
safe  basis  and  therefore  contribute  to  further  reducing  financial  fragmentation.  This  also
includes harmonising insolvency regimes for businesses.
Second key area: thoroughly reviewing the incentive schemes for cross-border investments,
notably by promoting further convergence of tax and regulatory regimes.
Third area: expanding the supply of financial intermediation services, be it in the form of new
savings  products  –  more  long-term  and  risk-oriented  –  or  new  market  initiatives  in  green
bonds or private placement for instance.
Fourth area: making sure that vital financial activities and risks for European economies are
properly  controlled.  This  requires  in  particular  relocating  certain  activities  in  the  European
Union, such as euro-denominated clearing activities that are systemically important for the
euro area.
The second reform at the European level is a macroeconomic ambition: a better euro
area policy-mix. This would help offset the short-term pain of national structural reforms before
achieving  the  long-term  gains.  Let  me  be  crystal-clear:  we  should  not  abandon  the existing
rules  that  apply  to  each  Member  State,  including  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact:  rules  are
necessary, but they are not sufficient. What we currently lack is a common direction, despite the
progress brought by the European Semester method. A proper euro area policy-mix requires a
collective economic strategy, whereby Member States “seal a deal” involving each country. Let
us aim, until the end of 2017, for an obvious progress: growth and employment will be stronger in
Europe if we combine more structural reforms where they are needed – in France and Italy for
instance –, and more fiscal or wage support in countries with room for manoeuvre – for example,
Germany and the Netherlands.
Another relatively low-hanging fruit would be a common stabilisation fund equivalent to 1 to 2% of
euro area GDP, which could provide us with a proper macroeconomic stabilisation capacity. I
note  that  this  largely  converges  with  the  Commission’s  proposal  to  create  a  macroeconomic
stabilisation  function  for  the  euro  area.  This  common  stabilisation  fund  would  be  used  under
efficient rules – but not conditional to an adjustment program, contrary to the ESM – to support,
through loans, Member States’ counter-cyclical policies when they are faced with asymmetric
economic shocks. The fund itself would be financed by borrowing.
To definitely succeed in this ambition, the euro area will need a common keystone: an institution
that  fosters  confidence.  Because,  as  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa  put  it:  “complete  and
systematic consistency of [national] policies achieved without any institutional infrastructure is a
dream" .  This  is  why  the  new  French  President  has  proposed  creating  a  euro  area  “finance
minister”, which probably requires modifying the existing Treaties. This finance minister would
embody and bring to fruition the shared commitment of our Member States. As I also mentioned
this idea before , let me share some personal views on the issue. With great respect for the
8
9
 6 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
the  Economic  Commissioner  and 
principle of subsidiarity, the finance minister would need to be: first,  institutionally strong, by
being  both 
the  Eurogroup;
second, democratically  legitimate,  by  being  accountable  to  the  European  Parliament  in  an
adequate  format;  third,  technically  supported,  by  relying  on  a  European  Treasury  –  which
would be largely based on the expertise of European Commission staff – and on an independent
advisory Economic Policy Council, and coordinating the European Stability Mechanism and the
crisis  management  framework;  and  finally, internationally  recognised  as  the  economic
spokesperson of the euro area, alongside the ECB President for monetary policy.
the  President  of 
In the longer term, as mutual trust between euro area countries increases, a last step will have to
be considered to complete our common investment capacity: a genuine euro area budget, led by
the finance minister. This would be a powerful tool. However in no way is this euro area budget to
be confused with a one-way “transfer union” – and here I understand the German fears. It should
potentially  benefit  all  –  not  only  the  weaker  –  euro  area  countries,  and  would  be  rooted  in
increased  economic  convergence.  The  euro  area  budget  would  be  used  to  finance  certain
“European public goods” such  as  digital  technology,  the  energy  transition  or  the  integration  of
refugees. It could also include a European-wide unemployment insurance scheme. And to be
effective, it would need to be able to directly issue common debt – for the future – and/or raise
taxes. Obviously this would be a “quantum leap” in the nature of our Union, which would require
resolute political will, but this is our chance to make a real difference.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by quoting a British citizen, who happened to be one of
the  greatest  Europeans  of  the  past  century.  Winston  Churchill  said  in August  1949 :  “I  am
certain that it is within our powers to overcome the dangers still before us, if we so wish. Our
hopes and our work point to an era of peace, prosperity and abundance and the inexhaustible
wealth and genius of Europe will turn it once again into the very source and inspiration of the
world’s life.” The European Union remains to this day a unique political and economic experiment
that has no equivalent in modern history. And we have from 2017, following the electoral cycle in
Europe, a unique window of opportunity. Nothing should be taken for granted, but much is open.
We should not let this opportunity pass us by. Thank you for your attention.
10
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 “Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa: Economist, policy-maker, citizen in search of European unity”, Speech by Lorenzo
Bini Smaghi, European University Institute, Fiesole, 28 January 2011.
Source: European Commission, Reflection paper on the Deepening of the Economic and Monetary Union, May
2017.
European Commission, Standard Eurobarometer 86, Autumn 2016.
T. Padoa-Schioppa, “Capital Mobility: Why is the Treaty Not Implemented?”, Address to the Second Symposium
of European Banks, Milan, June 1982.
Pietro Catte, The Reform of the International Monetary System, Background note prepared for Conference in
Memory of Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa, Rome, 2011.
T. Padoa-Schioppa, “The European Monetary System: A Long-Term View”, in F. Giavazzi, S. Micossi, M. Miller,
The European Monetary System, Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Banque de France, « Coût des carences de coordination des politiques économiques dans la zone euro »,
Bulletin de la Banque de France, n° 211, Mai-juin 2017. English version: “Cost of the lack of coordination of
economic policies in the euro area”, Quartely Selection of Articles no. 46 (Banque de France Bulletin), to be
published in Summer 2017.
T. Padoa-Schioppa, “Capital Mobility: Why is the Treaty Not Implemented?”, Address to the Second Symposium
of European Banks, Milan, June 1982.
 7 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
9
10
See for instance: speech at Bruegel in Brussels on 22nd March 2016 or speech before the Committee on
Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament on 28 September 2016.
W. Churchill addressing the crowd on place Kléber in Strasbourg on 12th August 1949, day of the First Session
of the Consultative Assembly of the Council of Europe.
 8 / 8
BIS central bankers' speeches
