François Villeroy de Galhau: Ensuring confidence in the currency
Introduction  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the
conference on "Recent monetary policy developments", Paris, 4 May 2017.
 Our  currency,  the  euro,  is  at  the  centre  of  debates  that  are  particularly  important  to  French
citizens. The Banque de France is independent from politics, but in keeping with our mandate
within the French Republic to ensure confidence in the currency, it is my role to provide certain
clarifications. I hear proposals for a dual currency with the return of a national currency in parallel
to a European currency. I must say that such suggestions would put confidence in the currency
in danger.
No advanced economy has this type of parallel circulation. Where two currencies exist (or have
existed) and can be used to make payments, one always inspires less confidence than the other.
Generally,  it  is  the  “national”  currency  that  suffers  –  the  only  one  accessible  to  households,
particularly  poorer  households,  and  to  SMEs.  The  currency  therefore  quickly  loses  its  value,
leading to excessive price increases and a negative impact on purchasing power.
If we were to consider returning to the ECU, it is important to remember that it has not existed for
18 years and was not a real currency: the ECU was a unit of account that could not be used by
either individuals or companies to make payments. Even if it were possible, going back to the
ECU  would  present  major  disadvantages  compared  to  today’s  euro:  until  the  euro  was
introduced,  France  did  not  actually  participate  in  decisions  on  interest  rate  levels  and  had  to
follow  German  monetary  policy;  the  franc  was  at  the  mercy  of  speculative  attacks  from  the
financial markets that drained our currency reserves as we saw in the 1992-1993 period. The
euro was introduced to solve these problems.
Today,  the  euro  is  alive  and  well.  It  is  the  currency  of  340  million  Europeans,  is  recognised
worldwide and is trusted by the people of France. Almost 70% of French citizens are in favour of
the euro because it protects their purchasing power, with prices that increase three times less
rapidly than previously; because it makes borrowing easier, with interest rates that are 1.5% to
3% lower; and because it safeguards the value of their savings.
Finally,  I  would  like  to  add  that  the  Eurosystem  has  not  modified  its  sovereign  debt  purchase
programme in relation to France’s presidential elections. The distribution of monthly purchases
between the various countries is based on the ECB’s capital allocation principle.
 1 / 1
BIS central bankers' speeches
