J u n e   2 2 ,   2 0 1 7 
B a n k   o f   J a p a n 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Aomori 
Kikuo Iwata 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
(English translation based on the Japanese original) 
Introduction 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  today  to  exchange  views  with  administrative, 
financial,  and  business  leaders  in  Aomori  Prefecture.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this 
opportunity  to  express  my  sincere  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  with the activities  of  the 
Bank of Japan's Aomori Branch. 
 Today, I would like to have your views on the actual situation of the local economy, as well 
as  your candid opinions about the Bank's policies and activities. Before exchanging  views 
with you, I will briefly explain the recent economic developments at home and abroad, and 
then touch on some points regarding monetary policy. 
 I. The Current Situation of Economic Activity and Its Outlook 
The economic growth in Japan has taken hold more firmly since last autumn, and the Bank 
judges  that  the  economy  has  been  turning  from  its  moderate  recovery  trend  toward  a 
moderate expansion. Looking ahead, from fiscal 2017 through fiscal 2018, improvement in 
overseas  economies  and  the  government's  large-scale  stimulus  measures  that  were 
formulated  last  year  are  expected  to  clearly  have  positive  effects  on  the  economy.  Under 
these circumstances, Japan's economy is likely to continue expanding and keep growing at a 
pace above its potential, mainly through fiscal 2018. 
 In what follows, I would like to talk about the current situation of Japan's economic activity 
and its outlook in more detail. 
 Let  me  first  touch  on  overseas  economies  affecting  Japan's  economy.  In  the  first  half  of 
2016, pessimistic views about the global economy prevailed; concerns heightened regarding 
the  slowdown  in  emerging  economies  including  China,  and  the  global  financial  markets 
became volatile, triggered by the so-called Brexit. However, the global economy hit bottom 
in the first half of last year, and its growth momentum seems to have strengthened thereafter, 
with  various  economic 
indicators 
improving  markedly.  Specifically, 
remarkable 
improvements  have  been  observed  in  the  manufacturing  sector  and  trade  activity,  both  of 
which  had  lacked  growth  momentum  after  the  global  financial  crisis  (Chart  1).  Their 
positive  effects  have  spread  globally,  and  emerging  economies  --  which  tended  to  lag 
 1 
behind  advanced  economies  --  also  have  been  improving.  In  the  NIEs  and  the  ASEAN 
economies,  for  example,  although  they  were  sluggish  in  2015  and  2016,  their  exports 
clearly have picked up and consumer confidence has improved. In China, the economy has 
continued to see stable growth on the whole, as evidenced by the fact that the  year-on-year 
GDP  growth  rate  for  the  January-March  quarter  of  2017  increased  somewhat  from  the 
previous quarter. 
 Looking forward, growth in emerging economies is expected to become solid on the back of 
the  steady  growth  in  advanced  economies  and  the  effects  of  policy  measures  taken  by 
emerging  economies.  The  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  (WEO)  released  by  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  projects  that  the  global  economic  growth  rate  will 
increase, registering 3.1 percent in 2016, 3.5 percent in 2017, and 3.6 percent in 2018 (Chart 
2). The Bank is also monitoring developments in risk factors and their impacts on the global 
economy;  risks  include  those  of  the  new  U.S.  administration's  economic  policy  and  of 
political situations in Europe, as well as geopolitical risks. 
 Let  me  now  turn  to  Japan's  economy.  Japan's  exports  and  production  have  been  on  an 
increasing trend amid the global improvement mainly in the manufacturing sector and trade 
activity (Chart 3 [left chart]). 
 Against  this  background,  in  the  corporate  sector,  profits  have  been  at  record  high  levels 
(Chart  3  [right  chart]).  Business  sentiment  has  been  favorable  on  the  whole,  and  business 
fixed  investment  has  continued  on  a  moderate  increasing  trend.  A  feature  of  the  current 
economic recovery phase is that improvement in business sentiment has been widely seen, 
not only for firms in metropolitan areas and large firms but also for firms in local areas and 
small  firms.  The  diffusion  indexes  (DIs)  by  region  for  business  conditions  in  the  Tankan 
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) have been positive as a trend for all 
regions  since  the  December  2013  survey  (Chart  4).  The  DIs  by  firm  size  have  been  well 
above zero for large firms as well as small firms (Chart 5). This was not the case with the 
previous  economic  recovery  phase  from  2002  through  2008  before  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
  2 
In the household sector, Japan's labor market conditions have continued to tighten steadily. 
The unemployment rate has declined to the range of 2.5-3.0 percent -- which is virtually full 
employment -- for the first time since 1994. The active job openings-to-applicants ratio has 
risen  to  1.48  times,  the  level  last  seen  in  1974,  exceeding  the  peak  level  observed  in  the 
"asset  bubble"  period  (Chart  6).  Looking  ahead,  labor  market  conditions  are  expected  to 
tighten further as the economy continues growing at a pace above its potential. 
 In this context, some economists argue that labor shortage may constrain Japan's economic 
growth.  However,  I  am  in  dissent  with  this  argument  and  believe  that  labor  shortage  will 
instead  raise  labor  productivity  through,  for  example,  a  gradual  increase  in  labor-saving 
investment, thereby encouraging further economic growth. 
 The  tight  labor  market  conditions  also  have  been  exerting  gradually  increasing  upward 
pressure  on  wages.  In  fact,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  hourly  wages  of  part-time 
employees,  which  are  particularly  sensitive  to  labor  market  conditions,  has  risen  to  the 
range of 2.5-3.0 percent. Furthermore, many firms appear to have raised their base pay for 
the  fourth  consecutive  year  in  the  annual  spring  labor-management  wage  negotiations  this 
year. Base pay rises are especially evident in small and medium-sized firms that face acute 
labor  shortage,  amid  improvement  in  business  conditions  spreading  beyond  large  firms 
(Chart 7). 
 Next,  I  will  talk  about  price  developments.  Although  a  decline  in  energy  prices  since  the 
second  half  of  2014  had  exerted  downward  pressure  on  consumer  prices,  such  pressure 
dissipated and energy prices turned toward pushing up general prices. The year-on-year rate 
of change in the consumer price index (CPI) excluding fresh food has been slightly positive 
since  January  2017.  Meanwhile,  that  in  the  CPI  excluding  fresh  food  and  energy  has 
continued  to  be  positive  as  a  trend  for  around  three  and  a  half  years  (Chart  8).  Japan's 
economy  is  no  longer  in  deflation,  which  is  commonly  defined  as  a  sustained  decline  in 
prices. 
 Nevertheless, we must admit that Japan's inflation has been relatively moderate, despite the 
fact that corporate profits have been at record high levels and the labor market has been  at 
 3 
virtually full employment.  This is in striking contrast to the situations in the United States 
and Europe, where inflation rates have already recovered significantly (Chart 9 [left chart]). 
 What  lies  behind  such  moderate  inflation  is  the  fact  that,  in  Japan,  people's  perception  of 
future price developments -- that is, inflation expectations -- tends to be largely affected by 
actual  inflation  rates,  which  declined  in  the  past.  This  largely  adaptive  formation 
mechanism  of  inflation  expectations  is  unique  to  Japan,  and  is  rarely  observed  in  other 
major economies. In fact, despite the global fall in crude oil prices, inflation expectations in 
the United States and Europe have barely declined (Chart  9 [right chart]). This is  because 
the degree to which inflation expectations are affected by past inflation is  smaller in these 
economies. 
 What  creates  such  differences?  My  answer  is  that  the  forecasts  of  prices  based  on  past 
inflation have performed well in Japan, as the inflation rate was persistently low for a long 
time during the deflationary period since the second half of the 1990s. During this period, if 
the actual inflation rate in the previous year was 0 percent, for example, it was reasonable to 
project that the inflation rate would be 0 percent again in the following year, rather than rise 
to 2 percent. 
 However,  Professor  Milton  Friedman  --  a  distinguished  scholar  of  economics  --  made  the 
following argument, stating that how inflation expectations are formed among the public is 
subject to change. If wages are unchanged in a situation of continued inflation, employees' 
real income will be lost to the extent of inflation. They would not tolerate such a situation 
forever;  rather,  they  eventually  will  start  to  forecast  future  inflation  in  a  forward-looking 
manner  and  demand  wage  increases  based  on  the  forecast.  This  is  an  example  for  wages, 
but  the  same  mechanism  will  be  in  place  for  retail  prices  of  products  and  services;  in  an 
inflationary phase, firms  will start to anticipate future inflation and  raise their retail prices 
based on their forecast. 
 As  for  the  outlook,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  consumer  prices  is  expected  to 
accelerate, as upward pressure on wages heightens amid a further tightening of labor market 
conditions, and as a positive contribution of energy prices to inflation increases. Friedman's 
 4 
argument  suggests  that,  during  this  inflationary  phase,  inflation  expectations  in  Japan  will 
become  less  affected  by  past  inflation,  with  a  gradually  increasing  number  of  people 
formulating  their  inflation  expectations  in  a  forward-looking  manner,  as  is  the  case  in  the 
United States. Furthermore, as I will talk about more later, the Bank will continue to pursue 
powerful  monetary  easing  with  the  aim  of  achieving  its  price  stability  target  of  2  percent. 
Against  this  backdrop,  although  uncertainty  about  future  developments  in  inflation 
expectations  warrant  attention,  Japan's  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  gradually  increase  toward 
the price stability target of 2 percent. 
 II. Thinking behind the Conduct of Monetary Policy 
Next, I would like to talk about the thinking behind the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
Since last September, the Bank has been conducting monetary policy under the framework 
of "Quantitative and  Qualitative Monetary  Easing (QQE) with Yield Curve Control." This 
framework consists of two components (Chart 10). 
 The  first  is  an  inflation-overshooting  commitment.  This  is  the  Bank's  strong  commitment 
that it will continue expanding the monetary base until the year-on-year rate of increase in 
the observed CPI exceeds 2 percent and stays above that level in a stable manner. You may 
wonder  why  monetary  easing  will  be  continued  until  the  inflation  rate  exceeds,  not  just 
reaches,  2  percent.  In  Japan,  the  view  that  prices  will  not  increase  --  the  so-called 
deflationary mindset -- has been entrenched among people under prolonged deflation.  It is 
crucial, therefore, that the public actually experience inflation above 2 percent and thereby 
the perception takes hold among them that prices of goods and services tend to go up every 
year by around 2 percent. With this in mind, the Bank has committed itself to continue with 
large-scale  monetary  expansion  until  such  situation 
is  achieved 
through 
this 
inflation-overshooting commitment. 
 The second component is yield curve control. Under yield curve control, the Bank has been 
facilitating  the  formation  of  the  yield  curve  that  is  considered  most  appropriate  for 
achieving the price stability target of 2 percent, taking account of developments in Japan's 
economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  financial  conditions.  At  present,  the  Bank  sets the 
short-term  policy  interest  rate  at  minus  0.1  percent  and  the  target  level  of  the  10-year 
 5 
Japanese government bond (JGB) yields at around 0 percent, conducting JGB purchases so 
as to achieve this target level. 
 As I explained earlier, although the economic growth in Japan has taken hold more firmly, 
the inflation momentum is not yet sufficiently firm and there is still a long way to go before 
achieving  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  Risks  have  continued to  be  skewed to the 
downside,  particularly  those  regarding  developments  in  overseas  economies  and  in  firms' 
and households' medium- to long-term inflation expectations. Under these circumstances, I 
believe that it is necessary that the Bank persistently pursue monetary easing under "QQE 
with Yield Curve Control," aiming to lower real interest rates, taking advantage of lowered 
nominal interest rates. 
 Now  I  would  like  to  bring  up  my  views  on  two  proposals  recently  heard  from  some 
economists on the Bank's conduct of monetary policy. 
 The  first  proposal  is  that  the  Bank  should  start  raising  interest  rates,  as  the  global 
environment  surrounding  interest  rates  has  been  changing  against  the  background  of  the 
global  economic  growth gaining  momentum  and the  Federal  Reserve  pushing  forward  the 
rate hike process. 
 As  often  pointed  out,  nominal  interest  rates  in  Japan  of  late  are  lower  than  those  in  the 
United States for both short and long maturities (Chart 11). However, it is not nominal but 
real  interest  rates  --  calculated  by  subtracting  inflation  expectations  from  nominal  interest 
rates -- that determine monetary easing effects on the economy. With this in mind, if recent 
real interest  rates  in  Japan  are compared  with  those  in  the  United  States,  it is  evident  that 
long-term real interest rates are lower in Japan while short-term real interest rates are higher. 
This is because inflation expectations are lower in Japan than in the United States. In other 
words, unlike nominal interest rates,  it is not necessarily the case that real interest rates in 
Japan are significantly lower than those in the United States. 
 Moreover, while the inflation rate in the United States  already has been close to 2 percent, 
in Japan there is still a long way to go to achieve the price stability target of 2 percent. This 
 6 
means  that  monetary  easing  is  still  necessary  in  Japan  in  light  of  achieving  the  price 
stability target, and I do not think at all that it is time that we reduce the level of monetary 
accommodation,  which  may  not  be  very  high  at  present  compared  to  that  in  the  United 
States, by raising interest rates. 
 The  second  proposal  is  with  regard  to  the  Bank's  price  stability  target  of  2  percent.  Some 
economists argue that there may be no need to aim at higher inflation than the current level 
as  Japan's  economic  growth  rate  has  been  increasing,  or  that  1  percent  --  instead  of  2 
percent -- is appropriate  for Japan's price stability target  level since the inflation rate does 
not accelerate easily in Japan. 
 To  argue  against  this  kind  of  proposal,  let  me  look  back  on  short-term  interest  rate 
developments in the United States and Japan since the outbreak of the global financial crisis. 
When an economy suffers from a negative shock and demand declines significantly, as was 
the  case  following  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  is  crucial  to  reduce  real  interest  rates 
sufficiently to stop the decline in demand and work toward its prompt recovery. From this 
perspective,  both  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  conducted  monetary  easing 
after the global financial crisis, thereby reducing short-term nominal interest rates to almost 
0 percent (Chart 12). 
 However,  developments  in  real  interest  rates,  which  are  a  determinant  of  monetary  policy 
effects,  show  that  while  short-term  real  interest  rates  in  the  United  States  declined 
significantly  after  the  global  financial  crisis  and  remained  in  negative  territory  thereafter, 
those  in  Japan  actually  increased  and  stayed  in  positive  territory.  It  was  not  until  the 
introduction of QQE in 2013 that short-term real interest rates in Japan started to follow a 
declining trend, entering and then remaining in negative territory. 
 As we have just seen, even though short-term nominal interest rates in Japan and the United 
States  were  reduced  to  0  percent,  the  level  of  short-term  real  interest  rates  in  Japan  was 
higher than that in the United States. This is due to the difference in the levels of  inflation 
expectations,  which  are  subtracted  from  nominal  interest  rates  in  calculating  real  interest 
rates.  Although  inflation  expectations  declined  both  in  the  United  States  and  Japan  right 
 7 
after  the  global  financial  crisis,  you  will  find  striking  differences  between  these  two 
economies in developments following the crisis. In the United States, the extent of decline 
was  only  marginal;  inflation  expectations  soon  bottomed  out  and  have  been  at  around  2 
percent in a stable manner. In Japan, inflation expectations -- which had been much lower 
than those in the United States even before the global financial crisis -- declined to a large 
extent, and thereafter remained in negative territory for a prolonged period until 2013. This 
explains why short-term real interest rates in Japan remained higher than those in the United 
States. 
 By  the  same  token,  the  main  reason  why  the  differential  between  long-term  real  interest 
rates in Japan and those in the United States was far narrower than the differential between 
long-term  nominal  interest  rates  for  the  two  is  because  inflation  expectations  in  Japan 
remained lower than those in the United States (Chart 13). 
 In  Japan,  where  inflation  expectations  are  low  and  tend  to  decline  further  in  a  recession 
period  especially,  real  interest  rates  cannot  be  lowered  sufficiently  to  provide  appropriate 
monetary accommodation, even with nominal interest rates of  0 percent. In contrast, in the 
United States, where inflation expectations have been stable at around 2 percent, a reduction 
in  nominal  interest  rates  will  result  in  a  sufficient  decline  in  real  interest  rates,  providing 
adequate monetary accommodation. In other words, without reducing nominal interest rates 
to  negative  territory  as  in  Japan,  sufficient  monetary  easing  effects  can  be  obtained  in  the 
United States while alleviating impacts on financial institutions of low interest rates. 
 Although  the  epicenter  of  the  global  financial  crisis  was  outside  of  Japan,  its  economy 
suffered  a  more  significant  downturn  thereafter  than  did  those  of  the  United  States  and 
Europe  (Chart  14).  Moreover,  the  price  stability  target  of  2  percent  has  not been achieved 
yet  despite  the  large-scale  monetary  easing  since  the  introduction  of  QQE  in  2013.  It  is 
undeniable that one of the most important factors behind this is that there was limited room 
for  a  reduction  of  real  interest  rates  --  or  for  monetary  easing  --  in  Japan,  as  inflation 
expectations stayed at low levels, or declined significantly, after the global financial crisis. 
  8 
With  these  factors  in  mind,  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  monetary  policy  to  achieve  the 
price stability target of 2 percent, with a view to creating an environment where real interest 
rates  can  be  lowered  sufficiently  and  thereby  the  economy  can  be  supported  effectively 
even  when  adverse  shocks  hit  the  economy.  The  price  stability  target  is  set  at  around  2 
percent  in  many  major  economies,  including  Japan.  This  is  because  of  the  view  shared 
globally  that  it  is  important  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  at  2  percent  and  to  secure 
sufficient room for a reduction of real interest rates, by keeping the inflation rate stable at 
around  2  percent.  Therefore,  when  I  hear  the  kind  of  arguments  in  Japan  that  we  do  not 
need to aim at 2 percent inflation, I wonder whether people have already forgotten the very 
important  lesson  learned  from  the  hard  times  after  the  global  financial  crisis,  as  nearly  a 
decade has passed since then. 
 The  Bank  will  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing  with  the  aim  of  achieving  the  price 
stability target of 2 percent at the earliest possible time. 
 Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  let  me  touch  on  the  economy  of  Aomori  Prefecture.  The  prefecture  can  be 
characterized by prosperous agricultural, forestry, and fishery industries with rich nature, as 
well as a variety of natural, historical, and cultural tourist attractions. 
 In the agricultural, forestry, and fishery industries, the prefecture is Japan's largest producer 
of  many  items  such  as  apples  and  garlic,  with  a  large-scale  and  modern  business  project 
expanding  in  the  livestock  industry  in  recent  years.  Despite  nationwide  sluggishness  in 
these industries, Aomori Prefecture's production is on the rise, at a growth level that is one 
of the highest among all prefectures. The industries have been taking initiatives recently to 
raise  the  value  added  through  enhancement  of  the  products'  brand  images  as  well  as  the 
"sixth  industrialization,"  and  proceeding  with  overseas  expansion  of  their  businesses. 
Steady progress has been made already; "Seiten no hekireki" is gaining attention as a new 
rice brand and "Kuro ninniku," or black garlic, has been increasingly sold in Europe and the 
United States. 
  9 
In the tourist industry, the prefecture is endowed with various attractions such as the natural 
environment  and  its  historical  and  cultural  heritage:  the  Shirakami  Mountains,  which  are 
registered  as  a  world  heritage  site;  Hirosaki  Castle,  which  is  also  famous  for  cherry 
blossoms;  Jomon  period  archeological  sites;  and  the  Nebuta  Festival.  On  top  of  these, 
taking  advantage  of  the  launch  of  the  Hokkaido  Shinkansen  last  year,  the  prefecture  has 
been enhancing tourism promotion in cooperation with the Hakodate area. It also has been 
making great efforts in boosting inbound demand. With these initiatives, the recent growth 
rate in the number of accommodated inbound guests has marked one of the highest figures 
nationwide. The number of cruise ships calling at ports in the prefecture is higher than that 
in  any  other  prefectures  in  the  Tohoku  region,  and  more  foreign  visitors  are  expected  as 
regular international flights have been in operation at Aomori Airport since this May for the 
first time in 22 years. 
 I believe that people in Aomori Prefecture are taking on new challenges, making full use of 
these rich resources. I expect the Bank's Aomori Branch to support these initiatives through 
analysis  of  the  local  economy  and  communication  with  the  public.  In  closing,  let  me 
express my strong hopes for the further development of Aomori Prefecture's economy and 
convey my best regards. 
 Thank you very much for your attention. 
  10 
Japan's Economy and Monetary Policy 
Speech at a Meeting with Business Leaders in Aomori 
  June 22, 2017 
 Kikuo Iwata 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan 
Overseas Economies 
Manufacturing PMI 
Chart 1 
Note:  Figures for the global economy are the J.P.Morgan Global Manufacturing PMI. Figures for advanced economies as well as emerging and  
Notes:commodity-exporting economies are calculated as the weighted averages of the Manufacturing PMI using PPP-adjusted GDP shares of  
Notes:world total GDP from the IMF as weights. Advanced economies consist of the United States, the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Japan.  
           Emerging and commodity-exporting economies consist of 17 countries and regions, including China, South Korea, Taiwan, Russia, and Brazil.  
Sources: IMF; IHS Markit (© and database right IHS Markit Ltd 2017. All rights reserved.); Haver. 
1 
World Economic Outlook Released by the IMF 
Chart 2 
Projections for Major Economies  
(as of April 2017) 
Note: ASEAN5 are Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Viet Nam. 
Source: IMF. 
2 
Exports, Industrial Production, and Corporate Profits 
Chart 3 
Exports and Industrial Production 
Corporate Profits 
 
 
Note: Figures for corporate profits are based on the "Financial Statements Statistics of Corporations by Industry, Quarterly." 
          Excluding "Finance and Insurance."  
Sources: Bank of Japan; Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry. 
3 
Business Conditions by Region (Tankan) 
Chart 4 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
4 
Business Conditions by Size of Enterprise (Tankan) 
Chart 5 
 
 
Note: There is a discontinuity in the data in December 2003 due to a change in the survey framework. 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
5 
Labor Market Conditions 
Chart 6 
Unemployment Rate and Active Job Openings-to-Applicants Ratio 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. 
6 
Nominal Wages 
Chart 7 
Hourly Cash Earnings 
 Scheduled Cash Earnings 
 (Full-Time Employees) 
 
 
Note: For hourly cash earnings, Q1 = March-May, Q2 = June-August, Q3 = September-November, Q4 = December-February.  
          Figures for 2017/Q1 are those of March-April averages. 
Source: Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare. 
7 
Consumer Prices 
Chart 8 
Note: Figures for the CPI are adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the consumption tax rate.  
Source: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications. 
8 
Consumer Prices and Inflation Expectations  
Chart 9 
in Advanced Economies 
Consumer Prices 
 (All Items) 
Inflation Expectations  
(Long-term) 
 
 
Notes: 1. Figures for Japan's CPI (all items)  are adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the consumption tax rate.  
           2. Figures for inflation expectations (long-term) are 6-10 years ahead expectations in the "Consensus Forecasts."  
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; BEA; Eurostat; Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts." 
9 
QQE with Yield Curve Control 
 Chart 10 
Inflation-Overshooting Commitment 
Yield Curve Control 
 
 
 
Source: Bloomberg. 
10 
Nominal and Real Interest Rates (the Most Recent) 
Chart 11 
(1) Short-term (overnight) 
Nominal Interest Rates 
Inflation Expectations 
（≒Observed Inflation Rates) 
Real Interest Rates 
(2) Long-term (10-year) 
Nominal Interest Rates 
Inflation Expectations 
Real Interest Rates 
 
 
Notes: 1. Figures are those of April 2017. Figures for observed inflation rates are the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy)  for Japan and  
               the PCE deflator (all items less food and energy) for the United States.                
           2. Figures for long-term inflation expectations are 6-10 years ahead expectations in the "Consensus Forecasts."  
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts"; Bloomberg; BEA. 
11 
Short-term Interest Rates (O/N) after the Global Financial Crisis 
Nominal Interest Rates 
Inflation Expectations 
(≒Observed Inflation Rates) 
 Real Interest Rates 
Chart 12 
 
 
 
 
Note: Figures for observed inflation rates are the CPI (all items less fresh food and energy, adjusted to exclude the estimated effects of changes in the  
          consumption tax rate)  for Japan and the PCE deflator (all items less food and energy) for the United States.  
Sources: Bloomberg; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; BEA. 
12 
Chart 13 
Long-term Interest Rates (10-Year) after the Global Financial Crisis 
Nominal Interest Rates 
Inflation Expectations 
Real Interest Rates 
 
 
Note: Figures for inflation expectations are 6-10 years ahead expectations in the "Consensus Forecasts."  
Sources: Bloomberg; Consensus Economics Inc., "Consensus Forecasts." 
 
13 
Developments in Real GDP after the Global Financial Crisis 
Chart 14 
Sources: Cabinet Office; BEA; Eurostat. 
14 
