Yves Mersch: Why Europe still needs cash
Contribution by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank,
for Project Syndicate, 28 April 2017.
 Payment systems in Europe are facing upheaval. With the digital revolution offering ever-faster
and more convenient means for settling transactions, cash seems to some to have no future.
But to write off the role of banknotes and coins in the economy would be a mistake.
Non-cash payment options have been proliferating in recent years. Credit cards, online transfers,
and  direct-debit  payments  are  already  well  established.  Now,  smartphone-enabled  digital-
payment  solutions  and  mobile  wallets  are  also  gaining  ground.  The  emergence  of  potentially
disruptive  innovations  like  distributed  ledger  technologies  indicate  that  further  and  possibly
fundamental change may be on the horizon.
Independent of these new and incipient options, there are a number of studies lobbying to abolish
cash. Advocates of a cashless society tend to fall into three distinct camps.
The  first  camp, the alchemists, wants to overcome the restrictions that the zero lower bound
(ZLB) imposes on monetary policy. The second, the law and order camp, wants to cancel the
primary  means  of  payment  for  illicit  activities.  And  the  third  camp, the  fintech  (financial
technology) alliance, anticipates major business opportunities arising from the elimination of the
high storage, issuance, and handling costs of cash that the financial industry currently faces.
But the arguments for going cashless do not withstand scrutiny. Start with the alchemists’ case.
It  is  true  that,  in  an  environment  of  very  low  interest  rates,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy
becomes difficult.
Yet  experience  has  shown  that  the  effective  lower  bound  is  different  from  the  ZLB.  Indeed,
negative interest rates have worked, without triggering a flight to cash, especially when combined
with outright asset purchases, long-term credit operations (including “fixed-rate full allotment” and
“targeted”  variants),  and  forward  guidance.  As  such,  negative  interest  rates  should  be
understood  as  a  specific  non-standard  monetary-policy  instrument  different  from  low  interest
rates.
The law-and-order camp’s case for banning cash also wilts under scrutiny. By acting as a store
of value and a means of payment, cash fulfills an important social function for many law-abiding
citizens. Would anyone suggest forbidding private ownership of luxury cars or gems because
criminals like them? Harming the decent majority in order punish a misbehaving minority would
be like cracking a nut with a sledgehammer – and breaking the table it is on in the process.
Finally, the fintech alliance promises that, with its innovative digital-payment solutions, it can ease
the conduct of financial transactions. Customers would no longer need to carry wads of cash or
search for ATMs. But it is an open question whether the still highly fragmented digital-payment
sector will help customers more than the companies offering the payment solutions.
There is one more major problem with the arguments for a cashless society: most people, at
least in the eurozone, don’t want it. According to an as-yet-unpublished European Central Bank
survey of 65,000 eurozone residents, almost 80% of all point-of-sale transactions are conducted
in cash; and, in terms of value, more than half of payments are made in cash.
As is often the case in Europe, the differences among member states are pronounced: the share
of  cash  transactions  ranges  from  42%  in  Finland  to  92%  in  Malta.  But,  overall,  the  public’s
commitment to cash remains strong – and is becoming stronger.
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  fact,  growth  in  overall  demand  for  cash  is  outpacing  nominal  GDP  growth.  In  the  last  five
years, the average annual growth rate of euro banknotes was 4.9% by value and 6.2% by piece.
This rise includes denominations that are predominantly used for transactions, rather than for
savings.
These  findings  confirm  the  appropriateness  of  the  ECB’s  neutral  stance  on  payments,  which
allows  for  both  cash  and  cashless  payments.  This  approach  is  based  on  four  principles:  (1)
technological  safety,  (2)  efficiency,  (3)  technological  neutrality,  and  (4)  freedom  of  choice  for
users of the respective means of payments.
The ECB’s supreme objective is to ensure price stability. To support that objective, it supplies
safe  central-bank  liquidity,  in  the  form  of  both  bank-held  central-bank  reserves  and  banknotes
(the latter being the sole notes with the status of legal tender in eurozone).
If Europe were to abolish cash, it would cut off people’s only direct link to central-bank money. In
a democracy, such a link helps to foster public acceptance of central-bank independence, by
reinforcing the trust and support of the people in the conduct of effective monetary policymaking.
The ECB will continue to provide banknotes. We will also facilitate the further development of an
integrated, innovative, and competitive market for retail payment solutions in the eurozone. If, one
day, cash is replaced by electronic means of payments, that decision should reflect the will of the
people, not the force of lobby groups.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
