Philip R Lane: Drivers of change in the banking sector
Speech  by  Mr  Philip  R  Lane,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  Banking  and
Payments Federation of Ireland, Dublin, 23 May 2017.
 Good morning. I would like to thank the Banking and Payments Federation of Ireland (BPFI) for
the invitation to speak to you today.
I plan to cover a broad range of topics but with one common theme – that of change and the
primary  drivers  of  change  that  are  affecting  financial  services  and  banking  in  particular.  I  will
consider three broad driving forces. First, while acknowledging that much has been done, further
steps  are  needed  to  resolve  the  continued  legacy  issues  remaining  from  the  crisis  period.
Second, banks face an evolving macro-financial environment, including shifts in the international
regulatory architecture and substantial uncertainty about the future paths for the domestic and
international  economies.  Third,  financial  innovation  is  already  disrupting  the  sector  and  poses
both opportunities and risks over the coming years.
Legacy issues
It is nearly a decade since the onset of the financial crisis. While the economic recovery is well
established, Ireland is still deeply affected by the legacy of the crisis. High outstanding debt levels
and the substantial stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) pose ongoing financial stability risks.
Equally,  consumers  are  entitled  to  fair  treatment  from  banks  and  other  credit  intermediaries,
including in relation to the management of loans that originated during the boom period.
The  Central  Bank  considers  these  issues  from  both  systemic  and  firm-level  perspectives.
System-wide tools such as the new suite of macroprudential capital buffers and macroprudential
mortgage  measures  are  designed  to  increase  the  resilience  of  banks  and  households  and
reduce the risk of future financial crises, especially credit-driven housing bubbles. 
At  an  over-arching  level,  a  fundamental  protection  for  consumers  lies  in  ensuring  that  the
financial system is stable and that the firms that operate within it are financially safe and sound.
In relation to firm-level supervisory strategies, our approach focuses on protecting consumers
through  seeking  to  ensure  their  fair  treatment.  We  also  have  clear  prudential  supervisory
strategies that aim to ensure banks operating in Ireland have business models that will be capital
accretive  over  the  long  term;  are  well  governed,  with  robust  risk  management  and  control
arrangements;  have  sufficient  financial  resources,  including  under  plausible  but  severe  stress
scenarios; and, finally, are on a path to being resolvable in the event of failure.
Notwithstanding  the  improvements  that  have  been  made  across  financial  services,  remaining
issues demonstrate the need for further change, including in the following three areas:
1) Financial strength
The banks operating in Ireland are better capitalised, have returned to profitability in aggregate
and  have  more  stable  funding  models.  It  follows  that  associated  financial  stability  risks  have
declined. That said, significant vulnerabilities remain.
Notably, three of the five domestically-focused retail banks are still majority state-owned (Irish
and  UK),  with  the  State  continuing  to  be  an  important  minority  shareholder  in  a  fourth.  Our
experience from the crisis is that the weakest banks did not survive and even those domestically-
focused banks that did survive required substantial taxpayer support. It follows that access to
private capital is an important mitigant to future financial shocks.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In recent years, there has been significant progress in resolving NPLs in the domestic banks.
NPLs have declined each quarter since the late-2013 peak, with a cumulative reduction of €47
billion or 55 percent. However, NPLs across the domestic retail banks remain elevated at 17.5
percent of loan books, which pose financial stability and consumer protection risks. The current
pace  of  NPL  reduction  is  too  slow:  continued  efforts,  strategy  refreshes,  dedication  and
innovation are needed to speed up the process.
In summary, the balance sheets of domestically-focused banks, while much improved, require
further repair.
2) Governance & culture
Regulators, supervisors and financial services firms have undertaken much work to change and
improve governance, risk management and control arrangements. Yet, this work is not complete
and further work is required to address and embed cultural change. Our inspection work in banks
continues  to  find  far  too  many  issues  in  both  domestically-  and  internationally-focused  banks
relating to (inter alia): governance arrangements; internal control; IT risk; basic levels of control
relating  to  regulatory  reporting;  and  credit  risk  management.  High  profile  performance  failures
persist across all types of financial services firms – notable recent examples in Ireland include
serious failings of basic controls with regard to anti-money laundering, and the systemic, acute
and unacceptable shortcomings in the treatment of tracker mortgage borrowers.
Looking  beyond  the  specific  regulation  breaches,  these  issues  point  to  the  need  for  cultural
change. A recent UK Financial Conduct Authority Paper noted the sizeable challenges faced by
regulators  in  ensuring  compliance  with  the  rules  and  principles,  and  the  associated  need  for
firms to bring morality and ethics to the fore when employees make their decisions.   Our own
work on behaviour and culture has highlighted significant risks of groupthink in some banks and
our cross-industry analysis indicates worrying patterns regarding diversity and inclusion – with
resultant concerns regarding culture and challenge. Furthermore, in line with the Central Bank’s
new  Consumer  Protection  Risk  Assessment  (CPRA)  model,  firms  need  to  ensure  that  the
appropriate  internal  risk  frameworks  are  in  place  to  identify  and  mitigate  risks  to  their
2
customers.
3) Cybersecurity / IT risk
1
Further change is required with respect to mitigating IT risk. The recent cybersecurity incidents
arising from the WannaCry ransomware attack highlight the risks. While we have seen good and
improving  practices  across  many  financial  services  firms,  we  also  have  observed  material
weaknesses  in  basic  management,  including  patching,  that  need  to  be  addressed.  There  are
widespread and fundamental issues across the industry on identifying, detecting and protecting
against cybersecurity risks. These flaws are matched by concerning deficiencies in the capability
of firms to respond and recover from cybersecurity attacks. Together with the management of
legacy infrastructure risks, this creates major change imperatives.
Fortunately, in the case of the recent cybersecurity incident, no bank operating in Ireland was
directly affected. Nonetheless, the threats are real and are increasing in complexity and potential
impact.
Put bluntly, this threat could affect the banking system’s ability to deliver its core functions.
The macro-financial environment
The macro-financial environment for financial services firms in Ireland is changing. While the low
interest rate environment remains in place, the prospect of a reversal in term premia and risk
premia is prominent in discussions in international fora in relation to financial stability risks. There
are  also  significant  international  regulatory  changes  in  progress,  including  in  relation  to  the
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Capital  Requirements  Directive,  the  Basel  Framework  and  the  second  Markets  in  Financial
Instruments Directive.
Given its importance, I will say a few words on Brexit. At this stage, it is impossible to say with
any  certainty  how  Brexit  will  affect  financial  services  across  the  globe.  However,  given  the
importance of London on the global stage, it is clear that there will be sizeable effects – both in
the short and long term. From a systemic perspective, London will undoubtedly remain a major
financial services hub. But it is also seems certain that elements of the capital markets activity
currently undertaken in London will migrate to the remaining European Union members.
The Central Bank has communicated regularly about the implications of Brexit, both in relation to
the economic impact on Ireland, which is expected to be negative, and the relocation of financial
services firms and activities from London to Dublin. Through our economic analysis and stress
testing at a systemic level, we continue to assess and try to mitigate the negative economic risks
arising from Brexit.
We  recognise  that  affected  firms,  their  customers,  and  the  regulatory  community  face
considerable  uncertainty.  We  are  seeking  to  limit  regulatory  uncertainty  through  a  clear
articulation  of  our  approach  and  expectations  of  regulated  firms  and  (in  collaboration  with  our
European  colleagues)  striving  hard  through  the  various  European  institutional  mechanisms  to
minimise  the  instances  of  regulatory  differences  (and  hence  arbitrage  risks)  both  across
countries and sectors.
By ensuring that firms providing financial services activities in the EU do so on the basis of the
same  regulatory  standards  and  requirements  wherever  they  are  located,  firms  can  make
decisions based on other factors. Such considerations will most likely include the legal system,
infrastructure, availability of skilled workers and taxation.
Nonetheless, it is clear that Brexit will alter the financial services landscape and its impact will be
across the industry, both directly and indirectly. 
Over  recent  months,  we  have  received  a  large  number  of  enquiries  from  UK-based  financial
groups and firms thinking about potentially setting up a subsidiary or expanding an existing entity
to maintain their presence in the EU after Brexit. We have had many discussions with such firms
to  explain  how  the  Central  Bank  approaches  regulation  and  supervision  and  to  discuss  their
plans to deal with the significant challenges presented by Brexit.
The Central Bank expects to see a meaningful increase in applications for authorisation or for
extensions  of  existing  business.  We  have  already  received  a  number  of  applications  and  are
reallocating  existing  staff  and  recruiting  new  staff  to  deal  with  Brexit-related  applications  as  a
priority.
Financial innovation
Turning now to my final topic: financial innovation. While I have noted that banking in Ireland has
been  subject  to  significant  changes  in  recent  years,  it  is  also  fair  to  say  that  the  business  of
banking has not changed that materially. The domestic banking system is more concentrated
both as a whole and with regard to the business models of individual banks. Digital channels are
being better exploited but the industry has not been substantially disrupted by technology to date.
Similarly, we have seen change in the business models of international banks (and this may be
accelerated as a result of Brexit) but fundamental business models remain largely unchanged. I
do not think this will last.
Last year, I spoke at the Financial Services Ireland (FSI) on the topic of technological innovation
and financial services.  I shared our understanding of the drivers, potential outcomes, associated
risks and the readiness of financial firms. Much of what I discussed then remains valid today. I
3
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
spoke  about  the  digital  revolution  underway  within  incumbent  firms  to  keep  pace  with  the
increasing consumer demand to move online. I also discussed the associated business model
trade-offs this poses, given the burden of aging legacy infrastructure compounded by the threat
of new entrants.
The  tensions  of  conflicting  forces  at  work  remain.  There  are  signs  that  point  to  degrees  of
consolidation, and indeed cooperation across the sector (as can be seen from cooperation on
technology such as blockchain). There may also be increased fragmentation pressures caused
by new specialist providers and a likelihood of new strategic alliances being formed among larger
incumbents  and  newer  financial  technology  providers.  Whatever  the  outcome,  there  will  be
winners and losers and a “zero failures” objective is not appropriate. As such, we can see a wide
range of risks associated with innovation. For example, we can see:
Increased competition that can erode income streams and reduce profitability; or
New conduct risks from new categories of potential mis-information and mis-selling; or
Increased  operational  risk  due  to  the  intrinsic  characteristics  of  some  new  technologies,
together with elevated implementation risk.
When we assess agility of firms to adapt to such technology pressures, our experiences have
been varied. Some firms have a coherent approach to considering the risks. Many other firms
are less able to invest in innovation due to a continued draw on resources to resolve legacy risks.
Through  resolution  of  such  issues  from  the  past,  their  perspective  must  change  so  that  the
necessary (and overdue) investments are made for the future.
In this light, as the financial services landscape evolves, the Central Bank itself recognises that it
must advance its thinking. Our own frameworks and tools (consumer, prudential, and financial
stability) must change with the evolving geometry of the regulatory perimeter.
In this context, a Fintech working group has been established within the Central Bank. Initially, it
has focused on providing an overview of the fintech sector and stakeholder map of the fintech
ecosystem.  Key  observations  drawn  by  the  group  so  far  include  that  payments  system
innovation is at the forefront in Ireland and that innovation occurring at incumbent firms (rather
than Fintech firms) is likely to have more impact for retail clients, if current trends continue.
Further,  novel  innovations  in  the  markets  sector,  such  as  distributed  ledger  and  crypto
currencies, may present the largest policy challenges given their complexity and novelty. Finally,
we note that many Fintech start-ups will have limited regulatory expertise and this may present
policy challenges in communicating the scope and requirements of the authorisation regime and
the role of the Central Bank.
To conclude my remarks on threats associated with innovation, I would like to discuss the topic
of shadow banking. As documented in the Financial Stability Board’s Shadow Banking Monitoring
Report  2016,  the  Irish  non-bank  financial  intermediary  sector  is  characterised  by  a  variety  of
financial  activities  with  varying  connections  to  other  countries  and  financial  sectors.  Its  size,
including investment funds, money market funds and special purpose vehicles with links to credit
intermediation,  was  just  over  €2  trillion  in  Ireland  at  end-2015.  Non-bank  intermediaries  assist
financial  development  and  economic  growth,  through  intermediation,  risk  diversification  and
promoting  market  efficiencies.  Increasingly,  non-bank  alternatives  are  competing  with  banks,
requiring  the  latter  to  adapt  their  business  models.  Furthermore,  financial  stability  risks  may
arise, given the inter-linkages of the non-bank sector with the international financial system.
The Irish domestic economy has limited direct exposures to the sector, although any adverse
developments in it could cause reputational damage to Ireland.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Conclusion
In conclusion, significant progress has been made in enhancing and improving the resilience,
governance  and  risk  management  in  firms  operating  in  Ireland  today.  However,  our  job  is  not
done yet. We must ensure that prolonged legacy risks are resolved in a spirit that prevents a
recurrence. Central to this endeavour is ensuring that a culture of putting consumers first truly
exists.
A  key  part  of  this  preparation  is  for  financial  services  firms  to  ensure  that  they  improve  their
overall  fitness,  agility  and  ability  to  drive  and  manage  the  continued  change  and  evolutionary
pressures they face. As Socrates outlined: “the secret of change is to focus all of your energy not
on fighting the old, but on building the new.”
I thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
“Behaviour  and  Compliance 
 
See www.fca.org.uk/publication/occasional-papers/op16-24.pdf .
in  Organisations,”  FCA  Occasional  Paper  24,  December  2016.
See Central Bank of Ireland, “A Guide to Consumer Protection Risk Assessment,” March 28th 2017.
“Technological Innovation and Financial Services” Address by Governor Philip R. Lane (16 June 2016)
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
