Jon Nicolaisen: What should the future form of our money be?
Speech by Mr Jon Nicolaisen, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the
Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 25 April 2017.
Origins of the central bank
 The Dutch financier Johan Palmstruch arrived in Stockholm in 1647. Some ten years later, he
was  granted  permission  to  open  a  private  bank,  Stockholms  Banco,  where  he  combined  two
important  innovations.  The  first  of  these,  pioneered  by  Palmstruch,  was  to  use  customer
deposits to fund lending. The second utilised Johannes Gutenberg’s invention, the printing press,
to print the first European banknotes.
Stockholms Banco was authorised to issue banknotes backed by the copper and silver coins in
use at the time. Coins could be deposited at the bank in return for banknotes, and banknotes
could be exchanged for copper and silver at the bank. The banknotes proved to be popular and
were soon in circulation.
Stockholm Banco also offered loans in the form of banknotes. For the Swedish king, Karl Gustav,
this occurred at a convenient time. Wars were in progress that had to be financed, and a bank
that  would  offer  loans  was  like  manna  from  heaven.  King  Karl  Gustav  made  good  use  of  the
money. Sweden’s victory over Denmark-Norway in the 1658 Dano-Swedish War, leading to the
permanent cession to Sweden of the strategically and historically important territory of Båhuslen
in southeastern Norway, was thus at least partly the result of a financial innovation.
Things did not end well for Johan Palmstruch. There were no rules to limit the loans that could be
issued by the bank, and Stockholms Banco’s loans far outstripped the value of the copper and
silver  held  by  the  bank.  Confidence  in  the  banknotes  began  to  evaporate,  and  their  value  fell.
Demand to redeem the banknotes for copper and silver was high, but Stockholms Banco did not
have enough metal to meet the demand, and Sweden experienced its first banking crisis. The
bank was declared bankrupt and was liquidated. Johan Palmstruch was sentenced to death for
irresponsible accounting. The death sentence was subsequently commuted, but Palmstruch had
to spend the rest of his life in prison.
Nonetheless,  the  Stockholms  Banco  crisis  left  a  permanent  legacy:  in  1668,  the  authority  to
conduct banking operations was transferred to a bank that was later to become the Riksbank,
under the direct control of the Swedish parliament, Riksdagen.  The world’s first central bank
2
was born.
What is money?
1
So what is money exactly? The simple answer is that money is a means of payment. It is also a
universally recognised common unit of account. Money has therefore a key role in all financial
transactions – it is a practical means of assigning value to goods and services and of settling
trades.
To  perform  these  functions,  money  must  have  a  fairly  stable  value.  People  will  only  accept
money as payment if they believe it can be used again as a method of payment in the future.
Money must therefore also function as a store of value.
The first coins to be struck, imprinted with the king’s mark as a guarantee of their weight, were
produced in Lydia almost 2500 years ago – with the reverse bearing the mark of King Croesus.
Since then, coins in a variety of metals have been widely used. The currency of Norway was
directly linked to a metal for centuries, until the gold standard was abandoned in 1931.
 1 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Wealth in the form of silver and gold coins can – literally – be a heavy burden. The emergence of
banknotes  that  could  be  exchanged  for  a  specific  monetary  value  in  metal  made  it  easier  to
manage large sums of money. A banknote is in reality a promissory note – an interest-free claim
on the issuer. Its value depends on trust that the issuer will keep his word and that the banknote
proves to have the promised value.
The issue of banknotes by private entities was a fundamentally unstable system. The solution
was to establish central banks in order to build abiding trust in the currency. The Swedish central
bank, the Riksbank, the first central bank in history, was founded because the issue of banknotes
by a private bank – Stockholms Banco – led to a banking crisis. The origins of the US Federal
Reserve are similar: during the so-called “free banking” era, private banks could issue their own
banknotes in various denominations. However, the banks experienced repeated crises, and in
1913, the Federal Reserve was established to stabilise the private banking system.
In the post-war years, the value of western currencies was pegged to gold under the Bretton
Woods system: an ounce of gold was worth USD 35. All the other member countries – including
Norge – agreed to peg their currencies at a fixed rate to the US dollar. The gold standard was
abandoned by President Nixon during the Vietnam War, and the traditional fixed exchange rate
system was terminated in 1971. 
The value of money is no longer linked to precious metals. Today, money is so-called fiat money.
The term derives from the Latin “fiat”, meaning “let it become”.
In his book Sapiens – A Brief History of Humankind, Yuval Noah Harari writes: “Trust is the raw
material from which all types of money are minted”.
And he goes on:
“..., the fact that another person believes in cowry shells, or dollars, or electronic data, is enough
to  strengthen  our  own  belief  in  them,  […].  Christians  and  Muslims  who  could  not  agree  on
religious beliefs could nevertheless agree on a monetary belief, because whereas religion asks
3
us to believe in something, money asks us to believe that other people believe in something.”
Money has value because – and only because – everyone believes in its value. Money is minted
from trust.
But how is this possible? How can money retain stable value in a system exclusively based on
belief and trust?
First, money must be usable. This is the domain of the authorities. All taxes in Norway must be
paid  in  Norwegian  kroner.  The  governments  of  most  countries  have  defined  the  country’s
banknotes and coins as legal tender. This means that a buyer is entitled to make a payment in
the country’s currency, and a seller can require payment in this currency. Legal tender cannot be
refused as payment by either party.  Buyer and seller can of course agree on a different method
of payment if they so wish.
4
Second, trust is related to the role of the central bank. In most countries, it is taken as a matter of
course that the central bank guarantees the value of the currency. The central bank is subject to
democratic  control.  In  Norway, Article  75  of  the  Constitution  states  that  “It  devolves  upon  the
Storting [Norwegian parliament]… to supervise the monetary system of the realm”. At the same
time, the people’s elected representatives have conferred independence on the central bank in
the use of its instruments by means of the Norges Bank Act. This underpins trust in the central
bank and ensures the democratic legitimacy of the system.
For Norway’s founding fathers, another important objective was to ensure that the king and his
government  did  not  have  direct  access  to  the  banknote  printing  press.  Past  experience  had
 2 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
shown that kings were not immune to temptation.
The stability of the value of the currency in Norway is guaranteed by Norges Bank, and ultimately
by  the  Norwegian  government.  The  authorities  have  delegated  this  task  to  Norges  Bank  and
decided that the Bank’s monetary policy objective is to keep inflation low and stable. The inflation
target is quantified in the regulation on monetary policy as annual consumer price inflation over
time of close to 2.5 percent. The Bank’s policy instrument is the key policy rate. Confidence that
inflation will be kept low and stable is underpinned by the central bank’s independence. Norges
Bank has a clear mandate and an independent position. This fosters trust in the Bank’s ability to
do its job. 
But  a  regulation  defining  the  inflation  target  and  central  bank  independence  are  not  enough.
Confidence  in  the  inflation  target  can  only  be  upheld  if  the  central  bank  actually  ensures  that
inflation is low and stable over time, thereby maintaining monetary stability. Credibility and trust
are built up over time. In Norway, inflation has been low and stable for a quarter of a century. As
the expression goes, the proof of the pudding is in the eating.
How is money created?
Today, there are two forms of central bank money. One of the forms is common knowledge –
banknotes and coins. The other, bank reserves at Norges Bank, is less well known. The sum
total of banknotes and coins and bank reserves at Norges Bank is about NOK 85 billion.  But the
total money supply is much larger than this. Customer deposits in banks are also money. These
deposits, referred to as deposit money, total more than NOK 2 trillion in Norway. This money is
created by banks, not by Norges Bank.
5
 Chart 1 shows the money supply and the supply of banknotes and coins in Norway since 1960.
In Norway, the money supply mainly comprises deposit money in banks.   In  the  early  1960s,
banknotes and coins accounted for a fifth of the money supply. Current accounts and cheques
were  already  becoming  commonplace.  Since  then,  banks’  deposit  money  has  increased
dramatically,  and  today,  banknotes  and  coins  make  up  less  than  2.5  percent  of  the  money
supply. In other words, virtually all the money we use has been created by banks.
6
 3 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
So how do banks create money? The answer to that question comes as quite a surprise to most
people.
When you borrow from a bank, the bank credits your bank account. The deposit – the money – is
created by the bank the moment it issues the loan. The bank does not transfer the money from
someone else’s bank account or from a vault full of money. The money lent to you by the bank
has been created by the bank itself – out of nothing: fiat – let it become.
The money created by the bank does not disappear when it leaves your account. If you use it to
make a payment, it is just transferred to the recipient’s account. The money is only removed
from circulation when someone uses their deposits to repay a bank, as when we make a loan
repayment.  The money supply is therefore only reduced when banks’ claims on the rest of the
economy decrease.
7
Banks also fund lending by raising loans themselves instead of creating money in the form of
deposits.  In  order  to  reduce  risk,  banks  also  use  other  forms  of  investment  in  addition  to
lending.  Nevertheless, the money supply is growing at almost at the same pace as total bank
credit.
8
To sum up: banks create money out of nothing and withdraw it when loans are repaid. Growth in
9
total bank credit is normally matched by growth in the money supply.
This does not sound encouraging. Is money an illusion? Why is today’s privately issued deposit
money often perceived to be as safe as money issued by the central bank?
First and foremost, maintaining confidence that the deposits are safe is the responsibility of the
banks.  If  a  bank  takes  on  too  much  risk,  trust  in  that  bank  will  be  impaired.  For  trust  to  be
maintained, it is essential that a bank operates responsibly.
Customer  deposits  in  Norway  are  also  covered  by  a  deposit  guarantee.  For  customers  with
accounts  in  Norwegian  banks,  the  guarantee  covers  deposits  of  up  to  NOK  2  million  per
depositor per bank. This guarantee is provided by the Norwegian Banks’ Guarantee Fund, a joint
deposit insurance scheme funded by Norwegian banks.
Nonetheless, probably the most important factor is that the banking sector is one of the most
highly regulated sectors in society and is subject to strict supervision. A bank cannot operate
without a licence, and banks are required to satisfy a number of requirements relating to capital
adequacy  and  liquidity  management,  all  of  which  limit  bank  lending  and  money  creation.
Norwegian banks cannot behave as Stockholms Banco did in the 1600s. By ensuring that banks
are solid and sufficiently liquid, regulation and supervision also underpin trust in the money we
use.
The financial crisis in autumn 2008 was triggered by the collapse of an under-regulated financial
institution – the Lehman Brothers investment bank.
 In the years preceding the crisis, Lehman’s
equity was less than two percent of its assets. With so little capital supporting loans, it does not
take more than a puff of wind to bring down a house of cards.
New forms of payment and new forms of money
10
Trust is necessary, though not sufficient, for money to function as a universal means of payment.
It must also be efficient and safe to use.
When you make a payment in a shop using a bank card, one of the largest systems we have is
set  in  motion.  Payments  move  back  and  forth  between  banks.  Banks  settle  the  payments  by
transferring  money  between  their  accounts  at  Norges  Bank.  Your  payment  then  becomes
available in the recipient’s account, normally a few hours after the payment process was initiated.
 4 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
The hub of the payment system in Norway is Norges Bank’s settlement system, and it is our
responsibility  to  make  sure  the  system  is  efficient  and  reliable.  Turnover  is  substantial,  and
transactions totalling close to NOK 240 billion were settled by Norges Bank in 2016 – every day.
As a society, we are completely dependent on the smooth functioning of the payment system.
Without a stable settlement system, it would not be possible to use customer deposits in bank
accounts as a means of payment, and substantial resources are allocated, both by banks and by
Norges Bank, to make the system as robust and efficient as possible.
Technological  innovation  continues  to  bring  us  new  methods  of  payment.  Using  smartphone
apps  such  as  Vipps  and  MobilePay,  we  can  now  make  payments  using  our  mobile  phones.
Technology giants such as Apple, Samsung and Google are also entering the payment market.
Suppliers of goods and services are making their own apps and linking them to bonus and loyalty
programmes. Although this may be a positive trend for many people, it comes at a price. It is
difficult for us as consumers to keep track of the information we disclose and how it is used. This
poses a challenge to data privacy and the security of the payment system.
The apps are only a customer interface. Behind them lie international card schemes such as
Visa and Mastercard. Even though users do not cover costs directly, the costs involved in using
these schemes are high, making these solutions an expensive alternative for banks. Eventually,
banks’ customers foot the bill one way or another.
Cheaper alternatives are on their way. The new solutions could also result in faster payments.
National payment card schemes, such as BankAxept in Norway, might provide an alternative to
the  international  card  schemes,  including  access  to  the  new  services.  New  regulations  have
been  introduced  to  lower  the  costs  related  to  international  cards.  A  new  EU  regulation  also
provides for direct bank-to-bank payments, bypassing the card schemes entirely.
Technological innovation has given us not only new methods of payment, but also new forms of
money – so-called e-money. E-money is electronic money issued by non-bank entities, but in
existing  currencies.  Paypal  customers  can  make  payments  through  their  Paypal  account.
Facebook  has  recently  applied  for  a  Europe-wide  e-money  licence.  If  large  providers  offer  an
attractive, user-friendly solution, this method of payment could become widespread. A key issue
related  to  e-money  is  the  question  of  consumer  trust.  E-money  is  a  claim  on  the issuing
company. E-money is not backed by a deposit insurance scheme or any authority.
Other companies are offering new forms of money – often in the form of a new currency – on
closed  platforms  such  as  social  networks  and  online  games.  Examples  of  such  platform
currencies are Amazon Coins, the virtual currency used in the online game World of Warcraft
and Chinese Q Coins. These currencies might seem insignificant, but they have already been
used as means of payment outside their own platforms.
A number of private digital currencies have also appeared. Some have gained ground in terms of
turnover and use, while others were introduced for purely fraudulent purposes and have rapidly
disappeared.  The  largest  and  best-known  digital  currency  is  Bitcoin,  which  was  launched  in
2009. Bitcoin has been the subject of widespread debate, but still has only a minor role in the
payment  system.  Payment  by  Bitcoin  is  costly,  and  the  system’s  capacity  is  limited.  Bitcoin
prices  have  been  highly  volatile. A  characteristic  of  private  currencies  such  as  bitcoin  is  the
absence  of  any  central  institution  backing  the  currency.  But  this  is  also  a  problem,  making  it
difficult to establish the trust necessary for a widespread adoption of these currencies.
Cybercrime
New  technology  and  new  forms  of  payment  are  raising  fundamental  questions  related  to  the
security  of  the  payment  system.  Cybercrime  is  evolving  rapidly,  with  cyberattacks  becoming
increasingly advanced and well-organised.
 5 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
Central banks are also targeted. In February last year, an attempt was made to steal USD 950
million  from  the  central  bank  of  Bangladesh.  Most  of  the  payments  were  stopped,  but  in  the
course of 48 hours, USD 81 million had found its way to a bank in the Philippines. A few days
later, more than USD 60 million had disappeared through Philippine casinos. As far as I know,
the money trail stopped there.
All the institutions involved in our payment system are devoting increasing resources to prevent
cyberattacks, from banks and Norges Bank to our security authorities. However, we can never
be  completely  certain  that  the  system  will  be  able  to  resist  all  possible  attacks.  We  can  lose
money too. Ultimately, there may come a time when our systems have to be shut down for a
period.
We need to be prepared for a situation where the payment system – or parts of it – has to be
shut down for a period. Contingency arrangements must provide protection against a wide range
of incidents, not just cyberattacks. These arrangements primarily comprise a number of reserve
solutions  in  our  electronic  systems.  Our  ultimate  contingency  and  reserve  solution  is  our
banknotes and coins. This part of our contingency arrangements must be strengthened. On the
advice  of  Norges  Bank  and  Finanstilsynet  (Financial  Supervisory  Authority  of  Norway),  the
Ministry of Finance recently circulated a consultation paper proposing a regulation to ensure the
availability of cash in a contingency.
What should the future form of money be?
The role of banknotes and coins, which have been our central bank money since Norges Bank
was founded a little more than 200 years ago, continues to diminish. Everyday payments are
increasingly  made  using  deposit  money  in  bank  accounts.  New  forms  of  payment  are  a  new
stage of this trend. This prompts the following question: what should the future form of money
be?
There are perhaps some who believe that deposit money will ultimately become the sole means
of payment. Because Norwegian banks are well-run and well-capitalised, and because customer
deposits are covered by the deposit guarantee scheme, we trust deposit money. As long as this
is the case, using deposit money will be cheap and efficient for the consumer. But is it entirely
unproblematic?
Imagine an ordinary consumer, let’s call him Ola, in a future when cash is no longer in frequent
use. Ola hasn’t been to a bank for many years. He hasn’t used cash for a long time. He pays for
everything  digitally.  But  now  he’s  worried.  Over  the  past  few  weeks,  there  have  been  several
major cyberattacks against the bank he uses. The bank’s systems have been down for hours at
a time, and staff are working overtime to fix the problem.
Ola decides he wants his money.
He logs on to his online bank, which for the time being is still open. He considers his options: he
could transfer his money to an account in another bank. Or he could transfer money to a pre-paid
card. But Ola does not trust either option. Who is really behind these solutions? How safe are
they now?
Ola decides he wants cash and contacts his bank. But the bank cannot meet his request as it is
currently unable to provide Norwegian banknotes. Ola faces the same options as before: use an
account in another bank? or a payment card? The only option that does not involve using another
bank account is to buy bitcoins. Ola does not want to do this. Perhaps he is a little stubborn. He
wants cash.
The bank clerk is patient. He tells Ola that the bank can offer dollar or euro banknotes. Ola sees
no alternative and withdraws euro banknotes. But he soon encounters another problem. In order
 6 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
to use this currency to make purchases in Norway, the shop has to accept payment in euros. If
not,  Ola  will  have  to  deposit  the  euro  banknotes  in  his  bank  account  in  order  to  make  the
payment – bringing him back to square one.
What has been lost here?
First, Ola has become completely dependent on a third party – the bank: payments can no longer
be made directly between two parties, but must be channelled through a bank, a card company
or  an  app.  Today,  you  can  settle  a  payment  at  a  shop  or  with  a  neighbour  in  cash,  without
involving anyone else.
Second, Ola has become dependent on the technology functioning as it should. Technology is
not needed to settle payments in cash – as long as cash is available.
Third, Ola is no longer anonymous when he makes a payment. All payment transactions using
deposit  money  can  be  recorded. Anonymous  payments  are  often  associated  with  something
negative, such as tax evasion or other criminal activity. But there is another side to anonymity –
privacy. We may not be entirely comfortable with the thought that every purchase we make is
recorded.  It  may  be  too  reminiscent  of  the  society  described  in  George  Orwell’s  70-year-old
novel 1984.
Fourth, Ola no longer has access to money directly backed by Norwegian authorities. We no
longer  have  functional  legal  tender.  The  monetary  system  has  been  turned  over  to  private
entities. Alternatively, Ola has to use another country’s currency – in our hypothetical case, the
euro.
We  have  to  ask  ourselves:  should  we  allow  private  solutions  to  compete  freely  in  developing
means of payment, or must the authorities play a role?
The crucial factor is whether solutions based on private money deliver the characteristics the
payment system should have. The system must be able to channel payments swiftly, safely, at
low cost and in a user-friendly manner. The means of payment itself – our money – must be
universal, because money is only useful if it is widely used. This requires trust.
Deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  banking  regulation  promote  trust.  The  objective  of  monetary
policy is to maintain stability in the value of the currency. Norges Bank assists private operators
in implementing faster and safer payments. We cooperate with other authorities to oversee and
supervise the payment infrastructure to ensure robustness and efficiency. Privacy rules prevent
unauthorised access to payment information.
But there are some characteristics deposit money lacks. It cannot offer anonymous payments.
The system is vulnerable to advanced attacks. Having more money on deposit than is covered
by the deposit guarantee scheme involves risk. Nor is direct and immediate settlement between
two parties, without the involvement of a third party, possible without cash.
In  the  future,  new  payment  solutions  may  be  able  to  offer  these  possibilities.  Private  digital
currencies providing anonymity are already on the market. These currencies can also be used
even  if  banks’  systems  fail  –  as  long  as  the  Internet  is  still  functioning.  The  same  applies  to
platform currencies and e-money. However, there are other crucial characteristics missing from
these  solutions  –  they  are  not  backed  by  any  authority  and  the  level  of  foreign  exchange  and
credit risk can be high.
One alternative currently being discussed is the introduction of electronic central bank money.
There are several ways of achieving this: consumers can have an account either at the central
bank itself or in a system controlled by the central bank. Another possible solution is for Norges
Bank  to  issue  a  payment  card  or  develop  an  app  for  consumers  to  use  for  anonymous
 7 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
payments.
Which brings us to another question: which means of payment should be the statutory form of
legal tender in Norway if we introduce electronic central bank money? Should it be banknotes and
coins, or Norges Bank’s electronic money, or both?
We must also ask ourselves what the consequences will be for the banking system. For many
consumers, electronic central bank money could provide an alternative to deposit money in a
bank, as cash does today. Banks can attract deposits through the interest rates they offer. But
their ability to create money and extend credit could nonetheless be affected, especially if this
new form of electronic money enters into widespread use.
Norges Bank has begun the work of assessing what the future form of money should be. This is
a long-term process. Whatever the conclusion, we can be fairly certain that banknotes and coins
will be with us for many years yet. Deposit money in banks will most likely continue to be the
dominant means of payment, even if electronic central bank money is introduced. Nevertheless,
the very fact that these questions are being raised heralds a new era for our monetary system.
Choosing the direction our future monetary system and payment system will take requires not
only  economists,  but  also  technologists,  lawyers  and  other  social  scientists.  And  political
decisions will ultimately need to be made by our elected representatives. It devolves upon the
Storting to supervise the monetary system of the realm.
The  questions  are  numerous,  but  we  already  have  one  of  the  answers.  Central  banks  were
established to build confidence in the monetary system. That is still our primary task. We cannot
leave the monetary system entirely in the hands of private entities. There will be a role for central
bank money. We must have a legislative framework and a means of payment backed by the
authorities to ensure trust in our money – as history has shown. 
Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
www.riksbank.se/en/The-Riksbank/History/Important-date/1590-1668/
For more details about the story of Stockholms Banco and the origins of the Riksbank, see the  Riksbank
website www.riksbank.se/en/The-Riksbank/History/
Harari, Y.N. (2011) Sapiens: a brief history of humankind. Vintage Books, London, pp. 201 and 207.
Definitions of legal tender vary across countries. Danish banknotes and coins, for example, are legal tender in
Denmark, but this is a right for the payer and an obligation for the recipient of the payment, and not vice versa.
See "Report  on  the  Role  of  Cash  in  Society",  The  Danish  Payment  Council, August  2016:  and  Danmarks
Nationalbank's Monetary Review, 3rd Quarter 2006, "Legal Tender".
Bank reserves at Norges Bank are not included in the total money supply (M1, M2 and M3) as these reserves
are financial institutions’ claims on other financial institutions. Claims between financial institutions or from the
public sector are not included in the money supply.
We refer here to the money supply measure M3, which includes time deposits, repurchase agreements, and
bonds and short-term paper with a maturity of less than two years. We do not show M1, which only includes
cash and customer deposits in banks, because there are substantial breaks in our historical series and M3 is
comprised  almost  exclusively  of  deposits.  In  February  2017,  repurchase  agreements  and  bonds  were  0.4
percent of M3. Time deposits represented a somewhat larger share at 9 percent of the money supply. For more
details  on  money  supply  statistics,  see ssb.no/en/bank-og-finansmarked/statistikker/pengemengde.    For  a
review of Norway’s monetary history, see Eitrheim, Ø., J.T. Klovland and L.F. Øksendal (2017).  A  monetary
history of Norway, 1816-2016, Cambridge University Press.
Deposit money is also reduced when customers withdraw cash. However, since cash is part of the money
supply, the total money supply in the economy does not change.
 8 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
8
9
10
In isolation, diversification reduces banks’ funding risk. Increased use of wholesale funding may lead to slower
growth in the money supply than in credit. Banks also hold liquidity portfolios containing highly liquid securities
that can be sold to compensate for deposit withdrawals. This also reduces banks’ risk.
For a more detailed explanation of how money is created by banks, see “Money creation in a modern economy”,
Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin2014/Q1, and Bernhardsen, T., A. Kloster and O. Syrstad (2016) “Alternative
virkemidler  i  pengepolitikken  –  Den  nødvendige  monetære  økosirk”  . Staff  Memo12/2016.  Norges  Bank
(Norwegian only).
Lehman Brothers was an investment bank and did not accept customer deposits. However, as the bank issued
short-term paper and took part in repurchase agreements, which are included in M3, Lehman Brothers created
money. The closure of Lehman Brothers led to investor flight from money market funds, very high money market
volatility and higher demand for cash from US bank customers.
 9 / 9
BIS central bankers' speeches
