Ravi Menon: The rise of Asian banking
Speech  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the
Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance, jointly organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco and the Monetary Authority of Singapore, Singapore, 29 May 2017.
 Dr John Williams, President and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco,
Distinguished guests, colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.
Welcome to Singapore once again for this year’s Symposium on Asian Banking and Finance,
jointly organised by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco and the Monetary Authority of
Singapore.
Let me say what a delight it has been for us at the MAS working with John and his colleagues at
the San Francisco Fed, putting together this event. 
     2017 marks the tenth anniversary of the Symposium. It is also the third year that MAS is
partnering the San Francisco Fed to host the event.
     This Symposium has been providing a high-quality platform for policy-makers, industry
captains, and academics to exchange views on global finance.
          It  stands  out  from  other  conferences  for  its  focus  on  bringing Asian  voices  to  the
discussions.
We at the MAS have a soft spot for this event, as it represents a milestone in our long-standing
relationship with the San Francisco Fed – a relationship that dates back to the time current Fed
Chair Janet Yellen was at the helm, before she handed over to John.
     One person at the San Franciso Fed that we had a close working relationship with was
Teresa Curran, who passed away last year. 
     We will miss her, her professionalism, and her passion for the Asia-Pacific region.
Since this is a symposium on Asian banking and finance, let me share some quick thoughts on
the subject:
     how Asian banks have stepped up in recent years to play a greater role in the region;
     how they are dealing with the challenges posed by today’s environment; and
     how they are positioning themselves for a digital future.
Asian banks have stepped up
Asian banks emerged from the global financial crisis with stronger fundamentals relative to their
global peers.
          The  crisis  revealed  glaring  weaknesses  in  many  global  banks.  This  led  to  the
implementation of wide-ranging regulatory reforms.
     These weaknesses were less pronounced in Asian banks, which had already built up
significant buffers following the Asian Financial Crisis.
     Asian banks’ strong deposit funding placed them in a strong position to meet the new,
higher global standards.
Helped by stronger fundamentals, Asian banks have stepped up in regional markets where global
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
banks have retreated.
First, they have increased their lending to the region significantly.
     In 2007, Asian banks accounted for just a third of all international claims  to the region. 
2
Today, they account for more than 60% of non-local lending to the region . 
     This increase comes on the back of a decline in lending by Euro-area banks – over the
same  period,  their  share  decreased  from  around  a  third  to  less  than  15%  as  they  pulled
back from the region.
1
Second, Asian banks have been acquiring the Asian business lines from global banks, especially
in wealth management.
     In 2013, Sumitomo Mitsui Banking Corporation bought over SocGen’s Japanese private
banking arm.
          And  just  late  last  year,  OCBC  Bank  acquired  Barclays’  wealth  and  investment
management business in Singapore and Hong Kong.
Even as Asian banks push for growth, they continue to maintain high prudential standards.
     The average Tier 1 capital ratio of Asian banks was 13.4% as of last year, up from 10.6%
in 2008 and comfortably above the Basel minimum requirement of 6%.
     Key Asian jurisdictions who are members of the Financial Stability Board – including
China,  Japan,  Indonesia,  Korea,  Hong  Kong  and  Singapore  –  have  been  assessed  to  be
compliant or largely compliant with the Basel Committee’s capital and liquidity standards.
          Several  other  Asian  countries  –  Malaysia,  Philippines  and  Thailand  –  have  also
implemented the Basel III rules.
Asian banks are dealing with cyclical headwinds
The major Asian banks’ sound prudential standards position them well to face the challenges in
the current environment – ranging from geopolitical risks to heightened policy uncertainty in the
advanced economies.
The post-crisis operating environment has been difficult for banks around the world.
          European  bank  profitability  remains  depressed  seven  years  after  the  global  financial
crisis, with return on equity or RoE averaging below 3%.
     Asian banks have also not been spared, though they have done better.
The RoE of Asian banks has been declining in recent years, and is currently hovering around
8%.
A recent study  by MAS  found that three cyclical factors have driven the decline in Asian bank
profitability.
3
     First, weaker global economic growth has affected credit demand in the region, leading to
slower loan growth.
     Second, prolonged accommodative monetary policy in the advanced economies has
compressed  domestic  interest  rate  spreads  in  Asia.  This  has  reduced  banks’  interest
income.
     Third, asset quality has declined, as non-performing loans (NPLs) have risen in many
regional economies.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
But an increase in NPLs must be viewed in perspective.
          Banks  are  in  the  business  of  intermediating  risk.    When  risks  materialise  –  as  they
sometimes do when those who borrow get into difficulties – NPLs must rise.
     This may be odd for a regulator to say – but if NPLs did not rise at all during difficult
times, then the banks are probably not lending enough or taking on sufficient risk to promote
business expansion or enterprise.
 What is important is: 
Is the rise in NPLs manageable and contained?
Are problem loans being monitored closely and classified prudently?
Are provisions made proactively and conservatively?
Take for example Singapore. NPLs have risen amidst a weakening economic environment and
emerging asset quality risks in the oil and gas (O&G) sector, which has been weighed down by
low oil prices.
     But our banks’ exposure to the O&G sector is contained.
The banking system’s aggregate exposure to the O&G sector is around 10%.
For local banks, this figure is lower at 6-7%.
 Banks in Singapore have also made adequate provisions for their overall NPLs.
The overall provisioning cover for the banking system, as a percentage of total unsecured
NPLs, is above 100%.
The local banks’ provisioning cover is even higher, at above 200%.
The good news for Asian banks is that these cyclical headwinds should pass in time.
          Growth  is  recovering,  monetary  policy  is  normalising,  and  commodity  prices  are
stabilising.
Asian banks are positioning for Asian growth and a digital future
And that takes us to the medium to long term. The prospects for Asian banks are good – chiefly
because the prospects for Asian economies are good.
     The region is expected to continue registering relatively high growth rates in the medium
term – about 6% on average over the next 5 years, compared to the global average of 3.7%.
          Higher  Asian  incomes  will  drive  demand  for  financial  services,  leading  to  more
opportunities in banking.
At the same time, financial inclusion remains low in many parts of Asia.
     A 2015 World Bank study found that of the 2 billion adults on the planet with no bank
3
accounts, more than half were in East and South Asia  . 
         A  more  recent  study  by  the ADB  covering  Cambodia,  Indonesia,  Myanmar  and  the
Philippines found significant gaps between demand and supply in several financial services,
4
including payments, savings, and credit  .
Interestingly, the authors estimated that using digital finance to enhance financial inclusion
would  boost  GDP  by  between  9-14%  in  large  economies  such  as  Indonesia  and  the
Philippines, and up to as much as 32% in Cambodia.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Global banks will continue to play an important role in the region, especially in wholesale banking
and the intermediation of US Dollar flows.  But the onus largely falls on Asian banks to expand
financial  inclusion,  especially  at  the  retail  and  small  business  level.  Using  innovative  FinTech
solutions,  they  can  mobilise  untapped  savings  and  provide  access  to  credit  for  under-banked
individuals and businesses.
Asia is fertile ground for digital innovation in banking. 
     In Indonesia and Vietnam, only around a third of the population is formally banked. 
     Yet, their mobile phone penetration rates are above 100% – that’s more than one phone
per person on average!
     Coupled with a young and tech-savvy population, what we have is a ripe environment for
mobile banking.
And we are seeing interesting innovations across Asia, bringing banking services to the broader
population.
In Indonesia, the Financial Services Authority (OJK) runs a branchless banking programme with
participant banks.
          Called  Laku  Pandai,  or  “smart  man”,  the  programme  offers  banking  and  financial
services to the under-banked, supported by mobile phones and IT facilities.
DBS Bank is collaborating with peer-to-peer (p2p) lending platforms to cross-refer clients.
     DBS will refer to the p2p lenders some of the smaller businesses that it is unable to lend
to. 
          In  return,  the  p2p  lenders  will  refer  borrowers  who  have  completed  two  successful
rounds of fund raising to DBS for larger commercial loans and other financial solutions such
as cash management.
The road to financial inclusion is neither short nor easy. But it is an important one.
     Broadening access to financial services will offer Asian banks – and FinTechs – the
opportunity to grow their business while serving a social purpose.
          Financial  inclusion  will  be  a  key  priority  in  the  economic  co-operation  agenda  when
Singapore assumes the chairmanship of ASEAN next year.
Conclusion
You will be discussing many of these issues in the days ahead. I look forward to hearing your
insights.
It leaves me now to hand over to John Williams for his keynote address.  He will speak on US
monetary  policy  –  a  subject  of  evergreen  interest  to  the  financial  industry  and  central  banks
around the world.
I look out for John’s speeches not so much for clues to what the Fed might do next – though that
is of course of great interest too – but for the original insights John provides on some of the deep,
conceptual issues in monetary policy. 
          John  has  made  thought-provoking  contributions  in  areas  such  as  the  natural  rate  of
interest, or r*, and nominal GDP or price level targeting for monetary policy.
It  is  my  pleasure  now  to  invite  John  to  share  with  us  his  insights  on  how  we  should  view
monetary policy in a changing world.
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
1
2
3
4
BIS’  definition  of  international  claims  comprises  cross-border  claims  and  local  claims  of  foreign  banks’
affiliates in foreign currency.
2 Based on a presentation by E Remolona (2017), “Bank flows in EMEAP: Neither a lender nor a borrower be”.
See also E Remolona and I Shim (2015), “The rise of regional banking in Asian and the Pacific”, BIS Quarterly
Review, September 2015.
4 World Bank (2015), “The Global Findex Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion around the World”.
5 Asian Development Bank (2017), “Accelerating Financial Inclusion in South-East Asia with Digital Finance”.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
