Sharon  Donnery:  Communication,  calibration  and  coordination  –
challenges implementing macroprudential policy in the euro area
Speech  by  Ms  Sharon  Donnery,  Deputy  Governor  (Central  Banking)  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Ireland,  at  the  second  ECB  Macroprudential  Policy  and  Research  Conference,  Frankfurt  am
Main, 12 May 2017.
 I would like to thank  Mark  Cassidy,  Martin  O’Brien,  Eoin  O’Brien,  Mícheál  O’Keeffe  and  Jean
Quin for their contribution to my remarks.
Vice-President, distinguished guests, it is a pleasure to speak on this policy panel today.
Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  years  in  developing  the  EU’s  macroprudential
framework and much credit for this must go to institutions like the ECB, ESRB and European
Commission, as well as national macroprudential authorities.
The  manner  in  which  we  now  conduct  macroprudential  policy  emerged  in  the  context  of  the
global financial crisis and recession. The relative impact of these and the interaction with diverse
domestic factors has led to a policy framework which, in broad terms, shares common themes
and objectives, while also reflecting important country and region-specific characteristics.
It is timely that we now consider our broader framework in the EU as the economic recovery has
become more firmly established, and we see a normalisation of the financial cycle. 
At the same time, we are potentially presented with broader and more diverse sources of risk
than  when  the  parameters  of  the  current  framework  were  being  designed.  These  include  the
increasing  role  of  non-banks  in  financial  intermediation  and  the  challenges  arising  from  the
decision of the United Kingdom to leave the EU.
To date, we have learned ‘a lot by doing’, and indeed a lot has been done in the establishment of
1
the framework and the activation of macroprudential policy instruments across the EU.
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  my  remarks  on  some  of  the  challenges  in  implementing
macroprudential policy through borrower-based measures for the mortgage market. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Ireland  introduced  caps  on  loan-to-value  (LTV)  and  loan-to-income  (LTI)
ratios in early 2015. Both the introduction of the measures and the first review in 2016, threw up
some interesting challenges, some of which I would like to share with you today.  These include
the need to frequently communicate on the objectives of the measures and the need to regularly
review  their  impact  and  effectiveness.  More  generally,  some  other  challenging  issues  with
respect  to  these  instruments  include  whether  there  should  be  a  more  coordinated  European
framework for their introduction. 
 Communication
Borrower-based measures such as loan-to-value and debt-service-to-income, debt-to-income or
loan-to-income ratios have been introduced in a number of European Member States over recent
years.
Prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  these  type  of  measures  were  deployed  in  mainly  non-European
countries  (including  South  Korea,  Hong  Kong,  Singapore  and  others)  and  there  is  empirical
evidence  regarding  their  potential  effectiveness  in  reducing  risks  to  financial  stability.   The
2
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
evidence however is rarely clear cut and the impact of such measures can vary depending on,
among other things, characteristics of national housing markets and the position in the financial
cycle. 
Whilst  subject  to  intense  debate,  when  we  introduced  the  mortgage  measures  in  2015,  the
legacy  of  the  crisis  was  still  at  the  forefront  of  many  people’s  minds.  This,  to  some  degree,
facilitated the subsequent broad societal understanding and acceptance of the measures.
Our  two  primary  objectives  when  introducing  these  measures  were,  first,  enhancing  the
resilience of households and banks to economic and financial shocks and, second, reducing in a
structural way the pro-cyclicality that can be inherent in housing and credit markets by capping
the amount of high LTV and LTI mortgages allowed at any time. 
However, while we have emphasised in all our public communications that it is not our objective
to target house prices, this has proven in fact to be a very difficult message to get across to the
public. Underlying much of the public discourse on the mortgage rules is the central issue of
affordability. In this context, it has been challenging to explain (i) that house prices are determined
by a complex interaction of supply and demand side factors, (ii) that although our measures may
impact on prices – that is not their primary goal, and (iii) that housing market policy issues like
taxes,  building  measures  and  the  shortage  of  supply  of  housing  for  buyers  and  renters  are
outside of our remit.
Our view is that not only would it be extremely difficult to choose an appropriate target for house
prices but also extremely difficult to hit this target. Financial sector regulations cannot address
these issues, which must instead be addressed by other targeted policies.  To banks, we have
also had to carefully explain that these are limits, not targets. We continue to monitor their risk
appetites in this regard.
3
Figure  1  shows  the  recent  history  of  property  prices  in  Ireland.  It  also  shows  some  uptick  in
mortgage lending across some segments of the market. Although the overall numbers remain
modest because of the scale of deleveraging following the crisis, the volume of new lending is
going  up.  In  terms  of  transactions,  cash  buyers  continued  to  account  for  a  large  relative
4
proportion of activity, at 42% in 2016.
Given  these  market  dynamics,  existing  supply  constraints  and  strong  demand  factors  are
unlikely  to  moderate  significantly  in  the  short  term.  This  requires  us  to  reinforce  our
communication of the objectives of these measures.
 Calibration
In terms of their design, the measures create a framework which allows us to better take into
account the balance of risks to the economy, by adjusting the parameters according to current
market conditions.  Having this flexibility is particularly important for a small open economy like
Ireland.
5
The  mortgage  measures  are  complementary  to  existing  microprudential  supervision  and  to
lenders’ own risk management practices. They are not intended to capture all aspects of credit
risk associated with the borrower, nor to replace or substitute for a bank’s existing internal credit
assessment policies and procedures. Rather they are designed to reinforce and strengthen the
6
existing suite of credit risk mitigation tools employed by prudent lenders.
Following the crisis, we introduced comprehensive loan-level reporting requirements on the main
Irish  banks.  This  data  provides  information  on  a  wide  range  of  loan  characteristics  including
outstanding  balances,  loan  terms  and  loan  repayment  for  the  population  of  mortgage  and
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
consumer loans and is critical in the calibration and evaluation of the measures. The activation of
our Central Credit Register in June will further enhance our analytical capacity with respect to our
evaluation of the measures. It may also facilitate us in moving toward a debt-to-income ratio in
the future.
Our measures, as initially calibrated, set out a loan-to-income ratio of 3.5 as the anchor of the
framework, with the value of loans exceeding the LTI limit of 3.5 not to be greater than 20% of
new lending in a given year. This only applies to primary dwelling homes and there is no LTI limit
for investment purchases.  A maximum LTV of 80% was set for non-first time buyers.  For first
time buyers a higher cap of 90% applied for house purchases for the first €220,000 and the 80%
LTV then applied to that part of the value of the house above €220,000. Banks were allowed to
issue up to 15% of their primary dwelling home (PDH) loans above these LTV limits on an annual
basis.  We apply a more stringent limit to the purchase of houses for investment purposes and
here the limit is 70% LTV, with up to 10% of new lending on this basis allowed above the limit.
 At the time of introduction of the measures, we committed to regular reviews of their impact and
effectiveness.  This  we  believe  represents  good  practice,  and  mitigates  against  any  potential
inaction bias. It is also consistent with the commitment for quarterly reviews of counter-cyclical
capital buffer (CCyB) settings and annual reviews of the identification of, and buffer setting for,
other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs) as prescribed in CRR/CRD IV.
The review process was overseen by a new Macroprudential Measures Committee and involved
a range of analytical projects looking at issues such as borrower impact, the early performance
of  the  measures  against  the  stated  objectives,  and  any  side  effects,  including  in  relation  to
impact  on  the  rental  market,  or  leakages.    To  enhance  transparency  and  understanding,
research outputs on all these issues and records of the meetings are published on the Central
7
Bank’s website.
In addition, feedback from external stakeholders was gathered through a call for evidence on the
impact of the measures. Submissions were received from a variety of property and construction
industry  stakeholders,  financial  services  firms  and  groups,  political  parties,  government
departments, academics and individual members of the public. The submissions were a very
useful input for our review, and were also published on the Central Bank of Ireland’s website.
It is obviously the case that it was very early after their initial introduction to be able to find much
causal  impact  from  the  introduction  of  the  measures,  but  still  our  review  threw  up  some
interesting findings and resulted in some changes to the design of our policies.
We saw a reduction in high LTV mortgages and simulations from loan-loss forecasting models
indicate that resilience of banks and households increased. We found that the introduction of the
measures had an immediate and material impact in moderating price expectations.  Actual price
increases also moderated although it is more difficult to ascribe any causality to our measures. 
In general, we found that the overall framework of the measures is appropriate and effective in
meeting  the  objectives.  Nonetheless,  following  our  2016  review  some  changes  to  these
parameters were applied to improve the sustainability and effectiveness of the overall framework.
Most notably the higher 90 per cent LTV available to first time buyers is now available at all house
prices.  The change was in part to avoid a situation whereby the €220,000 cut-off point would
have  to  be  recalibrated  at  regular  periods  as  house  prices  increased.  This  change  was  also
supported by new research findings of lower credit risk for first time buyers at all house price
levels.
The other main change arising from the review was to the structure of proportionate caps such
that  instead  of  a  LTV  allowance  of  15  per  cent  for  all  owner-occupier  mortgages,  separate
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
allowances for first time buyers (5 per cent) and second and subsequent buyers (20 per cent)
are now allowed.
High levels of household indebtedness and a large number of households in mortgage arrears
and/or  with  negative  or  low  positive  equity  in  their  houses,  are  prominent  features  of  the  Irish
residential real estate market. Whilst not materially affecting the amount of allowances available,
differentiating the allowances of first time buyers and second and subsequent buyers allows for a
more precise calibration of the rules by borrower type if in future they need to be tightened or
loosened in response to emerging risks and developments in the property market.
Negative  equity  borrowers  are  exempt  from  the  measures. As  more  second  and  subsequent
buyers  move  from  negative  equity  into  small  levels  of  positive  equity,  the  higher  level  of
exemptions will ensure the measures would not act as an excessively binding constraint.
 Taking communication and calibration together, people broadly understood the rationale for the
limited refinements and minor recalibration of the framework. However, with such levels of house
price increases, we have found the need to communicate that policy stability is important for both
households  and  banks.  As  central  banks,  we  have  the  responsibility  to  reduce  regulatory
uncertainty and therefore annual reviews are most appropriate.  In the case of the LTV/LTI caps,
it is intended that the annual reviews will allow for both evaluation of the structural design of the
framework,  analysis  of  any  side  effects  or  unintended  consequences,  and  assessment  of
whether the parameters are calibrated appropriately for current housing and credit conditions.
8
***
Coordination
The experience so far in Ireland corresponds with the broad international experience as to the
effectiveness  of  borrower-based  measures  for  the  mortgage  market  given  country-specific
features.  A framework for transparent and accountable policy making in this space, supported
by consistently communicated, well-defined objectives and related evidence base, are necessary
conditions for their acceptance and effectiveness.
At  present  national  macroprudential  authorities  play  the  central  role  implementing  borrower
based  measures.  The  ESRB  however  has  an  important  coordinating  role  via  the  notification
process. National authorities also benefit in their deliberations from interactions with the ECB.
The ECB also has an important ‘top-up’ power with regard to capital-based instruments like the
CCyB and O-SII buffers.
The impact of borrower based measures when they are binding is much more evident to the
public at large than capital and liquidity restrictions imposed directly on banks. Borrower-based
measures can have important distributional and welfare effects in society, particularly in relation
to access to home ownership.  These factors underline the importance of getting the design of
the  measures  right,  taking  into  consideration  country-specific  factors,  and  also  the  need  to
communicate the overall framework and ensure it becomes generally acceptable in society as a
permanent feature of the mortgage market. 
As well as the wide range of national-specific institutional features which influence the design and
calibration of such instruments, this suggests that responsible authorities must be accountable
at national level. Although,  we  should  be  humble  enough  to  acknowledge  that  the  interactions
between macroprudential policy measures may not be fully or correctly identified ex ante.
Significant  progress  has  been  made  in  the  analytical  toolkit  to  support  macroprudential  policy
across the euro area, as was outlined in some of the presentations yesterday. As policy-makers
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
we should continue to  draw  on  this  input,  encourage  its  further  development,  and  understand
where judgement in evaluating policies impact, effectiveness and interactions is necessary.  In
this  regard,  particularly  as  we  are  still  in  the  early  stages  of  an  active  macroprudential  policy
framework in Europe, we should aim to avoid underlaps to ensure systemic risk is mitigated.  As
the  framework  in  the  EU  develops,  national  designated  authorities  should  continue  to  have  a
sufficiently broad set of tools to target identified systemic risks.  We should continue to learn by
doing.    Combined  with  a  commitment  to  regularly,  rigorously  and  transparently  review  policy
measures, we will ensure the most effective tools are in operation, both in isolation and jointly, to
mitigate systemic risk.    
***
Conclusion
Today, I have touched on a number of challenges that we have before us when considering the
appropriate macroprudential policy framework for Europe.  As we well know, past performance is
no guarantee of future returns.  However, I believe we can look back at the first generation of the
EU macroprudential policy framework and how it has been adopted at both national and at Union
level in a broadly positive light. 
Important  features  should  remain,  such  as  the  prominent  role  national  authorities  have  in
identifying  systemic  risk  and  designing  policy  measures,  the  effective  cooperation  across  the
euro area and ESRB and the appropriate acknowledgement of the implications of our policies in
other  dimensions  and  countries.    While  the  challenges  we  face  are  ever-changing,  the
foundations we have laid and the commitment shown over the past few years can give us some
confidence going forward.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
 By the end of 2016, legislation formally establishing national macroprudential authorities had been passed in
26 Member States and there has been a very high level of effective operationalisation of the framework. National
authorities in the EU and Norway had notified the ESRB of 83 significant measures in the three years up to end-
2016. See ‘A Review of Macroprudential Policy in the EU in 2016’, ESRB, April 2017.
Cerutti,  Eugenio,  Claessens,  Stijn  and  Laeven,  Luc,  (2015),  The  use  and  effectiveness  of  macroprudential
policies: new evidence. Journal of Financial Stability. 2016, November: 11.
See FAQ – Outcome of the Review of Mortgage Measures, 23 November 2016.
For  a  fuller  discussion  see  Coates,  Dermot,  McNeill,  Joe  and  Brendan  Williams,  (2016),  Estimating  Cash
Buyers and Transaction Volumes in the Residential Property Sector in Ireland, 2000–2014, Central Bank of
Ireland  Quarterly  Bulletin  03  /  July  16.    The  full  year  2016  estimate  is  derived  using  data  on  mortgage
drawdowns from the BPFI and the Residential Property Price data from the CSO.
See ‘Lessons from the past, safeguarding stability for the future’ Address by Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor
of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  at  the  Centre  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (CEPR)  Economic  History
Symposium, Dublin, 9 June 2016.
See Review of residential mortgage lending requirements.
Records of the Macroprudential Measures Committee meetings. Accompanying research papers regarding the
mortgage measures, submissions and feedback statements are also published.
See ‘Macroprudential policy: action in the face of uncertainty’. Address by Sharon Donnery, Deputy Governor of
the Central Bank of Ireland at the Dublin Economic Workshop Annual Economic Policy Conference. 24 Sep
2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
