 PLATFORM FOR DISCUSSION  
   EVENT:   BIS Meeting of the Working Party on  
   Monetary Policy in Central and Eastern Europe 
    DATE:     9–10 February 2017 
  
LOCATION: Budapest, Hungary 
 NATIONAL BANK OF THE REPUBLIC 
OF MACEDONIA 
    info@nbrm.mk 
    www.nbrm.mk 
      Lingering low interest rate environment and monetary accommodation in the 
euro area - impact on the region? 
 Anita Angelovska Bezhoska, Vice Governor of NBRM 
Ana Mitreska, Director, MPRD1, NBRM 
Sultanija Bojceva Terzijan, Deputy Director, MPRD, NBRM 
                                                            
1 Monetary Policy and Research Department. 
Lingering low interest rate environment and monetary accommodation in the Euro Area – 
impact on the region? 
  A  decade  after  the  global  crisis  outburst,  withdrawal  of  the  ECB  unprecedented  monetary 
stimulus seems distant. The low interest rate environment, breaking of the nominal zero lower bound 
frontier and the enormous balance sheet of the central bank, linger on, being a reflection of the economic 
malaise  and  low  inflation.  Decisive  standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy2  action  supported  the 
impaired financial markets and impacted the terms of financing and hence the recovery of the Euro Area 
economy.  Yet,  the  growth  agenda  is  to  be  completed,  as  healthy  expansion  is  still  not  achieved  and 
balance sheet crisis in the Euro zone is still present. Albeit for solving the growth puzzle a larger focus on 
structural policies and productivity growth is called, it is more than obvious that accommodative monetary 
stance of the ECB will persist in the forthcoming period, as a tool for growth support and for closing the 
gap between the current inflation and the medium term inflation target. 
Chart 1: ECB balance sheet and key interest rate (%) 
Source: ECB, WEO and Federal Reserve Economic Data 
Having  in  mind  the  magnitude  of  the  monetary  accommodation  and  the  fact  that  ECB 
tapering  seems  remote,  this  note  investigates  the  effects  the  monetary  accommodation 
produces on the countries in the Central and South-Eastern Europe3. All economies in the region 
are  open  economies  with  strong  trade  and  financial  linkages  with  the  EU.  Thus,  there  are  a  couple  of 
channels  through  which  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  of  the  ECB  may  be  transmitted  to  the 
                                                           
2Since  2009  ECB  adopted  a  number  of  asset  purchase  measures  aimed  at  stabilizing  dysfunctional  financial  markets.  Given  the 
importance of the bank finance for the non-financial sector, the ECB undertook specific measures targeted at covered bond market, 
which is an important source of liquidity for banks. To ensure adequate depth and liquidity at secondary markets for government 
securities  and  increase  the  investors’  confidence  in  2010  Securities  Market  Program  and  later  on  in  2012  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions were implemented. To support the lending to the private sector a credit easing package was introduced in 2014. To 
address the risk of prolonged period of low inflation, at the beginning of 2015 the Expanded Asset Purchase Program was adopted. 
3Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Bulgaria,  Croatia,  Czech  Republic,  Estonia,  Hungary,  Latvia,  Lithuania,  Macedonia,  Poland, 
Romania, Serbia, Slovenia.  
region. In this analysis we will focus on the financial channel, i.e., on the extent to which eased financial 
conditions due to the ECB’s unprecedented monetary stimulus has affected the financial conditions in the 
region.  First,  we  will  tackle  the  question  on  the  synchronization  between  the  changes  in  ECB  rate  and 
policy rates in the region, and subsequently the transmission to banks’ lending rate as an indicator for the 
financing conditions of the private sector. In this context we will also touch upon the issue of the spread 
between foreign and domestic interest rates as an important factor that influences the room for monetary 
policy maneuver of the central banks in the region, especially for economies with some form of managed 
exchange rate regime. Given the fact that in many economies, the banking system predominantly relies 
on domestic sources of financing, we will also take a look at the impact on the yield on savings. Second, 
the ECB monetary policy through the quantitative easing, flooded the system with liquidity, part of which 
potentially could be allocated into the region. Therefore, we will analyze the financial flows in the region 
to better understand the abundance of the flows, changes in the pattern and in their structure. Third, we 
will explore whether the suppressed interest rates in the Euro Area have impacted the cost of sovereign 
borrowing of the government. 
Despite  the heterogeneity  of  the  monetary policy and exchange rate regimes  in  the region, 
the policy rate reaction of the central banks has been mostly in line with the accommodative 
stance of the ECB. In general, low interest rate environment in the Euro zone allowed a room for lower 
interest rates in the region, without any major disturbances in the external sector. At the very beginning 
of  the  crisis,  some  of  the  countries  due  to  some  specific  constraints  were  not  able  to  follow  the  ECB 
actions,  while  since  2009  almost  all  economies  followed  a  loosening  pattern.  This  was  the  case  for 
Macedonia, where the central bank initially tightened, as well in 2016, as a response to pressures on the 
exchange  rate,  which  is  a  primary  concern  in  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  Hungary  was  in  a  similar 
position, tightening the monetary policy stance, as a reaction to the pressures on the domestic currency 
and rising risk premium. In Serbia, apart from the tightening at the crisis outburst, it was also observed 
in 2010 and 2012, in presence of large deviation of the inflation from the inflation target. Yet, excluding 
these “episodes”, the monetary policy stance in the region was lax, with policy rates declining across the 
board. The most recent data point to an average adjustment of policy rates close to 4.5 p.p. since 2007, 
which is a somewhat bigger adjustment compared with the change of the ECB policy rate (4 p.p.). The 
adjustment ranged between 1 p.p. in Macedonia and 6.6 p.p. in Hungary. Hence, the spread to the Euro 
Area  rate  narrowed  in  most  of  the  economies,  which  was  particularly  pronounced  after  2012,  when  a 
debate  on  the  future  of  the  single  currency  came  to  the  fore.  In  such  a  context,  when  the  anchor 
currency  undergoes  a  crisis,  the  compression  of  the  spreads  seemed  unlikely  to  become  a  hurdle  for 
capital influx in the countries in the region. 
 Chart 2: Central bank policy rates  
Source: Central Banks’ internet pages. 
 The eased monetary stance across of the central banks in the region led to loosening of the 
financial conditions for borrowing of the  private sector. The scrutiny of the lending interest rate 
data  reveals  that  the  downward  adjustment  of  the  cost  of  credit  is  visible  in  all  of  the  countries  in  the 
region. The ease of the lending rates was pertinent both for households and corporate sector, though in 
some of the countries, like the Baltic States, Romania, Bulgaria and Serbia, the correction of the interest 
rates on loans was more pronounced at the corporate segment. Macedonia and Poland have the feature 
of  a  sharper  correction  at  the  housing  segment,  compared  to  the  corporate.  The  magnitude  of  the 
correction along different sectors is conditioned upon many specific factors, the initial levels, the riskiness 
of  the  portfolios,  for  instance,  and  hence  it  is  difficult  to  infer  which  banking  sectors  had  larger  “pro-
growth”  adjustment  in  the  interest  rate  policy.  What  is  also  important  is  the  fact  that  the  costs  of 
financing were reduced, and the intensity of the reduction did not differ much compared to the  changes 
of the key policy rate (highest difference of about 2 p.p. is observed for Macedonia, Serbia and Bulgaria). 
Thus, access to financing for both households and corporate sector was facilitated, contributing to higher 
propensity to borrow and underpinning economic recovery. 
 Chart: 3 Lending interest rate and the adjustment* 
 
Source:  Central  Banks’  internet  pages.  *Policy  rates  in  Baltic  countries  are  approximated  with  the  ECB  interest  rate,  while  for 
Bulgaria, where currency board is in place, the interbank rate is used as a proxy.   
The  ease  of  the  lending  rates,  was  probably  important,  but  not  sufficient  prerequisite  for 
enabling stronger credit financial flows in the region. Although in the last couple of years signs of 
credit  recovery  are  visible  in  many  of  the  countries,  it  is  still  tepid,  and  in  some  of  the  countries 
deleveraging  of  the  private  sector  continues.  The  average  rate  of  change  in  the  last  three  years  is  still 
negative  in  countries  like  Slovenia,  Hungary,  Latvia,  Croatia,  Bulgaria,  indicating  that  some  structural 
obstacles, such as high NPLS, new regulatory requirements, deleveraging of the private sector, still act as 
drag for a stronger credit revival. Also, cleaning up of the balance sheet of the banks may to some extent 
distort the data on the credit support. In order to make a qualitative dynamic review of the main forces 
behind the lending behavior of the banks in the region, we do a recap of the main findings of the CESEE 
Bank  Lending  Survey  from  2013  until  present  day4.  The  recap  points  to  several  important  conclusions. 
First, credit supply from being tight in the second half of 2013, was gradually eased until the first half of 
2015. Afterwards it stabilized, and no major changes were observed. In all of the surveys, including the 
last one for the first half of 2016, the new regulatory environment and capital constraints, as well as the 
NPL  ratio  are  pointed  as  key  factors  which  adversely  impact  supply  conditions.  Second,  demand  for 
credits  was  improving  throughout  the  whole  period,  since  the  second  half  of  2014  in  particular. 
Furthermore,  since  2015  credit  demand  for  investments  purposes  is  also  visible,  signaling  positive 
structural shifts. Third, access to funding of the banks,  in general was not  signaled as problem even at 
the beginning of the survey, indicating that funding problems that emerged at the beginning of the global 
crisis  were  alleviated.  But,  it  should  be  stressed  that  throughout  survey  vintages,  a  rebalancing  of  the 
                                                           
4 CESEE Bank Lending Survey, European Investment Bank.  
sources of financing was visible. Given the deleveraging of the international banks present in the region, 
the intra-group financing which was receding was substituted with local funding. Easy access to retail and 
corporate  deposits  was  reported  as  a  feature  in  the  second  half  of  2015,  and  the  first  half  of  2016  as 
well. 
Chart 4: Average annual credit growth  
 
Source: Central Banks’ internet pages.  
 
 In  light  of  the  rising  importance  of  local  funding  as  a  source  of  financing  for  the  banking 
systems in the region,  and hence as a basis for further credit revival,  one important aspect  
is  the  impact  of  low  interest  rates  on  the  savings  in  the  banking  system.  The  dynamic 
observance  of  the  deposits  rates  in  the  banking  system  of  the  region  reveals  a  large  downward 
adjustment of the yield on deposits, both for corporates and for households. The average deposit rate on 
households and corporate deposits for the region equals 1.4% and 0.9% in 2016,  compared to  around 
5%  and  4%,  respectively  in  2007.5  The  correction  is  in  line  with  the  policy  rate  and  lending  rates 
adjustment, and reflects the natural response of the banks for preserving their profitability at acceptable 
levels. Yet, it seems that deposit interest rates in some of the countries in the region, in the members of 
the Euro Area in particular, are approaching the lower bounds. Albeit saving alternatives for the private 
sector in the region are limited, further drop in deposit rates might act as a constraint for further deposit 
growth. The falling opportunity costs can increase the propensity to hold cash or short-term funds in the 
banking  system,  thus  eroding  the  quality  of  the  financing  sources  and  banks’  ability  to  provide  more 
credit. Still, given that recent bank profitability indicators point to a gradual improvement in profitability, 
profitability  concern  will  probably  weigh  less  on  the  deposit  interest  rates.  Nevertheless,  in  few  of  the 
countries  (Croatia,  Hungary,  and  Bosnia)  profitability  indicators  are  still  worrisome.  In  addition,  further 
decline of the ECB rates, for some of the countries might also pose challenges in this regard.  
                                                           
5Interest rate data for Bosnia, Croatia, Serbia available since 2011, or 2012. Hence the 2007 figures do not include these countries, 
and Albania as well, for which sector by sector data is not available.  
Chart 5: Deposit interest rates and profitability indicators 
Source: Central Banks’ internet pages. 
 The data on the average annual growth of households’ deposits in the region show a sharp 
deceleration,  compared  to  the  pre-crisis  period.  Yet  in  the  last  three  years  the  growth  rate 
was rather stable and gravitated around 5%. On a country by country basis, there are some 
examples where the data do reveal need for cautiousness. Thus, in countries like Albania, Croatia, 
and  Macedonia  as  well,  the  growth  of  household’s  deposits  is  tepid.  In  the  first  two  countries,  the 
average growth rate is around zero in the last four years, while in Macedonia, although the growth rate is 
positive, a slowdown is observed in 2015 and 2016. In the Macedonian case, a comparison of household’s 
savings  and  its  fundamentals  was  conducted,  and  the  analysis  revealed  that  the  slowdown  cannot  be 
explained  by  the  change  in  the  disposable  income,  nor  by  other  savings  alternatives.  Hence,  some 
country-specific factors – political instability, and the drop in the interest rates were detected as possible 
causes for the slowdown.  
  Chart 6: Annual growth in % 
Source: Central Banks’ internet pages. 
 Apart  from  the  interest  rate  channel,  quantitative  easing  is  another  possible  spillover 
channel  of  ECB  policy  that  so  far  has  not  been  subject  to  a  wide  research.  The  expected 
outcome of the ECB assets purchase programs for the region would be allocation of part of the liquidity 
on the CESEE financial markets, enabling increase of the cross–border capital flows, compression of the 
longer  term  yields,  of  the  government  in  particular  and  possible  increase  of  the  stock  market  indices. 
Most  of  the  research  concerning  unconventional  measures  has  been  focused  on  quantitative  easing  of 
Fed and the research concerning the ECB measures has been scant. A recent empirical investigation on 
the  matter,  published  in  September  20166,  deals  exactly  with  the  spillovers  of  the  ECB’s  non-standard 
monetary  policy  into  the  CESEE  economies.  The  empirical  investigation  employs  an  event  study 
methodology,  assessing  whether  the  announcements  of  the  ECB  non-standard  measures  affected  the 
nominal  exchange  rate,  long-term  sovereign  yield,  stock  market  indices  and  portfolio  inflows.  The 
findings suggest that ECB measures had moderate impact on all of the variables. Furthermore, the study 
proceeds  with  empirical  investigation  of  the  effects  on  the  dynamics  of  cross-border  capital  flows, 
distinguishing  between  portfolio  investment  and  international  bank  lending.  The  results  reveal  that  ECB 
non-standard measures may have enhanced cross-border flows to the CESEE region. We will try to tackle 
some of the above-stated questions, by observing the most recent data on  balance of payments, which 
can be used as an indication of the dynamics and the structure of the capital flows. We will observe the 
period before and after the crisis, and in the latter one, in order to observe the most recent changes, we 
will focus on the last three years, in particular.  
                                                             
6Ciarlone A. and Colabella A., "Spillovers of the ECB's non-standard monetary policy in CESEE economies", Bank of Italy, Occasional 
Paper no.351, September 2016. 
 
Chart 7: Cumulative financial inflows as % of GDP, changes in p.p.  
 Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics.  
 Data from  the  balance  of payments  statistics  used as an indicator for  the capital  inflows in 
the  region  point  that  overall  capital  flows  have  continued,  but  at  a  much  slower  pace 
compared to the pre-crisis period. The slowdown is visible in the most recent period, as well. 
Thus, during 2013-2015 the capital inflows for the region on average amounted to around 12 % of GDP, 
compared to a cumulative growth of 38 % of GDP in 2008-2012 and 67 % during 2007-2005. The largest 
slowdown is observed for the CEE group of countries, where capital inflows almost stalled. 
  Chart 8: Components of capital inflows, cumulative change in p.p. of GDP 
Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics.  
 The screening of the structure of the capital inflows pinpoints to a slowdown of all types of 
capital  inflows.  Foreign  direct  investments  continued  in  the  region,  but  at  a  slower  pace  especially 
during  2013-2015.  In  all  three  regions,  direct  investment  flows  moderated,  but  were  positive  on  a 
continuous basis since the crisis. The slowdown of the portfolio inflows was the lowest. The dynamics of 
portfolio inflows is positive throughout the whole period for all sub-regions. Since 2008 on a cumulative 
basis  portfolio  inflows  increased  on  average  by  12  p.p.  of  GDP  with  highest  increase  observed  in  CEE 
countries  of  18  p.p.  of  GDP.  The  portfolio  flows  were  mainly  driven  by  the  debt  component,  while  the 
equity component went through mild changes. The largest part of the debt portfolio inflows was driven 
by  the  government  borrowing,  reflecting  its  financing  needs  amidst  expansionary  fiscal  policy  and 
favorable terms of financing on the international market. The decline of the long term yields, as well as 
the fact that since the end of 2014, ECB started to purchase sovereign bonds and absorbed part of the 
market,  opened  more  room  for  governments  to  borrow.  Although  it  is  difficult  to  draw  any  firm 
conclusions,  the  data  point  to  possible  spillover  effects  of  the  asset  purchase  programs  to  the  region 
through the portfolio channel, in particular for the government sector.  
As  for  the  other  flows,  the  most  notable  slowdown  is  observed  for  the  other  debt 
instruments.  In  the  last  couple  of  years  even  a  repayment  of  other  debt  instruments  is 
registered. The downward adjustment of the other debt instruments is observed in the CEE countries, 
while in the other two groups mild increase of the debt financing is seen in the most recent period. The 
more  granular  data  reveal that  this  deleveraging  refers  to  the  banking  system,  and  it  is  present  across 
the board. This is consistent with the findings of the CESEE Bank Lending Survey, where banks report a 
reduction of the intra-group financing. Thus, this data does not provide any evidence for spillover effects 
of the quantitative easing through the banking liquidity channel that is the increased liquidity of the EU 
banks has not led to increased cross-border lending to their subsidiaries in the region. 
Chart 9: Sectoral components of debt and portfolio liabilities, change in p.p. of GDP 
Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics.  
 If we observe the dynamics of capital flows though international investment position lenses, 
conclusions change somewhat. The IIP data also points to a notable slowdown of the capital inflows 
and even to a decline in liabilities across all sub–regions in the most recent period. When dissecting the 
structure  of  the  international  labilities,  similar  to  the  BOP  data,  a  decline  in  the  debt  component  in  the 
last three years is noticed. The strongest intensity has been recorded in the CEE countries, but also in the 
other  two  regions  as  well,  which  was  not  the  case  to  the  BOP  data  where  a  very  mild  increase  in  the 
other two sub-regions is observed. According to the IIP data, deleverage refers to all three sectors, not 
only to the banking system, and it has been present in the last 3 years, with the exception of the banks 
where  the  deleveraging  started  since  the  emergence  of  the  crisis.  Same  conclusions  on  portfolio  flows, 
derived from the BOP data, can be also drawn from the IIP position. They continued to grow in the post-
crisis  period,  driven  mostly  by  the  debt  component  of  the  government.  As  for  the  foreign  direct 
investments,  their  growth  in  the  last  period  stalled,  mainly  due  to  the  decline  observed  in  the  CEE 
countries. In the  other two sub-regions growth  continued, but at a much slower pace especially during 
2012-2015 period. 
Overall,  the  data  indicate  that  the  ECB  policy  measures  positively  affected  financial 
conditions  in  the  region.  First,  loosening  of  the  monetary  stance  through  conventional  instruments 
(policy  rate)  created  a  room  for  loosening  of  the  monetary  stance  in  the  Central  and  South  Eastern 
economies  without  negative  implications  for  the  balance  of  payments.  Reduced  policy  rates  led  to 
reduced lending rates thus decreasing the costs of borrowing of the private sector. Second, the ECB asset 
purchase programs that resulted in unprecedented increase of liquidity most probably positively affected 
the liquidity conditions in the region, as well. Although at a significantly decelerated pace, capital inflows 
continued  in  most  of  the  countries  of  the  region.  Exceptions  are  the  outflows  from  the  banks  in  the 
context of the process of deleveraging, although the outflows might have been bigger in absence of asset 
purchase  policies.  Portfolio  investments  have  been  relatively  solid,  explained  to  a  great  extent  by 
governments’ borrowing on the international markets.  
Although  the  capital  inflows  were  not  sizable  leading  to  creation  of  imbalances  in  the 
economies, vigilance is warranted. The pre-crisis process of rapid worsening of the net international 
position was stalled, but with differences across countries. The improvement is visible for CEE and Baltic 
states,  while  SEE  region  registered  worsening  of  the  international  position,  albeit  from  initially  lower 
levels.  Despite  the  downward  adjustment,  at  end  2015  the  IIP  in  most  of  the  countries  is  above  the 
threshold set by the European Commission’s Macro Imbalance Procedure (-35% of GDP), which points to 
a  still  relatively  high  exposure  to  potential  external  shocks.  Given  the  banks’  deleveraging  process  and 
their higher reliance to domestic sources, the credit growth in the region is still anemic without significant 
pressures  on  the  aggregate  demand  and  current  account  deficit.  Furthermore,  the  analysis  of  the 
developments  at  the  stock  exchanges  in  the  region  also  do  not  point  to  any  sizable  flows  resulting  in 
notable  price  changes  misaligned  with  the  general  economic  developments.    The  stock  indices  in  the 
region have been gradually recovering especially since 2013, but in most cases they have not recovered 
to the pre-crisis levels. Concerning the real estate market, the prices have been also recovering, though 
they  are  still  below  the  pre-crisis  levels,  with  the  fastest  upward  adjustment  in  Hungary  and  the  Baltic 
States.   
   Chart 10: External positions and assets prices indicators 
Source: International Monetary Fund, Balance of Payments Statistics, WEO October 2016 Database, Eurostat. 
 Despite  the  absence  of  sizable  inflows,  relatively  high  external  financial  exposure  of  the 
region  underlines  the  risks  in  case  of  global  tightening  of  the  financial  conditions  in  the 
context of tightening of the US monetary policy or a “surprise” tapering by ECB. The region is 
mostly  exposed  to  the  European  markets,  but  to  the  extent  that  the  US  tightening  affects  European 
financial  markets  it  may  have  negative  implications  for  the  region  through  the  interest  rate  or  liquidity 
channel.  Having in mind the state of the fiscal finances particularly vulnerable segment seems to be the 
government sector.     
The screening of the fiscal position of the countries in the region, shows that without doubts 
financial  crisis  took  a  toll  on  the  fiscal  positions  of  the  countries.  Against  the  background  of 
countercyclical  fiscal  policy  headline  balances  deteriorated  sharply  and  the  public  debt  went  on  a  rising 
track. The deterioration in the fiscal position and lack of fiscal space (due to low initial space before the 
crises)  emphasized  the  need  for  consolidation.  Most  of  the  countries  of  the  region  recognized  it  and 
embarked on the consolidation path.  In the 2013-2015 period the budget deficit figures show that  nine 
out of fourteen countries of the region have already reduced the deficit level compared to the 2008-2012 
period. The other five countries (Macedonia, Albania, Serbia, Bulgaria and Slovenia) increased the deficit 
reflecting  idiosyncratic  factors,  countercyclical  policy  (Macedonia,  Bulgaria),  or  recognition  of  implicit 
liabilities (emergency recapitalization of the country's banks in Slovenia). The same dynamics is more or 
less  mirrored  by  the  government  debt  data.  After  the  strong  initial  debt  rise,  the  consolidation  phase 
imposed slower borrowing pace, however in most of the countries the debt continued to rise. Analyzing 
the countries, only 5 countries  of them, Czech Republic, Poland, Hungary, Latvia and Estonia,  managed 
to  reduce  the  debt  in  the  2015/2013  period.  These  countries,  with  the  exception  of  Hungary  are  less 
vulnerable  when  it  comes  to  the  government  debt  as  they  belong  to  the  so  called  "lower  indebted 
countries". On the other side, the debt rise in the latest period additionally inflated already high levels of 
debt  and  deepened  the  vulnerable  positions  of  some  of  the  countries  in  the  region  (Slovenia,  Croatia, 
Serbia and Albania). 
 Chart 11: Fiscal indicators, developments in different periods of time  
Source: WEO October 2016, database. 
 The  analysis  of  the  long-term  rates  on  government  debt  reveals  that  after  the  peak  of  the 
crisis in 2009, the interest rates on government borrowing in the region have been declining. 
The  only  exception  from  the  pattern  is  Slovenia,  where  the  costs  of  government  borrowing  went  on  a 
rising  track  in  the  period  of  2011-2013,  reflecting  the  banking  system  crisis  and  the  adverse  feedback 
loop  to  the  sovereign  segment.  The  average  long-term  interest  rate  in  the  2008-2012  equaled  close  to 
7%, and declined to an average of 3.7% in the 2013-2015 period, which is an adjustment of around 3 
p.p.  Also,  the  spread  of  the  interest  rates  of  countries  in  the  region  relative  to  the  interest  rate  of 
Germany, as a risk-free anchoring rate, followed a declining path, and hence more favorable conditions to 
borrow.  Some  of  the  simple  indicators  for  the  fiscal  space,  like  the  interest  rate  –  growth  differential, 
although  improved  compared  to  the  acute  phase  of  the  crisis,  still  is  less  favorable  relative  to  the  pre-
crisis period. 
 Chart 12: Interest rates on government bonds in % 
 
*The data for all the countries, except for Albania, Macedonia and Serbia is Eurostat data referring to the Maastricht Treaty EMU 
convergence  criterion  series  which  relates  to  interest  rates  for  long-term  government  bonds  denominated  in  national  currencies. 
Data  is  based  on  central  government  bond  yields  on  the  secondary  market,  gross  of  tax,  with  a  residual  maturity  of  around  10 
years. For Serbia and Albania –Thomson Reuters data on average interest rate on government securities. Macedonia data refer to 
the average interest rate on securities at the longest available maturity issued. 
The  continuous  debt  increase  suggests  need  for  further  fiscal  adjustment,  which  will  be 
challenging in case of tightening of financial conditions. The presence of ultra-low interest rates 
in  the  Euro  Area  and  the  abundance  of  liquidity  on  the  market  have  not  been  conducive  to  faster 
consolidation.  The  need  for  further  fiscal  adjustment  is  clearly  emphasized  in  the  latest  available  IMF 
country  reports.  The  screening  shows  that  with  exception  of  two  countries  (Romania  and  Lithuania)  all 
the countries should adjust further. According to the IMF, most of the countries are in the so-called group 
of "strong adjustors"7. This means that the governments should have a very "ambitious" agenda, or have 
to  significantly  shrink  the  primary  deficit  in  order  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability.  Expectedly,  the  most 
indebted countries are amongst the ones  where the strongest downward adjustment is envisaged, such 
as Slovenia, Croatia, Serbia and Albania. However, even if they pursue their consolidation plans, some of 
them will still have vulnerable position as the debt level will be higher then what the Maastricht criteria 
prescribes (60% of GDP) - chart 13 lower right and left quadrant. Further fiscal consolidation against the 
background of still "anemic" economic activity and rising interest rates may be very challenging.  
                                                             
7 Authors’ definition, presented on chart 13. 
Chart 13: Size of fiscal adjustment -2021-2015*           Debt change and distance from the Maastricht            
         Criteria 60% of GDP**  
*Size: 0.5 - no adjustment; 1 - gradual; above 1 - strong. **  "-" is above "+" is below the benchmark. 
     To  sum  up,  it  appears  that  ECB  policy  accommodative  actions  affected  the  financial  conditions  in  the 
region.  Reduction  of  the  main  policy  rate  allowed  a  room  for  policy  rate  reduction  in  the  region  thus 
contributing  to  lower  costs  for  borrowing  of  the  private  and  public  sector.  Part  of  the  injected  liquidity 
through asset purchase programs seems to be allocated on the CESEE financial markets, enabling cross–
border  capital  flows  that  underpinned  the  process  of  recovery  of  asset  prices  and  reduction  of  the 
borrowing costs. In case of global tightening of the financial conditions in the context of tightening of the 
US monetary policy or a “surprise” tapering by ECB, many countries in the region may face challenges as 
the external financial exposure of the region is relatively high, despite the recent declining trend. This, in 
particular holds for the government sector as the process of fiscal consolidation is very gradual and the 
public debt continues to increase.      
    