Elvira  Nabiullina:  Establishing  a  mega  regulator  for  the  Russian
financial sector
Speech  by  Ms  Elvira  Nabiullina,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Russia,  at  the  Federation  Council,
Moscow, 15 February 2017.
Good afternoon, esteemed colleagues, ladies and gentlemen
 Today I will speak on the progress to date as regards our efforts to establish a megaregulator
and develop the industries which fall into our remit.
Let  me  begin  with  a  brief  summary  of  the  past  economic  background  for  the  makings  of  the
megaregulator.
It would be fair to stay that three years ago all the hardships the Russian banking sector and the
overall economy were set to go through were the very last thing expected. Oil prices were high
and steady then, while the negative impact from the nascent geopolitical developments was yet
to take its toll. As the Russian economy faced the sharp decline in the price of oil in the second
half of 2014, alongside financial sanctions, the Bank of Russia focused on the need to secure
both financial and price stability, as well as financial security. The Central Bank had to take tough
steps to address the impact from the turbulence on financial institutes and their clients. With the
Bank  of  Russia  having  by  then  become  the  sole  regulator  of  the  financial  market,  we  could
approach the overall financial sector in a holistic manner. 
The switchover to a floating exchange rate regime, our moderately tight monetary policy stance
and  consistent  action  to  cleanse  the  market  of  chronically  unstable  or  even  criminal  financial
institutions helped the financial system quickly adjust to the new environment and stabilise the
situation.
Between late 2014 and early 2015, at the acute stage of the crisis, key impact was expected
from our monetary policy and the programme to support a stable operation of the banking sector
and the financial market overall.
The floating ruble exchange rate the Bank of Russia implemented in late 2014, came to be seen
as  an  inbuilt  stabiliser  enabling  to  reduce,  at  the  time  of  stress,  the  influence  from  external
shocks  on  the  economy,  while  also  providing  an  overall  balancing  effect  on  exporters’  and
importers’ interests.
Although the scale and duration of the oil price slump, further complicated by sanctions, were
more severe than in 2008–2009, the rate of economic decline was more than twice lower and
unemployment rose only slightly. The key rate rise to 17% at the end of 2014, with its subsequent
gradual  reduction,  was  central  to  countering  a  surge  in  inflation,  inevitably  triggered  by  the  oil
slump-caused drop in the ruble exchange rate.
As  you  are  aware,  inflation  for  2016  was  record  low  at  5.4%,  while  annualised  inflation  for
January  slowed  down  to  5%.  Our  plans  envision  for  inflation  to  reach,  in  late  2017  and  on
schedule,  our  4%  target.  Steadily  low  inflation  is  a  major  factor  enabling  households  and
businesses to make long-term plans; it lays the groundwork for transition to an investment-type
economic  development  based  not  only  on  oil  exports,  but  also  on  domestic  investment.  Low
inflation is a means of protection for our citizens against the depreciation of their incomes and
savings.
Incidentally, the rise in the key rate made bank deposits fairly attractive, so in the very challenging
environment of the year 2015 banks showed a record growth in deposits (25%). The banking
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
system managed to retain its resources and credibility.
At  the  time  our  actions  included  some  nonstandard  approaches.  To  name  just  a  few,  we
implemented some easing in the regulation of the banking sector and provided foreign currency
refinancing facilities to help companies meet their external debt liabilities when such payments
peaked, given that external financial markets were inaccessible.
Through its cleansing programme for the banking sector the Bank of Russia meant to do away
with weak and unscrupulous players, as well as to stave off the domino effect, when financial
difficulties of individual banks will trigger repercussions in the overall banking system.
The  current  banking  system  indicators  are  almost  back  to  their  pre-crisis  readings.  Banking
sector profit is rising, and so is banking capital stock; growing bad debt is no longer a risk factor.
Banks were able to build up appropriate reserves against bad loans. The rates of lending to the
economy are consistent with the overall economic trends and on course to reach 4–7% in 2017.
Although lending rates are still high, they are beginning to decline and are set to decline further as
inflation recedes.
Let me proceed to report on our efforts to build a megaregulator and the progress to date.
Our efforts were centred on the development of institutes, instruments and infrastructure of the
Russian financial market. While we remain committed to the global financial system as its full-
fledged participant, we seek to create conditions for the domestic financial market to be able to
operate regardless of external political developments.
The financial market can be viewed as a whole through the lens of a megaregulator, so that grey
zones  or  regulatory  arbitrage  can  be  avoided; 
facilitates
improvements  in  the  quality  of  supervision,  enabling  a  transition  to  consolidated  supervision,
preventing,  at  the  same  time,  problems  at  an  early  stage  in  financial  groups  and  holding
companies (given that these hold a lion’s share of financial system assets).
the  megaregulator  concept 
In  2013,  the  disbanded  Federal  Financial  Markets  Service’s  functions  were  transferred  to  the
Bank of Russia. We assumed responsibility for the regulation of insurance and pension markets,
professional security market participants, investment funds, actuary activities, rating agencies,
microfinance organisations, as well as for the development of financial market infrastructure and
instruments, etc. As a result, the Bank of Russia’s remit extended to more than 20 thousand
supervised entities. The list was later further expanded to include pawn-shops and forex dealers.
Over  these  three  years,  the  Bank  of  Russia  has  conducted  policies  to  cleanse  and  enable
financial recovery of market participants; these efforts are almost complete as regards non-credit
financial institutions.  The  cleansing in  the  banking  sector  is  however  set  to  take  a  few  more
years.
Beyond  this  agenda,  the  challenging  geopolitical  environment  spells  the  need  for  the
megaregulator to provide financial security and lower the Russian financial market’s reliance on
external factors. Hence the need to build a fully-fledged domestic financial market infrastructure,
especially in the sectors previously fully reliant on the global market. This is why we set up the
National  Payment  Card  System,  re-launched  the  rating  industry,  established  a  national
reinsurance company and advanced a SWIFT-equivalent tool for the domestic market.
The  national  system  of  payment  cards  currently  handles  all  Russian  domestic  bank  card
transactions. The scheme was put in place in spring 2014; Mir, the national payment card, has
been in circulation since late 2015. Since then, as many as 2.5 million cards have been issued,
which can be used in almost 80% of points of sale accepting banking cards. Mir is also used for
cash withdrawal (approx. 98% ATMs accept Mir) or online shopping. In the next two years Mir will
be  the  system  to  handle  payments  to  all  public  sector  employees,  pensioners,  students  and
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
other budget payment recipients.
The State Duma is currently crafting a draft law to specify the timeline when all budget payments
will pass over to Mir. Our intention is to ensure that this transition is as trouble-free to clients as
possible  and  to  give  banks  sufficient  time  for  preparations,  with  a  compressed  time  frame
though. The national system of payment cards has also covered the Republic of Crimea, with its
banking  system  having  integrated  into  the  Russian  financial  system  and  penetration  levels
approaching Russia’s average.
Furthermore,  in  2016  the  Central  Bank  established  a  national  reinsurance  company  (NPK),
which is supposed to accept a wide range of risks for reinsurance including, among other things,
those  related  to  home  insurance  and  government  contracts.  NPK  will  also  provide  insurance
protection to companies under international sanctions. The creation of NPK will be instrumental
in enhancing capacities of the Russian reinsurance market, still underdeveloped, with a view to
turn around the situation where most risks are reinsured overseas.
Let me now proceed to comment on the issues of regulation and development of key financial
market sectors.
The Bank of Russia has also been actively targeting the insurance market, seeking to get rid of
weak and unscrupulous players by strengthening requirements for the sustainability of market
participants. Upon obtaining the respective mandate, the Bank of Russia launched a thorough
analysis of insurers’ assets. As a result of the above measures, by 1 February, 183 insurance
companies (roughly 40% of the total insurance market) had exited the market. A big portion of
these companies did not have sufficient real assets. Formal compliance with requirements as of
a reporting date is not the only concern of ours. Any insurers should possess real assets in their
balance sheets – to be able to fulfil their obligations at any moment. We view it as a priority for
our supervisory policy. Insurance companies should be able to pay out insurance indemnities.
The Bank of Russia intends to further strengthen requirements for the quality of assets in which
insurers invest their own funds and insurance reserves. At present, we are transitioning to risk-
oriented supervision in the insurance sector and introducing the institute for curatorial practice.
A  reform  in  the  actuarial  industry  has  been  conducted  to  enhance  the  quality  and  status  of
actuarial reports used in insurance business. We want to thank you parliamentarians for passing
the respective law.
OSAGO  seems  to  be  the  most  challenging  and  also  the  most  socially  sensitive  type  of
insurance.  Problems  in  the  OSAGO  market,  where  rates  have  remained  unchanged  for  a
decade,  have  been  piling  up  for  quite  a  long  time.  In  some  regions,  OSAGO  has  turned
unprofitable. The deterioration in the OSAGO market was caused by rising prices for spare parts
following  the  ruble  appreciation.  This  objective  economic  factor  raised  OSAGO  rates. At  the
same time, the market situation was adversely influenced by non-market factors, such as the
activities  of  traffic  lawyers  which  have  virtually  distorted  the  market  in  several  regions.  We
definitely  regard  consumers’  interests  as  our  priority.  Therefore,  we  have  applied  various
measures to insurers in order to restore the accessibility of OSAGO in distressed regions, given
the overall profitability of this type of insurance. These measures include the launch of OSAGO
policy sales through a single agent and mandatory sales of electronic OSAGO policies starting
this year.
It is now time to put an end to the practice pursued by traffic lawyers who tap insurers for money.
The true aim of such lawyers is to obtain maximum penalties levied on insurers by court orders,
rather than to restore the violated rights of offended parties.
Work is now underway to prepare a bill on the priority of in-kind loss resolution. The bill is being
discussed rather thoroughly and heatedly. We believe that all this will eventually make OSAGO
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
less attractive for unscrupulous lawyers-intermediaries, and this is the initiative where I count on
your support.
Pension savings market
Efforts were also made to streamline and strengthen non-governmental pension funds. They had
to be turned into joint-stock companies. As a result, as many as 41 non-governmental pension
funds  are  currently  operating  in  the  mandatory  pension  insurance  system  (out  of  89  non-
governmental pension funds which dealt with mandatory pension savings in 2014).
We introduced a system of guaranteed pension savings. It serves as reliable protection for the
interests of pension fund customers. However, the situation calls for further improvements in the
pension system and its funded component. Therefore, the Central Bank jointly with the Ministry of
Finance have put forward their concept which is currently being discussed in the government. In
our opinion, this concept enables citizens to make a new and beneficial choice, providing good
protection for their rights and making it possible to accumulate more pension funds (in addition to
the state insurance pension).
The operation of microfinance organisations is another highly sensitive social issue. Microloans
are very popular among households. Should legal lenders, capable of issuing express loans in
small amounts and for short terms, disappear, while household demand remains unchanged,
microfinance organisations may be replaced by shadow lenders. Borrowers will be left absolutely
unprotected against tough debt collectors and exaggerated interest charged on their loans. This
market remains flawed, with loud cases surfacing from time to time, when individuals become
suddenly  aware  that  they  owe  microfinance  organisations  outrageous  amounts  in  interest,
absolutely inconsistent with the amount of the principle.
Jointly with the parliament, we have carried out considerable work to enhance the protection for
borrowers. The Federation Council initiated this work in order to massively limit the amount of
potential debt for households and to lower lending rates.
We seek to thoroughly clean up this sector. As a result, roughly 4,000 organisations have been
struck off from registers.
Alongside the above efforts, we also initiated a programme to record microfinance organisations,
to rectify the situation where they operated as totally invisible organisations without any official
records in the register.
We sought to either include them in the register or to strike them off from the register, if required
by supervisory findings.
This brings me to the end of my speech. I would like to conclude by saying that we will continue
with our efforts to develop the megaregulator, along key functionalities of the financial market. I
refer to the document that has been drafted for the first time and formulates our strategy for three
years  ahead  across  all  areas  of  financial  market  development.  We  have  forwarded  this
document to the parliament for consideration, and we plan to continue our joint work on it.
Thank you for time.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
