  23.06.17 
 “The challenges facing the Spanish banking industry” 
Closing address to the seminar “La Cuarta revolución. ¿Cómo afecta la agenda 
digital a la economía y a la industria?” (“The fourth revolution. How does the 
digital agenda affect the economy and industry?”, UIMP – APIE (Santander) 
Javier Alonso 
Deputy Governor 
 
  Good  morning.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Santander  today,  at  the  Universidad 
Internacional  Menéndez  Pelayo,  continuing  the  tradition  for  the  Deputy  Governor  of  the 
Banco  de  España  to participate  in  the  closing session of this  seminar. Thank  you  to  the 
University,  to  its  Rector,  to  the  APIE  (Association  of  Economics  Journalists)  and,  in 
particular, to Miguel Ángel Noceda, for organising this event and for his kind invitation.  
This year, the focus of the seminar is technological developments and, in particular, the so-
called  “digital  agenda”.  This  gives  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  about  one  of  the  main 
challenges  facing  the  banking  industry  (new  technologies  and the  entry into the  banking 
market of what are known as “fintech” companies).  
However, I do not wish to overlook other important challenges for the industry, such as its 
profitability, compliance with the new regulatory requirements (in particular on resolution) 
and  the  need  to  maintain  customer  confidence:  the  most  important  and  fragile  of  bank 
assets and the fundamental basis of banking activity.  
1 The Spanish banking industry 
In  order  to  clarify  the  background,  before  addressing  the  challenges,  allow  me  to  briefly 
describe some of the main features of developments in the Spanish banking industry as a 
whole. 
In terms of solvency, the position of the Spanish banking industry has improved significantly 
in  recent  years,  thanks  to  the  reforms  implemented  in  the  industry,  the  strengthening  of 
regulation and supervision, and the recovery in economic activity that has taken place in 
Spain.  
It should be recalled that the regulatory response to the financial crisis led to a substantial 
increase  in  capital  requirements,  as  part  of  a  raft  of  measures  geared  to  minimising  the 
probability of bank crises and to reducing their impact if they do occur, in particular in terms 
of  the  use  of  public  funds.  Not  only  were  the  own  funds  requirements  increased  for 
institutions  but  also  the  quality  of  own  funds  (i.e.  their  loss  absorbing  capacity)  was 
improved,  through  the  introduction  of  a  number  of  more  restrictive  criteria  for  the 
determination of eligible capital, known as “common equity tier 1” (CET1).  
Thus, in terms of CET1, although the Spanish banking system still has a ratio below that of 
the main European countries, its strengthening in recent years has been notable: by more 
than one percentage point on average since its introduction in 2014. As at December 2016 
this  ratio  for  the  Spanish  banking  industry  as  a  whole  reached  12.8%,  exceeding  the 
regulatory  minimum  requirements  and  standing  not  far  from  the  average  for  banks 
supervised by the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), which is close to 14%. 
At the same time, in comparison with the situation at the outset of the financial crisis, the 
banking industry is not only more capitalised, but has also carried out an intense balance 
sheet clean-up, as a result of the far-reaching process of transformation of the sector. As 
has  been  quantified  on  other  occasions,  the  industry  has  set  aside  provisions  totalling 
around €300 billion since the start of the crisis.   
 3/8 
 The  volume  of  non-performing  loans  has  also  been  reduced  significantly  from  the  highs 
reached at the end of 2013. Thus, non-performing loans to the private sector in Spain have 
fallen by more than €77 billion in absolute terms and by more than 40% in relative terms 
over the last three years.  
This decline in non-performing loans is based on various factors, such as lower obstacles 
to the sale of non-performing loans to third parties and also, to some extent, more prudent 
lending policies on the part of institutions. However it is basically a result of the stabilisation 
and progressive improvement in economic and business activity, which has  reduced the 
credit default rate. If the economy maintains its present growth trend, the reduction in the 
volume of non-performing loans can be expected to continue.  
The fall in non-performing loans (which exceeds credit growth, which is still negative) has 
resulted in an improvement in the non-performing loans ratio. This ratio has in fact fallen by 
several percentage points in recent years, to 5.7% in December 2016, on consolidated data. 
In comparative terms, the NPL ratio of the Spanish banking industry in consolidated terms 
stands at similar levels to the European average, although it is still above those of some of 
the main European countries. 
2 Challenges 
That  said,  as  I  indicated  at  the  start,  the  banking  sector  needs  to  address  important 
challenges, affecting not only Spanish banks but also the other euro area countries.  
2.1 Profitability 
The  first  challenge  I  wish  to  mention  is  profitability;  adequate  profitability  is  essential  to 
ensure  banks’  viability  for  the  medium  and  long  term.  Since  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  the 
banking  sector’s  profitability  has  been  quite  low,  well  short  of  the  double-digit  figures 
observed in earlier periods. Last year, Spanish deposit institutions overall saw their return 
on  equity  fall  by  1.3  percentage  points,  from  5.6%  in  2015  to  4.3%  in  2016,  although  it 
remains slightly above that of the main European countries and the European average. 
As you are aware, there are several factors exerting downward pressure on banking sector 
profitability. The very low interest rate environment, in response to a euro area inflation rate 
that  is  below  the  ECB’s  target  rate,  is  one  of  the  main  factors  behind  the  low  levels  of 
profitability in recent years. Against this low interest rate backdrop, both financial revenues 
and costs have fallen, although it is increasingly difficult to achieve further cuts in the cost 
of liabilities, now that levels close to zero have been reached, and this has a direct impact 
on the net interest income of Spanish banks.  
Other  factors  that  continue  to  affect  banking  sector  profitability  are  the  lower  volume  of 
banking  activity  –  in  a  setting  in  which  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  credit  to  the 
resident private sector  remains in negative territory – and the presence of still significant 
levels  of  non-productive  assets  on  banks’  balance  sheets.  These  assets  weigh  on 
profitability, despite the reductions achieved in the volume of non-performing loans that I 
spoke of earlier. Lastly, I must also mention the increase in legal costs, which has recently 
become a further factor in the decline in profitability. 
4/8 
 By contrast, the decrease in the volume of non-performing loans from the highs of 2013, 
which has been reflected in a continued decline in banks’ provisioning needs, is one of the 
main  factors  making  a  positive  contribution  to  Spanish  credit  institutions’  income 
statements, offsetting to a certain extent the decline in margins.  
 2.2 Resolution requirements: MREL 
The  second  challenge  I  wish  to  highlight  is  the  need  for  banks  to  comply  with  the  new 
resolution requirements that were introduced post-crisis, aiming to secure the stability of 
the financial system, minimise the cost for the taxpayer of banking crises and ensure that 
banks’ critical functions are maintained.  
As you are aware, banks will have to comply with the minimum requirement for own funds 
and  eligible  liabilities  (MREL).  For  that  purpose  they  will  have  to  have,  on  their  balance 
sheets, instruments that provide sufficient loss-absorbing capacity and that will allow them, 
where  appropriate,  to  recapitalise.  Accordingly,  should  a  bank  find  itself  in  resolution,  it 
would be able to continue to perform its critical functions – essentially lending and holding 
deposits – without having to resort to public support and without jeopardising the financial 
stability of the system.  
Although the Resolution Directive entered into force on 1 January 2015, setting of the MREL 
requirements is still at a preliminary stage and there is as yet no specific date for compliance 
with  the  requirements.  The  Single  Resolution  Board,  which  is  the  European  resolution 
authority, will set the MREL requirements for the institutions for which it is responsible, that 
is, those that are directly supervised by the SSM, at the end of the year. These requirements, 
for which the transition period for compliance therewith has still not been determined, are 
not expected to come into force before 1 January 2019. In the case of the less significant 
institutions,  for  which  responsibility  lies  with  the  national  resolution  authorities,  the  time 
frame for adaptation to the new requirements will foreseeably be longer.   
The requirements set will fundamentally depend on two components: the loss absorption 
component, which in general will be common to all banks and will be equivalent to their 
capital  requirements;  and  the  recapitalisation  component,  the  amount  of  which  should 
depend  on  the  resolution  strategy  deemed  most  appropriate  for  each  institution.  For 
instance if, in the event of resolution, and after absorption of possible losses, it is expected 
that  the  institution  in  question  would  continue  to  perform  its  critical  functions,  the 
recapitalisation component would be equivalent to the new capital requirements estimated 
for the institution following the resolution process.  
In any event, the European regulations are currently under review, and will continue to be at 
least into next year, so it is still too early to know the precise details of the final requirements 
and, therefore, to accurately estimate the issuance volumes that institutions would need in 
order to comply with those requirements. Also, in order to allow the markets to absorb the 
foreseeably high issuance volume that would be needed to meet those requirements, there 
is  a  common  understanding  that  an  appropriate  transition  period  is  essential  for 
implementation of the MREL requirements. 
That said, it is clear that although their introduction will be  greatly beneficial for financial 
stability, they may pose a significant challenge for the banks themselves, especially for small 
and medium-sized banks that, owing to their business model, have less experience than 
 5/8 
 their  larger  peers  in  raising  funds  on  the  debt  markets.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  MREL 
requirements will not act as a further drag on these banks’ profitability, nor place excess 
constraints on their business models.   
2.3 Technological innovation 
Lastly, and as I said at the start of my address, I wish to focus on the challenge posed by 
technology and the changes it may bring in the banking sector.  
We  unquestionably  face  a  situation  in  which  digital  innovation  is  transforming  traditional 
banking. This transformation is already apparent in our ability to communicate with banks 
without having to go to a branch, in the constant supply of new products and services, in 
the  new  ways  that  data  can  be  used  or  in  the  improvement  of  market  systems  and 
infrastructures  allowing  instantaneous  execution  of  transactions  which  previously  took 
several days. Further, technological innovation is giving rise to the penetration of some areas 
of banking by new firms known as “fintechs”, which provide financial services under a wide 
range of business models.  
The implications of this technological revolution are complex and varied both for the banking 
sector and for regulators and supervisors, and must be analysed with caution taking into 
account the particularities of the banking sector and avoiding oversimplification.  
For  example  the  use  of  technology  for  high-speed  analysis  of  a  large  volume  of 
heterogeneous  data  – known  as  “big data”  – may  have  multiple  applications  in  banking. 
Banks have a large amount of diverse information on their customers. Careful analysis of 
this  information  may  give  banks  a  better  knowledge  of  their  customers’  behaviour  and 
enable them to refine their products by fine-tuning them to the particular needs and risk 
profile  of  each  customer.  This,  however,  must  be  done  in  conformity  with  personal  data 
protection  regulations.  We  must  not  forget  that  customers  trust  a  bank  to  observe  the 
confidentiality of their transactions. 
Similarly, services known as “cloud computing” have been on the rise for some time now. 
They unquestionably offer big advantages for banks: they reduce processing and storage 
costs and provide great flexibility for adjusting information systems to current needs, and, 
moreover,  they  are  an  efficient  means  of  big  data  analysis.  However,  this  increased 
dynamism is not free from a risk of data loss which must be controlled.  
Much  the  same  goes  for  automated  advisory  services,  known  as  “robo  advice”.  It  is 
increasingly  common  to  see  automatic  tools  which  act  through  digital  channels  in  the 
process of providing advice. These solutions may be useful, for example, in the purchase of 
a product, because they simplify communication between banks and customers, but this 
service  must  conform to marketing  regulations.  It is  necessary to  ensure  that  customers 
have  unrestricted  access  to  sufficient  and  relevant  information  that  allows  them  to  fully 
understand the product in question, and that the product is not purchased automatically 
without understanding the conditions and the risks involved. 
In short, technological innovations offer banks a way to reduce costs and better adapt their 
products  to  customers’  needs,  but  their  implementation  in  banking  operations  requires 
close monitoring of the new risks introduced into the system. Matters such as the privacy 
of personal information, security, the risk of cyberattacks or even the risk of exclusion, must 
6/8 
  be monitored and, where appropriate, duly regulated. Regulation has to achieve a balance, 
protecting financial stability and confidence in the system, without unjustifiably hindering 
the exploitation of these technological innovations by industry and society in general.  
It  is  still  too  soon  to  gauge  the  impact  of  the  technological  revolution  on  the  traditional 
banking sector. I believe that technological innovations will complement traditional banking 
activities, but to achieve this banks must be sufficiently flexible and dynamic to reap the 
benefits of technological innovation.  
There is no question that innovation is also favouring the proliferation of new fintech firms, 
of  highly  varying  profiles  and  business  models,  which  may  conceivably  compete  with 
traditional banks in a specific part of the banking value chain, but are more likely to engage 
in new ancillary services. One example is joint financing through online platforms, known as 
“crowdfunding”.  It  is  an  alternative  source  of  financing  which  may  offer  certain 
improvements over traditional banking in terms of convenience, speed and cost. But risks 
have also been identified, such as a potential increase in fraud or greater weaknesses in 
terms of investor confidence. There is a well-known case of a Swedish P2P platform which 
went  bankrupt  late  last  year  after  the  detection  of  malpractices  in  credit  extension, 
prompting a fall in the activity of the sector and closer regulatory attention. 
In my opinion, fintech firms are at an early stage of development in which it is not yet clear 
which of them will become credible alternatives, so it is still early to say how they will evolve. 
In any event, the greater the likeness between their financial activity and traditional banking 
activity, the more they will be subject to requirements and controls similar to those of banks, 
tailored to the risk of the activity in question. That is to say, it is necessary to set fair rules 
of play ensuring neutrality on the basis of the risk involved and the activity carried out.   
3  Final reflections 
In  short,  the  Spanish  banking  industry,  and  other  European  institutions,  face  major 
challenges  at  a  time  of  far-reaching  transformation  of  traditional  banking  business. 
Regulatory reform, with the tightening of capital requirements and the introduction of the 
new  resolution  requirements  that  I  have  described,  and  the  development  of  new 
technologies  are  two  of  the  vectors  of  change.  In  this  new  environment,  it  is  difficult  to 
imagine  that  it  will  be  possible  to  sustainably  achieve  the  pre-financial  crisis  levels  of 
profitability (in double digits).  
However,  following  the  transformation  undertaken  in  recent  years  and  the  progress 
achieved in terms of solvency and cleaning up balance sheets, the industry is today more 
resilient  and  in  a  better  position  to  face  these  changes  with  confidence.  In  terms  of 
efficiency, for example, Spanish banks are in a better position than the average institution 
supervised by the SSM. In addition, there is still room for improvement, particularly when it 
is noted that Spain continues to be the EU country with the highest density of branches per 
head of population. And this does not seem to be very compatible with the technological 
innovation I have been talking about, whose introduction permits a lesser physical presence. 
Banks must adapt to the new environment and continue the orderly correction of excess 
capacity carried out in recent years. The increases in efficiency required could lead to some 
further consolidation within the sector. 
 7/8 
 Finally, as I said at the start, I cannot finish without reminding you of the need to maintain 
the confidence of bank customers, the most important and also the most fragile asset of 
the  business  of  deposit  institutions.  In  my  first  public  address  as  Deputy  Governor  I 
mentioned  aspects  that  could  be  improved.  The  Banco  de  España  is  strengthening  its 
supervisory activities in relation to the conduct of banks. The priority must be the customer, 
as  this  is  the  only  way  to  maintain  confidence  in  the  sound  functioning  of  the  Spanish 
banking system.  
 Thank you very much for your attention.  
 8/8 
 