Partnership for capacity development in household surveys 
for welfare analysis 
LAUNCH EVENT 
Remarks by Valeria Sannucci, 
Deputy Governor of the Bank of Italy 
Rome, June 19 2017 
          Good morning ladies and gentlemen, 
On behalf of Governor Visco, I am pleased to welcome you all to the Bank of Italy in Rome. It is 
indeed an honour today for the Bank of Italy to host the distinguished representatives of the World 
Bank and of all the institutions involved in this important Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). 
As part of its legal mandate, the Bank of Italy currently promotes technical cooperation with 
central banks and other institutions in the emerging countries. Through staff training activities and 
consultancy,  the  Bank  aims  at  helping  to  improve  the  institutional  capacities  of  the  beneficiary 
institutions, establishing relationships that strengthen reciprocal ties. Moreover, the Bank is Italy’s 
representative  in  numerous  international  organizations  and  institutions,  such  as  the  World  Bank, 
cooperating  with  them  in  various  ways,  with  the  ultimate  purpose  of  promoting  international 
financial  stability  and  a  smooth  functioning  of  the  payment  system.  The  partnership  we  are 
launching today is thus an integral part of this more general context. 
The cooperation between the World Bank and the Bank of Italy in the field of statistics was 
not born today. In October 2015 another MoU between these two institutions was entered into. On 
that  occasion,  several  areas  of  collaboration  were  pointed  out: improving the  availability,  quality 
and  cost-effectiveness  of  data  production  to  inform  policy  making  in  low  and  middle  income 
countries;  engaging  in  research  on  subjects  of  common  interest;  promoting  the  harmonization  of 
household surveys; and engaging other entities, such as research institutions and local academia, to 
give additional support to the abovementioned activities. 
In this framework, our institutions co-founded the Center for Development Data (C4D2) in 
Rome,  with  which  we  have  been  working  for  the  past  2  years.  Let  me  now  share  with  you  my 
personal satisfaction in having contributed to launching a project that has organized such a wide and 
knowledgeable team of institutions which can significantly improve the statistical data for welfare 
analysis in developing countries and in our countries too. 
Contributing to the achievement of a world free of poverty is the ultimate goal for which all 
economists should bear responsibility. To this end, economic growth, although necessary, may not 
be a sufficient condition for everyone to make progress. Nowadays there is great concern about the 
possible  effects  of  technical  progress  and  globalization  on  inequality.  Both  in  developed  and 
developing countries, political institutions must constantly monitor the different segments of their 
populations to ensure that no one is left behind and promote a shared prosperity. In this perspective, 
sample  surveys  acquire  a  strategic  role.  Cooperation  in  this  field  arises  from  the  awareness  that 
macroeconomic data are not enough for economic analysis. It is essential to look at the distribution 
of  phenomena  and  not  only  at  averages,  in  particular  when  dealing  with  household  welfare  and 
inequality. 
Microdata derived from household surveys are not only a powerful descriptive tool; they can 
be  employed  in  more  complex  statistical  analyses  to  study  how  variables  as  different  as  an 
individual’s occupational status, social environment and personal values relate to consumption and 
1 
saving  behaviour.  General  models  can  thus  be  adapted  to  new  scenarios  and  to  the  measures 
referring to estimated subgroups. 
Throughout  its  history,  the  Bank  of  Italy has  been  an  active  producer  of statistics,  and  in 
particular of household survey data. In June 1947 the then Governor Luigi Einaudi, during the work 
of  the  Constituent  Assembly  of  which  he  was  a  member,  advocated  the  need  for  collecting 
information on the standard of living of Italian citizens. By the 1950s, the Bank of Italy had already 
worked with Doxa, a private company, on conducting surveys on household finances. In the early 
sixties, the Bank of Italy conducted several pilot surveys on the income, consumption and savings 
of Italian households and in 1966 the first official survey was conducted. Since then, the Bank of 
Italy has interviewed almost 200,000 households in what is now called the Survey on Household 
Income and Wealth (SHIW), collecting biannual data on several aspects of economic behaviour. 
SHIW  data  have  been  often  used  in  the  Bank  of  Italy  to  carry  out  structured  research 
projects  on  the  main  economic  themes,  like  saving  and  consumption  behaviour,  ageing  and  the 
pension  systems,  distribution  of  wealth,  measures  of  well-being  and  financial  vulnerability. 
Moreover,  the  availability  of  a  database  containing  a  large  amount  of  information  on  Italian 
households has enabled policy measures to be evaluated, thereby contributing to an informed public 
debate. 
Thanks to the free availability of anonymous microdata, survey data have also been widely 
used for academic research. A recent bibliography of scientific works that over time have used the 
survey  data  included  over  800  articles  by  more  than  450  authors  at  the  end  of  2016.  This  has 
improved the accountability of the Bank and enriched the economic debate. 
Over the years, the Bank of Italy’s statisticians have explored the methodological issues of 
the SHIW in detail, focusing both on its potentials and pitfalls. While a standard methodological 
report allowing for the analysis of standard errors is always attached to each survey report, specific 
studies have been carried out on various topics, like unit non-response, measurement errors, under- 
reporting and micro-macro reconciliation. This long experience has taught us that in sample surveys 
the  adoption  of  best  practices  in  the  collection  of  survey  data  can  significantly  increase  the 
reliability of estimates. Moreover, if the move towards the standards is widespread, comparisons are 
also positively affected by the change, adding value to each statistical source. 
For a number of years the Bank of Italy has been promoting projects aimed at harmonizing 
SHIW data with those obtained from other surveys, such as the Luxembourg Income Study and the 
Luxembourg  Wealth  Study.  In  recent  years  our  survey  has  become  part  of  the  Eurosystem's 
Household Finance and Consumption Survey (HFCS), coordinated by the European Central Bank. 
The  HFCS  includes  harmonized  surveys  on  household  income  and  wealth  from  18  euro-area 
countries,  as  well  as  Poland  and  Hungary.  The  network  of  participants  has  proved  to  be  a  very 
valuable  forum  for  exchanging  experiences  in  conducting  surveys  and  fostering  the  adoption  of 
uniform best practices. We hope the expertise acquired on these technical grounds can be useful for 
the present project. 
2 
      In  fact, at the present time, survey data do not always share common standards regarding 
sampling, coverage, definition of variables or valuations and estimation methods as more standard 
statistics like national accounts do. This is particularly true in the developing countries, which often 
face  peculiar  difficulties  in  conducting sample  surveys,  due  to  a  lack  of  population  lists,  logistic 
problems  in  territories,  and  so  on.  Improving  the  availability  of  reliable  data  production  is  a 
valuable ingredient for promoting evidence-based policy making; this is why, although it is a costly 
exercise, it is crucial for low and middle-income countries to invest in this field. 
The  cooperation  starting  today  will  initially  focus  on  training  with  the  objectives  of 
improving  the  quality  and  coherence  of  international  training  for  statistical  capacity  building  on 
microdata,  and  of  supporting  training  activities  in  these  fields  based  in  low  and  middle-income 
countries. 
In  particular,  the  project  will  implement  a  training  program  for  statistical  capacity  building  in 
household surveys, through some week-long training courses and workshops, to be held in the Bank of 
Italy’s premises, and with training sessions in various statistical training centres in Africa. By adopting a 
training of trainers (ToT) approach, the project will exploit a multiplier effect, spreading the ability to 
deal  with  sample  surveys  beyond  the  participants  and  reaching  a  large  number  of  low  and  middle 
income countries. 
  
A further and no less important aim of this project is building a network which includes experts 
from  many  developed and developing countries. The  exchange  of  experiences can be beneficial 
for  improving  statistical  capacity  in  household  surveys  and  fostering  convergence  towards 
common standards. 
Let me conclude with the words of Luigi Einaudi which have often been quoted by those 
who  have  succeeded  him  as  Governors  of  the  Bank  of  Italy.  All  policymakers,  all  institutions 
should base their modus operandi on the principle ‘Conoscere per deliberare’ (know, then decide).1 
It  expresses  the  need  for  a  policy  based  both  on  knowledge  and  data,  as  can  be  derived  from 
microsimulation  model  estimations  when  analysing  alternative  scenarios  and  policy  measures.2 
Einaudi  would  certainly  have  approved  the  efforts  we  are  all  making  in  pursuing  this  current 
project. He would also have appreciated the presence of a number of important Italian institutions 
here today. It is important that the Bank of Italy is not alone in this endeavour. Cooperation with the 
Italian  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  International  Cooperation,  the  Italian  Agency  for 
Development  Cooperation,  the  Italian  National  Institute  of  Statistics  and  the  Italian  National 
Institute  of  Health  means  fostering  dialogue  among  different  disciplines  and  recognizing  the 
multidimensional nature of human well-being, the measurement of which is the aim of household 
surveys.  Yet  it  also  testifies  to  the  commitment  of  leading  Italian  public  institutions  to  working 
together to strengthen our cooperation with developing countries. 
1 L. Einaudi, Prediche inutili, Opere di Luigi Einaudi, Volume II, Einaudi, Turin, 1964 (first edition 1956). 
2  See  for  example  Ando  and  Nicoletti  Altimari,  ‘A  microsimulation  model  of  demographic  development  and 
households’  economic  behaviour  in  Italy’,  Temi  di  discussione  (Working  Papers),  533,  2004,  and  Michelangeli  and 
Pietrunti,  ‘A  microsimulation  model to evaluate Italian households'  financial  vulnerability’, Questioni di Economia  e 
Finanza (Occasional Papers), 225, 2014. 
3 
     