  
 
 
 
 
Andreas Ittner 
Vice Governor 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“The horses and the carriage” 
 
Fourth  Research  Workshop  of  the  Task  Force  on  Banking  Analysis  for  Monetary 
Policy of the MPC 
 
The better understanding of the relationship between monetary policy and banking is not only 
important  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective  but  also  from  a  financial  stability  perspective. 
Therefore, I expect that this workshop improves the understanding of these two perspectives.  
The agenda names a host of critical issues in this respect: 
 REMARKS 
Wien, January 26, 2017 
  The  effects  of  the  prolonged  period  of  very  low  interest  rates  and  unconventional 
monetary policy including the continued central bank balance-sheet expansion 
  on banks’ incentives to generate loans, 
  profitability and 
 
their cost of equity. 
 
As  a  consequence,  the  workshop  also  contributes  to  the  international  and  inter-institutional 
debate about the interaction between monetary policy and financial stability. Let me start with a 
question:  Are  financial  stability  and  monetary  policy  two  horses  that  try  to  pull  the  carriage 
“economy“ in opposite directions? 
To  answer  that  question  I  will  critically  assess  some  statements  that  are  often  mentioned  in 
public discussions, but some of them do not seem to be well-grounded. 
 
When looking at those two economic and political strands, that are very different in their targets 
and instruments, the question raises: Is there a conflict of interest between monetary policy and 
macroprudential policy? 
 
The institutional assessments vary. On the one hand, ECB, Fed and IMF support the „separation 
principle“. 
They  track  different  targets:  monetary  policy  aims  at  price  stability,  while  macroprudential 
supervision  aims  at  maintaining  financial  stability.  With  that,  they  follow  the  spirit  of  the 
 Publisher and editor: 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank  
Communications Division   
Editor in chief: Christian Gutlederer 
 Otto-Wagner-Platz 3, 1010 Vienna, PO Box 61 
in 
instruments 
that  sense, 
for  different  objectives.  And 
 
 
 
Tinbergen  rule:  different 
macroprudential policy is a reasonable complement to monetary policy. 
The IMF states that “leaning against the wind” is primarily the responsibility of macroprudential 
supervision  and  not  of  monetary  policy.  Within  the  economic  and  monetary  union  a  single 
monetary policy requires an additional instrument to address the asynchronous credit cycles in 
the EA Member States. The national macroprudential mandate therefore increases the degrees 
of freedom of the single monetary policy. 
 
On  the  other  hand,  the  BIS  has  a  different  view  on  the  interaction  of  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential policy. Let me quote Mr. Caruana, General Manager of BIS: 
“It  would  be  rather  elegant  if  some  kind  of  “separation  principle”  allowed  monetary  policy  to 
concentrate  exclusively  on  the  business  cycle,  while  prudential  and  macroprudential  policies 
dealt with the financial cycle. Unfortunately, we don’t think this describes the real world.”1 
Hence,  in  the  BIS’  understanding,  macroprudential  supervision  on  its  own  is  insufficient  – 
monetary policy needs to contain the build-up of financial booms. Raising rates too late and/or 
too  slowly  can  fuel  financial  booms;  which  then  lead  to  very  costly  busts.  Hence,  monetary 
policy should pay greater attention to financial booms and busts. In their view monetary easing 
of advanced economies even has led to imbalances in emerging economies.  
 
I think these two economic and political strands have to be seen complementary, not conflicting. 
Focusing on financial stability can help to mitigate unintended consequences caused by monetary 
policy. Unconventional monetary policy incorporates some relevant transmission channels that 
influence financial stability: 
  The risk taking channel: Monetary policy reduces the risk-free interest rate. 
  The  portfolio  effect:  Via  the  portfolio  switching  channel  monetary  policy  influences 
prices and yields in other financial segments (like equity markets). 
  The duration channel: The rise of bond and equity prices might not be sustainable; with 
a rising interest level they sharply decline. Prices show a boom and bust evolution. 
  Furthermore, inflation expectations increase. 
Hence,  by  complementing  monetary  policy  macroprudential  policy  can  widen  the  room  for 
maneuver  for  monetary  instruments  and  reduce  the  conflicts  of  interest  within  the  monetary 
policy. Furthermore, monetary policy and financial stability do not contradict each other as they 
address different specific targets. Monetary policy addresses the level of the (risk-free) interest 
rate while the macroprudential policy has an impact on the interest rate of bank intermediated 
credit via its impact on intermediation costs. Intermediation costs are those costs that banks add 
on  to  the  risk-free  interest  rate  in  the  context  of  internal  fund  transfer  prices.  Therefore, 
macroprudential policy addresses the mispricing of liquidity and capital costs. This means, that 
overall credit growth at rates that do not cover the refinancing and risk costs are harmful from a 
macro-economic perspective.  
 
In  the  context  of  financial  regulation  it  is  often  hypothesized  that,  financial  regulations  – 
particularly higher capital requirements – would increase banks‘ cost of funding. 
Let me develop on this. Funding costs are priced in the interaction of profitability, asset quality 
and  capitalization.  Colleagues  from  the  OeNB2  in  an  IMF  paper  have  shown  new  evidence  on 
                                                 
1 Monetary policy for financial stability. Keynote speech by Jaime Caruana at the 52nd SEACEN Governors’ 
Conference, Nov 2016 (http://www.bis.org/speeches/sp161130a.pdf) 
Seite 2 von 5 
  
 
 
this empirical relationship by  using  CDS spreads  as a proxy for funding costs and analyzing  an 
unbalanced  panel  of  54  large  banks  from  six  countries  that  cover  the  period  from  2004Q4  to 
2013Q4.  The  results  show  that  funding  costs  are  statistically  and  economically  significantly 
associated  with  bank  solvency:  A  100  bps  increase  in  effective  regulatory  capital  ratios  is 
associated with a decrease in funding costs of about 110 bps. The study concludes that stronger 
capitalization reduces funding costs.  
A sound capital basis being the foundation for a stable financial system is common sense between 
all international institutions involved in financial stability matters (like BoE, BIS or IMF and of 
course  SSM,  EBA  and  ECB  which  states  in  the  current  Financial  Stability  Report:  “The  global 
financial  crisis  underlined  the  need  for  greater  resilience  –  including  more  and  higher-quality 
capital.”3) 
 
So  based  on  this  results  does  financial  regulation  come  without  costs?  No  but,  financial 
regulation makes costs more transparent and first of all changes the distribution of costs across 
society. To minor extent it might also cause additional costs by “red tape”. 
But  assessing  the  costs  of  financial  regulation  is  not  trivial.  The  misallocation  of  costs  across 
society  leads  to  suboptimal  incentive  structures  which  in  turn  cause  substantial  social  costs. 
Financial regulation aims to internalize negative externalities: costs that have been socialized by 
banks  –  i.e.  implicit  government  guarantees  –  need  to  be  transferred  back  into  the  banks’ 
balance sheets. But this does not constitute additional social costs. Frankly speaking, cleaning-up 
the  mess  after  a  financial  crisis  is  much  more  costly  than  avoiding  it  in  the  first  place.  Hence, 
overall social costs are lowered by financial regulation. 
 
A core question regarding the interaction of the current monetary policy and the banking sector 
is: How does the low interest environment affect bank profitability? 
There are positive and negative effects. Positive effects are triggered by the increase of portfolio 
values due to the lower interest rates and the partial reduction of funding costs; while the effects 
on interest margins are negative. With a prolonged low interest environment the negative effect 
outweighs the positive effect  - unless banks accomplish to increase their credit margins. In the 
first session  on  bank profitability we will hear the results  of  a  recent OeNB study4 that shows 
that Austrian banks’ margin decrease with the short term interest rate. A drop of 100 bps in the 
reference rate is associated with a drop of 16bps in net interest margin. 
 
Coming  back  to  capital:  Banking  capitalization  is  not  only  relevant  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective. But also supports monetary policy measures as empirical analysis show. Here, the 
results of a topical study of the National Bank of Belgium5 are very interesting: Monetary policy 
transmission works better if banks are better capitalized. 
First  of  all,  the  Belgian  colleagues  show  that  European  credit  support  policies  have  been 
successful  in  stimulating  credit  flow  of  banks  to  private  sector.  And  second,  better  capitalized 
                                                                                                                                                         
2 Schmitz W.S., Sigmund M., Valderrama L. (2016): Bank Solvency and Funding Cost: New Data and New 
Results. IMF WP (forthcoming) 
3 ECB (2016): Financial Stability Review. Nov. 2016. 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialstabilityreview201611.en.pdf?f0feb4db4cc3aacc6f824b829c4f
27d4 
4 Kerbl S., Sigmund M. (2016): From low to negative rates: an asymmetric dilemma. OeNB Financial Stability 
Report 32. Dec. 2016. https://www.oenb.at/Publikationen/Finanzmarkt/Finanzmarktstabilitaetsbericht.html 
5 National Bank of Belgium (2016): The transmission mechanism of credit support policies in the Euro Area. 
Working Paper Research No 302. Oct 2016. https://www.nbb.be/doc/ts/publications/wp/wp302en.pdf 
Seite 3 von 5 
  
 
 
banks  have  on  average  responded  more  to  the  credit  support  policies  of  the  Eurosystem  as  a 
result of more favorable size, retail and liquidity effects. 
 
An  Austrian  Study6  supports  the  finding  that  poorly  capitalized  banks  are  less  responsive  to 
monetary policy changes. This topical study is based on a unique data set that matches data of 
non-financial  firms  (that  answered  a  questionnaire  concerning  credit  limitations  they  faced  by 
their banks) with rating information on this firms as well as data on their major bank. 
 
Of course the major question in this context is about the optimal level of capital banks need to 
hold. So what is a sufficient capital basis for banks in the long run? I would like to see that from a 
functional  perspective:  A  bank  is  sufficiently  capitalized,  when  –  even  after  a  major  external 
shock  has  materialized  –  the  bank  is  still  able  to  refinance  itself  on  the  market  at  reasonable 
spreads.  Banks  on  their  own  define  what  reasonable  spreads  are  from  their  perspective  as 
spreads differ depending on size, business model and region. 
Hence, investors that fund European banks rather than regulators or supervisors define the long-
term  optimal  level  of  capitalization.  This  means  also  that  there  is  an  upper  limit  for  bank 
capitalization. Above a certain level you will not find anybody to invest in bank shares. 
 
Similar  and  connected  to  the  issue  of  optimal  capital  level  is  the  introduction  of  MREL  (the 
Minimum  Requirement  for  Own  Funds  and  Eligible  Liabilities)  and  therefore  the  question  on 
how much MREL is needed? 
The MREL requirement is designed to ensure a ‘bail-in’ of shareholders and creditors in the case 
of  a  failing  bank.  It  safeguards  that  a  bank  has  sufficient  shares  and  debt  instruments  issued  to 
absorb losses or to convert into new shares to recapitalize systemic functions. In particular, it is 
questionable how capital buffers are linked to the amount of MREL needed. 
In my opinion, it strongly depends on the bank‘s individual resolution strategy. If a bank is not 
recapitalized in a resolution it does not need to mirror its capital buffers in the MREL amount. 
Moreover, if a bank in resolution is fully or close to 100% recapitalized it will also not need to 
include its capital buffers fully in the MREL amount as capital buffers shall absorb losses in times 
of  stressed  periods.  However,  the  right  balance  of  MREL  has  to  be  found  to  ensure  that  the 
recapitalized institute has sufficient capital to access funding markets. 
 
Let me come to another often quoted assumption in the context of financial regulation: Higher 
capital requirements restrict bank credit supply. 
What  do  we  observe?  Higher  capital  requirements  cause  deleveraging  but  without  hampering 
credit to private sector7: 
  Capital has contributed the lion’s share to the leverage reduction in the Euro Area (88%) 
and Austria (73%) between Oct. 2008 and Feb. 2014. 
  Contrary  to  popular  opinion,  bank  funding  for  the  real  economy  and  for  governments 
has increased even after the crisis, despite substantial deleveraging both in the Euro Area 
and in Austria. 
                                                 
6 Hahn, F.R., Hölzl, W., Kwapil, C. (2016): The Credit Channel and the Role of Monetary Policy Before, During 
and  After  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  –  A  Micro  Data  Approach  to  the  Analysis  of  Bank-firm  Relationships. 
WIFO. 
7 Eidenberger J., Schmitz S.W., Steiner, K. (2014): The Priorities of Deleveraging in the Euro Area and Austria 
and Its Implications for CESEE. OeNB Financial Stability Report 27. July 2014. 
https://www.oenb.at/Publikationen/Finanzmarkt/Finanzmarktstabilitaetsbericht.html 
Seite 4 von 5 
    The  decrease  in  total  assets  was  driven  by  reductions  in  interbank  assets  and  external 
assets, while funding for governments and for the real economy have increased since the 
outbreak of the crisis. 
These  results  go  in  line  with  an  important  point  the  OECD  always  makes:  capital  levels  have 
increased since the crises without leading to a credit crunch. 
 
Let me comment on this from a financial stability perspective. This deleveraging development is 
to  be  welcomed,  as  reduced  leverage  decreases  both  the  potential  for  risks  and  the  degree  of 
financial interconnectedness and thus mitigates systemic risks and strengthens financial stability. 
 
Hence,  deleveraging  takes  place  without  constraining  private  sector  loans.  This  empirical 
evidence  is  also  supported  by  a  topical  EBA  survey,  the  EBA  Risk  Assessment  Questionnaire 
2016. And I quote: “Results from the Risk Assessment Questionnaire confirm that banks plan to 
continue moving towards their predominantly traditional lending role in the financial sector.”8  
Further you can take out of this survey that Banks will endeavor to increase lending volumes to 
the corporate sector, in particular SMEs, and to households, including both residential mortgage 
and  consumer  credit  loans.  The  strategic  goal  of  European  banks  is  the  further  increase  of 
corporate and household loans. 
 
To sum up, Monetary policy and financial stability are complementary. 
A  better  understanding  of  how  banks  work  and  how  they  are  steered  (namely  via  dynamic 
balance sheet optimization) helps not only to implement effective micro- and macroprudential 
regulation but also better targeted monetary policy. 
Banks  and  their  environment  have  dramatically  changed  over  the  last  years.  Banks  are  not  the 
same  as  before  the  crisis.  Hence,  it  is  essential  that  models  and  analytical  tools  are  frequently 
adapted to fit the current environment. 
 
And the conclusions regarding one of my main concerns from my perspective as a supervisor are 
the following: 
  Higher capital requirements decrease social costs. 
  Solid capitalization also improves monetary policy transmission; 
  The  benefits  of  higher  capital  requirements  –  with  an  upper  limit  –  outweigh  the 
potential costs. 
 
Coming  back  to  my  picture  of  the  horses  and  the  carriage  at  the  beginning;  I  would  like  to 
conclude, monetary policy and financial stability are not two horses pulling the carriage in the 
opposite  direction  –  but  they  should  coordinate  well  and  make  potential  conflicts  of  interest 
transparent. 
Overall the two horses look forward and together make sure that the carriage runs smoothly on 
a bumpy road. 
 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                 
8 EBA (2016): Risk Assessment of the European Banking System. Dec. 2016. 
https://www.eba.europa.eu/documents/10180/1315397/EBA+Risk+Assessment+Report_December+2016.pdf 
Seite 5 von 5 
 