  An address by Lesetja Kganyago,  
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank,  
at the CEEF Africa Annual Banquet  
in celebration of 21 years of leadership investment 
 Johannesburg, 
19 June 2017 
 South Africa’s crisis of confidence and the policy response 
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Thank you for inviting me to address you today. 
 The global economy has been as favourable recently as it has been  for some time. 
We are experiencing a synchronised cyclical upturn across major economies. South 
Africa’s  terms  of  trade  are  near  all-time  highs.  Meanwhile,  global  financial  markets 
have resumed a search for yield, causing stronger capital inflows to emerging markets, 
including South Africa.  
 By contrast, the domestic economy has fallen into recession, with output contracting 
in both the last quarter of 2016 and the first quarter of 2017. Although this is the first 
technical recession since 2009, it continues a trend of exceptionally poor economic 
performance. We have warned about poor economic performance for several years, 
and although we did not expect the first-quarter GDP1 figure to be quite so weak in 
quarter-on-quarter terms, our assessment in the May MPC2 meeting was that the risks 
to the growth forecast were on the downside.  
                                                            
1 gross domestic product 
2 Monetary Policy Committee 
 Page 1 of 10 
Meanwhile, inflation has returned to within the target range, as expected. Some recent 
numbers  have  come  in  a  bit  lower  than  anticipated,  but  our  forecast  still  indicates 
inflation  in  the  upper  half  of  the  target  range  across  the  forecast  horizon,  which 
stretches to the end of 2019.  
 The combination of lower inflation and lower growth suggests, at least to some, that 
the time has come for rate cuts. The MPC will meet in late July to consider how the 
outlook has changed, and we will make the appropriate decision at that time. We are 
not here for me to give interesting hints about the next repo rate decision. The best 
source on MPC decisions is the MPC statement, not speeches a month prior.  
 Instead,  this  speech  is  about  our  broader  policy  constraints  and  the  medium-term 
outlook for the South African economy. We confront major challenges – challenges 
which cannot be resolved in any meaningful sense by fine-tuning the repo rate – and 
we need to grapple with those problems. Monetary policy does have a role to play, but 
it is crucial to acknowledge the limits to monetary policy and to focus on  its optimal 
contribution over a medium-term horizon.  
 Today,  I  will  start  by  discussing  South  Africa’s  macroeconomic  strategy  since  2009 
before turning to the outlook. 
 The world economy and South Africa’s macroeconomic strategy 
 The most recent Global Financial Crisis was a huge economic earthquake, one which 
threw  South  Africa  and  most  other  countries  into  recession.  Like  many  big 
earthquakes, it was followed by a series of aftershocks. One was the euro area crisis 
of 2011-12, which produced two years of negative growth in one of our most important 
trading partners. More recently, the global economy has suffered a second aftershock 
in  the  form  of  an  emerging  market  slowdown,  linked  to  weaker  commodity  prices, 
overstretched  policy  frameworks,  and  risk-off  sentiment  in  global  financial  markets. 
Because  of  these  shocks,  world  economic  growth  has  repeatedly  fallen  short  of 
forecasts. 
  Page 2 of 10 
The South African policy response to these conditions can be summarised as ‘support 
and wait’. Macroeconomic policy provided support in the form of low interest rates and 
large budget deficits. At the same time, we waited for the global economy to recover. 
But this strategy has yielded disappointing results. In part, this is because we ended 
up  waiting  much  longer  than  expected.  Furthermore,  as  the  waiting  went  on  and 
domestic growth kept slowing, loose policy settings became not simply a response to 
slow growth but also one of its causes.  
 As  the  post-Crisis  period  dragged  on  without  a  robust  global  recovery,  persistently 
large fiscal deficits caused our debt-to-GDP ratio to almost double.3 By importing large 
quantities of savings from the rest of the world and then exporting revenue to pay the 
interest, our current account widened to become very large, exceeding 6% of GDP in 
some quarters. Investor doubt about the strength of our macroeconomic framework 
contributed to  higher  borrowing  costs  as  well  as  exchange  rate  weakness,  with  the 
rand  becoming  one  of  the  world’s  worst-performing  currencies.  The  depreciated 
currency  was,  of  course,  a  major  reason  why  inflation  forecasts  began  indicating 
prolonged breaches of the top end of our inflation target range. By 2014, it was clear 
that  this  broad  macroeconomic  trajectory  was  unsustainable;  something  had  to 
change.  Accordingly,  monetary  policy  embarked  on  a  gradual  tightening  cycle,  with 
the  repo  rate  rising  from  5%  to  7%  over  the  course  of  two  years.  Similarly,  fiscal 
policymakers set out a consolidation agenda to stabilise debt and contain spending 
growth. 
 It would be wrong to say that policymakers slammed on the brakes. Rather, we eased 
off the accelerator. The monetary policy adjustment was the most limited and gradual 
in recent history, with the repo rate rising by just 2 percentage points over 27 months. 
At 7%, which is where we are now, the policy rate remains quite low from a historical 
perspective.  
 Meanwhile,  although  fiscal  policy  has  become  less  expansionary,  deficits  have 
remained larger than 3.5% of GDP over the past three years. These deficits have been 
                                                           
3 In gross debt terms, as a share of GDP, government’s debt stock was 26.5% of GDP in 2008. In 
2016, it was 50.5% of GDP, and IMF forecasts indicate that it will reach 52.5% of GDP in 2017. 
 Page 3 of 10 
more than simply the unfortunate consequence of low tax revenues caused by slowing 
growth. In structural terms – that is, correcting for the economic cycle – South Africa’s 
fiscal deficit has still averaged about 3% over the past three years, according to IMF4 
estimates.5 As an illustration, 3% is greater than the output of the entire agriculture, 
forestry  and  fishing  sector;  it  is  a  large  amount  to  borrow  every  year  and  it  injects 
substantial spending into the economy. 
 South Africa’s macroeconomic settings also look accommodative in comparison with 
those of other countries. In fiscal terms, most of our peer countries have borrowed less 
heavily. Amongst the major non-oil commodity exporters, South Africa’s average post-
Crisis deficit is larger than any country’s except Brazil’s.6 Indeed, not only have many 
of  our  peers  achieved  smaller  deficits  than  we  have;  sometimes  they  have  even 
managed budget surpluses. For example, Chile, Colombia and Peru all exploited the 
post-Crisis rebound in commodity prices to balance their budgets.7 If anything, South 
Africa stands out for running consistently large budget deficits despite historically high 
commodity prices. The result has been higher debt service costs and reduced fiscal 
space.  
 In monetary policy terms,  South Africa more closely resembles its emerging market 
peers. Most of these countries began tightening policy around 2013 or 2014. Some of 
these  countries  faced  inflation  well  above  their  targets  and  therefore  raised  rates 
sharply. The most prominent cases were Brazil and Russia, where policy rates went 
up by 700 and 1 150 basis points respectively. Where the inflation challenge was less 
extreme, smaller adjustments were possible. Colombia, for instance, tightened by 450 
basis points, Indonesia by 200 basis points, and Chile by just 50 basis points.  
                                                            
4 International Monetary Fund 
5 The April 2017 Fiscal Monitor estimates South Africa’s structural budget balance at -3.4% for 2014,  
-2.8% for 2015 and -2.8% for 2016. Since 2009, the structural budget balance has averaged -3.5% of 
GDP. Internal SARB estimates are very similar.  
6 This comparison refers to the following countries (with the average 2010-2016 fiscal balances in 
brackets): Brazil (-5.1%), South Africa (-3.9%), Argentina (-3.6%), Australia (-3.4%), Canada (-2.2%), 
Colombia (-2.1%), New Zealand (-1.9%), Indonesia (-1.8%), Chile (-0.7%) and Peru (0%).  
7 Specifically, Chile recorded budget surpluses in 2011 and 2012, Colombia in 2012, and Peru in each year from 
2010-2013. 
 Page 4 of 10 
More recently, some emerging markets have had space to cut rates. The prevailing 
pattern has been that the countries that are closer to their inflation targets, and which 
previously increased rates more, now have greater scope to cut. For instance, inflation 
in Chile has fallen from 5.7% at its peak to just 2.6%, below the 3% inflation target, 
permitting the central bank to reduce rates by 100 basis points. In Brazil, inflation has 
declined from a high of 10.6% at the start of 2016 to 4.1% in May, and the policy rate 
has come down from 14.25% to 10.25%. Brazil’s inflation target, for your information, 
is a point of 4.5% within a range of 3-6%. 
 In  sum,  we  have  run  accommodative  macroeconomic  policies  throughout  the  post-
Crisis period. Since 2014, the degree of stimulus provided by policy has been reduced 
to  contain  inflation  and  slow  the  pace  of  debt  accumulation.  Policy  nonetheless 
remains broadly supportive of economic activity. Despite this fact, growth has slowed 
steadily  throughout  the  post-Crisis  period.  To  some  extent,  we  have  been  able  to 
blame  this  on  an  unfavourable  global  economic  environment.  Yet,  now  the  global 
economy looks as healthy as it has in years – but the South African economy is still 
struggling. So why are we doing so badly? And what can be done about it?  
 South Africa’s crisis of confidence 
 At  the  present  juncture,  our  fundamental  problem  is  confidence.  In  economic 
discussions,  ‘confidence’  is  sometimes  an  opaque  and  disreputable  concept.    Paul 
Krugman in 2010 coined the term ‘confidence fairy’ for when pundits rely on magical 
thinking  to  explain  how  their  favourite  policies  can have  only  good  effects.8  But  I’m 
afraid that, in South Africa at the moment, we can’t comfort ourselves that confidence 
is a mythical creature. It would be more accurate to say that it is very real – but badly 
endangered.  
 We  have  reliable  measures  of  business  and  consumer  confidence.  The  BER’s9 
surveys show that the confidence levels of both these sectors are at their lowest since 
                                                           
8 See the article by Paul Krugman, ‘Myths of austerity, published on 1 July 2010, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/02/opinion/02krugman.html.  
9 Bureau for Economic Research (Stellenbosch University) 
 Page 5 of 10 
the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  These  two  indicators  slipped  below  their  long-term 
averages in late 2015 and have stayed there ever since. Just last week, for example, 
new data for business confidence in the second quarter came out at a fresh post-Crisis 
low, with 70% of the respondents pessimistic about local business conditions.  
 Weak  confidence  has  profound  economic  consequences.  When  people  are  this 
worried  about  the  economy,  theory  tells  us,  they  don’t  make  large  purchases. 
Businesses defer investments. All of this weakens economic growth. These theoretical 
predictions are completely consistent with what we see in the data. 
 Why  is  confidence  so subdued? The answer  is  simple.  Everyone  in  South  Africa  is 
worried about their country. Twice a year, South African Reserve Bank (SARB) hosts 
monetary policy forums in 10 major and secondary cities.  During these forums we find 
that people want to talk about governance, about the exchange rate, about credit rating 
downgrades. They’re worried about policy; they’re worried about living in a junk status 
country. It is a depressing discussion, but in a way it is impressive: economic issues 
often seem obscure, yet people quickly become informed and passionate when the 
situation is serious. 
 The message we get from regular South African citizens is fundamentally very similar 
to  the  one  we  hear  from  the  ratings  agencies.  We  have  deep-rooted  problems  of 
unemployment, poverty and inequality. Our economy is not growing as fast as it needs 
to, and this problem has been getting worse.  
 Nonetheless,  South  Africa  still  has  strengths.  In  particular,  we  have  functioning 
institutions  that  deliver  on  their  mandates.  We  also  have  sophisticated  firms  and 
markets, even if there is always room for improvement. Nonetheless, these general 
positives help to maintain South Africa’s status as an upper-middle-income country, a 
member of the G2010, and a member of the BRICS11 grouping. Many other countries 
do  worse.  But  if South  Africa  doesn’t  start  doing  better,  it  won’t  be  able to meet  its 
                                                           
10 Group of Twenty 
11 Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa 
 Page 6 of 10 
challenges – and it will be overtaken by other countries. So what do we do about our 
growth trap, our downgrade challenges, and our crisis of confidence? 
 There are roughly two narratives forming around the subject. One of them holds that 
if  the  ratings  agencies  don’t  like  us,  that’s  their  problem  –  and  their  judgement  is 
unreliable and biased anyhow. Policy settings are much too tight; fiscal and monetary 
discipline really means asphyxiation. If private confidence is so elusive, it might as well 
be  ignored.  This  view  is  wrong-headed  and  dangerous.  In  my  view,  it  amounts  to 
shooting yourself in the foot, finding it hurts, then shooting yourself in the other foot to 
get even.  
 The alternative view is that South Africa needs to re-establish its strengths and recover 
from there. Back before the Global Financial Crisis, some observers used to look at 
growth rates of 3% or even 4% and complain that they weren’t high enough, that we 
had implemented such excellent macroeconomic policies and worked so hard to make 
the country attractive to investors, yet the rewards were meagre. We are now seeing 
what it looks like when we are not so virtuous. We don’t grow at 3% anymore; we don’t 
even grow fast enough to keep up with the growth rate of the population. There was a 
lot  to  be  said  for  an  economy  with  rock-solid  finances,  confident  investors  and  3% 
growth. I think we can do even better than 3% growth, but we certainly need not do 
worse. 
 The contribution of the South African Reserve Bank 
So what is the contribution from the SARB?  Our fundamental, constitutional mandate 
is  to  protect  the  value  of  the  currency  in  the  interests  of  balanced  and  sustainable 
growth. Balanced growth is about seeing to it that the value of the currency allows both 
exporters and importers to engage productively in the economy. It also means that the 
economy’s growth is sustainable, that imbalances are neither generated that cause 
crises through over-heating nor throw the economy into severe downturns.  All of this 
is clearly in the interest of all South Africans. 
We  implement  this  mandate  through  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  framework.  We 
sometimes hear the objection that targeting inflation is bad for growth  – that is, one 
 Page 7 of 10 
part of our constitutional mandate conflicts with the other, and protecting the buying 
power  of  the  rand  is  anti-development.  However,  low  inflation  is  actually  the  ally  of 
development. There are several reasons for this. Low inflation helps maintain the value 
of  the  money  in  your  pocket.  This  is  good  for  all  South  Africans,  but  especially  the 
marginalised and poor – those without the information or power to protect themselves 
from inflation. Low inflation also helps maintain the competitiveness of South African 
goods  and  services  in foreign  and domestic  markets, by  moderating  real  exchange 
rate  appreciation.  Furthermore,  low  inflation  produces  lower  interest  rates.    In 
summary, there is no long-term trade-off between growth or inflation.  Keeping inflation 
low, protecting the value of the currency, is supportive of growth.   
Through history, some countries have tried to deny these truths, pretending that high 
inflation somehow begets sustainable growth. This kind of macroeconomic populism 
is usually a precursor to misery, not least because it impoverishes nearly everyone in 
society. The few who benefit are those that somehow are able to capture a dwindling 
supply  of  the  necessities  of  life  or  gain  privileged  access  to  foreign  currency  (for  a 
short  time).    Neither  the  middle  classes  nor  the  poor  of  high  inflation  countries  are 
likely today to be partisans of such an approach to policy.  
The  impact  of  inflation  on  interest  rates  is  often  misunderstood.  This  is  probably 
because the interest rate is our main tool for controlling inflation, so when interest rates 
rise the reason for this is typically higher inflation. Sometimes people suggest that if 
we would just ignore the inflation, then interest rates wouldn’t have to move and we 
could have more growth. But as I explained in my speech at the University of Kwazulu-
Natal earlier in the year, interest rates incorporate compensation for expected inflation. 
For this reason, as the Fisher equation states, the rate of interest is equal to expected 
inflation plus a real premium. If you have two identical countries, and one has a three 
percent inflation target and the other has a six percent target, then interest rates will 
be exactly three per cent higher in the country with the higher target. If that country 
raises its target to nine per cent, then interest rates will end up rising another three 
percent.  And  if  that  country  simply  stops  trying  to  control  inflation  at  all,  then  it  will 
become harder to borrow in its currency, with lenders switching to some other currency 
with more predictable inflation.  In the short run, you can get lower interest rates by 
 Page 8 of 10 
surprising people with higher inflation. But once they wake up – and investors aren’t 
slow to see higher inflation – interest rates have to rise. 
For this reason, one of the most effective ways for lowering interest rates is to keep 
inflation low and predictable. Looking around the world, the evidence is very clear that 
low inflation countries have low interest rates and high inflation countries have high 
interest  rates.  In  the extreme  cases,  such as  Sweden,  inflation  is so  low  they  even 
have negative interest rates. Sweden’s repo rate, for example, is currently at -0.5 per 
cent.  By  contrast,  in  countries  with  much  higher  inflation,  like  Argentina  or  Nigeria, 
policy rates are much higher. Nigeria’s is currently 14 per cent. Argentina’s is 26.25 
per cent.12 So although it is the case that interest rates typically rise in response to 
higher inflation, on average interest rates are lower because of lower inflation. This is 
why inflation targeting is a way to get lower rates over time.  
This  sets  the  context  for  our  current  policy  settings.  Inflation  in  South  Africa  has 
moderated in recent months. We now have a good chance of getting inflation down 
well  within  the  middle  part  of  the  target.  Inflation  is  likely  to  move  in  this  direction 
because of declining food inflation, our policy communications, the stronger exchange 
rate, and the sensitivity of price and wage setters to weak economic conditions. If we 
can keep inflation lower, anchoring inflation expectations, that should in turn generate 
a lower rate of interest to support the economy.  
Unfortunately, we also have to worry about higher inflation if things go wrong – that is, 
if the exchange rate begins depreciating again, if wage settlements are excessive, or 
if our monetary policy communication isn’t heard, loud and clear. These factors limit 
our policy space.13 
The ratings agencies have been clear that the effectiveness of the central bank is one 
of the strongest pillars supporting this economy – a claim that speaks to both our price 
and financial stability mandates. We will continue to honour our constitutional mandate 
and the trust placed in us by the South African society.  
                                                           
12 Argentina’s May 2017 inflation rate was 24%. Nigeria’s was 16.25%. (Data from Haver.) 
 
 Page 9 of 10 
Thank you.  
  Page 10 of 10 
