Vítor Constâncio: Investment and growth in advanced economies -
selected takeaways from the ECB's Sintra Forum
Contribution  of  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Mr  Philipp
Hartmann (ECB) and Mr Peter McAdam (ECB) for VoxEU, 5 July 2017.
 The  European  Central  Bank’s  2017  Sintra  Forum  on  Central  Banking  built  a  bridge  from  the
currently  strengthening  recovery  in  Europe  to  longer-term  growth  issues  for  and  structural
change in advanced economies. In this column the organisers highlight some of the main points
from the discussions, including what the sources of weak productivity and investment are and
what type of economic polarisation tendencies the new growth model seems to be associated
with.
This  year’s  ECB  Sintra  Forum  on  Central  Banking  focused  on  the  major  real  economy
developments  that  surround  and  interact  with  monetary  policy.  Policymakers,  academics  and
market economists debated on the topics of innovation, investment and productivity as well as
business  cycles,  growth  and  associated  policies.  In  this  post  we  summarise  six  of  the  main
themes  that  were  keenly  discussed  in  Sintra  in  June  2017:  explaining  the  global  productivity
slowdown; the implications of technical progress for employment; explaining the laggard post-
crisis recovery; sources of weak investment; the complementarity between demand and supply
policies; and relevant aspects of the broader societal context. The full set of papers, discussions
and speeches can be found on the Sintra Forum website while video recordings of all sessions
are on the ECB’s YouTube channel.
Explaining  the  productivity  slowdown:  techno-pessimism,  fading  research  effort  or
mismeasurement?
“Perhaps the most remarkable fact about economic growth in recent decades is the slowdown in
productivity growth that occurred around the year 2000,” said Chad Jones (2017) in motivating
his Sintra contribution. This phenomenon, which has affected many advanced economies, has
been widely argued for a number of years and may have become more pronounced following the
financial crisis (e.g. OECD 2015, Adler et al. 2017). Jones suggests studying the sources of this
slowdown via the two main forces that explain productivity in modern growth theory: innovation
and the misallocation of production factors. Regarding the latter, Jones (2017) reports key results
of the literature that associates the dispersion of marginal products of the same factors across
firms  in  the  US  and  in  Europe  with  degrees  of  misallocation  (e.g.  Gopinath  et  al.  2017,
highlighting deteriorating factor allocation in Italy and Spain). A recent paper by Bils et al. (2017)
suggests, however, that if one corrects for measurement error, the entire increase of allocative
inefficiency in US manufacturing since the late 1970s disappears. It may therefore be advisable
to wait until measurement errors are also accounted for in the literature on non-manufacturing
sectors and on Europe before drawing clear-cut conclusions.
Regarding innovation Jones argues that their contribution can either be driven by the impact of
new ideas and processes on total factor productivity (“ideas TFP”) or the research effort pushing
new  ideas  (such  as  the  number  of  researchers  employed).  Gordon  (2016),  for  example,
suggested for the US that ideas with the same productivity benefits are harder to discover today
than in history. Jones – in joint work with Bloom, Van Reenen and Webb (2017) – finds that this
is  a  rather  general  phenomenon  across  different  sectors  and  products,  detecting  significant
reductions  in  “ideas  TFP”.  Over  many  decades,  however,  this  was  compensated  by  over-
proportionate increases in research effort. As research employment growth has slowed down
since  the  early  2000s  –  mostly  in  Japan,  significantly  in  the  US  and  to  a  lesser  extent  in  the
European Union (see Figure 1) – the phenomenon has become more harmful today than it used
to be. This can explain the productivity slowdown and is consistent with Gordon’s thesis. But it
 1 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
puts the emphasis on ways on how to maintain a sufficiently high research effort.
On  historical  grounds,  Joel  Mokyr  (2017)  challenged  the  view  that  it  is  the  nature  of  today’s
innovations that accounts for the productivity slowdown and staged a forceful rebuttal of “techno-
pessimism”.  First,  economists’  primary  measures  of  innovation  –  estimations  of  total  factor
productivity and counting of patents – both underestimate their productivity effects. Second, in
history humans have overcome the fact that the technological fruits that can still be picked are
hanging higher and higher through building “taller and taller ladders”. This “arboreal metaphor”
illustrates  a  feedback  from  technology  to  science.  The  technological  tools  detected  over
centuries  that  made  that  possible  included  the  telescope,  the  microscope,  the  eudiometer  or,
more  recently,  x-ray  crystallography.  Two  prominent  and  powerful  tools  today  are  laser
technology and computers. The “hot technology of the day” is machine learning – according to
Hal  Varian  (2017)  –  and  quantum  computing  is  on  the  way.  So,  Mokyr  does  not  see  why  the
growth in economic welfare should slow down for technological reasons. In this context, it was
interesting  that  an  online  poll  showed  that  72%  of  voting  Sintra  participants  felt  that  the
productivity  gains  from  the  ICT  (information  and  communication  technology)  revolution  will
 2 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
accelerate, given that its full potential has not emerged yet. Reinhilde Veugelers (2017) added
that it is diffusion that makes innovation such a powerful growth engine. She referred to recent
evidence  produced  by  the  OECD  suggesting  that  the  diffusion  and  adoption  of  the  latest
technology across firms may be more of a problem than a lack of innovation as such (Andrews
et  al.  2015).  (This  point  had  already  been  much  emphasised  by  Mario  Draghi  and  Catherine
Mann at the 2015 ECB Sintra Forum; see Constâncio et al. 2015.) She reckoned that the most
potent mechanism for the transfer of new know-how is when the innovating researchers move
from frontier firms to other sectors or firms.
In addition to Mokyr, several other speakers also considered measurement problems affecting
productivity assessments, e.g. through the underestimation of GDP (the numerator of aggregate
productivity measures). Jones (2017) and Varian (2017) referred to software or services provided
for free or at very low prices by ICT firms or not-for-profit institutions (e.g., Facebook, Google or
Wikipedia).  The  problems  are  particularly  pronounced  in  areas  involving  rapid  quality  change,
such as photography, the global positioning system (GPS) or, more generally, the smartphones
in which these and many other applications are embedded. At zero or near-zero prices, hedonic
quality adjustments in nominal national accounts are difficult. Recent literature, such as Byrne et
al. (2016) or Syverson (2017), however, argues that the “free” services and other ICT features
only account for a small part of the productivity slowdown in the US. Based on the practice of
statistical  agencies  to  impute  value  developments  of  disappearing  products  from  value
developments  of  surviving  products,  Philippe  Aghion  presented  in  Sintra  sizeable  growth
underestimation for France and the US, amounting to slightly more than half a percentage point
of measured annual growth (see Aghion et al. 2017b for the US). But Jones (2017) points out that
the authors do not find a substantial change over time, which would be required to provide an
explanation for the measured productivity slowdown around 2000.
All this led to a debate about the relative roles of the private and the public sector in innovation.
Reinhilde  Veugelers  (2017,  Chart  1)  showed  that  the  European  Union  is  particularly  weak  in
business research and development (R&D; constituting only about 1% of GDP) relative to major
advanced and emerging economies, having even fallen behind China over the last decade. Chad
Jones  (2017,  Chart  3)  showed  that  after  large  contributions  in  the  late  1950s  and  1960s,
government R&D has become much less important in US intellectual property investments over
the  last  decades.  This  evidence  led  Simon  Johnson  (2017)  to  identify  the  government  as  “a
primary  culprit”  for  the  US  losing  its  world  technological  leadership  and  the  growth  and
employment that went along with it. He called for increased public spending on basic scientific
research  and  the  creation  of  new  technology  clusters,  based  on  local  expertise  and
specialisation, and co-funded by the federal government. Mariana Mazzucato promoted mission-
directed government investments in innovation (one example being the US Apollo programme of
the 1960s and early 1970s), which “co-shape and co-create markets” and benefit from patient
long-term  strategic  financing  (Mazzucato  and  Semieniuk  2017).  She  was  sceptical  of  indirect
forms  of  financing,  such  as  tax  advantages,  which  may  enhance  profits  without  necessarily
ensuring  “additionality”.  Dietmar  Harhoff  (2017)  concurred  that  the  preferential  treatment  of
intellectual property, such as “patent boxes”, amounted to beggar-thy-neighbour policies with little
positive impact on innovation.
Does technical progress create or destroy jobs?
One of the fundamental tenets of growth theory, underlined by the discussion summarised in the
previous  section,  is  that  technical  progress  makes  long-term  per  capita  growth  possible  in
equilibrium (Solow 1956, 1957). But recently concerns have arisen that the technical advances of
our  times  may  be  particularly  destructive  in  replacing  jobs  (the  dystopian  variant  of  techno-
pessimism, according to Joel Mokyr (2017)). David Autor and Anna Salomons (2017) forcefully
argue  that  this  has  not  been  the  case  in  history,  despite  such  concerns  having  emerged
periodically over the last 200 years. Covering 19 advanced economies between 1970 and 2007,
they  find  that  productivity  growth  has  been  mildly  positive  for  aggregate  employment.  Their
 3 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
country-industry panel regressions suggest that – over long periods of time – the negative effect
of productivity growth on employment in the same industry is more than compensated by positive
“spillovers”  in  terms  of  expansions  in  other  industries.  Thus,  structural  change  triggered  by
technical progress, ultimately, creates more employment in new sectors than it destroys in old
ones.
Does this pattern change over time? Figure 2, taken from Autor and Salomons’ (2017) Sintra
paper,  compares  the  estimated  own  (“internal”)  industry  effects,  the  external  effects  on  (or
spillovers to) other industries and the net effects for four different decades. In line with the pooled
results,  the  internal  effects  are  consistently  negative  and  the  external  effects  consistently
positive. In the 2000s, however, the positive external effects are so small that the net effects turn
negative. Whether this means a reversal of the historical pattern is open to debate. The authors
indicate that as early as in the 1980s negative and positive effects were basically cancelling each
other  out  but  strong  positive  spillovers  returned  in  the  1990s.  Moreover,  preliminary  follow-up
work with a different database going up until 2014 seems to suggest that another recovery of the
benign productivity-employment relationship may have emerged (though these results could be
subject to change). Ultimately, only the future will tell. Indeed, another online survey showed that
participants  of  the  Sintra  Forum  were  divided  on  this  issue.  43%  of  voters  indicated  that
technological innovation will have an insignificant impact on employment in the next 10 years.
28% felt that the net impact would be positive and an equal share that it would be negative.
 4 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Interestingly, the historical productivity-employment nexus is quite different across sectors. For
example, the strongest positive employment spillovers originate from productivity growth in low-
tech services (capturing e.g. car sales, real estate, hotels and catering or social and personal
services).  Significantly  positive  spillovers  also  emerge 
from  high-tech  services  (e.g.
telecommunication  and  financial  intermediation)  as  well  as  health  and  education.  Autor  and
Salomons do not find significant external effects of other sectors. More worrying, however, are
their results on the effects of productivity growth on the composition of labour demand. They find
clear evidence of “polarisation” in the group of 19 advanced economies in that most new jobs
were  –  on  average  –  created  for  highly  skilled  employees,  whereas  jobs  for  medium  or  low-
skilled workers grew slowly (see Figure 3).
 5 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Explaining the slow post-crisis recovery: demand or supply?
While slower productivity advances may have been weighing on economic growth since the early
2000s, it cannot explain why recoveries towards potential growth were so weak and slow. Bob
Hall  (2017)  tries  to  identify  sources  of  stagnation  tendencies  in  his  Sintra  paper  by  looking  at
developments in real earnings per member of the population in six major advanced economies
(France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States) between 2000 and
2014. He regards this as a particularly suitable metric, because it measures the well-being of a
majority of populations. In the seven years following the start of the financial crisis, Germany in
particular  but  also  France  appear  to  have  experienced  little  stagnation,  with  positive  annual
growth  rates  of  labour  earnings.  The  most  stagnating  economies  were  Italy  and  Spain  with
negative annual growth rates of almost 2%, whereas the UK and the US saw more moderate
stagnation.
Hall  suggests  assessing  the  plausibility  of  factors  explaining  stagnation  tendencies  by
 6 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
decomposing real earnings per capita into seven components (the labour share of total income,
multifactor  productivity,  the  capital-output  ratio,  hours  per  worker,  the  employment  rate,  the
labour-force participation rate and the ratio of working-age population to total population). Table 1,
taken from his paper, shows the annual growth rates for five of these components between 2007
and 2014. First of all, the many green (favourable, mostly positive values) cells in the first row
illustrate the relatively positive developments for German workers. Second, the declining labour
share in total income (see first column “Share”) is a broad-based international problem, which
Hall characterised as “the hot topic in quantitative macroeconomics”. (Not only is it present in the
US,  many  European  countries  and  Japan  but  also  in  China;  see  Karabarbounis  and  Neiman
(2014),  Figures  II  and  III,  and  Hall  2017,  Figure  2).  Third,  protracted  unemployment  weighs
particularly  on  labour  earnings  in  Southern  Europe  (“Employment  rate”  column).  The  primary
stagnation factor in France is the labour share while in the UK it is productivity. Finally, the single
red (negative value) cell in the last column (“Participation”) suggests that declining labour market
participation is a problem that is very much in evidence in the US.
From the large diversity across countries and labour income components, Hall (2017) finds it
implausible that “unitary theories” of stagnation can explain these empirical facts. Rather, each
country seems to have its own story, involving particular patterns of factor shares, productivity
growth, unemployment, labour supply and demographics. Moreover, many of the key factors are
not of a cyclical  nature  and  therefore  cannot  be  effectively  cured  with  expansionary  monetary
policy.  Instead,  some  of  them  belong  to  supply  components,  such  as  labour  participation  or
productivity, to which policy attention should turn, in Hall’s view.
Gauti Eggertsson (2017) challenged this, based on a different reading of the facts. Referring to a
 7 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
host of previous papers, he argued that New Keynesian secular stagnation theory can make a
valuable  contribution  to  understanding  the  slow  post-crisis  recovery.  First,  the  financial  crisis
may have involved an aggregate demand shock that lowered the real natural rate of interest, so
that the effective lower bound of interest rates prevented central banks from exercising enough
monetary policy stimulus. The resulting low inflation and growth in the euro area, the UK and the
US would go hand-in-hand with sub-par labour income growth. Second, the effect of the crisis
may have been asymmetric in the euro area, with Germany being less negatively affected. So,
the common ECB monetary policy may have been consistent with the full utilisation of labour
inputs in Germany, in Eggertsson’s view, but insufficiently expansionary for Italy or Spain. Third,
Eggertsson was not convinced that divergent labour market or productivity outcomes could not
be explained by demand factors as well. For example, different labour market institutions could
lead  to  different  degrees  of  “labour  rationing”  across  countries.  Moreover,  if  innovation  is
endogenous hysteresis effects of a demand-led recession could lead to a protracted slowdown
in productivity (e.g. Garga and Singh 2016).
An online survey suggested that 36% of voting Sintra participants thought that mostly aggregate
demand and 18% that mostly declining supply trends were responsible for the slow economic
recovery. Interestingly, 38% pointed to a protracted debt overhang that affects deleveraging and
demand. The relatively favourable labour income developments in Germany prompted several
Sintra participants to offer their own explanations. Volker Wieland explained that the phenomenon
started before the financial crisis, around 2005, when the lagged effects of previous massive tax
reductions, labour market reforms and a focus of the unions on job security rather than wage
growth healed Germany’s economy – at the time “the sick man of Europe”. Thereafter, Germany
developed a low-wage services sector that hurt productivity through a composition effect but at
the same time greatly expanded employment. In other words, it was an example of a supply-side
policy that created demand, supporting Bob Hall’s conclusions. In a similar vein, Michael Burda
added that Germany increased labour force participation via part-time work arrangements. Since
total hours worked hardly changed, this acted like work sharing. There was an increase in wage
dispersion  but  little  movement  in  wage  levels.  Workers  had  to  accept  this  due  to  the  labour
market  reforms,  which  cut  unemployment  benefits  and  their  duration,  and  thereby  increased
incentives through replacement rates (the ratio of unemployment income and expected income
when employed). All not a miracle, Burda said, just neoclassical economics working the right
way.
Investment gap? The roles of product market competition and intangibles
One of the distinct features of the deep and long recession caused by the twin (financial and
sovereign  debt)  crises  and  the  slow  recovery  in  Europe  has  been  weak  investment.  Thomas
Philippon,  in  collaboration  with  Robin  Döttling  and  Germán  Gutiérrez  (2017b),  explored  the
causes of this phenomenon, comparing primarily a group of eight euro area countries with the
United States. They first establish a number of stylised facts: 1) the corporate investment rate
was low in both the euro area and the US, with the share of intangibles (investment in intellectual
property such as computer software and databases or research and development) increasing
and the share of machinery and equipment decreasing; 2) corporate profits were low in the euro
area and relatively high in the US; 3) Tobin’s Q (e.g. Tobin 1969) was relatively low in the euro
area – explaining corporate investment well (in particular if one excludes Italy and Spain) – and
relatively high in the US but underpredicting investment there. The latter finding – that there is an
“investment gap” at the aggregate level in the US but not in Europe – is displayed in Figure 4,
where in the upper panel the dashed red line tracks investment rather well and in the lower panel
investment is lower than what Q would predict.
  8 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
As is well known, Tobin’s Q is defined as the market value of a firm’s assets (typically measured
by  its  equity  price)  divided  by  its  accounting  value  or  replacement  costs.  Under  certain
assumptions,  it  should  capture  the  main  economic  fundamentals  determining  investment.
 9 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Therefore, Döttling, Gutiérrez and Philippon (2017b) infer from fact 3) above that weak aggregate
demand and low expected future growth must explain the low Q in the euro area, which in turn
explains most of the aggregate euro area investment slump (notably in Austria, Belgium, Finland,
France,  Germany  and  the  Netherlands,  but  not  in  Italy  or  Spain).  In  contrast,  the  general
economic  environment  as  reflected  in  a  high  Q  does  not  explain  weak  US  investment,  which
must be due to other, more structural factors. Building on previous work (Gutiérrez and Philippon
2016), the authors observe that the opening of the aggregate investment gap in the US around
2000 coincides with the start of a trend in corporate concentration and a reduction in antitrust
enforcement in the country. (Regulatory reforms in many euro area countries, however, made
their  product  markets  more  competitive  during  the  2000s.)  Moreover,  given  high  corporate
savings  (see  fact  2)  above;  see  also  Eberly  2017,  Chart  2),  it  is  not  plausible  that  financial
constraints played a large role in the US (except perhaps at the height of the financial crisis).
Finally, the share of intangibles in investment is unlikely to explain the difference between the US
and the euro area, because its growth was slowing in the early 2000s (see e.g. Eberly 2017,
Chart 1, or Jones 2017, Chart 3) and Europe’s share catching up since the late 1990s (Döttling
et  al,  2017b,  Chart  15).  In  sum,  Philippon  et  al.  conclude  that  deteriorating  product  market
competition  is  likely  to  be  a  major  factor  in  explaining  the  aggregate  US  investment  gap.  But
structural features, probably other than corporate concentration, also seem to be of relevance in
explaining  the  investment  gaps  in  Italy  and  Spain.  There  is  no  comparable  corporate
concentration  trend  in  Europe,  but  Reinhilde  Veugelers  (2017)  observed  that  research  and
development  (R&D)  expenditures  become  more  concentrated  in  fewer  firms.  It  needs  to  be
determined  whether  this  R&D  concentration  is  simply  a  sign  of  the  advantages  that  leading
technological firms may have in terms of efficiency; or whether it may in fact become an obstacle
not only to the diffusion of ideas but also to new entrants in the future.
As several Sintra authors elaborated, intangibles generally play an increasing role in investment.
This  is  particularly  a  consequence  of  the  prominent  role  that  digitisation,  information  and
communication technology play in what is often called the third industrial revolution. But in the US
a pronounced trend started as early as in the 1950s (see Eberly 2017, Chart 1, and Jones 2017,
Chart 3). Once the fixed costs of IT hardware have been paid, human capital and intellectual
property  gain  importance  relative  to  physical  capital.  This  can  affect  investment  and  its
determinants  in  various  ways.  First,  as  Philippon  et  al.  suggest,  intangible  assets  are  more
difficult to accumulate quickly, which is tantamount to higher adjustment costs. So, in equilibrium,
rising intangible investment should lead to rising Q. Second, Enrico Perotti pointed out that high-
intangibles  firms  pay  highly  skilled  employees  to  invest  their  human  capital  (e.g.  to  develop
software) and therefore do not need to undertake as much traditional investment spending as
low-intangibles  firms  (see  Döttling  et  al.  2017a).  In  fact,  the  investment  share  of  some  of  the
most innovative and rapidly growing sectors in the US, namely the high-tech industries, is rather
stagnant  (Eberly  2017,  Chart  3).  Third,  intangible  investments  are  beset  with  measurement
problems,  so  that  they  could  be  underestimated  in  available  data.  All  in  all,  the  negative
relationship between the share of intangibles and total investment that emerges from this list is
consistently  confirmed  in  empirical  estimations  (Eberly  2017),  including  (for  cross-sectional
industry  data)  in  Europe  (Döttling  et  al.  2017b).  So,  part  of  the  low  investment  observed  in
countries  with  rapidly  growing  intangible  shares,  such  as  the  euro  area  countries  covered  in
Döttling et al., may not be a sign of economic weakness but a sign of structural change and
difficulties in capturing intangible investment in available data. But growing intangibles could still
be a contributing factor to labour market polarisation, because the employees producing them
tend to be highly skilled and paid (see Section 2 above).
Relationships between demand and supply policies
The Sintra discussions about the slow post-crisis recovery and the role that investment played in
it suggest that both supply and demand policies have a role to play, depending on the country
and time considered. But demand and supply policies do not need to be substitutes: they can be
complements.  Philippe  Aghion,  in  a  joint  paper  with  Emmanuel  Farhi  and  Enisse  Kharroubi
 10 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
(2017a),  crystallised  this  with  the  example  of  monetary  policy  and  product  market  reforms,
bolstering President of the ECB Mario Draghi’s (2014) view that “aggregate demand policies will
ultimately  not  be  effective  without  action  in  parallel  on  the  supply  side”.  With  two  different
empirical  approaches  they  find  that  countercyclical  interest  rate  movements  become  more
effective in stimulating output when product markets are more competitive. The first approach
starts by estimating the countercyclicality of real short-term interest rates (for the euro area, the
area-wide nominal rate divided by national inflation rates) in response to output gaps at the level
of  14  advanced  economies  (9  euro  area  countries,  3  other  EU  countries,  and Australia  and
Canada).  The  second  step  of  this  approach  is  to  interact  the  estimated  countercyclicality
parameters with measures of firm financial constraints and product market regulation. As long as
the 1998 level of the OECD indicator for barriers to trade and investment is low, it turns out in a
country-industry panel regression of quarterly data between 1999 and 2005 that a sector with
high labour costs to sales (as a measure of firms’ financial constraints) located in a country with
high interest rate countercyclicality exhibits a 1.6 percentage points higher real value-added per
worker growth than a sector with low labour costs to sales in a country with low interest rate
countercyclicality (see the left blue pillar in Figure 5). In contrast, when product market regulation
is heavy, then this growth difference evaporates (right pillar in the figure).
 11 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  second  approach  takes  the  ECB’s  announcement  of  its  Outright  Monetary  Transactions
programme (OMT) in September 2012 as a laboratory. It first estimates forecast errors for 10-
year government bond yields of 7 euro area countries (Austria, Belgium, France, Germany, Italy,
Portugal  and  Spain)  for  the  periods  2011–12  and  2013–14,  i.e.  before  and  after  the  OMT
 12 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
announcement. The difference between the two is taken as surprise changes in firms’ funding
costs. Stressed countries, such as Italy and Spain, experienced sharp unexpected interest rate
drops  but  the  same  did  not  apply  to  other  countries,  such  as  France  or  Germany.  Then  a
difference-in-difference  estimation  of  industry  growth  rates  for  2013–14  for  the  7  countries  on
industry  growth  rates  for  2011–12,  corporate  indebtedness  (measured  in  2010  and  2012,
respectively) and interactions between corporate indebtedness, product market regulation (same
OECD  indicator  as  in  the  first  approach  but  for  2013)  and  the  estimated  OMT  interest  rate
surprises is conducted. The results suggest that heavily indebted corporate sectors grew faster
as a consequence of the large surprising interest reductions, but only when they were located in
countries  with  relatively  less  regulated  product  markets.  This  effect  works  primarily  via  short-
term  debt,  which  firms  can  adjust  more  quickly  than  long-term  debt.  It  may,  however,  be
attenuated by an uncompetitive banking sector.
Marco Buti (2017) addressed the relationship between demand and supply policies from a fiscal
policy  angle.  He  juxtaposed  two  views  on  the  relationship  between  fiscal  consolidation  and
structural  reforms,  one  where  they  are  substitutes  (e.g.  because  the  temporarily  unemployed
from  labour  market  reforms  would  have  to  be  supported)  and  another  where  they  are
complements (e.g. because expansionary demand policies diminish governments’ incentives for
introducing  politically  costly  structural  reforms).  Buti  showed  recent  European  evidence
supporting  the  latter  view.  Before  the  crisis  there  was  no  clear  relationship  between  primary
cyclically  adjusted  budget  balances  and  reductions  in  employment  protection.  But  with  the
sovereign debt crisis a positive relationship emerged (see his Chart 2). He argued, however, that
the  complementary  approach  may  not  be  the  right  model  for  the  future,  because  of  rising
inequality and fiscal consolidation leading to reduced public education spending and the reforms
that  are  most  needed,  i.e.  the  ones  stimulating  innovation  and  productivity,  having  significant
budgetary costs.
When growth is not enough: inequality and the greater societal context
Introduced by a haunting plea from Ben Bernanke (2017) in his dinner speech “When growth is
not  enough”,  some  of  the  Sintra  discussions  branched  out  to  distributional  issues  and  the
societal  context  that  influences  the  environment  in  which  central  bankers,  much  like  other
policymakers, act and economic policies are conducted. Bernanke stressed that the continuing
structural change when the unusually prosperous post-WWII period in the US “normalised” as of
the  1970s  was  not  accompanied  by  supportive  labour  market  and  social  policies.  Over  time,
popular dissatisfaction about the economic situation emerged related to stagnating earnings per
worker,  declining  social  and  economic  mobility,  social  dysfunctions  such  as  drug  abuse  and
distrust of political institutions. Rectifying the situation requires interventionist policies, such as
community re-development, infrastructure spending, job training and addiction programmes. For
Europe, Bernanke recommended that the continuing labour market reforms that are necessary
should be accompanied by training and other work force development; that structural reforms
should  be  accompanied  by  demand  policies;  and  that  political  legitimacy  should  be  ensured
through  subsidiarity.  Whilst  against  the  background  of  ever  faster  technical  progress  and
structural change it was relatively uncontroversial that the traditional “once-in-a-lifetime schooling
strategy”  has  to  give  way  to  continuous  updating  of  knowledge  and  skills  (“lifelong  learning”),
Dietmar  Harhoff  (2017)  warned  that  so  far  there  is  little  systematic  implementation  and
institutional development.
Sergei Guriev (2017, Chart 1) presented “elephant curves” (à la Milanovic 2016), suggesting that
the crisis recession acted in a regressive way in southern European countries (see also Buti
2017,  Chart  3),  whereas  in  other  euro  area  countries  asset  price  declines  implied  that  the
recession’s  cost  were  mostly  borne  by  the  better-off.  But  in  terms  of  popular  support  for
economic policies, Guriev (2017, Table 1) provided evidence that it is not inequality per se but
perceived  “unfair”  inequality  (defined  as  uneven  opportunities,  such  as  parental  background,
gender,  ethnicity  or  place  of  birth)  that  leads  to  the  rejection  of  a  market  economy  (and  also
 13 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
corruption). Other factors captured in the residuals of the estimation, such as lack of effort or bad
luck, do not have this effect.
Agnès Bénassy-Quére (2017) perceived an imbalance in Europe between trade and competition
policies  being  centralised  at  the  area-wide  level  but  social  and  tax  policies  being  left  at  the
national level. When the federal level promotes free trade and competitive markets, then Member
States  are  left  to  bear  the  social  consequences.  In  her  view  Member  States  could  be  better
empowered by coordination in tax and social policies. One idea is to make the EU’s Globalisation
Adjustment Fund more effective; another is to introduce US-style TTTTs (timely, temporary, and
targeted transfers).
References
Adler, G., Duval, R., Furceri, D., Kiliç Çelik, S., Koloskova, K. and Poplawski-Ribeiro, M. (2017),
“Gone with the headwinds: global productivity”, IMF Staff Discussion NotesSDN/17/04, April.
Andrews, D., Criscuolo, C. and Gal, P. (2015), “Frontier firms, technology diffusion and public
policy:  micro  evidence  from  OECD  countries”, The  Future  of  Productivity:  Main  Background
Papers, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.
Aghion, P., Farhi, E.  and  Kharroubi,  E.  (2017a),  “On  the  interaction  between  monetary  policy,
corporate balance sheets and structural reforms”, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth
in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Aghion,  P.,  Bergeaud,  A.,  Boppart,  T.,  Klenow,  P.  and  Li,  H.  (2017b),  Missing  growth  from
creative destruction, mimeo, Collège de France, Paris, July.
Autor,  D.  and  Salomons,  A.  (2017),  “Robocalypse  now:  does  productivity  growth  threaten
employment?”, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt
am Main.
Bénassy-Quéré,  A.  (2017),  “Making  the  European  semester  more  efficient”,  forthcoming  in
ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Bernanke, B. (2017), “When growth is not enough”, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth
in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Bils, M., Klenow, P. and Ruane, C. (2017),  Misallocation or mismeasurement, mimeo, Stanford
University, 19 June.
Bloom, N., Jones, C., Van Reenen, J. and Webb, M. (2017), Are ideas getting harder to find?,
mimeo, Stanford University, 11 July.
Buti,  M.  (2017),  “Fiscal  consolidation  and  reforms:  trade-offs  and  complementarities”,
forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Byrne,  D.,  Fernald,  J.  and  Reinsdorf,  M.  (2016),  “Does  the  United  States  have  a  productivity
slowdown  or  a  measurement  problem?”, Brookings  Papers  on  Economic Activity  47(1),  pp.
109–182.
Constâncio, V., Hartmann, P. and Tristani, O. (2015), Selected takeaways from the ECB’s Sintra
Forum on “Inflation and Unemployment in Europe”, VoxEU, 28 October.
Döttling, R., Ladika, T. and Perotti, E. (2017a), The (self-)funding of intangibles, mimeo, 12 May,
available at ssrn.com/abstract=2863267.
Döttling, R., Gutiérrez, G. and Philippon, T. (2017b), “Is there an investment gap in advanced
 14 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
economies? If so, why?”, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies,
Frankfurt am Main.
Draghi,  M.  (2014),  “Unemployment  in  the  euro  area”,  speech  at  the  Annual  Central  Bank
Symposium in Jackson Hole.
Eberly, J. (2017), Comment on “Is there an investment gap in advanced economies? If so, why?”
by  Robin  Döttling,  German  Gutiérrez  and  Thomas  Philippon,  forthcoming  in  ECB, Investment
and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Eggertsson, G. (2017), Comment on “Sources and mechanisms of impaired growth in advanced
economies”  by  Robert  Hall,  forthcoming  in  ECB, Investment  and  Growth  in  Advanced
Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Garga, V. and Singh, S. (2016), Output hysteresis and optimal monetary policy, mimeo, Brown
University, 11 November.
Gopinath,  G.,  Kalemli-Ozcan,  S.,  Karabarbounis,  L.  and  Villegas-Sanchez,  C.  (2017),  “Capital
Allocation and Productivity in South Europe”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
Gordon, R. (2016), The Rise and Fall of American Growth: The U.S. Standard of Living Since the
Civil War, Princeton University Press.
Guriev,  S.  (2017),  “Impact  of  cycle  on  growth:  human  capital,  political  economy,  and  non-
performing  loans”,  forthcoming  in  ECB, Investment  and  Growth  in  Advanced  Economies,
Frankfurt am Main.
Gutiérrez,  G.,  and  Philippon,  T. 
investigation”, NBER Working Paper 22897, December.
(2016), 
“Investment-less  growth:  an  empirical
Hall,  R.  (2017),  “Sources  and  mechanisms  of  impaired  growth  in  advanced  economies”,
forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Harhoff,  D.  (2017),  Comment  on  “Robocalypse  now:  does  productivity  growth  threaten
employment?” by David Autor and Anna Salomons, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth
in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Johnson,  S.  (2017),  “Increasing  public  support  for  research  and  development  in  the  U.S.”,
forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Jones,  C.  (2017),  “A  discussion:  long  term  growth  in  advanced  economies”,  forthcoming  in
ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Karabarbounis,  L.,  and  Neiman,  B.  (2014),  “The  global  decline  of  the  labor  share”, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 129(1), pp. 61–103.
Mazzucato, M., and Semieniuk, G. (2017), “Public financing of innovation: from market fixing to
mission  oriented  shaping”, 
in  ECB, Investment  and  Growth  in  Advanced
Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
forthcoming 
Milanovic,  B.  (2016), Global  Inequality: A  New Approach  for  the Age  of  Globalization ,  Harvard
University Press.
Mokyr, J. (2017), “Is technical progress obsolete?”, forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth
in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
Organisation  for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development  (2015), The Future of Productivity,
 15 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
Paris.
Schmidt, M. (2017), “Building an innovation ecosystem: lessons learned and a view to the future
from  MIT  and  Kendall  Square”,  lunch  speech  held  at  the  ECB  Forum  on  Central  Banking  on
Investment  and  Growth 
June,  available
at www.youtube.com/watch?v=cbZHjiWQ_iA.
in  Advanced  Economies,  Sintra,  27 
Solow,  R.  (1956),  “A  contribution  to  the  theory  of  economic  growth”, Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics 70(1), pp. 65–94.
Solow,  R.  (1957),  “Technical  change  and  the  aggregate  production  function”,  Review  of
Economics and Statistics 39(3), pp. 312–320.
Syverson,  C.  (2017),  “Challenges  to  mismeasurement  explanations  for  the  US  productivity
slowdown”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 31(2), pp. 165–186.
Tobin, J. (1969), “A general equilibrium approach to monetary theory”,  Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking 1(1), pp. 15–29.
Varian,  H.  (2017),  “Technology, 
ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
industrial  organization”, 
innovation  and 
forthcoming 
in
Veugelers,  R.  (2017),  “An  innovation  deficit  behind  Europe’s  overall  productivity  slowdown?”,
forthcoming in ECB, Investment and Growth in Advanced Economies, Frankfurt am Main.
 16 / 16
BIS central bankers' speeches
