Vítor  Constâncio:  Macroprudential  stress-tests  and  tools  for  the
non-bank sector
Remarks by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the European
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) Annual Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 22 September 2017.
1. Introduction: Systemic risks in the non-bank sector
 1
Assessing the impact of a large shock on financial soundness of non-bank financial institutions,
stress  testing  can  improve  measurement  of  the  risks  and  can  help  in  the  calibration  of
instruments mitigating those risks. There is a need to further develop these policy tools while at
the  same  time  adaptation  of  stress  test  models  towards  integrating  different  agents  into  a
system-wide  tool  is  important.  The  ESRB  –  in  its  strategy  paper  on  macroprudential  policy
beyond banking , for example, emphasises the need to develop a wider financial stability toolkit,
including  top-down  stress  tests,  for  example,  for  asset  managers,  the  need  to  operationalise
macroprudential instruments for which a legal basis has already been created or the need to
investigate the potential for increasing the consistency of available macroprudential instruments
across sectors.  In its report on stress test analytics for macroprudential purposes in the euro
area,  the  ECB  also  outlines  the  plans  for  extending  stress  testing  into  other  sectors,  most
prominently the shadow banking sector, but also into the stress testing of central counterparties
3
and insurance and pension funds.
2
Let me first set the stage by reiterating the two main systemic risks stemming from the non-bank
financial sector.
First, the increasing size and growth of the euro area investment fund sector has the potential to
amplify  financial  stability  risks,  both  in  terms  of  liquidity  and  leverage. As  an  example  of  the
structural  change  in  the  European  financial  sector,  it  is  worthwhile  noting  that  the  size  of  the
money market and investment fund sector represented only 17% of banks’ total assets in 2008
but is now at 40%. Whereas the banking sector shrank by 18% since the crisis, the fund sector
more than doubled since 2008.
The  continued  inflows  into  bond  funds  for  example,  may  raise  concerns  about  sudden
redemptions  in  response  to  a  more  widespread  repricing  in  global  fixed  income  markets,  if  it
were  to  occur.  Large  redemption  calls  can  have  widespread  amplification  effects  in  financial
markets. There are signs that fixed income investment funds have increased their risk taking in
recent  years  via  a  higher  asset  allocation  to  lower-rated  debt  securities  and  an  increased
duration  in  their  fixed  income  portfolios. At  the  same  time,  there  is  evidence  that  redemption
patterns can be procyclical, which can foster adverse market dynamics when asset prices are
declining.
Second, the procyclical nature of margin and haircut-setting practices of market participants and
liquidity  risk  propagation  in  collateralised  securities  financing  and  derivatives  transactions  is  a
concern for financial stability. These practices stimulate the build-up of excessive leverage and
funding risk in good times, while amplifying funding stress and deleveraging in bad times.
Collateralised transactions, while limiting counterparty risk, have the potential to amplify funding
liquidity risk or market risk via fire sales in a stress scenario. The resulting propagation of risk
may be material and potentially of systemic nature. Non-bank financial institutions can be part of
the risk transmission mechanism, in particular, since they do not have recourse to central bank
liquidity.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
2. Macroprudential stress test to gauge the magnitude of the risks stemming from the
non-bank financial sector
So  the  questions  arise:  how  to  appropriately  measure  these  risks  and  how  to  derive  policy
instruments  that  are  effective  in  mitigating  these  risks?  What  are  the  challenges  for
macroprudential stress tests to provide meaningful indicators to measure and predict the level of
systemic risk, the position of the economy in the financial cycle and consequently the adequate
stance of macroprudential policies?
In  recent  years,  stress  testing  has  become  an  increasingly  prominent  approach  to  gauging
impact of a large shock on the agents’ financial soundness and on the market functioning.
Developed originally for assessing banking system resilience, macroprudential stress tests have
recently been extended to cover a wider range of non-bank financial institutions: let me mention
insurance companies (conducted by EIOPA), CCPs (conducted by ESMA) and asset managers.
This  more  recent  development  is  largely  reflecting  the  increasing  importance  of  non-bank
financial institutions within the EU financial system.
However, stress testing tools for non-banks are still in a fledgling state, in particular in how they
capture system-wide effects.  Let me elaborate on what needs to be improved to operationalise
them.
4
First  and  foremost,  in  order  to  conduct  proper  stress  test  analysis  for  the  non-bank  financial
sector,  data  availability  needs  to  be  significantly  improved.  A  successful  application  of  the
system-wide  stress  test  models  hinges  upon  availability  of  reliable  data  sources  for  model
calibration  and  validation.  In  general,  the  availability  of  sufficiently  granular  and  historical  data
series for the non-bank financial sector is still lagging behind the situation on the banking side.
These concerns notwithstanding, it should be acknowledged that data availability is improving in
some areas following some important initiatives of financial regulators and overseers. In Europe,
trade repository reporting under EMIR is one example that can shed light on interconnectedness
via derivative markets.  Another European initiative to improve information about SFT should go
live  in  Q1  2019  with  the  Securities  Financing  Transactions  Regulation  (SFTR)  transaction
reporting obligation.
5
Furthermore, ad hoc, targeted data collections can help improve the calibration of stress testing
models  and  inform  further  required  changes  to  the  regular  financial  reporting.  If  properly
constructed,  such  ad  hoc  data  collections  can  provide  deep  insights  into  potential  shock
transmission  channels.   I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  research  community  can  offer  useful
advice on relevant data dimensions in this regard and therefore should be actively involved in
designing such data collection templates.
6
As far as the second enhancement is concerned, existing non-bank stress test approaches need
to better account for interactions between agents. We know from experience that the impact of a
stress test event hitting a financial institution is often amplified via its interactions with the rest of
the financial system. Therefore, failing to account for such interactions may risk overestimating
the resilience of single institutions and the system as a whole. Some extensions to the traditional
stress testing have already been operationalised, at least for the banking system. I would like to
emphasise  the  inclusion  of  strategic  behaviour  (e.g.  balance  sheet  portfolio  optimisation  in
STAMP€ analytical framework of the ECB ),  game  theoretical  approaches  to  handle  strategic
responses to shocks and activity of other market participants (e.g. in the MFRAF stress testing
framework  of  Bank  of  Canada),  network  effects  capturing  interlinkages  (e.g.  in  the  RAMSI
framework of Bank of England or the ECB top-down stress test model ) or feedback loops with
the real economy (e.g. DSGE models in STAMP€).
7
8
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Third, as their business models and behaviour differ from traditional banks, specificities of non-
bank financial institutions have to be considered carefully when designing tools to stress them.
Both  the  policy  and  academic  communities  are  looking  into  ways  to  enhance  stress  testing
models  for  macroprudential  policy.  STAMP€  is  one  example.  Let  me  mention  a  few  others
focusing on integrating behaviours of different types of agents and on analysing the increasing
pool  of  data.  One  enhancement  is  about  fire  sales  mechanisms  stemming  from  interactions
between  banks  and  shadow  banks.   Another  example  worth  mentioning  is  about  systemic
aspects  of  liquidity  and  its  links  with  solvency  conditions  accounting  for  pertinent  interactions
between market participants captured in an agent-based modelling fashion.
 Though, what is
still  required  is  further  strong  support  from  the  research  community  to  provide  theoretical
foundations for the various components of the stress test apparatus.
3. Macroprudential tools to address the risk stemming from the non-bank sector
10
9
Despite these limitations, we should also note the progress made in understanding how stress
testing exercises, in particular, have the potential to support macroprudential policy in the design,
calibration and assessment of the impact of macroprudential tools.
Let me now turn to the state of play regarding the implementation and progress made for some
of the specific macroprudential instruments that authorities would need, should systemic risks
materialise.
11
On  the  global  level,  the  2017  FSB  policy  recommendations  on  asset  management  structural
vulnerabilities ,  now  being  operationalised  by  IOSCO,  are  expected  to  reduce  liquidity
mismatches  in  open-ended  funds.  Importantly,  recommendation  8  captures  the  potential
macroprudential role for authorities to provide direction on the use of liquidity risk management
tools (e.g. suspension of redemptions) by funds in extraordinary circumstances. In the area of
liquidity mismatch, the recommendations also address the potential use of system-wide stress
testing by authorities. Leverage recommendations focus on the measurement and monitoring of
leverage within investment funds, including data for synthetic leverage calculation.
On the European level, on-going work of the Expert Group on Investment Funds (EGIF) develops
recommendations that are addressed to funds and asset managers. Given that the investment
fund  sector  is  growing  relative  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  ESRB  is  analysing
systemic  risks  posed  by  liquidity  mismatch  and  leverage  in  the  types  of  investment  funds
exposed to these risks.
To highlight the importance of this work, let me preview results of an ECB Occasional Paper
 to
be  published  soon.  The  study  shows,  for  a  large  sample  of  European Alternative  Investment
Funds (AIFs), that open-ended leveraged funds experience greater investor outflows after bad
performance than unleveraged funds.
12
This  can  be  explained  by  investors  expecting  proportionally  larger  valuation  losses  when
remaining  invested  in  leveraged  funds.  During  stressed  periods,  leveraged  funds  need  to  de-
lever proportionality more than unleveraged funds in order to obtain liquidity to cover margin calls
and  higher  haircuts  on  leveraged  positions. Also,  leveraged  funds  have  to  sell  relatively  more
assets following redemption requests to keep the leverage ratio constant. To the extent these
asset  sales  impact  market  prices  or  are  sold  at  fire  sale  prices,  the  net  asset  value  of  the
portfolio declines.
These  new  findings  on  the  greater  vulnerability  of  leveraged  funds  to  potential  investor  runs
support  the  idea  that  mismatches  between  the  portfolio  liquidity  and  redemption  terms  of
leveraged funds are undesirable for more leveraged funds from a macroprudential perspective.
They also complement existing  evidence  on  the  greater  sensitivity  of  investor  outflows  to  bad
performance in illiquid versus liquid funds, which can be explained by higher liquidation costs for
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
less liquid assets.
Within  the  EU,  competent  authorities  already  have  legal  powers  to  impose  macroprudential
leverage limits on AIFs, such as hedge funds, bond funds and funds-of-funds. The ESRB has
marked the operationalisation of this existing policy tool as a key part of the agenda to develop
macroprudential policy beyond banking.
 Achieving this goal is important and may require an
EU-level framework to assess financial stability risks related to leverage in the investment fund
sector and to evaluate potential designs for macroprudential leverage limits.
13
14
For risks in SFT and derivatives, as I have laid in a keynote speech at a dedicated conference
last year here at the ESRB , I am convinced that macroprudential margins and  haircuts  are
tools that have the potential to allow authorities to control the build-up of excessive leverage in
these markets. Importantly, these tools can reach beyond the banking system and also address
the build-up of leverage and liquidity risks in parts of the financial system, where we have seen
rapid growth in recent years.
Since then, we have made some progress on this front. For example, the ESRB has published a
comprehensive report on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts this year. The report
describes in detail the mechanics of how these tools would affect leverage and procyclicality.
Nevertheless, the report also acknowledges a number of implementation challenges and calls for
further empirical and conceptual analysis.
So let me conclude by saying that despite the progress made, there is more work to be done: on
the  operationalisation  of  tools,  on  further  improving  data  or  the  interaction  with  the  policy  and
research community to enhance stress testing models. I would therefore encourage authorities,
including the European Commission, the ESRB but also ESMA to continue to contribute towards
this goal.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Macroprudential policy beyond banking: an ESRB strategy paper.
Examples  include  definitions  of  leverage,  taking  into  account  differences  and  interdependencies  between
sectors or macroprudential instruments, such as instruments that address procylicality of initial margins or
haircuts, especially in securities financing transactions and derivatives
Stamp€ Report.
The need to be able to capture system-wide effects in non-bank stress tests is strongly advocated by e.g.
the FSB.
J. Abad, I. Aldasoro, C. Aymanns, M. D’Errico, L. Fache Rousová, P. Hoffmann, S. Langfield, M. Neychev and T.
Roukny  (2016),  “Shedding  light  on  dark  markets:  First  insights  from  the  new  EU-wide  OTC  derivatives
dataset”, ESRB Occasional Paper 11.
BCBS-CPMI-FSB-IOSCO (2017), Analysis of Central Clearing Interdependencies, July.
Stamp€ Report.
ECB (2013), “A Macro stress testing framework for assessing systemic risks in the banking sector”, ed. J.
Henry, C. Kok, ECB Occasional Paper, 152.
S.  Calimani,  G.  Hałaj,  S.  Zochowski  (2017),  “Simulating  fire-sales  in  a  banking  and  shadow  banking
system”, ESRB Working Paper Series 46.
G. Hałaj (2017), “Agent-Based Model of system-wide implications of funding risk”, mimeo, ECB. R. Bookstaber,
M.  Paddrik  and  B.  Tivnan  (2017),  “An Agent-based  Model  for  Financial  Vulnerability”, Journal  of  Economic
Interaction and Coordination.
www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/FSB-Policy-Recommendations-on-Asset-Management-Structural-
Vulnerabilities.pdf
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
12
13
14
K. van der Veer, A. Levels, C. Lambert, L. Molestina Vivar, C. Weistroffer, R. Chaudron and R. de Sousa van
Stralen.Developing  macroprudential  policy  for  alternative  investment  funds,  Towards  a  framework  for
macroprudential leverage limits in Europe: an application for the Netherlands; to be published in October 2017
See  www.esrb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/reports/20160718_strategy_paper_beyond_banking.en.pdf,  page  4:  “To
operationalise macroprudential instruments for which a legal basis has already been created, in particular by
providing advice to the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) on the AIFMD framework for leverage
requirements.”
“Margins and haircuts as a macroprudential tool”, remarks by Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the ECB, at the
ESRB international conference on the macroprudential use of margins and haircuts, Frankfurt am Main, 6 June
2016.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
