Timothy Lane: Thermometer rising - climate change and Canada's
economic future
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Finance  and
Sustainability Initiative, Montréal, Quebec, 2 March 2017.
I would like to thank Erik Ens for his help in preparing this speech.
Introduction
 It is my privilege to speak to you about the economic implications of climate change—one of the
biggest challenges facing Canada and the world in the 21st century.
Let me first congratulate the Finance and Sustainability Initiative for your leadership in promoting
responsible investment for sustainable development. Your work is vital to putting finance at the
service  of  environmental  sustainability—helping  the  private  sector  to  identify  the  risks  and
opportunities inherent in climate change and green finance.
The  connection  between  climate  change  and  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  responsibilities  for  the
stability of prices and the financial system is not an obvious one. We are not experts on climate
science, nor do we control the tools to limit global warming. However, climate change itself and
actions to address it will have material and pervasive effects on Canada’s economy and financial
system. While many of these will play out over many decades, I will argue that they are already
starting to become important. So, the Bank needs to consider these effects as we deliver on our
mandate to promote the economic and financial well-being of Canadians.
In  the  time  I  have  with  you,  I  would  like  to  share  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  perspective  on  the
economic effects both of global warming and of the tools and policies that can be deployed to
address it. I will discuss some of the challenges—as well as the opportunities, because there are
many—that lie ahead for Canada. I will also talk about how the work of the Bank connects with
these issues.
The future becomes the present
Here in Montréal in early March, it might be tempting to think that rising temperatures could be a
welcome change for Canada. But, as we know, that would be wrong. Global warming is already
having negative effects, with significant economic costs compounding a heavy human toll around
the world, including in Canada. Climate scientists are convinced that global warming is, at least
to a large extent, attributable to human activity.
Climate systems, like economic systems, are complicated: the forces at work can interact in
unforeseen ways, so there are some significant unknowns. But these unknowns are all the more
1
reason to act, especially if they imply even a small risk of a truly catastrophic outcome.
Correspondingly, while the economic costs of climate change are uncertain they are likely to be
significant.  In  Canada  alone,  it  has  been  estimated  that,  in  the  absence  of  action  to  address
global  warming,  we  would  face  annual  costs  of  between  $21  billion  and  $43  billion  by  the
2050s.  Such costs would take a number of forms.
2
Global  warming  is  associated  with  more  frequent  extreme  weather  events—such  as  floods,
droughts  and  forest  fires—which  often  have  tragic  consequences  at  the  human  level.  In
economic  terms,  such  events  can  have  a  very  high  price  tag.  Take,  as  an  illustration,  the
wildfires in Alberta, which deducted about 1 per cent of Canada’s GDP in the second quarter of
2016. While the economy subsequently rebounded, this event was a setback to Canada’s return
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
to full potential.
We know that such extreme weather-related events are already more frequent than they were in
the past. They will become even more so as average global temperatures continue to rise, even
if action is taken now to address climate change. But in the absence of such action, the tab will
be much larger.
There are also risks to specific sectors associated with climate change—some of which have
started to materialize. For example, the forestry sector has seen the epidemic infestation of the
mountain  pine  beetle,  the  agricultural  sector  is  facing  more  frequent  droughts  and  the  mining
sector encounters infrastructure challenges when ice roads become impassable. It is likely that
further implications, as yet unknown, will become evident as global warming progresses.
In  economic  terms,  such  events  have  effects  on  both  aggregate  supply  and  demand.  As  a
central bank, we can react to events as they occur. But we cannot build them into our economic
forecasts or adjust our monetary policy in advance because each is unique and unpredictable. In
the short run, they may be viewed as a downside risk to economic activity in Canada, which we
would take into account in our risk management framework for monetary policy. Over a longer
period,  that  downside  turns  from  risk  into  near-certainty—that  is,  a  lower  growth  track  for  the
Canadian economy than we would otherwise achieve.
Let me turn to discuss two important tools that are at our disposal to address climate change:
carbon pricing and green finance.
Getting the price right
In  economic  terms,  climate  change  is  a  negative  externality. Any  individual  or  company  that
engages  in  activities  that  generate  greenhouse  gases  imposes  a  cost  on  everyone  else  by
contributing to climate change. Establishing a price for carbon emissions forces polluters to bear
those wider societal costs—thus internalizing the externality.
3
Based on this logic, setting the right price for carbon is at the core of Canada’s strategy to tackle
climate change.  In a market economy, prices are the mechanism through which decisions of
individuals and companies are coordinated. Using that mechanism to address carbon emissions
aligns environmentally sustainable goals with the self-interests of individuals and companies. Of
course,  the  right  pricing  does  not  mean  that  greenhouse  gas  emissions  and  global  warming
would stop. It only means that environmental costs are properly weighed against the benefits of
the activities that generate the emissions.
We can set a price for carbon through a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system. Either way, we
create incentives to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the most efficient way possible. These
incentives motivate several kinds of changes in behaviour by
encouraging the use of existing technologies to reduce carbon emissions,
inspiring the development of new technologies, and
helping shift consumption and investment toward those goods and services that require less
carbon to produce.
While some are skeptical that pricing will motivate changes in behaviour, experience confirms
that price incentives work. An example is British Columbia’s carbon tax, which is estimated to
have reduced greenhouse gas emissions by 5 to 15 per cent below what they would have been
otherwise.  Other examples include the widespread switch to smaller cars, prompted by the oil
price  spikes  of  the  1970s,  and  the  displacement  of  coal  by  cheaper  natural  gas  for  power
generation in recent years.
4
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Properly aligned incentives can reduce the need for pervasive regulation. Of course, regulation
has its place as a complement to pricing. But given how energy is used in a modern economy,
and  the  magnitude  of  the  changes  required,  regulation  alone  cannot  possibly  do  as
comprehensive  and  consistent  a  job  of  changing  the  behaviours  and  activities  that  generate
greenhouse gases.
Of course, carbon pricing has economic consequences: most directly, it is costly for households
and businesses to transition to a smaller carbon footprint. But those consequences need not all
be negative. They depend very much on how the revenues from carbon pricing are used. For
example,  the  revenues  from  carbon  taxation  could  be  used  to  lower  the  burden  of  other
taxes.   That  is  the  approach  followed  in  British  Columbia,  where  the  carbon  tax  enabled  the
provincial government to reduce personal income taxes and corporate taxes by a roughly equal
amount. Such revenues could also be used to smooth the transition for affected industries and
households and to address concerns about how the cost of carbon pricing is distributed.
5
Carbon pricing is more effective if the same price is in place everywhere in the world, so that the
steps  to  lower  emissions  can  be  at  the  lowest  economic  cost.  Further,  a  consistent  global
regime reduces incentives for high-emission activities to be relocated to another country rather
than scaled back and encourages more effective long-range planning for carbon use. This is one
reason why global agreements on climate change, such as the 2016 Paris Agreement, are so
important. 
It has been pointed out, though, that even if there were no global agreement, it would be in the
interest of a single country like Canada to set a meaningful carbon price. Emissions pose other
health  and  environmental  costs,  even  within  Canada,  that  would  motivate  a  public  policy
6
response.
Concerns that carbon pricing could result in a loss of Canadian competitiveness can also be
partly addressed through the use of the new revenue streams. For example, Alberta’s carbon tax
has  been  designed  to  help  address  competitiveness  concerns  in  energy-intensive,  trade-
7
exposed industries.
Financing the shift
I’ve made the case that carbon pricing is a powerful tool for meeting climate change targets. So
is green finance, which facilitates private-sector financial flows into environmentally sustainable
investments.
Green finance works hand-in-hand with carbon pricing. With the right pricing on carbon, more
green investments become profitable. However, enhanced transparency and analytical tools are
also needed to enable investors to exploit those opportunities, particularly when the benefits may
accrue over a long period of time. In this vein, growing numbers of investors—including some of
you  in  this  room—have  signed  on  to  the  Montréal  Carbon  Pledge  for  greater  disclosure  of
climate-related risks.
So why is transparency so important?
Those investors who choose to make environmentally responsible investments need clarity on
the environmental impact of the activities they are financing.
All investors need to know whether and how companies are exposed to any risks associated with
climate change, including the impact of policy changes. For example, will the shift to a lower-
carbon  economy  affect  an  oil  company’s  profitability,  either  through  tax  changes  or  reduced
8
demand for oil? Will certain oil reserves become uneconomic—aka “stranded assets”? 
These  questions  are  also  important  for  regulators  who  assess  whether  vulnerabilities  are
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
building  in  the  financial  system.  Physical,  liability  and  policy-transition  risks  could  result  in  the
repricing of financial assets—if  that  were  to  occur  suddenly,  it  could  potentially  pose  financial
stability concerns.
The Financial Stability Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures is helping to
address the information gap. The Task Force recently released a draft set of recommendations
for private sector firms on the effective disclosure of their climate-related risks. I don’t want to
prejudge any of the specific recommendations that may end up in the final report, which is to be
released later this year. But the new guidelines should be a helpful step forward in promoting
more informed investment, credit and insurance underwriting decisions.
While  disclosure  is  an  important  piece  of  the  puzzle,  green  investments  face  other  financing
challenges. For instance, their returns may accrue over a 
long-term  horizon,  which  poses  issues  similar  to  those  faced  by  many  other  infrastructure
projects. As another example, green technology companies, like other tech companies, may face
financing  hurdles  in  growing  to  an  efficient  scale.  Creditors  and  investors  may  also  lack  the
sophisticated analytical tools needed to properly assess environmental risks and returns.
To address these issues, in 2016 the G20 launched the Green Finance Study Group, of which
Finance Canada and the Bank of Canada are active members. The group issued a report last
year with options to address green finance barriers at both the international and national levels.
The study group will continue to build on this progress in 2017.
Despite the challenges, green finance has the potential to become an integral part of mainstream
finance.  During  the  transition,  there  will  be  many  opportunities  for  investors  and  financial
institutions to find innovative ways of filling the gaps in the existing financial structure. Some of
you are probably already working on those opportunities.
Last year was a record year for global green bond issuance at US$81 billion.  In Canada, Export
Development Canada, the Government of Ontario and TD have all issued green bonds in recent
years. Just last week the Government of Quebec issued its first green bond. These are small
steps in the grand scheme of things, but they will help catalyze greater market interest in this
sector.
Shifting to a lower-carbon economy
9
Make no mistake: the move to a lower-carbon economy is a major structural shift for the global
and Canadian economies. It is a change in the kind of energy that is used toward sources that
emit  less  carbon.  It  is  a  change  in  in how  goods  and  services  are  produced—lowering  their
energy-intensiveness. And it is a shift in what goods and services are produced and consumed—
away from more energy-intensive products toward other products and activities.
While many countries will be undergoing a similar structural transformation, adapting to a lower-
carbon economy will likely mean more profound structural changes for Canada than for many
other countries. Canada is  an  important  producer  of  fossil  fuels.  Our  manufacturing  sector  is
closely linked to energy—notably our automotive and aerospace industries—and will be affected
by  measures  to  address  climate  change.  And  Canadians  use  more  energy  per  capita  than
residents of many countries, given the size of our country as well as our climate, living standards
and lifestyles.
At the same time, Canada has certain advantages in facing this transition. It is already a large
producer  of  renewable  energy,  notably  hydroelectric  power.  And,  given  our  highly  educated
population, Canada has the capacity to innovate in green technologies—while the magnitude of
the transition itself provides a strong motivation for such innovation. 
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
While the coming shift does present some unique challenges, Canada has shown an ability to
adapt.  We  have  experienced  major  structural  changes  brought  about  by  changes  in  relative
prices.  Think  of  the  past  two  and  a  half  years,  when  the  drop  in  commodity  prices  drove
production  and  employment  away  from  resource  industries  toward  other  sectors  of  the
economy. This shift represented a meaningful setback to Canadian economic growth and much
economic pain to many families in the energy-intensive provinces. 
But the Canadian economy has proven itself resilient. Our flexible exchange rate helped provide
a  boost  to  our  non-resource  industries,  including  services  and  manufacturing.  Our  labour
markets  are  adaptable—employment  has  kept  growing  at  the  national  level  in  the  face  of  job
losses  in  the  oil  industry.  Our  financial  system  is  strong  and  resilient  and  has  been  able  to
finance  the  transition  rather  than  amplifying  the  resource  downturn.  Our  governments’  sound
fiscal positions have given them room to provide support for aggregate demand. And at the Bank
of Canada, we had room to ease monetary policy further to buffer the shock to the economy.
Thus, as the effects of the oil shock have bottomed out, the Canadian economy is expected to
return to its potential around the middle of next year.
Of course, adjusting to a lower carbon economy will likely be more profound and involve different,
more complex challenges. But the same factors that have made Canada resilient to the oil shock
should serve us well as this adjustment proceeds. Through the adjustment and beyond, we also
will rely on the innovative capacity of Canadians to recognize the many opportunities to develop
new products and technologies for a lower-carbon world.
Another important factor is that Canada’s policy strategy for addressing climate change is being
mapped out for the future—which will help in maintaining sustained growth and low, stable and
predictable inflation through these adjustments. Indeed, this is in sharp contrast to a scenario
where we do not succeed in staving off climate change which, as I have stressed, entails major
downside risks and uncertainties.
The Bank of Canada’s role
Now, how does the Bank of Canada fit into the picture? Obviously we are not at the front line
dealing with climate change, but the issues I have been discussing have important implications
as we carry out our responsibilities.
financial  system, 
including  robust  markets.  We  share  our 
Let me take a moment to talk about our mandate. The Bank has a role to promote a sound and
efficient 
financial  stability
responsibilities  with  other  federal  and  provincial  agencies.  In  contrast  to  some  other  central
banks, the Bank of Canada is not directly responsible for regulating banks, insurance companies
and similar financial institutions. It is therefore not for us to decide how these institutions should
prepare for risks related to climate change or for those associated with the structural changes I
have just discussed. We do not regulate financial markets and thus do not have the mandate to
establish standards of transparency and disclosure in support of green finance.
We  do,  however,  have  a  broader  set  of  responsibilities  to  support  financial  stability,  including
identifying, analyzing and assessing both imminent and emerging systemic risks. We bring this
risk assessment into our discussions with other agencies that control the relevant policy levers.
We also share our analysis with the public in our semi-annual Financial System Review and in
various staff publications—not to mention in speeches like this one.
Climate change also ultimately has implications for monetary policy. We will continue to pursue
low,  stable  and  predictable  inflation  amid  the  structural  shift  to  a  lower-carbon  economy.  The
introduction  of  carbon  pricing  itself  will  have  a  transitory  effect  on  inflation—indeed,  such  an
effect is evident in the most recent monthly CPI figures. But since this effect is due to a one-off
structural change, we look through it in making monetary policy—just as we have looked through
the  transitory  effect  of  lower  oil  prices  in  the  past  couple  of  years.  But  the  more  profound
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
structural changes that will be taking place are likely to have important consequences for both
aggregate supply and demand, which we will need to consider carefully as we conduct monetary
policy.  By  the  same  token,  if  rising  temperatures  were  to  bring  increasingly  frequent  adverse
shocks, we would need to factor that into our policy stance in the context of our risk management
framework.
Many of these forces are difficult to incorporate directly into our economic models, and we should
be  modest  about  the  degree  of  precision  we  can  bring  to  these  issues.
  But  models  are
nonetheless very helpful for characterizing the forces at work and capturing their interactions.
10
We  can  also  play  an  important  role  by  being  part  of  the  policy  dialogue,  in  Canada  and
internationally. I have already mentioned our contribution to the G20’s work on green finance, one
of a number of settings in which we can—and do—bring ideas and analysis to the table.
All  our  efforts  are  guided  by  research  to  analyze  the  economic  and  financial  forces  at  work.
Indeed,  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  Medium-Term  Plan  includes  an  emphasis  on  “considering
alternative futures.” That label seems tailor-made for thinking about climate change—where we
can  envisage  a  lower-carbon  future  or  another  future  where  our  economy  is  increasingly
subjected  to  the  shocks  stemming  from  rising  global  temperatures.  We  are  committed  to
analyzing the change that is here today and where it may take Canada’s economy and financial
system far into the future.
Conclusion
In these remarks, I have been focusing on the future. But these changes are already in motion
and are becoming increasingly important for decisions on a wide range of policies. The effects of
climate change are already being felt, and action to address climate change is being taken now.
If  it  is  on  a  sufficient  scale  to  address  the  problem,  it  is  also  on  a  sufficient  scale  to  have  a
meaningful economic impact.
The issues are complex, but basic economics can cut through some of the complexity. Putting a
price on carbon is a core element of Canada’s strategy for addressing climate change. And if we
get the price right, we can do a lot right. Early steps are also being taken to make the financial
system  an  effective  tool  for  green  finance,  including  here  in  Canada.  There  are  signs  that
momentum is building.
We  at  the  Bank  of  Canada  will  do  what  we  can,  within  our  mandate,  to  help  the  Canadian
economy through these changes. This is an integral part of our commitment to a better Canada.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Such outcomes are discussed in National Research Council, Committee on Abrupt Climate Change, Abrupt
Climate  Change:  Inevitable  Surprises  (Washington:  National  Academy  Press,  2002).  See  also  P.
Howard, Omitted Damages: What’s Missing From the Social Cost of Carbon, Joint project of the Environmental
Defense Fund, the Institute for Policy Integrity and the Natural Resources Defense Council, 2014).
Estimate from the National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy, 2011, using 2006 dollars.
The Pan-Canadian Framework for Clean Growth and Climate Change, 2017. Carbon pricing is discussed in a
report  by  Canada’s  Ecofiscal  Commission, The  Way  Forward:  A  Practical  Approach  to  Reducing  Canada’s
Greenhouse Gas Emissions (April 2015). (www.ecofiscal.ca). 
B.  Murray  and  N.  Rivers,  “British  Columbia’s  Revenue-Neutral  Carbon  Tax: A  Review  of  the  Latest  ‘Grand
Experiment’ in Environmental Policy,” Working Paper NI WP15–04 (May 2015). 
Similar issues arise if carbon pricing is achieved through cap-and-trade, depending on whether carbon permits
are auctioned or granted to existing emitters.
See, for example, I. Parry, C. Veung and D. Heine, “How Much Carbon Pricing is in Countries’ Own Interests?
The Critical Role of Co-Benefits,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper 14/174 (2014).
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
7
8
9
10
M.  Lowey,  “Alberta  Will  Protect  Energy-Intensive,  Trade-Exposed  Industries  in  Implementing  Climate  Plan:
Environment Minister,” EnviroLine: The Business Publication for the Environmental Industry (2016).
These and other financial stability issues were addressed in M. Carney, “Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon—
Climate Change and Financial Stability” (speech to Lloyd’s of London, London, England, 29 September 2015).
Climate Bonds Initiative
These modelling challenges, including those associated with the integrated models that seek to capture both
environmental and economic forces, are reviewed in R. S. Pindyck “Climate Change Policy: What Do the Models
Tell Us?” Journal of Economic Literature vol. 51 no. 3 (September 2013): 860–872.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
