SPEECH BY:  
Loi M Bakani CMG, Governor, Bank of PNG 
At the 
UNCDF 50th Anniversary 
19 January 2017 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is my pleasure to address you all at this momentous occasion 
marking UNCDF’s 50th Anniversary. 
The  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  has  had  a  close  relationship  with  UNCDF  through  the 
Pacific Financial Inclusion Programme (PFIP) since its inception in 2008.  
I would like to share with you some of PFIP’s highlights over the past 9 years. 
On a regional level, PFIP has been instrumental in supporting the role of the Central Banks 
in driving the Financial Inclusion agenda, and actively contributes to the Pacific Islands 
Regional  Initiative,  a  knowledge-sharing  platform  for  the  Central  Banks  in  the  Pacific 
region.  
By the end of September 2016, PFIP had reached an impressive cumulative total of over 
1.1 million clients across the Pacific, already surpassing the programme’s 2019 goal of 1 
million clients. These clients are now connected with financial service providers through a 
variety  of  financial  services  including  bank  accounts,  mobile  money,  micro  insurance, 
microfinance  and  more.  Closer  to  home  for  us,  in  Papua  New  Guinea  alone,  PFIP 
partnerships have led to over 400,000 clients receiving some form of financial service. 
 In  Papua  New  Guinea,  PFIP  has  been  supporting  the  Bank  of  PNG  and  the  Centre  for 
Excellence  in  Financial  Inclusion  through  support  for  development  and  implementation 
of  the  country’s  National  Financial  Inclusion  Strategic  Plans,  the  second  of  which 
(spanning  from  2016-2020),  you  may  be  aware,  was  launched  recently  in  December 
2016. This new plan has the ambitious target of reaching 2 million more unbanked low-
income Papua New Guineans, 50% of whom are women, by 2020. 
 BIMA is one example showing the tremendous need and potential for financial service in 
Papua  New  Guinea.  A  recent  entrant  into  the  insurance  market,  BIMA  provides 
convenient, affordable life and hospitalization insurance cover via a mobile platform to 
nearly  400,000  often  low-income,  financially  underserved  Papua  New  Guineans,  the 
majority are receiving the economic safety net of insurance cover for the first time. PFIP’s 
investment  grant  helped  BIMA  expand  outreach  in  the  Highlands  region,  reducing 
delivery costs and improving customer service through and expanded agent network. 
 PFIP is currently working with the with Department of Education, Provincial Government 
and  Bank  of  PNG  to  develop  a  pilot  for  Financial  Education  integration  into  technical 
and vocational college curriculums.  PFIP is testing a new model with Kamaliki Technical 
Vocational College and Goroka Technical College in the Highlands, working specifically 
with  technical  and  vocational  training  institutions  to  produce  labor  market-ready 
graduates who are better equipped to deal with financial decision-making. 
 PFIP  is  also  partnering  with  MiBank  on  a  ‘pay-as-you-go’  solar  energy  kit  loan  pilot.  This 
product has huge potential in Papua New Guinea, as you may be aware that 82% of our 
population are still ‘off-grid’. Besides enabling them to access electricity in a convenient, 
cost effective-way, the project has the potential to introduce 100,000 unbanked Papua 
New  Guineans  into  the  formal  financial  sector,  boost  financial  literacy  and  give  them 
opportunities to access additional financial products. 
 In  summary,  it  seems  that  UNCDF,  through  PFIP  has  been  very  busy!  We  would  like  to 
acknowledge  the  EU  in  particular  for  supporting  the  second  phase  of  PFIP’s  work  in 
Papua New Guinea through the RED 2 Programme, without which, many of the above-
mentioned  achievements  would  not  have  been  possible.  We  would  like  to  thank  PFIP, 
UNCDF  and  UNDP  and  for  their  support  in  advancing  financial  inclusion  in  Papua  New 
Guinea and more broadly in the Pacific. And finally, we wish to congratulate UNCDF of 
reaching the milestone of its 50th birthday. 
 