 An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
 Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the SANEF Nat Nakasa Awards Ceremony 
  Durban 
10 June 2017 
   Good evening, ladies and gentlemen. 
 Thank you to SANEF, the South African National Editors Forum, for the invitation to 
address you this evening.  
 As we all know, South Africa is going through a turbulent period at the moment – and 
this puts an enormous responsibility on the press to report on and interpret events in 
an open and balanced way. South Africa has a long tradition of journalists, such as 
Nat Nakasa, fighting for and trying to preserve media freedom, particularly during the 
era when the freedom of the press was an anathema. It is a testament to the resilience 
of our institutions that the country’s post-1994 new-found press freedom endures till 
today, despite noises from some quarters trying to undermine it. I salute all those of 
you who have carried on this tradition and have been nominated for the award tonight. 
 You do not need the Governor of the  South African Reserve Bank to tell you about 
your  role  in  society.  In  my  address  this  evening,  I  would  prefer  to  talk  about  the 
governance of monetary policy decision-making processes and our accountability as 
the country's central bank.  
  Page 1 of 10 
Accountability means that we have to explain ourselves to the public. One of the most 
important  channels  through  which  we  account  to  the  public  is  the  media.  So  our 
relationship with the media is of critical importance. 
 Some of you would have read the monetary policy statements that we publish at the 
conclusion of  our  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  meetings;  some  of  you  would 
have  seen  me  reading  out  the  MPC  statement  at  the  press  conference  which  is 
broadcast live on television. In this statement, the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) 
sets out how we view the state of the global and domestic economy – and how the 
situation impacts on our outlook for inflation. At the end of the statement, we announce 
the  policy  rate  decision.  This  decision  regarding  interest  rates  is  of  enormous 
importance to the economy in general, and  it affects most people, either  directly or 
indirectly.  This  raises  the  question  as  to  how  these  decisions  are  made,  the 
governance around the MPC decision-making process, and our accountability.  
 Central  banks  are  generally  viewed  as  conservative  institutions,  and  'conservative' 
implies a reluctance to change. However, there have been significant changes in how 
central banks operate in the last few decades. I would like to highlight the three main 
aspects to this central bank evolution or, perhaps more appropriately, revolution.  
 The first is the move towards monetary  policy independence. Many people assume 
that  independence  has  been  common  practice  since  the  establishment  of  central 
banks. But this is not the case. It is something that has evolved over time. In fact, the 
Bank of England, which in literature is often held up as the epitome of 'best practice' 
in central banking, was only granted monetary policy independence in 1997. Before 
then, all monetary policy decisions were taken by the Chancellor of the Exchequer, 
with the Bank of England merely implementing those decisions. 
 One of the theoretical rationales for an independent central bank is to avoid the so-
called  'political  electoral  cycles'  in  monetary  policy,  which  is  the  tendency  of 
governments to lower interest rates or loosen monetary policy before an election and 
then  tightening  them  afterwards.  Having  a  central  bank  with  a  time  horizon  that  is 
longer than the electoral cycle should ensure that monetary policy decisions are not 
 Page 2 of 10 
subject to political pressures. In other words, it should avoid the possibility of taking 
advantage  of  short-term  and  temporary  positive  trade-offs  which  ultimately  lead  to 
longer-term pain. These cycles are well documented in a number of countries. In South 
Africa,  the  SARB  reportedly  lowered  interest  rates  in  advance  of  the  Primrose  by-
election in 1984, only to raise them again a few weeks after the election. 
 The granting of operational independence to central banks has meant that monetary 
policy was in essence handed over to non-elected officials. Holding them accountable 
would  require  well-defined  goals  for  monetary  policy  and  effective  channels  of 
communication. This resulted  in  the second step of the revolution: a sea change in 
monetary  policy  communication.  From  being  highly  secretive  institutions,  central 
banks have become masters of communication, with communication strategy in fact 
now  regarded  as  one  of  their  policy  tools.  This  change  coincided  with  the  evolving 
view  of  how  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted.  The  idea  that  monetary  policy 
should surprise the markets made way for the current conventional wisdom that central 
banks should guide the markets – and this requires open communication as well. 
 The  third  aspect  of  this  central  bank  revolution  is  the  move  from  a  single  decision 
maker  to  committee-based  decision  making.  Historically,  monetary  policy  decisions 
were generally made by the Governor, perhaps with a committee in a purely advisory 
role. But along with this change came the need for governance structures around the 
decision-making process. 
 I should point out that inflation-targeting frameworks emerged hand in hand with these 
developments, which are entirely consistent with this framework. In fact, they had a 
symbiotic relationship. Inflation targeting requires a clear objective for monetary policy, 
and independence of decision making is therefore of the essence. Inflation targeting 
works partly through anchoring inflation expectations, and for this, clear and credible 
communication  is  required.  For  credibility,  there  needs  to be transparency  of  policy 
objectives  and  of  decision  making.  Independence  also  requires  accountability. 
Therefore, good governance structures relating to committee workings and decision 
making are also important.  
  Page 3 of 10 
While decision making by committee is not a prerequisite for inflation targeting, there 
are good arguments for it. It is an irony, however, that in New Zealand, the first country 
to  adopt  inflation  targeting,  the  Governor  is  the  sole  decision  maker.  He  does  take 
advice from a committee, but the decision is ultimately his. This is mainly because the 
Policy Targets Agreement that the Governor signs  with the government makes him 
personally responsible for achieving the target. His job is on the line if the target is 
missed.  
 There  is a sizeable literature on the relative efficiency of committee-based decision 
making. The general conclusion appears to be that, subject to certain features being 
present, a committee structure outperforms individual decision making. A committee 
tends to pool information and ideas from a group comprising different skills and views, 
and it also provides insurance against extreme preferences and outcomes. One of the 
arguments against committees is that they tend to be inertial and over time  may be 
subject to 'group think'.  
 The  structure  and  governance  frameworks  of  monetary  policy  committees  differ 
across  countries.  Sometimes  this  is  because  of  the  legislative  environment  that 
governs the committees. In other instances, the institutional design and processes of 
the committee are determined by past practice and institutional culture and traditions, 
as well as by the mix of people and personalities.  
 To  give  some  examples.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  MPC  consists  of  internal  and 
external  members,  with  the  latter  appointed  by  the  Chancellor.  Each  member  is 
individually responsible for his or her vote and has to explain, if asked, for example by 
a  parliamentary  committee,  why  they  voted  in  a  particular  way.  In  the  European 
Central  Bank  (ECB),  by  contrast,  each  member  state  appoints  one  member  to  the 
Governing Council, the main decision-making body of the ECB. Each member has a 
vote  and  these  votes  are  not  revealed;  the  Governing  Council  takes  collective 
responsibility.  
 The  United  States  practice  is  a  bit  more  complex.  The  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  consists  of  the  7  members  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
 Page 4 of 10 
Federal Reserve System, the  President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 
and 4 of the remaining 11 Reserve Bank Presidents who serve one-year terms on a 
rotating basis. The Presidents of all the other Reserve Banks attend the meetings but 
they do not have a vote. The voting record of the FOMC is made public.  
 Revealing  the  individual  members'  votes  does  not  necessarily  mean  that  there  is a 
democratic outcome. Alan Blinder, the former Vice Chair of the Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System, refers the possibility of 'autocratic collegial' processes 
where  the  Chair’s  preference  is  likely  to  be  the  consensus  outcome.  It  is  well 
documented that under Alan Greenspan’s chairmanship of the Fed, for example, there 
was a tradition that no more than two members would vote against the Chair’s wishes. 
In such instances, while there is an appearance of democratic processes, the reality 
may be quite different. 
 What is the practice in South Africa? The primary goal of the SARB is the maintenance 
of  price  stability.  This  is  confirmed  in  the  Constitution  of  the  country,  and  we  have 
applied policy within an inflation-targeting framework since February 2000. The target 
in effect quantifies our constitutional mandate. The Constitution is, however, silent on 
how  monetary  policy  should  be  conducted,  and  this  allows  for  monetary  policy 
practices to evolve over time. The 'how' is discretionary, and the Constitution gives the 
SARB autonomy or independence in making these policy decisions.  
 An MPC was first constituted in October 1999. Prior to this, decisions were made by 
the  Governor  at  times  that  were  not  pre-set.  Generally,  announcements  were  a 
surprise, made on late Friday afternoons after the local financial markets had closed.  
 With the introduction of inflation targeting, practices have evolved. It is not my intention 
to outline all these changes here tonight, but I would rather like to focus on the current 
practice.  
 Monetary  policy  decisions  are  made  by  the  MPC,  which  currently  comprises  six 
members: the Governor, the three Deputy Governors, and two other senior officials of 
the SARB. The composition and workings of the MPC are governed by internal terms 
 Page 5 of 10 
of reference, which make provision for up to  four senior officials apart from the four 
governors.  The  choice  of  these  officials  is  the  prerogative  of  the  Governor,  after 
consultation with the Deputy  Governors. These appointments are not ex-officio and 
are therefore not automatically related to a specific position within the SARB. Rather, 
they  are  focused  on  the  contribution  that  particular  individuals  can  make  to  the 
monetary policy decision-making process. But within these constraints, we also have 
to be mindful of the gender composition of the MPC, which is currently all male. This 
explains the absence of a full complement as provided for in the terms of reference, 
and it is something that we are working hard at to rectify.  
 Every monetary policy decision is an outcome of in-depth discussion and debate. Even 
a 'no change' decision is a policy decision. I should also note that the monetary policy 
decision is not a one-off event; it is a continuous process which culminates in the MPC 
meeting  where  decisions  are finally  taken. We  are  constantly  talking  to  each other, 
discussing what we see and how we interpret what we see.  
 These  discussions  are  not  only  amongst  MPC  members,  but  also  with  other  staff 
members in the SARB who keep us updated about developments. We also interact 
with analysts outside the  SARB, and we hear what they are thinking as well.  A few 
days before each meeting we receive further documentation prepared by various units 
in the SARB, so by the time we have the MPC meeting, we are well prepared! 
 MPC  meetings  last  three  days.  The  first  day  of  the  MPC  meeting  is  devoted  to 
discussions about global and domestic economic and financial market developments. 
This  part  of  the  meeting  is  attended  by  the  MPC  as  well  as  about  55  other  staff 
members.  Each  presentation  is  followed  by  a  discussion,  where  we  interrogate  the 
presenters  and  their  colleagues.  All  attendees  are  invited  to  contribute  to  this 
discussion. At this point, however, there is no discussion of the policy stance. 
 The following morning is devoted to a discussion of the forecast. These deliberations 
are attended by some members of the modelling team as well as about  eight other 
senior officials, apart from the MPC members. The outputs of two of the main models 
are presented and discussed. 
 Page 6 of 10 
 Given the centrality of the forecast, it is important to say something about the role of 
the forecast in the monetary policy decision-making process. Monetary policy acts with 
a lag. According to our models, the full impact of a change in interest rates could take 
between 12 and 18 months to fully work its way through the economy to impact on 
GDP1 and inflation. For this reason, monetary policy decisions need to be based on 
the expected path of inflation and not on current inflation, which is a function of past 
monetary  policy.  The forecast  is  therefore  of  central  importance  and  is  given  much 
attention, both in our deliberations and in our communication of the monetary policy 
stance. 
 Given this, it is important that there are appropriate governance structures around the 
forecast. We are aware that there is a possibility that the forecasters themselves could 
bias the forecast in such a way as to influence the direction of the policy stance. One 
way in which we ensure that this does not happen is by making the MPC members 
part  of  the  process  that  decides  on  the  assumptions  regarding  the  exogenous 
variables  of the model. This in effect makes the MPC ultimately responsible for the 
forecast.  The  assumptions  can  make  a  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the 
longer-term inflation forecast. These assumptions, which have to be made to cover 
each  quarter  over  the  three-year  forecast  period,  include  international  oil  prices, 
international  commodity  prices,  global  inflation,  and  the  starting  point  for  the  real 
effective exchange rate.  
 The assumptions are finalised at a meeting about two weeks before an MPC meeting. 
In  the  interest  of  transparency,  these  assumptions  of  the  exogenous  variables  are 
published as an annexure to monetary policy statement. The SARB's core model has 
also been published, and this allows analysts to compare forecasts and understand 
the source of the differences in forecasts that may arise. 
 I should also emphasise that we do not follow the forecast in a mechanical way. If we 
did,  we  could  simply  hand  over  the  decision  to  a  computer  which  would  tell  us  the 
appropriate policy path to follow in order to ensure that inflation is brought back into 
                                                      
1 gross domestic product 
 Page 7 of 10 
target within an appropriate and achievable time horizon. We know that models are 
merely an approximation of reality and are therefore prone to error. Furthermore, we 
know  that  the  assumptions  that  we  make  could  also  turn  out  to  be  incorrect.  Each 
MPC  member  would  have  their  own  view  about  the  risks  to  the  assumptions  and 
therefore to the forecast. Ultimately, we have to rely on our own judgement. 
 Following the presentation of the forecast, the MPC has a session with a few key staff 
to get their views. Thereafter, the MPC members meet on their own, where they review 
the highlights of the previous two days. The MPC then meets on the following morning, 
where each member sets out his view of the economy and policy preference. This is 
not a repeat of the facts, but rather an assessment of how the information received 
confirms our priors and how it affects the assessment of the risks to the outlook.  
 After a presentation by each MPC member, the other members can raise questions or 
debate  issues  raised  in  the  presentation. The  debates  that follow  the presentations 
are inevitably robust. But while there are disagreements, the atmosphere is collegial 
and marked by mutual respect.  
 There have been instances where members changed their policy stance after these 
debates,  but  this  was  because  they  had  been  convinced  by  other  arguments,  not 
because of pressure from peers or from the chair. It has been a long-standing tradition 
of the MPC that the views of the majority carry the day. A vote different to that of the 
Governor  is  not  regarded  as  'dissent’,  but  rather  as  an  expression  of  a  different 
viewpoint, which is encouraged. In the event that the preferences are evenly split, the 
Governor has the casting say.  
 Disagreements at South Africa's MPC are quite common and reflect an absence of 
group think. Of the past 16 meetings, only half were unanimous. In the other seven, 
there were 4-2 splits on three occasions, 5-1 splits on three occasions, and a 3-3 split 
on  one  occasion.  On  one  occasion,  three  members  preferred  a  50  basis  point 
increase, two preferred a 25 basis point increase, and one preferred no change in the 
policy rate. 
  Page 8 of 10 
The preferences are revealed in the monetary policy statement, although we do not 
reveal individual member preferences. As I noted earlier, there are different practices 
in this respect. Our view is that identifying the individual votes would place excessive 
focus  on  the  individual  rather  than  on  the  decision.  While  we  do  allow  for  different 
opinions and views, we take collective responsibility once a decision is made.  
 An important part of accountability is the communication of the decision. We do this in 
various ways. First, we do not publish the transcripts of the MPC meetings. There is 
much debate globally about this. Experience in other countries shows that publishing 
the transcripts of committee deliberations could stifle debate and result in an excessive 
reliance  on  prepared  statements  that  are  read  out.  We  do,  however,  release  a 
statement at the end of each meeting. The statement outlines how the MPC sees the 
economy,  the  reasons  for  its  policy  stance,  the  assessment  of  the  risks,  the  voting 
preferences, as well as some qualitative forward guidance. The statement is read out 
at a press conference that is televised live on a number of channels; it is also streamed 
live on the SARB website. All MPC members constitute the press conference panel, 
and questions are taken from the press and other analysts who can dial in. 
 Accountability and transparency are further enhanced through the biannual publication 
of the Monetary Policy Review (MPR), in which an in-depth analysis of the monetary 
policy stance is presented. The MPR is launched at a national Monetary Policy Forum 
(MPF),  with  all  MPC  members  on  the  panel;  the  launch  is  open  to  all  interested 
stakeholders. The MPF is usually attended by  more than  300 people. Thereafter, a 
series  of  regional  MPFs  is  conducted,  with  at  least  one  MPC  member  as  chair,  at 
about nine different venues around the country. 
 As  part of  our  communication  strategy,  we  also  arrange  stakeholder  engagements. 
We  regularly  meet  with  foreign  and  domestic  asset  managers  and  investors.  Our 
outreach  programme  includes  different  groups  from  the  broader  society.  These 
include  trade  unions,  business  associations  and  political  parties.  We  also  have  an 
economic round-table discussion with economic analysts every alternate month, and 
we engage regularly with the academic community. Ultimately, we are accountable to 
Parliament.  The  SARB's  Annual  Report  is  presented  to  the  parliamentary  Standing 
 Page 9 of 10 
Committee  on  Finance,  and  we  report  to  the  committee  whenever  requested  by 
Parliament to do so. 
 Last  but  not  least,  the  press  and  general  news  media  are  an  integral  part  of  our 
communication  strategy.  Not  only  do  the  media  report  what  we  say,  but  they  also 
interpret  (and  in  some  cases  misinterpret)  what  we  say.  In  order  to  improve  the 
understanding of our thinking, and to encourage accurate coverage, the MPC meets 
with  editors  from  the  main  publications  at  least  twice  a  year,  and  once  a  year  with 
senior journalists. And in order to enhance the quality of financial journalism, the SARB 
sponsors a Chair in Financial Journalism at Rhodes University.   
 The steps towards communication and transparency undertaken by central banks and 
the SARB in particular have been significant. While we have our own communication 
strategies,  we  cannot  do  this  without  close  interaction  with  the  press  and  broader 
media. We depend on each other. The press in South Africa has a proud tradition of 
being open, vibrant and questioning. I am sure that you, present here this evening, will 
carry on this tradition. My heartiest congratulations go to the winner of the award. 
 Thank you. 
 Page 10 of 10 
