Central Bank of Chile’s Twenty-first Annual Conference 
“Monetary Policy and Financial Stability: Transmission Mechanisms and 
Policy Implications” 
Opening remarks by Governor Mario Marcel 
 Good morning and welcome to the Twenty-first Annual Conference of the Central Bank of 
Chile. It is a pleasure to host this event that every year gives us an opportunity to reflect and 
discuss  about  issues  that  have  direct  implications  on  our  work  as  central  bankers  from  a 
broader perspective. I am looking forward to active discussions through the rest of the week 
on this year’s conference theme: monetary policy and financial stability. 
Ten years have passed since the onset of the Global Financial Crisis and we are still dealing 
with its economic consequences. But we have learnt a lot, and a decade of hindsight about 
the causes and long-lasting effects has led us to rethink the way we conduct monetary policy, 
how  to  ensure  financial  stability,  and  how  these  two  elements  are,  or  should  be, 
interconnected. 
One of the most important policy lessons from the crisis concerns the relevance of actively 
seeking financial stability in a context of ever-increasing financial complexity. And central 
banks worldwide have been increasingly involved in assuring this, since it has become clear 
that financial stability is a pre-condition for price stability. Although financial stability has 
long been a key concern for policymakers, particularly in emerging countries where financial 
vulnerabilities are, or were, more evident and where risks to stability often come from abroad, 
nowadays the key concern is how to act in a preemptive way with actions that are costly, to 
ensure financial stability into the future.  How should macroeconomic policy pursue the goal 
of  financial  stability  in  normal  times,  when  the  benefits  are  uncertain  but  the  costs  are 
noticeable?  
As many of you well know, this concern came with the observation that the buildup of risks 
in the United States before the crisis occurred during a period of stable prices and output, the 
so called “Great Moderation” period, where low nominal interest rates that were consistent 
with the Central Bank’s commitment with CPI inflation stability may have led to excessive 
risk-taking  by financial intermediaries,  and to  a  rise  in  asset prices, while good  economic 
conditions masked the developing of financial imbalances. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  policy  rates  were  drastically  reduced  and  diverse  policy 
measures were implemented as the zero-lower bound became an active constraint. But the 
increasing  concern  about  financial  conditions  and  the  consequent  reassessment  of  the 
macroeconomic policy framework was most evident with the adoption of macroprudential 
 1 
policies. But the question remains about the role of monetary policy. Should monetary policy 
frameworks  explicitly  incorporate  risks  to  financial  stability?  This,  the  so-called  Leaning 
Against  the  Wind  debate,  has  become  one  of  the  most  hotly  debated  issues  in 
macroeconomics, in policy as well as academic circles, and will be one of the main topics 
we will be discussing and learning about during these couple of days.  
Let  me  contribute  to  this  debate  with  the  perspective  of  a  policymaker  in  a  small-open 
economy like Chile. In our case, financial vulnerabilities have been often related to large and 
volatile capital flows, with their consequent effects on asset prices and credit spreads. In this 
context,  raising  the  interest  rate  in  normal  times  due  to  financial  stability  concerns  as  the 
LAW strategy would prescribe, may be counterproductive as it would attract more capital 
flows, would tend to appreciate the domestic currency and would encourage foreign-currency 
borrowing.  These  mechanisms,  of  course,  have  been  at  the  core  of  monetary  policy  in 
developing countries for many years. In the case of Chile, they were more evident during the 
90s when capital controls were in place to try to give more autonomy to monetary policy in 
a context of persistent and large capital inflows. However, these mechanisms are relevant as 
well when debating about the role of monetary policy in actively pursuing an objective of 
financial stability.   
A second issue I would like to point out is related to the credibility of the Central Bank, which 
is also a very important concern for emerging economies like Chile, where credibility was 
gained over several decades of responsible policymaking, and losing it would mean a costly 
institutional setback. A strong advantage of having monetary policy focusing exclusively on 
price  stability  is  that  it  simplifies  communication  and  enhances  accountability,  with  the 
resulting  positive  effects  on  credibility.  Adding  a  different  objective  would  hinder 
transparency, endangering the anchoring of inflation expectations.   
However, independently of the convenience of following a LAW strategy or keeping the pre-
crisis consensus with monetary policy focusing primarily on price stability, I am convinced 
that the main lesson from the Crisis is that regulatory frameworks aimed at specific sectors 
and markets are  a key element of a defense against financial disruptions. Macroprudential 
policies,  and  in  particular  monetary  policy,  are  not  substitutes  for  an  efficient  regulatory 
framework.  Microeconomic  policies  can  be  targeted  much  closer  to  the  source  of  market 
imperfections,  mitigating  their  effects  while  at  the  same  time  avoiding  the  economy-wide 
costs of contractionary macroeconomic policies.  
We  cannot  forget  that  inefficiencies  in  the  regulatory  framework  were  at  the  heart  of  the 
buildup of risks in the run-up to the crisis. The fact that fragilities in the financial system, 
namely  inadequate  levels  of  capitalization  and  liquidity,  were  not  properly  and  timely 
identified, may primarily reflect inadequacies in regulation and supervision.  
 2 
Our best response is to continue strengthening regulation and supervision regimes aimed at 
avoiding future crises. And central banks have a crucial role to play because there are clear 
complementarities between financial and monetary stability, which, as is the case of Chile, 
are often formally recognized in central banks’ official mandates. Before referring to what 
we have done on this matter in Chile, let me briefly describe our experience with the Global 
Financial Crisis and our macroeconomic policy response to it. 
While we were still enjoying the commodity boom of the 2000s, we were hit by the spillover 
effects of the crisis and its aftermath, namely the tightening of domestic lending conditions, 
capital outflows, a reduction of the external demand for our exports and  a decrease in the 
price of copper, which is still the main source of external income for the Chilean economy, 
and in particular an important source of revenues for the Treasury. The price of this critical 
commodity fell more than 60 percent in just five months. Exports fell almost 20 percent in 
two years, a strong shock for an economy where exports accounted for more than 40 percent 
of  GDP.  A  similar  drop  experienced  public  revenues,  with  those  coming  from  copper 
production falling 23 percent in 2008 and 50 percent the following year. 
Despite the severity of the shocks, economic performance and the resilience of the financial 
system  have  been  better  than  in  comparable  situations  in  the  past.  Behind  this  favorable 
response of the Chilean economy lies a macroeconomic policy framework able to pursue an 
effective reaction, and  a  regulatory scheme supporting  the high resilience  of the domestic 
financial system.  
In Chile the monetary policy framework consists of a flexible inflation-targeting regime with 
a floating exchange rate. This framework has allowed us to respond efficiently to external 
shocks keeping inflation expectations anchored. Before the Asian Crisis of 1998, we had a 
managed  exchange  rate  and  we  had  capital  controls  in  place  to  allow  monetary  policy 
independence  to  manage  inflation  in  a  context  of  abundant  capital  inflows.  Indeed,  we 
experienced  a  costly  adjustment  to  that  episode,  and  this  was  fueled  in  part  by  financial 
stability concerns that called against an exchange rate adjustment. But once the harder times 
had passed, the exchange rate was allowed to float freely, facilitating not only the external 
adjustment against shocks but also improving the incentives for private agents to  properly 
hedge their foreign currency operations.  
The deep-rooted credibility of our Central Bank has also facilitated the conduct of monetary 
policy with a floating exchange rate system. The fact that the market understands that the 
Central Bank pursues a goal for inflation at a 24-month horizon means that the exchange rate 
pass-through  to  inflation  is  relatively  low,  indeed  the  lowest  in  the  region.  This  can  be 
illustrated with the reluctance of the Central Bank to tighten monetary policy in 2015 despite 
a  49  percent  devaluation  in  2014-2016,  and  without  affecting  24-months-ahead  inflation 
expectations, which remained anchored at the target level. 
 3 
As the 2007 financial crisis unfolded and its effects spread-out, this framework helped us to 
avoid  large  costs  and  evade  financial  problems  despite  our  strong  ties  with  the  global 
economy. In the aftermath of the crisis the local currency depreciated around 45 percent in 
seven months, while the  monetary policy  rate was reduced from a relatively high level  of 
8.25 percent in December 2008 to a point five percent in July 2009, remaining there for about 
a year. Together with lowering the interest rate, the Central Bank implemented a program of 
liquidity provision that significantly reduced the market interest rates to a level much closer 
to the monetary policy rate. Additionally, in the middle of 2009 it established a term liquidity 
facility for banking institutions, granting 90- and 180-day liquidity at the prevailing monetary 
policy rate, signaling a more expansionary path for the monetary policy rate than the market 
expected.  
The active monetary policy response, together with an expansionary fiscal policy, favored by 
a  healthy  fiscal  position  that  was  achieved  thanks  to  a  fiscal  rule  where  expenditures  are 
determined as a function of long-run copper prices and economic growth, facilitated a rapid 
adjustment. After only one period of negative annual growth in 2009, the economy was able 
to sustain growth rates above 4 percent in the years that followed. The inflation rate fell well 
below the target range for about a year, but inflation expectations remained well anchored at 
our target of 3 percent in the two-year horizon. 
Undoubtedly this is the strongest countercyclical macroeconomic policy response we have 
ever  implemented  to  a  shock  of  this  magnitude,  and  it  was  possible  thanks  to  a  sound 
corporate sector, a well-capitalized and resilient financial sector, and a solid position in terms 
of international liquidity.  
Importantly for the discussion ahead, this was the result of careful regulation and supervision 
of individual financial institutions. This scheme hails back to the banking crisis of the 1980s, 
and it has been constantly adapted and improved since then.  
In Chile, financial services are regulated and supervised by different institutions according 
to  the  type  of  service;  securities  and  insurance,  the  pension  system  and  unemployment 
insurance,  and  banks.  In  the  case  of  banks,  the  Superintendence  of  Banks  and  Financial 
Institutions and the Central Bank are in charge.  Different schemes have been designed to 
facilitate coordination between institutions. This effort has led recently to the creation of the 
Financial Market Commission, which will be headed by an autonomous board of directors 
and will transform the financial supervision and regulation scheme to an integrated one, with 
a systemic view of the stability and risks facing the financial sector and more flexibility to 
deal with critical situations. 
The  Central  Bank  of  Chile  enjoys  a  special  independent  status  under  the  Bank‘s 
Constitutional  Organic  Law.  Besides  specific  regulatory  tasks  with  regard  to  the  banking 
sector, the Central Bank oversees the foreign exchange regulations and monitors closely and 
 4 
constantly all the industries making up the financial sector. A central task performed by the 
Central Bank aimed at financial stability is the publication of the Financial Stability Report, 
twice a year.  
The  banking  regulation  has  evolved  gradually  and  steadily,  adopting  proven  international 
standards  and  best  practices.  A  new  General  Banking  Law  will  provide  for  a  gradual 
convergence  to  the  Basel  III  framework,  which  will  raise  the  quality,  consistency  and 
transparency of the capital base; strengthen risk hedging; introduce leverage limits; promote 
a  countercyclical  capital  framework;  and  introduce  a  global  liquidity  standard.  These 
requirements will be implemented gradually through 2019. They will provide higher stability 
and sustainability and contribute to Chile’s reputation and access to international markets.  
Chile largely complies with the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure established by 
the BIS.  An assessment made by the World Bank and the IMF last year identified a high 
level  of  compliance  with  the  principles  on  the  part  of  the  entities  assessed,  as  well  as  the 
authorities.  The  main  conclusion  was  that  Chile  has  sound  and  robust  financial  market 
infrastructures, in line with international standards and best practices on risk management, 
the finality and irrevocability of settlement, efficiency and transparency. 
The  Chilean  financial  market  is,  in  general,  deeper  than  those  of  other  Latin  American 
countries, with  larger institutional  investors and  greater maturity.  Banks'  capital  adequacy 
indicators  are  similar  to  those  of  other  economies  in  the  region,  but  lower  than  in  OECD 
countries,  while  their  exposure  to  credit  risk  is  low  relative  to  both  OECD  and  emerging 
economies.  The  World  Economic  Forum  Banking  Strength  index  shows  that  the  Chilean 
banking sector is very strong, as it ranks in the 11th place in the world.  
Let me finish by pointing out the relevance that the exchange rate derivatives market has had 
in favoring both financial stability and the conduct of the flexible inflation targeting scheme 
in Chile. 
This market is not as deep as it is in developed countries, but it has experienced significant 
growth of more than 10-fold since 1998, fueled in part, as I already mentioned, by the floating 
exchange rate regime. The role of pension funds has been significant as well, as they maintain 
a large positive foreign financial position, and keep hedging against exchange rate risk even 
above the regulatory requirements, especially in the aftermath of the last crisis.  
Thanks to these factors and a favorable regulation, Chile shows a high level of penetration 
of financial derivatives compared to other emerging economies and countries in the region. 
All this has contributed to a limited exchange rate mismatch of corporations. Today the share 
of  firms  with  a  mismatch  over  10  percent  of  their  assets  is  below  10  percent,  down  from 
around  20  percent  before  the  Crisis.  Hence  monetary  policy  can  be  conducted  in  a 
countercyclical  manner,  without  the  need  to  manage  the  exchange  rate.    However,  as  the 
recent experience in developed countries has revealed, the rapid development of derivatives 
 5 
markets  also  poses  challenges  to  regulators  due  to  their  complexity  and  potential 
concentration of risks in a few entities. 
An additional strength of the Chilean economy in the context of emerging countries, which I 
think is very important for the topic to be discussed during these days, is the relevance of 
institutional investors, particularly pension funds. Their role in financial stability has gone 
well beyond the development of derivatives markets. They have contributed to the deepening 
of capital markets, portfolio diversification, and the development of new financial products, 
among  other features. Moreover, with their peso-denominated liabilities and large foreign 
position,  which  is  around  35  percent  of  GDP  in  the  case  of  pension  funds,  they  have 
facilitated the conduct of monetary policy being an important source of liquidity in foreign 
currency when needed.  Acknowledging this, the financial regulation has gradually expanded 
the scope of possible investments for institutional investors, including raising the limits for 
investments abroad.  
Let me finish by thanking the distinguished group of economists that have joined us to present 
and discuss issues concerning monetary policy and financial stability. I would like to thank 
also Alvaro Aguirre, Markus Brunnermeier, Diego Saravia and Catalina Larraín for putting 
together the program, and Paloma Navarro and Carola Besa for helping with the organization. 
    6 
