Encik Abu  Hassan Alshari  Yahaya:  Future  proofing  compliance  –
responsibility and response-ability
Speech  by  Mr  Encik Abu  Hassan Alshari  Yahaya, Assistant  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of
Malaysia  (Bank  Negara  Malaysia),  at  the  9th  International  Conference  on  Financial  Crime  and
Terrorism Financing (IFCTF) "Future proofing Compliance: Responsibility and Response-ability",
Kuala Lumpur, 5 October 2017.
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  among  industry  leaders  and  experts.  As  we
approach the end of this conference, I would like to thank all of you for your participation and
contribution in making this year’s IFCTF a success. I believe that the various sessions and the
topics  discussed  in  the  past  two  days  have  provided  significant  insights  and  understanding
towards strengthening our risk management and capabilities to mitigate the vulnerabilities from
threats of money laundering and terrorism financing. I would like to commend CONG and AIF for
the  continuous  effort  and  initiatives  in  enhancing  the  capacity  and  capability  of  the  financial
industry, to improve the industry’s response to financial crime and terrorism financing.
As  highlighted  yesterday,  countries  are  still  facing  fundamental  challenges  towards  effective
implementation of AML/CFT measures. Weak legal, regulatory and supervisory framework and
inadequate  risks  understanding  would  have  cascading  effects,  not  just  on  compliance  with
international standards, but towards effective implementation of AML/CFT measures in achieving
the  intended  outcomes.  While  efforts  can  be  made  to  strengthen  the  legal  and  supervisory
framework, from the financial industry perspective, strong understanding of risks and effective
application of risk mitigation, including commensurate application of the AML/CFT measures are
critical  for  the  meaningful  conduct  and  practices  of  financial  institutions.  This  is  particularly
important  in  the  conduct  of  CDD  and  transaction  monitoring  that  will  facilitate  strong  financial
intelligence and reporting, to achieve the enforcement objectives.
Authorities are committed to continuously enhance the current legal and supervisory framework.
At  the  same  time,  financial  institutions  and  other  reporting  institutions  must  be  robust  in  their
current practices and compliance.
Technological Development
Everyone  agrees  that  technological  advancement  is  moving  at  a  pace  far  greater  than  ever
before.  For  the  financial  industry  to  maximise  the  overall  benefit  of  this  progress,  we  must
acknowledge both the advantages and the risks of such rapid technological advancement while
keeping abreast with the latest innovations. New devices, software, applications and inventions
will continue to emerge. The challenge is for us to keep pace and ensure that industry players
understand the potential benefits as well as the risk they bear. As the financial industry evolves
into digital, it is inevitable that the industry becomes vulnerable to various new threats and risk
factors, especially in the domain of financial crimes and terrorism financing.
In the effort to mitigate these risks, it is important that we embrace technology and use it to our
advantage in order to strengthen our defences against financial crimes and terrorism financing.
There are many areas in which the industry could benefit from the latest in technology.
1.  Firstly, the enhancement of transaction monitoring and reporting system through the use of
advanced  big  data  mining  and  analysis  method.  The  advancement  in  artificial  intelligence
and machine learning enables us to collect and analyse data in a way that was not possible
before. This allows us to gain new and important insights that will contribute significantly to
the  prevention  of  financial  crimes.  Furthermore,  the  ability  to  tap  into  vast  amount  of
information  also  helps  promote  better  client  management  which  would  encourage  wider
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial inclusion and tailored customer service;
2.  Secondly,  the  use  of  technology  to  complement  and  support  the  compliance  function
especially in the area of higher risk. A good example of this is demonstrated through the use
of digital verification to overcome challenges surrounding non-face-to-face verification and
transaction. Online identification recognition and biometric verification such as facial, voice
and fingerprints recognition offer a new layer of security and potential increase in efficiency
for the financial sector. Such advanced systems have the potential to strengthen the existing
framework and process to minimise fraud and error.
It is all too common to view technology as a disruption and a threat to the way we are used to
doing things. Nevertheless, when technological change is managed appropriately and its related
risks are mitigated, we can turn it into an enabler of progress for the financial industry. There is
always a group of people who are relentless in their criminal pursuit of economic profit at the
expense  of  others.  It  is  only  through  our  collective  efforts  that  we  can  manage  this  negative
externality of technological advancement.
Challenges posed by Cryptocurrency for AML
As all of you are aware, the next frontier in the financial industry is the advancement in blockchain
technology that allows the existence of cryptocurrency. With the global market capitalisation now
standing at approximately US$160 billion , cryptocurrencies could become a major part of the
financial system that offers new and exciting opportunities as well as challenges for the industry
and regulators. However, cryptocurrency is vulnerable to criminal abuse due to the anonymity it
provides to its users and its ability to facilitate cross-border transactions, potentially allowing illicit
funds to be transferred globally without a trace.
1
We have seen a range of actions taken by regulatory bodies across the globe in order to manage
this  risk,  ranging  from  total  prohibition,  partial  regulation,  to  full  legalisation.  Each  country  will
need to make an assessment of risks and rewards in its own unique context. We are also in the
midst of making such an assessment and we do so with an objective that has and will always
remain steadfast – that is to balance between safeguarding our economy and allowing room for
innovation and progress.
Increasing Threat of Cyber crimes
Let me now touch on the increasing threat of cyber-crime. We have seen a double digit growth in
cyber-crime in the past decade. By 2019 , cyber-crime could reach up to US$2 trillion, which is
three  to  four  times  the  total  banking  asset  in  Malaysia .  Domestically,  we  saw  persistent
increase in cyber security incidents reported to the Malaysia Computer Emergency Response
Team with the majority of these cyber incidents being related to fraud and intrusion. The threat is
imminent not only in the private sector, but also in the public sector.
2
3
Enhanced security framework and proper mitigating strategy and action plan is vital in order to
manage the risk and alleviate the impact of any potential attack. A research done in 2016 in the
US  showed  that  only  37%  of  the  financial  services  industry  have  a  Cyber  Security  Incident
Response Plan. I believe that our financial industry needs to be in greater state of preparedness
on this.
Emerging Terrorist Financing Threats
Terrorism  financing  continues  to  pose  significant  threat  to  the  financial  industry,  with  larger
ramifications that reverberate to political stability and the loss of lives. Importantly, the terrorism
financing  threat  continues  to  evolve  alongside  technology.  While  traditional  methods  such  as
mule  accounts  and  cash  smuggling  continue  to  be  the  main  feature  of  terrorism  financing,
terrorist organisations and actors have not been slow in exploiting new technologies and financial
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
products.  Social  media  platforms,  online  crowdfunding  websites  and  e-wallet  services  are
increasing in popularity among terrorists to gather their resources, especially with the increasing
trend in remote radicalisation and “lone-wolf” actors. These platforms have enabled a more direct
and faster approach in seeking out sympathisers for donations. There is also evidence of the use
of new financial products such as prepaid shopping gift cards and online game platform credits
to transfer funds to finance terrorist and terrorist-related activities.
A more dynamic and intelligent system, based on real-time data analytics supported by artificial
intelligence  and  machine  learning  would  be  useful  in  detecting  and  halting  such  transactions.
Importantly, we need to have the capability to detect the interconnectedness between terrorism
financing and other crimes including robbery, fraud, kidnapping and drug trafficking.
Threats of proliferation financing
Every  jurisdiction  has  a  vital  role  to  play  in  hindering  the  proliferation  of  weapons  of  mass
destruction. We must be attentive to the various methods of circumventing sanctions relating to
proliferation financing. Our monitoring and detection systems must be dynamic to incorporate
changes in our environment. There are many documented cases of sanctions circumventions
due to lapses in the system. This includes deficiencies in establishing beneficial owners which
allows  sanctions  to  be  circumvented  through  conduits  such  as  real  estate  firms  and  shell
companies. Accounts opened with inadequate customer due diligence or transactions without
appropriate screening are loopholes that can be exploited. These serve as important reminders
that we must be wary and alert at all times in the daily operations.
Responsibility
Collectively, the roles and responsibilities that we have, extend beyond the scope of our individual
organisations. Prevention of financial crimes and terrorism financing is an important element to
fortify the agenda of monetary and financial stability of the country. Complying adequately with
international  standards  and  best  practices  is  consistent  towards  instilling  confidence  among
stakeholders  on  the  integrity  and  credibility  of  our  financial  system.  More  importantly,  keeping
financial crime and terrorism financing in check helps contribute towards the country’s security
and stability, which is an important catalyst to a balanced economic growth and development.
Allow  me  to  share  some  of  the  ideas  and  expectations  with  regard  to  the  responsibilities  of
compliance officers.
As we are all aware, the requirements imposed are now moving towards principle-based rather
than that of prescriptive or rule-based. This provides institutions with the authority or freedom to
develop their own internal policy that commensurates with their risk and profile while upholding
the policy intent. Thus, it is up to compliance officers to support the institutions to develop such
comprehensive policies and to ensure they are properly implemented within the institution and by
all relevant staff. The compliance office should also be proactive in providing accurate and proper
information for their clients, especially the general public, on the intent and requirement of their
policies  to  avoid  misrepresentations  of  regulatory  requirements  and  the  institutions’  own
business decisions.
Compliance  officers  should  be  proactive  in  recommending  efforts  and  initiatives  within  the
institutions  and  industry  that  could  contribute  towards  the  prevention  of  financial  crimes  and
terrorism financing. Apart from standing guided by specific instruction and detailed direction from
regulators, compliance officers are encouraged to introduced new or proactive measures, within
the ambit of the law.
Similarly,  the  requirement  now  emphasises  on  measures  that  commensurate  with  risk.  The
application  of  the  risk-based  approach  (RBA)  should  have  a  meaningful  application  in  action.
Misinformed  RBA  could  lead  to  unjust  financial  exclusion,  economic  cost  to  institutions,  or
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
sanctions by the authority.
The efforts by private sector are vital as they form a part of the country’s assessment towards
compliance to international AML/CFT standards. They are assessed under Immediate Outcome
4  on  whether  RIs  adequately  apply AML/CFT  preventive  measures  commensurate  with  their
risks,  and  report  suspicious  transactions.  I  wish  to  highlight  that,  based  on  Mutual  Evaluation
Exercise conducted on 38 countries so far, majority of the private sector within these countries,
including developed countries are still unable to demonstrate the characteristics of an effective
system;  namely  understanding  risks,  comprehensive 
internal  control  and  compliance
programme including application of customer due diligence on suspicious transactions reporting.
I would like to echo the discussion during the Plenary session yesterday that an effective anti-
financial crime programme requires concerted efforts from every line in the institutions, be it the
first,  second  or  third  line  of  defence.  It  also  demands  collaborative  efforts  by  other  functions
within  the  institutions,  including  an  updated  IT  system  and  infrastructure,  comprehensive  and
continuous  staff  training  programmes,  and  good  understanding  of  risks.  Most  importantly,  the
oversight and support from senior management and Board of Directors of the institutions.
Before  I  conclude  my  speech,  allow  me  to  share  with  you  some  developments  from  the
regulatory perspective that you can expect in the near future.
As you may be well aware, our national ML/TF risk assessment (NRA) is currently in progress
and  is  expected  to  be  concluded  by  year  end.  The  results  of  the  assessment  will  be
accompanied  with  some  guidance  from  regulators.  This  should  be  used  as  a  basis  in  your
institutional risk assessment to eventually align your operations on a risk-based approach.
You  can  also  expect  introductions  and  amendments  to AML/CFT  policies,  in  response  to  the
NRA as well as to new areas relating to cryptocurrencies and e-KYC.
From  the  enforcement  perspective,  another  notable  change  to  expect  in  the  next  year  is  the
publicising of financial penalties imposed on financial institutions and information on misconduct
resulting in penalties.
With  the  increase  in  the  number  of  investigations  by  law  enforcement  authorities,  you  should
expect more significant demand for information and collaboration from your institutions. Needless
to say, timely and accurate responses are highly required and of paramount importance. A sound
public-private partnership is essential to achieve the ultimate objective of an effective AML/CFT
regime.
On that final note, I would like to once again thank CONG, AIF and all of you here for attending
this conference. I wish you all the best and let us all contribute hand-in-hand towards building a
safer and more secure environment.
Thank you.
1
2
3
Forbes 
800-this-year/#7e89e36b67c7.
(2017) www.forbes.com/sites/cbovaird/2017/08/27/cryptocurrencys-total-market-cap-has-risen-nearly-
www.juniperresearch.com/press/press-releases/cybercrime-cost-businesses-over-2trillion.
RM2.5 trillion (USD633billion).
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
