Ravi Menon: Skills for the future
Welcome remarks by Mr Ravi Menon, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore,
at the Institute of Banking and Finance Distinction Evening, Singapore, 29 September 2017.
 Mr Lim Swee Say, Minister for Manpower
Members of the IBF Council, Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen,
Welcome to the IBF Distinction Evening 2017.
Tonight, we are honoured to have Mr Lim Swee Say, Minister for Manpower, as our Guest-of-
Honour. 
Minister Lim, as you know, has been a lifelong passionate advocate for helping our workers
build up their skills, grow in their jobs, and contribute to the economy. 
He will speak later in the evening on these issues – issues that are close to his heart – and
also to all of us as part of the IBF community.
The global economy is in a better place this year compared to last year. Let us take stock of
where we are.
The Singapore economy is on track to achieve slightly higher growth this year compared to 2016.
And so is the financial sector.
For the first five years after the global financial crisis, our financial sector grew twice as fast
as the overall economy.
Last  year,  for  the  first  time,  the  financial  sector  grew  slower  than  the  overall  economy,
weighed down by weaker lending growth to the region.
This year, the financial sector is expected to grow by 2.5-3.5%, slightly faster than the 2.0-
3.0% expected for the overall economy.
Beyond  the  headline  growth  rates,  Singapore  has  also  made  significant  strides  as  an
international  financial  centre  in  recent  years.  We  are  consistently  ranked  among  the  top  five
financial centres in the world, sometimes even top three.
Singapore,  along  with  Hong  Kong,  remains  the  dominant  centre  in  the  Asia-Pacific  for
offshore lending, debt markets, and derivatives trading.
Our role as the leading regional hub has grown in re-insurance and infrastructure finance.
We have a global position in foreign exchange, private banking, and asset management.
But we have quite some way to go in the equities market space, beyond of course REITS
where we are still Asia’s largest hub.
Financial services are a major export engine for the Singapore market.
Singapore runs a surplus in financial services trade.
This surplus has grown by 40% since 2011.
Singapore  has  been  gaining  market  share  in  the  imports  of  financial  services  by  several
major economies including China, India, and ASEAN.
The medium-term prospects for the financial sector are good. 
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
I say this, with full recognition of the daunting challenges facing the industry. 
But our challenges are not without silver linings – which, if we are smart and nimble, we can
harness to our advantage.
Global growth is very unlikely to pick up to the levels that we saw in the heady days before the
financial crisis. But Asia will remain the most dynamic region in the world.
Its middle class is rapidly growing and its businesses are expanding across the region.
Both of these will mean healthy demand for a range of financial services.
Financial regulation has become tougher across the board. And as a regulator I say this for good
reason. But from a competitive position, our financial institutions are well-placed because of their
larger buffers they built up and more prudent risk management practices they adopted.
Technology will disrupt existing value chains in financial services. But it will also open up new
avenues  of  growth.  It  will  intensify  competition  from  non-bank  players  and  non-financial
institutions, but also create new pathways for our financial institutions to access markets that
were previously difficult to reach.
While the prospects for the financial sector are good, the outcome is by no means certain. There
is much that we need to do – together – to realise the potential and secure a good outcome.
Next month, MAS will announce details of the Industry Transformation Map for financial services.
I will not give away the details here, but I can say that building up skills, competencies, and
deep expertise is a critical part of the effort.
If we want to transform the industry, we must start by transforming our human capital.
Setting competency standards and certifying the programmes to achieve these standards are
IBF’s raison d’etre.
Empowering our finance professionals with the requisite skills and preparing them to take on
the jobs of the future is at the heart of everything that IBF does.
I am therefore pleased to announce the launch of the IBF Standards for Future-Enabled Skills.
These  are  the  generic  skills  that  will  become  increasingly  important  across  a  range  of
finance jobs in the future.
These are the skills our professionals will need to thrive and grow in a digital future. They will
complement the domain expertise that are unique to industry segments.
We developed with active industry collaboration, this new set of Standards which will focus
on areas like data science, human centered design, tools for innovation, agile approaches to
technology, and risk and governance in a digital world.
We will not just learn to thrive in a digital world; we will also learn digitally! And so, to promote the
learning  of  skills  under  the  new  Standard,  besides  the  usual  training  programmes,  IBF  is
developing Learn@IBF, a mobile learning app that will provide simple and concise information on
these topics. You will get to see a preview of this app after this.
I want to acknowledge our partners who helped to make this happen: Amazon, Facebook,
IBM, Luma and Rainmaking Innovation as well as our institutes of higher learning, training
providers  and  of  course,  all  of  you,  our  financial  institutions  who  are  part  of  the  IBF
Community.
They provided and reviewed the content that will be posted on the app.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
The  next  step  is  for  financial  institutions  to  work  with  their  staff,  particularly  those  in  jobs
undergoing transformation, to help them explore possible pathways and acquire the skills they
need for the future.
Ultimately, whether we transform and succeed will depend on our finance professionals taking
ownership of their own professional development. 
IBF will continue to introduce new platforms to help our finance professionals do just this.
IBF has recently launched the MySkills Portfolio. This is an online tool which can be a useful
resource for individuals to plan and manage their learning.
MySkills Portfolio allows individuals to track their training progress and receive programme
recommendations based on their training goals.
It also functions as a repository of training records.
Most of all, IBF is about building a community.
Today we celebrate our latest cohort of IBF Fellows and Distinguished Fellows.
These individuals have contributed their time and expertise, not just on policy ideas, but also
as speakers, trainers and mentors to our young finance professionals.
All of you compete vigorously when it comes to business – and that is good. But together we
have created something unique here in Singapore’s financial sector:
a shared vision for building up our capabilities;
working towards the greater good;
looking out for one another and bringing people along. And we must bring our people along.
This is what will help ensure that our financial sector grows from strength to strength;
that we create good job opportunities for Singaporeans;
that we build up skills and raise standards across the industry; and
that all those who work in the industry enjoy the fruits of growth.
Thank you once again for your strong support, and I wish everyone an enjoyable evening.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
