"Development of Rural Financing Institutions and Cooperatives" 
CICTAB Program on 
Bode, Bhaktapur  I   10 September 2017 
Address Delivered by Dr. Chiranjibi Nepal 
Governor of Nepal Rastra Bank 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Program delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  address  this  august  gathering  at  this  opening  session  of  this  Training 
Program on "Development of Rural Financing Institutions and Cooperatives" in Nepal.  
At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  thank  Centre  for  International  Cooperation  and  Training  in  Agricultural 
Banking (CICTAB) for again selecting Nepal to host this topical program and would give my best wishes 
to the Nepalese organizing member-institutions for success of the program.  
I would like to extend my warm welcome to all the foreign and national participants at the inauguration of 
this 5-day program being held in Kathmandu. 
Being  one  of  the  founding  members  of  CICTAB,  Nepal  Rastra  Bank  has  been  actively  participating  in 
most of the CICTAB programs held in Nepal as well as other countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 It  has  been  recognized  that  among  the  several  mechanisms  that  could  be  utilized  to  accelerate 
economic  development  and  broad  based  growth,  one  critical  instrument  is  the  development  of  rural 
finance– this will contribute to inclusive growth.  
  While the microfinance revolution has been largely successful in expanding financial services to many 
poor  people,  there  are  instances  when  the  very  poor  and  other  especially  disadvantaged  and 
marginal groups tend to be excluded.  
  Although  the  number  of  BFIs  has  been  significantly  increased  in  Nepal  during  last  three  decades, 
most of them are found centric in urban and accessible areas. Some of the survey results show that 
only 40 percent of Nepalese people are in the net of formal financial access. In this context, the role 
of rural financial institutions and cooperatives in the country like Nepal has become more important as 
the economy itself is rural-based.   
 If  we  look  upon  the  latest  available  data,  some  34  thousand  cooperatives  has  already  been  in 
operation in Nepal. Of these, half of them are involved in saving and credit activities while others are 
engaged  in  different  agro-based  production  activities  like  agriculture  farming,  milk  production,  fruit 
and vegetable farming, tea and coffee farming, production of herbs, sericulture, horticulture, etc. More 
than  6  million  people  are  directly  involved  in  these  cooperatives  as  their  members  and  these 
institutions  have  employed  some  60  thousand  people  as  their  regular  staffs.  Their  savings  have 
already  reached  nearly  300  billion  rupees  while  they  have  disbursed  some  290  billion  rupees  as  a 
credit to their members for different income generating activities.  In this regard, cooperatives are felt 
to be an important provider of rural financial services to spurt inclusive growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
  Government  of  Nepal  in  Financial  Sector  Development  Strategy  (FSDS),  issued  in January  6,  2017 
has  recognized  the  importance  of  the  Cooperative  Sector  to  achieve  economic  development  and  in 
this regard, has devoted a separate chapter to its elaboration.  
  This  is  recognition  of  importance  of  cooperative  sector  in  economic  development;  however 
Government of Nepal and Nepal Rastra Bank (NRB) have already  been involving themselves in the 
policy formulation and program initiation regarding the rural financing since almost four decades.  
 I  would  highlight  that  NRB  has  also  joined  hands  with  the  government  to  establish  and  manage  a 
wholesale  lending  fund,  that  is  the  Rural  Self-Reliance  Fund,  which  lends  concessional  fund  to  the 
cooperatives of rural areas for further lending to the deprived and poor households.  
  The establishment of five rural development banks in five development regions during 1990s decade 
to do micro financing activities replicating Grameen model is another instance on NRB's commitment 
on enhancing access to finance for rural poor. Currently, these banks have been merged.  
  We are also exercising to harness the mechanism of technology to enhance its inclusive nature with 
regard to rural financing. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
  Allow me at this juncture to provide  a glimpse of Nepal’s experiences  with regard to rural financing. 
The country is basically a rural economy with more than 80 percent of its population residing in rural 
areas.  
 It  is  expected  that  Nepalese  economy  will  perform  very  well  in  2016/17,  registering  a  growth  of  6.9 
percent.  This  trend  is  expected  to  continue  in  the  current  fiscal  year  2017/18,  given  the  series  of 
election are going to be held, which is expected to raise domestic demand. 
  As  the  agriculture  sector  presently  contributes  more  than  one-third  to  the  country's  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) and employs more than two-third of total labor force, economic growth of the country 
is  largely  determined  by  the  performance  of  the  agriculture  sector.  Moreover,  a  better  performing 
agriculture  is  instrumental  in  promoting  rural  jobs,  improving  trade  imbalance,  reducing  poverty  and 
fostering equitable distribution of income.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
  CICTAB,  set  up  in  1983,  has  been  providing  an  effective  forum  for  exchange  of  experience  in 
agricultural  banking  and  related  fields  between  different  developing  countries  of  this  region.  In  this 
respect, I am delighted to note that some of the innovative financial products and services developed 
and mainstreamed over the last three decades for the rural economies of this region, have been, to 
some extent, positively influenced by CICTAB. In this scenario, CICTAB has become very prominent 
for  us  as  it  conducts  various  training  programs  with  special  focus  on  cooperatives  and  rural 
development by providing a common platform to the agricultural and rural development institutions of 
its member countries.        
  Nepal Rastra Bank, as a member of CICTAB, would like to assure the Centre that it will continue to 
support  the  Centre’s  objective  of  providing  a  common  platform  to  the  agricultural  and  rural 
development institutions of its member countries by imparting comprehensive and top quality training, 
seminars and workshops.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
  Looking over the program schedule  I am happy to note that many topical and interesting issues are 
covered. 
  I  am  confident  that  there  will  be  a  most  active  participation  and  exchange  of  ideas  from  the 
participants  over  the  next  five  days,  which  will  contribute  positively  to  their  respective  institutions 
development.  
I also hope that all the participants, especially our foreign guests, will also have time to enjoy both the 
beauty and the flavor of Nepalese culture.  
  Thank you very much and my best wishes for the successful conclusion of this program!  
 