Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Sticktoitiveness
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Freshmen Orientation Program and Launching of the University of
Phlippines BGC Graduate Business Program, Bonifacio Global City, 4 September 2017.
 Dr.  Ben  Paul  B.  Gutierrez,  Dean,  Cesar  E.  A.  Virata  School  of  Business,  University  of  the
Philippines, faculty, staff, and incoming freshmen of the Master of Business Administration and
Master of Science in Finance programs, ladies and gentlemen, good evening. 
I understand that eighty (80) new MBA and MS Finance students were admitted to UP-BGC. I am
delighted to address this audience. It is one full of promise and potential. Yours is the first batch
to learn in these new, world-class halls!  What an honor for you!
Nostalgia
Addressing you today, I am reminded of the thirty-seven (37) years that separate the time when I
myself was a freshman of the UP-MBA program. It made me think of my student number (I think,
I will keep this a secret). It made me nostalgic for UP Diliman (for fishballs in front of Vinzon’s
Hall) and mainly, for how the College of Business Administration building stood proudly (well, still
stands) in the center of campus, opposite Quezon Hall.
It was the most modern building in the academic oval (at least in my time) with an architecture
markedly different from that of Palma, Melchor, and Malcolm Halls.
Compare  that  to  where  we  are  now  in  a  state-of-the  art  building  in  the  heart  of  the  Bonifacio
Global City. The imagery of the two structures juxtaposed in my mind is enough symbolism for
how fast things have changed (and improved!) in that span of time.
Change
In the last two to three decades, the world has become a very different place transformed by
digital revolution and technological advances in almost every field and industry. 
Students  like  you  have  the  advantage  of  data  retrieval  in  real  time!    Your  connections  are
wireless, with access points in classrooms, hallways, in the library almost everywhere. You read,
communicate, research and are entertained on iPads, iPhones, Androids and laptops these are
developments  we  never  would  have  imagined  as  we  strolled  by  the  sunken  garden  decades
ago!  Simple lang kami noon.  To run regressions, we punched cards and dashed to the UP
Computer Center.  We had to come back later for the results print-out which were in outsize
continuous forms at least an inch thick.
Yes,  change  is  inevitable.  But  as  you  begin  your  journey  as  graduate  students  (especially  as
many of you here are also working students) let me share with you a timeless value that ensures
success. Grit. Sticktoitiveness. – yes, this is a real word.
Secret formula for success
Grit, discipline and diligence are requirements for each of you to successfully hurdle every exam,
presentation, case discussion, thesis defense and requirement that you need to earn your MBAs
and  Masters  of  Science  in  Finance.  Grit  is  needed  to  face  life’s  challenges.  Grit  –  mental
toughness –will set you apart. 
While the truth of this is borne out of my personal experience, the expression of this idea is not
new. Many studies (and I understand, facebook posts) convey that neither intelligence nor talent
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
ensures success.  Rather, it is perseverance that allows one to fulfill goals and make dreams
come true. 
In my long career at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (thirty-six years and counting!) as a young
bank officer and working student shuttling between the CB Campus in Malate to Diliman, Quezon
City as Deputy Governor of the Supervision and Examination Sector for the last twelve (12) years
to this day as Governor of the BSP, sticktoitiveness has made all the difference in my career.
Why?    The  reason  is  simple.  There  are  good  days  and  there  are  bad  days.  While  we  are
presumably talented and intelligent uniformly each day (at least we hope to be!) – the feeling of
wanting  to  persevere  and  stay-on,  changes.  It  changes  with  our  moods,  and  is  affected  by
situations and circumstances. This is why sticktoitiveness commitment is the true formula for
success.
When  I  first  joined  the  Central  Bank  in  1981,  I  was  idealistic.  My  grit  was  tested  all  at  once! 
During the turbulent 80’s, there was political unrest. A debt crisis was unfolding and it forced the
country to declare a moratorium on the payment of its foreign debt by 1983. Dollars had to be
rationed. Central Bank interest rates shot up to around 40% per annum. Compare that to 3%
today.  The  economy  was 
In  1986,  Senator  Benigno  Aquino,  Jr.  was
assassinated. What a challenging time for the central bank and a young central banker like me!  I
certainly had days when I wondered if I should continue. I am glad I did.
in  recession. 
Grit in central banking
In  the  central  bank,  grit  is  always  required.  Grit  is  what  brings  about  constancy,  continuity,
credibility and stability to the financial system.
Perseverance  is  needed  to  face  macroeconomic  challenges  on  both  global  and  domestic
fronts. Right now, it is necessary as we face the growing uncertainty of economic policies as
more central banks in major advanced economies prepare to enter a tightening cycle. The US
Federal Reserve (US Fed) hiked the federal funds rate in June (the second time this year) and
there is an expected further rise in US interest rates. The European Central Bank (ECB) is also
talking about tapering in Quantitative Easing (QE) Policy in 2018.
Vigilance is needed as we remain resolute in our mandates of price stability, and banking and
financial stability in the face of global political and economic uncertainties and given domestic
challenges such as the ongoing Marawi conflict.
Grit translates to us preparing well, committing to the implementation of difficult but necessary
and bold reforms. Grit is synonymous to the perseverance needed to cushion the economy from
any volatility. 
Even as we enjoy our current economic sweet spot, we still need to be tenacious, dedicated to
the fundamentals of hard work and proactive reform. The same should hold true for each of you
here as you begin your graduate studies and face your future.
Economic sweet spot
And  may  I  say,  even  as  I  began  with  earnest  advice  of  vigilance,  that  the  future  looks
good. Present numbers indicate it to be so. 
As Governor of the BSP, I am committed to ensuring continuity in the policies that resulted in this
favorable economic environment (with room for improvements through strategic financial sector
reforms).
I am glad to share that real GDP rose by 6.4 percent in the first half of this year with stronger
economic  activity  expected  in  the  second  half.  This  has  been  the  trend  for  the  last  74
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
quarters. This shows overall economic vitality and resilience.  
Inflation also remains manageable.  While headline inflation rose to 2.8 percent in July (from 2.7
percent  in  June),  the  year-to-date  average  inflation  rate  of  3.1  percent  is  well  within 
Government’s target range of 2-4  percent for 2017, and should remain solidly on-target over the
2018–19 policy horizon. 
There is ample domestic liquidity. Bank lending is strong but prudent,  and funds continue to flow
into productive sectors. The banking sector is in sound condition as reforms put in place by the
BSP over the last decade, along with banks’ implementation of better corporate governance and
risk  management  have  brought  about  big  improvements  in  bank  asset  quality,  business
operations, and strong capitalization.
Time of great advancement
We are in time of great advancement.  Innovation is at the forefront of economic development.
And you are the very generation that knows how to leverage on this!  In  one click, you obtain
information that we used to find slowly and tediously in volumes of dusty encyclopedias. Almost
in an instant, you send and receive messages that, in the past, took us weeks to give and get.
These innovations have produced great strides in communication, finance and commerce. 
We are in tune with the times.  I am also eager to share that the BSP is creating a regulatory
environment to encourage innovation and maximize prudent technology use. An ecosystem is
being  created  so  that  the  unreached  are  granted  financial  services  through  alternative
providers. BSP is piloting its own “regtech” solutions to address its operational pain points.  Our
goal is that through technological solutions — financial consumers and investors would be able
to  make  more  informed  business  decisions  and  choose  from  a  longer,  fresher  and  more
innovative menu of available financial products and services. We see the digitalization of finance
as essential to achieve significant inroads against financial exclusion and payments inefficiency. 
We adopted the National Retail Payments System (NRPS) project, a flagship program for digital
finance.   Its purpose is to establish a safe, efficient and reliable means to transfer money value
digitally.  Envisioned  is  an  effective  and  interoperable  interface  of  various  electronic  payment
channels.    The  NRPS  will  expand  the  reach  of  financial  services  and  will  promote  efficiency,
transparency and development of business models improving economic competitiveness. With
the  NRPS,  we  hope  to  transition  from  a  cash-heavy  economy,  where  99  percent  of  retail
transactions by volume are done in cash, to a cash-lite economy, with transactions becoming
mostly electronic. 
Collaboration and cooperation
In  making  all  these  happen,  the  BSP  counts  on  its  partners  and  stakeholders  in  the  private
sector, in the government, and in the academe. We understand that we cannot achieve our goals
alone.
Especially  as  we  create  an  enabling  environment  for  Fintech,  we  have  awareness  there  are
several  industry  regulators  with  oversight  over  multiple  players.  There  are  multi-layered
relationships.  We  are  mindful 
inconsistency,  conflicts  and
gaps. Otherwise, there is a danger of regulatory arbitrage or a failure of oversight.
to  guard  against  policy 
We  know  that  the  best  way  to  prevent  this  is  through  constant  engagement  with  Fintech
innovators,  financial  sector  players,  regulatory  agencies  and  experts.  Collaboration  and
cooperation are required for us to have a deeper understanding of risks inculcate appreciation for
financial inclusion goals and to communicate market conduct expectations.
Indeed, collaboration and cooperation is very important. These are values you too –  dear grad
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
students –  can apply.  You will find that your professors and your classmates will contribute to
your success and will multiply the possibilities of your hard work. These connections are very
important not just as you pursue your studies. You will find these indispensable in your personal
lives as well. Relationships, discussion, the expertise and guidance of others will matter and add
value. 
Even Harvard studies confirm that true success and happiness is not determined by material
possessions,  but  by  friendships,  good  communication  and  camaraderie.  Even  in  this,
sticktoitiveness is also needed. 
In closing
As I end, allow me to remind you to consider yourselves blessed to be part of this elite group of
graduate students. Congratulations to all of you. Embrace this challenge, persevere in it!
I realize that I shared a lot of thoughts and information with you. But I hope, if anything  that you
remember the main idea I shared this evening. Take the word to heart sticktoitiveness. I promise,
it will help you.
I wish you all the best and godspeed.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
