10 Years of Romania’s EU Membership: 
Looking to the future 
Liviu Voinea, Deputy Governor, National Bank of Romania  
 26 October 2017 
   Ten  years  after  Romania’s  EU  accession,  the  world  has  changed 
dramatically: the global financial crisis of 2008-09 led to the revision of 
rules  in  the  international  banking  system,  to  growing  social  discontent 
with  major  consequences 
in 
terms  of  flourishing  populism  and 
protectionism,  as  well  as  to  a  reshuffle  of  maps  –  be  they  geopolitical, 
military or economic.  
  Uncertainty is running higher today than prior to the crisis and the room 
for  quantitative  easing  policies  based  on  stimulating  demand  has 
narrowed considerably. 
  Looking  ahead,  both  the  European  Union  and  Romania  need  structural 
reforms. 
 As regards the EU: 
  Many  steps  have  been  taken  so  far  at  institutional  level:  Stability  and 
Growth Pact, CRD IV (Capital Requirements Directive), Banking Union, 
SRB  (Single  Resolution  Board),  SSM  (Single  Supervisory  Mechanism), 
ESRB (European  Systemic  Risk  Board). When  needed,  monetary  policy 
undertook  –  in  Europe  as  well,  similarly  to  the  US,  UK  or  Japan  –  to 
escape recession and deflation and to foster renewed economic impetus. 
  A challenge to the EU is to maintain the pace of economic growth as the 
ECB gradually exits from quantitative easing. 
  Another challenge facing the EU is to manage Brexit properly and avoid 
other exits, which would question the very essence of European identity.  
 1 
  The EU should continue and complete institutional reforms, by finalising 
the Banking Union, the aspects regarding the operationalisation of EDIS 
(European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme),  by  setting  MREL  (minimum 
requirement  for  own  funds  and  eligible  liabilities)  for  banking  groups; 
moreover,  the  EU  should  move  towards  a  fiscal  union  without  debt 
mutualisation,  should  leave  less  room  for  discretion  and  comply  with 
rules  once  they  have  been  adopted,  it  should  clarify  the  fine  balance 
between  the  consolidated  microprudential  supervision  of  banks  and 
national accountability in terms of resolution. 
  But  maybe  the  most  important  factor  for  the  cohesion  and  coherence  of 
the European project is the success in safeguarding the four fundamental 
freedoms:  the  free  movement  of  capital,  goods,  services,  and  above  all 
persons  within  the  Union.  A  Union  that  would  waive  these  principles 
would  no  longer  be  the  Union  that  was  established  in  1957  and  that 
Romania joined 10 years ago.  
 As regards Romania: 
  Romania  has  accomplished  a  lot  in  the  past  ten  years:  nominal 
convergence,  real  convergence  in  part,  financial  stability,  it  has  gained 
market confidence and has implemented structural reforms. 
  In  order  to  carry  on  with  real  convergence,  Romania  has  to  exploit  its 
growth potential and to get as close as possible to full employment. 
  With  a  view  to  achieving  these  goals,  we  should  focus  on  a  number  of 
issues related to real convergence which were less debated in the first ten 
years. 
  The demographic problem: the equivalent of approximately 30 percent of 
the  labour  force  in  Romania  and  of  13 percent  of  the  total  population 
work abroad (from 3 percent in 2005). This is Romania’s lost GDP. 
 2 
  Moreover,  even  now,  when  Romania’s  economy  reports  above  potential 
growth  rates,  the  country  continues  to  record  negative  birth  rates.  The 
ageing  of  the  population  affects  potential  GDP;  and  it  is  not  only  about 
ageing  –  ageing  is  doubled  by  a  high  rate  of  people  at  risk  of  poverty 
(around 40 percent in 2016).  
  According  to  in-house  studies  that  refer  to  a  panel  of  6  Central  and 
Eastern  European  countries  and  cover  the  period  from  2005  to  2016,  a 
1 percent increase in the share of population aged 65 and above triggers a 
1.3 percent decline in potential GDP. 
  Real  convergence  is  measured  not  only  in  quantitative  terms,  in  cold 
figures, but also in qualitative terms. For instance, over 90 percent of the 
population  owns  a  house,  but  housing  quality  is  the  lowest  in  Europe 
(about  30 percent  of  the  individuals  have  no  access  to  basic  sanitary 
facilities and around 70 percent live in overcrowded dwellings). 
  The  living  standards  and  the  wage  differential  further  account  for 
emigration waves even amid the high economic growth. This is a deeply 
uneven growth at both interregional and intergenerational levels, which is 
unbalanced in terms of structure and which reinforces inequalities within 
the society (the Gini coefficient stood at 38 percent in 2015). 
  The  growth  potential  should  be  enhanced  also  by  an  increase  in  capital 
flows  and  stock,  the  absorption  of  EU  funds  and  a  better  allocation  of 
resources via investment prioritisation. 
  Achieving  convergence  is  not  enough,  as  convergence  should  be 
sustainable, balanced and equitably distributed. 
  Real convergence should be pursued not only in terms of income, but also 
in  terms  of  output  structure,  by  means  of  the  level  and  composition  of 
budget revenues and expenditures. 
 3 
  Good  European  practices  should  be  used  to  fight  tax  evasion  and 
strengthen financial discipline. 
  In the medium run, a balanced primary budget should be ensured and the 
MTO  (medium-term  objective)  should  be  again  pursued;  public  debt 
should  be  maintained  at  sustainable  levels  and  inappropriate  incentives 
leading  to over-indebtedness  of  private  sector  and  households should  be 
avoided. 
  It  is  necessary  to  improve  the  access  to  financing.  83%  of  households 
have 6% of deposits, whereas 0.3% of households hold 25% of deposits. 
Housing  loans  have  been  accessed  by  only  1%  of  very  low  income 
earners  (the  1st  quintile)  and  by  only  4%  of  relatively  high  income 
earners  (the  4th  quintile).  12%  of  the  highest  income  earners  (the  5th 
quintile) have accessed housing loans. 
  A roadmap is necessary for joining the euro area. 
  The public goods that should be preserved and even strengthened include: 
the country’s security, financial stability, investors’ confidence. 
 European Union – Romania joint agenda for 2019 
  Conclusion of Brexit negotiations. 
  Completion of important files, such as the prudential treatment of banks’ 
exposures  to  sovereign  risk  (the  bank-sovereign  link),  EDIS  (European 
Deposit Insurance Scheme), euro area reforms. 
  2020 budget – better use of resources. 
  Aligning  the  budgetary  provisions  of  the  NATO  with  those  of  the  EU. 
Exemption  of  the  rise  in  military  expenditure,  for  NATO  countries  that 
are  EU  Member  States,  from  the  EDP (excessive  deficit  procedure)  rule 
and from the MTO (medium-term objective). 
  Monetary policy normalisation and fiscal policy sustainability. 
 4 
