Yves  Mersch:  Evolving  regulatory  environment  for  CCPs  -  the
perspective of a central bank
Speaking points by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central
Bank, at the Cumberland Lodge Financial Services Summit, Cumberland Lodge, Windsor, Great
Park, 10 November 2017.
Introduction
I am delighted to return to this year’s Summit.
 I spoke last year about the systemic importance of central counterparties, and their importance,
in  particular  for  monetary  policy  transmission.  I  spoke  about  how  the  growth  of  these
infrastructures  means  that  the  existing  regulatory  framework  will  need  to  be  enhanced,  to
address the increasing risks posed by CCPs.
I also spoke of how the prospect of the UK’s exit from the EU creates uncertainty regarding the
future of the regulatory and supervisory framework for non-euro area CCPs that clear significant
amounts of euro currency.
There have been very significant developments at EU level since I spoke about this topic last
year.
The most notable development has been the Commission’s proposal from June of this year to
amend the EMIR framework for the supervision and regulation of EU and third country CCPs.
We strongly welcome the proposals to strengthen the role played by the central banks of issue of
the  EU  in  the  regulatory  framework,  as  the  authorities  responsible  for  the  implementation  of
monetary  policy.  This  strengthening  is  necessary  in  light  of  two  major  trends  of  the  past  few
years.
First, since EMIR first entered into force there has been a continued growth of central clearing
and resulting financial risk concentration in CCPs. This has significantly increased the potential
disruptive effects that CCPs can have on the implementation of our monetary policy.
Second,  the  UK  departure  from  the  EU  implies  that  a  very  large  part  of  euro-denominated
clearing activities across all asset classes may be performed from outside the EU in the future.
While  central  clearing  is  undeniably  a  global  industry,  the  range  of  euro-denominated  asset
cleared  outside  of  its  monetary  zone  is  unparalleled  for  any  other  major  currency  around  the
world. This clearly points to the need to strengthen the EU regime for third country CCPs and to
enhance in this context also the role of the relevant central banks of issue.
As distinct from the need to strengthen the role of the central banks of issue serving a monetary
policy purpose, it is also fully justified to seek to strengthen the supervisory regime for CCPs
Take the case of third country CCPs: until now, the EU’s approach towards third country CCPs,
including  those  that  are  of  systemic  importance,  has  been  to  rely  entirely  on  the  supervision
carried out by home authorities. Deference to home authorities should continue to be the norm in
those areas where rules are fully equivalent. However, there are certain areas in which EU rules
provide more protection than those in other jurisdictions, and in these areas the Commission is
right  to  suggest  that  reliance  on  home  authorities  may  not  be  enough,  and  that  more  direct
involvement by EU authorities is required. This is the same approach as currently followed by
certain other major jurisdictions.
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Where the approach proposed by the Commission may differ is that it also foresees that under
extreme  circumstances,  certain  systemically  important  third  country  CCPs  might  not  be
authorised to operate from outside the EU, and would be required to establish themselves within
the  Union  if  they  wish  to  continue  providing  services  to  EU  counterparties  and  markets.  EU
authorities  acknowledge  that  such  a  decision  would  have  important  consequences  on  market
structure. However, as I mentioned earlier, for no other major currency are so many systemic
asset  classes  cleared  outside  of  its  own  monetary  area.  The  requirement,  proposed  by  the
Commission, for CCPs to be established within the EU would function as a last resort measure,
to  be  triggered  in  the  event  EU  authorities  cannot  control  the  risks  to  their  mandates  through
other  means.  The  ECB  would  be  involved  in  the  process  in  order  to  share  its  liquidity
considerations as a monetary policy authority, but the final supervisory decision would be within
the hands of the Commission and the Union legislators.
Another aspect where the proposals might differ somewhat from the approach taken in certain
other major jurisdictions is the larger role given to central banks of issue. In this respect, it should
be  noted  that  a  comparable  role  has  been  given  to  the  US  Federal  Reserve  in  respect  of
systemically  important  financial  market  utilities,  including  CCPs.  This  is  entirely  justified:
enhancing the role of central banks is absolutely essential considering just how critical CCPs
have become for the smooth conduct of monetary policy.
Indeed, disturbances affecting a CCP can cause significant liquidity strains for banks. This can
directly affect the central bank’s ability to implement monetary policy and can impact the smooth
functioning of payment systems.
In  addition,  a  crisis  affecting  a  repo  CCP  can  disrupt  the  functioning  of  the  money  market,
thereby impairing the channels through which central banks conduct monetary policy operations.
Furthermore, disruptive changes to CCP risk management (e.g. sudden collateral haircuts) can
generate asset price volatility and affect the central bank’s ability to implement monetary policy.
Finally, a potential decision to allocate liquidity for financial stability purposes outside the currency
area would affect the monetary policy stance of the central bank inside the currency area.
This is the reason why, in the event of a severe crisis, emergency financial assistance by euro
area  national  central  banks  is  always  subject  to  a  non-objection  procedure  by  the  ECB  to
preserve its monetary policy objective.
This  brief  overview  shows  the  significant  impact  the  malfunctioning  of  a  major  CCP  clearing
significant amounts of euro could have on the conduct of monetary policy. At the same time,
allow  me  to  stress  that  the  Commission  proposal  does  not  entail  that  central  banks  of  issue
would duplicate the work of supervisors. On the contrary, the role ascribed to them is a limited
and targeted one, centred on the aspects of CCP risk management that are most essential for
the fulfilment of their monetary policy mandates. This is also why third country CCPs and their
home authorities need not be concerned about potential overlaps between EU supervisors and
central  banks:  each  will  play  a  well-defined  role  in  the  regulatory  framework,  under  their
respective statutory responsibilities.
In  order  to  play  the  greater  role  foreseen  for  central  banks  under  the  legislative  proposal,  the
ECB’s Governing Council unanimously adopted a recommendation to amend Article 22 of our
Statute.
I would like to emphasize here that any potential regulatory actions of the ECB could only be
taken within the limits ascribed to us by the Treaty – i.e. the implementation of monetary policy –
and would be subject to stringent internal governance controls as well as full judicial review. The
role that we would fulfil is not a supervisory one – this is the task conferred upon the national
competent  authorities  and  ESMA.  Our  involvement  would  be  fully  focused  to  the  specific
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
responsibilities with which we are tasked as a monetary authority.
Likewise, the Union legislators or the Commission could only adopt measures within the limits of
their tasks under the Treaties, focusing on the field of CCP supervision, and their objectives of
ensuring financial stability and achieving the harmonisation of the internal market. This would be
essential to avoid overlapping or contradictory measures. After all, these objectives are distinct
but complementary to the objective of price stability.
Further issues regarding FMIs arising from Brexit
The withdrawal of the UK from the EU will, needless to say, create legal uncertainty not only for
CCPs  but,  also,  for  other  financial  market  infrastructures,  including  payment  and  securities
settlement  systems  processing  euro-denominated  transactions.  These  issues  need  to  be
carefully  monitored  and  assessed,  and  solutions  may  need  to  be  explored  in  order  to  ensure
certainty and stability.
By way of example, the EU’s Settlement Finality Directive provides that only payment, clearing
and  securities  settlement  systems  governed  by  the  law  of  an  EU  Member  State  may  be
‘designated’ by Member States, and only such ‘designated’ systems may benefit from the finality
protections under the SFD. Systems governed by the law of a third country are not eligible for
designation  under  the  SFD,  and  will  not  benefit  from  those  protections.  As  a  result,  if  EU
participants in a third country system were to become insolvent, the courts could, based on their
national insolvency laws, and depending on whether or not their national legislator has activated
the option provided for in Recital 7 of the SFD, require the unwinding of transfer orders that they
have  entered  into  the  third  country  system,  thereby  undermining  the  system’s  integrity  and
affecting other participants in that system. Regulatory accommodations may need to be made, to
mitigate  the  adverse  effects  of  the  loss  of  SFD  designation.  However,  it  remains  to  be  seen
whether this will prove possible and, if so, what form these will assume.
Another example relates to issues arising with regard to the proposed moratorium tool under the
BRRD.  The  recent  proposal  to  amend  the  BRRD,  empowers  competent  and  resolution
authorities  to  suspend  certain  payments  and  delivery  obligations,  if  this  would  help  facilitate
recovery and resolution. Of course, the proposal ensures exemptions from the moratorium tool
related to FMIs, including CCPs. It may be necessary to consider whether there is a need to
exempt  recognise  third-country  central  securities  depositories  and  third-country  payment
systems subject to a cooperative oversight arrangement involving at least one central bank in of
the ESCB.
The rationale is that a suspension prohibiting a participant (e.g. a credit institution) from making
any  payments  to  an  FMI  will  de  facto  cause  that  participant  to  no  longer  be  able  to  meet  its
obligations as they fall due. For payment obligations to FMIs, this would place the participant in
default. Without an exemption for this type of payment, the moratorium would actually have the
potential to amplify systemic risk before the FMI safeguards kick in.
Conclusion
I have a few concluding remarks.
First, these various legislative initiatives are crucially important in the current context. Ensuring a
successful  outcome  of  these  discussions  in  a  timely  manner  should  be  a  key  priority  for  EU
legislators.
Second, we strongly welcome the intention of the legislator to give central banks of issue a role in
the regulatory framework for CCPs, commensurate with their responsibilities. As I have said, this
is  of  crucial  importance,  considering  the  fundamental  impact  CCPs  can  have  on  monetary
policy. At the same time, the involvement of the central bank in the regulatory framework should
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
not put into question either its independence or its discretion to define the scope of its monetary
policy. We are confident that the EU legislator will fully recognise this imperative.
Thank you for your attention.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
