 An address by Lesetja Kganyago, 
Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, 
at the 5th SA Tomorrow Investor Conference 
 New York 
9 November 2017 
 
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. 
 
Thank you for the opportunity to address this important conference today.  
 
As many of you will know, the South African economy faces some major challenges. 
Economic growth is weak and unemployment remains high despite favourable terms 
of  trade  and  a  robust  global  recovery.  We  have  good  ideas  for  addressing  these 
problems, but regulatory and policy uncertainty as well as corruption and a lack of 
direction  in  some  areas  have  all  sapped  consumer  and  investor  confidence  and 
weakened  private-sector  investment.  It  should  not  be  a  difficult  task  to  turn  things 
around. Setting out some investment-friendly ambitions for the economy and reducing 
political uncertainty would go a long way towards boosting confidence. As is often said, 
raising confidence is the cheapest form of stimulus. 
 
Given  the  economy’s  poor  performance,  there  is  an  understandable  focus  on  the 
negatives – but we should not forget that there are also positives. I will touch on these 
during my address today, particularly on those that impact directly on the work of the 
South African Reserve Bank (or SARB). These include a much smaller current account 
deficit, which has made the rand more resilient to risks. There has also been some 
moderation in inflation, which has eased the near-term pressure on monetary policy. 
Given our enhanced focus on keeping inflation expectations low, this could extend 
well into the future. 
 
Page 1 of 9 
Current account rebalancing 
 
Four years ago, South Africa was counted as one of the Fragile Five, along with Brazil, 
India, Indonesia, and Turkey. These were all countries with weak external positions, 
which seemed vulnerable to shifting capital flows. In particular, all five experienced 
sharp currency depreciations after the Fed1 signalled that it could tighten policy faster 
than the market then expected – provoking the so-called ‘taper tantrum’.  
 
The impact of this shock was that South Africa focused on the need for rebalancing. 
At the time, the fiscal deficit (for 2012/13) was 4.3% of GDP2 while the current account 
deficit was unsustainable at nearly 6% of GDP (-5.88% in 2013). The combined twin 
deficits were just over 10%. Monetary policy was fairly loose: with a repo rate3 of 5% 
and an inflation rate close to 6%, our real interest rate was negative and also lower 
than real interest rates in the major advanced economies. This couldn’t go on, and 
thankfully it didn’t.  
 
By 2014, most of the high-deficit countries had begun to adjust their imbalances, even 
though  the  capital-flow  reversal  was  more  modest  than  expected.  The  start  of 
normalization in the advanced economies kept on being delayed, and when it did begin 
in the US4, the pace was much slower than initially expected. Today, these ‘fragile’ 
countries have adjusted significantly, in response to increased macroeconomic policy 
discipline. They are now in a better position to deal with the possible consequences of 
higher interest rates in the advanced economies. 
 
Although the speed of South Africa’s current account adjustment was slow, the extent 
of the adjustment was significant. Over a three-year period, the deficit went from a 
quarterly trough of 6.8% of GDP to just 1.7% of GDP in the fourth quarter of 2016, and 
then to 2.0% and 2.4% in the first two quarters of 2017. This correction was facilitated 
by a more depreciated exchange rate, the tighter monetary policy stance from January 
2014, as well as a degree of fiscal consolidation.  
                                                      
1 Federal Reserve System (United States) 
2 gross domestic product 
3 repurchase rate 
4 United States 
Page 2 of 9 
 
The adjustment has come mainly through the trade account, which turned positive in 
the second quarter of 2016 and has since been roughly balanced. This reflects better 
net exports, partly through more favourable terms of trade but also because weak 
investment expenditure has led to lower imports. The overall current account remains 
in  deficit,  however,  due  to  services,  transfers,  and  income  payments  to  foreign 
investors  –  which  are  the  inevitable  consequence  of  attracting  large  quantities  of 
foreign savings on a sustained basis.  
 
Before  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  current  account  was  financed  predominantly 
through equity purchases by non-residents while bond flows were comparatively small 
on a net basis. Since the crisis, with interest rates in the advanced economies close 
to  0%,  the  search  for  yield  has  resulted  in  large-scale  net  purchases  of  rand-
denominated government bonds by non-residents. This trend intensified following the 
inclusion  of  South  Africa  in  the  Citibank World  Government  Bond  Index. Whereas 
before the crisis non-residents held about 7% of domestic currency government debt, 
this ratio increased to current levels of around 40%. This is a positive development; it 
reflects  South  Africa’s  deep  and  liquid  domestic  bond  market  and  an  absence  of 
‘original sin’. There are, however, concerns that the increased holdings may make us 
more vulnerable to changes in non-resident sentiment.  
 
In the context of concerns about the impact of possible sovereign ratings downgrades, 
the narrower current account deficit implies a lower financing requirement. It puts us 
in a better position to cope with a possible portfolio capital outflow or reduced inflows. 
Furthermore, the fact that South Africa has a positive international investment position 
also means that we do not have a ‘fear of floating’ as is the case in a number of other 
emerging markets, where foreign-currency liabilities are relatively high. Under those 
circumstances,  currency  depreciations  have  significant  negative  balance-sheet 
effects. The floating rand remains a key shock absorber for the economy, assisting in 
the correct direction of economic adjustment and making a market in rand assets.  
 
That is not to say that we will emerge unscathed should our local-currency debt be 
downgraded to sub-investment grade. There is little doubt that such a move would 
impact negatively on the rand, government bond yields, and confidence. Short-term 
Page 3 of 9 
overshooting of the currency is likely, with some longer-term level change and pass-
through  into  inflation  expectations.  But  the  exact  long-term  impact  is  uncertain. 
Estimates of the possible extent of selling by index-tracker funds range between R100 
billion and R180 billion. The short-term impact will also depend on how much is already 
priced into the markets, the extent to which exposures have already been reduced, 
and whether the buyers of these bonds are residents or non-residents. While South 
Africa’s risk premiums have increased in line with those of countries that are sub-
investment grade, the possibility of an additional deterioration is high as the broader 
downgrade shock is felt in medium-term decisions of households and firms.  
 
From a monetary policy perspective, a central objective is to reduce the impact that 
currency  volatility  and  level  shifts  have  on  the  inflation  trajectory.  And  while  pass-
through, as in other economies, has been weaker in the post-crisis period, we saw 
greater price responsiveness to rand strength early this year. We should be cautious 
in  inferring  too  much  from  this  for  our  pass-through  estimates,  but  with  renewed 
currency weakness in recent months it does warn us against complacency. Various 
factors beyond a credit rating review present themselves as risks to the currency, and 
there are even some, like slower normalization in the advanced economies, that push 
risk  towards  a  stronger  currency.  Indeed,  conditions  in  the  global  economy  have 
generally played a strong role in reducing downside risk to the rand in recent years. 
 
The inflation outlook and monetary policy 
 
The outlook for the exchange rate is an important, although not the only, consideration 
when  making  monetary  policy  decisions.  The  current  environment  has  created 
challenges for monetary policy, but the positive news is that inflation has moderated 
and has been sitting fairly comfortably within the target range for the past few months. 
However, the expected inflation trajectory is still higher than we would prefer, with the 
risks tilted to the upside. At the same time, we have to take cognisance of the growth 
outlook  and  provide  whatever  support  we  can.  This  is  exactly  what  we  did  at  the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting in July. However, we must be clear about 
the  limits  of  monetary  policy,  and  what  it  can  and  cannot  do.  We  cannot  expect 
monetary policy to solve what are essentially structural problems in the economy.  
 
Page 4 of 9 
Year-on-year headline CPI5 inflation returned to within the inflation target range in April 
this year, having declined steadily from 6.6% in January. It reached a low of 4.6% in 
July  before  rising  to  4.8%  in  August  and  to  5.1%  in  September,  in  line  with  our 
forecasts. At the September MPC meeting, the headline CPI inflation forecast was 
5.3% for 2017 and 5.0% and 5.3% for 2018 and 2019 respectively. A lower turning 
point  of  4.6%  was  still  expected  in  the  first  quarter  of  2018.  The  forecast  for  core 
inflation – which strips out the volatile components of food, petrol, and electricity – and 
which is a reflection of underlying price pressures, was 4.8% for 2017, rising marginally 
to 4.9% and 5.0% in the next two years.  
 
These forecasts are markedly lower than those from earlier in the year. We remain 
concerned, however, that inflation expectations, as reflected in the survey conducted 
by the Bureau for Economic Research, remain anchored at the upper end of the target 
range. This is particularly the case for the price-setters in the economy, i.e. business 
and labour respondents. We would prefer to see these expectations anchored at the 
midpoint of the target band. Inflation at this level would bring our inflation rate closer 
to,  though  still  remaining  somewhat  above,  those  of  our  peer  emerging-market 
economies. It would also give us more headroom within the target range to absorb 
adverse supply-side shocks without breaching the upper end of the range.  
 
Getting inflation expectations to converge on the midpoint of the target band would 
help  to  ensure  that  inflation  actually  gravitates  towards  that  level.  Yet  inflation 
expectations are unlikely to moderate much, unless price-setters believe that lower 
inflation  can  be  sustained.  This  requires  improving  monetary  policy  credibility  by 
bringing inflation closer to the 4.5% midpoint of the inflation target range.  
 
Bringing inflation to the midpoint and ultimately anchoring expectations there, instead 
of at 6%, is one of the SARB’s most important medium-term strategic goals. Yet we 
are  well  aware  that  the  economy  is  undergoing  one  of  its  worst  growth  phases  in 
several decades, and although most of the growth problem is structural, there is some 
scope to provide countercyclical stimulus. We therefore aim for a policy stance that 
                                                      
5 consumer price index 
Page 5 of 9 
its 
long-term  disinflation,  and  all 
balances  short-term  growth  support  with 
accompanying benefits.  
 
It is difficult to calibrate the exact repo rate this requires. In July, the combination of 
better-than-expected inflation outcomes and worse-than-expected-growth prompted 
us to reduce the repo rate by 25 basis points to 6.75%. This adjustment also flattened 
out a spike in the real interest rate, keeping the policy stance fairly expansionary. At 
that  stage,  we  assessed  the  risks  to  the  inflation forecast  to be  broadly  balanced. 
There  was  a  widely  held  view  in  the  markets  that  a  further  cut  would  transpire  in 
September.  In  the  event,  the  MPC  decided  to  keep  the  monetary  policy  stance 
unchanged as the inflation forecast shifted marginally while our assessment of the 
risks to the inflation outlook deteriorated significantly. Events have since vindicated 
that September decision; in particular, the rand has depreciated quite sharply recently, 
demonstrating that some of the risks we had in mind were not already priced in by 
asset markets.  
 
It is, perhaps, unfortunate that some market players were surprised by our decisions. 
Nonetheless,  at  times  of  heightened  uncertainty,  monetary  policy  becomes  highly 
data-dependent and also more sensitive to our assessment of the risks to the forecast. 
We have tried to communicate this data dependence and its implications. We also 
include, in our MPC statements, the preferences of the different MPC members, which 
should help analysts to understand which decisions are finely poised and which are 
more  straightforward.  With  a  four-two  spilt  in  July  and  a  three-three  divide  in 
September, it should have been reasonably clear to observers that monetary policy 
was not on a predetermined course.  
 
Although it may be comfortable for markets to have certainty around the short-term 
repo rate path, the real priority for the larger economy is fostering confidence that 
inflation  will  be  well  behaved  over  the  medium  and  long  terms.  To  this  end,  we 
implement  monetary  policy  through  flexible  inflation  targeting.  This  provides  a 
framework  both  for  interpreting  economic  news  and  for  communicating  our  policy 
stance to our stakeholders so that it is more predictable over time. How, then, does 
the outlook appear through this lens?    
 
Page 6 of 9 
As outlined earlier, the exchange rate and its long-term impact on price and wage 
determination remains the single biggest risk to inflation. In analysing these risks, we 
would want to look through short-term volatility and focus on the longer-term trend. 
This is often easier said than done, given the tendency of the rand to overshoot (in 
both directions) and the conflicting factors weighing on it.  
 
Apart from the exchange rate, the main risks to the inflation outlook emanate from the 
supply side. The application by Eskom for a 20% tariff increase from mid-2018 poses 
a significant risk. An increase of this magnitude could increase the inflation trajectory 
by  0.2-0.3  percentage  points,  relative  to  the  current  assumption  of  an  8%  tariff 
increase. The National Energy Regulator of South Africa is currently conducting public 
hearings into Eskom’s request, but at this stage we have not adjusted our assumption 
and will await the outcome of that determination. However, to the extent that there is 
an upside surprise, our reaction will be guided by the extent to which we assess the 
second-round effects. In general, we would not automatically react to the first-round 
effects of a supply-side shock. 
 
International oil prices have increased significantly since their lows of below US$45 
per barrel in June. They are currently trading at over US$60 per barrel, above our 
current assumptions of US$55 and US$56 in the next two years. Increased global 
demand, coupled with output restrictions by some producers, has contributed to the 
higher trend. The prices may, however, be ultimately capped by increased output by 
US  shale  producers,  who  have  now  become  the  main  swing  supplier  in  the 
international oil market. While we still expect a moderate increase over the forecast 
period, there may be some upside risk to this. At this stage, we see the main risk to 
the domestic petrol price coming from the exchange rate and higher fuel levies. 
 
Demand  pressures  are  expected  to  remain  relatively  muted.  They  may  have 
contributed to the more moderate trend of core inflation in 2017. This is also reflected 
in the persistence of a negative output gap despite potential output growth of only 
1.1% for  this  year  rising  to  only  1.3% by  2019. We do not  see  inflation  pressures 
coming from the demand side for some time, although global growth is expected to 
close the global output gap in 2018 – and this will also further narrow our own gap. 
Household consumption expenditure growth is expected to remain relatively muted, at 
Page 7 of 9 
around 1% per annum, over the forecast period. This is against a backdrop of weak 
growth in credit extension to households, low levels of consumer confidence, higher 
tax burdens, and the absence of significant wealth effects.  
 
By contrast, some support to consumption expenditure is expected to come from lower 
inflation and real, albeit modest, wage growth. Wage pressures remain a concern, as 
nominal  wage  settlements  continue  to  contribute  to  the  persistence  of  inflation  at 
higher levels.  
 
Overall, we remain concerned about the weak economic growth outlook. The SARB’s 
forecast for GDP growth for 2017 has been revised upwards, albeit marginally, from 
0.5% to 0.6% in September, while the forecasts for 2018 and 2019 have remained 
unchanged at 1.2% and 1.5% respectively. The risks were assessed to be slightly on 
the downside. Of major concern is the negative growth in gross fixed capital formation, 
particularly by the private sector. Growth in private-sector fixed capital formation has 
been  negative  for  six  consecutive  quarters.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  restoring 
confidence will go a long way in getting us on a recovery path. Without growth, we will 
not  be  able  to  make  any  inroads  into  our  most  pressing  problem  of  high 
unemployment, currently at over 27%. 
 
So, what can monetary policy do to help in this situation? It is clear that the problems 
the economy faces are mostly of a structural nature – not something that can be solved 
by monetary policy alone. In addition, recent surveys conducted by the Bureau for 
Economic Research also indicate that the uncertain political environment is the single 
biggest  factor  weighing  on  business  confidence,  and  therefore  on  investment. 
Research conducted at the SARB indicates that the confidence factor shaved off at 
least one percentage point from growth in 2016. 
 
Nonetheless, we do not believe that low growth is a non-issue for monetary policy. 
The moderate nature of the tightening cycle in 2014-16, when we raised interest rates 
by a cumulative 200 basis points, attests to our sensitivity to growth and the output 
gap. Furthermore, as we noted in the July MPC statement, we saw the reduction of 
the repo rate as having a positive impact on growth at the margin, providing a measure 
of support to the economy.  
Page 8 of 9 
 
Conclusion 
 
The SARB will continue to focus on its constitutional mandate to pursue price stability. 
This  is  the  best  contribution  we  can  make  to  the  economy  because  it  creates  the 
conditions for long-term investment decisions that generate jobs. However, this will be 
done within a flexible inflation-targeting framework, always mindful of the trade-offs 
and the impact we may have on growth in the short run. This balancing is important. 
It  implies  that,  while  our  bi-monthly  monetary  policy  deliberations  have  become 
intensely data-dependent and are likely to remain so with uncertainty and risk high, 
we will continue to see through the noise and focus on long-run outcomes.  
 
This stability in our approach to monetary policy can contribute to better long-term 
inflation outcomes and therefore a more favourable environment for investment. In 
conjunction with appropriate structural and confidence-boosting policies, there is no 
reason why we cannot get investment and growth going again and make South Africa 
an investment destination of choice once more.  
 
Thank you. 
 
Page 9 of 9 
