financial  stability  compatible  with 
François  Villeroy  de  Galhau:  Are  the  regulations  implemented  to
guarantee 
required
acceleration in euro area growth?
Speech by Mr François Villeroy de Galhau, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Académie des
sciences morales et politiques (Academy of Moral and Political Sciences), Paris, 6 November
2017.
the 
I  would  like  to  thank  Anne-Sophie  Cavallo,  Marine  Dujardin,  Pierlauro  Lopez,  Elise  Peron,
Guillaume Richet-Bourbousse, Bérengère Rudelle, Valerio Scalone and Oana Toader for their
help in preparing this speech.
 Dear Chairman,
Dear Permanent Secretary,
Dear Academicians,
Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  speak  before  you  this  afternoon  and  I  wish  to  warmly  thank  your
Chairman  Michel  Pébereau  for  his  kind  invitation.  We  also  have  with  us  at  this  illustrious
gathering some of my most renowned predecessors: Jacques de Larosière and Jean-Claude
Trichet. I am very pleased that the topic you have chosen for this year is that of reforms. This
term is often given too little prominence in France, between our supposed taste for revolutions
and our actual conservatism. We have to turn to Alexis de Tocqueville in order to attempt to bring
back the patience of enduring effort to our history: “[The French Revolution] took the world by
surprise;  yet  it  was  the  mere  natural  result  of  very  long  labours,  the  sudden  and  violent
termination of a task which had successively engaged ten generations of men”.  The example of
our  neighbours,  from  Germany  to  Spain,  is  today  nevertheless  illuminating  in  this  respect:
reforms  work  in  Europe.  They  are  the  way,  the  only  way,  to  make  compatible  our  European
social model, which is legitimate, and economic growth, which is essential in order to reduce
unemployment and to finance our future.
1
Today,  I  will  focus  my  talk  on  other  no  less  important  reforms,  implemented  in  a  particularly
disrupted  context:  the  financial  regulations  introduced  in  the  wake  of  the  2007–2009  crisis.  Is
there  any  need  to  recall  the  disastrous  consequences  that  this  crisis  inflicted  on  the  real
economy,  the  social  dramas,  and  the  democratic  fragmentation  with  the  rise  of  populism?
Financial stability is therefore a common good that needs to be guaranteed. It is one of the three
core tasks of the Banque de France, alongside monetary strategy and services to the economy.
We  have  been  striving  to  achieve  it  in  the  international  bodies  that  coordinated  the  financial
reforms after the crisis. The urgency of the situation required rapid and effective action, and as
early as April 2009, the G20 launched a global concerted action plan. This afternoon, I would like
to start by explaining the ambivalent relationship between finance and growth, and the attendant
need for financial regulation. Then, I will discuss at greater length what has been done, with an
initial assessment of our achievements. Lastly, I will consider our challenges for the future.
I. The ambivalent relationship between finance and growth.
I would like to say right away that finance is a remarkable instrument for economic progress,
decisive in the birth of European and then global capitalism since the 16th century. In order to
support trade initially, then investment, and innovation today, – as well as growth –, it is naturally
vital to create the right conditions for financing the economy and for sound financial institutions.
2
 1 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
2
5
4
3
Many academic studies   confirm that finance makes a positive contribution to economic
growth because it reduces transaction and information costs and leads to a better allocation of
capital.  It  is  estimated  for  example  that  between  1960  and  1995,  some  developing  countries
would have accelerated real per capita GDP growth by an additional 0.4 to 1 percentage point per
year  if  their  financial  systems  had  been  more  developed.   Some  authors  even  go  as  far  as
positing  that  it  would  be  preferable  to  let  market  forces  prevail  without  worrying  about  the
emergence of bubbles or financial imbalances which would be absorbed by themselves. This
would mean that financial crises would just be the price to pay in the short term for stronger
medium to long-term growth. The conclusions of these studies are nevertheless evidently too
radical: they place finance at the helm of the economy rather than an instrument at its service, an
instrument used to achieve a goal, that of the work and progress of mankind.
Indeed,  as  with  all  human  endeavours, finance  is  not  immune  to  certain  excesses,  or  to
certain limits. Some studies   have  highlighted  the  inherent  instability  of  the  financial  system.
The existence of excessive risk-taking – the economists Guttentag and Herring use the concept
of “disaster myopia”  – or the possibility of bank runs are among the examples of market failures
or negative externalities, which justify public intervention and financial regulation. Similarly, some
indicators, which are initially signs of economic development, may in extreme cases reflect the
over-exuberance  of  the  financial  system,  which  may  hamper  growth.  For  instance,  it  is
commonly acknowledged that when volumes of debt as share of GDP are too high, this has a
negative impact on growth in the long term.  Beyond public debt – discussed in a report by your
Chairman in 2005, and alas still topical – private debt in France now stands at 130% in France,
compared with 122% in the euro area and 150% in the United States.  Regulation can and must
play a protective role, by setting certain limits ex post and by shoring up resilience to destabilising
impacts ex ante. A 21st century Rabelais would say that finance without conscience is but the
ruin of the soul. I will return to individual conscience in my conclusion. But undoubtedly, finance
without rules could be the ruin of the economy.
To be sure, financial regulation is necessary particularly because financial crises often have
considerable economic and social costs, with serious and lasting repercussions. A study by
Laeven and Valencia   in  2013,  which  considers  147  banking  crises  between  1970  and  2011,
estimates the median output loss between the peak of activity before the crisis and the three
years after at around 23% of GDP, and the median increase in public debt over the same period
at 12% of GDP, while total government bailout spending amounts to almost 7 percentage points
of GDP. Moreover, beyond the immediate effects, financial crises reduce the economy’s long-
term potential: companies cut back on their R&D, capital and infrastructure investment, which
results in a decline in productivity and a slowdown in technological progress.
6
7
8
The 2007–2009 crisis is unfortunately an illustration of this; it was the worst crisis since that of
the  1930s.  The  financial  imbalances  generated  by  the  bursting  of  the  subprime  bubble  in  the
United States spread rapidly to the global economy. The crisis affected both the level and trend of
GDP, leading to a permanent loss in wealth. Cumulative GDP losses compared to the pre-crisis
9
  In  a  number  of  countries,  in  particular  in
trend  are  estimated  at  a  quarter  of  global  GDP.
southern Europe, GDP has still not returned to its pre-crisis level. 
II. The  new  regulations  have  increased  the  solidity  of  the  financial  sector,  without
weighing to any notable extent on economic growth
The exorbitant costs of the 2007–2009 crisis highlighted the urgent need to reinforce financial
stability,  and  the  response  was  unequivocal.  In  2009,  at  their  meetings  in  London  and  then
Pittsburgh, the G20 leaders rose to the challenge of their historical mission, setting an ambitious
agenda for global cooperation. The opening words of the communiqué from the London summit
still merit repeating today: “A global crisis requires a global solution […]. We believe that the only
sure  foundation  for  sustainable  globalisation  and  rising  prosperity  for  all  is  an  open  world
 2 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
economy based on market principles, effective regulation and strong global institutions. We have
today therefore pledged to do whatever is necessary to: restore confidence, growth and jobs;
repair the financial system to restore lending; strengthen financial regulation to rebuild trust."
This unprecedented regulatory effort concerned all financial system participants. Four main
objectives  were  set:  (i)  to  make  financial  institutions  more  “resilient",  that  is  increase  their
soundness and their ability to withstand crises; (ii) to put an end to the problem of “too-big-to-fail”
institutions  –  which  benefited  from  an  implicit  guarantee  that  they  would  be  bailed  out  by  the
government;  (iii)  to  make  over-the-counter  derivatives  markets  more  secure,  notably  through
central clearing; and (iv) to transform unregulated market activities – shadow banking – into a
sound  form  of  market  financing.  At  the  global  level,  responsibility  for  the  operational
implementation  of  these  objectives  was  entrusted  to  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  and  to  the
Basel Committee on which both the Banque de France and ACPR are active.
Since 2010, significant, albeit uneven, progress has been made on all four G20 objectives. I shall
focus  here  on  the  first  of  these:  financial  institutions  are  now  more  resilient.  The  Basel  III
Accords, adopted in 2010, have increased both the quantity and quality of banking sector own
funds; in addition, they ensure better account is now taken of the diverse risks to which banks
are  exposed,  thanks  to  the  introduction  of  a  leverage  ratio  –  measured  as  a  share  of  total
unweighted assets – and two new liquidity ratios for bank cash levels. Requirements have also
been  increased  in  the insurance  sector,  with  the  entry  into  force  of  the  new  Solvency  II
regulatory framework in Europe at the start of 2016. At the end of 2016, French insurance firms
subject to Solvency II had a solvency capital ratio of 222%, well in excess of the required 100%.
These various tools, known as microprudential as they are intended to reduce the individual risks
incurred  by 
institutions,  have  been  supplemented  with  a  set  of  so-
called macroprudential tools,  designed  to  improve  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  as  a
whole. In France, the development of macroprudential policy led to the creation, under the 2013
Banking  Law,  of  the  High  Council  for  Financial  stability  (HCSF),  chaired  by  the  Minister  for
Finance, and on which the Banque de France plays an active role. This High Council meets once
a quarter with a total of eight members, three of whom are independent economists. It identifies
any risks of potential financial “bubbles", and has the power, where necessary, to implement a
series of macroprudential measures, including a countercyclical capital buffer – currently set at
0% – or tighter lending standards.
financial 
11
10
Ten years after the start of the crisis, eight years after London and Pittsburgh, it’s time now to
stand  back  and  take  stock.  Our achievement today  is  that  the  objective  has  largely  been
  The  first  assessments  show that these reforms have had a significantly positive
met.
impact on the soundness of banks, both in terms of their ability to withstand liquidity shocks
and their solvency, with the core capital ratio (Common Equity Tier 1 or CET1) of the main banks
operating at international level rising by 5 percentage points since 2011, from 7.4% at end-2011
to 12.3% at end-2016.
 As for the four largest French banks, their own funds have more than
doubled since the crisis: in 2008 they amounted to EUR 132 billion; in 2016 that figure reached
EUR 296 billion. Put another way, the majority of French banks have increased their capital levels
by more in the past eight years than in the previous century. 
This increase in financial institution resilience has not been achieved at the expense of
economic activity. This brings me to the crux of the question put to me by your Academy today.
First,  the  objective  of  the  regulators  was  clearly  to  limit  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  their
reforms on the real economy, and to ensure that financial activities support growth and economic
development. In 2010, before the roll-out of Basel III, major work was carried out
 to measure
the  impact  of  these  reforms.  The  Basel  Committee’s  Macroeconomic  Assessment  Group
concluded, from a broad range of estimates, that for every 1 percentage point rise in the target
capital ratio, the cost of credit would increase by an average of around 0.15 percentage point. Yet
in practice, this credit tightening never materialised. The favourable effects of the fall in interest
12
 3 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
rates  under  the  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  have  far  outweighed  any  negative
consequences  of  stricter  regulatory  requirements.  Today  in  Europe,  as  in  France,  the  flow  of
bank  lending  to  businesses  and  households  remains  robust.  Indeed,  the  strength  in  private
sector lending is even the focus of particular vigilance in France and on the part of the HCSF. In
September 2017, growth in bank lending to households and businesses reached 5.7% and 5.4%
respectively in France, twice the rates observed in the euro area as a whole. Since the start of
2010, the cumulative growth in both forms of lending (29%) is almost twice that of nominal GDP.
No  one  can  seriously  argue  that  the  financial  reforms  have,  up  to  now,  restricted  the  credit
supply, and hence growth, in France. At the same time, it should be stressed that the French
banking  system  –  one  of  the  most  resilient  in  Europe  and  the  world  –  has  fulfilled  its  role  in
financing the economy. Beyond the French banking sector, the Financial Stability Board has also
noted an improvement in the resilience of all financial institutions at global level, with no decline in
the provision of financing to the real economy.
13
I’d just like to say a few words on what seems to me to be a false debate. Although the recovery
has indeed been slower in Europe than in other geographical regions, this cannot be attributed to
overregulation. The scale of the euro area’s difficulties can in part be explained by the fall-out
from the debt crisis which has affected its members since the start of the 2010s. In addition,
certain more specifically European or French problems, such as the slowdown in productivity or
the lack of sufficient structural reforms, are also limiting the acceleration in growth. Lastly, for the
time being at least, the regulations have, on the whole, been applied at least to the same extent in
the United States as in Europe.
III. Five challenges for a balanced regulatory framework
That  said,  I  will  be  careful  not  to  be  utopian  about  these  new  regulations.  We  are  still  faced
with five challenges and if I may, I would like to consider each of them in turn.
1) The first challenge is to complete the rules for banks’ minimum capital requirements by
finalising the Basel III reform. The majority of the work – let’s say 80% – has already been
done: its main aspects were approved in 2010–2011 and are now widely implemented. However,
discussions remain ongoing on the question of risk weighting in bank balance sheets. The goal is
to limit any unjustified variability in the weighting between banks or countries. However, this must
not  result  in  a  standardisation,  as  the  variability  of  results  is  also  a  reflection  of  different  risk
profiles. The risk sensitivity allowed for in banks’ internal models represents a huge step forward,
as  it  ensures  that  requirements  are  proportionate  to  risk-taking.  Naturally,  we  must  reinforce
confidence in internal models by supervising them closely, as the ACPR has long done and as
the Single Supervisory Mechanism in Frankfurt does today. But the task at hand is to finalise
Basel III, not to build a new Basel IV based mainly on the standard approach that by definition
would not take account of differences between countries and banks.
It  is  in  the  strategic  interests  of  France,  which  has  always  promoted  international  rules,  to
conclude a final agreement on Basel III. We have made significant progress, particularly during
the latest Basel Committee meeting last month on 4 and 5 October, but we are not there yet,
even though I hope that an agreement will be reached as quickly as possible. If we are to reach
an  agreement,  two  conditions  must  be  met.  First,  the  agreement  must  be fair –  it  must  be
applied by all jurisdictions, in all its components, including by the Americans in the measurement
of market risks, i.e. the “fundamental review of the trading book” (FRTB). Second, the agreement
must be reasonable, in terms of the increased capital requirements that will apply to French and
European  banks  –  including  through  the  introduction  of  the  so-called  “output  floor”  on  capital
requirements for banks that use internal models. On the one hand, these capital requirements
would have to be met over time through “normal” allocations of profits to reserves, without any
bank having to resort to a dedicated capital increase. On the other hand, these new rules must
be fully compatible with the smooth financing of the French and European economy and sound
credit growth. In particular,  our  mortgage  lending  model,  based  on  guaranteed  loans,  and  our
 4 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
14
financing of SMEs cannot be called into question. In my view, these are the principles that will
determine whether any future agreement can be accepted.
2) The second challenge is to finalise measures that target non-banks. First, progress must
continue on the “resolution” of central counterparties – their treatment in the event of difficulties –,
as  they  have  become  systemically  more  important  with  compulsory  centralised  clearing  for
derivative  instruments. Above  all,  we  must  ensure  a  balance  between  financing  channels. All
discussions on the shadow banking system must continue in order to take account of the risks
that  may  have  moved  into  this  sector  as  a  result  of  the  ramping  up  of  requirements  in  the
regulated  sector,  and  for  banks  and  insurers  in  particular.  It  has  been  estimated  that  the
segments  that  may  pose  financial  stability  risks  represented  a  total  of  USD  34  trillion.
  The
priority  has  now  shifted  from  the  solvency  of  banks,  which  has  improved  substantially,  to  the
liquidity of the shadow banking sector, particularly funds and asset management companies that
are exposed to the risks of sudden panic-driven runs. Lastly, progress is required on FinTechs
and above all on the major digital platforms and businesses, which, if they carry out financial
activities, will have to comply with similar regulations sooner or later.
3)  The  third  challenge  is evaluation.  Evaluation  is  essential  to  the  credibility  of  the  financial
reforms  that  have  been  adopted  worldwide,  and  to  this  end,  the  G20  adopted  a  post-
implementation evaluation framework this summer. This framework should allow us to determine
whether  the  reforms  have  actually  achieved  their  desired  results,  without  any  unexpected,
adverse  effects,  and  to  make  adjustments  if  this  is  not  the  case.  Two  initial  evaluations  are
already  underway:  the  first  deals  with  the  effectiveness  of  reforms  that  encourage  the  use  of
central clearing while the second assesses the impact of G20 reforms on access to financing,
which  will  begin  by  looking  at  infrastructure  financing  before  focusing  on  credit  to  small  and
medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). The first evaluation reports are expected to be made public
by the end of 2018.
4) The fourth challenge, in order to consolidate the progress we have made, is to ensure that
the  new  regulatory  framework  is  implemented  consistently  across  the  board  while
remaining vigilant to avoid backtracking. In The Country Doctor, Balzac wrote “...in all things
human, is not constancy the highest expression of strength?", rightly reserving this virtue for the
great men of his day. Now, as you know, the new US government has raised the possibility of
reviewing their national banking regulations.
 Certain national adjustments could be considered
appropriate and justified, as is the case, for example, for regulations that concern entities whose
operations are only local in scale, or regulations that are purely American in scope such as the
Volcker rule on proprietary trading portfolios. But the same cannot be said for abandoning the
minimum requirements agreed internationally that apply to entities operating on a global scale,
like the FRTB that I mentioned previously. Unilateral deregulation would be nothing less than a
lose-lose scenario with serious consequences for the stability of the global financial system – we
would be paving the way for the next financial crisis – as well as the competitive landscape for
US and European banks. International cooperation on financial reforms is a common good that
has been extremely precious during these past eight years and is crucial to our future.
5)  The  fifth  challenge  is  to complete  the  European  framework  and  ensure  greater
consistency between regulation, supervision and resolution. Since 2014, the euro area has
taken decisive steps with its Banking Union, which now ensures the uniform supervision of the
banks of 19 countries. But in order to complete it, further progress is needed on three levels.
First, with regard to concrete mechanisms, the second pillar of the Banking Union, which deals
with  “resolution”  in  the  event  of  difficulty,  must  be  finalised  and  simplified.  Second,  laws  and
requirements,  which  all  too  often  accumulate  diverse  additional  regulations  and  amendments,
should  be  coordinated  in  a  consistent  manner.  Moreover,  cross-border  banking  mergers  in
Europe  are  still  too  difficult.  Lastly,  as  regards  the  interaction  between  institutions,  we  should
develop a better interaction between the various European authorities, and even envisage, going
15
 5 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
forward, a single authority that would strive to enhance the soundness of the European banking
sector. And in addition to the regulatory aspect, we must endeavour to implement what I call the
Financing  Union  for  Investment  and  Innovation.  The  goal  is  to  better  channel  the  euro  area
savings surplus of EUR 350 billion to the areas where investment is needed, and encourage the
pooling of private risks, particularly through the development of corporate equity.
I would like to conclude by mentioning a sixth and final challenge: the inherent limitations of any
regulation, no matter how worthy it may be. First, financial stability is not simply a question of
regulation;  it  rests  on  a  trifecta  of  regulation,  microprudential  supervision  and  macroprudential
policies, and relies on each of these components in equal measure. What’s more, and above all,
there must be complementarity between collective rules and individual behaviour – ethics. Prior
to  2007,  self-regulation  was  the  norm,  especially  in Anglo-Saxon  countries,  placing  excessive
trust in codes of conduct and business ethics. Today, let’s make sure we don’t tip the scales too
much in the other direction. The Académie des sciences morales et politiques is here to remind
us that rules will never be a substitute for individual conscience. This also applies to the financial
sector. Thank you for your attention.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Alexis de Tocqueville, The Old Regime and the Revolution, Book I, Chapter V.
Robert King and Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August, 153 (3), pp. 717–738. Ross Levine (1997), “Financial Development and Economic Growth:
Views and Agenda”, Journal of Economic Literature, June, 35, pp. 688–726. Thorsten Beck (2014), “Finance,
growth and Stability”, Journal of Financial Stability, 10 pp.1-6. Thorsten Beck, Tao Chen, Chen Lin and Frank M.
Song (2016), “Financial innovation: the Bright and the Dark Sides”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 72, pp. 28–
51.
See, notably, Ross Levine, Norman Loayza, Thorsten Beck, “Financial intermediation and growth: Causality and
cause”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Volume 46, Issue 1, August 2000, pp. 31–77 and Thorsten Beck, Ross
Levine, Norman Loayza, Finance and the sources of growth, Journal of Financial Economics, Volume 58, Issues
1-2, 2000, Pages 261–300.
Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, “The aftermath of financial crises”, American Economic Review 99,
No. 2, 2009, pp. 466–472. Moritz Schularick and Alan M. Taylor (2012), “Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary
Policy, Leverage Cycles and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, American Economic Review, 102 (2): pp. 1029–
1061. Thomas Philippon and Ariell Reshef (2013), “An International Look at Growth of Modern Finance”, Journal
of economic perspectives, 27, pp. 73–96. Stephen Cecchetti and Enisse Kharroubi (2015), “Why does financial
sector growth crowd out real economic growth”, BIS working papers, 490.
Jack  Guttentag  and  Richard  Herring,  “Disaster  myopia  in  international  banking",  Essays  in  International
Finance, No. 164, 1986.
See notably Jean-Louis Arcand, Enrico Berkes and Ugo Panizza, “Too Much Finance?", Journal of Economic
Growth 20, 2015, p. 105–148.
Private non-financial sector debt as share of GDP, Q1 2017. Sources: Eurostat data, Federal Reserve, Banque
de France calculations.
Luc Laeven and Fabian Valencia, “Systemic banking crises database", IMF Economic Review, Vol.61, No. 2,
2013,  cited  by  Taryk  Bennani,  Laurent  Clerc,  Virginie  Coudert,  Marine  Dujardin  and  Julien  Idier,  “Politique
macroprudentielle, prévenir le risque systémique et assurer la stabilité financière", Pearson, 2017, p.118.
See IMF World Economic Outlook, April 2015 and see Patrice Ollivaud and David Turner, “The effect of the global
financial crisis on OECD potential output", OECD, Working Papers, No. 1166, 2014.
See in particular “The impact of financial reforms”, Banque de France Financial Stability Review No. 21, April
2017.
Basel Committee, Basel III Monitoring Report, September 2017.
See reports by the Basel Committee’s Macroeconomic Assessment Group (MAG) and Long term Economic
 6 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
Impact Group (LEI).
13
14
15
Financial Stability Board, Implementation and Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms, August 2016,
2nd Annual Report.
Financial Stability Board, Global Shadow Banking Monitoring Report 2016, May 2017.
See US Department of the Treasury, “A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities", June 2017.
 7 / 7
BIS central bankers' speeches
