Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: The big picture
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Bloomberg FX 2017 Forum, Makati City, 30 August 2017.
 Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to be here at the 17th Bloomberg
Foreign Exchange Summit. It is a pleasure too to share the spotlight with     Dr. Mark Mobius and
Mr.  John  Lagman,  whose  insights  contribute  to  making  financial  markets  more  efficient  and
effective catalysts of economic growth.  Good afternoon to all.
The Exchange Rate
Developments in the foreign exchange market and the peso have garnered significant attention of
late.  For the first time this year, the peso breached the P51/1US$ mark, closing at P51.11/1US$
yesterday.
Indeed,  if  one  uses  the  Bloomberg  News  Search  function,  one  will  discover  that  the  words,
“peso” and “BSP” have appeared together 7.5 times a day since May 2017.  This is significantly
greater compared to the frequency of 2.9 times a day in the first four months of the year. 
What seems to be the concern?
I am here to share the big picture with you – to share the forest for the trees.
Under a flexible exchange rate regime, domestic currency fluctuates and acts as an automatic
stabilizer  to  contain  swings  in  financial  markets…  These  fluctuations  are  not  in  themselves
bad…  Rather,  they  shield  the  economy  from  temporary  shocks.  In  fact,  there  are  studies
showing that a flexible exchange rate better positions emerging market economies to moderate
the impact of global financial and monetary forces.
Recent developments in the peso are largely brought about by strong and broad-based imports
growth, reflecting the economy’s solid growth momentum.  Investments by both the private and
government sectors continue to expand.  We are also seeing he private sector expanding their
businesses overseas and actively managing their financial exposures.  Additionally, the expected
U.S.  rate  hikes  and  possible  unwinding  of  the  Fed’s  balance  sheet  by  year-end  likewise
contribute to depreciation pressures on the peso due to portfolio re-balancing.
We have responded to these developments by allowing a moderate and gradual depreciation of
the peso as part of a healthy defensive adjustment process.
Amid  these  developments,  we  are  confident  that  the  country’s  robust  growth,  stable  inflation
environment,  strong  and  resilient  banking  system,  and  prudent  fiscal  position  will  continue  to
provide fundamental support to the peso.
Solid Macroeconomic Fundamentals
The developments we have seen thus far in 2017 point to overall economic resilience.
Economic  performance  in  terms  of  GDP  growth  has  been  sustained.  Real  GDP  rose  by  6.5
percent in the second quarter of 2017.  We are one of the fastest growing economies in Asia… 
Stronger economic activity is expected in the second half of the year due to the robust growth in
the  services  sector  and  improved  external  trade  conditions….Private  consumption  demand  is
expected to remain firm, aided mainly by sustained remittance inflows and low inflation.
As  more  government  infrastructure  programs  get  underway,  the  positive  spillover  effects  on
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
private capital formation will contribute to economic growth over the medium term…
The  economy  is  on  track  toward  achieving  the  government’s  full-year  target  of  6.5  to  7.5
percent… This extends our streak of uninterrupted growth to 74 consecutive quarters!  …Over
the past five years, the economy has expanded by an average of more than 6 percent annually, a
feat not accomplished since the 1970s.
Latest data shows that domestic liquidity conditions are ample to finance the requirements of the
growing  economy.  Domestic  liquidity  (M3)  grew  by  13.3  percent  year-on-year  in  June  2017,
faster than the 11 percent expansion in the previous month.
This  expansion  in  economic  activity  was  sustained  without  fuelling  inflationary  pressures…
Although headline inflation rose slightly to 2.8 percent in July (from 2.7 percent in June), the year-
to-date average inflation rate of 3.1 percent.  This is fully in line with our 2017 forecast.  This
means we will once again be solidly on target.
Indeed, our latest baseline forecasts indicate that inflation is likely to settle near the midpoint of
the government’s 2-4 percent target range over the 2017 to 2019 forecast horizon. 
Equally important, our banking sector continues to be fundamentally sound. The many reforms
put  in  place  by  the  BSP,  along  with  the  banks’  significantly  improved  risk  governance  have
resulted in clear improvements in the quality of Philippine banks’ assets and loan portfolios as
well as in strong capitalization.  These indicate superior ability to absorb risks…
Strong balance sheets have allowed bank lending activity to remain upbeat as it continues to flow
into  the  country’s  productive  sectors  such  as  real  estate;  power  and  utilities;  manufacturing;
wholesale and retail trade; and information and communication. The non-performing loans (NPL)
ratio  and  non-performing  assets  (NPA)  of  universal  and  commercial  banks  (U/KBs)  have
significantly declined since 2001, to less than 2 percent by June 2017. At the same time, banks’
Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  (CAR)  of  15.8  percent  as  of  March  2017  remains  well  above  the
minimum norms.
Meanwhile,  the  external  debt  situation  has  also  continuously  improved.  Outstanding  Philippine
external  debt  stood  at  US$73.8  billion  as  of  end-March  2017,  equivalent  to  just  24  percent  of
GDP.  This is a significant decline from 60 percent in 2005.
At this stage, the country is seeing a reversal in its overall Balance of Payment (BOP) position
which as of July 2017 posted a deficit of US$ 1.4 billion… The balance of payments deficit can be
attributed in part to stronger growth in imports and as well as to rebalancing of portfolio capital
flows in line with monetary policy changes in advanced economies.  This is manageable and
sustainable.
We shouldn’t forget the positive factors going for the economy.  Business Process Outsourcing
(BPO)  receipts  reached  US$5.5  billion  as  of  Q1  2017,  growing  by  9.9  percent  relative  to  the
same quarter last year.
Remittances from overseas Filipinos (OFs) continue to flow in…  The inflow of cash remittances
from OFs coursed through banks remain steady, reaching US$ 2.5 billion in June, a 5.7-percent
increase from the level posted in the same period a year ago… Merchandize exports grew by
13.6 percent in the first half of 2017, faster than projection.
As a result, the country’s gross international reserves (GIR) remained ample as of end-July 2017
at  US$81.1  billion.    This  is  more  than  enough  to  cover  8.7  months  of  imports  of  goods  and
services and 5.5 times the country’s short-term debt obligations.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Need for Vigilance:  Macroeconomic Headwinds
Despite  this  favorable  economic  backdrop,  the  Philippine  economy,  like  other  economies,
continues to face challenges on both global and domestic fronts.
After  years  of  protracted  subpar  growth,  the  global  economy  is  finally  experiencing  a  “firming
recovery.” In its latest World Economic Outlook (WEO) in July, the International Monetary Fund
(IMF) projected global output to grow at 3.5 percent in 2017 and further at 3.6 percent in 2018.
This is on the back of the notable improvements seen in the Euro area, as well as the robust
growth outlook in advanced and emerging Asia.
But  there  are  downside  risks  over  the  near  and  medium  term  that  stem  from  a  number  of
factors.  The  first  is  growing  uncertainty  of  economic  policies  as  more  central  banks  in  major
advance  economies  prepare  to  enter  a  tightening  cycle  at  different  speeds.    The  US  Federal
Reserve (US Fed) seems set on its path to normalization as it hiked the federal funds rate in
June (the second time this year)… It is also set to unwind its bond purchases during the year…
The European Central Bank (ECB) has just started pondering on how to taper its Quantitative
Easing (QE) Policy in 2018…Similarly, the Bank of England (BOE) has finished its latest round of
QE – which it launched after the Brexit referendum last June 2016 – BOE is also considering
hiking interest rates.
On  balance,  a  well-calibrated  adjustment  from  these  major  central  banks  should  not  trigger
dramatic  shifts  in  global  capital  flows.  However,  as  the  accommodative  stance  from  these
economies begin to unwind, there could be knock-on effects, both economic and financial, such
as the potential for a capital flow reversal in emerging economies including the Philippines.
A second risk rises from global political uncertainty. Polarization has intensified owing partly to
the growing discontent over globalization and the inequality perceived to have resulted from it…
If this trend gains further traction, there is likely to be greater inclination towards “inward-looking”
policies.   For example, the US government’s efforts to implement a conservative policy agenda
on immigration, offshoring/outsourcing, trade, tax reform, labor/immigration laws,  and  financial
and  business  regulation,  could  potentially  shrink  external  trade,  and  even  derail  the  global
economy’s path to recovery.
Closer  to  home,  it  could  dampen  the  country’s  Overseas  Filipino  (OF)  deployment  and
remittances.  It can also significantly affect our exports, ultimately hurting domestic consumption.
The US remains the second largest market destination of Philippine merchandise exports with an
average annual share of 14.8 percent in the period 2013–2016.  For our BPO industry, the US
remains  the  largest  export  market,  accounting  for  nearly  80  percent  of  industry  revenues  in
2014.  Nevertheless, our local BPO industry leaders remain confident that the cost advantages in
the Philippines will remain a key factor in US firms’ decision to outsource.
Lastly, the ongoing rebalancing of the Chinese economy as it continues to transition from export-
led  growth  to  services-  and  domestic  consumption-driven  expansion  could  also  impact  on
Philippine exports given the expanding bilateral relations between the two economies in recent
years.    Nevertheless,  the  expected  recovery  in  both  advanced  economies  and  emerging  and
developing economies, as projected by the IMF in its July 2017 World Economic Outlook (WEO)
update, could also compensate for the potential slowdown in China.
Challenges on the Homefront
In  addition  to  the  risks  emanating  from  the  external  front,  we  also  need  to  contend  with
homegrown risks.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Challenges in the near term relate to regional and domestic security issues such as on-going
tensions between the US and North Korea as well as the still   on-going conflict in Marawi which
may  have  a  direct  impact  on  business  and  consumer  sentiment  as  well  as  on  tourism,  if
prolonged.
Over the medium term, there is also the key challenge of addressing the infrastructure gaps in
the economy.
To  this  end,  the  National  Government’s  proposed  fiscal  reform  package  seeks  to  increase
available resources for needed public capital spending while also encouraging private spending. 
The DOF is also planning to introduce other tax reforms that will include, among other things, a
reduction  in  the  corporate  income  tax  rate,  harmonization  of  capital  income  tax  rates,  and
rationalization in the valuation of property prices.
The tax revenues from the initial package will be used to sustain higher productive investment
spending for physical and human capital development, thus ultimately leading to gains for the
economy  in  the  medium-to-long  run…  Given  a  sustained  increase  in  productive  public
investment and higher capital income from the gradual reduction in corporate income tax, we can
expect a positive knock-on effect on private investment, resulting in a beneficial cycle of higher
investment and higher potential output for the economy.
This  means  that  the  success  of  the  country’s  much  needed  infrastructure  investment  relies
heavily on the passage of the tax reform package.
Policy Responses:  Managing Risks
Fortunately, the BSP has a broad policy toolkit for responding to some of the risks I have outlined.
These  include:  (i)  macroprudential  regulations  targeted  to  specific  sources  of  risks,      (ii)
contingency measures such as liquidity-enhancing facilities, and (iii) liquidity provision measures
and  regional  firewalls  that  boost  the  flexibility  and  effectiveness  of  our  actions.    The  BSP  will
activate these tools as appropriate.
In  the  context  of  pursuing  our  price  stability  mandate,  the  BSP  will  continue  to  fine-tune  its
implementation framework for monetary policy to make it even more market-oriented. We have
already started with the deployment of the interest rate corridor (IRC) system.  Over time, the
IRC is expected to aid in advancing the development of the domestic money and capital markets
based on greater reliance on the use of market-friendly instruments.  The IRC will further align
our  open  market  operations  with  liquidity  needs  of  the  market,  strengthening  monetary  policy
transmission channels.
In terms of banking supervision, we continue to review and align our financial regulations and
policies  with  international  standards  to  improve  risk  management  as  well  as  ensure  the
competitiveness of our banks in view of ASEAN integration… We intend to further enhance our
macro-financial surveillance capability by, among others, improving coordination and cooperation
with  other  government  agencies  and  regulators…  We  are  also  working  closely  with  other
government  agencies  and  private  sector  stakeholders  to  accelerate  the  development  of  the
domestic  debt  market, 
financial  market
infrastructures that provide orderly trading, clearing, and settlement of the full range of financial
transactions.
the  development  of 
the  necessary 
including 
Earlier  last  year,  the  Monetary  Board  approved  the  ninth  wave  of  liberalization  of  foreign
exchange rules. This is to encourage the public to transact their FX needs with banks, enhance
market efficiency, and improve data capture.  There are more ambitious FX reforms to come. 
We also continue to enhance and update our financial sector regulations and policies to bring our
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
financial system at par with international standards…Through the Financial Stability Coordination
Council Committee (FSCC) chaired by the BSP, macro-prudential surveillance of the financial
system  is  conducted  on  an  on-going  basis  to  enable  early  detection  of  any  incipient  signs  of
instability.
Our surveillance toolkit consists of a suite of quantitative models that attempt to address one or
more aspects of systemic risks. This includes, among others:
Early Warning Systems (EWS) that employ aggregate information from various sectors to
generate early warning signs of systemic stress and at the same time, allow us to identify
potential build-up of stress in specific sectors of the economy.
Stress Tests that measure the resilience of the domestic financial system to various stress
factors,  including  shocks  from  macroeconomic  and  financial  variables  like  GDP,  liquidity,
and interest rates.
Stability  indicators  that  potentially  contain  more  information  on  the  changes  in  domestic
macro-financial conditions such as Philippine Composite Index of Financial Stress (PCIFS),
Bank Distress Index (BDI), and the Residential Real Estate Price Index (RREPI).
Philippine  Financial  Markets  Connectedness  Indices  are  also  being  developed  to  provide
information on the amount of spillovers to the domestic financial markets.
We are also looking at tapping new technologies such as big data analytics to further improve
and widen the breadth of our surveillance.
Lastly,  the  BSP  is  reinforcing  its  model-based  assessments  with  qualitative  and  informed
judgments  on  current  macroeconomic  and  financial  conditions  through  the  conduct  of  risk
assessment initiatives similar to environmental scanning exercises.
Concluding Remarks: Strength in Partnership
Ladies and gentlemen, both external and domestic developments compel us to remain watchful
in guarding against threats to growth and stability.
We have sustained reforms that have helped keep the Philippine economy on a steady growth
path in spite of external and domestic headwinds.  This track record of success provides us the
confidence and cautious optimism in meeting the many economic challenges along the way.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is the big picture … and I am grateful for the opportunity to share it
with you.  Please remember it as you trade day-to-day.
Thank you for your kind attention.  Good afternoon.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
