Financial regulation and economic policies for avoiding the next crisis 
(Urjit R. Patel, Governor, 32nd Annual G30 International Banking Seminar, 
October 15, 2017, Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, D.C.) 
 1. 
Let  me  start  by  reminding  ourselves  of  some  numbers  that  are  a  key 
backdrop for today’s panel discussion. Total global external liabilities have grown 
from  30  per  cent  to  190  per  cent  of  global  GDP  between  1980  and  2015,  far 
outpacing the growth in global trade (from 19 per cent to 28 per cent of GDP over 
the  same  period).  The  main  vehicle  of  this  new  globalisation  has  been  cross-
border banking flows, which constituted a third of global capital flows in the decade 
prior  to  the  financial  crisis.  In  parallel,  the  global  trade  network  has  become 
increasingly interconnected through supply chains that transcend national borders, 
and  by  the  advent  of  new  players,  especially  from  the  developing  world.  China 
now  accounts  for  about  11  per  cent  of  global  trade  and  emerging  market  and 
developing countries (EMDCs) taken together contribute 37 per cent (up by about 
15 percentage points since 2000). 
2.  During the global financial crisis, the explicit pre-crisis assignment of policy 
instruments  to  objectives  became  blurred.  The  experience  demonstrated  that 
macroeconomic  policymaking  is  expected  to  do  a  fine  balancing  act  to  achieve 
multiple  and,  at  times,  conflicting  objectives  of  monetary  stability,  fiscal  stability 
and financial stability. Within these trade-offs, financial stability has assumed some 
seniority,  entailing  for  national  authorities  the  constant  need  to  monitor,  identify 
and minimise the build-up of systemic risks in financial systems and reduce spill 
overs in the most efficient and effective way. This involves a fine dovetailing of the 
objectives  of  market  efficiency  into  consumer  protection  and  the  management  – 
even pre-emption – of systemic risks.  
3. 
financial regulation in averting the next crisis: 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  focus  on  the  following  issues  in  the  role  of 
•  Globalisation  and  adherence  to  global  rules/standards  −  synergies  and 
challenges. 
•  Financial  regulation  and  suddenness  of  crisis  incidence  −  regulatory 
intervention needs to be more anticipatory and data-based. 
•  Backward-looking  versus  forward-looking  risk-based  supervision  −  need  for 
global systemically important banks to disclose their internal rating models. 
•  Too-big-to-fail and moral hazard. 
 1 
•  Adequacy of global financial safety nets (GFSNs) in the context of the size 
and speed of crises − gaps and discriminatory practices in the international 
financial architecture. 
(i)      Globalisation and global rules/standards. 
 
4.  Emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  have  undoubtedly  benefited  from 
globalisation,  but  they  are  also  more  exposed  than  before  to  vulnerabilities  that 
come with globalisation. As we access markets abroad and spread our activities 
on  a  global  scale,  our  financial  systems  are  also  required  to  embrace  global 
norms, especially on capital, risk recognition and accounting standards; monetary 
policy  based  on  some  rule  relating  to  a  nominal  anchor  such  as  inflation;  fiscal 
policy  based  on  a  budget  or  expenditure  rule;  and  market-based  exchange  rate 
regimes,  complemented  by  strong  and  effective  financial  sector  regulation  and 
supervision,  corporate  governance  and  enforcement  rules,  and  bankruptcy  and 
resolution architecture. 
5.  Markets inherently impose these exacting standards of discipline when they 
allow access to banks and corporates. For example, international capital tends to 
punish monetary and fiscal indiscipline severely. Even as some shocks tend to be 
impervious  to  fundamentals,  economies  with  sound,  prudent,  transparent  and 
accountable  macro-policy  frameworks  have  demonstrated  success  in  containing 
negative  externalities  as  well  as  in  restoring  normalcy  faster.  In  this  context, 
prudent policy frameworks tie down policy actions to final goals. Some of us may 
think that rules are a cost imposed on us in the form of sacrifice of independence 
and sovereignty. While all rules may not best fit us, the ones that I will highlight, 
specifically,  monetary,  fiscal  and  accounting,  are  widely  accepted  by  reasonable 
people as a basic minimum.  
First, fiscal rules are institutionalised or legally binding rules that credibly commit 
authorities  to  fiscal  discipline.  By  restraining  expenditure  or  overall  deficits,  they 
enhance the credibility of macroeconomic policies, by keeping public debt within 
sustainable  levels  improving  thereby  the  credibility  of  the  fiscal  authority  as  a 
participant in financial markets. 
Second,  a  transparent  and  predictable  monetary  policy  framework  is,  almost  by 
definition, rule-based. 
 2 
Third, while regulation is imposed from outside, corporate governance is internal 
to firms and is more in the nature of self-regulation with safeguards that principles 
and rules laid down by the regulations are followed conscientiously. Nevertheless, 
regulation and corporate governance have to complement each other. 
Fourth,  with  globalisation,  operations  of  large  firms  have  become  transnational, 
and  massive  cross-border  movement  of  capital  requires  adoption  of  uniform 
accounting  standards,  such  as  the  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(IFRS).  When these standards are applied rigorously and consistently, investors, 
regulators  and  other  stakeholders  all  benefit  with  higher  quality  information  to 
make decisions.  
6.  With globalisation, it is imperative for banks in EMEs to adhere to standards 
emanating  from  the  global  standard  setting  bodies.    While  challenges  remain  in 
adopting  standards  like  IFRS  in  EMEs,  we  welcome  the  forward  looking 
provisioning framework. Banks generally tend to delay provisioning for bad loans 
until cyclical downturns have already set in and it is too late, possibly magnifying 
the  impact  of  the  economic  cycle  on  banks’  income  and  capital.  In  such 
circumstances, providing for and recognising actual and potential loan losses at an 
earlier  stage  in  the  credit  cycle  could  potentially  reduce  procyclicality  and  foster 
financial stability. 
 
(ii)        Financial  regulation  and  suddenness  of  crisis  incidence:  Need  for 
regulatory intervention to be more anticipatory and data-based.  
 
7. 
In the context of financial stability, acceptable regulation should have three 
broad  characteristics:  Firstly,  regulation  ought  to  be  predictable.  A  regulation 
susceptible to forbearing instincts carries the concomitant chance of risk inducing 
behaviour  by  stakeholders.  Second,  regulation  should  aim  to  shoehorn  internal 
governance mechanisms of the regulated entities in an incentive compatible way. 
Finally,  it  should  aim  to  address  information  asymmetry  between  the  key 
stakeholders  since  the  lack  of  information  often  leads  to  herd  behaviour,  thus 
precipitating crises.  
8.  Backward  looking  regulation  attempts  to  address  gaps  in  regulation  in  one 
sector, region, and nation; but given the complexity and inter-connectedness of the 
financial system, activity swiftly shifts to another sector, region or nation and builds 
financial excesses. However, the next threat to financial stability may come from 
 3 
quarters  that  regulators  are  completely  unaware  of.  Thus,  forward-looking 
regulations  are  required  to  tackle  such  unforeseen  risks.  With  the  advent  of  big 
data analytics, cloud computing and artificial intelligence, we are at a stage where 
data can be used to model future events with certain confidence intervals, and our 
regulations  can  potentially  be  structured  to  deal  with  such  events.  The  recent 
thrust  on  two  areas  -  cybersecurity  and  FinTech  -  is  a  case  in  point.  A  decade 
back,  few  bankers  or  policymakers  talked  about  this  threat.  Today  these  are 
identified as major risks to the financial system.  
9. 
The  allergy  to  intrusive  regulation  pre-crisis  has  been  overturned  into  a 
necessity in the post-crisis period across advanced economies (AEs) and EMEs. 
In  the  post-crisis  hyper-active  regulatory  environment,  it  is  possible  to  develop 
detailed dos and don’ts to potentially avert a crisis. In such a milieu, certain basic 
characteristics of a regulatory framework, coupled with a supervisory regime that 
is responsive to investors’ and other stakeholders’ concerns, has the best chance 
of  inducing  prudential  behaviour  among  regulatees.  Regulators  have  been 
slapping record fines on major banks and financial institutions for making undue 
profits or masking their problems by fraudulently rigging rates. A lot of mis-selling 
of  products  by  banks  in  certain  jurisdictions  has  also  raised  serious  concerns 
among  regulators,  which  is  attracting  more  intrusive  regulation  with  a  significant 
bearing on banks’ compliance costs. 
 
(iii)  Reliance  on  internal  rating-based  risk  assessment  by  global  banks: 
Black-box requires reasonable disclosure and transparency. 
 
10.  The last financial crisis has prompted doubts that the internal ratings based 
(IRB)  approach  may  have  been  used  opportunistically  to  minimize  capital 
requirements, thus helping banks to disguise credit bubbles by keeping their risk 
weighted assets (RWAs) artificially low.  The evidence suggests that internal risk 
estimates  employed  for  regulatory  purposes  systematically  under-predict  actual 
default rates. Supervisory confidence in risk weights is critical to the success of the 
regulatory  framework.  The  BCBS’s  work  on  the  implementation  of  the  Basel 
capital  framework  has  gathered  evidence  that  significant  variations  in  capital 
outcomes generated by internal models (with respect to portfolios with similar risk 
profiles) may be unwarranted. Thus, there is a need to improve transparency and 
comparability across internal models to ensure that internal ratings are built and 
 4 
validated  on  the  basis  of  a  set  of  common  standards.  A  reasonable  degree  of 
transparency  and  disclosure  will  help  establish  the  credibility  of  the  risk 
assessment models used currently by many large global banks. “Sunlight is said to 
be the best of disinfectants”. 
(iv) Too-big-to-fail (TBTF) and moral hazard. 
 
11.  There  are  concerns  related  to  the  implicit  government  guarantee  for  TBTF 
institutions. These concerns derive from the belief that the TBTF status gives large 
banks  a  competitive  edge  and  incentives  to  take  on  additional  risks.  If  investors 
believe that the largest banks are too big to fail, they will be willing to offer them 
funding at a discount. Together with expectations of rescues, this discount gives 
the TBTF banks incentives to engage in riskier activities. This, in turn, could drive 
smaller  banks  that  compete  with  them  to  take  on  further  risks,  exacerbating  the 
riskiness of the entire financial system. 
12.  Regulatory  labelling  of  systemically  important  financial  institutions/banks 
(SIFIs/SIBs)  may  convey  the  promise  of  implicit  taxpayer-sponsored  bailouts  for 
uninsured  deposits  in  case  of  insolvency.  While  they  also  bring  in  additional 
regulatory capital prescriptions to act as a loss absorbent, in a competitive capital 
market, the possibility of SIFIs/SIBs taking additional risks to earn the additional 
returns on capital and thereby negating the role of additional capital can never be 
ruled out. Hence, the nature of supervisory oversight of SIFIs/SIBs ought to be a 
lot  more  intrusive  relative  to  other  financial  institutions.  The  bank  bailouts 
experience in Europe shows that political economy of bailouts is more important 
than regulatory labelling.  
(v)   Inadequacy of global financial safety nets (GFSNs) and discriminatory 
central bank swap lines force EMEs to self-insurance.  
13.  Monetary  policy  stances  of  systemic  central  banks,  geo-political 
developments  and  uncertainty  surrounding  the  direction  of  macroeconomic 
policies in AEs have been the main push factors driving the influx of capital flows 
to  EMEs.  For  these  recipient  economies,  this  has  translated  into  heightened 
financial market volatility with adverse implications for their growth prospects and 
for macroeconomic and financial stability. By and large, EMEs have absorbed the 
shocks  by  maintaining  fairly  open  capital  accounts  and  by  strengthening  their 
 5 
macro fundamentals through prudent policies. Yet, as high intensity events starting 
with the taper tantrum have shown, macroeconomic fundamentals do not matter in 
the  face  of  these  large  and  sudden  movements  of  capital,  and  their  economies 
remain vulnerable to rapid materialization of risks. 
14.  So  far,  our  quest  for  a  robust,  equitable  and  quickly  deployable  global 
financial safety net (GFSN) has remained elusive. As a consequence, EMEs have 
had to buffer themselves by maintaining reserves and managing financial volatility 
through a combination of policy instruments, including a macro-prudential/capital 
flow  management  toolkit,  which  are  essentially  pre-emptive  in  nature.  Given  the 
“stigma”  attached  to  the  IMF  facilities  and  their  quest  for  “self-insurance”,  EMEs 
have resorted to building foreign exchange reserves as the “first line of defence” to 
calm  volatility  in  financial  markets  and  to  provide  adequate  liquidity  buffers  for 
“sudden stop” and reversals. Second, regional financial safety nets have emerged 
to complement the agenda of financial stability.  
15. 
In the post global financial crisis era, the GFSN has grown significantly with 
increased accumulation of reserves by countries, and increase in various bilateral 
and multilateral swap arrangements. Global reserves grew from about US$2 trillion 
in  2000  to  about  US$12  trillion  by  the  end  of  Q2  of  2017  about  60  per  cent  of 
which are held by EMEs. However, according to the Fund’s Assessing Reserves 
Adequacy  (ARA)  metric,  many  EMEs  (especially  in  Eastern  Europe  and  Latin 
America) fall short of the range of 100–150 per cent of the composite metrics that 
are considered adequate for precautionary purposes. Bilateral swap lines between 
central banks expanded dramatically during the crisis and have further increased 
since  then.  The  bilateral  swaps  are  dominated  by  China’s  extensive  network  of 
renminbi  swap  lines  −  30  swap  lines  in  place  at  end-2015  valued  at  US$500 
billion.  BRICS  countries  have  established  a  US$100  billion  multilateral  currency 
swap arrangement aiming to provide regional short-term liquidity and to address 
balance  of  payments  difficulties.  Other  regional  financing  arrangements  (RFAs) 
that have emerged are Eurasian Fund for Stabilization and Development (EFSD) 
with  contributions  of  US$8.5  billion,  Arab  Monetary  Fund  (AMF)  and  the  Latin 
American Reserve Fund (FLAR).  
16.  With every new tail event, however, the churn becomes larger, the volatility 
ever higher, threatening to overwhelm the modest defences that EMEs are able to 
 6 
muster. It is in this context that I would draw your attention to the stark asymmetry 
prevailing in the provision of swap lines by systemic central banks. In fact, I would 
go  as  far  as  describing  the  situation  as  a  virtual  “apartheid”  by  which  systemic 
central banks protect themselves and their self-interest. Meanwhile, EMEs that are 
at  the  receiving  end  of  global  financial  turbulence  are  systematically  denied 
access. The time has come to end this sectarian approach and the access to swap 
lines be equally available. While EMEs have shown a degree of resilience to the 
turmoil of recent years, they are vulnerable to liquidity and bridge financing gaps 
that  are  transitory  but  debilitating.  Access  to  swap  lines  will  help  them  manage 
these risks better and prevent them from assuming systemic proportions, thereby 
threatening global financial stability. We must learn from the lessons of the global 
financial crisis and act expeditiously and comprehensively to establish a broader 
swap  network.  In  its  absence,  the  macroeconomic  environment  of  each  country 
will inform the choice of policy instruments. In such a milieu, there cannot be any 
common code or uniform approach to capital account liberalization. 
17.  There has been considerable focus on macro-prudential measures (MPMs) 
in  the  recent  period.  However,  while  legitimacy  of  MPMs  has  been  well 
established, the same legitimacy for capital flow measures (CFMs) has not been 
universally accepted despite an explicit endorsement by the IMF for selective use 
of  CFMs.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  amid  global  financial  cycles  and  the 
inexorability  of  the  trilemma,  corner  solutions  are  not  feasible.  So  soft  capital 
account  management  becomes  a  necessity  –  keeping  external  debt  within 
practicable  limits  and  prudence  regarding  the  external  sector  help  strengthen 
financial and macroeconomic stability. 
18.  The challenge before us is to identify what is going to strike us next? Hence, 
any  regulation  of  the  financial  system  should  take  a  pre-emptive  approach,  and 
consider the potential fragility of banks alongside all other elements of the financial 
system. This would prevent regulatory arbitrage and help to ex ante determine the 
supervisory “guide rails/rules of the game” for the system. 
 7 
