Peter  Praet:  Monetary  policy  and  the  euro  area  economic
expansion
Remarks by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at
the  JP  Morgan  Seminar  entitled  "Euro  Zone:  Will  the  European  Recovery  Continue?",
Washington DC, 12 October 2017.
Accompanying slides
 The monetary policy measures introduced by the ECB since June 2014 have played a pivotal
role  in  supporting  the  economy  and  have  proven  to  be  effective  in  preventing  a  period  of
disinflation from degenerating into one of outright deflation. More than three years on, the risks of
deflation  have  largely  disappeared  and  the  transmission  of  our  policy  measures  to  the  real
economy  is  clearly  evidenced  by  a  broad-based  cyclical  recovery  with  solid  momentum.  This
lays the groundwork for a return of inflation to below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. The
strong economic expansion should not lead to complacency, however. Strengthening euro area
longer-term  growth  potential  and  reducing  vulnerabilities  requires  decisive  contributions  from
other  policy  areas.  Implementing  growth-enhancing  structural  reforms  and  strengthening  the
institutional architecture of Economic and Monetary Union are essential to support the resilience
of the euro area on a lasting basis.
Before turning to price dynamics and monetary policy, let me say a bit more about the latest
economic developments.
Real GDP in the euro area has expanded for 17 consecutive quarters, growing by 2.3% year on
year  during  the  second  quarter  of  2017,  according  to  Eurostat  –  a  rate  that  surpassed  our
projection at the start of the year. This compares with the latest potential growth estimates for the
euro area of just over 1%.  The latest survey data point to a strong third quarter. The composite
output Purchasing Managers’ Index – which is highly correlated with growth in the euro area – is
above  its  long-term  average  and  remains  close  to  six-year  highs.  The  forward-looking
components of the survey continue to point to growth in the quarters ahead. Moreover, Eurostat’s
Economic Sentiment Indicator is near a ten-year high.
1
A notable feature of the ongoing recovery is that it has led to tangible employment gains. Since
hitting a trough in mid-2013, the number of people employed in the euro area has increased by
almost 7 million. As a result, all of the employment losses recorded during the crisis have been
offset.  The  unemployment  rate  also  continues  to  decline,  despite  an  increase  in  labour  force
participation, and is now at its lowest level in eight years.
Employment  growth,  together  with  the  gradual  increase  in  employee  compensation,  supports
households’  disposable  income  and  is  underpinning  solid  consumption  dynamics.  Buoyant
sentiment, favourable bank lending conditions and the notable progress achieved with respect to
deleveraging  are  all  conducive  to  robust  consumer  spending.  The  investment  outlook  is  also
positive,  supported  not  only  by  a  need  to  modernise  the  capital  stock  after  years  of  subdued
investment and an improving outlook for profitability, but also by highly accommodative financing
conditions as our policy measures have passed through financial markets to affect the borrowing
conditions of businesses and their customers.
Since the announcement of our policy measures in June 2014, bank lending rates for euro area
non-financial corporations have fallen by almost 120 basis points and those for households by
100 basis points. Lending rates for very small loans, which can be taken as a proxy for loans to
small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (SMEs),  have  declined  by  almost  190  basis  points.  The
significant improvement in funding conditions for SMEs is especially encouraging as they provide
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
two-thirds  of  total  private  sector  employment  in  the  euro  area.  Heterogeneity  of  lending  rates
across  countries  has  also  fallen  sharply.  For  example,  the  difference  between  the  average
lending rate for firms in countries that were severely affected by the crisis versus other countries
has narrowed by around 100 basis points over this period. The pass-through of monetary policy
has become more even.
These  positive  developments  have  been  further  supported  by  the  second  series  of  targeted
longer-term  refinancing  operations,  as  a  result  of  which  banks  are  passing  on  the  favourable
2
funding conditions to their customers.  
3
The sharp reduction in bank lending rates has been accompanied by easier access to funding,
as recent surveys have shown.  Moreover, bank lending volumes have been gradually recovering
since  early  2014.  According  to  the  latest  Survey  on  the  Access  to  Finance  of  Enterprises,
covering the period from October 2016 to March 2017, euro area SMEs have continued to signal
improvements  in  the  availability  of  bank  loans.  Market-based  funding  conditions,  too,  have
improved  significantly  in  response  to  the  corporate  sector  purchase  programme  launched  in
June 2016.
Against the backdrop of this substantial easing of financing conditions, domestic demand has
become  the  mainstay  of  growth  in  the  euro  area,  making  the  recovery  more  resilient  to
developments overseas. The latest ECB staff macroeconomic projections point to robust private
consumption and a continued recovery in investment over the period ahead. Real GDP growth is
projected to remain well above potential growth and to average between 1.7% and 2.2% in 2017,
2018 and 2019. The risks to the growth outlook are broadly balanced: on the upside, the current
cyclical momentum could result in stronger than expected growth, while the remaining downside
risks relate primarily to global factors and developments in the exchange rate.
From  today’s  point  of  view,  the  strength  and  resilience  of  the  recovery  tends  to  foster  our
confidence that reflationary forces will gradually support a return of headline inflation towards a
level  that  is  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  But  inflation  dynamics  remain
subdued.  After  hovering  at  levels  well  below  1%  for  three  years,  with  occasional  dips  into
negative  territory,  euro  area  headline  inflation  edged  higher  towards  the  end  of  last  year  and
stood  at  1.5%  in  September  according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate.  Owing  to  energy-related
base effects, headline inflation rates are likely to temporarily decline towards the turn of the year.
Looking  further  ahead,  as  reflected  in  the  latest  ECB  staff  projections,  headline  inflation  is
expected to remain notably below a level that is consistent with our inflation aim over the next two
years, averaging 1.5% in 2019. Furthermore, the recent volatility in the exchange rate represents
a source of uncertainty which requires monitoring with regard to its possible implications for the
medium-term outlook for price stability. Some measures of underlying inflation – which is more
closely related to domestic price pressures – have ticked up moderately in recent months. For
example, HICP inflation excluding food and energy had been stuck below 1% for around three
years, but was 1.1% in September. Nevertheless, underlying inflation pressures are still too weak
and have so far failed to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend.
An  important  element  keeping  underlying  price  pressures  subdued  is  muted  wage  dynamics,
which are shaped by many factors. In addition to weak productivity developments, the significant
degree of remaining labour market slack is limiting wage growth. When assessing slack, it can
prove useful to also look at broader measures than the unemployment rate. The so-called “U6
measure” captures unemployment, underemployment (meaning workers who would like to work
more  hours)  and  marginal  attachment,  namely  those  workers  that  are  not  competing  very
actively in the labour market, for example because they are not available to start a new job at
short  notice.  This  measure  currently  covers  just  below  18%  of  the  labour  force  and  is  thus
4
considerably higher than the unemployment rate.
We are undoubtedly experiencing a solid, broad-based and resilient economic recovery that is
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
contributing to a narrowing of the output and unemployment gaps. But there still appears to be a
disconnect between growth and  inflation. As  slack  in  the  economy  continues  to  be  absorbed,
reflationary  forces  will  gradually  build  up  and  the  traditional  Phillips  curve  connection  between
inflation and the business cycle should eventually reassert itself.
That being said, current estimates of the slope of the Phillips curve appear to be flatter than in
previous  times,  which  could  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  that  the  relationship  between
economic slack and inflation has weakened. This could be due to either a mismeasurement of
slack (because of structural changes in the labour market) or the relationship between slack and
inflation not being stable over time. At the same time, this effect could also result from discrete
parallel shifts in the Phillips curve. Such parallel shifts may occur because of temporary changes
in wage and inflation mark-ups, or – more concerning from a central bank’s perspective – the
incipient  dislodging  of  inflation  expectations.  In  an  extreme  scenario,  the  entrenchment  of
disinflationary  developments  could  sustain  a  downward  drift  in  the  Phillips  curve  and  unmoor
inflation  expectations.  Empirically  disentangling  these  factors  is  extremely  difficult,  so  such
considerations need to be borne in mind when discussing the relationship between economic
slack and inflation developments, particularly in an environment of uncertainty over the anchoring
of inflation expectations. It is our primary task, as a central bank, to ensure that the reconnection
of the real and the nominal sides of the economy – what I referred to before as the Phillips curve
regularity eventually reasserting itself – occurs at a steady state rate of inflation that is consistent
with our medium-term aim: a level below, but close to, 2%.
We have not yet accomplished our mission, and so we must remain patient and persistent.
Patience is required for inflationary pressures to show through convincingly in the data. The euro
area’s economic environment is improving, and the negative tail risks to inflation expectations,
which  were  clearly  visible  at  the  start  of  our  asset  purchase  programme,  have  virtually
disappeared. But measured inflation rates are exceedingly volatile and metrics of underlying price
pressures remain weak. The entire distribution of inflation expectations still needs to shift a fair
distance to the right.
We  must  also  be  persistent  in  using  our  policy  instruments  to  ensure  a  durable  and  self-
sustained return of inflation towards a level that is below, but close to, 2% over a meaningful
medium-term horizon. Crucially, the baseline scenario for future inflation remains contingent on
easy financing conditions, which, to a large extent, depend on the support of monetary policy.
In  the  next  few  weeks,  the  Governing  Council  will  assess  how  the  evolving  macroeconomic
conditions,  most  notably  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  and  the  state  of  monetary  policy
transmission  can  be  expected  to  influence  the  monetary  policy  stance.  It  will  recalibrate  its
instruments  accordingly,  with  a  view  to  delivering  the  monetary  policy  impulse  that  remains
necessary to secure a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation in a manner that is consistent
with our monetary policy aim.
1
2
3
4
See, for example, the European Commission’s “European Economic Forecast – Spring 2017”.
For more details, see the box entitled “The targeted longer-term refinancing operations: an overview of the take-
up and their impact on bank intermediation”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
See the ECB’s euro area bank lending survey, July 2017, and the ECB’s Survey on the Access to Finance of
Enterprises in the euro area, October 2016 to March 2017.
See the box entitled, “Assessing labour market slack”, Economic Bulletin, Issue 3, ECB, 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
