RESERVE BANK OF FIJI 
  GOVERNOR ARIFF ALI’S PRESENTATION TO THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
ECONOMIC AFFAIRS ON THE RESERVE BANK OF FIJI INSURANCE ANNUAL 
REPORT 2016 ON 4 OCTOBER 2017 
 
 
1.  Introduction 
 
Thank  you  Honourable  Chair  and  Honourable  Members  for  the  invitation  to  present  the  2016 
Reserve Bank of Fiji’s Insurance Annual Report to the Standing Committee on Economic Affairs. 
 
Let  me  first  introduce  my  colleagues  who  are  here  today:  the  Acting  Deputy  Governor  Mr  Esala 
Masitabua;  the  Chief  Manager  Financial  Institutions  Group  Ms  Vilimaina  Dakai,  Manager  Policy 
and Research Mr Seci Taleniwesi and Manager Financial Institution Supervision Three  Mr Shanil 
Totaram. 
 
Please allow me to make some brief introductory remarks before we seek to answer your questions.   
 
The Reserve Bank of Fiji is the supervisory authority for the Fijian insurance industry and by virtue 
of this supervisory role, has the responsibility of administering the Insurance Act 1998 (“the Act”).  
We are therefore mandated under section 165 of the Act to submit the Insurance Annual Report by 
30 June of every year. 
 
Honourable Chair, we wish to report that we have not failed in meeting this provision of the Act, 
and  I  am  pleased  to  also  highlight  that  our  Insurance  Annual  Report  has  been  commended  by 
various local and international  experts as one of  the best  repository of insurance statistics for any 
country.  Needless to say that we are the only supervisory authority in the region, which produces 
such a report. 
 
2.  The Fijian Insurance Industry in 2016 
 I wish to provide an overview of the Fijian insurance industry in 2016: 
 
2016 is  now etched in  every  Fijian’s memory as the  year in  which we faced the most devastating 
natural catastrophe in our nation’s history.  Tropical Cyclone (TC) Winston has defined the year for 
us as such, and brought to the fore the importance of having a robust insurance industry. 
 
Honourable  Chair,  in  our  last  presentation  to  the  Standing  Committee  on  the  2014  and  2015 
Insurance  Annual  Reports,  we  had  highlighted  the  significance  of  the  insurance  industry  to  the 
economy. 
 
The  risk  transfer  role  that  the  insurance  industry  plays  is  key  to  the  growth  of  our  economy.    It 
provides  the  necessary  safeguard  for  the  financial  health  of  individuals,  families,  communities, 
businesses, financial institutions and the economy as a whole. 
 
1 
 The  industry  also  plays  an  information  role  in  providing  an  indication  of  existing  risks  in  the 
economy  and  probability  of  loss,  and  a  developmental  role  in  the  capital  markets,  by  mobilising 
savings for productive use. 
 
In  2016  therefore,  the  Fijian  insurance  industry  remained  sound  despite  the  significant  damage 
caused  by  TC  Winston.    The  combined  gross  premium  income  of  the  industry  stood  at  $311.9 
million in 2016, the first time year that the annual premium has gone past the $300 million mark. 
This, Honourable Chair, is reflective of a growing industry even in a year of a severe catastrophe.   
 
Net  policy  payments  for  the  life  insurance  sector  and  net  claims  paid  for  the  general  insurance 
sectors totalled $185.9  million.   The industry continued to  be assessed  as solvent and its earnings 
performance assessed as satisfactory. 
 
Honourable  Chair,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  continues  to  liaise  with  individual  companies  on  the 
sustainability  of  their  operations  and  like  any  other  business  during  times  of  crisis,  some 
companies’ underwriting capacity have been challenged by the impact of recent loss events.  As the 
regulator,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  the  necessary  powers  to  enforce  requirements  to  ensure  that 
individual companies remain safe and sound, and the insurance industry as a whole continues to be 
stable. 
 3.  Conclusion 
 
Honourable  Chair,  we  note  from  the  list  of  questions  circulated  by  the  Committee,  the  increased 
interest in what the insurance industry is doing to increase its visibility and promote the important 
role it plays. We in fact welcome this long list of questions as this gives us an opportunity to explain 
these issues and clear any mis-understanding or mis-conception. 
 
We admit that while there is a view that we have not been pushing the industry that strong, we are 
happy to report that various development work were being undertaken behind the scenes in the last 
three years, of which we are now beginning to see the results. 
 
I will therefore conclude by providing some brief information on a number of recent developments 
that  now  prove  a  more  collaborative  approach  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  the  insurance  industry  and 
development  partners  in  seeking  to  increase  the  Fijian  insurance  industry’s  capacity  to  offer  new 
and innovative products: 
 
(i) Inclusive Insurance Bundled Product 
 In March 2015, the Reserve Bank of Fiji, in collaboration with the United Nations Pacific Financial 
Inclusion Program, embarked on a project to facilitate the expansion of inclusive insurance in Fiji.   
Inclusive  insurance  (or  micro-insurance)  refers  to  the  provision  of  insurance  products  to  the  low 
income and vulnerable sectors of the population. 
 
While  the  Reserve  Bank’s  intention  of  involving  all  general  insurance  companies  did  not  really 
come though, we were pleased to note that in July 2017, FijiCare Insurance Limited came forward 
and offered the  first  bundled micro insurance product  to  11,606 registered cane farmers who now 
have access to some form of insurance. 
2 
  
The bundled micro insurance product provides a sum insured of $10,000 with an annual premium of 
$52 ($1 per week) and is allocated as follows: 
 
 
•  Term life 
 
•  Fire  
 
•  Personal Accident   
•  Funeral 
 
$3,000.00 
$3,000.00 
$3,000.00 
$1,000.00 
    Crop Insurance 
Since its launch, FijiCare has paid 18 claims amounting to $64,000.00.  Of these claims, two were 
for fire related events while the rest is for death.   
 
We  wish  to  also  mention  another  micro-insurance  product  that  has  increased  the  take-up  of 
insurance  in  Fiji  in  the  last  12  months.    BIMA  is  a  mobile  insurance  initiative  by  Dominion 
Insurance  and  Digicel  offering  a  life  insurance  cover  and  a  hospitalisation  insurance  cover  at  15c 
per  day  (which  equates  to  $1.05/week).    BIMA  has  just  reported  to  the  Reserve  Bank  that  after 
completing a thorough assessment of its impact on the Fijian insurance market, it can comfortably 
confirm that it has increased the insurance penetration in Fiji from 12 percent to 15 percent. 
 
(ii) 
 
The Reserve Bank has been part of discussions with the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the 
United  Nations  (FAO)  and  the  Fiji  Crop  and  Livestock  Council  in  the  design  of  a  crop  insurance 
product  for  specific  crops  such  as  sugar  cane,  dalo,  cassava  and  yaqona.    The  cover  is  for  perils 
such as cyclone, floods and droughts. 
 
The  product  is  a  purely  parametric  insurance  cover,  meaning  that  loss  payments  respond  to  the 
occurrence of a pre-agreed trigger event  or movement in  a reference index rather than the normal 
principles of indemnity. 
 
Honourable  Chair,  we  are  actually  meeting  the  Acting  Prime  Minister  and  Minister  for  Economy 
this  afternoon  to  brief  him  on  the  progress  so  far  on  crop  insurance.  Government  support  will  be 
needed in the form of subsidy of premiums or tax incentives.  Discussions are ongoing with relevant 
stakeholder agencies on the finalisation of a product proposal. 
 
The  crop  insurance  scheme  aims  to  reduce  the  rehabilitation  costs  borne  by  farmers  and  the 
Government after a natural disaster. 
 
(iii)  Household Insurance for Fijians 
 This project is currently undertaken with the technical assistance of the World Bank to establish a 
disaster  risk  insurance  cover  for  the  household  sector,  specifically  the  low  income  and  uninsured 
population in Fiji.  
 
The World Bank in its first round of technical assistance and assessment has been able to come up 
with a classification of the proposed covers for the different levels on households: 
 
  Gold standard – those who can afford insurance and are currently paying (15k households); 
3 
3 
  Silver standard – middle income who can afford but do not have insurance because of the high 
cost of meeting insurer requirements such as the Engineer’s Certificate (36k households); 
 
  Bronze standard– low income who can afford some form of insurance cover but are not offered 
the  relevant  products  to  meet  their  capacity  to  pay  and  the  need  that  they  have  (121k 
households); 
 
  Microinsurance – considered uninsurable and will need support as they cannot afford to pay for 
insurance (68k households). 
 
  The target group at this time is the Bronze standard and we have now reached a stage where a 
product proposal has been put together for a sum insured of $7,000 to be offered as household 
insurance for majority of the households in Fiji with a low level of compliance, and a premium 
of around $200. 
 
  The  World  Bank  will  present  the  final  product  proposal  to  the  Government  with  the  aim  of 
soliciting international aid to assist in reinsuring this insurance portfolio.  
 
Honourable Chair, I hope those remarks are helpful background for the Committee’s review of the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  2016  Insurance  Annual  Report,  and  we  would  be  happy  to  answer  your 
questions. 
 
 
Thank you 
 
 
 
4 October 2017 
4 
 