Vitas Vasiliauskas: Income inequality in Lithuania
Speech  by  Mr  Vitas  Vasiliauskas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Lithuania,  at  the  first  Lithuanian
Economy Conference, organised by the Bank of Lithuania, Vilnius, 5 October 2017.
Good morning, dear colleagues and guests, 
 Welcome to Vilnius, everyone. And – special thanks to our distinguished speakers for joining us
at this very special (for us) event – the first Lithuanian Economy Conference organised by the
Bank of Lithuania. 
Colleagues,  I  am  saying  “the  first”,  as  we  intend  to  organise  such  conferences  annually.  The
reason for organising such conferences and their direct purpose is not only to share insights,
hold  interesting  discussions,  but  also  formulate  or  at  least  contribute  to  the  formulation  of
constructive proposals on economic policy.    
This is what I also expect from today’s meeting on income inequality. 
Yes, I admit – the expectation is ambitious. Merely because the issue of inequality is one of those
perennial issues, which have been widely discussed during all times, in all parts of the world and
in numerous various formats. It seems that not much may be added in the wake of Plato, Marx,
Smith and the eminent contemporary classics. 
And yet life shows that this topic is not yet exhausted, the case remains open. Particularly in
Lithuania, and at this point in time.  
During the period of independence, we have made huge progress towards Western standards of
living. We have overcome the 2009 crisis and the post-crisis recession, and we are now once
again among the fastest-growing European economies. 
This is good news. 
At the same time, however, there is different news too. 
Eurostat  data  shows  that  income  inequality  in  Lithuania  is  among  the  highest  in  the  whole
European Union. 
More than a fifth of our population still lives in poverty.  
A large share of those in need are simple, working class people, trying to make ends meet and
maintain their families with low (minimum or even lower) wage, also our compatriots who cannot
find a job or those in retirement after having worked honestly all their lives.  
This is bad news. 
However, the worst thing of all is that, while the economy has been expanding, income inequality
continues to worsen, and has been worsening at a very fast pace. Let us compare: in 2012, the
level of income of the 20 per cent of the most-earning residents was five times higher than that of
the 20 per cent of the poorest residents.  In 2016, this indicator already exceeded seven times.  
In terms of income inequality, external observers often tend to equate Lithuania not with Northern
or  even  Eastern  European  countries  –  we  are  sometimes  compared  to  economically  less
developed  countries.    We  do  not  like  such  “radical”  comparisons  and  try  explaining  them  by
referring to the large scale of shadow economy (and thus quite a significant share of income not
represented  in  official  statistics)  in  Lithuania.  However,  this  is  neither  an  attenuating  nor
 1 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
aggravating factor behind the situation. Rather vice versa. 
 There had long prevailed a belief that economic expansion will, in the long run, mitigate income
inequality and that the task of the authorities is to enable rapid economic development, without
ensuring a more equal distribution of the gains within the society. 
A convenient doctrine. It had long allowed neglecting the issue without taking into account what is
obvious:  insufficient  income  limits  the  possibilities  for  people  in  poverty  to  purchase  even  the
basic goods and services. This not only undermines their well-being but also hampers domestic
consumption.  In  other  words  –  high  levels  of  income  inequality  prevent  stronger  and  more
sustainable economic growth. 
On the other hand, income is not merely about economics. Left unaddressed, income inequality
takes  deep  root.  Over  time,  this  threatens  transforming  into  inequality  of  opportunities.  I  am
convinced that this is the most unfair of all the existing forms of inequality. And the most cunning
one  too,  as  it  gives  rise  to  tensions,  disappointment  in  one’s  country  and,  finally,  leads  to
decisions  such  as  emigration.  We  try  to  interpret  the  scope  of  emigration  as  well,  aiming  to
explain it by statistical effects, errors, impact of compulsory health insurance (CCI) and other
factors. But the facts are undeniable. 
Dear guests, 
We  are  aware  that  Lithuania  is  not  the  only  country  facing  growing  income  inequality.  Similar
trends  are  observed  (although  to  different  extents)  in  many  developed  and  developing
economies. Nevertheless, this awareness does not comfort. 
All  the  more  so  that  there  are  states  which  have  managed  to  successfully  cope  with  the
challenge  of  inequality.  For  example,  at  the  time  when  Lithuania  witnessed  a  drastic  surge  in
inequality rates during the post-crisis years, in Sweden it rose only marginally, while in Finland its
level even decreased.  
So what should and what can we do to become more similar to our near-neighbours rather than
the above-mentioned less developed economies?  
I am certain that today we will hear various interesting answers – this is what we have gathered
here for. 
Seizing the opportunity, I will, however, mention a few, in my opinion, critical directions. 
The first one is undoubtedly taxes. If we want to reach a real breakthrough in the fight against
income  inequality,  we  will  have  to,  or,  to  be  more  exact  –  we  must  immediately  start
implementing  real  changes  in  the  taxation  system.  The  second  pillar  is  reforming  the  old-age
pension system. And the third one – education. 
We have already submitted proposals on the restructuring of the first two systems – tax and
pension – to the Government, and have presented them to the public. I believe that some of you
are already familiar with them. 
For others, let me briefly tell you that, in the view of the Bank of Lithuania, the changes to the tax
system proposed by the Government this summer, such as easing the tax burden for those with
the lowest income, are the right actions in the right direction. However, alone, they will not be
sufficient to fundamentally alter the present situation.  
That requires a more thorough and far-reaching tax reform. When designing it, we should focus
on several elements. Firstly – on reviewing workforce taxation, secondly – on reducing the variety
 2 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
of  income  tax  regimes,  and  thirdly  –  on  searching  for  additional  sources  of  revenue.  In  this
regard, expansion of the property tax base could, and should, be considered. The data confirms
such needs: budget revenue from income and property taxes in Lithuania accounts for less than
a fifth of total tax revenues. In the European Union, this share stands at one-third on average. 
The general government revenue-to-GDP ratio in Lithuania also lags significantly behind the EU
average.  This  has  an  inevitable  and,  unfortunately,  negative  impact  on  the  quality  of  public
services. In other words, compared to Western Europe, not enough money is collected into the
budget. This results in insufficient funds necessary for adequately funding public services and
ensuring their high quality for all citizens of the country – in line with the needs of a developed
society. 
Now let me refer to the pension system. In our view, in its current form, it not only fails to address
the issue of income inequality, but even makes it more acute. Retirement pensions in our country
over the last few years have increased at much slower pace than average wages, which has
significantly deteriorated the financial situation of many pensioners. 
As of next year, indexation of pensions is to come into effect, meaning that pension payments will
be  linked  to  the  average  annual  change  in  the  economy-wide  wage  level.  From  today’s
perspective, this is undoubtedly the right solution, which is to be viewed as a precondition for a
more consistent and sustainable pension system, dissociated from political cycles. 
Or rather – as one of the necessary preconditions. And clearly not sufficient. 
After  carrying  out  comprehensive  research,  we  came  to  the  conclusion  that  changes  which
(should we commit to implementing them) would increase transparency of the pension system,
boost motivation to participate in the social security net and reduce incentives for acting in the
shadow,  are  both  necessary  and  possible.  People  need  clarity.  If,  on  our  virtual  personal
account, we could see how much we would accumulate for our future pension given our official
wage “on paper”, everyone would think twice before agreeing to take payments “under the table”. 
This would not cost much and would not require particular expenses or long-term investments.
Yet, it would bring us closer to a few of our basic goals. It would improve the situation of SoDra.
More importantly – it would enhance the financial situation of each future pensioner. And, most
importantly,  it  would  change  our  understanding  of  what  social  security  is  and  whom  –  the
authorities or the insurance policy holder as well – it is necessary for.  
One more thing that we need to keep in mind when discussing this reform – we must see the
pension  system  as  an  integral  whole.  This  implies  not  making  artificial  divisions  between  its
elements (pillars). 
I  mentioned  education.  I  am  not  going  to  argue  for  what  is  obvious.  Income  possibilities  are
directly linked to the possibilities for achieving quality education. Meanwhile, insufficient utilisation
of the human capital potential increases the risk of getting stuck in the “average income trap”
without having caught up with the wealthier Western economies. 
This is why I hope that in our today’s discussions on the causes of income inequality and the
possible solutions, we will also focus on this, I dare say, essential pillar. We have been hearing
about  the  necessity  of  reforming  the  education  system  nearly  as  long  as  we  can  remember.
However, today we really are at the “either–or” point, when we must undertake essential reforms.
With these reforms, we must make sure that the bulk of money allocated to the sector is used to
ensure  high  quality  education  in  the  whole  country  rather  than  just  maintaining  the  existing
infrastructure. This is the piece of advice that we constantly receive from various international
organisations. 
 3 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
Dear colleagues, 
A few days ago, while discussing the latest economic projections, a colleague of ours presented
the  following  facts:  labour  resources  are  depleting;  the  reserves  have  dried  up.  Hence,  the
number of the employed has decreased as well. Projections suggest that it will continue on the
downward path. The conclusion was laconic: we have reached the end of the road – Lithuania is
shrinking. 
I must say that until now the insights of our economists have been rather precise. I hope the
latter insight will not come true. To be more exact, I hope that we will finally undertake solutions
and,  most  importantly,  actions  for  it  not  to  be  fulfilled.  Let  me  assure  you  that  the  Bank  of
Lithuania is ready to contribute with its expertise. 
I am sure that members of the academia, policymakers and representatives of the private sector
participating in today’s conference will add to this by sharing their knowledge as well. A multi-
layer discussion and insights from different perspectives should help us better comprehend the
underlying causes of the issue at hand and, hopefully, provide us with effective solutions. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you a meaningful discussion.
 4 / 4
BIS central bankers' speeches
