Sabine Lautenschläger: Dealing with a globalised banking sector
Statement  by  Ms  Sabine  Lautenschläger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European
Central Bank and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank, at George
Washington University Law School, Washington DC, 16 October 2017.
Ladies and gentlemen,
 Today we can look back on nearly a decade of rule-making. Following the financial crisis of 2008,
almost no stone was left unturned – at least in the field of banking regulation.
But  this  wave  of  re-regulation  didn’t  just  focus  on  banks;  rules  were  put  in  place  to  increase
consumer  protection  and  regulate  the  derivatives  business,  central  counterparties  and  rating
agencies.
In many countries these changes were accompanied by institutional changes – new authorities
were  set  up  to  deal  with  financial  risks,  and  they  were  given  new  powers  and  instruments  to
mitigate these risks.
Authorities gained a whole new set of tools for macroprudential oversight.
The reforms were far-reaching in many countries, and in particular in the major financial centres.
And I am convinced that this overhaul will contribute to future financial stability.
There are two main reasons for this.
First, deregulation and light-touch supervision were a significant cause of the financial crisis in
2008.
In the early 2000s many believed in the self-regulation of the financial market – so restricting the
entrepreneurial freedom of financial market participants was not at the top of governments’ to-do
lists.
This  all  changed  with  the  financial  crisis,  which  was  costly  for  banks,  their  investors  and  the
taxpayers in many countries. In addition, the crisis was followed by an economic recession.
Banks, for example, now have to comply with a strict set of rules – they have to hold more and
better  capital  than  they  did  ten  years  ago.  Their  capacity  to  absorb  losses  has  increased
significantly.  Banks  are  better  prepared  for  a  potential  drying-up  of  liquidity  sources,  as  the
quantitative and qualitative requirements regarding liquidity management have risen significantly.
This makes banks more resilient to potential economic downturns or major unexpected events.
And supervision has changed quite dramatically, too. Many supervisors have been given greater
powers  to  act  pre-emptively;  the  set  of  supervisory  tools  and  resources  has  expanded
considerably. Supervisors are therefore able to pick up on deficiencies in banks, risky trends and
misbehaviour earlier and more decisively than before the crisis.
Does this mean that there is no room to improve the current rules?
Definitely not.
There may be some topics which we have not yet addressed or which might need addressing
because changes in the regulatory environment are always met with evasive manoeuvres.
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
One example is the shadow banking sector. When regulation is tightened in one area, incentives
are put in place for other intermediaries to step in.
When certain business activities are pushed out of the banking sector, it does not necessarily
mean that the risks for financial stability increase, but nor does it mean that these activities will
not pose risks if they are handled by other market participants.
So developments in the shadow banking sector warrant our close attention.
Furthermore, we have to regularly assess whether the stated objectives have been fulfilled with
the  new  set  of  rules.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  is  currently  evaluating  the  recent
reforms,  so  this  will  give  us  an  indication  as  to  whether  there  have  been  any  unintended
consequences and whether we need to adapt some of the rules – although I do not expect a
need for huge amendments.
As  I  mentioned,  there  is  a  second  reason  why  I  think  that  the  reforms  have  made  financial
markets safer.
The standards were set at the global level, by the FSB and the global standard-setting bodies.
This addressed one of the lessons learnt from the last crisis – financial markets and financial
institutions are much more closely interconnected than most people realised.
There  is  no  such  thing  as  a  national  banking  sector.  The  banking  sector  has  become  global.
Many banks operate not just in one country, but in dozens of countries. And almost all banks do
at least some business with banks from outside their own country.
Such a global banking sector is a good thing. It facilitates global trade and investment; it unlocks
new sources of funding for the economy; and it improves the way capital and risks are allocated
across countries.
And because the banking sector is global, the standards need to be global too, to contribute to
financial stability in the major financial centres. So I hope that the latest package of global banking
standards – Basel III – will be completed this year. And I am still confident that this will be the
case.
After  finalising  Basel  III,  we  need  to  focus  on  implementing  the  standards.  I  worry  that  some
financial centres might not implement significant parts of the agreed framework.
And that would be a great mistake.
Without consistent implementation, the common standards will remain fragmented, leaving the
door wide open to a race to the bottom in regulation, regulatory arbitrage, higher risks and future
crises. At the same time, banks would not compete on a level playing field, and that would weigh
on efficiency.
Ladies and gentlemen, the reforms that followed the financial crisis of 2008 were far-reaching,
and they placed a burden on the financial sector – of that there is no doubt.
Do the reforms offer a full insurance contract to prevent each and every risk to financial stability?
Well, no; such rules do not exist.
But there is no doubt that they help to make the global financial sector a safer place. They make
it less likely that we will experience a second financial crisis of the same magnitude.
Looking ahead, we should not forget that we live in a globalised world. And any attempt to turn
back time, any attempt to isolate one country from the rest of the world is not only a pipe dream;
it is a perilous dream.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
That is particularly true in the case of finance and banking.
So, instead of building walls, we should come together to discuss how we can deal with a global
banking sector, how we can reap the benefits and keep the risks in check. That is the only way
forward. Walking backwards will only lead us to where we came from: another global financial
crisis.
Thank you for your attention.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
