1 
   “Economic and Financial Regulation in the Era of Big Data” 
Paris, 24 November 2017 
 Closing remarks by François Villeroy de Galhau, 
Governor of the Banque de France 
  I am very pleased to close this Conference on “Economic and Financial Regulation in the Era 
of  Big  Data”.  I  was  in  London  this  morning  and  I  therefore  regret  having  missed  your 
discussions on an issue which I consider of paramount importance. Let me thank warmly all 
speakers,  in  particular    Benoit  Coeuré,  member  of the  Board  of  the  ECB,  who  opened  this 
Conference and Philip-Hans Franses, Professor at Eramus School of Economics,  who I am 
told gave an outstanding lecture.   
Big Data indeed deserves a global view, from a number of angles. It was the objective of this 
Conference  and  I  am  grateful  to  all  of  you,  presenters  and  participants,  to  have  made  this 
possible.     
In  closing  this  Conference,  I  will  not  come  back  to  the  specificities  of  Big  Data  and  its 
numerous usages. All presentations have given a fresh look on Big Data and I am sure that 
on  such  an  excellent  basis,  discussions  will  continue  beyond  this  one  day  Conference  on 
issues which are of key importance for all of us. 
I would rather like to focus on the consequences of Big Data for the economy in general and 
for central banks in particular. I will develop this into three parts: 
 I. 
Big  Data  will  have  significant  economic  effects.  It  will  in  particular  change  the 
relationships  between  the  members  of  the  financial  community  and  between  this 
community and the non-financial world  
2 
II. 
Regarding  Big  Data,  central  banks  will  have  to  switch  from  an  observer  status  to  a 
user  or  player  position,  which  implies  significant  changes  in  performing  part  of  their 
activities  
III. 
Big  Data  raise  regulatory  issues  that  cannot  be  solved  within  a  national  context  but 
require a global reflection from public authorities.   
 I.  Big  data  will  have  significant  economic  effects.  Entry  costs  for  carrying  out  financial 
transactions have already been reduced and will be lowered  further in the future. Customer 
knowledge,  in  particular  regarding  the  conditions  applied  by  financial  institutions,  will  be 
enhanced  and  more  generally  information  asymmetries  between  clients  and  providers  of 
financial  services  will  narrow.  Big  Data  can  be  a  powerful  card  to  play  by  GAFAs  or  other 
native  non-financial  firms  to  develop  new  activities.  The  financial  industry  has  therefore  to 
adapt rapidly to face the data revolution and compete with the new entrants, while protecting 
privacy against increasing cyber risks in particular. All in all, competition will increase, which 
is  beneficial  to  the  economy.  The  flip  side  can  be  enhanced  risks  for  financial  stability, 
implying a new form of vigilance for  central bankers in particular. I will elaborate a bit more 
on this later on.  
 II. 
Terabytes  of  data  are  available  and  more  will  be  coming  soon.  Central  banks  will 
collect  more  and  more  granular  data.  This  is  a  clear  opportunity  for  better  forecasting  and 
even  nowcasting.  But  to  reap  all  the  benefits,  central  banks  have  to  be  up  to  the 
technological challenge, which is huge. They have also to face a much larger competition in 
the new data Era, with a view to maintaining trust in public information. They have therefore 
to become Big Data players and not only observers. This requires significant efforts. Let me 
illustrate this in five avenues to adapt to the digital evolution. 
 a)  The  Big  Data  era  implies  large  changes  in  the  IT  infrastructure  and  a  strong 
determination  to  address  novel  technical  challenges  and  to  build  a  forward-looking  data 
management and analysis scheme. At the Banque de France, we are building a Data Lake 
that covers all the new data functionalities, from data collection to machine learning.  
  b)  Central  banks  should  also  organise  themselves  to  answer  the  legitimate 
request from academics to  have access to a wide  range of granular data, in a modern and 
researcher-friendly  way.    At  the  Banque  de  France,  we  opened  just  one  year  ago  a  Data 
Room which gives access to 600 million of anonymized series, and it has already attracted 
more than 30 research teams. Harvesting Big Data capacities is only beginning and central 
3 
banks should be in the race.   
 c)  Data quality should be maintained at the same time. There should not be with 
central banks input/output process any ‘garbage in, garbage out’. Managing huge volumes of 
data, carrying out machine or deep learning requires investing in human and automatic data 
technology,  in  training  and  hiring  data  analysts  and  scientists.  Indeed,  Big  Data  requires 
novel and significant human resources, and this has to be anticipated and properly managed.     
 d)  The appetite for real time intelligence, the “short-termism” that can be inflated 
by the Big Data Revolution, entails risks that “bad data chase good ones”, thereby impeding 
the  understanding  of  economic  and  financial  developments  by  the  general  public  and  the 
media. We must do our best to kill fake news, and there is also economic fake news. But, in 
a society of communication more than of information, delivering data of good quality, which 
will  always  be  a  trademark  of  central  banks,  can  hardly  be  the  only  answer.  Central  banks 
need to make their publications clearer, more readable, and more visible. In particular, if we 
want sound data to be shared and used, we should speak to each and every one and not just 
to experts. We should be more “B to C” and not only “B to B”: this is a cultural shift beyond 
mere technology change. 
 e)  Central banks and I would say public authorities in general can no more work 
in  silos.  Data  sharing  is  a  must.  In  France,  we  have  an  excellent  cooperation  with  the 
national  statistical  institute  and  we  do  share  on  a  day-to  day  basis  many  data  between 
supervisors and central bankers but the issue is deeper and wider.  
Which brings me to my last point.   
 III.  Big data raise issues that cannot be solved in a national context but require a public 
global reflection. 
Very large worldwide corporates are hugely leveraging on Big Data. Public authorities 
have  to  forge  answers  to  concerns  that  may  arise  on  an  international  level.  Which  themes 
should be addressed? I would like to propose a few leads. 
4 
 1)  Data sharing has to be developed on a worldwide basis, as rightly underlined 
by  the  IMF  in  the  ‘Data  Gaps  Initiative’  that  has  been  launched  by  the  G20.  In  Europe, 
existing legal provisions that authorize data sharing between supervisors and central bankers 
could become more prescriptive and be more largely implemented in practice in all countries 
concerned. Data sharing between tax authorities and other public administrations should be 
facilitated, subject to the respect of individual privacy of course.   
 2)  Private innovation is fostering growth and is increasing economic efficiency. It 
should  therefore  not  be discouraged  by  disenabling  regulations.  At  the  same  time,  it  would 
be beneficial to the economy in the long run, and to financial stability more specifically, that 
the global actors  that handle enormous volumes of data on physical persons as well as on 
private  entities,  comply  with  3  core  principles:    security,  transparency,  accountability.  In  a 
fully interconnected world, it cannot be effectively addressed at the country level.  I therefore 
believe that it would be useful for the International Organizations to carry out a reflection and 
issue recommendations in this regard.  
 Let me thank you for your attention and wish you a pleasant weekend and for those who are 
not Parisians a pleasant journey back home... today or I hope for some of you on Sunday!         
