Andreas  Dombret:  Behind  the  curve?  The  role  of  climate  risks  in
banks' risk management
Remarks by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank,
at the National University of Singapore, Singapore, 2 October 2017.
 1. Introduction
Ladies and gentlemen
When  I  told  one  of  my  colleagues  that  I  was  going  to  Singapore  to  deliver  a  talk  on  climate
change, he told me about his visit to Singapore Zoo a couple of years ago. Back then, he took
part in the Zoo’s famous Night Safari and attended one of the shows.
To  his  surprise,  the  show  was  not  so  much  about  nocturnal  animals  in  their  natural  habitat.
Instead, the star of the show was a very diligent little weasel that, on command, sorted waste into
different  containers.  It  distinguished  between  plastic  bottles,  aluminium  cans  and  other  items
without making a single mistake.
Towards the end of the show, the presenter reportedly explained how plastic disposables are
made from finite fossil fuels. He went on to note how burning plastic waste, instead of recycling
it, releases greenhouse gases that contribute to climate change. And to the great surprise of my
colleague,  by  the  end  of  the  show  the  whole  crowd  was  chanting  the  slogan  “reduce,  reuse,
recycle".
I took two things away from this report. First, I should probably pay a visit to the Night Safari to
see this impressively well-trained weasel for myself. Second, it reminded me how far climate
change has made inroads into our day-to-day life.
2. The many effects of climate change
There  is  good  reason  for  this.  Greenhouse  gas  emissions  are  arguably  the  single  biggest
negative externality of our time. Scientific consensus holds that emissions are excessive, and
that  concentration  levels  in  the  atmosphere  lie  above  what  our  ecosystem  can  absorb.  The
result: climate change.
It’s  not  new  to  us  that  climate  change  affects  each  and  everything.  Our  standards  of  living.
Migration flows. Technological developments. The economy.
But the discussion about how it affects the financial sector is relatively new. The year 2015 can
be seen as a starting point. That was the year when the Chinese G20 presidency put “Green
Finance” on the agenda. The German G20 presidency followed subsequently. Also in 2015, the
Paris Climate Agreement was reached. I will come back to that topic later. Last, but by no means
least,  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  gave  a  speech  in  London  that
subsequently framed the discussion.
How  far  have  we  progressed  since  then  in  understanding  how  climate  change  affects  the
financial sector?
3. The discussion on Green Finance and climate risks
A key term in this discussion – yet one that is not always used coherently – is “Green Finance".
Many aspects of how climate change ultimately affects the financial sector are discussed under
its umbrella. In the narrower sense, Green Finance is about how the financial sector can, broadly
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
speaking, contribute to mitigating the effects of climate change and to promoting environmentally
sustainable developments – for example, by steering funds towards green technologies.
A second aspect that is sometimes part of the discussion surrounding Green Finance are the
risks that climate change might bring for the financial sector and the question of how financial
institutions need to adapt if they are not to fall prey to these risks.
This  second  aspect  is  what  I  will  be  focusing  on  today.  I  will  take  the  risk  perspective.  The
question I am asking is this: are we underestimating the financial risks associated with climate
change and the transition to a green economy?
My answer will be: we certainly do. But bear with me: I will try and say a little more than just that.
4. The characteristics of climate risks
So how does climate change potentially affect the financial sector? Once you start looking, you
realise that there are plenty of possible effects. But the most important ones that I see can be
categorised in two main channels.
4.1 The first channel: physical risks
The first channel is the most direct one and involves all physical risks related to extreme weather
events or changing climate conditions. Floods and heavy storms can cause severe damage to
physical assets, both private and public.
Take the Atlantic hurricane season we are currently witnessing. It is one of the worst in years, by
various meteorological standards. The same holds for the expected costs. Preliminary estimates
by rating agencies and reinsurers put it in the triple-digit billions of US dollars. Hurricane Harvey
alone could require up to 180 billion, which would make it more costly than Hurricane Katrina in
2005 that cost 160 billion in today’s US dollars, by official estimates.
Other events, such as droughts or other, more permanent regional changes in climate, can have
a  devastating  impact  on  crop  yields  and  impair  the  productivity  of  the  agricultural  sector  and
related industries.
Clearly,  then,  extreme  weather  events  or  changing  climate  conditions  can  result  in  significant
losses for both the public and the private sector.
And the financial sector is exposed to these losses as well. If losses are insured, the insurance
sector is exposed. If losses are uninsured, banks and other financial institutions are exposed. For
example, households are more likely to default on their loans and mortgages, while the collateral
they have provided is no longer available to cover these losses. Credit risk for banks can also
rise vis-à-vis corporates who face a reduction in profitability and a deterioration in their balance
sheets.
Wider  economic  repercussions,  such  as  a  disruption  of  local  or  global  supply  chains  and
reduced productivity, can cause significant additional costs and erode the value of investments
held by financial institutions. Lastly, an impact on economic activity will tend to worsen the fiscal
situation of sovereigns, and can ultimately drive up sovereign default risk.
Average weather-related losses per year worldwide have roughly tripled over the past 30 years,
according to data gathered by the Bank of England. At the same time, the share of uninsured
losses has increased. If, as expected, extreme climate events become more frequent and costly,
the future insurability of such risks will be called into question, widening the protection gap.
This  is  a  significant  development. As  we  have  just  seen,  risks  that  are  not  insurable  are,  by
definition,  always  risks  for  financial  stability.  Banks  and  other  financial  institutions  need  to  be
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
aware of this.
Awareness  of  the  potentially  devastating  effects  of  extreme  climate  events  –  not  only  for  the
economy,  but  also  for  mankind  and  nature  as  a  whole  –  has  increased.  And  the  global
community has started taking  action.  To  mitigate  the  effects  of  climate  change,  in  December
2015 nearly 200 countries finalized the Paris Climate Agreement, which subsequently went into
effect. They agreed, and I quote, to “holding the increase in the global average temperature to
well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase
to 1.5°C."
Meeting  this  goal  is  of  utmost  importance  and  will  require  enormous  efforts  by  all  countries.
That’s why the current stance of the United States administration towards the agreement worries
me. But at the same time, governments across the globe have voiced their strong commitment
to  honouring  the  ambitious  deal.  If  they  succeed,  this  will  –  according  to  the  best  scientific
evidence available – significantly reduce physical risks.
But it also gives rise to yet another kind of risk: transition risks. This is the second channel I will
talk about.
4.2 The second channel: transition risks
It  should  be  taken  as  a  fact  that  the  2-degree  goal  under  the  Paris Agreement  can  only  be
reached  if  economies  across  the  world  are  transformed  into  green,  low-carbon  economies.
Achieving this transition will require potentially disruptive technological advances as well as far-
reaching changes in climate policy.
Without a doubt, such a transition will prompt markets to reassess the value of a broad range of
assets. Depending on how quickly and orderly the transition and the associated re-pricing occur,
they could become highly relevant for the stability of financial institutions as well.
To  illustrate  one  particular  transition  effect,  let’s  look  at  the  concept  of  the  “carbon  budget".
Meeting  the  target  of  the  Paris Agreement  will  require  limiting  global  carbon  emissions.  The
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates that in order to reach the 2-degree target
with a probability of just 50 per cent, the maximum amount of additional carbon emissions this
century  must  roughly  remain  below  1,100  gigatonnes  of  CO2.  For  higher  probabilities  of
success, lower carbon budgets apply.
However,  the  total  amount  of  carbon  embedded  in  all  known  global  fossil  fuel  reserves  is
estimated  at  roughly  2,800  gigatonnes.  This  means  that,  to  reach  the  2-degree  target  with  a
reasonably high probability, about two-thirds of all known coal, oil and gas reserves must remain
in  the  ground.  But  the  future  exploitation  of  these  reserves  is  what  many  companies  base  a
significant  share  of  their  value  on  –  especially,  but  not  only,  those  engaged  in  extracting  and
refining them. According to the World Wide Fund for Nature, listed fossil fuel companies currently
carry more than half of the total global fossil fuel reserves on their balance sheets as assets. If
these  reserves  cannot  be  developed,  the  corresponding  assets  become  worthless  –  they
become what are known as “stranded assets".
The decision to actually limit emissions would be made by governments, and their tool would be
climate-related  laws  and  regulations.  And  there  is  a  clear  trend  towards  more  government
intervention. The Global Climate Legislation Study found that, since 1997, the number of climate
change laws and policies has doubled every 4-5 years. While the pace has been levelling off
recently, the trend is clear.
We have already seen examples of sharp devaluations in the fossil fuel and energy sector. One
oft-cited example are the top four US coal producers. Their combined market capitalisation has
fallen by well over 90 per cent since 2010. Listed utility companies in Germany have also seen
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
sharp devaluations. These cases are exemplary of the transition risks I am talking about. And
they prove that markets can respond well before the fact.
What is important to recognise is that transition risks are not confined to companies operating in
the  production  of  fossil  fuels  or  in  the  energy  sector.  Other  sectors,  such  as  transportation,
logistics, automotive, chemicals and heavy industry, which currently rely on fossil fuels or are
energy-intensive, could be hit by transformation costs as well. But these second- and third-round
effects  are  extremely  complex  and  can  currently  only  be  quantified  using  equally  complex
assumptions.
The exposure of the financial sector becomes apparent when, besides the direct investments in
the industries in question, we take into account the tendency of insurers, pension funds and other
investors to align their portfolios with capital market indices which often contain large portions of
the industries that might be affected by the transition. And much like what we discussed in the
case of physical risks, lenders are exposed due to reduced collateral values or the risk that their
borrowers’ once-profitable business models are not profitable anymore. To be fair, we also have
to factor in the possibility that some green business models might not deliver the benefits and
financial returns investors expect.
Transition risks will be less severe the sooner the transition begins and the more predictable it is.
It’s a simple matter of fact that the longer governments wait, the more they will have to act later
on to meet their targets.
5. The way forward
We have identified two risk categories: physical risks that relate directly to climate change, and
transition risks that relate to society’s response to it.
At the beginning of my talk, I asked: are we currently underestimating these risks? I think we do.
There is a difference between identifying risks, monitoring risks and managing risks. We may
have identified the risks, but we don’t know how material they are. This needs to change, and in
the remainder of my talk today I want to discuss how that can be done.
For many reasons, understanding the risks I have talked about is inherently challenging. First, the
developments we are facing stretch over the long term, and their outcome is uncertain; second,
historical  data  are  of  little  use  to  predict  them;  and,  third,  the  whole  process  will  be  heavily
influenced by policy decisions, which involves further uncertainty.
Another problem is that, typically, analysts don’t look beyond a horizon of five years. They rely on
past experience and on expectations for a rather short forecast period. This means that long-
term, non-linear, non-cyclical risks that extend beyond that period are likely to be missed. In other
words, the horizons of market players are compressed.
One  of  the  obstacles  to  incorporating  longer-term  developments  into  the  analysis  is  a  lack  of
forward-looking data reported by issuers. Data on climate-related financial risks are scarce and
often chaotic, since there is no framework that standardises their disclosure. As a first step to
change  this,  an  industry-led  task  force  convened  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board  recently
published recommendations for voluntary, consistent and comparable disclosures of such risks
by corporates. This is an important first step, and its success will depend on whether a critical
mass of corporates follows the recommendations. In parallel, the G20 is working on improving
the availability of public environmental data.
The  next  step  we  need  to  take  is  to  improve  analytical  tools.  Many  banks  and  institutional
investors  have  yet  to  develop  the  capacity  to  identify  and  quantify  the  risks  that  arise  when
environmental  aspects  are  factored  into  the  valuation  of  their  assets.  Promoting  the  use  of
environmental risk analysis in the financial sector is one important topic of the current German
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
presidency of the G20. First and foremost, of course, it is a task for financial institutions. Banks
need to incorporate climate risks into their risk management – in particular, but not exclusively,
for long-term project financing.
The  Bundesbank  and  other  central  banks  are  in  the  process  of  improving  their  analytical
capacities  for  climate  risks.  But  I  believe  that  the  role  of  central  banks  can  go  further.  As
supervisors who are in close contact with financial institutions, we can foster an awareness of
physical  and  especially  transition  risks,  and  make  sure  that  they  are  taken  seriously.  Where
appropriate, we will also incorporate climate-related risks into our supervisory risk analyses. For
example, the analysis of portfolio risks stemming from physical or transitional risks – a concept
known as carbon stress testing – has been a niche topic so far. I believe that this will have to
change.
Furthermore, central banks can help in generating knowledge. For example, the central bank of
the  Netherlands  has  established  a  Sustainable  Finance  Platform  to  promote  and  encourage
dialogue on sustainable finance in the financial sector. I expect we will see more initiatives like
that in the near future, and I think they can play an important role in promoting knowledge.
An important task for governments is to provide guidance to companies and financial markets on
their  policy  path  with  respect  to  climate-related  laws  and  regulations.  If  governments  and
authorities  draw  attention  to  the  upcoming  transition  of  the  economy  and  act  predictably,
corporates  and  markets  will  have  more  time  to  understand  and  adapt.  The  sooner  they  start
aligning their portfolios, the quicker misallocations will be corrected and transition risks become
less relevant.
6. Conclusion
Ladies and gentlemen
Just like the CO2 levels in the atmosphere, the CO2 levels in this room are on the rise. Before
they reach a critical level, let me summarise.
We have identified two categories of risks that climate change and our response to it can pose to
the  financial  sector:  physical  risks  and  transition  risks.  And  we  have  reached  a  basic
understanding of how they work. What we have not sufficiently understood is how material these
risks are, and whether financial institutions and markets are suitably taking them into account.
I have named a number of steps that I believe will bring us closer to this goal. Clearly, we have
only begun to work on this.
The French poet Victor Hugo once said: “You cannot resist an idea whose time has come". I
believe that the transition of the economy and the greening of the financial sector are just such
ideas. So let’s get started.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
