Nestor A Espenilla, Jr: Thinking out of the Bank
Speech by Mr Nestor A Espenilla, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP, the central
bank of the Philippines), at the Cocktail Hour: Up Close and Personal with the BSP Governor,
Manila, 26 October 2017.
 WTCMM  Chairman  Guilly  Luchangco,  WTCMM  President  Pamela  Pascua  and  officers  of
WTCMM,  partners  from  the  private  sector,  fellow  public  servants,  special  guests,  ladies  and
gentlemen, good afternoon.
To  get  up  close  and  personal  –  This  underlines  the  Terms  of  Reference  for  this  afternoon’s
cocktail  hour.    ....    I  think  the  natural  tendency  is  for  people  not  to  disclose  too  much  of
themselves...  Candor  requires  courage.    Sharing  about  one’s  identity,  vision  and  values,
necessitates confidence. 
I welcome this opportunity to share more about the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, who we are, our
policy  thrusts  and  initiatives.      To  be  able  to  engage  our  stakeholders  in  the  shared  task  of
national  development,  we  must  make  ourselves  and  our  mandates  more  widely  known  and
understood.
Getting Past First Impressions
With  Philippine  banknotes  issued  by  the  BSP  and  marked  with  our  logo...  with  banks  making
reference to our authority... and with our name mentioned in media fairly often,  it is easy for
Filipinos to know OF the Bangko Sentral...  But KNOWING the BSP is an entirely different thing. 
Allow me to take us beyond acquaintance...
Apart from being a supervisor and regulator of banks and other financial institutions, and apart
from being the sole issuer of our currency, most of what we do at the BSP seems esoteric to the
general public.  This is not surprising as the workings of economics, statistics, data analytics and
the like, often do not enjoy public attention (maybe, even public interest).  
Issuing and implementing policies to promote stability is the crucial work that the BSP does in the
background.
When one thinks of the BSP, one may have the initial impression that our functions are detached
and removed from everyday life... the impression is that perhaps, the policies and regulations we
churn out do not have that much impact on the ordinary citizen...     I hope very much that we
would get past this notion.
As  businessmen,  investors  and  consumers,  you  may  have  seen  and  experienced  that  the
Philippines has, been enjoying strong economic growth with financial stability.   We are seen as
one of the fastest growing and most resilient economies in the region and the world.
The economy has experienced sustained uninterrupted expansion for the past 74 consecutive
quarters — spanning 18 years! Over the past five years, the domestic economy expanded by
more than 6 percent annually, providing more opportunities across all segments of society. 
Traditional Central Banking
Let  me  share  an  open  secret:  Central  Banks  worldwide  (and  the  BSP  is  no  exception)  are
traditionally conservative institutions and some would argue, boring.  Understandably so since
stability is our main concern.  Thus, doing novel things may not be intuitively consistent with this
goal. 
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In  its  invitation,  the  WTCMM  asked  me  to  share  my  plans  and  programs  in  the  continuity  of
providing the country a strong monetary and financial system.  This is really the traditional part of
central banking, focusing on our core mandates of price and financial stability. 
The BSP adopted the inflation targeting framework in 2002 to achieve low and stable inflation. 
This was accomplished,  providing credibility to what we do as a monetary authority.
Inflation continues to remain low and stable with well-anchored inflation expectations.  Headline
inflation  rose  to  3.4  percent  year-on-year  in  September,  making  the  resulting  year-to-date
average inflation rate of 3.1 percent within the Government’s target range of 3.0 percent ± 1.0
percentage  point  for  2017.    We  expect  to  sustain  this  through  2018  to  2019  based  on  our
forecast.
In 2016, we formally adopted the interest rate corridor (IRC) system, which enhances the link
between  the  BSP’s  monetary  policy  stance  and  financial  markets.  The  primary  benefit  of  the
adoption of an IRC system in the Philippines is the strengthening of monetary policy transmission
by ensuring that money market interest rates are meaningfully influenced by the BSP’s policy
rate.    We  continue  to  refine  the  implementation  of  the  IRC  system  to  make  it  more  market-
friendly.
Our financial sector also demonstrates stability and robust growth. Domestic liquidity conditions
remain ample to support lending.  Banks remain strong, supported by a stable capital base and
satisfactory asset quality. The non-performing loan ratio (NPL) is down to just 2.0 percent as of
end-August 2017.  Actually, it’s negative if we net out the generous allowance for loan losses.  
As of end-June 2017, capital adequacy ratio (CAR) of universal and commercial banks is very
healthy at 16.0 percent on a consolidated basis. 
Getting Personal
The road to a resilient banking sector has not been easy.  The Asian financial crisis revealed
weaknesses in bank management and also banking supervision.  The BSP implemented bold
and systematic banking reforms to rise above the crisis and get the financial system and the
economy  going  again.    This  was  a  journey  I  was  very  personally  involved  in,  being  deputy
governor for supervision for the last twelve years before I become governor. 
It  was  a  challenging  journey,  one  which  required  patience  and  grit,  given  the  significant
implications on the existing set-up.  The reforms needed called for substantial improvements in
our processes and more challenging, a paradigm shift in the mind-set of bank supervisors, to a
risk-based approach that allowed for innovations but also kept a firm handle over risks.
We  initially  adopted  a  gradualist  approach  while  we  worked  on  the  buy-in  of  major
stakeholders.    Progress was also very incremental.  However, in  2005, the pace of reforms
accelerated and the full shift started to happen.    This involved improving data collection and
storage,  reviewing  and  revising  competency  requirements  for  bank  supervisors,  changing  the
examination and off-site supervisory processes, and pursuing capacity-building to continuously
upgrade  the  skills  of  bank  supervisory  staff.    At  the  same  time,  we  have  aligned  prudential
regulations with international standards.
Today,  we  use  a  range  of  tools  and  techniques  in  deploying  our  supervisory  resources  on  a
proportionate  basis.    The  BSP’s  supervisory  process  is  also  underpinned  by  an  enforcement
framework that clearly defines principles in deploying enforcement actions, including escalation
processes, and the menu of actions available to supervisors. 
The reforms and transformation of the banking system and how we supervise it is a continuing
story.  Rather than be complacent because of the success, we see this window as providing the
opportunity to further deepen financial sector reforms.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Beyond Traditional Central Banking
In  being  a  conservative  central  monetary  authority,  we  face  a  significant  tension:  there  are
several factors that compel us to become more innovative and creative in our approaches and
go  beyond  traditional  central  banking.  The  pervasive  problem  of  inequality,  the  fast  pace  of
technology and digitisation, the interconnectedness of markets, globalisation, regionalisation, a
growing millennial population and  other  dynamics  highlight  the  need  for  us  to  evolve,  address
issues in possibly non-traditional ways, and be steps ahead. 
Towards this end, the BSP has woven in financial inclusion to its traditional objectives.  As early
as  2000,  the  BSP  played  a  key  role  in  expanding  access  to  financial  services  to  the
entrepreneurial  poor  by  mainstreaming  microfinance  in  the  banking  sector.    I  was  personally
involved  in  these  efforts,  being  part  of  the  Microfinance  Committee  in  my  capacity  then  as
Managing Director of the Supervision and Examination Sector. 
In 2007, we embraced the more ambitious and broader goal of financial inclusion.  As far as I
know, we were the first central bank in the world to have a unit dedicated to financial inclusion. 
We  also  established  at  the  same  time  dedicated  units  focused  on  consumer  protection  and
information technology supervision.  These were all deliberate investments that anticipated the
digital future of finance.
While financial inclusion has been framed as an advocacy, we cannot deny its linkage to financial
stability.  It has been shown that broader access to bank deposits can have positive impact on
financial stability by building resilience of deposit funding base.  Thus, in a way, financial inclusion
is not necessarily beyond the BSP’s core mandate.
We  have  used  several  platforms  to  reach  the  grassroots  and  allow  more  of  our  countrymen
greater  access  to  financial  services.    These  promote  increased  usage  of  the  full-range  of
financial products for saving, remittance, payment, credit, insurance and investments, as well as
acquire greater financial literacy and awareness.
In addition to increasing access through liberalized branching regulations that build on brick and
mortar venues, we are leveraging on digitisation and fintech solutions to provide more financial
services and reach  the unbanked and the underbanked at a faster rate and at much lower cost.
We are also closely working with the National Government for the adoption of a biometric-based
foundational ID system. We have identified the lack of a reliable and convenient ID system to be
a  major  barrier  to  access  to  financial  services.    This  initiative    will  bring  millions  of  the
underserved and unserved to participate in the digital finance ecosystem.
Beyond Banking:  Fintech Revolution
FinTech  is  altering  traditional  concepts  and  the  very  scope  of  the  financial  system  itself. 
Alternative sources of funding have been and continue to be developed.
We believe that payments can be a crucial step to financial inclusion.  When we provide people
the means to pay and receive payments using digital platforms connected to the formal financial
system, users become familiar with new procedures.  This eventually builds their confidence to
transact  within  the  formal  financial  system,  and  have  access  to  more  value-adding  financial
products and services like savings, loans, insurance and investments. This is very crucial for our
country where access to an account is only around 31% of the population.
As  part  of  our  commitment  to  the  national  strategy  for  financial  inclusion,  the  BSP  is  actively
working with the industry towards enabling more Filipinos to have access to a basic transaction
account  in  a  bank  or  non-bank  financial  institution  to  send  and  receive  payments  via  any
electronic  device.    Last  December  2015,  we  launched  the  National  Retail  Payment  System
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
(NRPS) project.  The NRPS, and the inter-operable digital payment ecosystem that it will enable,
will make it convenient and affordable to transfer funds between and among accounts using any
digital device. NRPS will facilitate our transition to a cash-lite economy. 
As a key component of the NRPS initiative, the Philippine Payments Management, Inc. (PPMI)
was recently registered with the Securities and Exchange (SEC).  This will act as the industry-
driven  self-governing  body  to  drive  the  responsible  development  and  operations  of  the  retail
payment system.   We are now also working with the industry on the formation of two priority
Automated Clearing Houses (ACHs) that will actually deliver the payment solutions —  the batch
electronic fund transfer credit payment scheme (called PESO Net); and the real-time low-value
push payment scheme (called InstaPay).  PESO Net is set to launch on November 8, 2017, less
than two weeks from now.
Over  the  years,  we  have  taken  a  very  active  role  in  ensuring  that  our  policy  and  regulatory
environment  provide  opportunities  for  innovation  while  ensuring  risks  are  well-managed.    We
have learned to be open-minded to change. 
Among central banks, we are a pioneer in the use of the “test and learn” approach, now called
the regulatory sandbox.   One of the earliest applications of this was for e-money in 2004, when
few  people  have  heard  of  it.    We  allowed  non-banks  to  pilot  the  provision  of  e-money  within
defined parameters.  We have since then used this test and learn approach to allow piloting of
many other fintech innovations in our system. 
We are doing our own fintech experimentation to improve our own capability.  We are exploring
an API system to connect financial service providers to the BSP.  This would strengthen BSP’s
risk-based regulatory and supervisory activities, and may very well be an initial step to building
capacity for big data analytics.  This is Regtech.
Earlier this year, we issued various regulations aimed at mitigating effects of technology-related
risks, including AML/CFT and other concerns with respect to fintech.  This includes enhanced
regulations to ensure that non-banks such as pawnshops and money service businesses are
properly  supervised  as  they  compete  in  delivering  bank-like  services.    This  also  extends  to
entities that use virtual currency as underlying instruments for remittance. We expect financial
access to further expand with our recent issuance allowing technology-enabled third party retail
outlets  to  function  as  bank  cash  agents.      Complementing  these  are  regulations  that  allow
reduced  Know-Your-Customer  (KYC)  processes  for  certain  low-risk  accounts  and  the  use  of
technology for KYC. These amendments aim to facilitate frictionless customer on-boarding and
convenient customer access. 
In keeping with our mandate to maintain financial stability, soon we shall be issuing enhanced
information security framework to strengthen cybersecurity controls in line with a rapidly evolving
cyberthreat landscape surrounding financial institutions.    It is vital that we preserve the balance
between innovation and risk management.
Game-Changing Financial Sector Reforms
Given the country’s potential as a promising investment destination, our domestic capital market
is being positioned to serve as an important source of long-term funding and as a complement to
bank lending to support economic growth. 
In  this  regard,  we  are  closely  collaborating  with  other  government  agencies,  namely  the
Department of Finance (DOF), Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and Bureau of the
Treasury (BTr), and industry stakeholders to deepen the local currency debt market.
Complementing  this  local  currency  debt  market  development  initiatives,  we  are  also  further
liberalizing foreign exchange (FX) rules in order to enhance the ease of doing business.   This
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
forms part of a broader agenda for an organized FX market to enhance depth and transparency,
improve  price  discovery,  and  increase  availability  of  FX  products,  especially  hedging
instruments. 
Mutuality in Relationships
Indeed,  the  economic  circumstances  today  demand  fresh  and  bold  approaches.      But  to
succeed, collaboration and cooperation is key — with other government agencies and with you,
our stakeholders in the private sector and the Filipino public.
Any  great  innovation  effort  begins  with  understanding  “the  who,  what,  and  whys”  of  those  we
serve...  In other words, who are our customers?  What needs do they have?  And why do they
have  these  needs?...    This  is  the  true  essence  of  customer-centricity,  empathising  with  the
experiences of our stakeholders.  We in the BSP cannot answer these questions – who, what
and  why  –  ourselves.    Our  varied  expertise  and  perspectives  will  need  to  converge  for  this
purpose to come up with viable solutions.
The  programs  I  mentioned  –  the  National  Retail  Payment  System,  the  biometric-based  ID
system, even the deepening of the capital market are endeavours that cut across sectors.  Their
success  hinge  largely  on  the  buy-in  and  cooperation  of  all  those  involved  and  all  who  will
ultimately be benefitted. 
Challenge
As I close, let me reiterate what I earlier said about customer-centricity, and also return to the
theme – getting up-close and personal...  While this was intended to refer to our own interaction
and discussions here...  to be more effective in what we do, we MUST – by all means – get up
close and personal...   with our citizens, and you, with your clients and customers. 
We have an increasing population of millennials who are tech-savvy, somewhat impatient and in
need of faster and more streamlined products and services.  This group prefers to be on the
move and is thus partial to electronic services. Observing this group and exploring their needs
will uncover a number of ways in which they may be served.  
Moreover,  in  the  area  of  fostering  greater  financial  inclusion,  empathy  with  underprivileged
sectors and with sectors challenged with access to formal credit will spur us to become more
innovative together.  It is time to get personal.  Our businesses, our services and our mandates
ARE personal. 
In meeting this challenge so that we can have more inclusive growth, the BSP is here with you. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board and the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, I thank you for your kind
attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
