 Professor Claudia M Buch 
Vice-President  
of the Deutsche Bundesbank 
Speech at the presentation of the 
2017 Financial Stability Review 
of the Deutsche Bundesbank  
in Frankfurt am Main 
Wednesday, 29 November 2017 
Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 1 of 9 
Contents 
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. 2 
LOW INTEREST RATES AND STRONG GROWTH MIGHT CAUSE RISKS TO 
BE UNDERESTIMATED. ................................................................................. 3 
RISKS CAN BE MUTUALLY REINFORCING IN THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM . 5 
THE RESILIENCE OF THE FINANCIAL SYSTEM COULD BE OVERSTATED  6 
WHAT NEEDS TO BE DONE? ........................................................................ 8 
1 
2 
3  
4  
5  
 
1 
Introduction 
Germany’s economy has been expanding for eight consecutive years now. 
•  Enterprises and households alike can borrow cheaply, and they have 
accumulated comfortable capital buffers.  
•  Banks, meanwhile, have built up their equity capital in the years since 
the crisis.  
•  Default numbers are low; valuations in the financial markets are high.  
Market participants, encouraged by the rosy macroeconomic prospects for Germany and 
Europe, are expecting interest rates to slowly increase again. 
So there's no reason to fear for the stability of Germany’s financial system, then? 
Assuming the economy does indeed follow its expected path, then, yes, the risks to finan-
cial stability will be limited.  
But what if the economy takes an unexpected turn for the worse? How will the mar-
kets respond to an unforeseen slowdown in real economic momentum and to rates stay-
ing low for even longer? Or to the emergence of political risk and a spike in risk premiums 
in financial markets?  
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 2 of 9 
A “stable” financial system needs to be in a position to weather unexpected, but by 
no means wholly unrealistic, scenarios such as the ones I have just mentioned. 
These are the questions we have to consider, then, if we are to identify risk early on and 
thus play our part in safeguarding financial stability in Germany. 
All in all, it would be premature to see the benign economic prospects as any rea-
son to sound the all clear. During the extended spell of low interest rates, risk has 
been growing in the German financial system in three respects. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Low interest rates and strong growth might cause risks to be underes-
timated.  
Second, risks can be mutually reinforcing in the financial system. 
And third, the resilience of the financial system might be overstated. 
2 
Low interest rates and strong growth might cause risks to be un-
derestimated.  
Germany’s economy is in good shape at the moment, and it's not alone – the global 
economy, too, is expanding at a brisk pace. International Monetary Fund (IMF) projec-
tions suggest that the world economy will expand by 3.6% this year, compared with last 
year’s 3.2%, and indicate that this trend will continue in the years ahead. Market partici-
pants, bolstered by the current growth forecasts, are expecting interest rates to slowly 
start picking up again. A gradual upturn in interest rates would generally boost the stability 
of the German financial system.  
  Life insurers and pension institutions would be more likely to be able to 
generate their contractually agreed guaranteed returns.  
Banks, meanwhile, would probably see their interest margins recover.  
But it is precisely this already very lengthy upbeat economic spell in Germany that 
harbours the risk of market participants turning a blind eye to scenarios involving 
heavy losses. The longer booms persist, the greater the inclination to extrapolate them 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 3 of 9 
into the future. Gaze into the rear view mirror like this for too long and there is a risk of 
overlooking hazards on the road ahead.  
That’s because there are other scenarios which could hit Germany’s financial sys-
tem hard. The markets have become more vulnerable to unforeseen events. 
One risk scenario is a faster-than-expected upturn in interest rates. For instance, risk 
premiums in international financial markets might shoot higher all of a sudden. 
A rapid increase in interest rates would drive up funding costs and might hit banks where 
it hurts, seeing as the terms and interest rate lock-in periods of bank loans have been ex-
tended in recent years – indeed, 44% of loans for house purchase now have lock-in peri-
ods of more than ten years. An abrupt increase in interest rates would put pressure on 
banks – their funding costs would go up, and their interest income would rise at a slower 
pace initially. 
An abrupt rise in interest rates would also send valuations down from their current high 
levels and thus cause losses. 
That scenario of persistently low interest rates would amplify the search for yield, with 
banks and other market participants taking on greater risks in an effort to keep their profits 
steady. Life insurers and pension institutions would find it increasingly difficult to generate 
enough income to cover the guaranteed returns they have promised to pay. 
If the real economy takes a worse path than expected, that would also drive up the num-
ber of insolvencies. Insolvency numbers have almost halved in the past years, dropping 
from just over 39,300 in 2003 to a little more than 21,500 last year. To put that into pro-
portion, given that there are just over 11,000 municipalities in Germany, that's an average 
of less than two insolvencies per municipality. Judging by those numbers, it’s no surprise 
that credit risk at banks is minimal. 
Low default rates on loans are welcome news, all other things being equal – but let's not 
forget that they are a backward-looking indicator. Future developments are what counts 
for the stability of the financial system. Larger banks use risk models of their own to esti-
mate those risks and quantify their capital requirements. There is the danger, then, that 
banks might underestimate the risks which might arise if economic activity were to take an 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 4 of 9 
unexpected turn for the worse. They might, in turn, also underestimate how much capital 
they need to set aside. 
3   Risks can be mutually reinforcing in the financial system  
Every market participant needs to hedge against negative scenarios – by making 
sure that they put enough capital into any investment and basing expectations on the 
most realistic scenarios possible. But what happens when risk materialises which the in-
dividual cannot readily grasp, when risks become mutually reinforcing in the system? 
Contagion effects can arise in the financial system whenever market participants 
are contractually highly interconnected or investment strategies are very similar. In 
that situation, a relatively minor shock can send tremors through the entire financial sys-
tem. 
Allow me to use two examples to illustrate what I mean. 
•  First, risks stemming from an interest rate hike, revaluations in the mar-
kets and increased credit losses could materialise simultaneously. Asset 
values might plunge; write-downs would erode equity. And, in particular, 
credit risk could increase if economic activity in Germany were to unex-
pectedly begin to splutter.  
•  Let’s now turn to my second example. One of the German banking sys-
tem’s fortes – its large number of smaller credit institutions operating di-
rectly within the regions in which they are based – might undermine sta-
bility precisely when interest rates climb more briskly and more strongly 
than anticipated. The bulk of Germany’s smaller credit institutions – its 
credit cooperatives and savings banks – are highly exposed to interest 
rate risk. Small though these institutions may be individually, together 
they account for a significant share – roughly 50% – of lending to do-
mestic enterprises and households. If those institutions were to run into 
difficulties, then, the repercussions for the economy as a whole could be 
severe. 
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 5 of 9 
As these two examples show, the financial system needs to have sufficient buffers 
in the form of equity capital to be able to absorb even unexpected events, which 
can become mutually reinforcing in the system. 
4  
The resilience of the financial system could be overstated  
German enterprises are better capitalised than they have been in a long time – the 
average capital ratio is 30%, and interest payments on loans stand at just over 5% of pre-
tax profits. Household debt as measured against disposable income currently comes to 
around 90% and has remained virtually unchanged over the past few years, despite the 
low interest rates.  
The situation is less positive at the global level. At 144% of GDP, private sector 
debt around the world is higher than its pre-crisis level (2007: 125%). This trend is 
explained, not least, by increased leverage in the corporate sector, particularly in emerg-
ing market economies. 
However, low interest rates and a sound economic position mean that market par-
ticipants could be taking an overly positive view of debt sustainability. Take, for ex-
ample, the German housing market. 
The real estate market in Germany is important to the economy as a whole. Lending 
for house purchase accounts for over two-thirds of household debt. More than half of all 
loans granted by German banks to non-banks are housing loans. 
Experience in other countries has shown that if a real estate bubble accompanied by a 
strong build-up of household debt bursts, significant economic and social costs can come 
in its wake. We therefore keep a very close eye on risks to financial stability that can em-
anate from the housing market. What is particularly important here is the interplay be-
tween three indicators: 
•  changes in real estate prices; 
 the granting of loans for house purchase; and  
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 6 of 9 
 lending standards. 
Strong price rises alone are not evidence enough of a build-up of risks to financial stabil-
ity. 
The current situation in the housing markets paints a mixed picture. 
•  House prices are rising – and, at 6.1% in recent times, they are picking up 
much more strongly than prices across the board. A large part of this price in-
crease can be explained by fundamental factors such as the healthy state of 
the economy or higher demand. That said, our models are unable to explain 
around 15-30% of the price rise in cities in 2016. In 2015, this unexplained 
portion came to 10-20%. 
•  Growth in loans for house purchase is moderate. Loan growth currently 
amounts to 3.9% and is thus lower than its long-term average since the early 
1980s of 4.8%. 
•  We do not have sufficient official statistics on lending standards or the dis-
tribution of debt across the population. However, the available indicators give 
no suggestion that standards were loosened perceptibly or that household 
debt sustainability has deteriorated. 
All in all, the risks stemming from housing loans are therefore still relatively low, 
and the information available does not indicate any direct risks to financial stabil-
ity. There is thus no need to make use of the macroprudential instruments available from 
this year – these being minimum requirements for own funds (loan-to-value ratio) and for 
amortisation. 
Nonetheless, there is a risk that lending activity in the real estate markets will prove 
unsustainable in future. This could be the case if interest rates rise or there is a turna-
round in price dynamics. Loan collateral would then lose value.  
What this means is that we will continue to closely monitor the residential real estate mar-
ket. But to gain a better understanding of changes in lending standards, we need better 
official statistics. Furthermore, we cannot lose sight of the fact that our assessment of the 
situation may change in future.  
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 7 of 9 
5   What needs to be done? 
Greater capital levels have been built up over the past few years, both in the Ger-
man financial system and in the banks at its core. At the same time, though, the ex-
tended spell of low interest rates has left the system more vulnerable to unexpected de-
velopments. It is possible that the assessment of future economic developments and debt 
sustainability is overly positive, while contagion effects in the financial system could be 
understated.  
There is thus no reason to sound the all clear. Sufficient resilience and sustainable 
loans are in the interest of each and every market participant. In this context, we have to 
look at the stability of the financial system as a whole.  
Since the financial crisis, reforms have been initiated – the impact of which is now 
gradually making itself felt in the markets. More capital and the financial system’s im-
proved resilience to negative developments are a stated objective of these reforms. We 
can now begin evaluating the effects of the reforms. Have they achieved their objectives? 
Do the reforms bring with them unintended side-effects?  
Under Germany’s G20 presidency, which will come to an end in the next few days, 
we have made considerable progress. Together with our international partners, we 
have agreed on a framework for a structured evaluation of the reforms. Sound and relia-
ble information and data are at the heart of each evaluation. This is why it’s so important 
for us to close the gaps in the housing data in Germany. 
A structured evaluation is the only way to gauge the costs and benefits of the re-
forms to society at large. Let me give you an example. The costs of failures in the finan-
cial system should be borne by those who cause them – the shareholders and potentially 
also the creditors of financial institutions – rather than by the taxpayer. The agreed rules 
for bank resolutions therefore have to be rigorously applied – and creditors have to bear 
losses in a resolution. There may be increased costs for the private sector, but society 
benefits when the costs of crises are shouldered by those who cause them. 
A second example of the implementation and evaluation of reforms is capital add-
ons for systemically important financial institutions. At present, the macroprudential 
add-ons imposed on the capital of institutions that are systemically important to the do-
 Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 8 of 9 
mestic market are limited by European rules to a maximum of 2%. Yet the resulting capi-
tal buffers could be insufficient to actually cover systemic risk. 
Evaluation therefore means making the costs and rewards of the reforms for socie-
ty as a whole more transparent and disclosing any unintended side-effects. The 
evaluation of the reforms should not be used as a pretext to water them down or weaken 
the resilience of the financial system. 
  Deutsche Bundesbank, Directorate General Communications 
Wilhelm-Epstein-Strasse 14, 60431 Frankfurt am Main, Germany, Tel: +49 (0)69 9566 3511, Fax: +49 (0)69 9566 3077 
presse@bundesbank.de, www.bundesbank.de 
Reproduction permitted only if source is stated. 
Page 9 of 9 
