Annual Convention of the  
Asociación de Mercados Financieros
Recent developments and open questions  
in the European banking industry
Speech by Governor of the Bank of Italy
Ignazio Visco
Madrid, 6 November 2017
   Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is an honour and a privilege to address this assembly. I would like to express my 
gratitude to Governor Linde and President Prados del Amo for the kind invitation to be here 
today.  I  will  take  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  reflections  on  the  state  of  the 
European banking industry, of which Spanish banks are a fundamental part. 
I will start with some considerations on the evolving structure of the sector; I will then 
move on to the issue of profitability; and I will conclude with my take on the main open 
questions we need to address over the coming months. 
The  long  journey:  evolving  structure  of  the  European  banking  industry  since  the 
financial crisis 
Since  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  European  banking  industry  has  undergone  a 
considerable structural transformation, along three closely intertwined dimensions. 
The  first  one  concerns  the  profound  changes  in  both  regulation  and  institutional 
set-ups. Capital requirements have been raised, leverage has been limited, and stringent 
liquidity  requirements  have  been  established.  The  institutional  set-up  has  also  been 
completely modified. In a very short time frame, the Banking Union has been launched, 
with the introduction of the Single Supervisory and Single Resolution Mechanisms (SSM, 
SRM).  A  new  framework  for  managing  banking  crises  has  been  adopted.  Although  the 
third  pillar  of  the  Banking  Union  –  the  European  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  –  is  still 
lacking  and  in  other  dimensions  advancement  is  slow,  the  overall  progress  has  been 
remarkable. It would perhaps have been unimaginable only a few years ago and testifies to 
the strong determination to continue along the path to European integration. 
  The  second  dimension  of  structural  change  relates  to  the  contracting  size  of  the 
European banking sector, which not only reflects the tightening of regulation but also other 
factors,  such  as  the  need  for  banks  to  clean  up  their  balance  sheets,  the  impact  of 
technology,  as  well  as  the  increased  role  of  non-bank  financing.  In  the  aftermath  of  the 
crisis, the total assets of the euro area banking sector declined significantly both in absolute 
terms,  by  15  per  cent  between  2008  and  2016,  and  relative  to  GDP;  leverage  has  been 
reduced across the board, and especially in countries where it was higher. 
industrial  organisation,  which  represent 
The downsizing of the European banking sector is also the result of important changes 
its 
third  dimension  of  structural 
in 
transformation. Between 2008 and 2016 the number of euro area banks declined by around 
25 per cent, with Spain being one of the countries where the reduction was greatest. The 
number of branches is also decreasing and the use of resources is generally becoming more 
efficient. 
the 
Overall,  this  set  of  structural  changes  is  delivering  positive  results.  The  European 
banking  system  is  enhancing  its  resilience  and  all  actors  involved  are  contributing: 
regulators, banks, and supervisors. There is, however, no room for complacency. As I will 
discuss  next,  legacies  from  the  crisis  still  linger  and  remaining  vulnerabilities  call  for 
continued vigilance and unwavering determination on all sides. 
Out of the woods? Not yet: some crisis legacies are still with us 
The  issue  that  epitomises  the  problems  left  on  the  table  is  low  profitability.  On  the 
aggregate, the return on equity of euro area banks has not yet recovered since the financial 
and sovereign crises, and remains low by historical and international standards. There are, 
however, important heterogeneities: small and medium-sized banks are still suffering, while 
larger  intermediaries  are  recovering.  In  2017,  net  interest  income  improved  for  some 
intermediaries, while fee income, supported  by  the asset  management business, increased 
more broadly. 
Profitability is also well below estimates of the cost of equity for most banks. Despite 
the differences across banks and jurisdictions – in Spain, for example, the gap is relatively 
smaller than elsewhere – the problem extends across Europe. The causes of the phenomenon 
  can be traced back to both transitory factors – such as the legacy assets from the adverse 
cyclical developments – and structural elements, including the need to adjust the business 
model to technological change and to the new regulatory environment. 
The  ongoing  recovery  of  the  global  and  the  euro  area  economies  contributes  to 
addressing  the  transitory  impediments.  However,  analyses  and  simulations  from  various 
sources seem to suggest that for a non-negligible part of the European banking sector this 
may not suffice to recover adequate levels of profitability. 
Going forward, the target for banks’ profitability may actually prove to be lower than 
the  one  deemed  appropriate  by  some  international  institutions,  such  as  the  IMF.  Indeed, 
once the transition to the new regulatory regime is completed, and a safer banking system 
has emerged from the reforms, investors might reduce the returns that they expect to receive 
from  banks.  In  other  words,  in  future  months  the  “reform  dividend”  may  translate  into  a 
lower cost of equity. Indeed, estimates of the cost of capital for European banks show that it 
has declined significantly since the beginning of the year, although it remains higher than 
the  average  in  countries,  like  Italy  and  Spain,  that  have  been  hit  particularly  hard  by  the 
financial crisis. This is a key issue that deserves further analysis and that we have to keep 
monitoring closely. 
A  contribution  to  closing  the  gap  must  also  come  from  banks’  efforts  to  increase 
profitability in a structural way. This is something that concerns most banks, those facing 
difficulties as well as those that currently show healthy conditions. Against this backdrop, 
while there is no single winning business model, the experience of the most profitable banks 
provides  useful  guidance  for  both  costs  and  revenues.  On  the  revenue  side,  a  greater 
diversification of the sources of income in favour of high quality financial services can help 
compensate for the prolonged compression of interest margins. A progress in this direction 
is  already  visible,  but  international  comparisons  suggest  that  there  is  ample  room  for 
improvement.  
The  expansion  of  non-bank  financing  and  technology-based  intermediation,  despite 
increasing  competition,  also  offers  banks  opportunities  for  broadening  their  revenues  by 
focusing on the provision of related and complementary services, for example in the areas 
of corporate finance and asset management. Benefits for income generation can also come 
  from mergers and acquisitions geared towards exploiting economies of scope and scale, and 
facilitating investment and access to capital markets. Those of a cross-border nature can also 
foster financial integration. 
On  the  cost  side,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  that  operational  efficiency  needs  to  be 
improved resolutely. Since the beginning of the crisis, the banks’ cost-to-income ratio has 
deteriorated in the majority of countries. In many cases this has reflected the reduction in 
revenues per unit of assets, while the cost-to-asset ratio has often improved. In Spain there 
has  been  a  major  effort  in  streamlining  branch  networks;  the  number  of  branches  has 
dropped by almost 40 per cent since 2008. In Italy the figure is less impressive, 15 per cent, 
but progress has been made nonetheless.  
As  in  other  countries,  there  is  room  for  further  streamlining  –  not  only  as  regards 
branch networks but also operational costs, including, where appropriate, labour costs and 
managers’ remunerations. Cost savings coming from further rationalisation can be used to 
redirect spending towards investment in technology and innovation, which can go a  long 
way to enhancing productivity.  
Needless to say, further progress in the clean-up of balance sheets is also necessary to 
increase  profitability.  Encouraging  signals  are  emerging:  as  the  economic  recovery 
consolidates, credit quality is improving. In Italy, which is one of the countries where the 
problem of non-performing loans  (NPL) is  most acute,  the flow of new NPLs relative  to 
total  outstanding  loans  has  fallen  to  the  levels  prevailing  before  the  crisis.  The  stock  of 
NPLs  is  also  falling  quite  significantly,  and  disposals  currently  under  way  will  lead  to  a 
further drop over the coming months. It is important that such disposals are implemented in 
an orderly fashion, in order to avoid fire sales and keep the market price of NPLs at levels 
consistent with their recovery rates. Indeed, sales at very low market prices, which reflect 
high returns required by the buyers, would put undue pressure on banks’ balance sheets and, 
ultimately, lead to a contraction in the supply of credit to the real economy. 
This clean-up of banks’ balance sheets must continue, both in Italy and elsewhere. 
For this to happen, European banks must strengthen their strategies for NPL management. 
In this respect, the guidelines published last March by the SSM are an important point of 
  reference  and  indicate  several  possible  options,  from  the  creation  of  separate  and 
specialised  management  units,  to  the  recourse  to  external  managers,  and  to  the  sale  of 
portfolios on the market. The stock of NPLs in banks’ balance sheets depends crucially on 
the length of the recovery procedures which in turn depends on the protection granted to 
the  creditors  by  the  law  in  the  event  of  insolvency  of  the  debtors  and  on  the  time  that 
courts take to enforce the law.  
In Italy the stock of NPLs is high also because the outflows are small, due to the very 
lengthy judicial recovery procedures. Reforms recently introduced to significantly speed up 
the credit recovery process are already positively affecting the market price of NPLs; such 
effect will continue in the coming years. In Spain, as a legacy of the crisis, banks have taken 
large  stocks  of  foreclosed  assets  onto  their  balance  sheets.  In  other  countries,  other 
vulnerabilities,  such  as  for  instance  the  large  concentration  on  banks’  balance  sheets  of 
complex and illiquid activities – those classified as Level 2 and Level 3 assets, need to be 
closely monitored. 
A public consultation has recently been launched on a draft addendum to the ECB 
guidelines  considering  the  introduction  of  mechanisms  that  set  compulsory  minimum 
write-downs, increasing over time, on loans that will be classified as non-performing. It is 
important to recall that, in the current context, any policy action needs to strike a delicate 
balance between the goal of speeding up the resolution of the NPL problem and the goal 
of preserving financial stability.  
In  particular,  supervisors  should  refrain  from  imposing  measures  that  de  facto  imply 
blanket sales of NPLs on banks, which in the current circumstances would lead to a fall in the 
market  price  of  NPLs  and  thus  to  a  transfer  of  resources  from  the  banks  to  a  handful  of 
specialised  investors  operating  in  an  oligopolistic  environment.  This  type  of  policy  would 
erode banks’ own funds at a time when raising capital can still be difficult, thereby putting the 
ongoing recovery at risk. While there is no question that, especially because of the positive 
effects  of  the  recovery,  banks  should  make  clear  progress  in  the  management  of  NPLs,  I 
would dare to evoke the great nineteenth century Italian writer Alessandro Manzoni, who in 
his masterpiece “I promessi sposi” had the Spanish Gran Canciller de Milán Antonio Ferrer 
say to his coachman during a famous riot in 1629: “Pedro, adelante con juicio”.  
  Looking forward: expectations for a safer and sounder industry, and open questions 
The financial crisis has spurred a global regulatory response influencing almost every 
aspect  of  the  banking  industry:  lending,  securities  and  derivatives  trading,  funding,  bank 
supervision  and  resolvability.  Such  reforms  have  led  to  more  demanding  capital  and 
liquidity requirements, less room for banks to exploit leverage, stronger constraints on their 
organisational  structure  to  ensure  resolvability.  Further  adjustments  will  come  as  single 
pieces of the reform package, such as the requirements regarding loss-absorbing liabilities 
(TLAC  and  MREL),  are  implemented.  Moreover,  the  adoption  of  the  new  accounting 
standard IFRS9 in 2018 will change loan valuations: banks will have to make provisions for 
expected losses and no longer only in the event of a default. The new standard will force 
banks  to  improve  the  allocation  and  assessment  of  loans  and  to  adopt  new  criteria  to 
measure credit risk and calculate loan loss provisions. 
A  key  priority  now  is  to  rapidly  reach  –  after  a  too  long  negotiation  period  –  an 
agreement on the finalisation of the Basel 3 reform package aimed at reducing the ample 
variability of risk-weighted assets as calculated by internal models. Following that, a period 
of regulatory stability – free from further rule-changing – would be opportune, not only to 
allow banks to fully adapt to the new system, but also to avoid the incessant production of 
rules becoming in itself a source of uncertainty, and thus a hindrance to banking activity. 
Looking  ahead,  there  is  reason  to  be  confident.  Expectations  are  for  a  sounder  and 
gradually more profitable European banking industry. This is also borne out by the market’s 
assessment of the outlook for banks. The completion of the regulatory reforms will dispel 
the uncertainty that is still preventing the market from fully perceiving the benefits of the 
reduction of excessive risks in banks’ balance sheets. But we know that the stakes are high. 
For those banks that will not be able to withstand the increased pressure, it is important to 
prepare  measures in advance that  will  make it possible for them to exit the  market in an 
orderly fashion. 
Should new crisis situations emerge, preserving financial stability will hinge critically 
upon  the  availability  of  an  effective  crisis  management  framework,  one  characterised  by 
prompt and decisive action, close cooperation among all the parties involved, and a clear 
  definition of responsibilities and priorities. This is how in the past even severe strains were 
overcome without damage to savers or the overall economy. 
The  experience  gathered  thus  far  within  the  new  European  framework  for  bank 
recovery  and  resolution  can  teach  us  important  lessons  on  whether  the  new  set-up  also 
meets such criteria. In particular, besides the resolution of Banco Popular in Spain, earlier 
this  summer  three  crisis  situations  were  tackled  in  Italy,  leading  to  the  precautionary 
recapitalisation  of  Banca  Monte  dei  Paschi  di  Siena,  and  to  the  orderly  liquidations  of 
Veneto Banca and Banca Popolare di Vicenza. 
All these decisions complied fully, albeit in different ways, with European legislation 
and  procedures.  To  the  extent  permitted  by  these  rules,  efforts  were  made  to  find  the 
solution that best protected the interests of all parties involved; the recourse to public funds 
represented  only  a  small  fraction  compared  to  the  taxpayer  money  employed  just  a  few 
years  ago  by  other  countries  in  overhauling  their  own  banking  systems.  The  measures 
adopted have been successful in eliminating the tail risks weighing on both individual banks 
and the sector as a whole. In fact, over the last six  months, stock prices of  major Italian 
banks rose by 25 per cent, against the 11 per cent on average for major European banks. 
However,  these  initial  experiences  have  also  highlighted  some  inadequacies  and 
pitfalls  in  the  new  resolution  framework.  In  the  Italian  cases,  the  final  decisions  were 
adopted only following a lengthy and complex process due to the fact that in some instances 
(e.g. the precautionary recapitalization foreseen by the BRRD) the new framework entrusts 
the  management  of  banking  crises  to  numerous  mutually  independent  authorities  and 
institutions, both national and supranational. Such a framework is hardly compatible with 
rapid intervention and lacks an effective coordination mechanism for setting priorities and 
establishing  guidelines  on  the  margins  of  discretion  afforded  by  the  law.  Moreover,  no 
specific procedures are in place to account for the decisions taken.  
A  further  lesson  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  recent  cases  is  that  it  is  important  to 
preserve margins of flexibility in the framework, as even relatively small banks’ failures, if 
not properly managed, may have extensive and, at times, systemic consequences. Even the 
resolution of a middle-sized bank could have been problematic, had the overall economic 
  and financial conditions made it difficult to identify possible buyers and the bail-in of senior 
bond and relatively large deposit holders become inevitable. 
Overall, these experiences can be taken to support the view – which I have voiced in 
several occasions in the past – that the new resolution framework does not fully take into 
consideration the risks associated with its own implementation and thus needs further fine 
tuning.  The  new  rules  were  rightly  designed  with  the  goal  of  contrasting  opportunistic 
behaviour by banks, but their application must also take into account the broader objective 
of  safeguarding  financial  stability.  I  believe  that  the  transitional  period  foreseen  in  the 
implementation  of  the  new  framework  has  been  too  short  for  all  parties  involved  to 
adequately adjust to the new regime. This has been especially important in light of the fact 
that some of the crucial elements for the overall balance of the framework –  such as the 
availability of adequate loss absorbing liabilities in banks’ balance sheets, just to mention 
one among several others – were not yet in place. 
Furthermore, in my opinion the interpretation of the new rules on the management of 
banking crises and on state aid in some cases has been overly restrictive, denying recourse 
to  some  tools  used  in  the  past  to  effectively  manage  crisis  situations  without  causing 
undue  disruption.  For  example,  recourse  to  the  preventive  intervention  by  domestic 
deposit protection funds is now treated as equivalent to state aid, and thus not permitted, 
even  though  these  funds  are  entirely  private  and  their  utilisation  is  guided  by 
entrepreneurial considerations, and not by the authorities’ decisions. In addition, the use of 
public funds to address banking problems, even in specific circumstances where it may be 
economically  and  financially  advantageous,  is  now  subject  to  very  stringent  limits  even 
after shareholders and subordinated creditors have been bailed-in and the old management 
completely replaced.  
The interpretation of state aid rules as put forward in the EU legislation in 2013 has 
severely limited the possibility to establish a publicly supported asset management company 
(AMC) to deal with banks’ NPLs. I strongly believe that protecting taxpayers’ money must 
be  a  priority  in  managing  banking  crises.  But  I  also  think  that  the  seriousness  of 
macroeconomic shocks, the negative externalities that come from the dismal performance of 
the real economy, the market failures that result from the lack of a robust secondary market 
  for  NPLs  are  important  conditions  that  may  justify  the  recourse  to  public  funds.  This 
recourse  might have been excessive in Europe in the  years following the global financial 
crisis, but the reaction to such an excess may have also been somewhat extreme.  
It is important to carefully evaluate the costs directly and immediately borne by the 
State in each single intervention. However, those that may arise from a mismanagement of 
the  crisis  should  also  be  carefully  considered.  To  some  extent  this  consideration  may 
explain  why  the  AMC  hypothesis  has  recently  returned  to  the  spotlight.  Under  some 
proposals,  an  AMC  should  be  established  at  the  national  level  but  in  accordance  with  a 
common  European  framework.  This  implies  that  the  conditions  under  which  it  would 
comply  with  the  EU  regulatory  set-up,  including  the  BRRD  and  the  rules  on  state  aid, 
should be properly spelled out.  
In  order  to  address  the  NPL  problem  successfully,  such  a  company  would  need  to 
attract  a  relatively  large  number  of  banks.  Banks’  participation  in  the  scheme  should  be 
voluntary,  and  subject  to  standard  restructuring  plans  defined  ex  ante.  Most  importantly, 
NPL  transfer  prices  should  be  determined  so  to  make  the  AMC  profitable,  but  without 
making  them  excessively  detached  from  their  real  economic  values  (i.e.,  the  values  that 
could be reasonably recovered over time). 
All this leads me to suggest that the opportunity to improve upon the new regime of 
bank crisis resolution should not be missed. This can be accomplished through the review of 
the BRRD scheduled for 2018, as well as via the ongoing negotiations on issues related to 
the implementation of the MREL requirement and the completion of the Banking Union. In 
particular,  the  framework  should  envisage  adequate  tools  to  address  banking  crises  of  a 
systemic  nature.  Ways  to  limit  contagion  externalities  should  be  considered,  possibly 
allowing for the recourse to state aid in situations of serious market turbulence, and devising 
mechanisms to properly address liquidity crises. 
Some  shortfalls  can  be  addressed  along  the  road  towards  the  completion  of  the 
Banking Union. Indeed, the Banking Union is still missing two very important pieces: the 
availability of common public funds to support resolution procedures in the case of ailing 
banks  –  the  Single  Resolution  Fund’s  fiscal  backstop  –  and  a  common  bank  deposit 
insurance  scheme,  again  supported  by  a  common  public  backstop.  These  are  key 
  ingredients  for  the  overall  balance  of  the  new  system:  in  their  absence,  it  would  not  be 
easy  to  counter  the  views  of  those  who  claim  that  the  fiscal  backstop  should  remain  a 
national prerogative and that, therefore, the national authorities should have the final say 
in all interventions aimed at minimising the overall costs of the distress. Furthermore, we 
should also reflect on how to deal with possible crises of banks for which the existence of 
public interest, necessary for the initiation of a resolution procedure, is denied. This is the 
case for the smaller banks, but it may also apply, as it has been recently the case, to banks 
considered  significant  within  the  SSM.  Indeed,  it  would  be  difficult  to  object  to  the 
observation  that  the  current  framework  calls  on  these  banks  to  pay  into  a  crisis 
management system from which they cannot benefit.  
 To  conclude,  progress  on  all  these  fronts  –  and,  more  generally,  toward  a  deeper 
European  integration  –  can  be  achieved  only  if  we  overcome  the  mutual  distrust  and 
prejudice among member countries that have developed in recent years. In doing this, we 
should  strive  to  give  sound  and  fair  application  to  the  principles  underpinning  the  new 
European  rules,  preserving  the  value  of  banking  activity,  to  the  benefit  of  savers  and 
borrower households and firms. 
Thank you for your attention. 
  by the Printing and Publishing Division of the Bank of Italy
Designed and printed  
