Michelle Doyle-Lowe: Financial evolution – exploring the shift
Remarks by Ms Michelle Doyle-Lowe, Acting Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados,
at the BITT Fintech Forum “Central Bank Meets Blockchain”, Bridgetown, 3 October 2017.
 Firstly, I would like to warmly thank the organizers of this forum for inviting the Central Bank of
Barbados to give a few remarks on the rapidly evolving world of Fintech. It is not often that central
banks are immersed in what can be considered as ‘ground-breaking’ or ‘evolutionary’ financial
developments. On that score, let me express my gratitude to our host for being able to speak to
you this afternoon. 
In  recent  time  the  ‘hype’  surrounding  distributed  ledger  technology  and  Fintech  solutions  has
been evidenced by the explosion in the number of Google searches being conducted on these
keywords.  This trend,  and  even  today’s  forum,  reflects  the  increasing  dominance  of  Fintech,
supported by the billions of dollars being poured into Fintech research and development across
the globe. Let us first remind ourselves that distributed ledgers at its core, is a computer protocol
that  allows  many  participants  to  record  information  on  a  single  ledger  that  is  shared  among
users, so each one sees the same data. The best-known application of distributed ledgers is
Bitcoin, which is a decentralized digital currency that is an internet-based medium of exchange. I
want to draw the distinction between this and other forms of Fintech, which is broadly defined as
the  application  of  computer  programmes  and  other  technology  used  to  support  or  enable
financial services.
There are three key differences that we need to be cognisant of related to recent innovations in
Fintech, compared to prior technological improvements:
The first being the fact that today’s Fintech is being more heavily driven from outside of
the financial landscape, as opposed to being led by the traditional market intermediaries. 
Companies such as Apple and Google via Apple Pay and Google Wallet are responding to
customers’ demands and aiding the advancement by offering lower transaction costs and
more convenient personalised services that leverage the use of smartphones and speedy
settlement.  All  of  these  are  closely  aligned  with  the  desire  for  and  expectation  of
instantaneous access to goods and money. Whereas historically financial innovation in retail
financial  services  resulted  in  the  traditional  banking  intermediaries  remaining  dominant
players and adopting the technology to suit their needs,  this is no longer the case for some
of the new technology, which sets the stage for a definitive shift that no central bank can
ignore.
The  second  difference  is  that  the invention  of  distributed  ledger  technology  is  now
driving  the  necessity.  Unlike  Plato’s  saying  “Necessity  is  the  mother  of  invention”,
institutions and firms are now searching for, and discovering new ways by which distributed
ledger technology can be applied to their day-to-day operations. It is important to also note
that not all Fintech innovations aimed at enhancing efficiency are driven by distributed ledger
technology. 
The third difference – the Millennials. According to the Millennial Disruption Index, a third of
Americans ages 15–34 years old believe that they will not need a bank in the next five years.
Given  these  factors,  when  the  term  financial  evolution  is  used,  the  possibilities  are  more  far
reaching than before.
What is the initial response of the Central Bank of Barbados to exploring this shift? We
are paying close attention to developments and our evolving role in this paradigm. As issuer of
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the nation’s currency with responsibility for monetary policy execution and financial stability, our
aim is to establish and nurture a financial ecosystem that is supported by sustained collaboration
between financial institutions, us the regulator, Government, and entrepreneurs. Of course for
this ecosystem to thrive, it is imperative that each participant clearly understands its role. Just
last year, the level of engagement required was aided by our then Governor, Dr. DeLisle Worrell,
when  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados  hosted  Dr.  Simon  Johnson  of  the  MIT  Sloan  School  of
Management,  to  facilitate  discussions  with  stakeholders  on  the  potential  implications  of  digital
currencies and financial innovation.
Regulators  must  implement  and  enforce  policies  that  foster  a  regulatory  environment  that  will
engender the development of the financial ecosystem. Deepening the level of financial digitisation
has  the  potential  to  bolster  settlement  efficiency,  encourage  entrepreneurial  activity  and  to
improve the country’s overall competitiveness. It is our hope that regulation in this context is not
viewed as a hindrance, particularly since it is necessary to engender trust and confidence among
financial market participants and to build resilience.
In the early 2000s, our Central Bank advanced its real-time gross settlement (RTGS) payment
system and the Automated Clearing House, which are critical pillars of our market infrastructure.
We remain committed to the modernisation of the payments system and to facilitating increased
use of technology in the financial market. In this context, the Central Bank is willing to examine
Fintech  initiatives  that  may  increase  financial  settlement  efficiency. The  Central  Bank  has
formulated  internal  working  groups  to  critically  examine  varied  aspects  of  the  electronic
payments  evolution  and  to  embrace  the  enabling  requirements  for  payments  efficiency.  The
focus of these groups is as follows:
The Review of Financial Legislation & the Regulatory Framework
This  is  aimed  at  adopting  the  level  of  regulation  required  to  provide  adequate  oversight  of
unregulated  entities  that  are  growing  in  prominence  and  engaged  in  offering  new  Fintech
products.
Overhaul of the Payments Infrastructure
To modernise the payment system to address the issue of persons wanting more immediate
access to their money and reduced clearing times. This is inclusive of enhanced data imaging,
cheque  truncation,  and  retail  and  large-value  payment  settlement.  Given  the  need  for  a  more
analytical  focus,  we  also  need  to  collect  more  granular  data  on  transactions  to  allow  market
participants  and  regulators  to  better  understand  customers’  behaviour,  so  as  to  deepen  the
innovation in financial services.
Analytical Framework for Fintech
The  Central  Bank’s  main  goal  is  to  understand  and  assess  the  mechanics,  limitations  and
possibilities  of  new  technologies,  especially  as  we  review  options  for  modernising  our  own
payment system architecture. This framework is aimed at keeping the Central Bank abreast of
developments  and  to  leverage  lessons  that  can  be  learnt  from  other  emerging-market
economies  that  have  made  greater  progress  in  many  respects.  For  example,  India  has  bio-
metric  identification  cards  linked  to  e-accounts  and  in  Kenya,  social  security  benefits  are
received on smart phones. What institutional agreements, access to consumer information and
security protocols were required for these types of initiatives? Should we envision a reality where
countries migrate to a system where all citizens are issued with e-wallet accounts, to promote e-
payments for financial transaction involving government? How should these accounts be backed
by central banks and should they accrue interest?
For the Central Bank, other critically important questions to be explored include: How can this
new  technology  enable  the  further  digitalisation  of  our  economy?  What  role  does
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Government and regulators need to play? At this defining moment for innovation in financial
services another very popular question is, “Do distributed ledgers represent an evolution or
revolution?”
To frame our thinking, we need to also touch on two follow-on questions:
Is this change likely to be disruptive?
What is yet to be determined about this new technology?
Advocates for distributed ledgers suggest that the technology could create disruption within the
financial services industry by making processes more efficient, whether related to cross-border
payments  or  digital  identities,  making  it  the  next  biggest  innovation  since  the  Internet.  From  a
regulatory perspective, distributed ledger technology can be especially effective in the reduction
of fraud and anti-money laundering efforts, since several industry observers believe that illegal
transactions  continue  to  thrive  in  the  current  system,  despite  the  anti-money  laundering  and
combating financing of terrorism regulations.
At present, the majority of banking systems are housed on centralized databases, making them
more  susceptible  to  cyber-attacks  since  all  the  information  is  stored  in  one  place,  and  some
banking systems are out-dated and susceptible to new forms of cyber-attacks. Given that the
distributed  ledger  technology  stores,  encrypts  and  verifies  every  single  bit  of  data  in  a
transaction, any data breach, fraudulent activity, or trades with flagged entities would be made
immediately obvious to all parties who have permission to access the data on the ledger. This is
especially pertinent since data stored on a blockchain is immutable and irreversible therefore the
risk of duplication or errors would be greatly minimized. Furthermore, regulators would quickly
realize the benefits of easily auditing and tracking all financial transactions.
Various studies have determined that by employing the use of distributed ledger technology for
Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)  requirements,  banks  would  not  only  reduce  operational  and
compliance  costs,  but  also  increase  the  efficiency  of  their  compliance  processes.  Using  the
technology, access to KYC data can be shared by banks and accredited organizations would
have no need for a duplicated KYC process.  Ironically, a Goldman Sachs report noted that a
10% reduction in staff could be achieved with the introduction of blockchain technology in KYC
procedures, which would equate to US$160 million in annual cost-savings.
Therefore, the response to that very popular question, “Does distributed ledger technology
represent  an  Evolution  or  Revolution?” really depends  on  who  you  are  asking.  From  the
Central  Bank’s  perspective,  it  is  more  of  an  evolution  that  is  likely  to  transform  our  financial
landscape. The role of the Central Bank in this process is acknowledged as being focused on
maintaining financial stability and promoting economic development. This requires that we foster
innovation  by  working  together  with  key  stakeholders,  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to
tomorrow’s evolving financial system in a safe and sound manner, supported by the requisite due
diligence and regulatory reviews of new market entrants.
How can this new technology enable the digitalisation of our economy and what is yet to
be determined?
In response to the tremendous potential benefits before us, central banks must be open-minded
and think outside of the box, while seeking to understand the inherent risks so as to acquire clear
approaches to containing these risks. In this regard, the Bank of England (BOE) has been in the
vanguard of the evolution of digital currency. In March of this year, the BOE launched its Fintech
Accelerator Programme which aims to share developments, trends and insights, to ensure that
the BOE is engaged with different Fintech firms and to enable firms with an interest in Fintech to
network with a view to supporting the development of the sector. To this end, they recently tested
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
the use of distributed ledger technology, which aims to make cross-border payments and the
movement  of  currencies  more  immediate.  The  BOE  has  also  collaborated  to  test  an  artificial
intelligence  system  that  allows  for  detecting  abnormalities  in  financial  transactions  and  for
analysing  the  quality  of  regulatory  data  input,  as  well  as  recently  disclosing  its  forthcoming
version  of  a  real-time  gross  settlement  (RTGS)  payment  system  that  will  be  compatible  with
distributed ledger technology.
This mode of experimentation by central banks is reflected across the globe. In China research
and trial runs on the prospect of issuing its own digital currency have not only been conducted,
but  a  Digital  Currency  Institute  has  been  established  with  a  research  focus  on  the  use  of
distributed ledger technology and Fintech.
Of note, a recently published BIS study posited the view that whereas cash is the only means by
which the public presently holds central bank money, in the future central banks will probably
have  to  decide  whether  to  issue  retail  or  wholesale  central  bank  cryptocurrencies.  The
Cambridge Centre for Alternative Finance indicated that 20 percent of central banks surveyed
expect  to  be  using  blockchain  technology  by  2019.  If  central  banks  issue  cryptocurrencies,  it
allows  the  public  to  hold  these  liabilities  in  digital  form.  This  raises  the  concern  of  universal
accessibility  and  whether  central  banks’  settlement  accounts  should  remain  available  for  a
limited  set  of  entities,  namely  banks,  or  more  widely  accessed  by  individuals?  Beyond  these
types of decisions, the consensus by the major central banks that have tested these operations
is that distributed ledger technology is not yet mature enough for current adoption. Furthermore
implications for monetary policy, payment execution and net clearing and settlement – are yet to
be fully assessed.  In reality, no one yet knows what the social and economic payoffs to these
realities will be.
It  is  conceptually  interesting  to  fathom  an  alternative  future,  such  as  one  in  which  there  is
complete  disintermediation  of  banks  and  even  central  banks,  with  state  currencies  being
replaced by decentralized digital currencies. However, the reality is that some form of cash is still
likely to be retained, since it allows for reliable ‘redundancy’ support. At a recent forum a very
vivid  example  was  provided,  “…even  though  we  have  the  benefit  of  LED  lights  and  energy
efficient  appliances,  when  the  electricity  goes  off,  we  resort  to  candles  and  flashlights.”  The
reliance  on  cash  is  no  different,  as  we  were  recently  reminded  in  the  face  of  our  regional
neighbours’  natural  disasters,  when  there  was  mobile  phone  connectivity  or  access  to  online
banking services. In short, digital currencies still have a competitive disadvantage as a store of
value  and  medium  of  exchange,  compared  to  traditional  means. As  such,  even  though  it  is
foreseeable that more central banks may issue digital forms of their national currencies to retain
monetary policy control, it is likely that these will simply coexist with the physical form.
What else is yet to be determined? Financial institutions, including the Canadian banks that
are well-known to us, are working hard to test and adopt new technologies and adjust to new
trends. So while the operations of the banking sector may look different in the future as more
Fintech adaptation is filtered to our local banks over time, banks will still play a pivotal role in our
financial ecosystem.
There are still several developmental hurdles to be cleared for distributed ledger technology to be
more widely applied in being transformative to our system. Some of these include:
A Sound Legislative Base to provide adequate market guidance and ensure that there is a level
playing field for market entrants.
Regulatory Support  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  parameters  are  adequate  to  build  trust  by
containing  risks,  safeguarding  financial  stability,  protecting  market  integrity  through  rules  that
guard  against  money  laundering  and  terrorism  financing,  provisioning  for  liquidity  support,
financial inclusion, consumer protection, and finally compliance with domestic and cross-border
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
capital requirements.
Cyber Security Concerns require that there are sufficient layers to prevent hacking and protect
data privacy.
To  address  innovation  in  financial  services,  there  must  be  active  engagement  between
authorities and the private sector. For example, the Monetary Authority of Singapore engages in
official regulatory  sandboxes,  where  for  a  predetermined  period  regulatory  requirements  are
relaxed, to allow an assessment of the impact and inherent risks of start-up companies. This
level  of  experimentation  with  technology-driven  entities  is  aimed  at  ensuring  that  economic
opportunities are not foregone by creating the space to explore innovation. This is something that
the Central Bank of Barbados has received a proposal for and is now considering.
In closing, what is evident today is that:
Innovation in Fintech could have a net positive impact on the financial system, provided that
risks  are  adequately  managed.  Distributed  ledger  technology  has  obvious  transformative
capacity but there are still important challenges to overcome.
It  is  an  evolution  that  presents  the  opportunity  for  financial  institutions  to  adapt  to  market
demands and for new market players to join the financial ecosystem.
We are still at the preliminary stage of exploring the adequacy of the regulatory framework to
ensure that it fits with the new realities and vulnerabilities, in this new paradigm.
This is the time for active engagement between financial institutions, new entrants and policy-
makers, in order for us to work together to create the right landscape that can unlock the gains of
new technology. This means some agreement on governance, standards and protocols, as well
as  a  solid  legal  framework  to  allow  for  the  best  interoperability  with  existing  systems  in  the
financial landscape.
On that note, I want to leave you with one other question of interest, “What do you think people
will be saying about distributed ledger technology, fifty or sixty years from now?
Thank-you for your attention.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
