Stephen S Poloz: Release of the Financial System Review
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Stephen  S  Poloz,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press
conference following the release of the Financial System Review, Ottawa, Ontario, 28 November
2017.
 Good  morning.  Thank  you  for  coming  here  to  the  Bank  of  Canada.  Senior  Deputy  Governor
Wilkins  and  I  are  happy  to  be  with  you  to  talk  about  the  latest  issue  of  the  Bank’s Financial
System Review (FSR), which we published today.
I will start with a reminder about the purpose of the FSR. In it, we identify key vulnerabilities in the
financial  system,  which  can  interact  with  and  magnify  economic  shocks.  We  monitor  the
evolution  of  these  vulnerabilities,  and  we  look  at  their  potential  implications  for  the  financial
system and economy if a significant shock were to occur.
The  most  important  vulnerabilities  for  the  financial  system  remain  the  high  level  of  household
indebtedness and imbalances in housing markets. These vulnerabilities continue to be elevated
and it will take a long time for them to return to more sustainable levels. A stronger economy and
sound policies are working in the same direction to help bring about a gradual easing of these
vulnerabilities, and this trend should continue. Let me give you some details.
Since our last report in June, household debt has continued to rise more quickly than household
income. Borrowing for mortgages and home equity lines of credit is driving this growth. Further,
we  see  that  households  with  the  highest  debt  relative  to  their  income  are  carrying  a  growing
share of the total. That said, new and pending rules for housing finance should help mitigate this
vulnerability.
Last year, the government introduced stricter rules for high-ratio mortgages—that is, where the
down payment is less than 20 per cent of the value of the home. These rules are continuing to
improve the quality of new high-ratio mortgages. Fewer of these mortgages are being issued,
particularly among highly indebted households.
However, we have become increasingly concerned about low-ratio mortgages—those where the
down payment is more than 20 per cent of the value of the home. We are continuing to see an
increase in new low-ratio mortgages that have riskier characteristics. More of these are being
taken  out  by  highly  indebted  households,  and  a  growing  share  of  borrowers  is  choosing  an
amortization  period  longer  than  25  years.  Last  month,  the  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of
Financial Institutions announced enhanced guidelines for low-ratio mortgages that are similar to
the  changes  announced  for  mortgage  insurance  last  autumn.  There  will  be  restrictions  on
borrowing from multiple sources to finance a purchase, and borrowers will have to show that
they could handle higher interest rates. That is just good practice for anybody who is taking on
new debt.
While we can be confident that the new rules will help mitigate this vulnerability, their precise
impact will depend on how both borrowers and lenders respond. We will be watching this closely
when the guidelines come into effect next year.
Another important development since June is the Bank’s tightening of monetary policy through
two interest-rate increases, which came in the context of improving economic fundamentals. The
effect of these moves on mortgages is complex. Roughly 15 per cent of borrowers have floating-
rate  mortgages,  and  they  felt  the  impact  immediately.  However,  interest  rates  on  fixed-rate
mortgages only change when they are renewed, and about half of all mortgages will not reset for
more  than  a  year.  Some  of  those  that  will  reset  next  year  could  even  see  their  interest  rate
decline, depending on their term. Improvements in the labour market, particularly stronger wage
 1 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
growth, should help households adjust to higher interest rates. But clearly, this is another area
we will watch closely.
The second vulnerability, imbalances in the housing market, has also been affected by recent
changes in government policy. Price growth has slowed in the Greater Toronto Area after the
Ontario government introduced policies aimed at housing affordability. This slowing pulled down
national house price growth to an annual rate of 10 per cent.
The  Toronto-area  market  is  following  a  pattern  similar  to  what  took  place  in  the  Greater
Vancouver  Area  last  year,  where  resales  fell  sharply  and  new  listings  rose  after  the  B.C.
government  announced  a  tax  on  non-resident  buying.  It  is  worth  noting  that  prices  in  the
Vancouver area are once again growing more quickly than the national average. The Bank will
continue  to  monitor  housing  market  imbalances  closely,  particularly  for  signs  of  extrapolative
expectations.  
Higher  interest  rates  and  stricter  mortgage-finance  rules  should  also  help  mitigate  this
vulnerability.  However,  the  economic  fundamentals  of  the  Canadian  housing  market  remain
strong. Demand is being supported by increases in employment and population, and supply is
being held back by basic geography and restrictions on land use.
The  third  vulnerability  I  will  quickly  mention  is  related  to  cyber  security.  There  has  been  a
worldwide increase in the frequency, severity and sophistication of cyber attacks. Because our
financial system is so interconnected, a successful attack on one institution can potentially lead
to widespread disruptions. We are working with our partners in the banking industry and public
sector  to  ensure  the  system  is  robust  and  that  institutions  can  recover  quickly  should  any
disruptions occur.
To better understand the potential implications of all these vulnerabilities, we examined the same
risk  scenarios  as  we  did  in  June.  The  risks  are  essentially  unchanged.  However,  the  policy
changes affecting housing finance are clearly a step in the right direction. Still, it will take time for
these,  as  well  as  the  effects  of  recent  interest  rate  increases,  to  significantly  reduce  the
vulnerabilities.
Meanwhile,  our  financial  system  continues  to  be  resilient  and  is  supported  by  improving
economic fundamentals, in particular, by strength in the labour market.
With that, Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins and I are happy to respond to your questions.
 2 / 2
BIS central bankers' speeches
