Marzunisham Omar: Financial advisers, trusted advisers
Keynote address by Mr Marzunisham Omar, Assistant Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia
(Bank Negara Malaysia), at the 6th Annual Conference of the Association of Financial Advisers
2017 "Financial Advisers, Trusted Advisers", Kuala Lumpur, 9 October 2017.
 It  is  indeed  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning.  I  would  like  to  thank  the Association  of
Financial Advisers for inviting me to speak, and allow me first to congratulate the team on the
successful organisation of this year’s conference.
The future is as promising as it is unpredictable. As I reflect on the theme of the Conference, I
am reminded of a quote from Confucius, the ancient Chinese philosopher – “I used to take on
trust a man’s deeds, after having listened to his words. Now, having listened to a man’s words, I
go on to observe his deeds.”
This morning I would like to talk about trust – financial advisers as trusted advisers. Indeed, trust
is  at  the  heart  of  the  financial  advisory  industry.  While  customer  service  and  technology  are
increasingly  the  key  differentiators,  the  most  essential  element  has  been,  and  will  always  be,
trust.  In  an  industry  where  the  very  foundations  are  dependent  on  the  strength  of  personal
relationships,  trust  is  not  only  a  necessary  feature  –  it  is  its  strongest  advantage,  its  defining
value proposition. 
Therefore, in my view, trust is where the future is – the financial adviser of the future will be a
trusted adviser – one that customers can depend on for reliable, thoughtful and bespoke advice
without hesitation.
Confidence and trust in the industry has unfortunately been bruised in recent years. Instances of
mis-selling and fraudulent practices have adversely affected the industry’s reputation. The rising
occurrence  of  illegal  financial  schemes  in  recent  times  has  further  worsened  the  public’s
perception towards individuals who call themselves “financial experts”. Most financial advisers
have  done  the  right  thing,  only  a  small  minority  has  not.  Yet,  it  is  this  minority  that  has  been
enough to trigger a tipping point of bad publicity for the profession.
Under  these  circumstances,  trust  becomes  the  ultimate  currency  of  trade.  Trust  entails
adherence to high ethical standards, putting the interests of customers first and treating them
fairly.  It  comes  down  to  the  profession  having  a  genuine  concern  for  customers’  long-term
financial needs. As trusted advisers, your responsibilities extend beyond just advising customers
on  how  to  invest  their  money.  Rather,  it  is  about  helping  them  achieving  their  financial  goals,
building their financial standing, and securing a promising future for them and their children.
Indeed, this is in line with the philosophy of the Association of Financial Advisers. It is imperative
that your actions reflect these values. Indeed, as Confucius reminds us, it is the deeds that will
prove  critical  in  building  the  long  lasting,  reliable  relationships  that  will  take  this  profession  to
greater heights.
To many, financial planning can be a fairly complicated task. Identifying personal financial needs
requires consideration of an impossibly wide array of factors, finding the right solutions for them
even more so. For years, financial advisers have played the crucial role of condensing the vast
technical  complexities  of  finance  into  practical,  reliable  advice  on  a  personal  level.  It  is  a  role
whose prominence I am certain can only grow with time, but only if it successfully adapts to a
rapidly transforming financial and social landscape.
In this connection and before elaborating further on the concept of a trust, I would like to draw
your attention to three major trends that are shaping the industry as we speak.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
First,  demographic  shifts.  Malaysia  is  a  relatively  young  nation.  40–50%  of  our  workforce  are
aged  between  21  to  35,  also  known  as  Gen  Y.  This  remains  a  largely  untapped  market  for
financial  advisory  services,  and  for  a  reason  –  many  individuals  within  this  age  group  are
skeptical of, or distrust financial advisers. According to a survey by the Asian Institute of Finance
in 2015, only 37% of these individuals had sought advice from a financial adviser. Of this, only
26%  trusted  the  advice  they  received.  This  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  these  are  highly
connected, tech-savvy individuals with broad access to online platforms that act as a primary
source of information and advice. Earning the trust of the Gen Y market, and offering them a
unique  product  or  service,  will  no  doubt  be  the  biggest  and  most  important  challenge  for  the
financial advisory profession of today if it is to remain relevant tomorrow. 
This leads me to the second major challenge facing the industry, that is the digital revolution.
Less than a decade ago, digital investment platforms and robo-advisors were barely heard of.
Today, they form a booming global industry, with a projected asset growth worldwide of 68% by
2020 – amounting to USD2.2 trillion. Recently, a private wealth management company based in
Labuan launched the first ever Shariah-compliant robo-advisor in Asia. Fueled by technological
advancements,  robo-advisors  are  capable  of  completing  tasks  such  as  fact-finding  and
calculation of risk profiles much quicker and at a much cheaper cost.
Third, increasing financial complexity. Over the years, financial institutions have introduced many
innovative  products  to  serve  various  needs  and  risk  appetites.  Yet,  a  nation-wide  survey
commissioned by Bank Negara Malaysia reveals that financial literacy remains relatively low in
Malaysia.  Even  the  most  sophisticated  consumers  suffer  from  “choice  fatigue”  from  the  vast
array of financial products that are available in the market. An opportunity thus exists for financial
advisers  to  help  consumers  address  these  challenges  by  conceptualizing  and  packaging
recommendations in a manner that would be at once holistic and digestible.
With a new paradigm looming on the horizon, financial advisors must reinvent through innovative
business  models,  new  delivery  channels,  and  an  openness  to  continuous  learning.  The  final
destination of these transformative efforts, however, will always remain the same – the building,
preserving and strengthening of trust between adviser and consumer.
That said, I would next like to share and elaborate on what I believe are three core features of a
trusted adviser – professionalism, independence and adaptability.
Elevating professionalism
is 
first  and 
Professionalism 
foremost  about  being  customer-centric.  Nurturing  strong
relationships with customers is key. Technology can be leveraged. Digital interfaces can help
provide  a  more  seamless  customer  experience.  Big  data  may  yield  insights  for  anticipating
customer needs. However, technology is ultimately only an enabler. It should seek to amplify the
human  touch,  not  diminish  it.  In  the  business  of  trust,  no  algorithm  can  replace  a  smile,  a
handshake or a chat over coffee.
Professionalism  is  also  about  competence.  Being  qualified  is  a  starting  point.  But  to  remain
relevant,  it  is  important  that  financial  advisers  continuously  strive  to  keep  up  with  the  latest
developments. In this regard, continuous professional development is critical. Learning events
such as today’s conference are certainly useful and I would like to congratulate the Association
for organizing these learning events.
In addition, professionalism is about character – it embodies the highest standards of integrity,
ethics  and  responsible  conduct.  This  is  what  I  believe  differentiates  a  trusted  adviser  from  a
merely reliable one. One way of achieving this is by holding financial advisers accountable to a
strong code of ethics. In this regard, it is heartening to note that the Association already requires
its  members  to  abide  by  the  code  of  ethics  for  the  financial  sector  issued  by  the  Financial
Services Professional Board. Going forward, the Association may consider refining this code of
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
ethics to better reflect the specificities of the financial advisory industry. For improved efficacy,
the  code  should  also  be  complemented,  if  I  may  suggest,  by  rigorous  monitoring  and  strong
enforcement. To this end, I would like to suggest the Association spearhead the development of
an  oversight  programme  aimed  at  identifying  and  responding  to  misconduct  risks  in  a  timely
manner. Perspectives from members could contribute towards crafting more creative, practical
and effective monitoring mechanisms, such as members’ compliance report cards.
To further elevate the professionalism of financial advisers, Bank Negara Malaysia is currently
reviewing the fit and proper requirements. These requirements will specify, among others, the
factors to be observed in the assessment and appointment of key responsible persons, such as
members  of  the  Board  and  CEOs  of  the  financial  advisers,  and  financial  advisers’
representatives. Adoption of these standards we hope will help to strengthen the credibility of the
profession.
Another aspect that is closely linked to professionalism is transparency. It is for this reason that
the Bank has introduced additional disclosure requirements through the LIFE framework. These
disclosures are intended to ensure that appropriate and fair advice is given to consumers who
purchase  insurance.  Mandatory  sales  illustrations  have  also  been  enhanced.  Additionally,  all
intermediaries now have to provide a service guide to help insurance buyers better understand
the advice and services to which they are entitled. Instead of viewing these as requirements to be
complied with, I would like to encourage financial advisers to take advantage of these disclosure
tools  to  help  customers  fully  understand  what  they  are  paying  for.  This  will  go  a  long  way  in
establishing yourselves as trusted advisers.
Upholding independence
The  second  feature  of  a  trusted  adviser  is  independence.  When  consumers  seek  financial
advice, they expect to get an objective point of view that places their best interest above all else.
And rightly so – the individual’s hard-earned savings are at stake. Yet, the reality today is that the
practice of commission-based compensation for financial advisers may not be fully aligned with
the principle of rewarding quality advice to customers.
Certainly, commission-based compensation has its advantages. It is effective in ensuring that
products are actually bought. It is also appealing to consumers who may not be able to afford to
pay for advice. But there is a world of difference between sales and advisory. While sales seeks
to maximise transaction volume, advisory seeks to maximise the consumer’s welfare. With the
prevalent practice of commission-based compensation, it is not surprising that the industry is still
often perceived as one that pushes products, rather than provide solutions.
The  introduction  of  the  balanced  scorecard,  which  is  currently  being  piloted  among  financial
advisers, is to help address this perception. With the scorecard, remuneration of intermediaries
will  be  more  closely  aligned  to  the  suitability  of  products  for  prospective  customers  and  the
overall quality of service. I believe that such a shift in incentive structures will encourage advisers
to build more enduring relationships with customers.
More can be done beyond the realm of regulation. In other countries – such as Australia, United
Kingdom and India – financial advisers are voluntarily adopting a fee-based model. The combined
effect  of  increased  customer  awareness  and  bargaining  power  are  also  pushing  financial
advisers  to  reduce  their  commission-based  income.  In  India  for  example,  several  firms  have
successfully shifted to largely fee-based models. This is, however, not a painless transition. In
doing so, some have parted ways with customers who were unwilling to pay these fees.
I  believe  that  the  move  towards  a  fee-based  model  is  an  important  signal  that  the  advisers’
incentives are aligned with those of their customers. To ensure a successful transition to a fee-
based  model,  financial  advisers  will  need  to  enhance  their  value  proposition  to  ensure  that
customers receive the standard and breadth of advisory services that would be worth paying for.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
This is no easy undertaking, but I am confident that it is one that our financial advisory firms will
be able to achieve.
Adaptability to change
At the beginning of my remarks, I had highlighted three key trends affecting the industry. How well
financial advisers respond to these developments will determine the industry’s relevance in the
years to come. This brings me to the third feature of a trusted financial adviser – the adaptability
to change.
Traditionally, financial advisers have been a staple for high net-worth individuals. Gen Ys have
rarely been reached, reinforcing the unfortunate perception that financial advisory services are an
“outdated” concept, or simply not for younger generation. This must change going forward, as
this generation represents a large untapped market for financial advisers, and will continue to
grow in importance as their wealth increases over time.
 Whether financial advisers adapt successfully in reaching out to Gen Ys depends on their ability
to understand the unique characteristics of this demographic. Gen Ys actively compare products
using a wide range of information, such as online research, social media and peer reviews. They
are also accustomed to services being convenient, real-time and on-demand. Within the context
of financial advisory, engaging Gen Ys may also have a specific challenge – that is, planning for
long-term  goals  such  as  retirement  or  wealth  accumulation  may  take  a  back  seat  to  more
immediate needs.
To  meet  these  demands,  financial  advisers  must  be  flexible  enough  to  employ  a  range  of
engagement methods. For example, financial advisers should take advantage of social media
platforms as part of their marketing strategies. 
Financial advisers could also leverage on interactive online platforms to better engage with Gen
Ys. Recently, tech start-ups are launching applications to match consumers seeking financial
advice to financial advisers seeking customers. These applications are using a “matchmaking
concept”  to  link  customers  to  trustworthy  financial  advisers,  based  on  their  unique  investing
needs and personality.
In addition, different pricing strategies could also be explored. These should be commensurate
with the profile of a prospective Gen Y customer. For example, fees can be adjusted in proportion
to a younger customer’s income level, rather than linked to assets under management, as is
typically the case now. Flat fees or hourly charges may also be considered for customers with
smaller account balances.
Conclusion
I have spoken at length about the key tenets of a trusted adviser today, but I also understand that
transforming  the  profession  into  where  it  needs  to  be  in  the  future  is  not  something  that  can
happen  overnight.  Like  any  other  transformation,  the  effort  will  require  meticulous  planning,
strategy  and  sheer  determination  through  the  many  changes  to  come.  Professionalism,
independence and adaptability will all be hard-won victories. While Bank Negara Malaysia stands
ready to support initiatives in this direction, it is the industry that must ultimately collaborate to
create the business models and value propositions that will define the financial advisory services
of the future. The Association serves as an excellent platform for such collaboration, with the
potential participation of 618 registered financial advisers’ representatives to date. I welcome the
innovations that are to come from the Association and the members.
I began today’s speech with Confucius, and I’d like to close with another pearl of wisdom from his
analects – “The man who moves a mountain begins by carrying away small stones.” As today’s
theme  suggests,  our  work  for  the  future  begins  now.  This  includes  resource  training,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
accreditation, recruitment strategies, designing new business models and forging relationships
with  a  new  generation  of  consumers.  Indeed,  the  trusted  financial  advisers  of  tomorrow  are
closer  than  we  think.  In  fact,  I  honestly  believe  the  trusted  advisers  of  the  future  are  already
amongst us here today. 
With that, I wish all of you a fruitful and engaging conference ahead. Terima kasih.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
