Jens Weidmann: Welcome remarks
Speech by Dr Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  and  Chairman  of  the
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  at  the  SAFE/CFS/Deutsche
Bundesbank  lecture  on  "Making  inclusive  growth  a  reality"  by  Tharman  Shanmugaratnam,
Frankfurt am Main, 5 December 2017.
 1. Introduction
Dear Tharman
Dear President Wolff
Dear Otmar
Ladies and gentlemen
I wish you a warm welcome to today’s lecture on “Making inclusive growth a reality", which is
organised  jointly  by  the  Center  for  Financial  Studies  (CFS),  the  Research  Center  SAFE  and
the Deutsche Bundesbank.
How to achieve inclusive growth featured prominently on this year’s G20 agenda of “Shaping an
interconnected world". With that in mind, I am especially delighted to welcome Tharman, Deputy
Prime  Minister  of  Singapore,  to  speak  on  this  issue  today.  Singapore  was  one  of  Germany’s
guest countries during the 2017 G20 presidency, and Tharman has first-hand information on the
topic  of  inclusive  growth,  having  been  one  of  the  protagonists  of  this  year’s  G20  meetings  in
Baden-Baden, Washington and Hamburg.
In addition to his duties as Deputy Prime Minister, Tharman serves as Coordinating Minister for
Economic  and  Social  Policies  in  the  Singapore  Cabinet  and  is  Chairman  of  the  Monetary
Authority of Singapore (MAS), Singapore’s central bank and financial regulator.
He also chairs the Group of Thirty, a consultative group on international economic and monetary
affairs  that  seeks  to  deepen  understanding  of  international  economic  and  financial  issues.
Tharman previously headed the International Monetary and Financial Committee, the key policy
forum of the IMF, where he was the first Asian chair.
Furthermore,  he  is  Chairman  of  the  G20  Eminent  Persons  Group  on  Global  Financial
Governance, a role to which he was appointed by the G20 finance ministers and central bank
governors in April 2017 to recommend reforms to the system of multilateral financial institutions.
It was in this capacity that he led the first Eminent Persons Group Symposium with international
organisations, 
at
the Bundesbank premises here in Frankfurt.
academics 
renowned 
yesterday 
experts 
today 
and 
and 
His broad set of national responsibilities and his wide-ranging experience on global issues put
him in an excellent position to speak on the topic of today’s lecture.
2. Inclusive growth
According to an IMF note prepared for and presented to the leaders at the G20 Hamburg summit
in July this year, "inclusive growth is a priority that resonates globally today". And, in contrast to
some  of  the  other  topics  discussed  at  the  Hamburg  summit,  the  G20  member  states  were
unanimous in supporting the objective of inclusive growth.
So  what  does  inclusiveness  mean  with  respect  to  growth?  Let’s  start  by  breaking  the  term
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
“inclusive  growth”  down  into  its  two  components:  “inclusive”  means  sharing  the  benefits  of
growth  amongst  all,  and  “growth”  can  be  simply  stated  in  economic  terms  as  a  long-term
increase in real GDP.
Thus,  we  are  talking  about  economic  prosperity  for  the  benefit  of  everyone.  Put  this  way,  it
becomes obvious that inclusive growth is not a recent invention but rather an economic goal that
is just common sense. After all, back in 1957, Ludwig Erhard, the former German Minister for
Economic  Affairs  and  later  Chancellor,  entitled  his  book  on  the  German  Social  Market
Economy "Wohlstand für Alle", which translates as “prosperity for all".
Although  the  invisible  hand  at  work  in  a  market  economy  leads  to  an  efficient  allocation  of
resources, it is now widely accepted that the market mechanism on its own creates winners and
losers.  While  technological  change  generally  leads  to  an  increase  in  production  capacities,  it
affects workers with different capabilities in different ways.
Obviously, a far-reaching redistribution would hamper incentives. Excessive public expenditure
— or speaking more generally – excessive redistribution through the tax system might harm the
potential for sustained growth because entrepreneurs and workers become discouraged.
On  the  other  hand,  "excessive  inequality  is  not  conducive  to  sustainable  growth"  either,  as
Christine Lagarde rightly stated.  Excessive inequality can harm growth because it dampens the
prospect for a significant part of the population of ever participating in the country’s prosperity.
1
And so it is a matter of course that in most countries, the public sector shares in individuals’
income  to  a  certain  degree  by  imposing  taxes,  with  the  majority  of  these  countries  imposing
progressive  taxes.  This  enables  the  public  sector  to  supply  public  goods.  Achieving  social
cohesion by means of social security transfers, building human capital by subsidising education,
and  promoting  the  labour  market  participation  of  women,  the  long-term  unemployed  and  low-
skilled workers – all of these things can boost not only inclusion, but growth as well.
Bearing this in mind, it is important to find the right calibration of growth policies.
The  public  debate  on  inclusive  growth  policies  often  takes  the  development  of  economic
inequality over recent decades as a starting point. Rising inequality is seen as a major challenge
2
around the world.  
However,  the  perception  of  steadily  rising  inequality  depends  strongly  on  the  indicator  used.
When you look at the Gini coefficient of net income, for example, which is a commonly used
measure  of  inequality,  inequality  across  countries  has  decreased  over  the  last  two  decades.
Within countries, however, we see a mixed picture of higher Gini coefficients since the 1990s in
3
some advanced and emerging countries, yet lower coefficients in other countries.  
Of course, Gini coefficients looking at the distribution of net income after taxes and transfers are
only one of many measures. The dispersion of gross market income, the distribution of wealth,
the  median  income  and  poverty  rates  are  other  measures  that  seek  to  quantify  economic
inequality. Further measures describe inter-generational distribution by looking at demographic
aspects and public debt. All in all, there is no uniform answer to the question how inequality has
evolved over the last decades.
3. Conclusion
Notwithstanding the difficulties associated with measuring inequality meaningfully, policies that
achieve  both  inclusion  and  growth  are  especially  sought  after.  We  need  to  ensure  that
enterprises and their employees are properly equipped to harness the opportunities presented by
globalisation and technological progress, and that they are able to cope with structural change,
especially through better education and life-long learning.
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
As a former Minister for Education, Tharman will certainly agree on this.
That said, we are looking forward to hearing suggestions from you, Tharman, on how to make
inclusive growth a reality.
The floor is yours.
1
2
3
Christine  Lagarde,  Managing  Director,  IMF:  “Lifting  the  Small  Boats",  Address  at  Grandes  Conferences
Catholiques, Brussels, June 17, 2015.
See, eg, The World Economic Forum (2017), The Inclusive Growth and Development Report 2017, Geneva,
and OECD(2017), A policy framework to help guide the G20 in its development of policy options to foster more
inclusive growth, Paris.
IMF (2017), Fostering Inclusive Growth, Report prepared by Staff of the IMF for the G20, June 2017, Washington
DC, p. 12.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
