Muhammad bin Ibrahim: Insurance supervision - looking beyond
Keynote address by Mr Muhammad bin Ibrahim, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia (Bank
Negara Malaysia), at the 24th International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) Annual
Conference 2017 "Insurance Supervision: Looking Beyond", Kuala Lumpur, 2 November 2017.
 Welcome to Kuala Lumpur. We are delighted to host the 24th IAIS Annual Conference. The last
time this conference was held in Southeast Asia was 14 years ago.
Bank Negara Malaysia has a very long and productive association with the IAIS. Not long after the
IAIS was established in 1994, a new insurance legislation was enacted in Malaysia. This was a
watershed  event,  changing  the  course  for  development  of  the  industry.  A  deep  and
comprehensive reform was instituted and the course was set to modernise the insurance sector
in Malaysia.
I  recall  how  useful  the  Insurance  Core  Principles  and  other  IAIS  standards  were  in  helping  to
shape  our  regulatory  approach  and  supervisory  practices. As  a  market  with  a  long  history  of
global insurers operating within our borders, we also benefited from arrangements that enabled
us to better supervise cross-border activities.
These arrangements have continued to strengthen over time, culminating most recently, in the
IAIS Multilateral Memorandum of Understanding.
We  are  therefore  delighted  to  host  this  event  in  Southeast  Asia,  where  the  deepening  of
insurance  markets  remains  key  to  support  economic  risk  management  and  broader
development goals for this region.
Looking beyond…
This brings me to the theme of this conference, “Looking beyond”. It is an interesting theme. It is
even more interesting if we look at the insurance industry from a broader perspective, from the
angle  of  economic  development.  Beyond  issues  of  safety  and  soundness,  my  experience
suggests that we ought to have a keen interest in the development of an effective and efficient
insurance  market,  that  serves  the  advancement  of  broader  goals,  from  the  provision  of
healthcare,  to  building  resilience  against  natural  disasters,  supporting  trade,  enhancing  social
security and providing the opportunity for people to improve their livelihood.
Insurance is a great invention, one of those inventions that touches people’s lives. Long before
“big data” became in vogue, insurers have effectively used data to turn unknowns into knowns,
and perils and hazards into opportunities. The concept of pooling funds to assist the unfortunate
and those faced with adverse situations is a very noble idea.
From  air  travel  to  the  launching  of  satellites,  insurance  innovations  have  enabled  many  of
mankind’s  greatest  feats,  propelling  civilisation  forward.  Innovations  in  micro-insurance  have
helped protect our most vulnerable communities from devastation. Today, drones are being used
to inspect property damage claims, and machine learning to detect fraud. Indeed, the industry
has enabled trade to flourish, serving as the bedrock of modern economies.
Despite  these  remarkable  developments,  the  world  continues  to  face  immense  economic,
environmental  and  social  challenges.  The  effects  of  climate  change  are  real,  leaving  horrific
damage and destruction. Economic losses in the aftermath of this year’s hurricane season in the
Gulf  of  Mexico  is  estimated  to  reach  up  to  $265  billion.  Events  that  we  once  thought  to  be
implausible or highly unlikely, have become the “new normal”.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
In many parts of the world, health care costs continue to rise, and many face uncertain futures
as public sector safety nets and government finances come under increasing strain. Against this
backdrop, financial inclusion for the underserved segments remains an elusive goal.
For the insurance industry, this raises important issues. Two issues come to my mind. First is
on the industry’s role in addressing a few of the challenges facing our economies and society.
And  second,  the  manner  in  which  regulation  and  supervision  can  adapt  to  support  broader
economic and social development.
In addressing these issues, I shall attempt to advocate the idea that a rethinking in approach is
an imperative. New paradigms are needed to anchor business and public policy to the realities of
the future. I will touch on three of them: competitive, stability and ethical paradigms.
A new competitive paradigm
In  an  increasingly  interconnected  world,  traditional  models  of  competition  deserve  a  re-think.
Network effects will become more important, both in increasing the value of insurance products
and services, and to better manage risks. Rather than see the competitive landscape through a
zero-sum lens, co-operative competition or “co-opetition” can result in synergistic benefits.
The  example  of  Hewlett-  Packard  (HP)  clearly  illustrates  this  idea.  Just  one  year  after  the
company  started  operating  its  direct  cargo  trains  linking  China  and  Europe,  it  made  the  bold
decision to allow other producers on-board, giving up what was seen as a significant competitive
advantage at the time. But the results were astonishing. By doing so, it was able to increase the
frequency of departures which allowed it to move its products more quickly to Europe. Today,
HP’s Europe-bound trains depart daily from China, with the higher frequency working to its own
advantage.
The  notion  of  co-opetition  is  not  entirely  foreign  to  the  world  of  insurance.  Insurance
marketplaces  such  as  Lloyd’s  of  London  have  long  operated  arrangements  that  deliver
advantages from pooling risks and information. In Malaysia, market mechanisms exist to move
reinsurance  documentation  more  efficiently  between  market  participants,  and  to  share
information on fraud.
The  emergence  of  new  technologies  will  take  this  further.  Open  application  programming
interfaces,  or  APIs,  enable  insurers  to  provide  and  obtain  access  to  information  that  will
significantly alter the operational process of insurers. But access to information would require a
network of service providers who are willing to share data and information, without giving away
one’s  competitive  edge.  Investments  in  infrastructure,  especially  in  ICT  is  very  expensive.  By
pooling  funds  to  build  shared  infrastructure,  the  burden  becomes  more  manageable.  More
investments in IT will enable new possibilities to expand insurance reach, improve efficiency and
increase effectiveness.
Not  long  ago,  the  natural  instinct  would  be  to  resist  these  forces  of  change.  More  than  ever,
corporations’  fortunes  and  survival  are  now  more  closely  linked.  New  realities  require  new
paradigms. Co-opetition. How we cope with the new realities will depend on our ability to re-set
our minds and leverage on networks to create value; at the customer, the firm, and at the system
levels.
There is enormous potential in re-defining strategies in competition and cooperation. Imagine the
possibilities that could be achieved with strategic investments in shared infrastructure and the
ability to share data securely across individuals and entities. We could significantly reduce costs,
improve access, deliver superior customer experience which was previously not possible, with
the network of shared information, better management and improved resilience against risks.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
A new paradigm on stability
It has been 10 years since the global financial crisis. The global insurance industry is now on
stronger  and  more  stable  foundation.  Industry  leaders  and  supervisors  may  be  satisfied  with
what was achieved since then, but there is certainly no room for complacency.
Achieving  stability  objectives  will  become  more  challenging  as  the  complexities  of  risk
identification  increase.  We  know  that  insurance  companies  can  create  systemic  risks,  even
though  we  may  differ  in  our  views  over  the  intensity  of  such  risks.  There  is  a  ‘constructive
tension’,  arising  from  the  need  to  significantly  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision  while
balancing the need for growth, development and innovation. 
In  a  world  characterised  by  fierce  competition,  complex  product  offerings  and  evolving
customers’  needs,  there  is  always  the  risk  of  administering  excessive  and  complicated
regulations.  This  could  lead  to  unintended  consequences  that  can  make  the  financial  system
less, rather than more stable. In a dynamic world, regulation and supervision should be agile,
pragmatic and dynamic and able to respond to changing conditions in a timely manner. A bit of
uncertainty ought to be tolerated. But at the same time, we should not hesitate to reverse course
should  a  particular  rule  prove  to  be  ineffective.  Rules  are  never  meant  to  remain  relevant  in
perpetuity. It never does. It always run its course. It is from this perspective that regulators must
have the courage to change course.
In addition, from another perspective, the importance of proportionate regulation and supervision
cannot be overstated. This is an area where I think we must continue to work in developing and
refining the approaches to proportionality and support more inclusive insurance markets. In the
larger  scheme  of  things,  as  regulators  we  cannot  ignore  the  broader  objectives  of  supporting
economic growth and improving the overall welfare of society.
Equally  important,  with  environmental,  social  and  governance  considerations,  becoming  an
important criterion and increasingly adopted by investors, the ethics and sustainability of insurers’
activities  will  be  important  factors  in  creating  shareholder  value.  Consumer  welfare  and  wider
social impacts alongside profits will constitute key metrics by which performance is measured.
This  is  only  appropriate,  as  maintaining  public’s  trust  and  confidence  is  a  good  business
strategy.
The idea here, is not to view the insurance industry’s stability in isolation, but to be seen within
the wider context of preserving social and economic value of insurance systems.
 A new paradigm on ethics
Technological advances and scientific breakthroughs have opened new possibilities to operate
and deliver products to customers. Technological innovations will make customers better off but
insurers on the hand, may be confronted with some fundamental ethical issues. For insurance
companies, this requires a rethinking of professional and ethical standards. Thus, a need for a
new paradigm on ethics.
For  example,  with  greater  ability  to  aggregate  and  analyse  more  data  from  multiple  sources,
questions arise on the extent insurers should consider using genetic and social preferences in
underwriting. Or whether it is acceptable to commit someone to a long-term financial undertaking
when they may not fully comprehend the implications of their choices even though insurers might
truly believe it is ‘good’ for them. And then, there is always the dilemma and trade-offs in directing
more  resources  toward  social  impact  investments,  in  cases  where  it  lowers  risk-adjusted
returns for policyholders.
As advancements in technology brings about various unknowns and a blurring of business lines,
professional and ethical standards need to be embedded into our DNA to ensure the integrity of
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
our industry. When it comes to ethical values and conduct, we must move beyond conceptual
discussions to practical applications. Time and effort must be undertaken to raise the standards
of competence and developing well-defined codes of behaviour. This should take into account an
insurer’s  legal  and  professional  obligations,  the  wider  impact  on  society,  issues  of  equity  and
fairness, and preservation of virtues such as honesty and compassion.
These issues I raised are delicate issues that can involve complex ethical choices. It will test the
values of corporations, its people, its leadership. 
Specific issues for regulation and supervision
Let me mention a few words on specific challenges for regulation and supervision in the future
that is before us. First, the lifespan of regulations is getting shorter and shorter, with new areas of
risk  emerging  faster  than  regulators  can  write  new  rules.  Second,  and  adding  to  the
complication,  potential  threats  are  also  creeping  in  from  beyond  the  traditional  regulatory
perimeter.  This  can  be  both  from  non-traditional  players,  or  unfamiliar  business  models  or
technologies. Third, we may have to simply accept that we may never fully grasp or understand
emerging risks facing the industry, in a timely manner.
to  collate 
Allow  me  to  offer  some  reflections  on  these  issues.  First,  we  need  a  better  and  effective
approach 
from  non-traditional  sources.  Technological
advancement offers additional opportunities. There is clearly vast potential on the use of big data
and machine learning to improve risk identification and assessments. Last year, the US SEC
successfully charged a bank for failing to adequately train its representatives in the sale of certain
complex debt instruments, using custom analytics.
intelligence, 
including 
Tools were developed to sift through millions of trading records, a task that would have been
impractical with traditional investigative techniques. I conjure that supervisory arrangements to
share  information  across  agencies  and  borders  had  also  assisted  in  expanding  and
strengthening the investigation effectiveness.
Second, we need broader toolkits that allow for more targeted and proportionate interventions.
Several  are  worth  mentioning.  Good  progress  has  been  made  in  recovery  and  resolution
planning that ensures large financial institutions can be unwound in an orderly fashion without
threatening  broader  stability.  In  Malaysia,  the  takaful  and  insurance  protection  system
complements  supervision  through  differentiated  premiums  that  create  strong  incentives  for
insurers  to  maintain  prudent  risk  profiles.  And  different  enforcement  approaches,  such  as
enforceable undertakings, can be an effective way to tailor supervisory responses to risks at the
institutional level.
Third,  we  need  to  recognise  that  regulation  is  as  much  an  art  as  it  is  a  science.  Experience
suggest that authorities should prioritise rules that are appropriate for their jurisdictions, and at
the same time, allow room for regulatory and supervisory discretion to respond to emerging and
specific risks. This is important if we are to reconcile and balance the trade offs between the
practical limitations that regulators face, the desire to avoid excessive regulation, and the need
for authorities to act to mitigate risks.
The  exercise  of  regulatory  discretion  should  be  subjected 
to  appropriate  rigour  and
accountability.  And  it  should  be  supported  by  a  stronger  focus  to  develop regulatory
experts, rather than just more regulations. This requires deep knowledge of the industry, but also
wisdom  and  discernment.  In  the  current  state  of  constant  change,  building  the  capacity  of
supervisors  is  one  of  the  most  critical  priorities  to  guard  against  threats  to  stability  without
impeding growth and innovation.
Finally,  we  need  to  create  room  for  experimentation.  While  rules  are  not  meant  to  restrict
innovation, they often have the effect of doing so. This might end up leaving customers worse off,
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
and insurers exposed to higher business risks than necessary or appropriate. When faced with
the stark choice of doing nothing and risking harm to public interests, or writing rules to control
something that we do not yet fully understand, it is only sensible to experiment and learn from it.
This  point  is  also  crucial,  when  technology  offers  so  much  potential  to  increase  financial
inclusion.  Platform-based  solutions  and  insure-tech  companies  are  opening  up  insurance
access to large segments of the population at a fraction of previous costs. To fully benefit from
such possibilities, some regulators have adopted “regulatory sandboxes” to test solutions and
design  regulations  that  are  appropriate.  There  will  no  doubt  be  other  approaches  taken  to
experiment and innovate. And when things do not work, we must be prepared to change tactics
and strategy.
Conclusion
Over the last few decades, the global regulatory community has come together to build stronger
supervisory systems and more resilient markets. Insurers have built extensive networks in their
pursuit of growth. Now is the time to build on these foundations and further strengthen them, with
a renewed commitment and focus on increasing the utility and impact of insurance.
In a journey of many twists and turns, the IAIS has been incredibly fortunate to have Secretary
General Yoshihiro Kawai at its helm, leading the IAIS through a large part of the journey, 14 years
in total. While the road ahead remains challenging, I am confident that under the able leadership
of  Secretary  General-designate  Jonathan  Dixon  who  succeeds  him,  the  IAIS  will  no  doubt
continue to strengthen its important role in building stronger insurance systems that work for all.
On that note, allow me once again to warmly welcome you to Malaysia, and to an engaging and
productive conference ahead.
Thank you.
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
