François Villeroy de Galhau: Insurance in a world of disruption
Speech  by  Mr  François  Villeroy  de  Galhau,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  at  the  9th
International Insurance Conference, Paris, 27 October 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I am very happy to be here today as supervisor in my capacity as President of the ACPR, and
also as guarantor of the smooth financing of our economy in my capacity as Governor. In these
two  respects,  the  insurance  sector  is  both  close  to  me  and  important  to  me.  Thank  you  for
inviting me to speak on this theme of disruption. To put it more clearly, and as you have pointed
out,  Mr.  President  [Bernard  Spitz],  the  world  is  in  turmoil  in  many  ways.  This  undeniably
represents  a  challenge  for  insurers,  but  also  a  motivation:  the  raison  d'être  of  insurance  has
always been to be a vector of protection and stability in the midst of uncertainty. This morning, I
would like to stress the essential role that insurance must play in our economy, by emphasising
two  areas:  its  financing  and  its  digitalisation.  But  before  that,  I  would  like  to  mention  the  very
recent developments in monetary policy.
I. Our monetary policy is in itself a source of stability
Yesterday, at the Governing Council presided by Mario Draghi, we took the important decision to
reduce our net monthly asset purchases by half – to EUR 30 billion – until September 2018. This
is an essential step towards their possible end later; a step that is justified by our confidence in
the gradual convergence of inflation towards our target of 2% over the medium term: we consider
the  economic  recovery  in  Europe  to  be  “increasingly  robust  and  broad-based".  In  parallel,  we
said  that  we  will  continue  to  ensure  “ample”  monetary  support,  rather  than  “very  substantial”
support as mentioned in our previous statements – thanks to the whole range of our instruments,
including  the  sizeable  stock  of  assets  that  we  will  continue  to  hold  in  line  with  our  policy  of
reinvestment, and our forward guidance on interest rates. In this new paragraph, the Governing
Council stresses an essential point that I have often referred to over these past few weeks: our
non-standard monetary policy is not a solo – it is not simply about net monthly purchases, and
we  shouldn’t  focus  too  much  on  them  –;  it  is  a  group  of  instruments  that  we  can  play,  by
following a predictable sequence, as part of our gradual normalisation strategy.
It is therefore important that insurers continue to adapt their business models to the low interest
rate environment. In particular, I welcome the gradual moderation of interest rates paid out on life
insurance  contracts,  which  should  be  pursued  in  order  to  maintain,  in  the  long  run,  insurers’
solvency and their ability to meet all their commitments vis-à-vis policyholders.
I would like to add a few words on the bad controversy that had surrounded the Sapin II law, and
which now luckily seems to be behind us. Much has been said about the measure which gave
the possibility to the Haut Conseil de stabilité financière (HCSF) to limit life insurance withdrawals
in the event of a crisis, and which was, according to some, an impingement on French citizens’
freedom to dispose of their savings. These allegations were, perhaps, temporarily detrimental to
life insurance; it would therefore be in your interest as professionals to point out, against certain
populist  excesses,  the  truth,  which  you  know:  these  powers  are  only  intended  to  be  used  in
serious and exceptional circumstances, to better protect the rights of policyholders. Here again,
our concern is to preserve stability.
II. The essential role of insurers in the financing of our economy
The  insurance  sector  is  the  largest  institutional  investor  in  the  euro  area,  with  total  assets  of
close to EUR 7,800 billion in the second quarter of 2017, of which more than EUR 2,600 billion
for the French market alone. Better steering these flows to sectors that need long-term financing
 1 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
is  essential  for  our  economy.  What  comes  to  mind  are  infrastructures,  of  course,  but  also
companies,  which  need  more equity financing  to  be  able  to  innovate  more:  as  innovation  is
more risky, it is financed through capital rather than debt. Start ups are well aware of this, but our
scale-ups,  midcaps  and  SMEs  also  need  greater  access  to  equity  leverage.  In  this  field,  our
economy,  like  that  of  our  neighbours  in  the  euro  area,  is  seriously  lagging  behind:  in  France,
equity only accounted for 64% of GDP at end-2016, which is half as much as in the United States
(128%).
1
It is true that French and European savers are very attached to safe investments. The bulk (69%)
of the EUR 4,765 billion in financial wealth held by French households is invested in interest rate
products, compared to only 31% in equity products, i.e. invested in corporate capital in the form
of  listed  or  unlisted  shares.   However,  it  is  important  to  distinguish,  with  respect  to  savers’
expectations  concerning  security,  two  components:  they  are  attached  to  the protection  of
capital, even more so than to liquidity. With the increase in life expectancy, and with a greater
need  to  prepare  their  retirement,  savers  are  increasingly  being  steered  towards  long-term
products; the liquidity component is becoming less decisive.
Here,  insurers  have  an  essential  role  to  play,  by taking  the  lead  on  new  forms  of  life
insurance that aim for a three-fold compatibility: with low interest rates, our economy’s need for
equity financing and the expectations of the French people. This requires new long-term savings
products that are less liquid but feature a form of capital protection and offer over time the higher
equity-type returns. Let me make myself absolutely clear: the development of unit-linked policies
is not a sufficient response. I take note of the vitality of these policies’ net premium inflows (up
27% in 2016, with inflows for the first 10 months of 2017 at more than twice their levels for the
same period in 2016), but they offer no capital protection, and let me remind you of the duty to
advise on the real risks incurred by policyholders. Instead, we must encourage the Euro-Growth
(Eurocroissance)  product,  which  should  be  revamped  and  expanded.  The  product’s  initial
calibration  has  prompted  debate;  its  commercial  take-up,  though  tangible  (assets  under
management of around EUR 1.8 billion), is still slow. I know that certain professionals have their
own ideas to address that. And it’s my sincere hope that progress is made on those ideas, and
quickly. It is not the responsibility of the public authorities to develop good products – that is down
to  you  –;  but  it  will  be  our  responsibility  to  encourage  them,  at  the  proper  time,  through  the
appropriate  prudential  and  even  tax-related  measures.  This  struggle,  targeted  towards  life
insurance  that  is  more  equity-linked  and  long  term,  seems  more  promising  to  me  than  the
struggle against the flat tax (prélèvement forfaitaire unique); I would like to mention in passing
that the flat tax contributes to a neutral stance on the different forms of savings, which is long
overdue.
The  diversification,  properly  understood,  of  the  investments  of  French  savers  towards  more
equity-based,  long-term  savings  is  in  everyone’s  interest.  And  today  there  are  additional
incentives  for  life  insurers  to  offer  new  products  that  break  away  from  the  dual  cash-liquidity
guarantee, due to the lesser Solvency II capital requirements. 
And this brings me to the issue of regulation. Here too, insurers have an essential role to play,
i n preparing  the  review  of  the  Solvency  II  Directive’s  new  regulatory  framework.  The
directive came into force almost two years ago now and you have implemented it with a great
deal of professionalism. In many respects, Solvency II represents a very significant step forward
for the insurance sector. But this does not mean that it’s perfect: we must analyse its impacts
closely,  particularly  its  effects  on  investment  behaviour  and  the  financing  of  the  economy,  in
order to propose the adjustments that prove necessary. Progress has already been made on the
financing of infrastructure projects and businesses, thanks to two amendments that came into
effect in April 2016 and September 2017, respectively, which adapted the calibration of capital
requirements.  More  generally  though,  the  reviews  of  the  standard  formula  and  long-term
guarantee  package  measures  planned  for  2018  and  2020,  respectively,  are  important
opportunities to make essential improvements. The work is already underway, and the more you
 2 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
actively participate, alongside your European colleagues, the more our chances of success will
be enhanced.
III. The role of insurers in the digitalisation of our economy
It is essential for our economy to adapt to the digital revolution: it creates incredible opportunities,
but with them, new risks against which the insurance sector, once again, can bring stability and
protection. I would like to discuss two subjects in particular:
Firstly, cyber-insurance. The cyber-insurance market is still underdeveloped. Insurers can
and should take inspiration from their own experiences in tackling cyber-risk, and use it to
develop  a  more  mature  French  and  European  cyber-insurance  offering.  The  coverage
against cyber-risk is a very real concern that affects all companies – both small and large –
as cyber-attacks are becoming increasingly frequent and costly: according to figures from
Euler-Hermès, 57% of French companies were victims of these attacks in 2016, compared
with  32%  in  2015.  We  at  the  Banque  de  France,  alongside  the  Eurosystem  and  our  G7
colleagues, have made cybersecurity one of our strategic priorities.
And secondly, personal data and big data. Naturally, the spread of connected objects that is
triggering  an  exponential  rise  in  the  amount  of  data  available  on  insurance  policyholders
represents  an  opportunity  for  the  business  of  insurance,  which  consists  precisely  in
collecting and exploiting data in order to quantify and put a price on risk. Nonetheless, I would
urge insurers to take a responsible approach: we need to strike the right balance between
segmentation  and  the  sharing  of  risk  between  policyholders.  The  basic  principles  of
solidarity and risk-pooling that are intrinsic to insurance are at stake. And we must not lose
sight of our collective values regarding individuals’ right to privacy.
Before  concluding,  I  would  like  to  add  a  few  words  about  Brexit.  The  French  authorities  are
mobilised and committed to making Paris a leading destination for insurance undertakings. The
ACPR  has  taken  the  lead  with  an  English-language  fast-track  authorisation.  We  are  holding
serious and discrete discussions with various business prospects. The recent announcement by
the  American  group  Chubb,  the  United  States’  leading  property  and  casualty  insurer,  of  its
intention  to  transfer  its  operations  to  Paris  demonstrates  that  our  expertise  in  supervision  in
particular is a recognised asset. But mobilising must not mean abandoning our high standards
and requirements, and Brexit cannot be an opportunity for British entities to simply set up empty
shell corporations in Europe, mere company name plates, while keeping their resources in the
United Kingdom. In this respect, I fully agree with the vigilance called for by EIOPA. And lastly,
Brexit also brings with it certain risks, and consequently the need for contingency plans: I am
thinking  particularly  of  the  French  policyholders  who  took  out  insurance  directly  with  British
undertakings, and by way of symmetry, the French undertakings with commitments in the United
Kingdom.
Beyond what the insurance sector can do for our economy, I would like to conclude by telling you
what we can do for you. At the Banque de France and the ACPR, we are ready and committed to
supporting you through all the current upheavals that are forcing you to rethink your business
models and professional reflexes. That could be digital technology – for which we have created a
FinTech unit and put in place the FinTech Forum – and could also be regulatory developments or
even climate change, which we will discuss again on 11 and 12 December in Paris. I know that
you are resilient, and we are there to help you. Thank you for your attention.
1
Annual report of the Observatoire de l’épargne réglementée, July 2017.
 3 / 3
BIS central bankers' speeches
