Vítor  Constâncio:  Economic  recovery  and  the  new  phase  of
monetary policy
Keynote speech by Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Opening Conference of the 20th Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 13 November 2017.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
 I  am  grateful  for  the  opportunity  to  address  you  today  at  this  event  that  opens  the  20th  Euro
Finance Week, addressing economic and monetary policy developments in the euro area.
At its last meeting on 26 October, the ECB Governing Council decided to substantially reduce its
asset purchases. However, an ample degree of monetary stimulus remains necessary in order
for underlying inflation pressures to continue to build-up and support headline inflation over the
medium-term.  The  recalibration  of  our  asset  purchases  reflects  growing  hope  in  the  gradual
convergence of inflation towards our inflation objective, on account of the increasingly robust and
broad-based  economic  expansion,  an  uptick  in  measures  of  underlying  inflation  and  the
continued effective pass-through of our policy measures to the financing conditions and the real
economy.
In my remarks today, I will reflect on the broad-based improvement in the general economic and
financial  situation  that  has  allowed  such  significant  recalibration.  I  will  argue  that  this
improvement illustrates, among other things, the appropriateness of the monetary policy that we
have undertaken in the past years. In this perspective, I will focus on the euro area as a whole as
well as more disaggregate developments in some countries.
Finally, you certainly cannot expect a central banker to end without a note of caution. In the last
part of my speech I will therefore focus on the challenges we are still facing.
Let  me  start  with  a  description  of  the  current  economic  developments. The  euro  area
economy  is  experiencing  a  broad-based,  robust  and  resilient  recovery,  and  this  recovery  is
underpinned  by  the  monetary  policy  measures  introduced  by  the  ECB  since  June  2014.
However, despite these favourable growth dynamics, inflation developments have been subdued.
At the same time, financial stability risks seem contained.
Sustained recovery
The  euro  area  has  been  expanding  for  the  past  four  years  and  the  recovery  has  gained
momentum. The GDP in the euro area has finally reached a level above that in 2007, 10 years
after the crisis.
Robust  economic  activity  is  further  being  translated  into  a  substantial  amount  of  job  creation.
Despite  the  unemployment  rate  still  being  too  high,  almost  7  million  more  people  are  now
employed in the euro area than in mid-2013, which implies that the employment losses recorded
during the crisis have been offset. This stands in contrast to the largely jobless recovery of 2010
and is another indication of the sustained recovery in the euro area.
The  improving  labour  market  combined  with  increasing  household  wealth,  strong  consumer
confidence  and  favourable  financing  conditions  are  supporting  robust  private  consumption.
Investment prospects also look promising, which reflects both the need to make up for forgone
investment in previous years as well as the highly accommodative financing conditions which
have been passed through to lower borrowing costs for euro area firms. Business investment is
now slightly above the 2007 level.
 1 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Forward-looking  indicators  transmit  a  similarly  positive  message:  business  confidence  is  at  a
decade high, and survey data point to continued growth in the period ahead.
Broad-based, convergent recovery
Over recent quarters, the economic recovery has also become more broad-based across euro
area countries and the different sectors of the economy.
In fact, all euro area countries, for the first time since 2007, are now enjoying positive real GDP
growth in annual terms. The convergence of cyclical growth is reflected in the fact that member
countries growth rates were never so close to each other since the inception of monetary union.
Moreover, unemployment rates have receded almost everywhere across the euro area. Despite
the fact that unemployment is still too high in some countries, notably as regards young people, it
is  worth  mentioning  that  it  came  down  the  most  in  several  of  those  countries  where  it  had
previously been especially high.
Contribution from the accommodative monetary policy of the past years
We  recalibrated  our  policies  following  the  positive  economic  outcomes,  but  these  outcomes
would not have materialised, at least not to the same extent, without the ECB’s expansionary
monetary policy.
When calibrating its monetary  policy  instruments,  the  Governing  Council  forms  a  view  on  the
degree of accommodation that is necessary to achieve its price stability objective. Concretely,
our  monetary  policy  measures  have  supported  economic  growth  and  the  reduction  in
unemployment in a variety of ways. First and foremost, they have supported domestic demand
and  have  facilitated  the  deleveraging  process  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  The  recovery  in
investment  also  benefitted  from  very  favourable  financing  conditions  and  improvements  in
corporate profitability.
A precise quantification of the contribution of monetary policy to the current economic recovery is
difficult,  but  current  estimates  suggest  that  the  measures  undertaken  have  been  highly
successful.  Recent  ECB  staff  estimates  indicate  that  our  monetary  policy  measures  are
contributing to an increase in the euro area GDP of around 1.7 percentage points, cumulatively
over the period 2016–2019. This contribution is well above monetary policy’s contribution to the
two previous euro area recoveries in 2003Q2-2006Q4 and 2009Q3-2011Q3.
The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  is  also  reflected  in  the  way  our  decision  to  reduce  our
monthly purchase of securities by half was smoothly received by the financial markets. In spite of
the  restrictive  nature  of  the  decision,  bond  yields  hardly  moved  and  some  even  came  down,
while the exchange rate slightly depreciated. This was the result of our cautious preparation and
communication, as well as from the ongoing positive growth momentum.
Looking ahead, the growth rate, unemployment, the labour market, the survey data, all provide
positive indications that we are moving towards a shrinking output gap as well as an improving
labour  market.  These  will  eventually  produce  higher  nominal  wage  growth  and  thus  higher
inflation. But we know that this process still relies significantly on our monetary policy support. It
is not yet self-sustained and therefore we must be patient and persistent.
Deflation risks diminished, inflation risks remain subdued
Every policy entails risks. Several concerns have thus been expressed about possible collateral
consequences of our policy. Such concerns have however not materialised in real facts and we
can now underline the appropriateness of our monetary policy stance.
 2 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Firstly, our monetary policy measures were not an “experiment” on the economy, but were in line
with the policies previously adopted by other major central banks. Interest rate paths and balance
sheets  of  the  ECB  and  the  FED  are  broadly  comparable,  despite  the  longer  and  slower
economic recovery of the euro area after the crisis.
Secondly, much-feared inflationary pressures have not materialised, nor can they be foreseen in
the immediate future. Measures of underlying inflation have ticked up only moderately in recent
months, and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend. Underlying inflation
in  the  euro  area  is  expected  to  rise  only  gradually  over  the  medium-term,  supported  by  our
monetary  policy  measures,  the  continuing  economic  expansion,  the  corresponding  gradual
absorption of economic slack and rising wages. Domestic cost pressures, notably from labour
markets,  are  still  subdued.  The  strong  worldwide  reflationary  phase  that  seemed  likely  at  the
beginning of the year has not materialised. Overall, price pressures are still muted and the path
of inflation remains conditional on continued support from monetary policy.
Finally, there were concerns that the ECB monetary policy could pose risks to financial stability
and provoke excessive asset price increases. Clearly, this did not materialise as there are no
generalised asset overvaluations in the euro area. In various countries, some restricted regional
pockets of real estate price buoyancy are being dealt with targeted macroprudential measures.
It is against this overall positive background that the ECB Governing Council has decided on a re-
calibration of its instruments, with a view to safeguarding the monetary policy impulse that is still
necessary to secure a sustained adjustment in the path of inflation, in a way that is consistent
with our monetary policy aim.
All countries have benefited from the recovery
An  important  feature  of  the  recovery  is  that  all  member  countries  have  benefited  from  the
recovery and have seen an improvement in their economic fundamentals.
The enormous credit flows from banks in core countries to their peers in the periphery, fuelled
economic overheating with housing price bubbles in some cases and generalised high external
deficits in the run-up to the crisis. The financial crisis then led to significant fiscal deficits when
governments had to assist domestic banks. Notably, since the inception of the financial crisis,
those  countries  have  undergone  a  significant  adjustment  path,  in  some  cases  supported  by
EU/IMF financial assistance programmes. When we compare today with the situation in 2008,
we see an impressive adjustment along several of the main economic variables. Fiscal deficits
have been significantly reduced and in those countries the primary fiscal balance is now positive.
At the same time, their current account balances have adjusted by more than 12 percentage
points from an average of –10 percent of GDP to a surplus of nearly 2 percent at the end of last
year.  This  adjustment  has  been  facilitated  by  a  significant  recovery  from  the  losses  in
competitiveness  experienced  before  the  crisis.  Unit  labour  costs  of  these  countries  have,  on
average, been reduced by nearly 10 percent over these years. In turn, this adjustment has been
enabled  by  significant  reforms  of  countries’  labour  and  product  markets  by  allowing  more
resources to be used in the tradable sectors and increasing the adaptability of their economies at
large. Overall, both ECB and IMF estimates show that the current account adjustments are, to a
large extent, of a structural nature and not just cyclical. They are therefore likely to be sustained
as the economic recovery of the euro area continues.
The general improvement in economic fundamentals also applies to member states that were
less  severely  affected  by  the  crisis.  Given  the  location  of  my  speech  today,  let  me  look
particularly at Germany. Having been the “sick man of Europe” in the early 2000s, the German
economy has become today’s engine of the euro area economy. Moreover, growth has recently
become  increasingly  domestically  driven.  This  has  clearly  also  facilitated  the  recovery  in  the
other euro area economies, via higher German import demand.
 3 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
Concerning  inflation,  fears  that  our  accommodative  monetary  policy  could  boost  excessive
inflation in Germany have clearly not materialised. Headline inflation has picked up this year from
the very low level of 0.4 percent last year. Most of this increase resulted from the significant pick-
up in oil prices. Underlying price pressures in Germany by contrast, have remained subdued, as
indicated by the rather stable core inflation rate.
The increase in house prices may be more of concern, particularly in some of the biggest cities,
but there is so far no evidence of broad-based excessive house price valuations in Germany as a
whole.
Strong  economic  growth  demonstrates  that  Germany  is  the  member  state  that,  after  Ireland,
shows the highest increase in income per person since the beginning of the euro. At the same
time,  the  present  unemployment  rate  is  the  lowest  in  the  last  37  years  and  is  well  below  the
European average.
Challenges ahead
Let me summarise. We are witnessing a sustained economic recovery in the euro area as a
whole  and  in  all  its  member  states.  In  particular,  countries  under  financial  assistance
programmes have been implementing significant policy measures to improve their resilience and
competitiveness. Many of these reforms will support potential growth but they tend to exert their
full impact with a considerable lag. In any case, such measures have increased the resilience of
member states’ economies and of the euro area as a whole.
At the same time, these positive developments should not lead to complacency. Inflation, which
is the core of our mandate, is still below our target after four years of growth supposedly above
potential.  We  are  not  yet  fulfilling  our  mandate  and  that  is  why  monetary  policy  will  have  to
continue to be very accommodative, assuring favourable financial conditions to foster growth and
spur wages and prices.
On  the  other  hand,  vulnerabilities  and  challenges  remain  in  many  euro  area  economies.
Unemployment rates have indeed come down, but in particular the number of young and long-
term unemployed is still unacceptably high. Moreover, despite an adjustment of flow variables,
such as the absence of excessive credit growth, lower budgetary deficits and improved current
account  balances,  the  legacy  of  the  crisis  is  still  visibly  expressed  in  high  stock  imbalances,
namely the high indebtedness of the private and public sector across many euro area countries.
These high debt levels make the countries vulnerable to adverse shocks. Furthermore, the crisis
has also interrupted the progress of real convergence in the more vulnerable economies towards
higher living standards. Negative divergences in personal income levels in relation to the euro
area  average  have  again  increased.  Higher  and  more  sustainable  growth  potential  requires
decisive policy actions.
At the national level, many structural and institutional reforms are still needed to safeguard and
improve the future functioning of countries’ economies and thereby the euro area as a whole. We
should also review the way in which national policies are currently co-ordinated in the EU. Both
the Five Presidents Report on “Completing Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union” (2015) and
the  recent  EU  Commission  paper  on  the  “Deepening  of  the  Economic  and  Monetary  Union”
(2017) provide guidance on the way to proceed. It is nevertheless a sign of the times that the EU
Commission  felt  compelled  to  reduce  the  ambition  of  its  proposal  regarding  the  European
deposit guarantee scheme , a significant component of the banking union. This just indicates
that there are understandable but relevant uncertainties about the future. Any agreement about
the evolvement of European integration is a difficult endeavour as it implies the involvement of all
member states as well as their respective public opinion. Some of the possible issues at stake
are  indeed  sensitive  and  could  generate  instability  if  not  carefully  assessed.  This  provides
another reason to take into account the concerns of all member states.
1
 4 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
It  is  however  also  true  that  the  present  favourable  economic  environment,  should  be  used  to
make progress in reinforcing the economic and monetary union resilience. This corresponds to
the common interest of countries made closely interdependent by the single currency. Reforms
at national and EU level will be crucial to improve resilience to shocks, increase growth potential
and ultimately restore a path of real economic convergence among member countries.
Thank you for your attention.
1
See  EU  Commission  (11  October  2017)  “COMMUNICATION  TO  THE  EUROPEAN  PARLIAMENT,  THE
COUNCIL, THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK, THE EUROPEAN ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE AND
THE COMMITTEE OF THE REGIONS ON COMPLETING THE BANKING UNION”. As the press release issued by
the  Commission  explains:  “  …In  particular,  today’s  Communication  is  suggesting  for  discussion  the
introduction of EDIS more gradually compared with the original proposal of November 2015. There would be
only two phases: a more limited reinsurance phase and then coinsurance. However moving to this second
phase would be conditional on progress achieved in reducing risks.”
 5 / 5
BIS central bankers' speeches
