Y V Reddy: A policy update  
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the book release, “Accelerating 
growth and poverty reduction” by Dr Arvind Virmani, in New Delhi, 7 April 2004. 
 Friends, 
I  have  great  pleasure  in  participating  in  this  book  release  function.  The  Academic  Foundation  has 
provided  yeomen  service  in  bringing  out  this  book,  which  is  very  valuable  and  special  for  several 
reasons.  It  is  essential  to  note  that  the  title  of  the  book  reminds  us  that  the  focus  of  accelerating 
growth should be on poverty reduction. The writing displays a high degree of objectivity. Of particular 
interest  to  students  and  policy-makers  is  that  it  presents,  in  a  coherent,  consistent  and  pragmatic 
manner, the problems and prospects of the Indian economy along with an array of specific solutions. 
The  book demonstrates  a  deep  understanding  of  the  dynamics of  economic policy-making  in  India. 
Among the new generation of top economists in India Dr. Virmani holds a special position and it is 
good that his ideas are being presented to a wider audience by Academic Foundation. 
I have worked with Dr. Arvind Virmani very closely, particularly in the management of external sector. 
His contributions to the reforms of external sector, specially LERMS and current account convertibility, 
are  immense.  I  have  personally  benefited  from  his  thorough  and  incisive  analysis  of  issues  and 
options. But more than that I have great personal regard and affection for him.  
In my capacity as Governor, RBI let me take this opportunity to place before you an update on our 
policy.  As  you  may  be  aware,  I  had  provided  an  update  on  the  outlook  of  the  Indian  economy  on 
January 7, 2004. Today, I will provide an update covering developments in three areas, viz., (i) money 
and credit, (ii) financial markets and external sector and (iii) follow-up measures to announcements in 
the November 2003 policy statement.  
Money and credit 
Expansion in broad money (M3), aggregate deposit and non-food credit has been slightly above the 
parameters  set  out  in  the  April  2003  policy,  but  have  been  largely  in  consonance  with  the  broad 
expectations.  Broad  money  in  2003-04  expanded  by  16.0  per  cent  (up  to  March  19,  2004),  as 
compared with 13.4 per cent (net of mergers), in the corresponding period last year. Reserve money 
expansion up to March 26, 2004 has also been higher at 13.1 per cent as compared with 9.2 per cent 
in the corresponding period of the previous year, mainly due to capital inflows. The bulk of the inflows 
have been sterilised through open market operations (OMO) including the Liquidity Adjustment Facility 
(LAF). This is reflected in contraction of net RBI credit to the government by Rs. 88,698 crore (up to 
March  26,  2004),  substantially  offsetting  the  pressures  on  monetary  expansion  emanating  from 
external sector. Aggregate deposits of scheduled commercial banks have expanded by 17.3 per cent 
up to March 19, 2004.  
Non-food credit expansion in 2003-04 has been of the order of 17.6 per cent, which though slightly 
lower than 18.6 per cent growth (adjusted for mergers) seen a year before, is in line with expectations 
set out in the April 2003 policy. The year 2003-04 began with a slack in credit offtake that persisted 
during  the  first  five  months.  Credit  expansion  in  subsequent  months  has  been  quite  vigorous.  As  a 
result,  Rs.  1,19,684  crore  incremental  credit  has  been  made  available  in  the  full  year  against  Rs. 
99,448 crore in the year before. In fact, since September 2003, non-food credit expansion has been 
higher by 38 per cent than in the corresponding period of the previous year.  
Credit  expansion  in  2003-04  appears  to  have  been  led  by  the  housing  and  retail  sectors.  This  has 
helped generate new demand for consumer durables, basic and intermediate products, as also new 
services. The resulting pickup in consumer demand seems to have improved production activity.  
Industrial  credit  has  also  expanded  since  September  2003,  although  at  a  slower  pace.  Slower 
industrial credit expansion this year, in part, reflects the shift in corporate financing pattern in recent 
years with increased reliance on internal financing alongside increasing accent on external borrowing.  
A significant feature of the credit growth this year has been the substantial flow of bank credit to the 
priority  sector  which  showed  an  increase  of  Rs.  33,720  crore  or  about  16  per  cent  in  the  first 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 1
10 months of 2003-04, for which data are presently available. Bank credit for housing had increased 
by 33 per cent, while that for infrastructure by 25 per cent in the same period.  
Financial markets and external developments 
The financial markets have continued to remain generally stable. The call money rate declined from 
6.3  per  cent  at  end-March  2003  to  4.3  per  cent  by  end-March  2004.  Reflecting  the  easy  liquidity 
conditions,  the  average  daily  absorption  in  the  repo  transactions  under  the  Liquidity  Adjustment 
Facility (LAF), increased substantially during last two months, averaging over Rs. 50,000 crore. It had 
averaged Rs. 25,800 in the first quarter of 2003-04. The overhang of liquidity has largely persisted as 
a result of continued capital inflows.  
In  general,  yields  in  the  government  securities  market  have  fallen  during  2003-04.  The  yield  on 
10-year paper declined by 106 basis points from 6.21 per cent as at end-March 2003 to 5.15 per cent 
by end-March 2004. The repo rate cut by 50 basis points from 5.0 per cent to 4.5 per cent on August 
25, 2003 was in tandem with market yields. The policy-stance helped in maintaining a generally stable 
environment in the government securities market.  
The  Indian  foreign  exchange  market  generally  continued  to  witness  orderly  conditions.  During  the 
year, the exchange rate of rupee, over the end-March 2003 level appreciated by 9.5 per cent against 
US dollar, while it depreciated by 3.1 per cent against the euro, 5.9 per cent against the Pound sterling 
and 4.4 per cent against the Japanese yen. Significant depreciation of US dollar against other major 
currencies prompted adjustments in world currencies and this was also reflected in the exchange rate 
of the rupee.  
The balance of payments position remains comfortable despite widening of the trade deficit. According 
to trade data (on shipment basis), exports in US dollar terms during April-February 2004 increased by 
14.7 per cent, over and above an increase of 17.2 per cent witnessed in the preceding year. Export 
growth  has,  however,  been  better  in  recent  months.  Imports  have  expanded  by  26.3  per  cent,  as 
compared with 17.3 in the previous year. Detailed commodity data available till December 2003 show 
that during the first three quarters of the current financial year, non-oil, non-gold import increased by 
26.2 per cent as compared with an increase of 19.0 per cent in the corresponding period last year. The 
trade deficit (on shipment basis), in the current financial year up to February 2004 has nearly doubled 
to about US$ 15.5 billion, compared with US$ 8.0 billion, in the corresponding period of the preceding 
year. Notwithstanding the widening of the trade deficit, the current account remained in surplus due to 
robust invisible earnings. In the first three quarters of 2003-04, for which data are available, the current 
account surplus was US$ 3.2 billion, higher than US$ 2.9 billion in the corresponding period a year 
ago.  
Capital  inflows  continue  to  remain  robust.  In  the  recent  period,  reserve  accretion  has  been  largely 
reflecting  both  comfortable  liquidity  prevalent  in  the  global  economy  and  the  underscoring  of 
confidence  by  the  international  community  in  the  Indian  economy.  During  2003-04,  the  foreign 
exchange reserves increased by US$ 36 billion to US$ 111.7 billion as at end-March 2004.  
During  2003-04,  the  significant  increase  in  forex  reserves  has  been  accompanied  by  (i)  smooth 
redemption  of  US$  5.5  billion  of  Resurgent  India  Bonds  (RIB),  (ii)  prepayment  of  certain  high-cost 
foreign  currency  loans  of  the  Government  of  India  amounting  to  US$  3.7  billion  and  (iii)  India 
participating  in  the  IMF’s  financial  support  to  Burundi,  Brazil  and  Indonesia  to  the  extent  of 
US$ 561 million. 
The  data  available  regarding  sources  of  accretion  of  reserves  for  the  first  three  quarters  show  that 
foreign investments (direct and portfolio) increased by US$ 10.1 billion. NRI deposit flows added US$ 
3.5 billion against US$ 2.4 billion last year. Short-term credits have also risen to US$ 2.4 billion from 
meagre  US$  0.4  billion.  The  level  of  the  reserves  now  roughly  equals  the  external  debt  of 
US$ 112.1 billion.  
Follow-up measures 
The Reserve Bank set up two internal groups, one on Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) and the other 
on Instruments of Sterilisation. Based on the recommendations in these respects and the feedback 
from  market  participants,  the  RBI  worked  closely  with  Government  to  facilitate  fine-tuning  of  the 
operating procedures and instruments to meet the new challenges. A memorandum of understanding 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2004
(MOU)  was  signed  between  the  Government  of  India  and  the  Reserve  Bank  on  March  25,  2004 
detailing the rationale and operational modalities of the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS). Under the 
MSS  scheme,  the  government  has  agreed  to  the  issuance  of  Treasury  Bills and  dated government 
securities with an overall ceiling of Rs. 60,000 crore for the year 2004-05. If the outstanding amount of 
issues  under  MSS  touches  a  threshold  limit  of  Rs.  50,000  crore,  the  ceiling  and  the  threshold  are 
subject to review. Following the MOU, an indicative schedule for issuance of such securities covering 
the  first  quarter  of  2004-05  with  a  total  auction  amount  of  Rs.  35,500  crore  has  already  been 
announced.  The  indicative  schedule  for  auctions  under  MSS  is  subject  to  variations  if  market 
conditions so warrant. These securities would be managed and maintained by the Reserve Bank and 
would  be  no  different  from  other  gilts,  except  that  the  proceeds  from  these  would  remain  with  the 
Reserve  Bank.  Thus,  the  MSS  provides  an  additional  instrument  of  liquidity  management  to  the 
Reserve  Bank,  without  segmenting  the  government  securities  market.  It  would  help  in  absorbing 
enduring liquidity in the system and in the process facilitate LAF to focus on day-to-day monetary and 
liquidity management.  
We have also announced some changes in the LAF scheme. The revised scheme provides for daily 
7-day  repo  and  daily  overnight  fixed  rate  reverse  repo,  both  to  be  conducted  on  week  days.  The 
14-day repo is being retained for the time being. The spread between repo rate and reverse repo rate 
has been reduced from 200 basis points to 150 basis points, with the 7-day repo rate at 4.5 per cent 
and overnight reverse repo rate at 6.0 per cent. Also, the entire amount of support under the standing 
liquidity facilities for export credit refinance for banks and liquidity support to primary dealers (PDs), is 
now available at a single rate, viz., the reverse repo rate. This would result in some reduction in costs 
of funds for banks and PDs.  
Under the revised scheme, the Reserve Bank will, however, continue to have discretion to conduct 
overnight  repo  or  longer  term  auctions  at  a  fixed  rate  or  at  a  variable  rate  depending  on  market 
conditions and other relevant factors. Reserve Bank will also have the discretion to change the spread 
between the repo rate and reverse repo rate as and when appropriate.  
It is expected that these measures under LAF and the MSS will enable the Reserve Bank to improve 
liquidity  management  in  the  system,  to  maintain  stability  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  and  to 
conduct monetary policy in accordance with the stated objectives.  
We have also encouraged banks to be more transparent on their interest rates. We have continued 
our  efforts  in  this  direction  in  a  consultative  manner  and  in  the  November  2003  policy  review,  had 
requested Indian Banks Association (IBA) to advise its members suitably on the implementation of a 
scheme of benchmark prime lending rate (BPLR), keeping in view the operational requirements. Since 
then, most of the banks have announced their BPLRs. They are lower by 25 to 100 basis points for the 
public sector banks. During the first three quarters of 2003-04, the range of interest rate on advances 
above Rs. 2 lakh (other than for export credit), at which substantial business is contracted has shown 
some decline.  
The  policy  review  had  also  focussed  attention  on  credit  delivery.  It  has  been  the  endeavour  of  the 
Reserve Bank to improve credit delivery mechanisms for agriculture, small and medium enterprises 
(SMEs) and other priority sectors. Keeping this in view and in accordance with the policy statement, an 
‘Advisory  Committee  on  Flow  of  Credit  to  Agriculture  and  Related  Activities  (Chairman:  Prof.  V.S. 
Vyas)’  and  a  ‘Working  Group  on  Flow  of  Credit  to  SSI  Sector  (Chairman:  Dr.  A.S.  Ganguly)’  were 
constituted.  
The Vyas Committee has made systematic efforts to reach out to as many stakeholders as possible by 
visiting  different  parts  of  the  country.  In  smaller  groups  the  committee  members  have  met  with 
representatives  of  commercial  banks,  cooperatives  and  RRBs,  government  administrators,  NGO 
leaders  and  other  knowledgeable  persons  in  15  states  of  the  country.  On  the  basis  of  these 
deliberations, the Committee is planning to submit its interim report shortly, covering issues such as 
rate of interest on agriculture credit, NPA norms in agricultural financing, outreach in the context of 
service  area  approach  and  micro  finance.  The  Committee  is  also  looking  into  institutional  and 
structural aspects of NABARD and RRBs, as also the operation of Lok Nayak Jaiprakash Fund. The 
Ganguly Working Group is examining issues relating to credit flow to medium enterprises also. The 
Group has held meetings with select SSI Associations and experts.  
The Reserve Bank has set up a ‘Committee on Procedures and Performance Audit on Public Services 
(Chairman: Shri S.S. Tarapore)’ and mirror Ad hoc Committees have been set up by each bank. The 
Committee set up by the Reserve Bank has submitted three Reports. The first Report covers foreign 
exchange transactions, the second covers Government transactions and the third deals with banking 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 3
operations  relating  to  deposit  accounts  and  other  facilities.  All  the  three  reports  are  focused  on 
Common  Persons.  Concerned  departments  of  Reserve  Bank  are  examining  the  recommendations 
made  in  these  reports.  With  the  functioning  of  the  Reserve  Bank  Committee  and  the  ad  hoc 
Committees it is expected that there would be perceptible improvement in customer services and a 
simplification of procedures and practices.  
In  order  to  strengthen  regulation  and  supervision,  a  ‘Standing  Technical  Advisory  Committee  on 
Financial  Regulation’  has  been  set  up.  The  Committee  has  representation  from  banks,  SEBI  and 
non-bank  financial  sector,  academics,  etc.  Since  its  constitution,  the  Committee’s  assistance  and 
views  have  been  sought  on  a  wide  range  of  regulatory  issues.  A  Working  Group  on  Systemically 
Important  Financial  Intermediaries  (SIFIs),  has  been  set  up  to  look  into  the  monitoring  of  financial 
conglomerates with members from Reserve Bank, SEBI and IRDA. The working group is expected to 
propose  a  list  of  financial  conglomerates  and  advise  on  the  monitoring  and  reporting  system.  In 
accordance  with  the  policy  announcement,  a  Working  Group  on  Development  Financial  Institutions 
(DFIs)  has  also  been  constituted  to  examine  the  broader  framework  of  regulation  of  NBFCs.  The 
Group is expected to submit its report shortly. 
After  the  initiation  of  reforms,  the  Reserve  Bank  has,  over  the  years,  taken  several  measures  to 
develop the government securities market. In continuation of these new guidelines were announced 
on March 29, 2004 to switch over the settlement in government securities transactions to the DVP III 
mode. The modifications would enable sale of government securities on the day of purchase, reducing 
the price risk and improving the liquidity in government securities market. The changeover would also 
enable  rollover  of  repos,  facilitate  non-banks  to  move  away  from  the  call  money  market  and  also 
enable banks to reduce their dependence on the call money market.  
With a view to bringing about further institutional development and improve the operational efficiency 
of  the  financial  system,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  developing  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement 
(RTGS) system and this has since gone live. For the time-being inter-bank transactions are being put 
through for four select banks which have participated in the trial run and efforts are being made for 
entry of other banks after assessing their readiness. Customer related transfers will be enabled later 
under  the  system.  Other  eligible  bank  and  primary  dealer  participants  will  join  in  due  course.  The 
RTGS  is  expected  to  significantly  reduce  settlement  risks  and  improve  the  quality  of  financial 
intermediation. In addition, Electronic Funds Transfers (EFT) is already in place in 15 centres and the 
Special EFT scheme is also operational in 127 centres, together covering about 8,500 bank branches.  
4 
 BIS Review 20/2004
