Antonio Fazio: Welcome address for the Euro-Mediterranean Seminar 
Welcoming  address  by  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor of  the  Bank of  Italy,  at  the  Euro-Mediterranean 
Seminar,  Eurosystem  and  Mediterranean  country  national  central  banks,  organised  by  the  Bank  of 
Italy and the European Central Bank, Naples, 14-15 January 2004. 
 The twelve Mediterranean countries of Africa, the Middle East and Europe represented here by the 
governors of their respective central banks are members of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. They 
are  Morocco,  Algeria,  Tunisia,  Egypt,  Israel,  the  Palestinian  National  Authority,  Jordan,  Lebanon, 
Syria, Turkey, Malta and Cyprus. They are joined by Libya in the capacity of observer. 
The partnership between the European Union and the Mediterranean countries began in 1995 with the 
Barcelona Conference; it should lead, in 2010, to the creation of an area of free trade in goods and 
services.  The  signatories  to  the  agreement  have  undertaken,  in  particular,  to  allow  the  reciprocal 
establishment  of  enterprises  and  to  promote  flows  of  direct  investment  in  the  less  advanced 
economies. The commitments entered into at Barcelona have been followed by bilateral Association 
Agreements  between  the  European  Union  and  nearly  all  the  Mediterranean  countries,  including 
measures to liberalize trade in manufactures as agreed during the Uruguay Round. 
The gross domestic product of these Mediterranean countries is equal to 10 per cent of that of the 
euro area. They have a population of 250 million people, which is growing at an annual rate of 1.8 per 
cent; young people below 15 years of age are 33 per cent of the total. 
The European Union has a population of 380 million; the proportion of young people under 15 is only 
17 per cent. The proportion of over-65 year-olds is 16 per cent and is destined to rise substantially in 
the decades to come. The present birth rate is extremely low, only slightly higher than the death rate. 
According  to  UN  estimates,  by  2015  Europe’s  population  will  have  grown  by  5  million,  that  of  the 
Mediterranean countries by 60 million.  
The per capita GDP of the twelve countries is showing a tendency to rise, albeit slowly; it still averages 
only 11 per cent of the figure for Europe. 
Some years ago the Bank of Italy began a study of the economies of North Africa and the Near East. 
The geographical proximity and already significant commercial ties with these countries, the migratory 
movements,  and  the  prospect  of  financial  integration  prompted  us,  within  the  Eurosystem,  to 
undertake a more systematic analysis of the scope for their development, which is of great importance 
for Europe as well. 
The exports of the twelve countries and Libya are equal to around $120 billion a year, 20 per cent of 
the area’s gross product. More than half go to the European Union; 50 per cent of the goods exported 
to Europe are manufactures, the remainder consists mostly of energy sources and to a smaller extent 
of other raw materials and food products.  
Over three quarters of the thirteen countries’ imports from Europe consist of manufactured products; 
these imports account for about half their total merchandise imports. 
Trade among the countries of the area is limited. 
There are intense migratory movements from these countries to Europe, owing to their closeness and, 
above all, as a consequence of the large differences in per capita incomes and living standards. 
In  Italy,  out  of  a  total  of  about  1,400,000  immigrants,  160,000  come  from  Morocco,  50,000  from 
Tunisia, 25,000 from Egypt and 12,000 from Algeria. In Germany, out of a total of some 7,300,000 
foreigners,  about  2,000,000  come  from  Turkey.  In  France,  out  of  a  total  of  about  3,300,000 
immigrants, more than 1,300,000 come from Morocco, Algeria, Turkey and Tunisia. 
Migratory  flows  will  undoubtedly  increase  owing  to  the  ageing  of  the  European  population  and  the 
limited supply of workers to do unskilled and low-paid jobs. 
A major social and political issue is how to control migration, to ensure that it will benefit rather than 
harm our economies, to guarantee that immigrants and their families are harmoniously inserted into 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 1
our societies; and to avoid the rifts, the marginalization and the problems of law and order caused by 
unregulated flows. 
Voluntary organizations do commendable work in fostering the social integration of immigrants. 
Many  attempts,  some  very  recent,  to  enter  countries  illegally  with  the  complicity  of  criminal 
organizations have ended tragically, with women and children among the victims. 
There is an increasingly urgent need to find suitable ways to regulate the phenomenon and prevent 
the suffering and loss of human lives, in combination with policies for the development of the countries 
of origin of the migratory flows. 
An  important  shortcoming  of  the  bilateral  agreements  between  the  European  Union  and  the 
Mediterranean  countries  is  the  failure  to  liberalize  trade  in  agricultural  products,  where  the 
Mediterranean  countries  have  a  significant  comparative  advantage,  to  the  benefit  not  only  of  their 
economies but also of ours. 
Direct  investment  in  the  Mediterranean  countries,  the  most  effective  way  of  disseminating 
technological know-how, has been on a limited scale up to now. At the end of 2002 it amounted to 
€103  billion,  or  less  than  20  per  cent  of  the  GDP  of  the  countries  of  the  area.  A  quarter  of  this 
investment was by EU businesses, 2 per cent by Italian ones. 
Firms from Mediterranean countries play only a small role in Italy, almost exclusively in the energy and 
media  sectors;  there  are  a  few  cases  of  equity  interests  in  Italian  banks  and  industrial  companies. 
Closer links exist with the productive sectors of other European countries, but they are still of marginal 
importance. 
The openness of the Mediterranean countries’ financial systems, centred on banks, is limited. In many 
countries  banks  are  still  largely  owned  by  the  state.  The  development  of  the  financial  system  is 
hindered by shortcomings in the legal framework and the governance rules for firms and markets. 
The key feature of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership is a new strategic approach on the part of the 
European Union to the problem of these countries’ development. 
No longer are they seen as single entities to trade with and provide with technical assistance through 
bilateral  agreements,  but  as  an  area  in  which  to  promote  the  start  of  a  process  of  faster  growth 
through institutional and economic reforms and the coordination of private and public investment. 
To  this  end  there  needs  to  be  a  continuing  financial  commitment  on  the  part  of  the  European 
institutions but also more intense contacts and exchanges of experience between the institutions and 
operators  of  the  Mediterranean  countries  on  the  one  hand  and  their  European  counterparts  on  the 
other. 
The  decision  taken  in  Naples  last  December  to  establish  a  Euro-Mediterranean  Foundation  can 
reinforce the links between the countries involved through training programmes and initiatives aimed 
at fostering mutual understanding and a dialogue between cultures. 
In the last few years the drive to bring about a radical renewal of the Mediterranean economies has 
lost momentum, partly as a consequence of the prolonged stagnation of the world economy. 
Progress  has  been  made,  albeit  to  a  varying  extent,  in  all  the  Mediterranean  countries  in  terms  of 
institutional reforms, market building, liberalization programmes and reducing the role of the state in 
the  economy;  coordination  of  the  action  aimed  at  the  integrated  development  of  the  area  is  still 
lacking. There are risks of marginalization with respect to a world economy that is changing rapidly. 
This seminar, organized by the European Central Bank and the Bank of Italy, can be a stimulus to 
renew the initiative. In three working sessions, reserved to the central banks, it will address a series of 
problems  regarding  economic  integration,  exchange  rate  management,  and  banking  and  financial 
systems. 
It is our hope and intention that the seminar will not remain an isolated event. The Bank of Italy, in 
close  accord  with  the  Eurosystem,  is  willing  to  offer  the  necessary  support  for  the  creation  of  an 
institutional framework for the start of a long-lasting collaboration. Meetings like the present one can 
be held periodically on specific topics of interest to the central banks. 
In classical antiquity the Mediterranean did not constitute a barrier between the populations living on 
its shores. Rather, it was a basin of communication for intense trade in commodities and goods, for 
cultural exchange, for often peaceful, sometimes belligerent relations. 
2 
  BIS Review 5/2004
In  the  words  of  Fernand  Braudel,  “The  Mediterranean  is  the  world’s  most  ancient  crossroads.  For 
thousands  of  years  everything  has  converged  here,  mixing,  enriching  its  history:  men,  beasts  of 
burden, machines, goods, ideas, religions, ways of life”. 
This ancient unity, the Greek koine and the Roman empire, were followed by centuries of troubles and 
division. The unity that wars had shattered was laboriously but admirably restored in the Middle Ages 
at the cultural level, with the contribution of great Arab and Jewish philosophers, with the recovery of 
ancient learning, with the synthesis of Scholasticism. 
Today, however, we come from a long period, many centuries, of division, conflict, and war between 
the peoples of the Mediterranean, of profound upheaval in Europe as well. 
In the last fifty years, after the Second World War, our continent has taken a great stride forward in its 
history; fifteen peoples who at times had fought each other fiercely over the centuries have decided to 
unite in taking a path of economic and civil advancement.  
These peoples will shortly become twenty-five. 
Today, we are taking the first small but sure steps towards building a new unity of intent in the quest 
for shared progress around the Mediterranean, sustained by the values and cultures of the peoples of 
Africa, the Near East and Europe and the desire to exchange goods and experiences. 
Peace and trade will necessarily bring prosperity.  
The  importance  of  the  financial  dimension  for  economic  development  must  emerge  clearly  from 
today’s seminar.  
Let  us proceed  with humility,  but  also with  commitment,  in  the search  for a common  language and 
shared objectives. 
This  invitation  is  addressed  to  those  participating  in  the  seminar,  but  also  to  the  wider  financial, 
economic and civic community which, responding to our call, has welcomed us to this ancient but also 
modern and beautiful city of Naples. 
BIS Review 5/2004 
 3
