European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 1 April 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, welcome again to our press conference.  
Before  I  proceed,  I  would  like  to  remind  you  that  I  have  conveyed  the  Governing  Council’s  sincere 
condolences to Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Banco de España, following the terrorist attacks in 
Madrid on 11 March 2004. I assured him of the Governing Council’s total solidarity with the Spanish 
people and the Banco de España.  
The Vice-President and I will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing Council 
of the ECB. 
On the basis of our regular economic and monetary analysis, we have not changed our assessment 
that the current stance of monetary policy remains in line with the maintenance of price stability over 
the medium term. Accordingly, the key ECB interest rates have been left unchanged. The low level of 
interest  rates  also  provides  ongoing  support  to  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  We  will 
continue  to  monitor  carefully  all  developments  that  could  affect  our  assessment  of  risks  to  price 
stability over the medium term. 
Let me now provide a more detailed explanation of our decision, turning first to the economic analysis. 
With regard to real GDP growth, it appears that the recovery in the euro area has continued into 2004, 
following quarter-on-quarter growth rates of 0.3-0.4% in the second half of 2003. Recently released 
data  on  production  and  demand  as  well  as  confidence  indicators  have  been  mixed,  implying  some 
short-term  uncertainty,  while  preliminary  information  available  after  the  tragic  events  in  Madrid  on 
11 March does not suggest a major impact on confidence. We will continue to monitor the situation 
closely. On balance, there is currently no evidence challenging the assessment of continued, though 
modest, real GDP growth in the euro area over the short term. 
More  fundamentally,  the  conditions  remain  in  place  for  the  recovery  to  continue  in  2004  and  to 
strengthen over time. First, global economic growth is robust and broadly based, both geographically 
and  across  sectors,  thereby  providing  a  positive  external  environment  for  the  euro  area.  In  this 
context, we expect euro area exports to grow significantly this year and next, despite some past losses 
in price competitiveness. 
Second,  on  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  be  helped  by  favourable  financing  conditions,  an 
improvement in corporate earnings and spillover effects from global demand trends. Some signs of an 
improvement  in  fixed  capital  investment  are  already  discernible  in  the  Eurostat  data  for  the  fourth 
quarter of last year. As regards private consumption, growth in real disposable income should lead to 
increased  spending,  in  particular  because  there  are  no  financial  constraints  for  households  which 
would pose obstacles to higher expenditure. Over time this should also be fostered by an improvement 
in employment and employment expectations. 
This is our assessment and it is supported by the available forecasts and projections. Obviously, any 
such forward-looking evaluation is conditional and subject to risks. At this juncture, risks are primarily 
related  to  the  persistent  imbalances  in  some  regions  of  the  world  and  the  weakness  of  private 
consumption in the euro area. Concerning private consumption, European citizens who still perceive 
that inflation is higher than measured by official indices should be assured that the official measures 
are accurate and that we will continue to maintain price stability in the future. Moreover, the prevailing 
uncertainties surrounding fiscal policies and structural reforms in some euro area countries may have 
had a negative impact on consumer sentiment. Ensuring clarity about the content and timing of these 
reforms  and  a  better  understanding  of  their  benefits  to  all  citizens  would  make  a  very  important 
contribution to supporting household confidence. 
Turning to price developments, we expect some short-term volatility in HICP inflation rates to continue. 
According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual inflation in the HICP was 1.6% in March, unchanged 
from February and down from 1.9% in January. However, over the coming months, annual inflation 
rates could edge up again, on account of less favourable base effects and increases in indirect taxes. 
BIS Review 20/2004 
 1
Looking  beyond  these  short-term  fluctuations,  we  expect  price  developments  to  remain  in  line  with 
price  stability.  Given  the  anticipated  gradual  pace  of  the  economic  recovery,  wage  developments 
should remain moderate. The latest data on wage growth in the fourth quarter of 2003 lend support to 
this view. Moreover, the past appreciation of the euro exchange rate will continue to alleviate import 
price pressures and dampen the inflationary impact of higher oil and commodity prices, which are also 
related to strong demand at the global level. 
Again,  this  outlook  for  price  developments  is  in  line  with  available  forecasts  and  projections.  Given 
their conditional nature, we will continue to monitor all indicators closely. In particular, the increase in 
commodity prices and the evolution of long-term inflation expectations deserve close attention. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, annual M3 growth has been moderating since the summer of 2003, 
though only slowly. At the same time, the growth of loans to the private sector has been edging up. 
Both monetary and credit growth seem to be supported by the low level of interest rates prevailing in 
the euro area and may also reflect the improvement in the economic environment since the summer of 
2003.  
Given the strong M3 growth over the past few years, there is currently more liquidity in the euro area 
than is needed to finance non-inflationary growth. The effects of this high liquidity on inflation over the 
medium  term  will  greatly  depend  on  future  developments  in  the  economy  and  financial  markets. 
Should excess liquidity persist, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
To conclude, the economic analysis continues to indicate that the outlook for price developments in 
the medium term is in line with price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis does not alter 
this picture. 
Let me also make a few remarks on other policies in the euro area. With regard to fiscal policies, the 
Governing Council sees continued reasons for concern. Recent information indicates that significant 
imbalances  are  emerging  in  a  growing  number  of  countries  and  that  current  policies  would  not  be 
sufficient to attain the consolidation objectives specified in the latest stability programmes. We strongly 
urge  governments  to  take  corrective  action  in  a  timely  and  sustained  fashion,  where  and  when 
necessary. 
Finally, with regard to structural reforms, the Governing Council welcomed the Presidency conclusions 
of  last  weekend’s  Brussels  European Council.  Structural  reforms are  necessary  to  meet  the  Lisbon 
challenge and thus reap the benefits of higher sustainable growth and employment. As pointed out by 
the European Council, the pace of reform needs to be significantly stepped up and the critical issue 
now  is  the  need  for  better  implementation  of  commitments  already  made.  Ending  the  political 
uncertainty  and  delays  surrounding  the  implementation  of  sustainable  fiscal  policies  and  effective 
structural reforms would indeed support private sector confidence, which would add momentum to the 
economic recovery in the euro area, given the supportive stance of monetary policy. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2004
