Zeti Akhtar Aziz: The nature of risks involved in dealing with OTC financial 
derivatives  
Keynote address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 4th Banking 
and Financial Law School Seminar, Kuala Lumpur, 19 February 2004. 
 It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  this  4th  Banking  and  Financial  Law  School  in  light  of 
developments in the global and domestic financial markets. We are in a period of great change. As the 
pace  of  globalisation  intensifies  the  global  environment  has  been  marked  by  greater  volatility  and 
uncertainty. As a consequence we are often dealing with probabilities. The process of globalisation 
has  resulted  in  international  capital  movements  and  developments  in  the  global  financial,  and 
regulatory  arena  that  have  had  significant  implications  on  domestic  financial  institutions.  There  is 
therefore a need for a global perspective in effectively managing these risks. The universal application 
of  ISDA  Master  Agreements  is  a  demonstration  of  the  need  for  globally  oriented  solutions.  This 
morning my remarks will focus on the need to appreciate the nature of risks involved in dealing with 
OTC  financial  derivatives,  both  by  the  market  and  the  regulators.  I  will  also  touch  briefly  on  the 
opportunities emerging in terms of developing derivatives within Islamic banking and finance. 
Financial institutions, as the linchpin for the process of financial intermediation, have a crucial role in 
facilitating the flow of capital to areas where it can be most productively used. The process of financial 
intermediation responds to changes in the environment with product and service innovations, and in 
this manner have continually re-shaped the international financial landscape. Derivatives are among 
the  most  innovative  sub-sectors  of  the  financial  industry.  Specifically,  the  ‘over-the-counter’  (OTC) 
products  are  not  derivatives  on  organized  markets,  but  rather  individually  customized,  often  highly 
complex with combinations of standard financial instruments packaged together to meet the specific 
needs of clients. Such contracts involve very little direct lending by banks to clients, and generate little 
net interest income to the banks. Derivatives generate substantial fee and commission income without 
the need to commit any of the institution’s capital. This therefore involves a different risk management 
approach  as  there  is  a  shift  away  from  continuous  risk  assessment  and  risk  monitoring  of  funded 
investment  projects  that  usually  produce  recurring  flows  of  interest  payments  over  time  to  the 
identification of riskless ‘trades’ that produce large, single payments, with much of the residual risks 
carried  by  purchasers  of  such  packages.  This  process  has  possibly  been  accelerated  by  the 
introduction of risk-weighted capital requirements. Market players and regulators both have a role to 
play  in balancing  potential  risk  with  potential returns  in  order  to promote  a  vibrant  financial  system, 
without compromising the stability and integrity or agility of the system. 
One of the Central Bank’s primary responsibilities is to maintain financial stability and confidence in 
the financial system and to ensure that the process of financial intermediation continues to function 
without disruptions. The financial and banking system provides vital financial services to the public. It 
is also a channel through which the central bank’s monetary policies are implemented. In the efforts to 
preserve financial stability, a careful balance is made in achieving the objectives of a sound and stable 
financial system with that which is efficient and effective in meeting the requirements of the economy. 
This  is  so  that  the  system  is  innovative  and  competitive,  while  at  the  same  time,  the  risks  do  not 
undermine the stability of the system. 
In Malaysia, derivatives are generally used as hedging instruments and to a limited extent to enhance 
yield. Derivatives have allowed banking institutions to increase product innovation without losing their 
ability  to  manage  the  increased  risks.  With  the  advent  of  credit  derivatives  and  Basel  II  proposals, 
derivatives  have  been  more  widely  recognized  as  a  risk  mitigation  technique  which  could  also 
economise on capital adequacy requirements. In 2003, it is estimated that the notional value of total 
outstanding  OTC  derivatives,  comprising  interest  rate  and  foreign  exchange  forwards,  swaps  and 
options,  grew  by  more  than  two  fold  in  Malaysia,  to  RM  171  billion  over  the  last  four  years.  It  is 
important to note that statistics on OTC derivatives are difficult to capture, and that notional amounts 
are not an accurate reflection of the actual risk exposure to financial institutions. Between 1999 and 
2003,  it  is  estimated  that  the  average  annual  growth  in  interest  rate  and  foreign  exchange  OTC 
contracts  collectively  and  in  aggregate  is  about  40 percent.  However,  interest  rate  derivatives  have 
experienced stronger  growth  given  the  sensitivity  to  interest rate  changes  and  the need to  manage 
exposure to fixed and floating rate financial assets. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
In the international financial markets, the growth in OTC derivatives has been phenomenal in recent 
years. The statistics compiled by the Bank for International Settlements indicate that as of the end of 
June 2003 the total outstanding OTC derivatives in notional amounts was 169 trillion US dollars. This 
total  figure  includes  22  trillion  US  dollars  of  foreign  exchange  contracts,  121  trillion  US  dollars  of 
interest  rate  contracts,  principally  swaps,  2.7  trillion  US  dollars  of  equity-linked  contracts,  almost 
1 trillion US dollars of commodity contracts and 18 trillion US dollars classified as Others. 
The  fact  that  growth  in  financial  derivatives  has  far  surpassed  the  growth  in  the  underlying  real 
economies that generated the original transactions and risks for diversification is a matter of concern 
to  regulators.  It  seems  that  speculators  appear  to  have  embraced  derivatives  as  another  form  of 
investment  for  short-term  capital  gains.  If  financial  derivatives  take  on  a  life  of  their  own  due  to 
excessive speculative activity, the utility for risk diversification may prove illusory from a systemic point 
of view because the new risks introduced by derivatives may well overshadow the risks posed to the 
financial system by the underlying more risky financial assets. 
On  a  preemptive  note,  in  response  to  a  series  of  derivative  debacles  that  was  sparked  off  by  the 
Barings crisis in 1994, Bank Negara Malaysia has taken steps to enhance prudential regulations on 
the derivatives business of banking institutions. In 1996, the Guideline on Minimum Standards on Risk 
Management Practices for Derivatives was issued to provide a framework that outlines the minimum 
risk management standards for the derivatives business of banking institutions. It requires banks to 
ensure  that  risk  management  controls  and  procedures  are  in  place  before  engaging  in  derivatives 
business.  The  guidelines  also  ensure  that  derivatives  can  be  offered  to  customers  for  hedging 
purposes only. In May 2003, as a step towards a more liberalized financial market, banking institutions 
are allowed to embed derivatives into investment instruments to enhance yields. The investment has 
to be principal protected, and may be offered to high net worth or corporate clients and for a minimum 
transaction  amount  of  one  million  Ringgit.  As  part  of  the  prudential  requirements,  no  leveraging  is 
allowed on the structure. Gradual liberalization allows the banking industry and the regulator to work in 
a collaborative manner in developing an innovative yet stable financial system. 
In the context of the significant growth in OTC derivatives, both in the domestic market as well as the 
global  market,  there  is  therefore  an  important  need  for  prudential  management  in  derivatives  since 
speculation  would  itself  introduce  risks  into  OTC  derivatives  market  and  could  deter  the  principal 
objectives of risk diversification and risk management. 
Allow  me  now  to  share  3  points  concerning  risk  management  opportunities  in  the  wake  of 
developments  emerging  in  the  international  financial  landscape.  The  first  point  is  that  regional 
integration offers increased opportunities for OTC financial derivatives in managing financial risks. The 
second  point  is  that  the  new  Basle  II  Capital  Accord  must  be  studied  carefully  to  ensure  that  the 
portfolio of derivative products is profitable and innovative while remaining in compliance with the risk-
weighted capital requirements, and thus preserving the financial stability of the institution. The third 
point is that the growth of Islamic banking and finance offers substantial new opportunities with respect 
to  designing  OTC  derivatives  compliant  with  the  Syariah  principles  and  appropriate  for  commercial 
use. As bankers and legal practitioners involved in the OTC derivatives industry, I believe these points 
will  be  of  relevance  to  you  in  providing  quality  services  to  your  clients  and  in  developing  your 
organisation’s OTC business portfolio. 
There  are  significant  opportunities  emerging  in  the  Asian  region.  Regional  integration  has  become 
more pronounced in recent years with the more rapid expansion of intra-regional trade in Asia. Intra-
regional exports account for about one third of total exports of the region. Intra-regional trade with the 
ASEAN nations accounts for about 24% of the region’s total trade, exceeding ASEAN’s trade with the 
United  States.  Trade  with  China,  India  and  Korea  has  increased  significantly.  Notably,  since  1993, 
China’s role in the region has reversed from that of a net exporter to a net importer. East Asian exports 
to China have doubled during the past decade. There has also been a trend towards greater intra-
Asian investment flows in the region. This includes higher investment of surplus funds into the region, 
in the form of foreign direct investments as well as portfolio capital flows. 
These regional developments will lead to greater demand for OTC financial derivatives, which can be 
met by any of the major national, regional or global financial institutions operating in these markets. 
Malaysian banking institutions must be prepared to compete in this highly innovative and agile global 
industry by staying ahead on the learning curve for writing OTC derivatives that precisely match the 
risk management characteristics needed for effective hedging. At the same time, banking institutions 
must take into account the need for robust internal controls specifically in the area of credit, market, 
operational and legal risks to prevent the failure of any derivative contract. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
My  second  point  concerns  the  New  Basle  II  Capital  Accord.  The  International  Swap  Dealers 
Association,  as  the  global  trade  association  representing  the  leading  participants  of  the  OTC 
derivatives industry, has provided its views to ensure that the capital requirements of the New Capital 
Accord’s  will  reflect  the  actual  amount  of  risk  that  a  bank  is  exposed  to  in  a  particular  derivatives 
transaction. According to the recommendations put forth by the Basle Committee, capital requirements 
to  support  off-balance  sheet  derivatives  are  calculated  by  reference  to  the  credit  risk  of  the  item 
adjusted  for  credit  quality  of  the  counter  party.  The  approach  essentially  “marks  to  market”  to 
determine the current replacement cost including the potential future exposures. 
One particular development that should be observed is the growth of the use of credit derivatives. The 
2001  Triennial  Survey  of  Foreign  Exchange  and  Derivatives  Market  Activity  conducted  by  the  BIS 
indicates a rapid expansion of the market for credit derivatives, with outstanding positions increasing 
from  108  billion  US  dollars  in  1998  to  695  billion  US  dollars  in  2001.  The  Centre  for  the  Study  of 
Financial  Innovation  has  identified  credit  derivatives  as  a  major  risk  area  due  to  their  rapid  growth 
coupled  with  a  lower  understanding  of  the  product.  The  implementation  of  Basle  II’s  risk  weighted 
approach to capital adequacy will have implications for banking institutions whose risk management 
systems have not assessed correctly the exposure due to off-balance sheet derivative items. As I have 
mentioned  earlier,  globalization  and  regional  integration  are  introducing  changes  that  will  alter  the 
nature of risks relevant to international trade, capital and the use of derivatives for risk management. 
Banks  should  be  transparent  and  upfront  in  disclosing  the  risk  and  valuation  approach  of  their 
derivative  products such  that  the inherent  risk  of  the  product  is adequately  addressed.  Let  me  also 
stress that the effectiveness of the risk adjusted capital requirements hinges not only on the capacity 
to perform sound risk assessments, but also on the legality of such derivatives transactions. 
How banking practices and products reflect clearly and fairly the requirements of current and proposed 
prudential standards in their dealings with clients is a challenge, both for bankers and lawyers. The 
availability of a sufficient pool of legal experts in the Malaysian legal fraternity who are well versed with 
the detailed content and strategic intent of the prudential requirements will contribute immensely to the 
future  development  of  the  Malaysian  derivatives  industry,  and  as  a  consequence  provide  more 
opportunities for greater innovation in risk management within the Malaysian financial system. 
Let me now turn to the final point I wish to make, which is about the opportunities within the rapidly 
growing Islamic banking and finance sector to develop derivatives that facilitate hedging of risks. The 
Islamic  financial  system,  comprising  the  Islamic  banking  industry,  the  Islamic  money  and  capital 
markets, and the Takaful market, is becoming an increasingly important component in the Malaysian 
financial system and in the global arena. Indeed, the Islamic capital market has registered very strong 
growth. In the debt market, the outstanding Islamic private debt securities as at the end of June 2003 
was  RM  68.2  billion,  or  37%  of  total  outstanding  private  debt  securities.  Malaysia  has  also  made 
progress  in  developing  offshore  Islamic  banking  and  financial  products.  The  latest  listing  of  the 
inaugural Sukuk by the Government of Qatar on the Labuan International Financial Exchange (LFX) 
on the 28th of January 2004 increased the market capitalisation of the exchange to USD 2.95 billion 
(RM 11.2 billion). The Bahrain-based International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM) has also endorsed 
the  Sukuk  in  September  2003.  The  Labuan  Financial  Exchange  has  signed  an  MOU  with  IIFM  to 
establish a framework for greater co-operation and to pave the way for both organizations to jointly 
develop an Islamic Capital Market with greater global reach. The importance to innovate and develop 
appropriate risk management tools is clear. 
There  are  unique  challenges  to  manage  in  developing  derivative  products  for  Islamic  banking  and 
finance because the end product must not only be Syariah compliant, in form and substance but also 
be  globally  attractive  to  all  customers.  While  Islam  encourages  risk  management  in  financial 
transactions,  the  tools  or  instruments  used  in  such  management  must  not  have  the  prohibited 
elements of riba (interest or usury), gharar (uncertainty) and maysir (gambling). Certain basic Islamic 
financial  products  already  exist  that  offer  the  benefits  of  hedging.  The  Bai’  as-Salam  contract,  for 
instance, is essentially a forward contract where two parties agree to carry out a sale/purchase of an 
underlying asset at a pre-determined future date, but at a price negotiated and fully paid today. The 
Istisna contract is an example of a futures contract where a buyer contracts with a manufacturer to 
manufacture a product at a future date. A more interesting example is the Istijrar contract, introduced 
in Pakistan, which includes the characteristics of a put and call option, allowing the buyer to cap the 
purchase price, and the seller to set a floor for the selling price. 
There  is  still  considerable  debate  amongst  Islamic  scholars  about  the  acceptability  of  the  various 
forms of derivative products from the perspective of Islamic jurisprudence. Hence, there is a need for 
more  investment  in  intellectual  capital  in  the  field  of  Islamic  finance  to  promote  innovation  that 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 3
integrates  the  appropriate  Syariah  principles  within  the  Islamic  financial  instruments.  Our  efforts  to 
keep  abreast  with  such  developments  will  facilitate  more  rapid  development  of  Islamic  financial 
instruments for the purpose of risk management, using derivatives. 
It  is  evident  that  the  derivatives  business  has  global  opportunities  since  risk  in  today’s  financial 
environment  is  a  product  of  uncertainties  prevailing  in  the  global  markets,  whether  financial  or 
non-financial.  The  ISDA  Master  Agreements  have  been  the  universal  means  of  bringing  order  and 
certainty to the complex and rapidly developing world of OTC derivatives. The culmination of the new 
2002 ISDA Agreement, 10 years after its predecessor, comes in the wake of many financial crises. 
Legal documentation of derivative transactions has a role in mitigating risks for banks and businesses. 
The world has changed considerably in this recent 10 years - financial liberalization driven by rapid 
advances in information technology is altering the financial landscape at an unprecedented pace. The 
legal and regulatory infrastructure must keep pace. We must continuously learn, un-learn and re-learn. 
The acquisition and application of knowledge must be a deliberate strategy and activity in pursuing the 
path of excellence. 
Apart  from  the  developments  in  the  nature  of  financial  risk  due  to  globalization  and  regional 
integration,  the  ramifications  of  the  Basle  II  capital  accord,  and  the  potential  for  developments  in 
Islamic derivative instruments, I am aware that there are many other highly technical matters that need 
to be appreciated and understood. I will leave this to the experts who have given their valuable time to 
share their knowledge with us today at this banking and law school event. 
I wish you an engaging learning experience. This is also a rare opportunity to develop your networks, 
share  your  knowledge  with  your  peers  and  reflect  upon  how  this  learning  experience  will  make  a 
difference in your professional career. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2004
