Toshihiko Fukui: Economic situation in Japan and abroad 
Summary of a speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting in Osaka, 
2 September 2004. 
 Today I will discuss the economic situation at home and abroad, and the conduct of monetary policy. 
Amid the continued expansion of the world economy, Japan’s economy has been on a recovery path 
since the summer of last year. The recovery has been initially driven in large part by an increase in 
exports. In addition to the favorable external conditions, the foundation has been laid domestically for 
a  self-sustaining  recovery.  We  should  also  note  that  the  current  recovery  has  been  achieved  while 
prices have been on a declining trend.  
World economy and Japan’s economy 
Let  me  start  with  the  world  economy.  The  economies  of  numerous  countries  including  Japan  have 
become  closely  interrelated  as  globalization  has  progressed.  This  is  evidenced  by  the  growing 
prevalence of the international division of production processes. For example, IT-related investment 
has been undertaken all over the world, led by the United States. High-value-added components of IT-
related goods are being produced in Japan, while processing and assembly have been concentrated 
in other East Asian countries.  
Overseas  economies,  particularly  the  United  States  and  China,  continue  to  expand.  The  U.S. 
economy has been maintaining expansionary momentum with a steady increase in capital spending 
and a large jump in corporate profits, despite several weak economic indicators. The Federal Reserve 
Board raised its target federal funds rate by 25 basis points in June and August, respectively. The East 
Asian economies have been growing steadily, with China likely to continue its high growth.  
In Japan, real GDP growth slowed to an annual rate of 1.7 percent in the second quarter, following 
high  growth  in  the  two  preceding  quarters.  Nevertheless,  it  is  our  overall  judgment  that  Japan’s 
economy has been in a recovery process, leading to a return to a sustainable growth path in light of 
the background I have just described. A rise in exports has raised industrial production and corporate 
profits, which in turn generates an expansion in business fixed investment. In the labor market, the 
number of employees has been increasing.  
Japan’s economy is thus expected to continue recovering, gathering stronger momentum. The positive 
effects  of  the  increases  in  production  and  corporate  profits  on  household  income  are  expected  to 
become visible, laying stronger foundations for a gradual recovery in private consumption.  
Corporate sector 
It  is  accurate  to  say  that  Japan’s  current  recovery  is  due  to  the  better-than-expected  growth  of  the 
world economy. It is also the result of the progress being made in adjusting excessive capital stock, 
debt,  and  labor  of  the  corporate  sector  as  well  as  dealing  with  financial  system  fragility.  Corporate 
restructuring  has  spread  from  large  manufacturers  to  nonmanufacturers  and  small  businesses, 
producing tangible results. The ratio of current profits to sales and return on assets in fiscal 2004 are 
projected  to  be  the  highest  for  both  manufacturers  and  nonmanufacturers  since  the  bursting  of  the 
asset bubbles.  
While dealing with the legacy of the asset bubbles, firms have been pursuing forward-looking business 
strategies, particularly in IT-related areas. For example, the markets for digital electronic appliances 
and environment-related products have been growing rapidly. To take advantage of the international 
division  of  production  processes,  Japanese  firms  have  increasingly  concentrated  resources  in  the 
areas  where  they  enjoy  a  comparative  advantage.  As  a  result,  they  have  succeeded  in  raising 
productivity at home and maintaining competitiveness.  
BIS Review 48/2004 
 1
Financial system 
For  Japan’s  financial  sector,  the  major  challenges  are  restoring  financial  soundness  and  pursuing 
profitable business opportunities.  
To  restore  financial  soundness,  banks  have  made  steady  progress  in  disposing  of  nonperforming 
loans (NPLs)  recently.  The  ratio  of NPLs  to  total  loans  has declined significantly  at  regional  banks, 
which had previously been slower than major banks to address the NPL problem. Credit costs, the 
costs incurred by banks when they dispose of NPLs, have clearly been on a declining trend.  
The financial soundness of banks and the managerial soundness of borrowers are two sides of the 
same coin. In this context, banks have been tackling the remaining issues necessary to resolve the 
NPL  problem,  including  the  revitalization  of  borrower  firms.  In  view  of  the  full  removal  of  blanket 
deposit  insurance  scheduled  for  April  2005,  it  is  vital  for  firms  and  banks  to  step  up  their  efforts  to 
resolve the NPL problem to revitalize Japan’s economy.  
In  pursuing  profitable  businesses,  financial  institutions  face  the  challenge  of  meeting  the  diversified 
needs of households and firms appropriately and efficiently. Banks have been seeking to strengthen 
their  management  and  construct  a  more  efficient  system  for  the  division  of  labor  and  collaboration 
through  alliances  and  wide-ranging  consolidation.  Major  banks  have  also  been  seeking  dynamic 
consolidation  to  better  compete  globally.  Given  the  reduced  restriction  in  terms  of  credit  costs, 
financial institutions have been gradually taking on new challenges such as increasing loans to small 
and medium-sized firms, originating syndicated loans, and selling mutual funds and insurance.  
Thus,  we  can  say  that  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  is  restoring  its  soundness  and  evolving  a 
forward-looking,  more  dynamic  style  of  management.  To  sustain  these  actions,  financial  institutions 
need to upgrade the integrated risk management system, in which various types of complex risks are 
controlled  in  a  consolidated  manner,  and  construct  a  framework  to  deploy  capital  more  efficiently. 
A  draft  of  the  new  Basel  Capital  Accord  released  at  the  end  of  June  has  adopted  a  risk-sensitive 
framework to encourage the upgrading of risk management. In line with this global trend, the Bank of 
Japan is working to improve the functioning of financial institutions through on-site examinations and 
off-site monitoring.  
Price developments 
While the corporate goods price index, particularly raw materials and intermediate goods, has been 
rising partly because of higher crude oil prices, the consumer price index (CPI) has been on a slight 
downtrend. A small decline in the CPI is largely due to the unit labor cost reductions in the corporate 
sector  reflecting  higher  productivity  and  the  restraint  on  labor  costs.  Thus,  the  outlook  for  prices 
depends on future developments in productivity and wages.  
Three factors underpin the rise in productivity. First, resources are being used more efficiently as a 
result  of  the adjustment  of  excessive capital stock and  labor  as well as  deregulation  in  a variety  of 
areas,  including  the  labor  market.  Second,  progress  continues  in  IT  and  technological  innovation. 
Third, as is generally observed during an initial phase of economic recovery, higher utilization of labor 
and equipment is increasing productivity. While the third factor is cyclical, the first two factors could 
spur structural changes, raising the potential production capacity of Japan’s economy.  
Many countries have experienced a situation in which prices do not necessarily increase in tandem 
with an upturn in economic activity. Economists and central bankers have been exploring a plausible 
explanation of this discrepancy. From the viewpoint of conducting monetary policy, we are carefully 
monitoring  price  developments  while  keeping  in  mind  the  following  questions.  If  the  recovery 
continues, will the growth in productivity slow?  Or, will such growth continue thanks to deregulation 
and the progress in IT? Or, will wages rise along with the growth in productivity?  
In  terms  of  developments  in  prices  over  the  shorter  term,  we  should  pay  attention  to  the  effects  of 
higher crude oil prices on the general price level. Crude oil prices have been around record-high levels 
against the background of a rise in global demand and heightened concern about geopolitical risks. 
We  have  seen  the  impact  of  higher  crude  oil  prices  on  the  domestic  corporate  goods  price  index, 
which marked a year-on-year increase of 1.6 percent in July, the largest since the latter part of the 
bubble period. Higher crude oil prices are also affecting the CPI through the rise in prices of gasoline 
and other petroleum-related products.  
2 
 BIS Review 48/2004
We should also pay attention to the effects of the increase in crude oil prices on economic activity.  
The steady expansion of the world economy including the United States may be adversely affected.  
At  home,  higher  crude  oil  prices  may  have  a  negative  impact  on  corporate  profits  and  households’ 
spending behavior.  
Conduct of monetary policy 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  bearing  in  mind  the  current  situation  in  which 
prices are not increasing together with the economic recovery.  
The Bank has made a commitment to continue the current quantitative easing policy until the year-on-
year change in the CPI registers zero percent or higher on a sustainable basis. Such a commitment is 
unusual for a central bank. Since the CPI is still on a declining trend, the Bank is determined to pursue 
an easy monetary policy even as the economy continues to recover.  
The positive impact of the current easy monetary policy on economic activity is strengthening as the 
economy recovers. The Bank’s policy commitment allows firms to continue enjoying low funding costs 
through the stability of expectations about future interest rates. As the economic recovery raises the 
expected rate of return on new investment with interest rates remaining low, firms will become more 
inclined to undertake investment.  
We  expect  consumer  prices  to  continue  declining  slightly  year  on  year  due  to  the  decrease  in  rice 
prices in the fall as a flipside of the increase of last year, despite higher crude oil prices. So far, we 
have  not  observed  any  major  changes  in  the  discrepancy  between  economic  activity  and  prices, 
productivity, and wages. It is our judgment that we remain at the stage where we should maintain the 
current commitment and firmly continue the quantitative easing policy.  
Eventually, we must return to the conventional monetary policy of using short-term interest rates as an 
operating  target,  from  the  current  policy  of  using  the  current  account  balance  at  the  Bank  as  an 
operating  target.  The  process  of  returning  to  the  conventional  monetary  policy  consists  of  two 
elements.  
One element is how to reduce the current account balance at the Bank of Japan. Financial institutions 
have  a  legal  obligation  to  hold  about  6  trillion  yen  in  the  current  account  at  the  Bank  as  required 
reserves.  At  present,  given  the  ample  provision  of  liquidity  by  the  Bank,  they  are  holding  30  to 
35 trillion yen in their current accounts, far exceeding the required reserves. The ample provision of 
liquidity has contributed greatly to financial market stability and thus prevented a deflationary spiral as 
it dispels concern about liquidity risk. As we return to the conventional policy framework, we will need 
to  reduce  the  current  account  balance  at  the  Bank.  The  other  element  involves  the  pace  at  which 
short-term interest rates, which are now virtually at zero, should be raised.  
How should we go through the process as we return to the conventional monetary policy? What is the 
most  appropriate  way  to  communicate  our  thinking  on  monetary  policy  as  we  eventually  shift  the 
policy? These are the important issues we must address in the future. We will seek a smooth transition 
from  the  current  monetary  policy  to  conventional  policy  by  taking  full  account  of  the  economic  and 
financial situation.  
Japan’s economy is moving steadily toward achieving sustainable growth and overcoming deflation. 
The Bank is determined to support the private sector’s efforts to move forward by firmly pursuing the 
appropriate monetary policy. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 3
