Jean-Pierre Roth: Switzerland - a financial centre in the heart of the euro area 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the Belgian Financial Forum, Brussels, 16 February 2004. 
The complete speech can be found in French on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Switzerland is not a fortress. In relation to the rest of Europe in particular, it is an economy that is very 
much open to mutual exchanges - notably with regard to trade and finance. It is not by chance that 
Switzerland has become a major financial centre. This can be ascribed to a number of positive factors, 
including  specialist  knowledge,  a  long-established  banking  tradition,  the  quality  of  the  financial 
infrastructure,  and  customers’  confidence  in  the  soundness  of  the  country’s  financial  institutions. 
Switzerland’s  political  stability,  its  high  level  of  savings  and  the  international  standing  of  the  Swiss 
franc have also enhanced the appeal of its financial system.  
Increasingly,  however,  Switzerland  is  not  alone  in  offering  such  advantages.  Moreover,  the  Swiss 
financial centre - like all the others - has to face the challenges of globalisation and the fight against 
financial  crime.  As  banking  secrecy  does  not  afford  any  protection  to  funds  of  dubious  origin,  the 
Swiss authorities are able to combat money-laundering with a reasonable degree of efficacy. In this 
area, Switzerland has implemented measures that have received international recognition.  
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  profoundly  changed  the  environment  in  which  the  Swiss  economy 
operates.  Since  1999,  the  Swiss  franc  has  coexisted  quite  harmoniously  with  the  euro.  In  fact,  the 
franc has been more stable against the euro than it was against the D mark. This is good news for 
Swiss  companies  exporting  to  the  European  market.  On  the  other  hand,  such  companies  have  to 
contend with a greater concentration of foreign-exchange risks. They are responding to this challenge 
with hedging policies that are more active than those pursued in the past. Pegging the franc to the 
euro  in  order  to  eliminate  exchange-rate  risks  would  entail  more  problems  than  advantages,  as  it 
would inevitably push up the level of interest rates in Switzerland. Against this backdrop, the National 
Bank is continuing to pursue an independent monetary policy that takes account not only of economic 
trends and inflation forecasts but also of the situation on the foreign exchange markets. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 1
