Joseph Yam: APEC initiative on development of securitisation and credit 
guarantee markets 
Opening remarks by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Second  High-Level  Policy  Dialogue,  APEC  Initiative  on  Development  of  Securitisation  and  Credit 
Guarantee Markets, Hong Kong, 22 March 2004. 
 It is a pleasure to welcome you all to this Second High-Level Policy Dialogue under the APEC Initiative 
on  Development  of  Securitisation  and  Credit  Guarantee  Markets.  We  are  honoured 
that 
Mr Gwang-Lim  Kim  and  Mr  Jamil  Kassum  will  be  opening  this  Dialogue,  and  the  excellent  list  of 
participants promises a very constructive and lively discussion. 
Hong  Kong,  China  is  pleased  to  co-chair,  with  Korea  and  Thailand,  the  APEC  Initiative  on 
Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets. On behalf of all three co-chairs, I would 
like to extend our sincere thanks to the World Bank for its considerable contributions to this Initiative. 
These contributions range from active participation to sponsoring experts to provide technical advice 
to  APEC  member  economies  on  how  to  develop  their  domestic  securitisation  and  credit  guarantee 
markets. 
It is generally recognised that there is considerable room for improvement in the efficiency of financial 
intermediation in this region. The bulk of savings find their way back to the region largely in the form of 
foreign portfolio flows and short-term banking credits, which present risks to financial stability. Local 
corporations have been relying too much on bank credits and equity markets as the major sources of 
financing. 
Among the various measures that have been put forward to address the structural impediments to the 
development of the bond market, securitisation, coupled with credit enhancement, provides the most 
effective  and  immediate  solution.  Securitisation  enables  borrowers  to  issue  asset-backed  securities 
that can enjoy a credit rating higher than a single borrower can obtain on its own. When combined with 
credit  enhancement  and  guarantee  arrangements,  these  securities  can  further  attain  a  credit  rating 
high enough to meet the requirements of investment managers. Securitisation will also help smaller 
corporations gain access to regional bond markets and reduce their reliance on short-term commercial 
bank finance. 
Securitisation is gradually gaining momentum in Hong Kong. The Hong Kong Mortgage Corporation 
(HKMC)  has  been  issuing  mortgage-backed  securities  since  1999.  More  recently,  synthetic 
securitisation  and  credit  card  receivables  securitisation  transactions  began  to  appear.  Not  only  is 
securitisation  a  tool  for  developing  the  bond  market,  it  is  also  useful  for  financing  infrastructure 
projects. The Hong Kong SAR Government intends to securitise the income receipts of five toll tunnels 
and the Tsing Ma Bridge to raise more than HK$6 billion in the coming months. 
It is against this background that the idea for this APEC Initiative was conceived. The objectives of the 
Initiative  are  to  promote  the  understanding  and  awareness  of  the  importance  of  securitisation  and 
credit guarantees to bond market development in the region, and to assist APEC member economies 
in  identifying  market  impediments  and  taking  concrete  steps  to  remove  them.  We  tackle  the 
impediments in the domestic bond markets first, so that the regional bond market can be developed 
from liquid and deep domestic bond markets. 
The  Initiative  comprises  two  core  parts.  The  first  part  involves  expert  panel  visits  to  the  APEC 
economies  interested  in  developing  their  domestic  securitisation and credit  guarantee  markets.  The 
first panel visits, to China and Mexico, were launched in 2003, and a second panel visit was made to 
Thailand earlier this month. Draft action plans have been prepared for the economies receiving expert 
advice.  The  second  part  of  the  Initiative  involves  the  holding  of  policy  dialogues  to  promote 
understanding and exchange views about securitisation and credit guarantee markets. The first policy 
dialogue under the Initiative was held in April 2003 in Seoul, Korea. We are delighted that Hong Kong 
is now the host for this second policy dialogue. 
This  APEC  Initiative  aims  at  developing  the  bond  markets  from  the  supply  perspective.  Two  other 
initiatives in the region tackle the issue in a complementary way. An initiative by ASEAN+3 focuses on 
facilitating  access  for  a  wide  variety  of  issuers  to  the  regional  bond  markets  and  on  creating  an 
environment conducive to the development of bond markets. Working groups have been established 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
to examine the creation of new securitised debt instruments, issuance of debt by international financial 
institutions,  regional  credit  guarantees  and  enhancement  facilities,  as  well  as  the  establishment  of 
local and regional credit rating and credit enhancement agencies. 
Meanwhile, a group under EMEAP is developing the Asian Bond Fund (ABF). The first phase of ABF, 
or  ABF1,  has  a  size  of  about  US$1  billion  and  was  launched  in  June  2003.  The  Fund  is  now  fully 
invested in US dollar denominated bonds issued by sovereign and quasi-sovereign issuers in EMEAP 
economies. ABF1 is an important step forward in promoting the efficiency of financial intermediation in 
the region. It helps to channel a small portion of the very sizeable official reserves held by the Asian 
economies  back  into  the  region.  After  the  launch  of  ABF1,  the  EMEAP  Group  is  now  studying  the 
extension of the ABF concept to local currency-denominated Asian bond funds, or ABF2. 
ABF2 will have a positive impact on the demand and supply of local currency bonds in the region, as 
well as improving the market infrastructure. On the supply side, ABF2 will provide a new asset class to 
international  investors  who  wish  to  have  a  well-diversified  exposure  to  Asia’s  bond  market.  On  the 
demand side, the investment of EMEAP Group in ABF2 will help foster an increased interest in Asian 
currency  bonds  amongst  domestic  and  regional  investors.  Individual  EMEAP  economies  can  also 
leverage  on  the  interest  and  momentum  generated  from  the  collective  investment  of  the  EMEAP 
central banks to further develop their domestic bond markets by improving their market infrastructure 
and removing market impediments. This should further contribute to the broadening and deepening of 
local currency bond markets in the region. 
I  think  you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  heterogeneous  nature  of  the  bond  markets  in  this  region 
presents  considerable  difficulties  to  developmental  efforts.  However,  I  am  very  pleased  to  note  the 
many  initiatives  now  in  place,  and  governments  have  moved  from  “words”  into  “action”.  Academics 
and market practitioners have also been supporting the public sector initiatives by providing valuable 
and practical advice on the action plans to remove market impediments. The timing for development 
has never been better. Let us continue to work closely together, through bond market development, to 
enhance  the  diversity,  and  therefore  the  stability  and  efficiency,  of  financial  intermediation  in  the 
region. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
