Lars Nyberg: Economic activity and housing finance in Sweden 
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference, in Frankfurt am 
Main, 4 June 2004. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  come  here  to  Frankfurt  and  introduce 
“EuroCatalyst  Investment  Focus:  Nordic  covered  bonds”.  I  shall  start  with  a  few  words  about  the 
Riksbank’s activities. With the objective of maintaining price stability, the Riksbank conducts a clear 
monetary  policy  with  an  inflation  target  of  2  per  cent  one  to  two  years  ahead,  with  a  tolerance  for 
deviations of plus/minus 1 percentage point. In addition, the Riksbank has the task of promoting a safe 
and  efficient  payment  system.  As  part  of  its  work  on  carrying  out  these  two  tasks,  the  Riksbank 
publishes an Inflation Report four times a year and a Financial Stability Report twice a year. The most 
recent  Inflation  Report  was  published  last  week,  while  the  latest  Financial  Stability  Report  was 
published  the  day  before  yesterday.  For  those  of  you  that  are  interested  in  economic  and  financial 
developments in Sweden, I would recommend that you read both Reports.  
Economic activity 
Everything  I  mention  now  about  economic  activity  and  the  assessment  of  inflation  is  taken  directly 
from the Riksbank’s latest Inflation Report (2004:02), which was presented on Friday, 28 May. In the 
Report we forecast GDP growth in the OECD area to average around 3 per cent over the coming three 
years. With regard to the outlook for Sweden, the Riksbank foresees an average annual growth rate of 
almost 3 per cent in the coming years.  
Looking at inflation prospects, the rate of price increases is expected to rise in the period ahead as 
resource  utilisation  increases  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  However,  a  continuation  of  relatively  weak 
labour market conditions and a favourable cost situation mean that the rise in inflation is expected to 
be  relatively  moderate  in  Sweden.  Our  forecast  in  the  Report  is  for  a  risk-adjusted  inflation  rate  of 
1.1 per cent one year ahead and 1.8 per cent two years ahead, measured as UND1X inflation. 
Swedish housing finance 
On 1 July this year the Act on issuing secured bonds (2003:1223) will come into force. One of the 
main  incentives  behind  the  new  Act  is  to  offer  Swedish  mortgage  institutions  the  same  favourable 
financing opportunities that these institutions face in European countries that have already introduced 
similar legislation. So will this new legislation result in a new financing structure for Swedish mortgage 
institutions and in large issue volumes in the international markets? This remains to be seen. 
The Riksbank has, for reasons of principle, been hesitant towards the introduction of the legislation on 
secured bonds, primarily because the supervisory task charged to Finansinspektionen (the Swedish 
Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  could  be  perceived  as  an  implied  government  guarantee,  but  also 
because the legislation in this field entails a return to regulation in the credit market, which in itself can 
be questioned. However, similar legislation has been introduced in several European countries, and 
mortgage bonds regulated according to this legislation on secured bonds have come in various ways 
to be viewed as more creditworthy than mortgage bonds that are not. It can therefore be claimed that 
Swedish  mortgage  institutions  should  be  given  the  same  opportunities  to  issue  secured  bonds  as 
mortgage institutions in other countries, which is also the view held by the Riksbank.  
Swedish mortgage institutions today already observe such strict legislation that they can be viewed as 
a kind of special company in a securitisation. The potential effects of introducing particular legislation 
for secured bonds are therefore possibly less in Sweden than in other countries, and it is difficult to 
see that the legislation regarding secured bonds would entail any dramatic change in the activities of 
Swedish mortgage institutions. However, there are advantages involved in introducing such legislation. 
Having legislation that is in line with that of other European countries will contribute to reducing any 
uncertainty, particularly from foreign investors, regarding the terms connected with owning securities 
issued by Swedish mortgage institutions. This should reasonably result in a broader circle of investors 
that  are  willing  to  invest  in  securities  issued  by  Swedish  mortgage  institutions,  and  hopefully  also 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
reduce  their  borrowing  costs.  In  addition,  European  central  banks  currently  regard  this  type  of 
mortgage  bond  as  more  creditworthy  than  mortgage  bonds  not  covered  by  legislation  on  secured 
bonds, when market participants pledge collateral with them. Even the Basel II regulations, which will 
come  into  force  in  2007,  provide  scope  for  regarding  mortgage  bonds  covered  by  legislation  on 
secured bonds as more creditworthy than mortgage bonds not covered by such legislation. 
However, the Swedish market for mortgage bonds is already a large, liquid market that has functioned 
well  since  its  deregulation  at  the  end  of  the  1980s.  It  is  the  third-largest  mortgage  bond  market  in 
Europe,  after  the  German  and  Danish  markets.  After  the  Swedish  government,  Swedish  mortgage 
institutions  are  the  largest  issuers  in  both  the  money  and  bond  markets  in  Sweden.  As  much  as 
around 40 per cent of all lending to the non-bank public is mediated via mortgage institutions, which 
largely finance their activities by issuing bonds and certificates in the securities markets. The market is 
dominated  by  five  mortgage  institutions,  which  together  account  for  around  99  per  cent  of  all 
borrowing. The four largest mortgage institutions are subsidiaries of the four largest Swedish banks, 
while the fifth, SBAB, is state-owned. 
The  mortgage  institutions’  annual  reports  show  that  as  much  as  around  30  per  cent  of  securities 
borrowing is carried out abroad, which suggests that there was already considerable interest among 
foreign  players  before  the  legislation  on  secured  bonds  was  proposed.  However,  there  are 
considerable differences between the institutions. Some institutions have an explicit policy of raising 
half  of  their borrowing requirement  abroad  in  their own name,  while others manage  their  borrowing 
abroad via their parent bank, which issues securities in the banking group’s name so as to ensure the 
lowest possible borrowing costs. Neither is it unusual for banks that own mortgage institutions to buy 
bonds issued by the mortgage institutions of competing banking groups. The reason for doing so is 
that banks are not allowed to use bonds issued by their own institutions as collateral when borrowing 
from  the  Riksbank,  while  they  are  allowed  to  pledge  bonds  issued  by  institutions  outside  their  own 
banking  group.  As  a  result,  mortgage  bonds  are  largely  owned  by  the  banks,  which  contributes  to 
reducing liquidity in the mortgage market. 
There are several factors that affect the ability of companies to borrow in the market. These include, of 
course, the possibility to easily assess the borrowers’ credit ratings and the quality of their assets. This 
is  made  easier  if  the  borrower  has  an  extensive  contact  network  so  that  institutional  investors  are 
familiar with the borrower and its activities. Building up and maintaining this type of contact network 
and credibility requires time and considerable resources. The Swedish mortgage institutions have long 
established such contact networks, primarily in the Swedish securities market, where the liquidity for 
Swedish  mortgage  bonds is  greatest.  A  rough  measure  of  liquidity,  the  ratio  of  bonds  sold and  the 
stock  of  outstanding  bonds,  shows  that  bonds  were  sold  around  4  times  during  one  year  in  the 
Swedish  mortgage  bond  market.  This  can  be  compared  with  the  market  for  Swedish  government 
bonds,  where  the  corresponding  turnover  rate  is  around  7.  The  difference  is  not  insignificant,  and 
indicates  that  more  can  be  done  to  create  a  more  liquid  secondary  market  for  Swedish  mortgage 
bonds.  
The new legislation will create the conditions for improved terms for mortgage institutions and housing 
finance.  However,  the  responsibility  for  making  use  of  these  conditions  will  lie  with  the  banks  and 
mortgage institutions themselves. A decisive factor as to whether the banks and mortgage institutions 
will  succeed  in  utilising  the  new  conditions  offered  through  secured  bonds  is  that  they  listen  to 
investors’ wishes. First and foremost, this requires establishing a liquid secondary market for secured 
bonds. This requires willingness to issue large volumes of bonds in the primary market. Maturities and 
constructions must also be tailored to investors’ requirements. The institutions have not always had to 
work in this way in the domestic market. 
The composition of mortgage institutions’ loan portfolios, and the state of the institutions’ borrowers, 
are  of  course  decisive  factors  in  pricing  the  securities  issued  by  the  mortgage  institutions.  The 
mortgage  institutions’  lending,  broken  down  into  different  types  of  property,  shows  that  most  of  the 
lending,  around  94  per  cent,  goes  to  financing  ownership  of  single-family  dwellings  and  apartment 
buildings. It is therefore primarily the developments in the household sector and in the housing market 
that are important when assessing the mortgage institutions’ assets.  
The Riksbank’s Financial Stability Report contains analyses of the household sector and the property 
market. The most recent Report observed that Swedish households are continuing to increase their 
debt burden at a rapid rate. Improved disposable incomes, low interest rates and high turnover in the 
housing market are some of the most important reasons behind this. Households’ debt in relation to 
disposable income has increased from around 90 per cent in the mid-1990s to almost 120 per cent 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
today.  However,  interest  payments  after  tax  on  these  loans  have  comprised  around  5  per  cent  of 
disposable incomes, which can be compared with levels of almost 11 per cent at the beginning of the 
1990s. 
Both the debt ratio and the interest ratio are expected to continue to increase over the coming years. 
Nevertheless, Swedish households’ ability to service their debt is relatively good. In addition to their 
disposable  incomes,  households  also  have  assets  that  can  be  used  as  a  buffer  for  increased 
borrowing costs. Their total assets exceed their total debts. A special article studies household debt 
and households’ ability to service this debt in different income classes. In the article the Riksbank has 
examined how households would be affected by increased interest costs or rising unemployment. The 
results  show  that  a  significant  part  of  the  debt  is  accounted  for  by  households  that  have  both 
substantial  assets  and  fairly  sizable  margins;  not  even  a  sharp  increase  in  interest  rates  or 
unemployment would affect their ability to service debt to an extent where it would seriously increase 
the  risks  in  lending  to  Swedish  households.  The  risks  in  lending  to  the  household  sector  therefore 
remain small, even when individual households are studied. Here it can be added that it was not the 
household  sector  that  caused  problems  for  the  banks  during  the  financial  crisis  of  the  early  1990s; 
despite the fact that the interest ratio rose to 11 per cent in 1991 and unemployment peaked during 
1993 at 8.5 per cent. 
With regard to developments in house prices, the assessment is still that Swedish house valuations 
are relatively reasonable. Fundamentals such as rising disposable incomes and falling interest costs 
could to a large extent explain the observed price trend. The demand for housing is expected to grow 
more rapidly than the supply. However, developments in house prices in Sweden vary considerably 
from region to region. Prices in metropolitan regions have risen by a significantly larger amount than 
for the country as a whole, although prices in the Stockholm region have stagnated over the past two 
years. There  has  also  been  a steeper  price rise  for  tenant-owned  apartments  than  for single-family 
dwellings. 
It  is  difficult,  at  present,  to  envisage  any  tendencies  towards  imbalances  that  could  lead  to  a 
substantial  fall  in  prices.  Some  form  of  unforeseen  event,  such  as  changes  in  regulations  or 
macroeconomic  shocks,  would  probably  be  necessary  to  cause  prices  to  fall  sharply.  The  fact  that 
interest rates will rise in the long term should be included in household expectations and can hardly be 
regarded as an unforeseen event in any economic scenario. 
The  market  for  apartment  buildings  has  also  been  characterised  by  rising  prices  since  1994. 
Regulations such as those on utility value, and the system of central rent negotiations, normally leads 
to stable, even developments in the prices of apartment buildings. However, the conversion of rental 
properties into tenant-owner associations has resulted in recent years in relatively sharp price rises for 
apartment buildings. Price developments can, of course, be affected by changed conditions such as a 
substantial increase in new construction or a rapid decline in demand. However, a low level of housing 
construction and a high demand for housing, particularly in metropolitan regions, indicates that this will 
not be the case. 
Conclusion 
The  Riksbank’s  work  on  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  emphasises  the  importance  of 
transparency, clarity and predictability. These are also important factors in the securities markets in 
which mortgage institutions are active. I hope that mortgage institutions’ own actions, coupled with the 
new legislation, will help to render the market for housing finance more efficient. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 3
