Glenn Stevens: Regional financial arrangements - recent developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  APEC 
Business Forum 2004, Sydney, 15 April 2004. 
 It has become better recognised in recent years that the quality of financial infrastructure is one among 
several factors which help countries gain from international opening. A high-quality financial sector can 
assist local producers operating in a globalised economy to manage their risks more effectively. It also 
helps the domestic economy harness the greater availability of foreign capital.  
Yet  the  experience  of  the  east  Asian  countries  in  the  late  1990s  demonstrated  that  international 
openness  also  exposes  any  residual  weaknesses  in  the  financial  sector,  and  that  can  potentially 
amplify  the  effects  of  international  shocks  to  the  great  cost  of  the  local  economy.  Since  the  Asian 
crisis, a great deal of effort has gone into trying to build more robust financial sectors in Asia. 
Some of the most important work has been to repair and strengthen banking systems, a costly and 
time-consuming process. This has involved use of public funds to re-capitalise banks, and efforts to do 
a better job of prudential supervision. All of that has to be supported by efforts to clarify property rights, 
bankruptcy procedures and so on, and various countries in the region are working on those things. 
One  of  the  key  initiatives  around  at  present  is  the  development  of  Asian  bond  markets.  There  are 
several groups seeking to make a contribution in this area and it is on this that I want to focus my 
remarks. 
To a non-financial audience, the question might occur: what’s the big deal about bond markets? 
A key reason for wanting well-developed capital markets is that having a diversity of funding sources 
for  governments,  businesses  and  individuals,  and  a  diverse  range  of  opportunities  for  investors,  is 
advantageous. A system which relies entirely on bank financing, or heavily on foreign capital market 
financing, arguably unduly concentrates funding risks. A full set of capital markets, on the other hand, 
offers a more comprehensive combination of financing and risk management to an economy. It would 
particularly offer currency risk matching for both borrowers and lenders in a way which would have 
been  helpful  during  the  Asian  crisis.  A  deep  and  liquid  official  bond  market  also  aids  in  pricing  of 
assets  and  risks  in  the  economy.  Indeed,  some  countries  have  seen  sufficient  value  in  having  a 
government debt market that they have taken steps to create one even though the government had no 
need  to  borrow  (e.g.  Hong  Kong,  Singapore)  or  to  sustain  one  even  when  government  debt  was 
running down (e.g. Australia). 
In the east Asian region outside Japan, the local currency bond markets collectively are thought to be 
about US$1.1 trillion in terms of total stock outstanding, up from around US$350 billion a decade or so 
ago. That is a sizeable sum, but of course it is dispersed around a number of countries in what are 
essentially  a  series  of  local  markets.  Some  countries  in  the  region  have  first-rate  financial 
infrastructure - legal and regulatory frameworks, trading platforms, clearing and settlement systems, 
and taxation arrangements. Other countries need, in the opinion of expert observers, more work to lift 
the quality of their infrastructure. Moreover, to develop a genuine regional market, in which savers and 
investors  in  the  region  can  transact  on  a  common  set  of  arrangements,  requires  attention  to 
harmonisation  of  many  of  these  aspects  of  financial  infrastructure.  All  of  this  is  worth  doing.  The 
potential  financing  needs  of  some  of  the  middle-income  but  fast-growing  economies  like  China  are 
very large indeed. To that could be added, if we shift our gaze a bit further west, the large and growing 
economic  size  of  India.  Hence  there  is  likely  to  be  significant  pay-off  to  efforts  to  develop  better 
functioning markets. 
A question which arises at this point is whether the priority should be at regional level, in efforts to 
develop a regional, cross-border market, or at the level of individual countries, developing their own 
markets. Efforts on both fronts are surely needed. A regional market would offer some efficiencies and 
enhancements to issuers and investors, but would have to be underpinned by the individual country 
components. It is in each country’s own interest to improve the functioning of their own market in any 
event. So the case for local initiatives is clear. But the push to take part in a regional project may well 
create  the  sort  of  dynamic  which  is  helpful  in  overcoming  obstacles  at  the  national  level,  and  the 
collective  and  individual  outcomes  will  be  stronger  the  more  effectively  market  practices,  and 
regulatory and legal issues can be harmonised at a ‘best practice’ standard. Hence, done with good 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
sense,  it  seems  to  me  that  local  and  regional  efforts  should  be  able  to  be  consistent  and  mutually 
reinforcing.  
Co-operative efforts have been initiated by various groupings to try to identify, and hopefully remove, 
the  various  structural  impediments  and  to  put  in  place  some  things  which  might  accelerate  market 
development.  Work  under  the  banner  of  APEC  is  seeking  to  promote  securitisation  and  credit 
guarantee  markets,  in  order  to  try  to  narrow  the  perceived  credit  and  liquidity  mismatch  between 
borrowers in the region and institutional investors. This is helpful, so long as it does not amount to 
governments taking on large contingent liabilities which weaken their own credit rating. 
Then we have the Asian Bond Fund being developed by the eleven central banks in the Asia Pacific 
region  known  as  EMEAP.1  The  first  step  (ABF  I)  was  the  creation  of  a  fund  which  pooled  a  small 
portion of the US dollar reserves held by the member central banks to invest in US dollar denominated 
bonds issued by east Asian governments, as opposed to the US Government. This fund commenced 
operations last July.2 The second and more difficult, but more fundamental, step will be the creation of 
ABF II, to invest in local currency-denominated sovereign and quasi-sovereign bonds in the region. 
Progress in developing the overall structure of this fund is well-advanced. The EMEAP central banks 
are  now  in  the  process  of  detailed  study  of  design.  As  it  happens,  there  was  earlier  today  a  press 
release informing markets and other observers of progress.3
While  this  work  obviously  adds  slightly  to  demand  for  Asian  bonds,  the  objective  is  not  to  lower 
artificially  the  funding  costs  for  governments  in  the  region  by  trying  to  divert  major  sums  of  central 
bank or other official money. Rather, it is to identify and remove where possible impediments to bond 
market investment, to develop some useful infrastructure for investors, and to show the way with a 
small investment by official institutions. Once established, the ABF II will hopefully be emulated by the 
private  sector,  and  some  parts  of  the  ABF  II  infrastructure  itself  will  be  available  for  use  by  private 
investors looking to acquire an exposure to Asian local currency debt. A well functioning market will, of 
course, surely deliver lower cost borrowing to well run government programs and to private borrowers 
over time. 
Apart from APEC and EMEAP mentioned above, there is also work being done under the auspices of 
ASEAN plus 3, and the Asian Cooperation Dialogue. So clearly there is a lot of work going on. To 
date,  these  groups  have  managed  to  avoid  working  at  cross  purposes.  As  the  various  initiatives 
actually  take  more  concrete  form,  it  will  be  important  to  continue  that  parallel  and  complementary 
development - hence a degree of information sharing will be useful. 
But ultimately, after all the facilitation efforts are completed, a critical factor determining the vibrancy of 
bond markets in the Asian region, as in any region, will be the quality of countries’ policies. This starts 
with  macroeconomic  policies  aimed  at  fiscal  sustainability  and  price  stability  - where  Asia  generally 
has  an  exemplary  record.  It  will  include  strong  efforts  at  financial  supervision  -  an  area  where  a 
number  of  countries  need  ongoing  development.  It  will  also  involve,  in  my  view,  the  willingness  of 
individual countries and their governments to allow markets to set prices and to play a major role in the 
allocation of funds - something some countries in the region have been less comfortable doing up to 
now.  Most  likely,  countries  will  need  to  allow  foreign  firms  to  participate  actively  in  market  trading 
activities in order for market making behaviour to flourish in key markets. 
Australia’s  experience  is  that  the  “embrace  of  the  market”  in  this  way  can,  on  occasion,  be 
uncomfortable. Markets will routinely react, and on occasion over-react, to government policies and 
other things which occur in the economy. Sometimes the market’s reaction is uninformed, unfair or just 
plain  wrong.  But  over  the  longer  run,  vibrant,  if  on  occasion  volatile,  financial  sectors  do  confer 
worthwhile benefits on an economy. They are not in any sense a magic bullet to achieve prosperity, 
but the evidence is fairly clear that properly functioning financial sectors do contribute to better growth. 
That is a not inconsiderable benefit to the firms, governments and citizens of the countries concerned.  
                                                      
1   Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Banks. Details of this group’s composition, history and work can be found 
at http://www.emeap.org. 
2   See http://www.emeap.org/press/02june03.htm. 
3   See http://www.emeap.org/press/15apr04.htm. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
