Mark W Olson: Protecting the financial infrastructure  
Testimony  of  Mr  Mark  W  Olson,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington, 
8 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
Thank  you  Chairman  Oxley  and  Ranking  Member  Frank,  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  a  matter  of 
significant  importance  to  our  country:  protecting  our  financial  infrastructure.  As  we  approach 
September 11, I would like to take a moment to honor the memory of those who lost their lives and to 
honor those who supported one another on September 11, 2001.  
Although the financial sector has years of experience dealing with operational disruptions caused by 
weather, power, and other critical infrastructure  outages, the September 11 attacks had a profound 
effect  on  how  the  industry  thinks  about  physical  and  cyber  security  as  well  as  business-continuity 
planning.  After  the  crisis  subsided,  sector  participants,  including  the  Federal  Reserve,  reflected  on 
lessons  learned  and  how  they  should  be  incorporated  into  daily  business  processes  and 
business-resumption planning.  
My  remarks  today  will  highlight  the  actions  the  Federal  Reserve  took  on  September  11  and 
immediately following to maintain confidence in and restore the operation of our financial system. I will 
also focus on numerous steps that we and the other financial regulators have taken since September 
11 to improve the resilience of - and to protect - the financial infrastructure.  
Response to September 11 
On Tuesday, September 11, terrorists destroyed a portion of the critical infrastructure that supports the 
U.S. financial markets, disrupted communications networks, and forced numerous market participants 
to move to contingency sites. These challenges, along with the tragic loss of employees of a few major 
financial  firms,  complicated  trading,  clearing,  and  settlement  of  a  number  of  financial  instruments. 
Operational disruptions caused uncertainties about payment flows, making it difficult for the reserve 
market  to  channel  funds  to  where  they  were  needed  most.  Depository  institutions  that  held  more 
reserve balances than they preferred had difficulty placing and delivering the excess in the market; on 
the other hand, depository institutions awaiting funds had to scramble to cover overdraft positions. As 
a result, market participants experienced significant liquidity dislocations, and the demand for reserves 
grew rapidly.  
The Federal Reserve accommodated the demand for reserves through a variety of means, the relative 
importance  of  which  shifted  through  the  week.  On  Tuesday  morning,  shortly  after  the  attacks,  the 
Federal Reserve issued a press release stating that “the discount window is available to meet liquidity 
needs,” thus reassuring financial markets that the Federal Reserve System was functioning normally. 
Borrowing by depository institutions surged to a record $45.5 billion by Wednesday. Federal Reserve 
discount loans to banks to meet liquidity needs dropped off sharply on Thursday and returned to lower 
levels by Friday. Separately, overnight overdrafts on Tuesday and Wednesday rose to several billion 
dollars, as a handful of depository and other institutions with accounts at the Federal Reserve were 
forced into overdraft positions on their reserve accounts. Overdrafts returned to negligible levels by the 
end of the week.  
Like their U.S. counterparts, foreign financial institutions operating in the United States faced elevated 
dollar liquidity needs. In some cases, however, these institutions encountered difficulties positioning 
the  collateral  at  their  U.S.  branches  to  secure  Federal  Reserve  discount  window  credit.  To  be  in  a 
position  to  help  meet  the  enhanced  need  for  funds,  three  foreign  central  banks  established  new  or 
expanded  arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve  to  receive  U.S.  dollars  in  exchange  for  their 
respective currencies. These swap lines, which lasted for thirty days, consisted of $50 billion for the 
European  Central  Bank,  $30  billion  for  the  Bank  of  England,  and  an  increase  of  $8  billion  (from 
$2 billion to $10 billion) for the Bank of Canada. The European Central Bank drew on its line that week 
to channel funds to institutions with a need for dollars.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
During that week, the disruption in air traffic caused the Federal Reserve to extend record levels of 
credit  to  depository  institutions  in  the  form  of  check  float.  Float  increased  dramatically  because  the 
Federal Reserve continued to credit the accounts of banks for the checks they deposited, even though 
the grounding of airplanes meant that checks normally shipped by air could not be presented to the 
checkwriters’ banks on the usual schedule. Float declined to normal levels the following week once air 
traffic was permitted to recommence. Finally, over the course of the week, as the market for reserves 
began to function more normally, the Federal Reserve resumed the use of open market operations to 
provide  the  bulk  of  reserves.  The  open  market  desk  accommodated  all  propositions  for  funding 
through repurchase agreements down to the target federal funds rate, operating exclusively through 
overnight  transactions  for  several  days.  The  injection  of  reserves  through  open  market  operations 
peaked at $81 billion on Friday. The combined infusion of liquidity from the various sources caused the 
level of reserve balances at Federal Reserve Banks to rise to more than $100 billion on Wednesday, 
September 12 - about ten times the normal level.  
In addition to accommodating the heightened demand for reserves, the Federal Reserve took several 
steps to facilitate market functioning in the wake of the September 11 attacks. For example, the hours 
of the funds and securities transfer systems for U.S. government and agency securities operated by 
the Federal Reserve were significantly extended during the week after the attacks. From September 
11  through  the  21st,  the  Federal  Reserve  reduced  or  eliminated  the  penalty  charged  on  overnight 
overdrafts,  largely  because  those  overdrafts  were  almost  entirely  the  result  of  extraordinary 
developments beyond the control of the account holders. For four weeks after the attacks, the Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York liberalized the terms under which it would lend securities from the System 
portfolio, and the amount of securities lent rose to record levels in the second half of September. The 
Federal  Reserve  working  with  the  National  Communications  System  (NCS)  also  assisted  market 
participants in restoring their telecommunications services.  
The markets and financial market authorities worked hard to restore operations, and market activity 
resumed relatively quickly after the attacks. By the week following September 11, the financial system 
had  largely  begun  to  function  normally,  although  activities  to  address  the  aftermath  of  the  attacks 
continued for some time.  
Steps taken since September 11 to protect the financial infrastructure 
Within  weeks  of  September  11,  we  initiated  a  self-assessment  of  our  contingency  arrangements 
across the Federal Reserve and embarked on forty initiatives, which we classified under five broad 
headings:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Ensure continuity of Federal Reserve operations.  
Ensure market liquidity during a crisis.  
Ensure effective communications and coordination during a crisis.  
Improve resilience of the private-sector financial system infrastructure.  
Improve  resilience  of  the  telecommunications  infrastructure  supporting  critical  financial 
services.  
Some of the key steps the Federal Reserve has taken to improve our infrastructure and the delivery of 
critical central-bank and financial services include the following:  
• 
We  have  developed  plans  to  ensure  that  critical  central-bank  activities,  supervisory 
functions, and financial services operations have sufficient redundancy in facilities and staff. 
We  have  enhanced  and  tested  business-continuity  arrangements  for  critical  functions  and 
business lines.  
Our  facilities  for  providing  critical  financial  services  are  backed  up  at  fully  operational, 
geographically diverse sites to ensure a speedy recovery even if the critical infrastructure is 
disrupted across multistate areas.  
We have enhanced our resiliency for discount window lending and cash services provided by 
the Reserve Banks.  
We have improved our tools and authority to provide liquidity in a crisis. In 2003, the Board 
established the primary credit program, as well as special arrangements for rapidly reducing 
BIS Review 49/2004
   2 
 the primary credit rate to the federal funds rate in an emergency. We also have improved the 
ability of the Board to approve the extension of emergency discount window credit.  
for  depository 
the  Federal  Financial 
institutions  more  specifically, 
The  federal  financial  agencies  took  immediate  steps  to  work  together  to  identify  new  vulnerabilities 
exposed  by  September  11.  These  efforts  were  coordinated  under  the  umbrella  of  the  President’s 
Working Group on Financial Markets, the Financial and Banking Infrastructure Information Committee 
(FBIIC),  and, 
Institutions 
Examination Council (FFIEC). The agencies have implemented a duty officer program and developed 
communications protocols for dealing with their staffs, regulated financial institutions, and the public. 
We  have  also  developed  and  tested  facilities  for  secure  communication  among  ourselves  and  with 
other agencies.  
The agencies that participate in FBIIC, including the Federal Reserve, and that have direct supervisory 
and regulatory responsibilities for the financial sector have assessed potential system vulnerabilities. 
We have shared that information with the Department of Homeland Security (DHS). Indeed, I would 
like to commend the DHS for their work to share information and coordinate with the financial sector 
including the FBIIC during the recent elevation of the threat level to orange for financial services firms 
in  New  York  City,  northern  New  Jersey,  and  Washington,  D.C.  The  timely  communications  and 
sharing  of  information  enabled  financial-sector  participants  and  law  enforcement  authorities  to  take 
steps to mitigate risks so that customers of financial services firms were able to conduct business in 
the  usual  fashion.  Financial-sector  participants,  including  the  financial  regulators,  strengthened 
business-resumption  plans  with  an  overall  goal  of  ensuring  the  smooth  operation  of  the  financial 
system.  Previously,  terrorist  attacks  were  treated  as  low-probability/high-impact  events  affecting  a 
single institution. As a result of September 11, industry participants are now planning for events that 
affect  wide  areas,  last  longer,  and  involve  loss  of  life  or  widespread  destruction  of  property  and 
information assets.  
The  process  of  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and,  in  particular,  organizations 
that  could have  a  systemic  effect  if  they  were  disabled,  is  being accomplished  through  the existing 
regulatory  framework.  More  than  a  year  ago,  in  April  2003,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) issued an 
Interagency Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen the Resilience of the U.S. Financial System. The 
paper  formalizes  a  set  of  sound  practices  viewed  as  necessary  by  the  agencies  and  the  financial 
industry to ensure the rapid recovery of the U.S. financial system following a wide-scale disruption that 
may  include  loss  or  inaccessibility  of  staff.  In  particular,  the  paper  articulates  sound  practices  for 
resumption and recovery of critical clearing and settlement activities by core clearing and settlement 
organizations  and  financial  institutions  that  play significant  roles  in  critical markets by  virtue  of  their 
market share (greater than five percent in one or more critical financial markets). The sound practices 
include  establishing  geographically  dispersed  backup  facilities  for  clearing  and  settlement  so  that 
these organizations can meet recovery objectives within the business day if a wide-scale disruption 
takes place.  
Using  their  respective  supervisory  and  regulatory  processes,  the  agencies  are  conducting  focused, 
ongoing  dialogues  with  the  organizations  that  are  subject  to  the  sound  practices  paper.  Financial 
organizations  are  investing  millions  of  dollars  to  implement  the  sound  practices.  Clearing  and 
settlement  organizations,  which  are  the  financial  utilities  for  the  U.S.  financial  system,  have  made 
substantial  progress  in  improving  their  resilience  and  achieving  out-of-region  geographic  dispersion 
between primary and backup operations facilities and data centers. Several have met or will meet the 
sound practices by year-end, with the remainder scheduled to complete implementation in the second 
half of 2005. Banks and broker-dealers that play significant roles in the critical markets defined in the 
paper indicate they will meet the paper’s 2006 implementation date.  
The sound practices are also relevant to other financial-sector participants. Many of the concepts in 
the  paper  amplify  long-standing  and  well-recognized  principles  relating  to  safeguarding  information 
and the ability to recover and resume essential financial services. Over the past few years, the FFIEC 
has  revised  and  expanded  guidance  for  banking  organizations  pertaining  to  operational  risk.  In 
December 2002, we issued revised guidance on information security. In April 2003, the FFIEC issued 
expanded  guidance  on  business-continuity  planning.  The  guidance  addresses  both  the  operational- 
and  business-risk  issues  that  depository  institutions  must  incorporate  into  their  business-continuity 
plans. The guidance specifically refers to the need to plan and test for recovery of critical business 
lines and functions - such as retail banking services - in the face of wide-scale disruption, as well as 
scenarios in which physical or information assets and personnel are lost. Recently, the FFIEC issued 
guidance  on  managing  additional  risks  arising  from  information  technology  operations,  network 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
management,  and  wholesale  and  retail  payments  systems.  Our  examiners  are  assessing  banks 
against  these  guidelines.  Other  financial  market  authorities  are  taking  similar  steps  for  the 
organizations that they regulate.  
Challenge of protection 
While  the  agencies  and  financial-sector  participants  are  working  to  improve  their  operational 
resilience,  some  vulnerabilities  continue  to  pose  challenges.  The  strategy  underlying  the  sound 
practices is to increase the likelihood that systemically critical institutions will be able to recover rapidly 
from a wide-scale disruption. However, the sound practices address only recovery, not the prevention 
of an attack.  
The  agencies  are  addressing  this  concern  by  working  to  improve  coordination  and  emergency 
planning efforts between federal, state, and local homeland security authorities; the various federal, 
state, and local protection agencies; and the systemically critical institutions. Efforts have focused on 
the locations where the systemically critical institutions have their primary operations - including New 
York  City.  The  agencies  also  plan  to  work  with  local  protection  agencies  in  cities  where  critical 
institutions  are  locating  backup  sites.  As  part  of  these  efforts,  the  Department  of  the  Treasury  has 
arranged for site surveys of key financial-services sector assets to determine whether physical security 
can be hardened. Protection plans have been developed and are being implemented.  
Importance of telecommunications to the financial services sector 
The  resilience  of  the  telecommunications  infrastructure  is,  from  our  perspective,  one  of  the  most 
important  national  issues  involving  the  nation’s  critical  infrastructure.  The  U.S.  financial  system 
depends on telecommunications to effect transactions and make payments.  
Following September 11, the Federal Reserve and the FBIIC agencies expanded and promoted the 
use of National Security/Emergency Preparedness (NS/EP) telecommunications programs sponsored 
by NCS. These programs worked well in helping to resume operations on September 11. The Federal 
Reserve  is  working  with  FBIIC  agencies  through  outreach  to  expand  NCS  services  to  clearing  and 
settlement  organizations  processing  securities.  Approximately  5,000  additional  authorizations  to 
ensure the priority of voice telecommunications have been issued in the financial sector. Moreover, 
about 4,100 critical circuits used to transmit financial data have been registered for priority restoration 
and  provisioning  of  new  lines;  these  include  most  circuits  between  the  payment  and  settlement 
systems, the markets, and key market participants.  
The  National  Security/Emergency  Preparedness telecommunications program  operated  by  the  NCS 
currently  focuses  on  recovery  and  restoration.  The  FBIIC  agencies  believe  that  a  third  aspect  - 
protection - through establishment of a national program for maintaining physically diverse circuits and 
switches, should be incorporated into the program. Treasury has designated the Federal Reserve as 
the  lead  agency  for  telecommunications  for  the  FBIIC  interdependencies  study.  At  the  Federal 
Reserve’s request, the telecommunications sector through the National Security Telecommunications 
Advisory  Committee  (NSTAC)  reviewed  the  resilience  of  the  telecommunications  infrastructure.  In 
response to the NSTAC’s recommendations that were submitted to the President in April 2004, the 
Alliance  for  Telecommunications  Industry  Solutions  (ATIS)  is  organizing  a  National  Diversity 
Assurance Initiative. ATIS has asked the Federal Reserve to participate in a pilot program to develop 
and test the requirements for physical circuit diversity across multiple carriers that can be used by the 
financial  system  and  potentially  other  critical  sectors.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  collaborating  with 
telecommunications services providers through NSTAC and the Federal Communications Commission 
Network  Reliability  and  Interoperability  Council.  As  an  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  currently 
working with the NSTAC to plan how NS/EP telecommunications services can be applied to the next 
generation of telecommunications networks based on internet protocols.  
Summary 
In  summary,  Mr.  Chairman,  we  believe  that  protecting  the  infrastructure  that  supports  our  financial 
system is a matter of national importance. As a result of careful planning and considerable investment 
by  both  the  private  and  public  sectors,  the  financial  sector  is  one  of  the  most  resilient  parts  of  our 
economy. The supervisory framework for the financial sector oversees compliance with security and 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
business-resumption expectations, which are relatively high because of the importance of ensuring the 
smooth operation of our financial system. All financial institutions have been expected to incorporate 
lessons learned from September 11, recent power outages, and cyber attacks. Organizations that we 
believe could have a systemic effect on the financial system if their functions were disrupted are being 
asked to meet very high standards of business resumption. The Federal Reserve will continue to treat 
the protection and resilience of the sector as a key responsibility.  
Thank you Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. I am happy to respond to any questions.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 5
