Irma Rosenberg: The current monetary policy situation  
Speech  by  Ms  Irma  Rosenberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Handelsbanken, 
Stockholm, 29 January 2004. 
 Thank you for the invitation to come here and speak about monetary policy.  
In recent months there have been many comments on what the Riksbank should decide with regard to 
the repo rate at the next monetary policy meeting on 5 February. We at the Riksbank have nothing 
against  discussions  on  monetary  policy  arising.  On  the  contrary,  we  find  it  useful  as  it  forces  us  to 
sharpen  our  arguments  and  our  reasoning  and  to  work  on  improving  our  methods  of  analysis. 
However,  to avoid  any misunderstandings,  it  is  important  for  us to  inform  others  of  how  we  work.  I 
shall therefore begin with some general words on the Riksbank’s inflation target and monetary policy 
strategy before going into the current situation. 
The Riksbank’s objectives and working methods 
Our  monetary  policy  objective  is  to  maintain  price  stability,  which  the  Riksbank  has  defined  as  an 
increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  of  2  per  cent  a  year  with  a  tolerated  deviation  interval  of  +/-
 1 percentage  point.  When  the  inflation  target  was  first  introduced,  it  was  rather  controversial  and 
many regarded it as unrealistic. Now there is general support for the inflation target and we have a 
good record of target fulfilment. There is also considerable confidence in the inflation target, judging 
from households’ and firms’ expectations of the future inflation rate. Of course, this does not prevent 
differing opinions being held, both within the Riksbank and by external analysts, as to how the repo 
rate should be managed in order to maintain price stability. 
Monetary policy is based on how the inflation rate is expected to develop in the near future, primarily 
1-2 years ahead. There are two reasons for this. The first is that monetary policy measures make their 
full impact on inflation during this time horizon. Thus, the Riksbank has little possibility to counteract 
shocks  that  affect  inflation  in  the  short  term,  but  it  can  conduct  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  to 
ensure that inflation is maintained around an average rate of 2 per cent a couple of years ahead. The 
second argument in favour of forward-looking monetary policy is that this provides scope for taking 
into account developments in the real economy. If the repo rate were to be changed continually to try 
to bring inflation back to the target level as quickly as possible every time a shock occurred, it could 
lead  to  considerable,  and  undesirable,  fluctuations  in  interest  rates,  production  and  employment. 
During the years that monetary policy has employed an inflation targeting strategy, we have developed 
a  clear  analytical  framework  for  our  work.  The  Riksbank  has  developed  a  simple  rule  to  make 
monetary  policy  more  easily  comprehensible  and  to  create  stability  when  making  monetary  policy 
decisions. What this entails is that if the inflation rate 1-2 years ahead is expected to be below the 
2 per cent target, the repo rate will usually be lowered, and vice versa. However, it is important to point 
out  that  this  rule  cannot  be  applied  mechanically  and  nor  has  this  been  the  case  earlier.  It  is  also 
important to emphasise that openness regarding our forecasts is a vital part of the monetary policy 
reasoning, as it enables discussion and assessment of our decisions. I will return to this issue later. 
Monetary policy therefore focuses on expected future inflation and not the most recent CPI outcome. 
However,  new  results  can  of  course  affect  the  assessment  of  future  events.  The  current  economic 
situation is very important in that it comprises the foundation for our forecasting work and therefore 
affects the conclusions we will reach regarding future inflation. Nevertheless, we cannot use monetary 
policy measures to influence economic conditions in the very short term, unless we are prepared to 
make drastic changes in the interest rate.  
The Riksbank’s views on inflation prospects are described in detail four times a year in our Inflation 
Reports. In connection with the publication of two of these reports there is also a public hearing of the 
Riksbank  Governor  in  parliament  by  the  Riksdag  Committee  on  Finance.  The  initiative  to  these 
meetings came from the Riksbank, as a way of creating further clarity and transparency with regard to 
monetary  policy.  A  press  release  is  published  after  each  interest  rate  decision,  containing  a  brief 
description  of  the  background  to  the  decision.  A  more  detailed  account  of  our  discussion  and  the 
motivation for the decision can be obtained from the minutes of the monetary policy meetings, which 
are usually published approximately two weeks after the meetings.  
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
Growth expectations appear to be correct 
Our  monetary  policy  decisions  are  thus  based  on  the  forecast  of  inflation  1-2  years  ahead.  The 
assessment of inflation prospects begins with an analysis of developments in the real economy. This 
has not been an easy task in recent years and the Riksbank, in common with many other analysts, 
has been forced to reconsider its forecasts of economic growth on a number of occasions.  
Sweden, like most other countries, was affected by the economic slowdown in 2001. The slowdown 
was aggravated by the uncertainty following the terrorist attacks on 11 September. Growth in Sweden 
and  in  the  OECD  as  a  whole  was  then  around  1  per  cent.  Economic  policy  was  made  more 
expansionary in many countries and at the beginning of 2002 there were signs that uncertainty had 
declined and that economic activity was about to improve. Growth improved slightly and assessments 
of future growth assumed that economic activity would continue to strengthen. 
However, these expectations were not met. During the second half of 2002 economic prospects took a 
downturn  once  again,  growth  forecasts  began  to  be  adjusted  downwards  and  the  time  for  the 
economic upturn was postponed further. This applied both internationally and in Sweden. It was partly 
due to the confidence crisis suffered by the business sector as a result of corporate scandals in the 
United States and a number of large-scale bankruptcies. This contributed to a new stock market fall. 
The threat of war in Iraq and the ensuing outbreak of war for a time created greater uncertainty over 
the global economy than usual. The lack of clearly positive economic signals once the acute stage of 
the war was over, contributed to an increasingly pessimistic view of the economic situation during the 
first  half  of  2003.  The  weaker  economic  activity  was  also  reflected  in  the  Riksbank’s  inflation  and 
growth  forecasts,  and  the  repo  rate  was  cut  by  a  total  of  one  percentage  point  during  spring  and 
summer 2003. 
During the second half of 2003 the views of economic activity became slightly more optimistic again. It 
now appears that economic growth in Sweden and the United States during 2003 was largely as we 
had expected at the beginning of the year. In Sweden, investment showed a much poorer growth than 
expected during 2003, but this was counteracted by good growth in consumption, in both the private 
and public sector, and by favourable developments in foreign trade. One could therefore say that the 
Riksbank, in common with other analysts, became overly pessimistic in connection with the Iraq war, 
at least with regard to the view of economic growth in the United States and Sweden. With regard to 
developments in the euro area, the situation is slightly different. There, the growth forecast for 2003 
has been revised down further during the second half of the year and it is only very recently that some 
positive  economic  signals  could  be  distinguished.  However,  it  is  quite  clear  that  growth  in  the  euro 
countries was much poorer during 2003 than we believed it would be at the beginning of the year.  
All in all, we have made an upward revision to our international growth forecast for not only 2003, but 
also 2004 and 2005. The assessment in the December Inflation Report was that growth in the OECD 
area would be around 2 per cent in 2003 and then rise to 2.9 per cent in 2004 and 2.7 per cent in 
2005. The new information that has become available since December confirms the original picture of 
the global economy, as our next monetary policy meeting approaches.  
The monetary policy decision in December was based on the assessment that the growth rate of the 
Swedish  economy  would  gradually  improve  from  1.5  per  cent  in  2003  to  2.5  per  cent  in  2004  and 
2005. So far, the new information received is consistent with this view.  
The significance of the labour market for inflation forecasts 
Developments in the labour market are very important for our inflation forecasts and we have had to 
revise our forecasts on several occasions over the past year. Employment measured as the number of 
people  in  work  was  on  average  as  expected  in  2003.  Developments  in  the  public  sector  were 
unexpectedly strong at the beginning of the year, which counteracted the fact that developments in the 
private sector were weaker than we had expected. The strained economic situation in the public sector 
indicates that employment there will develop weakly during 2004, while the economic upturn is still not 
expected to be reflected in any increase in the number of employees in the private sector. The fact 
that the labour market to some extent lags behind production development in the business sector is a 
normal part of the economic cycle, but developments in employment in the private sector have so far 
been slightly weaker than we had expected. 
Monetary policy can only marginally influence the weak labour market situation in the coming months. 
However, the situation in the labour market is a central factor in the assessment of demand and thus 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2004
for long-term assessments of inflation. Labour market developments can influence future inflation in 
several  different  ways.  If  the  demand  for  labour  remains  weak  during  a  longer  period  and 
unemployment  soars,  there  is  a  risk  that  this  will  have  negative  repercussions  on  household 
consumption  and  thus  on  demand.  Households  have  become  more  pessimistic  during  the  autumn, 
both with regard to unemployment and with regard to their private finances. So far we have seen no 
signs  that  household  demand  is  about  to  slacken,  but  this  was  a  factor  we  included  in  the  risk 
assessment  in  the  December  Inflation  Report.  More  unutilised  resources  could  subdue  inflationary 
pressure and finally result in a lower inflation rate. 
The labour market situation can also be an indicator of supply conditions in the business sector and 
thereby  of  how  inflationary  pressure  will  develop.  The  weaker  demand  for  labour  in  the  business 
sector  during  2003  has  not  been  due  to  weak  production  growth,  but  to  companies  being  able  to 
increase production without increasing the number of employees. Nor is it the case that the already 
employed have worked more. Instead, the average number of working hours has fallen more than we 
had anticipated. Production per hour worked, i.e. productivity, has thus shown a stronger development 
than  expected.  But  it  is  still  too  early  to  determine  the  cause  of  this.  It  is  therefore  also  uncertain 
whether  the  increase  in  productivity  will  endure.  It  could  be  an  element  of  the  jobless  growth 
phenomenon now being discussed intensively in the United States, although productivity growth has 
not been as strong in Sweden as it was there. While the statistics are uncertain, it is still exciting to see 
that, according to the Swedish National Accounts, productivity growth has also become more rapid in 
the service industries. One possible explanation for the strong growth in productivity put forward by the 
Federal Reserve, for instance, is that increased use of IT is now beginning to make a mark outside of 
the IT sectors. The explanation for the time lag before this has become visible could be that it takes 
time  to  learn  the  new  technology  and  to  reorganise  the  company  in  order  to  benefit  from  the 
advantages  in  terms  of  increased  productivity  from  earlier  investments.  If  the  strong  productivity 
growth  proves  to  be  permanent,  it  means  that  the  economy  can  grow  at  a  more  rapid  rate  without 
inflation accelerating.  
One question concerns the consequences of the poor employment situation and strong productivity 
growth for the outcome of wage negotiations and wage developments as a whole. If the labour market 
is  functioning  efficiently,  the  weak  labour  market  situation  should  result  in  modest  wage  increases. 
Unfortunately,  we  know  that,  historically,  this  has  not  always  been  the  case.  The  good  productivity 
growth  may  also  make  it  difficult  for  firms  to  withstand  higher  wage  demands.  It  could  become 
particularly  worrying  if  the  wage  negotiations  assume  that  the  improvement  in  productivity  is 
permanent and it later begins to decline again. 
It  now  looks  as  though  recent  wage  developments  may  have  been  calmer  than  expected.  In  the 
December Inflation Report we made a downward revision to the forecast for unit labour costs in the 
business sector for all three years covered by the forecast. This was because of the slightly lower rate 
of wage increases and a slightly more favourable development in productivity. The question of whether 
there is motivation for a further adjustment in the same direction is one that will be discussed at our 
monetary policy meeting in February. 
Inflation prospects 
The  average  inflation  rate  in  2003  was  roughly  as  we  had  forecast  at  the  beginning  of  the  year, 
although the composition was different. At the beginning of 2003, electricity and oil prices were soaring 
and inflation was above 3 per cent. We forecast this to be a temporary situation and that energy prices 
would  fall  again.  This  has  also  been  the  case,  but  on  the  whole  consumer  prices  for  energy  have 
increased  more  than  we  anticipated.  Nevertheless,  inflation  has  fallen  to  the  level  we  expected,  as 
price pressure in the rest of the economy was weaker than we had assumed. One important reason 
for this is a larger-than-expected fall in prices of imported goods. This in turn was connected with the 
appreciation of the krona and the weaker economic activity in Europe. The strong productivity growth 
in the business sector probably also contributed. Now, as we look ahead, it is important that the more 
lasting effects on inflation from the business cycle are distinguished from price fluctuations caused by 
disturbances in the energy markets and other more temporary factors. 
Monetary policy 
The  views  on  inflation  prospects,  which  in  turn  are  based  on  the  economic  situation,  employment, 
productivity  and  wage  developments,  held  by  the  Riksbank  and  other  analysts  have  not  differed 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
significantly. However, even minor differences between forecasts can lead to differing conclusions with 
regard  to  monetary  policy.  Consequently,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  Riksbank  and  other  analysts 
sometimes reach different conclusions on what can be considered a suitable change in the repo rate. 
However,  according  to  Swedish  law,  independent  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  has  been 
delegated to the Riksbank. Naturally, we listen to all well-founded analyses but in each situation we 
must ultimately rely on our own assessment of the right monetary policy measure for achieving the 
inflation target. It is nevertheless important, and of course a very reasonable request, that we are able 
to explain and motivate our assessments and decisions. We achieve this through the publication of our 
Inflation Reports, press releases, speeches and the minutes of the monetary policy meetings. 
If  we  are  open  and  clear  with  regard  to  our  forecasts  and  assessments,  it  is  easier  for  others  to 
evaluate our monetary policy. This is particularly important as the effects of a repo rate decision are 
felt after a time lag. A public inflation forecast makes it possible to assess and evaluate the monetary 
policy stance at an early stage. An open discussion also contributes to increasing understanding of the 
inflation target. It is part of the strength of the monetary policy regulations that there has sometimes 
been  rather  lively  discussion,  without  this  having  an  effect  on  confidence  in  our  main  objectives. 
Another advantage of openness is that it gives forecasters, both inside and outside the Riksbank, the 
opportunity  to  make  comparisons  that  help  to  sharpen  our  forecasting.  We  must  not  forget  that 
inflation  forecasts  are  made  under  great  uncertainty  and  that  inflation  is  affected  by  unpredictable 
factors. Nevertheless, during the 10 years we have employed inflation targeting, the average inflation 
rate has remained very close to the target level. 
To summarise, we can observe that the growth rate for 2003 was weaker than we had expected in 
2002. The inflation rate, however, was more or less as expected. It is possible that we became slightly 
too pessimistic with regard to economic activity in 2003. When we made our monetary policy decision 
in December the international upturn appeared to have been confirmed, and there were also signs that 
the  Swedish  economy  was  strengthening.  Inflation  had  developed  roughly  as  we  had  calculated  in 
earlier forecasts. Although energy prices did not fall as far as we had calculated, domestic inflationary 
pressure excluding energy prices proved to be lower than expected, probably because of the weak 
labour market development and good productivity growth. The falling import prices had an even more 
significant effect  on  inflation.  We  assumed  in  our  inflation  forecast  for  the  coming  years that  import 
prices would cease falling and instead begin to rise gently as international economic activity improved. 
The  forecast  for  domestic  cost  pressure  was  adjusted  slightly  downwards  as  this  was  expected  to 
show  only  a slight  increase  during  the forecast period.  The  conclusion  was  that  underlying  inflation 
excluding  energy,  which  was  assessed  as  the  best  mirror  of  cyclically-related  inflationary  pressure, 
was expected to be in line with the target 1-2 years ahead, and this was why the repo rate was left 
unchanged. 
The information received so far since December does not appear to significantly alter the picture of a 
recovery in economic growth. However, there may be a risk that the weak labour market situation will 
last longer than anticipated and have repercussions for growth and inflation through weaker private 
consumption. Now that we are in the midst of compiling the data on which to base our decision at the 
February meeting, it looks as though the new information received since December gives scope for a 
further slight downward adjustment to the forecast of domestic cost pressure. This is because it seems 
that labour market growth will be somewhat weaker than expected, and thereby also the rate of wage 
increases, and the fact that productivity growth during the first three quarters appears to have been 
somewhat more favourable than we had anticipated. The risk of contagion effects via energy prices 
also appears to have declined. However, as we said, we are in the midst of our forecasting work and 
not all of the information is complete as yet. Our monetary policy meeting will be held on 5 February 
and this is when the final decision on the repo rate will be made. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
