Lars Heikensten: Economic recovery with low inflationary pressure 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a  meeting  at  Residenset 
Härnösand, 15 March 2004. 
 Allow me to begin by thanking you for your invitation to today’s meeting. 
In order to get an idea of economic developments in different areas of Sweden and to explain how the 
Riksbank  works,  I  pay  regular  visits  to  various  parts  of  the  country.  The  items  on  the  agenda  for 
today’s visit include a talk at Mid Sweden University on how the Riksbank works, a visit to SCA and a 
discussion  with  county  representatives  about  developments  in  business  and  the  labour  market  in 
Västernorrland. At this lunch, I intend to give my views on the economic situation and monetary policy. 
Before going into the economic assessment itself, however, I would like to say a few words about the 
Riksbank’s  work  methods.  One  of  the  Riksbank’s  objectives  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  We  have 
decided  to  define  this  as  2  per  cent  inflation  as  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index,  with  a 
tolerance  range  of  plus/minus  1  percentage  point.  Monetary  policy  is  conducted  on  the  basis  of  a 
forecast of inflation over primarily the coming two years. If the forecast in this perspective indicates 
that inflation will be lower than 2 per cent, the repo rate should normally be cut and vice versa. The 
reason we focus on inflation 1-2 years ahead is because monetary policy affects the economy and 
inflation with a certain time lag. 
This approach has served us well over the decade during which we have conducted monetary policy 
with an inflation target. Since the target was adopted, inflation has by and large averaged 2 per cent. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  experienced  better  general  economic  progress  than  during  the  two 
preceding  decades.  The clear  target coupled with  our  mode  of action  has  also  helped  to make  the 
Riksbank’s policy accessible to both the public and the financial markets. Inflation expectations have 
been anchored fairly stably around our target and it has been possible to predict our actions rather 
well. 
Nevertheless, there is cause to underline that we do not run on autopilot and mechanically change the 
repo rate  in  relation  to  our  inflation  forecasts.  There may  be  reasons  for  us  to  wait  before  taking  a 
decision in order to be able to perform more in-depth analysis or obtain more information. There may 
also  be  reason  to  take  into  account  additional  aspects  in  our  decision  rather  than  just  inflation 
1-2 years ahead. Such aspects could include how the economy in general would be affected, inflation 
in both a longer- and shorter-term perspective and the impact on financial stability. But it is important 
to have a framework that is as explicit as possible, with clearly defined and stated objectives. In this 
way, everyone can follow our line of reasoning, question it and comment on it. Monetary policy is most 
effective when it is firmly established. 
International upswing is continuing 
Both real economic activity and inflation in Sweden are highly dependent on developments abroad. 
Broadly  speaking,  demand  and  economic  growth  since  the  end  of  last  summer  have  followed  the 
paths expected by the Riksbank at the time and subsequently. However, when seen over the entire 
period, growth in the US has been somewhat faster than anticipated. This also applies to the situation 
in Asia and in Eastern and Central Europe. Conditions are different in Western Europe, particularly in 
the  core  countries  of  the  euro  area  -  Germany,  France  and  Italy.  Here,  demand  has  not  risen  as 
expected and the upswing has been delayed. 
What has happened since the Riksbank’s last decision on the repo rate in February has followed the 
same pattern. Recent developments in the US economy have also been unexpectedly positive. This 
also applies to large parts of Asia, led by China and Japan. In addition, a number of Sweden’s other 
important  export  markets  such  as  the  UK  and  Norway  appear  to  have  performed  somewhat  better 
than  anticipated.  As  regards  the  euro  area,  the  most  recent  data  does  indeed  suggest  that  the 
recovery in industry has taken root but at the same time domestic demand continues to be weak. 
The  situation  in  China  deserves  a  special  mention.  Since  1990,  output  in  China  has  grown  at  an 
average rate of 9 per cent per year. Over the past three years, it has been 8 per cent. This means that 
China’s share of global output has more than doubled from 6 per cent to 13 per cent. This situation 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 1
has great significance for the world economy today. China has emerged as one of the world’s major 
importers  of  commodities,  especially  regarding  crude  oil,  copper  and  agricultural  products.  For 
example, China’s imports of copper totalled no less than 15 per cent of world trade in copper in 2002, 
compared with only a couple of per cent in 1990. At the same time, Chinese exports of manufactured 
goods are increasing rapidly, currently accounting for 6 per cent of world exports compared with 2 per 
cent  in  1990.  When  we  today  see  an  unusually  big  gap  between  international  price  inflation  for 
manufactured goods, which is presently exceptionally slow, and for commodities, which instead is very 
fast, it is probably somewhat due to what is happening in China. 
My overall view is that international economic activity will continue to strengthen in the years ahead 
largely as we expected before. Growth in the OECD area could reach about 3 per cent this year and 
average around the same in 2005 and 2006. This is marginally higher than we expected and implies 
slightly better export conditions. International prices of manufactured goods are likely to rise in tandem 
with the economic recovery. But by how much is uncertain. There are strong arguments to suggest 
that the increase in prices could be slower than usual against the background of globalisation and the 
weak  price  inflation  for  manufactured  goods.  Pointing  in  the  opposite  direction  is  increases  in 
commodities prices, which could have a greater impact were demand to accelerate further. However, 
futures prices of commodities are, if anything, indicating future price declines. 
Demand in Sweden in line with previous forecasts 
The  Swedish  economy  has  come  through  the  recent  economic  slowdown  comparatively  well,  with 
growth in the past three years averaging around 1.5 per cent per year. This is important to remember 
in  order  to  get  some  perspective  on  the  outcome  of  the  conduct  of  economic  policy  now  that 
employment has fallen somewhat. An important reason that economic activity has not been weaker is 
that household consumption has been relatively high. This has been bolstered by loose fiscal policy 
and low interest rates. The relatively weak krona has also boosted Swedish exports and resulted in a 
considerable trade surplus. 
Swedish  economic developments have  largely  followed  the paths  described by  the  Riksbank  in  the 
late summer and autumn 2003. Growth has gradually strengthened in line with international demand. 
At the same time, private consumption has continued to be relatively high. Investment has remained 
weak, however. This picture is confirmed in the latest National Accounts. Growth for the full year 2003 
is now judged to have been 1.6 per cent. However, there was a marked change over the course of 
2003; between the first and second halves of the year growth rose from 1.4 to 1.8 per cent. 
The situation at present is that the upswing in industry has progressed somewhat. Export demand has 
gathered pace, and firms are fairly optimistic about the future. It also appears that capacity utilisation 
in industry is continuing to rise. Exports were unexpectedly strong during the final two quarters last 
year,  and  business  tendency  data  point  to  continued  optimism  in  the  period  ahead.  Households’ 
expectations  regarding  both  their  own  finances  and  the  Swedish  economy  have  also  begun  to  rise 
again after having fallen somewhat at the end of last year. Retail sales figures indicate a continuation 
of robust consumption. Low interest rates, rising equity prices and low inflation will boost consumption 
in the period ahead as well. 
While  on  the  subject  of  household  consumption  allow  me  to  say  something  about  the  recent 
discussion  on  household  indebtedness.  Debt  as  a  proportion  of  households’  disposable  income 
continued to grow last year, and the debt ratio is now approaching the levels seen during the sharp 
expansion in credit at the end of the 1980s. At the same time, low interest rates mean that households’ 
interest costs as a percentage of income is at a historically low level. The latter means that it is not a 
great  problem  today  for  the  household  sector  to  bear  its  debt  even  if  this  debt  of  course  limits 
households’ scope for consumption in the near future. 
So  this  situation  hardly  constitutes  a  macroeconomic  problem  at  present.  In  actual  fact,  one  of  the 
aims  of  the  low  interest  rates  has  been  exactly  to  create  conditions  for  households  to  reduce  their 
saving and maintain their consumption in the weaker economic climate. In spite of this, there is reason 
for  the  Riksbank  to  monitor  developments  carefully.  There  is  also  good  reason  for  individual 
households to reflect on their debt situation. Interest rates are unusually low at present and will most 
probably change in the future. 
On the whole, there is no reason to make any marked adjustment to the overall outlook for demand in 
the Swedish economy in the coming years compared with in December or February. Most factors still 
indicate that growth in household consumption will continue to be stable around 2.5 per cent in the 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2004
years  ahead.  The  contribution  to  growth  from  exports  will  probably  be  somewhat  higher  than 
previously expected, but a large part of the effect on demand will be offset by the fact that this could 
also be the case for imports. Local government consumption appears to be somewhat weaker than we 
thought in December. Investment is a source of uncertainty and could probably pick up somewhat later 
than forecast. On the whole, therefore, GDP growth may be roughly as we expected in the December 
Inflation Report and when we took our decision in February, reaching around 2.5 per cent per year in 
the years ahead. 
Low domestic cost pressure 
In other words, the outlook from the autumn has so far remained largely intact, and economic activity 
is  strengthening  as  expected.  The  situation  is  different  for  domestic  cost  pressure.  In  this  respect, 
since the middle of autumn 2003, new data has gradually been received that has warranted changes 
in our view of the inflation situation. These relate to the labour market, which has been weaker than 
expected with consequences for our assessments of wage developments, to productivity, which has 
risen more than anticipated, with lower cost pressure as a result, and finally to actual inflation, which 
has  been  lower  than  expected,  with  effects  also  on  inflation  expectations,  which  have  declined 
somewhat. 
Employment growth has therefore been weaker than expected, particularly at the end of last year. The 
same  applies  to  the  number  of  hours  worked.  The  weak  employment  growth  coupled  with  a  lower 
number  of  labour  market  policy  measures  has  resulted  in  higher  unemployment.  This  rose  from 
4.5 per cent in February last year to 6.0 per cent in February this year. Business tendency data and 
other indicators currently suggest that employment growth in the private sector will be relatively weak 
in 2004. There are some signs that the labour market may be about to turn, but these are weak. Very 
recently, for example, the number of new job vacancies has increased slightly and redundancy notices 
have declined. At the same time, the strained financial situation in the public sector points to weak 
employment  growth  in  local  governments  in  the  period  ahead  as  well.  Thus,  employment  growth  is 
likely to be somewhat weaker during the year compared with our December forecast. 
As early as February, we changed somewhat our outlook for the rate of wage increases as a result of 
the  situation  in  the  labour  market.  There  is  reason  to  expect  total  rises  in  wage  costs  to  average 
around 3.5 per cent in 2004 and 2005, which in terms of average collectively agreed levels leaves little 
room  for  more  than  about  2  per  cent  on  average  in  the  years  ahead.  The  wage  bargaining  round 
appears so far to have gone relatively well, but the historical experiences of Swedish wage formation 
suggest that one should be cautious about assuming that we are home and dry. The parties appear to 
be far from agreement on a number of issues, and there are risks of conflicts arising. As long as the 
agreements are reached at moderate levels from an inflation perspective, longer agreement periods 
are preferable. This would alleviate some future uncertainty and should thereby contribute to a better 
economic situation. 
So while employment, measured by the number of hours worked, in the business sector was weaker 
than expected last year, GDP growth was roughly in line with the Riksbank’s expectations. This means 
that productivity was higher than anticipated. This picture has been confirmed by the latest National 
Accounts  data  and  was  underlined  as  early  as  in  our  December  assessment.  Since  then  it  has 
become clearer, and the somewhat better productivity was an important argument for the rate cut in 
February. 
It  is  likely  that  the  more  robust  productivity  has  partly  been  due  to  the  developments  in  economic 
activity; at the beginning of a recovery, existing production resources are utilised more efficiently and 
only when the revival has been established will a rise in investment and new jobs begin in earnest. But 
this explanation is not enough since productivity appears to have risen more than normal given the 
economic situation. This pattern is very clear in the US but is also somewhat discernible in Sweden. 
One possible interpretation is that it is due to unusually large-scale investment in, for instance, IT at 
the  end  of  the  1990s.  It  is  also  conceivable  that  it  reflects  more  permanent  changes  that  could  be 
related,  for  example,  to  technological  advances  in  IT  and  telecommunications.  At  present,  it  is  not 
possible to determine exactly what has caused the improvement in productivity. However, when we 
look ahead to the coming years, we see reason to expect a better productivity outlook than that we 
had in December. 
The  new  inflation  data  that  have  been  received  also  point  to  somewhat  more  subdued  inflationary 
pressure. The decline in inflation seen over the last six months has to a large extent been in line with 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 3
the  Riksbank’s  previous  forecasts.  The  reason  for  this  is  that  electricity  prices  have  adjusted 
downwards  as  expected.  The  fact  that  the  expected  decline  has  been  confirmed  is  positive  for  the 
inflation outlook since the risk of contagion to other parts of the economy diminishes. These risks have 
also decreased in that rent agreements at least so far have been concluded at moderate levels. In 
addition, the inflation outcomes in recent months have been lower than expected for other reasons as 
well. This is partly due to lower import prices, although domestic underlying inflation is also somewhat 
lower than previous forecasts. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
Permit me now to summarise my view of demand and inflation in the period ahead. It appears that 
international economic activity is progressing largely as expected. Compared with December, there is 
perhaps reason to expect marginally stronger activity due mainly to the rapid growth in Asia and the 
US. Economic developments in Sweden are also essentially following the paths we expected, even if 
there  has  been  a  certain  shift  between  different  demand  components  in  that  private  sector 
consumption  and  particularly  exports  are  growing  slightly  faster,  while  growth  in  local  government 
consumption will probably be somewhat weaker. In all, there is still reason to expect GDP growth in 
the years ahead to be somewhat higher than what the Riksbank believes to be sustainable in the long 
term. For inflation in the years ahead, it is of course important that there are some unutilised resources 
to begin with. 
So what can we expect in terms of inflation developments? In this respect, the outlook has gradually 
undergone a number of more marked changes since the end of the autumn. Principally, as a result of 
lower expected increases in wage costs and better productivity growth, unit labour costs are expected 
today compared with in December to grow a number of tenths slower in the years ahead. Normally, 
there are few factors that are more significant for inflation a few years ahead than unit labour costs. In 
addition,  international  price  pressure  is  muted.  Against  this  background,  most  factors  suggest  that 
inflation in the next two years will be below the Riksbank’s target. 
Also  with  regard  to  the  various  risks  to  economic  activity  and  inflation,  I  believe  there  is  cause  to 
reason somewhat differently than in December. As the economic upswing is gradually confirmed, the 
risk of a setback in the coming two years will diminish. Correspondingly, the probability that economic 
activity could prove unexpectedly positive and that the upswing will be quicker than anticipated is also 
likely to increase. However, this does not mean that there are no downside risks whatsoever in the 
short term. One such risk is that the weak labour market in the US or in Sweden - confirmed by the 
latest data - will worry households and dampen their consumption. It seems unlikely, however, that the 
upswing could be derailed entirely for this reason. 
As  regards  inflationary  pressure,  there  are  a  number  of  question  marks as  I  mentioned  earlier.  We 
don’t  know  how  long  the  recent  rise  in  productivity  will  last.  In  the  inflation  outlook  that  I  have 
presented,  some  consideration  has  been  given  to  the  new  data.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  good 
arguments  pointing  to  both  higher  and  lower  productivity  growth.  The  same  applies  to  our  view  of 
international  inflation.  As  regards  wages,  there  are  also  risks  on  the  upside,  which  are  essentially 
related to the way in which wage formation in Sweden is conducted. It can still not be ruled out entirely 
that the wage bargaining round will be derailed. Should the outcomes prove higher than expected, it is 
likely to have an impact on the future level of interest rates. 
So far I have not said anything about the exchange rate. There may be reason to touch upon this. For 
a long time, we have expected a krona appreciation that over the course of the forecast period would 
bring us to levels approximately in line with what we believe to be appropriate in the long term, given 
mainly  the competitiveness  of  the  Swedish  economy.  During  the  period  2002-2003  as  a  whole,  the 
krona strengthened roughly as expected. Recently, however, this strengthening has been curbed. One 
reason  for  this  appears  to  be  expected  relative  interest  rates,  where  there  has  been  a  certain  shift 
since  the  autumn.  There  may  be  reason  to  take  this  into  account  and  expect  a  somewhat  lesser 
probability than before of a krona appreciation. 
On the whole, this discussion of different uncertainty factors and risks does not lead me to see reason 
to make any appreciable changes to the assessment I have just presented. The risks I have discussed 
could perhaps push up inflation somewhat. Nevertheless, with what we know today, the conclusion 
remains that inflation will be below the Riksbank’s target one to two years ahead. 
By way of conclusion, allow me to stress that much work remains to be done before the next Inflation 
Report is published and it is this that will form the basis of our decision about the repo rate at the end 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2004
of March. So it is not just today’s assessment that could be affected by new data. In the light of the 
analyses currently  being  carried  out,  the  Executive  Board  may  assess  some of  the  factors  that  are 
significant for inflation in a different way than I have today. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 5
