John Palmer: Basel II and beyond 
Opening  address  by  Mr  John  Palmer,  Deputy  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the MAS Risk Conference, Singapore, 12 July 2004. 
 Introduction 
Good morning. Welcome to the MAS Risk Conference, and for visitors to these shores - welcome to 
Singapore. 
The Conference is held at an opportune time. It was only two weeks ago that the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision released the Basel II capital framework. 
This is enough time for all of you to have read the full text, and recent enough for you to remember 
most of what you have read. 
Not  surprisingly,  my  remarks  this  morning  will  be  focused  on  Basel  II.  They  are  drawn  from  my 
perspectives as a policy maker who actively supported the development of the Basel II framework, and 
as a prudential supervisor now faced with the challenge of implementing this new framework. 
I intend to offer a perspective on Basel II, some of the challenges that remain to be addressed and 
offer some thoughts on the future evolution of capital adequacy rules for banks. 
Later  in  the  conference,  my  colleague,  Low  Kwok  Mun,  will  discuss  MAS’  approach  to  Basel  II 
implementation,  including  requirements  for  local  banks  and  some  important  home/host  supervisory 
issues. 
Why Basel II? What is good about it? And what are the implementation challenges? 
Developing  Basel  II  turned  out  to  be  an  immense  challenge.  Implementing  it  will  be  no  less 
challenging. But the challenges are necessary ones, as I see it. 
Basel  II  was  made  necessary  and  inevitable  by  the  evolution  of  the  banking  sector  following  the 
introduction of Basel I, particularly the growth of internationally active banks and improvements in their 
risk management practices. 
Global trends and banking sector developments 
A number of factors over the last two decades have resulted in bigger, more international and more 
diversified banking institutions. 
Many banking institutions have seized the opportunities presented by liberalisation and globalisation to 
expand  beyond  their  home  bases  and  traditional  lines  of  business.  At  the  same  time,  rapid 
technological  advances,  particularly  in  computing,  allowed  for  the  streamlining  of  operational 
processes and made possible the effective management of large international financial conglomerates 
by reducing some of the inefficiencies of scale. 
Many, though certainly not all, of the banking institutions that expanded in this way have been quite 
successful.  They  have  benefited  from  economies  of  scale.  Furthermore,  the  broader  product  range 
and presence in multiple economic zones have helped to smooth product and economic cycles. 
Advancements in risk management 
But, expansion has brought with it significant risk management challenges. The growing size of these 
institutions, their spread across geographic boundaries, and their diversity of products and customers, 
have made it necessary for decision-making to be decentralized, at least to some extent, in order to be 
responsive to the needs of customers. But with more autonomous units, an internationally-active and 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 1
complex  bank  has  to  expend  more  effort  to  identify,  measure,  and  control  the  risks  arising  from  its 
diverse  and  far-flung  activities.  Traditional  rules  of  thumb  used  by  management  and  supervisors  to 
assess  risks  and  to  ensure  the  adequacy  of  capital  to  buffer  risks  are  no  longer  adequate.  And 
continuing  financial  success  depends  critically  on  how  a  bank  responds  to  the  risk  management 
challenges. 
In response to these challenges, the successful banks have developed enhanced tools for measuring 
risks. These can be grouped into two broad categories. The first category of tools are those that give a 
bank the ability to discriminate among risks by differentiating the riskiness of customers, and of various 
banking  facilities  and  products.  The  second  category  of  tools  includes  those  that  give  a  bank  an 
enhanced capability to quantify risks. 
The end of the road for Basel I 
In and of itself, the enhanced capability of institutions to differentiate and measure risks has been a 
welcome development. But, the increasing sophistication of institutions in risk management meant that 
the  crude  system  of  risk  weights  under  Basel  I  became  less  meaningful  in  ensuring  the  adequate 
capitalisation of large, complex banking institutions. 
By the mid-1990s, less than five years from the official implementation of Basel I,1 it was apparent that 
Basel I was becoming less relevant for some banking institutions. 
A widening gap was opening up between the requirements of Basel I and the way in which banks, 
particularly  the  large,  internationally  active  banks,  and  some  of  their  unregulated  competitors,  were 
thinking  about  risks.  This  placed  banks  at  a  competitive  disadvantage  vis-a-vis  some  of  those 
unregulated competitors, and was leading to extensive capital arbitrage by banks. 
The  sophisticated  approaches  under  Basel  II  were  devised  as  a  solution  to  this  problem.  The 
underlying philosophy of Basel II was simple and sensible: 
(i) 
Where  possible,  rely  on  the  risk  management  practices  of  banks  as  the  basis  for  setting 
more risk sensitive capital requirements. 
Provide incentives to banks to continuously improve their risk management practices. 
(ii) 
As this idea began to take shape, and the Basel Committee began to fall in love with it, we persuaded 
ourselves that it would lead to a supervisory nirvana, at least for the well-managed institutions, with 
less work for supervisors and less supervisory intrusion for those deserving banks. 
But,  idea  and  reality  do  not  always  coincide.  So  far,  an  immense  amount  of  work  has  gone  into 
development of Pillar 1 of the framework, which contains the nuts and bolts of Basel II’s risk sensitive 
capital requirements. The result is a far more complex system than we ever dreamed we would be 
putting in place. But in the end, we have met the objective of creating a more risk-sensitive supervisory 
system for measuring capital adequacy of banks, that is better aligned with the way in which banks 
manage their own risks. 
Good risk management as a competitive advantage 
The importance of Basel II lies not just in aligning capital adequacy requirements more closely with the 
way banks measure economic capital. The real payoff will be the positive impact it will almost certainly 
have - indeed is already having - on the risk management practices of institutions. 
Improvement in risk management will tend to enhance the competitiveness and financial success of 
banks.  As suggested  earlier,  good  risk  management  practices  allow  a  bank  to  take  more  risks  and 
improve  profitability.  Such  practices  foster  better  understanding  of  risks  and  allow  the  managers  of 
banks to establish proper tolerances for the risks they assume. Good risk management allows banks 
to weather the unexpected shocks that occur from time to time. The danger, of course, is that as risk 
management practices improve, a bank’s risk appetite may increase disproportionately. Bank directors 
and supervisors must be vigilant against this possibility. 
                                                      
1  Basel I was officially implemented in 1992. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2004
Main benefits of implementing Basel II improvement in risk management will materialise 
The risk management standards and practices embodied in the more sophisticated approaches under 
Basel  II  are  real  and  are  drawn  from  the  best  practices  of  large  internationally  active  banks.  They 
reflect many insights gathered through practical experience, including both successes and failures in 
risk management. 
Even for institutions at the forefront of risk management capabilities, we think the Basel II standards 
will be useful. Because the standards represent a comprehensive compendium of best practices, even 
the best-managed institutions will have to improve in some areas to take full advantage of the various 
approaches offered by Basel II. 
For  institutions  whose  risk  management  practices  are  not  leading  edge,  the  benefits  of  Basel  II 
implementation will be even more obvious. The Basel II framework contains many useful lessons and 
can serve as a good roadmap on how to improve internal risk management. 
With  the  exception  of  small  banks  with  relatively  simple  business  models,  the  risk  management 
practices  and  standards  under  the  more  sophisticated  approaches  of  Basel  II  will  be  useful  for  all 
institutions. 
Admittedly,  not  all  aspects  of  Basel  II  will  be  of  use  to  every  bank.  For  example,  some  of  the 
quantification tools used in large complex institutions may not be necessary for the smaller and less 
sophisticated institutions. But, common tenets of good risk management embodied in Basel II - such 
as good processes to identify risks, the exercise of sound judgment to assess the extent of threats to 
solvency posed by the risks, and the discipline to control risks if they are disproportionately high - are 
equally applicable to all institutions, large or small. 
Basel II and financial stability 
One of the criticisms of Basel II is that capital cushions required under Pillar 1 will tend to become 
more cyclical, dropping at the peak of economic cycles and increasing at the bottom of cycles when 
capital  can  be  more  scarce  and  expensive.  If  not  addressed,  this  pro-cyclicality  could  erode  the 
solvency  cushions  that  banks  should  be  holding  against  the  effects  of  economic  downturns. 
Addressing  this  is  one  of  the  most  important  remaining  challenges  of  Basel  II  and  is  particularly 
associated  with  the  implementation  of  the  more  sophisticated  approaches  of  the  new  capital 
framework. 
Despite  reassuring  noises  from  the  Basel  Committee,  this  is  not  going  to  be  an  easy  problem  to 
address. Few people, and definitely not banking supervisors, can foresee the peaks and troughs of 
economic cycles. But our inability to perfectly foretell the future should not be a pretext for inaction. 
An  effective  supervisory  review  process  will  be  critical  to  create  a  counter-weight  to  the  cyclical 
tendencies  of  the  new  capital  framework,  in  order  to  prevent  increased  incidences  of  failures  and 
financial instability. 
Managers  of  banks  and  bank  directors  have  an  even  more  important  role  to  play.  They  have  the 
primary  responsibility  for  identifying  and  assessing  various  threats  to  solvency  of  their  own  bank, 
including the risks that are partially covered or not covered at all under Pillar 1 of the framework. They 
also  need  to  be  cognizant  of  the  cyclicality  arising  from  their  quantitative  tools  and  should  have 
sufficient compensatory mechanisms against the cyclicality of regulatory capital requirements. 
These issues are referred to in Pillar 2 of Basel II. This is what we refer to as “Supervisory CAR”, to 
address  risks  not  covered  or  not  fully  covered  by  the  formulae  in  Pillar  1.  One  of  the  biggest 
challenges to supervisors now is to develop more detailed guidance for the implementation of Pillar 2 
and to follow that guidance in a consistent and coordinated manner across the supervisory community. 
Despite work done by the Basel Committee to encourage coordination among supervisors in this area, 
there remains a significant risk of inconsistent approaches and resulting supervisory arbitrage. 
While the rollout of the Basel II principles will be extraordinarily demanding, I am heartened to observe 
that  there  is  momentum  gathering  among  banks  and  supervisors  around  the  globe  to  meet  the 
challenge. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 3
Beyond Basel II: what would further installments look like? 
Even though the ink is still drying on the final version of the new framework, and we are just starting to 
tackle the implementation issues, it is not too early to think about how Basel II capital framework might 
evolve  in  the  future.  Because  we  can  be  sure  that  Basel  II  is  not  the  “End  of  History”  as  far  as 
regulatory capital requirements for banks are concerned. 
Greater applicability of risk quantification techniques 
Beyond Basel II, there may be greater scope for use of quantitative tools in setting minimum regulatory 
capital  requirements.  The  most  promising  areas  are  quantitative  tools  for  interest  rate  risk  in  loan 
portfolios and concentration risk. 
Three robust pillars 
I also think, despite my fears about inconsistency and arbitrage, that over time supervisors will develop 
more  consistent  approaches  to  Pillar  2  of  the  capital  framework,  and  greater  harmonisation  of 
supervisory reviews across jurisdictions. This will equip supervisors to deal with the future evolution of 
Basel II in a constructive and coordinated way. 
I  also  foresee  greater  transparency  surrounding  the  risks  faced  by  banks,  and  in  how  banks  are 
measuring and controlling them. In the future, I expect banking supervisors to place greater emphasis 
on the techniques of securities regulators by requiring more information to be disclosed to the markets 
and  the  public.  We  will  likely  place  even  greater  reliance  on  market  processes  and  corporate 
governance to ensure that banks are soundly managed and well capitalised. 
Sound precepts of risk management and prudential supervision 
While  there will  inevitably  be  ongoing challenges  to  the  vision  of  capital adequacy embodied  in  the 
new framework, particularly to its more technical aspects, I have no doubt that the sound precepts of 
risk  management  and  prudential  supervision  that  underpin  the  new  framework  will  be  an  enduring 
feature of future versions regulatory capital requirements for banks. 
Alas, the requirements and modeling of certain types of risks may get excruciatingly complex. Indeed, 
for  some  of  us,  they  have  already  reached  that  point.  But  in  selecting  and  imposing  such 
requirements,  supervisors  will  be  practical,  and  will  look  to  the  best  risk  management  practices  of 
banks and other financial institutions as the basis for setting risk sensitive capital requirements. And as 
supervisors become confident that the risk management processes of an institution are appropriate to 
match its risk appetite and operations, minimum capital requirements will edge downward. 
Nevertheless, a level of conservatism in minimum standards will be retained, which any responsible 
and  prudent  banker  would  no  doubt  agree  with,  at  least  in  principle.  Models  are  an  abstraction  of 
reality. Supervisors will continue to maintain a healthy sense of skepticism. Despite good intentions 
and best efforts, predictions made by models are never exactly right and sometimes very wrong. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  we  should  not  look  at  the  release  of  the  final  version  of  Basel  II  as  the  end  of  the 
process to set more risk-sensitive capital adequacy requirements for banks. It is really the end of the 
beginning. Basel II is a milestone on a longer journey. One that will occupy the energies of bankers 
and prudential supervisors for many years to come. This is not meant to be a discouraging note. Quite 
the contrary. Because this journey will be one of continuous improvement that can, if we do our work 
well, lead to stronger banks and more resilient financial systems. 
I  wish  you  all  useful  discussions  on  the  major  challenges  to  be  addressed,  and  on  the  important 
benefits that await us as we continue this journey. 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2004
