Alan Bollard: Asset prices and monetary policy 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Canterbury 
Employers’ Chamber of Commerce, Christchurch, 30 January 2004. 
 It  has  long  been  a  tradition  that  Reserve  Bank  Governors  begin  their  year  with  a  speech  to  the 
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce and because the economy of Christchurch is focussed 
on  exporting  the  topics  picked  have  often  been  of  particular  interest  to  the  tradable  sector.  Given 
current concerns about the exchange rate, you may have expected a talk on that subject. However, I 
want  to  talk  about  something  else  -  a  topic  which  may  seem  more  esoteric,  but  in  particular 
circumstances can be very important. Indeed, it is a topic that has been of considerable relevance to 
New Zealand from time to time over the years. 
Among central bankers right now one of the key topics of debate is whether monetary policy should 
actively  seek  to  encourage  asset  price  stability.  The  sharp  end  of  this  is  whether  monetary  policy 
should seek to prevent or at least reduce asset price bubbles? This is exemplified by questions such 
as whether Japan’s long-running recession and the US “tech wreck” could have been ameliorated by 
monetary policy constraining the events that preceded them. 
Before going further, I should define my terms a bit. By an asset price I mean the price of something 
that  one  buys  to  generate  income  or  to  sell  for  a  profit  later.  Examples  are  physical  assets  -  like 
housing, land, other buildings and collectables like paintings or exotic cars - and financial assets - like 
shares,  bonds  and  other  financial  instruments.  By  consumer  prices  I  means  things  one  buys  to 
consume, like milk, petrol, a visit to the doctor and ordinary cars. Remember also that asset prices 
often behave more erratically than consumer prices, being slower to react to changes in supply and 
demand. Prices of, for example, fruit and vegetables move constantly to match up buyers and sellers. 
Asset prices are seldom that appealing in terms of classic economics. 
Under  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Policy  Targets  Agreement  (PTA)  the  Bank  is  required  to  ensure  price 
stability,  as  measured  by  the  Consumers  Price  Index  (CPI),  and,  subject  to  this  goal,  to  avoid 
unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and the exchange rate. Asset prices are not included in 
the CPI. Thus the question is should monetary policy sometimes look ahead of its normal time horizon 
and try to offset the potential damage down the track to consumer prices and economic stability that 
can occur when asset prices tumble? 
Monetary policy automatically takes asset price developments into account 
The  first  point  I  need  to  make  is  that  day-to-day  central  banks  pay  attention  to  asset  prices  when 
setting  monetary  policy,  even  when,  as  in  New  Zealand,  their  formal  focus  is  exclusively  on 
consumption prices. 
This  is  primarily  because  asset  price  movements  impact  on  CPI  inflation  and  large  movements  in 
asset  prices  can  have  significant  implications  for  CPI  inflation.  For  starters,  in  the  case  of  physical 
assets, if their prices are rising faster than general inflation, people try to build or create more. For 
example, if the price of paintings is going up artists get painting. To do that they have to buy more 
paints, brushes and canvas, putting pressure on prices of these materials. 
In addition to that direct impact, asset price movements - physical and financial - also feed into CPI 
inflation due to the so-called “wealth effect”. As asset prices rise, people tend to feel wealthier. Some 
people go shopping as a result, and in an economy already running at full steam this gives inflation a 
push. This can apply with any kind of asset, but in New Zealand we see this mostly through house 
prices,  due  to  the  high  proportion  of  home  ownership  here,  as  well  as  the  large  proportion  of 
household wealth associated with housing, as illustrated in graph 1. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
Graph 1 
Household wealth: housing and net financial assets 
  
Asset prices also feed through into spending and hence inflation in other ways. For example, asset 
price  increases  improve  balance  sheets,  increasing  the  borrowing  power  of  firms  and  individuals. 
Increases in net worth tend to increase the willingness of lenders to lend and borrowers to borrow, 
facilitating a general expansion in spending as well as an expansion in spending on the construction of 
appreciating assets. 
In New Zealand, for example, house price inflation can lead to greater demand for houses, and price 
increases in construction-related goods and services. These goods and services are directly included 
in the CPI making up about 8½ per cent. Lately, “purchase and construction of new dwellings” has 
been notching up price increases approaching 7 per cent year-on-year. This is much higher than the 
CPI  average  of  around  1½  per  cent  (see  graph  2),  and  contributed  materially  to  our  recent  non-
tradables inflation of around 4½ per cent.  
Graph 2 
The link between house price inflation and the CPI 
(annual percentage change) 
2 
   BIS Review 7/2004
Central banks also pay attention to asset prices because they contain information that’s very useful 
when setting monetary policy. Normally asset prices reflect perceptions of future income streams that 
the assets will earn. Therefore, asset prices tell us something about how people think the economy will 
perform in the months and years ahead. 
Accordingly,  in  the  ordinary  day-to-day  operation  of  monetary  policy  asset  prices  matter.  Also, 
day-to-day,  when  the  Reserve  Bank  raises  or  lowers  interest  rates  to  keep  CPI  inflation  where  it 
should be, this also tends to partly constrain rising or falling asset prices in a desirable way. So most 
of the time asset and consumer prices roughly track together and asset prices present no particular 
problem for monetary policy or the economy. That’s most of the time.  
The building and bursting of big speculative bubbles 
There are however times when things get more difficult and asset prices move well out of line with 
underlying economic fundamentals. 
For example, in Japan real estate prices and the equity market shot up through the 1980s, with the 
Nikkei getting to extraordinary levels before the inevitable collapse which took 60 per cent off equities 
in 3 years and 70 percent off real estate prices over the following decade. Economic growth struggled, 
averaging only 2 per cent in the 1990s compared to 4 per cent in the 1980s. 
In Sweden real estate prices boomed in the second half of the 1980s, nearly doubling over that time. 
The boom ran out of steam in 1991, and the correction was severe enough to require the rescue of a 
good deal of the Swedish banking system. Over the first 3 years of the 1990s, Sweden’s economy 
shrank by nearly 10 per cent. 
And in the US the NASDAQ increased fivefold over 3 years in the late 1990s, before losing all of that 
ground by early last year. With the boom having helped the US economy grow at an exceptional pace 
during the 1990s, the collapse helped send that economy nearly into recession. 
These  examples  hopefully  make  clear  that  this  goes  far  beyond  just  housing  assets,  and  includes 
equities or shares, commercial property, rural property and a wide range of financial assets. 
In each of these cases, at least early on in the episode, asset prices were behaving “normally” and 
asset prices reflected reasonable expectations of the earnings prospects of those assets. A variety of 
things can cause expectations of future earnings prospects to be revised either up or down, and this 
will of course affect the prices of the assets. As farmers in the audience know, rural land and stock 
prices swing readily with peoples’ confidence about the future. The sharp rise in dairy land prices in 
following the GATT agreement in the early 1990s was an example of how expectations can influence 
asset prices. 
But  expectations  of  the  future  can  sometimes  go  beyond  the  well-founded  and  can  turn  out  to  be 
horribly wrong. Sometimes, asset prices can become disconnected from reasonable expectations of 
future earnings, resulting in speculative bubbles that cannot be justified by economic fundamentals. 
These are situations where markets fail in a big way to get prices even approximately right. Such mis-
pricing can be exaggerated by rule-of-thumb, momentum, or herd behaviour, or irrational exuberance 
if you like. It happens sometimes that speculators convince themselves that someone else will pay still 
higher prices for an asset in the future, and in such a situation prices can start bearing less and less 
relation to any reasonable expectation of future income streams.  
Classic examples of speculative bubbles include the tulip mania that swept Holland in the seventeenth 
century, and the South Seas bubble which caused the first big stock market crash in England in 1720. 
The more recent three examples I have cited were mild by comparison with these earlier ones! 
Although  bubbles  may  persist  for  quite  some  time,  experience  shows  that  asset  prices  eventually 
return to a level that is more consistent with “the fundamentals”. Bubbles do reveal themselves in the 
end  -  people  are  not  fooled  forever.  Eventually  mistakes  in  pricing  become  widely  recognised,  and 
markets  correct.  This  makes  bubbles  inherently  temporary,  involving  first  expansion  and  then 
contraction. It is often only once the contraction has taken place that we see how big the bubble was, 
or just how much prices were misrepresenting economic fundamentals. But by then a lot of damage 
may have been done.  
Failures to get asset prices “right” won’t always be obvious until prices have corrected, but in principle 
if  we  can’t  square  rapid  price  increases  for  assets  with  any  apparent  fundamentals  then  we  are 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
probably  looking  at  a  bubble.  In  extreme  cases,  that  inability  to  square  developments  with 
fundamentals may become obvious before the correction happens.  
Speculative bubbles can do damage in two ways. First, they distort resource allocation in the wider 
economy as people get fooled into investing in the wrong things. Resource misallocation can also be 
caused  by  the  consumer  price  inflation  that  sometimes  accompanies  asset  price  bubbles,  since 
inflation makes decision-making more difficult.  
Second,  when  the  bubble  bursts  there  is  damage  to  consumer  and  investor  confidence,  economic 
activity and potentially the financial system. Several recent international studies1 of asset price booms 
and busts have documented substantial costs from asset price cycles. 
The role of the financial system can be crucial to the consequences of a bubble building and bursting. 
The  economic  consequences  when  bubbles  burst  depends  on  the  extent  to  which  individuals  and 
companies  have  taken  on  debts  that  they  cannot  comfortably  meet.  Asset  price  changes  typically 
involve borrowing and lending in financial markets, because it is future income that is being used to 
“fund”  current  expenditure.  Generally,  at  least  some  of  the  income  from  an  asset  is  used  to  repay 
financial  obligations  associated  with  the  asset’s  purchase.  With  speculative  bubbles,  future  capital 
gains - rather than future income - are often the main source of expected profit. If the bubble bursts, 
and such capital gains aren’t forthcoming, people have to look elsewhere for the money to service and 
repay their debts. 
Debt financing is an extremely useful feature of the economy. It facilitates the reallocation of resources 
in  the  economy  towards  the  most  profitable  activities.  Nevertheless,  heightened  debt  can  seriously 
backfire when bubbles burst. In particularly severe cases, borrowers’ troubles carry over to lenders as 
well, so that in a bubble situation financing, credit and leverage may create financial fragility. Since the 
financial system is at the heart of all economic transactions, any disruption to it can have significant 
implications for economic activity. This fragility is sorely exposed when the bubble implodes. These 
issues are well-illustrated by the Japanese and Swedish cases referred to earlier. 
Prudent lending practices can help to insulate lenders from serious fallout associated with declines in 
asset prices, but even then a bubble can still result in serious macroeconomic fallout. The bursting of 
the  US  high-tech  stock  bubble  in  2000,  and  the  subsequent  weakening  in  equity  prices  more 
generally,  was  not  accompanied  by  major  financial  sector  problems,  but  it  has  been  followed  by  a 
sustained period of very weak economic growth. Stretched balanced sheets, characterised by excess 
leverage, damaged business confidence, over-investment in high-technology enterprises, and sharply 
increased costs of new equity raisings all combined to hold back new corporate investment to such an 
extent that economic growth stalled. 
This  brings  us  to  the  crunch  question  of  whether  central  banks  should  try  to  constrain  asset  price 
bubbles to avoid or at least reduce the disruption to the real economy that can come from a bubble 
bursting?  
Firstly, we need to recognise that this is difficult as it is very hard to tell in advance whether or not any 
particular  market  changes  are  justified.  Forecasting the  future  is  never  easy.  At  each  point  in  time, 
there tend to be many plausible explanations associated with any given price movement, and it is hard 
to separate temporary factors from more permanent ones until some time has passed.  
Secondly, pursuing a separate asset price objective could mean having to compromise on our normal 
inflation objective. Seeking to stabilise rising house prices or an overheated stock market might mean 
having to force inflation lower than otherwise would be required. It might also mean greater variability 
in  the  real  economy,  interest  rates  and,  potentially,  the  exchange  rate.  That  could  raise  questions 
about  the  PTA’s  requirement  to  conduct  monetary  policy  to  maintain  CPI  price  stability  and  avoid 
unnecessary volatility in those other variables. 
A further difficulty is that interest rates have limited power to affect the perceptions which move asset 
prices in the first place. To materially affect some asset prices, such as housing, interest rates might 
need to move quite a bit, and probably by much more than would be required just to keep CPI inflation 
comfortably within the target range. Since interest rate changes affect not just house prices, but also 
the  prices  of  most  other  assets,  goods  and  services,  there  would  be  secondary,  unintended 
consequences, with potentially serious consequences for the economy as a whole. 
                                                      
1   Helbling and Terrones (2003), IMF; Bordo and Jeanne (2002), IMF; Detken and Smets (2003), ECB. 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
Timing also makes this difficult. Given the lag of 1 to 2 years that we think applies between an interest 
rate move and its effect on the real economy, the risk is high that policy moves would be mistimed and 
only  make matters  worse.  If  interest  rates  are high at  the  moment  that  a bubble  bursts,  those  high 
interest rates will still impact on the economy two years on. This would make the landing harder. 
So,  given  both  uncertainty  over  whether  asset  price  increases  have  overshot,  and  doubts  over 
whether monetary policy responses are helpful for known bubbles, one has to be cautious in leaning 
aggressively against an increase in asset prices.  
What about using other instruments besides the interest rate? There are not many appealing options 
for this. Some less developed financial systems use mandatory credit rationing, but this instrument is 
also  very  blunt,  harming  newcomers  to  the  market,  distorting  resource  allocation  and  potentially 
depriving the private sector of sound investment opportunities. 
Another  possible  option  -  at  least  in  theory  -  is  to  make  more  use  of  prudential  regulation.  For 
example, could the capital ratio applied to banks be used counter-cyclically? Could the risk-weight on 
credit  exposures  secured  by  residential  property  be  applied  in  ways  that  reduce  swings  in  house 
prices? From time-to-time we consider these kinds of issues, but have so far always reached the same 
three negative conclusions.  
First, such tools are unlikely to be very effective in addressing asset price cycles. The implementation 
of policy changes would take time, after which there would be a potentially long and variable lag in the 
impact on asset prices. Second, although such tools are less blunt than the OCR in targeting particular 
asset categories, they are nonetheless still relatively blunt instruments, and would have impacts that 
go beyond those intended. Third, the use of such tools for macroeconomic purposes conflict with the 
objective  for  which  such  tools  were  originally  designed  -  i.e.  financial  stability.  Indeed,  the  use  of 
prudential regulation to moderate asset price cycles might backfire in some circumstances, creating 
perverse incentives for banks to bias their lending into riskier ends of the lending spectrum, which in 
turn could reduce the stability of the financial system. These factors have led us to reject the use of 
prudential tools as instruments for responding to asset price cycles.  
So where does that leave us? 
As I have already explained, in the course of doing what we normally do we automatically lean against 
detrimental effects of asset price movements, since there is often a correlation between asset price 
inflation  and  consumer  price  inflation.  The  harder  question  is  what  to  do  when  a  speculative  asset 
price bubble is not accompanied by current or near-term inflation. 
Responding to a bubble bursting is relatively obvious. The collapse of big speculative bubbles is often 
accompanied by recession and disinflation or even deflation. The Japanese case illustrates the point. 
A rapid monetary response, aggressively if need be, to a sudden collapse in asset prices would be 
consistent with the PTA, assuming there was also a substantial risk of consumer price disinflation.  
Responding to an emerging bubble is more challenging. I have presented reasons why it is sensible to 
prevent  the  emergence  of  large  speculative  asset  price  bubbles,  if  possible.  And  I  have  presented 
reasons why that would be difficult to achieve, and why it would be risky to try. Nonetheless, it seems 
to  me  that  the  scale  of  the  fallout  from  the  build-up  and  bursting  of  very  large  asset  price  bubbles 
warrants taking some risks in an attempt to moderate - and that’s all that one might hope for - the 
problem. And it seems to me that there are cases when the asset price misalignment is sufficiently 
obvious that one can be confident enough to take the risk. 
But  I  need  to  be  clear  that  such  situations  are  likely  to  be  rare  indeed.  And  the  risks  may  be 
considerable. We are talking about circumstances where monetary policy may well have to be quite 
tight - tighter than would be the case if the sole objective was to keep consumer price inflation within 
the  target  range.  In  such  circumstances,  I  expect  many  audiences  would  say  that  the  Bank  was 
unnecessarily squeezing growth from the economy. It would be a foolhardy central banker who would 
take such risks lightly. 
That said, as I interpret my mandate, it does permit me to take such risks in rare circumstances. As I 
explained  in  an  earlier  speech,  the  PTA  clearly  requires  monetary  policy  to  be  forward-looking. 
Normally,  we  would  think  in  terms  of  the  next  three  years.  But,  as  I  indicated  then,  there  will  be 
exceptions. Given the potentially long-lived nature of asset price misalignments, it may occasionally be 
helpful to take a longer view of when risks might eventuate, how best to insure against them, and at 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 5
what price. As a recent IMF study  2 has pointed out, in effect an asset price boom can change the 
trade-off  between  current  and  future  macroeconomic  objectives.  A  new  element  enters  the  picture, 
which  involves  trading  off  the  risk  of  severe  economic  dislocation  further  down  the  track  with  the 
near-term cost of reducing that risk.  
Recent New Zealand house price developments in context 
The next and obvious question is whether or not the recent run up in house prices in New Zealand 
constitutes  a  bubble  so  severe  that  it  warrants  a  one-off  additional  monetary  policy  response,  as 
described. Such a response would drive overall inflation to near the bottom or even below the 1 to 
3 per cent target range in the PTA, thereby letting the air out of the bubble to avoid a collapse later. 
The  immediate  answer  is  no,  though  of  course,  in  terms  of  the  day-to-day  controlling  of  consumer 
price inflation, housing is still the biggest thing being faced at the moment. 
Over  longer  periods  of  time,  real  house  prices  are  determined  by  the  balance  between  underlying 
demand  and  supply  conditions.  There  are  nevertheless  some  important  idiosyncrasies  to  housing 
markets  that  should  be  borne  in  mind.  On  the  demand  side,  such  factors  include  demographics, 
migration, growth in household disposable income, features of the tax system and the average level of 
mortgage  interest  rates.  On  the  supply  side,  factors  include  improvements  in  the  existing  housing 
stock, the availability of suitable building sites, and construction costs.  
Although  the  demand  for housing  can shift  quite  dramatically  in  a  short  space  of  time,  the  housing 
stock  is  relatively  inelastic.  It  takes  time  to  build  new  houses  and  the  capacity  of  the  construction 
sector to provide them also takes time to adjust to variations in demand.  
Accordingly,  housing  prices  are  prone  to  quite  significant  short-term  movements.  Extra  demand  for 
housing due to migration, for example, can create supply constraints given the time taken to plan and 
construct new housing. In New Zealand, the correlation between net migration inflows and house price 
inflation is striking, as illustrated in graph 3. 
Graph 3 
Migration and house prices 
The  price  signals  given  by  the  housing  market  thus  have  to  be  treated  with  caution.  Compared  to 
markets  for  financial  assets,  the  housing  market  is  relatively  slow  to  adjust,  with  long  and  variable 
                                                       
2   Bordo and Jeanne (2002). 
6 
 BIS Review 7/2004
times to close sales, and with, beforehand, much uncertainty about final closing prices, if deals are 
even  reached.  Aggregated  statistics  on  house  price  movements  are  “noisy”  indicators  of  the  future 
outlook for the housing sector. Past prices are not always a good indicator of future prices. Also, data 
on residential real estate prices are not always of a high quality. 
This  can  mean  that  the  housing  sector  is  susceptible  to  over-  and  under-shooting.  Initial  one-off 
increases in house prices may be misinterpreted as increases in a trend, leading to further moves in 
the same direction, giving an impression that a major trend shift is underway even if in  fact it isn’t. 
Because of the noisiness of the price signals, it can take a long time for this sort of thing to correct. 
Eventually, as for other types of assets, house prices do correct, either by falling outright, or by prices 
treading water for years until fundamentals have caught up.  
Do recent developments, in light of this susceptibility to over-shooting, imply that the housing market is 
in such a speculative bubble that an unusual monetary policy response is warranted? In some periods 
of our history, house prices and rural land prices have both moved through large cycles, both up and 
down  -  with  the  downs  more  noticeable  in  real  terms  (see  graph  4).  These  real  declines  were 
sometimes masked by high inflation, which may have fed the false perception in some quarters that 
house  prices  never  go  anywhere  but  up.  In  the  current  low  inflation  environment,  real  house  price 
declines as in the past would show up as outright declines in dollar prices.  
Graph 4 
Property prices 
(annual percentage change) 
 There is no doubt that we have seen quite strong increases in house prices in New Zealand in the last 
year  or  so.  Some  of  that  is  justified  by  fundamentals,  some  simply  reflects  the  fact  that,  in  a  small 
economy, with a small housing stock, it does not take much increase in demand to have a big effect 
on  house  prices.  But  some  of  the  recent  increases  may  also  reflect  excessive  exuberance  among 
some investors. 
Thus some people today may be incorrectly convincing themselves that level shifts associated with 
lower mortgage interest rates are in fact shifts in the trend of prices, that house prices only rise, and 
that someone can always be found who will pay more for a property. For a time, this behaviour can be 
price reinforcing, but eventually some unhappy soul will be stuck holding the bag. 
There  are  elements  of  speculative  bubble  behaviour  present  in  recent  house  price  developments. 
While that bodes ill for some individuals, however, it does not seem at this stage to be large enough, 
or of a character, to generate significant fall-out for the overall economy when the correction happens - 
as it will. 
In terms of potential risks to the economy and to financial stability, a bubble in residential housing is 
less of a concern than a bubble in commercial property or in the stock market. On average, banks’ 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 7
residential mortgage portfolios are much more stable than other loan portfolios. The historical loan loss 
on  residential  lending  is  very  low  indeed.  Furthermore,  recently  the  Reserve  Bank  worked  with  the 
major  retail  banks  in  an  exercise  that  involved  simulating  a  variety  of  shocks,  including,  amongst 
others, large falls in house prices and incomes, a foot and mouth outbreak, large changes to interest 
rates, the exchange rate and so on. The results of these tests suggest that the New Zealand banking 
system is well placed to absorb some quite nasty shocks including a large fall in nominal house prices. 
The  current-day  New  Zealand  financial  system  has  particularly  prudent  lending  practices,  strong 
capitalisation, sound asset quality and strong parentage. 
To be sure, there are legitimate reasons to be concerned that resources are being misallocated as a 
consequence of incorrect perceptions about the likely future course of house prices. But in terms of 
the ideas discussed earlier, the economy-wide scale of resource misallocation and the fall-out from a 
housing  market  correction  do  not  appear  sufficiently  severe  to  warrant  running  monetary  policy 
unusually tight above and beyond the requirement to ensure consumer price stability. 
The scale of recent house price developments is by no means comparable to the boom and bust in 
New Zealand equities in the 1980s. Graph 4, below, reminds us of the dramatic bubble in equity prices 
that was experienced in the second half of the 1980s, when equity prices doubled in one year and 
halved in the next. This period is a reminder of how substantial shifts away from fundamentals can be, 
especially with the benefit of hindsight! It defies belief that equity prices at all times during this period 
were  accurate  reflections of  the  true  fundamentals-based  value  of  traded  New  Zealand  companies. 
The 1980s experience was typical of the bubble phenomenon, as asset prices drifted to levels where 
they didn’t appear to have much connection with the real world, and then eventually they corrected 
back. 
So should the Reserve Bank have tried to head off the share market boom of the mid 80s, so as to 
avoid the 87 share market crash? That’s a really hard call. Monetary policy was already very tight as 
the  Reserve  Bank  valiantly  brought  inflation  down  from  very  high  levels,  price  stability  not  being 
achieved until 1991. To have applied even more pressure probably would have been very difficult. But 
now, with price stability in place, if our stock market was starting to look like the left hand side of graph 
5 then, yes, a Reserve Bank Governor might well say extraordinary measures were required. 
Graph 5 
New Zealand equity prices 
 Conclusions 
In this talk I have made the following points. 
I’ve  noted  that,  to  some  extent,  monetary  policy  aimed  at  keeping  consumer  price  inflation  under 
control automatically takes asset prices into account in terms of their effect on general price inflation. 
8 
 BIS Review 7/2004
However, even so, sometimes asset price bubbles occur, causing economic damage. I’ve suggested 
there are some very limited circumstances where monetary policy should look beyond the immediate 
inflation outlook and respond more vigorously to asset price developments. I have also noted that this 
carries risks and is difficult to do. And I’ve recorded that the New Zealand housing market currently 
does not warrant such a severe intervention, so that, for example, yesterday’s interest rate increase 
was just part of the normal operation of monetary policy to ensure continuing consumer price stability. 
There’s  an  old  adage  that  a  popular  central  banker  is  seldom  a  good  central  banker.  Those  in  my 
trade have also been likened to dismal souls that take away the punch bowl just when the party is 
getting boisterous. A central banker trying to constrain an asset bubble would certainly not be flavour 
of the month because everyone loves a bubble on the way up. Still, central bankers are required to 
think-long term and sometimes that means taking decisions that won’t be welcomed at the time but, in 
the longer-term, are in the public interest. 
(Assistance  in  the  preparation  of  this  text  was  provided  by  Nils  Bjorksten,  David  Archer  and  other 
RBNZ staff.) 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 9
