Birgir Ísleifur Gunnarsson: Interaction of monetary and financial stability in 
small open economies 
Welcoming  address  by  Mr  Birgir  Ísleifur  Gunnarsson,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the 
Central Bank of Iceland, at the SUERF Seminar, Reykjavík, 3 June 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentleman 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Iceland, I warmly welcome you to this seminar on the Interaction of 
Monetary and Financial Stability in Small Open Economies. It is an honour for us to co-sponsor the 
seminar  with  SUERF.  We  are  grateful  to  David  Llewellyn,  Eduard  Hochreiter,  Beatrix  Krones  and 
Micheal  Bailey  at  SUERF  for  the  excellent  cooperation  which  we  have  enjoyed  with  them  in  its 
preparation. 
The topic of the seminar is an appropriate one which is attracting increasing attention, both within and 
outside central banks. I trust that the presentations and discussions over the next two days will leave 
us  with  a  better  understanding  of  this  interaction  and  of  the  issues  on  which  we  wish  to  focus  our 
attention in the period ahead. 
We  will  be  assisted  by  very  impressive  speakers  and  participants.  I  wish  to  extend  my  gratitude  to 
those  who  have  agreed  to  give  lectures  and  present  papers  and  I  look  forward  to  inspiring  and 
stimulating contributions by them. 
In this address, I will briefly describe our own recent experience in the areas of monetary and financial 
stability. 
The current Act on the Central Bank of Iceland was adopted in 2001. It assigned to the Central Bank 
the  main  objective  of  pursuing  price  stability.  The  Bank  was  granted  instrument  independence  to 
pursue  that  main  objective,  its  financial  independence  was  enhanced  and  the  Act  included  clear 
provisions on transparency and accountability. The Act also stated that the Bank should promote an 
efficient  and  safe  financial  system,  including  payments  systems  domestically  and  with  foreign 
countries. In addition to price stability, the Bank was, in other words, given a clear mandate to concern 
itself with financial stability. 
An inflation targeting framework was adopted at practically the same time with a joint declaration of the 
Government and the Central Bank which set a target for inflation of a 2½% twelve-month rise in the 
CPI. The framework imposes strong demands on the professional capacity of the Central Bank. The 
Bank regularly publishes a macroeconomic forecast and inflation forecast, with an associated inflation 
report. The inflation forecast provides the foundation for the inflation targeting policy. In its quarterly 
Monetary  Bulletin,  the  Bank  publishes  a  detailed  analysis  of  current  economic  and  monetary 
developments  and  prospects.  It  also  presents  the  rationale  behind  the  decisions  by  the  Board  of 
Governors  to  change  or  not  to  change  interest  rates,  as  well  as  signalling  the  monetary  policy 
intentions for the period ahead. In these endeavours, the Bank seeks to be as transparent as possible. 
When the inflation target was adopted, the economy was quite unbalanced. It had boomed during the 
second  half  of  the  1990s.  The  upturn  was  originally  well  balanced  being  led  by  foreign  direct 
investment and exports. But eventually it turned into overheating and a surge in private consumption, 
which was fuelled, among other things, by rapid credit expansion in an increasingly liberalised financial 
environment. 
In due course, the imbalances began to have a negative effect on expectations, partly because of a 
sharply deteriorating current account. The currency began to slide and fell by a third in trade-weighted 
terms over a period of a year and a half until late 2001. This development affected inflation as rising 
import prices fed into domestic prices. When the inflation targeting framework was adopted, the most 
recent measure of the twelve month rise of the CPI was about 4%. The króna continued to depreciate 
for some time after the adoption of the target and inflation rose significantly above the upper tolerance 
limit of the inflation target. The Central Bank pursued a restrictive monetary policy, repeatedly raising 
its  policy  interest  rate  which  reached  a  historically  high  level.  This  ultimately  led  to  a  rapid  fall  in 
inflation after January 2002 and by late that year it had fallen under the inflation target, where it has 
remained more or less since until the most recent measure. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 1
We have now pursued an inflation targeting policy for more than three years. Our view is that it has 
been successful. Inflation was brought under control relatively quickly after the adoption of the inflation 
target  in  very  unbalanced  economic  circumstances.  There  is  also  firm  evidence  that  the  inflation 
targeting regime has earned credibility in the markets and the community. The monetary regime will be 
further tested in the period ahead, which will among other things be characterised by an exceptional 
level of foreign direct investment in the aluminium industry and associated publicly owned and debt 
financed power plants. 
Our experience is a strong indication that inflation targeting is a policy which can be pursued in a very 
small  and  open  economy  as  in  a  large  economy  with  very  deep  financial  markets.  This  policy  is 
resource-demanding and imposes by necessity a very strong discipline on the respective central bank. 
In our view the increased focus on financial stability in the Central Bank Act of 2001 was natural and 
well within the accepted framework of central bank activities. The Bank was responsible for banking 
supervision  until  the  end  of  1998  when  that  function  was  merged  with  the  Insurance  Supervisory 
Authority in a new and unified Financial Supervisory Authority, with which the Central Bank cooperates 
quite  closely  on  financial  stability  issues.  While  the  Central  Bank  had  responsibility  for  banking 
supervision, its attention was necessarily focused on individual institutions and overseeing that their 
operations  complied with  existing  laws and  regulations.  Before  banking  supervision  was  transferred 
elsewhere, the Central Bank had also begun to focus its attention on broader financial stability issues 
along the lines that many other central banks were doing at that time. A logical part of that process 
was  that  in  2000  the  Bank  began  to  publish  semi-annual  financial  stability  analyses  in  its  quarterly 
Monetary Bulletin. 
One reason for the increasing focus of the Bank on systemic financial stability issues in the late 1990’s 
was  the  growing  perception  in  a  liberalised  financial  market  that  a  weak  financial  system  could 
undermine economic and monetary stability just as much as economic imbalances and weak policies 
could undermine an otherwise sound financial system. A sound financial system, including safe and 
secure  payment  and  settlements  systems,  is  also  an  important  precondition  for  the  effective 
implementation of monetary policy. Capital movements were fully liberalised in the 1990’s, as was the 
domestic financial market which also underwent significant structural change, including the withdrawal 
of  the  government  from  direct  ownership  in  banking  institutions.  These  developments  stiffened 
competition  at  home  and  linked  the  domestic  financial  system  much  more  closely  to  international 
markets. Consequently, in its analyses, the Central Bank consistently draws attention to the potential 
vulnerability  of  the  domestic  financial  system  to  changes  in  the  external  environment,  including  the 
ready availability of foreign credit for refinancing purposes, and its vulnerability to sudden changes in 
the exchange rate. 
The  developments  in  the  Icelandic  economy  towards  the  end  of  last  decade  and  into  this  one 
resembled in many ways those experienced in some of the other Nordic countries a decade earlier. 
Needless to say, and in view of the experience of other Nordic countries, these developments caused 
considerable concern about the underlying stability of the financial system. The Central Bank candidly 
expressed these concerns in its financial stability reports, most notably in the spring of 2001. At that 
time  the  IMF  also  issued  its  Financial  Stability  Assessment  which  questioned  the  strength  of  the 
financial  system  in  Iceland  in  view  of  the  tremendous  imbalances  in  the  economy  and  what  was 
perceived to be an underlying weakness in the banking institutions. The IMF identified a potential risk 
of a rapid depreciation of the currency, which it felt could further weaken the banks and pose a threat 
to them. 
Early on in the upswing, amidst a rapid expansion of lending and external indebtedness of the banks, 
particularly  their  short-term  foreign  debt,  the  Central  Bank  imposed  a  liquidity  requirement  on  the 
commercial banks. Its purpose was to stem the growth of foreign borrowing and to shift the weight of 
foreign indebtedness from the very short end of the maturity spectrum. Another prudential rule set by 
the Central Bank concerns the foreign exchange exposure of commercial banks. This sharply limits 
their  scope  for  taking  direct  foreign  exchange  risk.  Beyond  these  prudential  regulations,  the  means 
which  the  Central  Bank  has  to  affect  the  practices  of  the  banks  are  through  public  pressure,  for 
example in its semi-annual financial stability reports or in other public or private statements. The Bank 
has used all these methods with varying degrees of success. In line with the traditional role of central 
banks, the Central Bank of Iceland can serve as a lender of last resort if a domestic bank experiences 
a liquidity shortfall. The Central Bank has also systematically built up its foreign exchange reserves in 
order to strengthen the external liquidity position of the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2004
As it happened, the Icelandic economy landed remarkably softly after the turbulent period of 1998 to 
2001. I mentioned earlier that inflation was brought under the inflation target in late 2002. The external 
current account was more or less in balance in 2002 only two years after the deficit had measured 
10% of GDP, credit growth came to a halt, and in  stark contrast to what happened in other Nordic 
countries  a  decade  earlier,  the  banks  emerged  from  the  period  in  a  satisfactory  position  and  have 
gained  considerable  strength  since.  No  doubt  there  are  many  reasons  for  this  relatively  favourable 
outcome. One could mention the generally good external conditions during the adjustment period, a 
relatively sound fiscal policy, and the swift correction of the external imbalance, as well as the rapid 
turnaround in the exchange rate after it reached its trough and the decline in the rate of inflation to 
below  the  inflation  target.  In  a  follow-up  to  its  report  of  2001,  the  IMF  recognized  in  mid  2003  the 
successful adjustment of the Icelandic economy, the significantly increased strength of the financial 
system and important changes in the regulatory framework. 
The  principal  objective  of  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland  is  price  stability,  as  I 
mentioned earlier. Its other principal goal is financial stability. The financial stability analyses focus on 
macroeconomic  stability  factors  and  on  the  strength  and  soundness  of  the  financial  system  as  a 
whole.  The  Bank  addresses  both  these  principal  areas  with  a  strong  professional  ambition.  Its  two 
main fields of analysis reinforce each other and benefit from close cooperation among the staff. Both 
areas have forced us to put our analyses, projections and policies on a longer-term perspective which 
provides an opportunity for better overall economic and monetary policy management. 
Although much remains to be explained about the nature of the interaction of monetary and financial 
stability, I mentioned earlier that a sound financial system is a precondition for economic and monetary 
stability and the implementation of an effective monetary policy. In this respect, these areas support 
each  other.  Since  financial  liberalisation  was  introduced,  we  have  not  faced  circumstances  where 
financial stability concerns have directly affected or conflicted with monetary policy decisions. Our aim 
is to prevent such a situation from arising. The potential risks to financial stability at the end of the last 
upswing were defused by the swift achievement of monetary stability and the restoration of internal 
and external balance. 
In conclusion, I would like to repeat my warm welcome to all the participants in the seminar. I trust that 
both the seminar and your stay in Iceland will be interesting and rewarding, professionally and socially. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 3
