T T Mboweni: Economic developments and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at a dinner of The South 
African Institute of Electrical Engineers, Rand Club, Johannesburg, 22 July 2004.  
 Introduction 
1. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  attend  your  dinner  in  these  illustrious 
surroundings. It is indeed always an honour to attend a function at one of the oldest clubs in South 
Africa, and even more so because of the role that it played in the history of our country. I appreciate 
having  the  opportunity  to  talk  to  your  Institute  on  this  occasion  because  of  your  role  in  the 
development of our economy. As a topic for discussion I thought it may be useful to briefly look at 
recent economic developments in the world and in South Africa and conclude my address with a few 
remarks on monetary policy and exchange rates. 
Global economic developments 
2. 
The global economy started to recover at an accelerated pace during the course of 2003 and the first 
quarter of 2004 and then growth seems to have slowed down somewhat in the second quarter of this 
year.  This  was  mainly  due  to  slower  growth  in  the  United  States  and  China.  The  softening  in  the 
economic growth of the United States' economy is probably a temporary phenomenon related to the 
spike  in  the  international  price  of  oil,  which  affects  consumer  expenditure.  It  is,  however  generally 
expected that business investment in the United States will pick up strongly in the second half of 2004 
and give further impetus to the world economic recovery. 
The  slowdown  in  the  Chinese  economy  was  the  result  of  deliberate  policy  actions  taken  by  the 
Chinese  authorities  to  cool  down  the  rapid  growth  that  they  have  experienced  over  the  past  years. 
Although the slower growth in China will occur from a very high level, it could have a significant impact 
on other Asian economies. A slowdown in China's energy, steel and chemical production could also 
affect demand in international commodity markets, resulting in a decline in international prices. China 
has become a major player in the world economy and is also now the fifth largest trading partner of 
South Africa. 
However, it seems unlikely that this slower growth will be a lasting feature of the world economy and 
most  international  organisations  such  as  the  International  Monetary  Fund  and  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements are still projecting a marked recovery in the global economy in the rest of this 
year and in 2005. 
Another important risk that the world economy is facing is the substantial increase in international oil 
prices.  Brent  crude  oil  prices  have  increased  from  levels  around  US$24  per  barrel  in  May  2003  to 
almost  US$40  per  barrel  in  May  2004.  This  rise  in  international  oil  prices  was  mainly  related  to 
ongoing geopolitical tensions in the Middle East, together with a strong demand for oil in the United 
States and China. Although oil prices started to decline somewhat in June 2004 to levels of around 
US$34 per barrel when the OPEC countries indicated that they would increase their production, this 
did not last long and at present Brent crude oil prices are fluctuating again at around US$38 per barrel. 
As one would expect with such a rise in oil prices, consumer price inflation increased in most of the 
major industrialised economies. For example, overall inflation in the United States accelerated from 
1,7 percent in March 2004 to 3,3 percent in June 2004. These increases are, however, coming from 
low  levels.  A  significant  rise  in  global  inflation  is  therefore  not  foreseen,  particularly  in  view  of 
continued  strong  productivity  growth  in  some  of  these  countries  combined  with  a  tightening  in 
monetary policy stance. 
After keeping the federal funds rate unchanged since the middle of 2003, the US Federal Open Market 
Committee raised this rate by 25 basis points to 1,25 percent on 30 June 2004. As underlying inflation 
is expected to remain low, the FOMC is of the view that “policy accommodation can be removed at a 
pace  that  is  likely  to  be  measured”.  Such  a  tightening  should  therefore  not  be  expected  to  have  a 
marked  impact  on  global  economic  growth.  Several  other  central  banks,  including  the  Bank  of 
England,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  and  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  have  also  been 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
increasing  interest  rates.  By  contrast  the  European  Central  Bank  has  kept  rates  unchanged,  while 
monetary policy has been eased in Japan. 
Domestic economic developments 
3. 
An important side effect of the acceleration in the global economic recovery has been a strong growth 
in  world  trade  and  a  sharp  rise  in  international  commodity  prices.  These  factors  have  led  to  an 
acceleration in the export prices of South Africa, which together with the decline in domestic interest 
rates  and  a  growth-supportive  fiscal  policy  stance  assisted  the  economy  in  maintaining  a  period  of 
economic expansion that has now already lasted for eighteen consecutive quarters. During the course 
of 2003, economic growth in most of the main domestic economic sectors became a little hesitant, but 
it then picked up again decisively in the first quarter of 2004 when the real gross domestic product 
increased at a seasonally adjusted annualised rate of 3 percent - more than double the pace attained 
in any of the four quarters of 2003. Preliminary indications show a continuation of this relatively high 
overall growth in the second quarter of the year. 
What  made  the  strong  growth  in  the  first  quarter  of  2004  even  more  remarkable  was  that  it  was 
registered in all the main sectors of the economy. Real manufacturing and agricultural output, which 
had  contracted  throughout  2003,  both  rose  at  a  seasonally  adjusted  and  annualised  rate  of 
2½ percent. Strong growth was also recorded in the value added by mining and electricity. Perhaps 
more important from the perspective of your Institute is that the real output of the construction sector 
continued to increase strongly. Its annualised quarter-to-quarter growth rate amounted to 6½ percent 
in the first quarter of 2004, the same rate as that attained in the fourth quarter of 2003. 
The growth in real gross domestic expenditure continued to exceed the growth in real gross domestic 
product  throughout  2003  and  the  first  quarter  of  2004  and  probably  remained  strong  in  the  second 
quarter. This strong growth in domestic expenditure contributed to the rise in domestic output and to a 
marked increase in the volume of imports. The demand for goods and services remained buoyant as a 
result  of  the  significant  reductions  in  the  repo  rate,  decreases  in  income  tax  rates,  high  salary  and 
wage settlements and the infrastructural expenditure of government and public corporations. 
In  particular,  growth  in  real  fixed  capital  formation  accelerated  considerably  from  the  beginning  of 
2004. This follows on a good performance in 2003. The rate of increase in real fixed investment rose 
from 8½ percent in the fourth quarter of 2003 to no less than 21 percent in the first quarter of 2004. 
This exceptionally high growth was registered as a result of the fact that private business enterprises 
stepped up fixed capital outlays and the South African Airways purchased several aircraft. 
Growth in real private consumption expenditure rose from an annualised rate of 4 percent in the fourth 
quarter  of  2003  to  5  percent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2004.  The  solid  expansion  in  the  consumption 
expenditure  of  households  was  discernible  in  all  the  main  categories  of  expenditure,  but  was 
especially apparent in the expenditure on durable goods such as transport equipment, furniture and 
household appliances. The expenditure of households was influenced mainly by the continued growth 
in  real  disposable  income,  the  reduced  cost  of  credit,  and  an  improvement  in  the  net  wealth  of 
households related to the rise in house prices. 
The real outlays on consumer goods and services by general government remained at a high level, 
particularly on account of the purchases of two corvettes for the South African Navy, while the pace of 
real inventory growth slowed down sharply in the first quarter of 2004 as the rebound in manufacturing 
production made inroads into stocks. 
The  continued  expansion  in  economic  activity  at  first  seemed  to  have  had  the  desired  effect  on 
employment  creation  and  from  2002  onwards  there  were  some  quarters  in  which  increases  were 
recorded in the formal non-agricultural employment in the economy. On balance, employment creation 
in the non-agricultural sectors of the economy continued to be disappointing and it seems that the total 
number of persons employed declined in the current upward phase of the business cycle. The creation 
of employment opportunities will be crucial if we are to improve people's lives in the years ahead. 
Considerably more success was achieved on the inflation front during the past year. The twelve month 
rate  of  increase  in  the  CPIX  declined  from  a  recent  peak  of  11,3  percent  in  November  2002  to 
4,0 percent  in  December  2003  and  then  rose  to  a  still  low  4,4  percent  in  May  2004.  A  number  of 
factors  have  been  identified  in  our  Monetary  Policy  Statements  explaining  this  favourable  inflation 
outcome,  which  I  won't  repeat  again  this  evening.  It  is  generally  expected  that  the  high  petrol  and 
diesel price increases at the beginning of June 2004 and increases in the prices of medical products 
would have caused inflation to rise in that month. This should only be a temporary upward movement, 
which  will  probably  again  be  reversed  in  the  subsequent  month.  Projections  using  the  SA  Reserve 
Bank's  econometric  models  indicate,  however,  that  CPIX  inflation  could  move  above  the  upper 
boundary of the inflation target range towards the end of the year. Fortunately, this is also expected to 
be reversed relatively quickly and is not a significant cause for concern. 
As  already  indicated,  the  increase  in  domestic  expenditure  led  to  a  marked  rise  in  the  volume  of 
imports during 2003. In the first quarter of 2004 the volume of imports contracted owing to a decline in 
the imports of oil. The volume of South African exports has fluctuated around a more or less horizontal 
trend since the second half of 2001, which brought about a substantial deterioration in the real trade 
balance over this period. This was accompanied by an improvement in the average terms of trade of 
2½ percent in 2002, 4½ percent in 2003 and by a further 2½ percent in the first quarter of 2004 in 
comparison  with  the  fourth  quarter  of  2003.  These  favourable  price  developments  were  unable  to 
prevent  the  current  account  of  the  balance  of  payments  from  moving  into  a  deficit.  The  improving 
terms of trade nevertheless kept the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments at a 
level  of  about  1½  percent  of  gross  domestic  product.  At  this  level  the  current  account  was  easily 
financed by net inflows of direct and portfolio investment. 
As these inflows of capital exceeded the current account deficit, they led to a sharp increase in the 
gold and other foreign reserves of the country. The favourable overall balance of payments position 
also  allowed  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  to  build  up  our  official  reserves  to  a  higher  level  in  a  gradual 
manner  while  taking  into  account  the  limitations  of  our  own  balance  sheet.  As  a  consequence,  the 
official gold and foreign exchange reserves of the Bank rose from US$7,8 billion at the end of 2002 to 
US$11,4 billion at the end of June 2004. 
The authorities continued to pursue a moderately expansionary fiscal policy. The non-financial public-
sector borrowing requirement as a ratio of gross domestic product accordingly rose from 1,4 percent in 
the fiscal year 2002/03 to a budgeted 3,1 percent in the fiscal year 2003/04. At this level this borrowing 
requirement is still in line with widely accepted principles of fiscal prudence. Moreover, it is envisaged 
that  this  ratio  will  decline  in  the  coming  years,  despite  the  positive  emphasis  on  infrastructural 
development.  
On  the  monetary  and  financial  fronts,  the  domestic  economy  was  characterised  by  a  few 
developments.  Firstly,  the  twelve-month  growth  rate  in  the  broadly  defined  money  supply  (M3) 
remained  brisk  throughout  the  last  twelve  months  and  fluctuated  around  a  level  of  12  percent. 
Secondly, credit extended by banks by means of mortgages, installment sale and leasing advances to 
the domestic private sector recorded strong growth in 2003 and the first half of 2004 under conditions 
of  lower  interest  rates,  rapidly  increasing  domestic  expenditure  and  rising  housing  prices.  Thirdly, 
money-market interest rates followed the repo rate downwards during 2003 and fluctuated around a 
horizontal trend in the first six months of 2004. Fourthly, yields on long-term government bonds, which 
had  declined  during  2003  to  a  low  of  8,78  percent  on  12  January  2004,  rose  to  10,26  percent  on 
15 June 2004 in response to rising inflation concerns. With the increase in the external value of the 
rand, yields fell again to below 10 percent in July. Fifthly, the JSE all-share index declined from an 
index value of 10387 at the end of December 2003 to 10131 on 21 July 2004 after having risen quite 
sharply from May 2003. Lastly, the real estate market remained buoyant and house prices continued 
to increase at a brisk pace, recording a year-on-year rate of increase of about 24 percent in the first 
half of 2004. 
Monetary policy 
4. 
As already indicated considerable success was achieved with the monetary policy measures during 
the past year and CPIX inflation has been within the target range since September 2003. This has 
allowed the SA Reserve Bank to keep the repo rate at an unchanged level of 8 percent per annum in 
2004. 
The major threats to the inflation target in this year have come mainly from exogenous factors. At first 
the  drought experienced  in  the  country  was regarded  as  an  important  risk  because  of  the negative 
implications that it could have had on food prices in general. Fortunately, this threat dissipated when 
widespread rains in February and March improved the outlook for the maize crop, leading to a fall in 
maize prices. 
Increases in international oil prices then increasingly became the major negative factor for the inflation 
outlook. At the MPC meeting in April 2004, developments in nominal unit labour cost were also singled 
out as a risk to the inflation projection. The rate of increase of these costs declined from 6 percent in 
2002  to  5  percent  in  2003,  but  the  salaries  and  wages  per  worker  still  increased  at  a  rate  of 
8,7 percent.  Other  threats  to  the  inflation  outlook  that  were  identified  included  the  stronger  trend  in 
monetary  growth,  the  rapid  rise  in  domestic  demand,  and  the  threat  of  increased  international 
instability. 
These threats to the inflation outlook still exist today. However there are also many positive factors 
which should assist us in containing inflation in the coming months. The most important of these is 
perhaps the decline in inflation expectations. Other factors supporting a favourable inflation outcome 
are the strength in the external value of the rand, the decline in production prices, low expected world 
inflation, low levels of capacity utilisation and the fiscal discipline of government. 
Against this background, our projections of inflation showed that the year-on-year rates of increase in 
the CPIX could temporarily breach the upper level of the target band towards the end of 2004 and 
early  part  of  2005.  Any  such  breach  is  nevertheless  expected  to  be  short-lived,  with  the  stronger 
likelihood that CPIX inflation would return to within the range shortly thereafter. The inflation outlook in 
general is still regarded as favourable. This view is supported by inflation expectations of business, 
labour, analysts and households. 
In  view  of  the  success  achieved  with  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy  framework,  I  find  it 
surprising that so many people still seem to be very critical of this framework. This is probably related 
to the recent strength of the rand. Monetary policy and more particularly the inflation-targeting policy 
framework  seems  to  have  been  singled  out  as  being  mainly  responsible  for  this  development.  The 
rand's strength is, of course, not only dependant on monetary policy. In the current circumstances the 
weakness  of  the  dollar  and  a  substantial  increase  in  international  commodity  prices  contributed 
significantly to the strength in the external value of the rand. In addition, exporters have been selling 
their foreign exchange proceeds in an aggressive manner and South Africa has attracted considerable 
financial inflows owing to the improved macroeconomic fundamentals and confidence in our country. 
The criticism against the monetary policy framework is even more surprising because the number of 
countries with floating exchange rates has increased dramatically since the early 1990s. This is partly 
due to the currency crises experienced under fixed exchange rate systems and a growing consensus 
on the disadvantages of conventional currency pegs. Floating exchange rates in combination with the 
inflation targeting regime have become the norm in a large number of countries, i.e. monetary policy 
has become more forward-looking while the determination of the exchange rate has been left to the 
currency markets.  
Inflation 
including  real  economic 
developments,  monetary  analysis  and  the  external  balance  of  the  economy.  This  is  done  in  a 
systematic and complex way. It is hence more demanding from this point of view than the alternative 
monetary strategies. Inflation targeting has placed the forecasting process at the heart of monetary 
policy  decision-making.  The  inflation  forecast  has  become  not  only  an  important  internal  decision-
making tool, but also a crucial communication device. However, in line with best international practice, 
even our highly developed, technically advanced and well-organised forecasting procedure is certainly 
not an automatic pilot for monetary policy decision-making. The forecast is an important input into the 
monetary  policy  process  and  like  other  central  banks  we  continue  to  try  our  best  to  continuously 
improve  our  macroeconomic  forecasting  capability.  However,  eventually  the  decision  is  always  still 
based not only on the central forecast itself, but also on the assessment of all the associated risks. 
We  now  have  more  than  four  years  of  experience  with  inflation  targeting  and  although  the  new 
monetary policy framework was introduced in February 2000 in a challenging situation of not having all 
the required supporting systems properly in place at the time, the economy urgently needed a new 
and more reliable nominal anchor to ensure a sustained disinflation path. The first years of the new 
regime  have  certainly  not  been  easy,  and  have  been  characterised  by  unfavourable  currency 
developments that contributed to numerical inflation target misses. South Africa has nevertheless for 
some time now been experiencing inflation within the target range and surveys indicate clearly that 
inflation expectations are more firmly anchored at lower levels. It is now more important than ever for 
us  to  stay  the  course  as  continued  price  stability  is  the  most  crucial  pre-requisite  for  sustained 
economic growth and development in the years ahead. 
targeting  requires  assessing  all 
the  available 
information, 
Exchange rate developments 
5. 
The exchange rate of the rand against a basket of currencies recovered by 16 percent in the year to 
the  end  of  December  2003  and,  on  balance,  appreciated  by  a  further  12  percent  in  the 
six-and-a-half-month  period  to  the  middle  of  July  2004,  despite  the  temporary  setback  to  the 
international  prices  of  commodity  exports  in  the  second  quarter.  While  these  movements  of  the 
exchange  rate  of  the  rand  reduced  the  international  competitiveness  of  South  African  producers,  it 
also caused the prices of imported goods to record twelve-month declines over the past 14 months, 
notwithstanding  a  significant  increase  in  the  international  price  of  crude  oil  over  this  period.  Goods 
price inflation was accordingly moderated, both at the production and consumer level, contributing to a 
reduction in twelve-month CPIX inflation. 
Despite  the  fact  that  the  rand  is  at  a  five-year  peak  to  the  dollar,  prospects  for  the  economy  have 
continued to improve. Tourism has fared better than expected and manufacturing output has improved 
significantly. The trade sector in particular is thriving, consumer confidence is at record levels and the 
world growth outlook remains favourable, with the result that some analysts have announced upward 
revisions  to  their  real  growth  forecasts  for  the  South  African  economy  for  2004  and  2005.  This, 
together with indications of a possibly more favourable credit rating for the country, flies in the face of 
the projections of most doomsayers. The process of dealing with a strong currency has most certainly 
been painful but also beneficial as it has forced productivity improvements and increased competition 
in the economy. 
Although business leaders continue warning of eroding profits and impending cuts in investment and 
jobs,  the  local  economy  has  been  adjusting  well  to  a  stronger,  more  stable  currency.  Significant 
problems have certainly been experienced by many mining and manufacturing enterprises as a result 
of the strength of the rand. This has had serious repercussions for the profitability of these enterprises, 
as well as their investment planning and employment. The recovery in the exchange rate of the rand 
has, however, forced companies to restructure their firms to cushion the impact of the strengthening 
rand. The restructuring has contributed to increasing resilience of the South African economy. Besides 
restructuring,  the  manufacturing  sector  has  been  taking  advantage  of  buoyant  domestic  demand 
sparked  by  the  sharp  fall  in  interest  rates  last  year  to  the  lowest  levels  in  almost  two  decades. 
Manufacturing enterprises have been taking advantage of strong local demand and are now doing this 
on a more productive basis as a result of restructuring. This has led to a rebound in manufacturing 
output from the first quarter of this year, and some analysts say this illustrates clearly that there were 
also benefits associated with the strengthening of the rand. Benefits that could last for a long time, 
rather than the short-lived relief of external price adjustments. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Critics of our current policy seem to forget these positive developments associated with the recovery in 
the exchange rate of the rand. I realise, of course, that there have been serious disadvantages, but I 
must  emphasise  that  the  strength  of  our  currency  is  not  directly  related  to  the  monetary  policy 
framework  that  we  apply.  We  accordingly  still  belief  that  an  inflation-targeting  monetary  policy 
framework  allows  an  independent  central  bank  to  commit  credibly  to  its  long-term  goal  of  price 
stability.  In  such  a  framework  supply  and  demand  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  must  inevitably 
determine  the  level  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  rand.  The  role  of  the  SA  Reserve  Bank  in  this 
framework is to gradually build up the official foreign reserves of the country to a respectable level in 
an orderly fashion in accordance with our balance sheet whenever circumstances allow us to do this. 
So the state of the economy looks promising. 
Thank you.  
