European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, Helsinki, 
6 May 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a pleasure to welcome you to our press conference here in Helsinki, where 
the Governing Council of the European Central Bank met today for the ninth time outside Frankfurt. I 
would like to thank acting Governor Matti Louekoski for his invitation and very kind hospitality, as well 
as the staff of Suomen Pankki - Finlands Bank for a perfectly organised meeting. We deeply regret 
that Mr Matti Vanhala had to resign from his position and we wish him all the best. 
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting.  On  the  basis  of  our  regular  economic  and 
monetary analyses, we continue to expect that price stability will be maintained over the medium term. 
Accordingly, we did not change our assessment of the monetary policy stance and left the key ECB 
interest rates at their current low levels. The low interest rates across the entire maturity spectrum are 
also  supporting  the  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  As  always,  we  will  continue  to  monitor 
carefully all developments that could affect our assessment of risks to price stability over the medium 
term. 
Allow me to elaborate on our decision, turning first to the economic analysis. Regarding the current 
situation  and  the  very  short-term  outlook,  the  conjunctural  indicators  available  still  provide  mixed 
evidence.  All  in  all,  they  suggest  that  the  recovery  of  real  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  has 
continued into 2004, albeit at a modest pace. Most recent information has been more encouraging, 
with the latest euro area survey data offering more positive signals with regard to the beginning of the 
second quarter.  
While  the  latest  positive  signals  need  to  be  confirmed  by  future  developments,  they  underpin  the 
expectation  of  the  gradual  recovery  in  the  euro  area  continuing  and  strengthening  over  time.  The 
conditions for such a recovery are in place.  
First, global economic growth continues to be robust and world trade has strengthened. The global 
economic  upturn  is  broadly  based,  both  geographically  and  across  sectors,  and  thus  provides  a 
favourable  external  environment  for  the  euro  area.  In  this  context,  we  expect  euro  area  exports  to 
grow  significantly  this  year  and  next.  Second,  favourable  financing  conditions,  improvements  in 
corporate efficiency and earnings and the strength of global demand should help investment. Growth 
in  real  disposable  income  should  support  private  consumption,  especially  since  households  appear 
not to face financial constraints that might impede stronger spending. Over time, consumer spending 
should also be supported by an improvement in labour market conditions.  
These  considerations  underpin  our  confidence  in  a  continuation  of  the  economic  recovery,  an 
expectation  which  is  mirrored  by  available  forecasts  and  projections.  It  is  also  in  line  with  financial 
market developments over the past few weeks. Obviously, any forward-looking assessment is subject 
to risks and uncertainties. On the external side, the adverse terms-of-trade effects of recent rises in oil 
and other commodity prices pose risks at shorter horizons, while the persistence of global imbalances 
implies  some  uncertainties  over  the  medium  term.  On  the  domestic  side,  uncertainties  surrounding 
fiscal policy and structural reforms in some euro area countries seem to have contributed to preventing 
a more vigorous improvement in consumer confidence. A continued commitment to and greater clarity 
about  the  content  and  timing  of  these  crucial  reforms,  supported  by  a  better  understanding  of  their 
necessity and benefits for all citizens, would help to resolve this uncertainty and thereby mitigate the 
associated risks for the euro area economy. 
Turning to price developments, annual HICP inflation rates will exhibit some short-term volatility over 
the coming months, as we already indicated on the occasion of previous meetings of the Governing 
Council. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate, annual HICP inflation was 2.0% in April, after 1.7% in 
March. While no detailed information is available as yet, the recent rise in annual inflation rates is likely 
to mainly reflect a strong base effect in the energy component resulting from the marked decline of oil 
prices a year ago. Moreover, recent oil price increases have exerted additional upward pressure. As 
these factors will also play a role in the next few months, inflation rates of 2% or somewhat above are 
possible over the short term. Despite these recent, less positive developments, over longer horizons 
we expect inflation rates to remain in line with price stability. In particular, wage developments should 
BIS Review 27/2004 
 1
remain moderate. The latest data on wage growth in the fourth quarter of 2003 lend support to this 
view.  
Our outlook for price developments is in line with available forecasts and projections. However, at the 
current juncture, the increase in commodity prices in general, and oil prices in particular, may pose an 
upside  risk  to  price  stability.  It  will  therefore  remain  important  to  pay  close  attention  to  inflation 
expectations.  
Moving on to the monetary analysis, annual M3 growth has moderated only slowly since the summer 
of 2003. While there is evidence of continued portfolio shifts out of M3 into longer-term assets, the 
pace of this adjustment remains modest. Both monetary and credit growth continue to be supported by 
the historically low level of interest rates in the euro area and may also reflect the improvement in the 
economic environment over the last few quarters. 
Given the continued strength of monetary growth, liquidity conditions remain ample in the euro area. 
The  impact  of  this  high  level  of  liquidity  on  inflation  over  the  medium  term  will  depend  on  future 
developments in the economy and financial markets. Should excess liquidity persist, it could lead to 
inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
To  sum  up,  the  economic  analysis  indicates  that  the  main  scenario  for  the  outlook  for  price 
developments over the medium term is in line with price stability. Cross-checking with the monetary 
analysis does not alter this view at the current juncture.  
As usual, I also wish to make a few remarks regarding other policies in the euro area. With regard to 
fiscal policies, the Governing Council sees increased reasons for concern. On the basis of the latest 
Commission forecasts, the average euro area budgetary position is not expected to improve much this 
year  or  next.  A  growing  number  of  countries  are  likely  to  report  significant  imbalances,  while  fiscal 
consolidation  efforts  might  fall  short  of  commitments.  It  is  essential  that  all  countries  concerned 
undertake  credible  measures  to  address  these  concerns.  Such  measures  should  be  part  of  a 
comprehensive  reform  strategy.  This  would  underpin  the  ongoing  economic  upswing  by  boosting 
confidence in sound public finances and by improving the prospects for future economic growth. The 
Governing Council welcomes the decision by the Commission to request more consolidation efforts 
from a number of countries. 
Turning  to  structural  reforms,  the  Governing  Council  reaffirms  its  view  that  such  reforms  are 
essential  if  the  euro  area’s  growth  potential  is  to  expand  substantially.  In  particular,  both  our 
employment  rate  and  our  labour  productivity  growth  need  to  increase  significantly.  Following  our 
discussions here in Finland, let me stress that this requires a strengthened technological and scientific 
base and its application in the euro area as a whole, fostered by major efforts to enhance the human 
capital  of  our  economy.  In  this  context,  we  are  particularly  concerned  that  youth  unemployment 
remains high in several countries. In order to achieve these goals, it is necessary to strengthen the 
implementation of structural reforms, both at the European and the national level. The Lisbon agenda 
provides an excellent diagnosis of the problem and we have a good understanding of the measures 
needed to deal with it. We strongly support the ongoing reforms, which should be speeded up across 
the euro area. It is important to understand that everyone will be better off - with higher growth and 
more jobs - if and when the reforms of the Lisbon agenda are delivered.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2004
