Lucas D Papademos: Presentation of the three prizewinning design proposals 
for the New ECB Premises 
Introductory statement by  Mr Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European Central Bank and 
Chairman of the Jury for the international urban planning and architectural design competition for the 
New ECB Premises, at the Deutsches Architektur Museum, Frankfurt am Main, 20 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
We  have  invited  you  today  to  the  Deutsches  Architektur  Museum  for  the  presentation  of  the  three 
prizewinning design proposals in the international urban planning and architectural design competition 
for the New ECB Premises. In addition, you will have the opportunity to preview the exhibition of all 
design  proposals  entered  in  the  competition,  which  will  be  on  display  to  the  public  here  at  the 
Deutsches Architektur Museum from tomorrow until 14 March 2004. 
In my introductory remarks I would like to do the following. First, to briefly recall the main steps that 
have  led  to  the  outcome  of  the  competition  and  today’s  event.  Second,  to  present  the  three 
prizewinning design proposals in some detail. And third, to explain what happens next and suggest a 
tentative timeframe for implementing the New ECB Premises project. Afterwards, I will be happy to 
answer any further questions, as will the three prizewinners when it comes to technical questions on 
the design proposals. 
The choice of the Großmarkthalle site 
1.  
What we have on display at this exhibition today documents a process that began some years ago 
with  the  decision  that  the  ECB  should  have  a  permanent  home.  The  search  for  a  suitable  location 
began in 1998, and - following the assessment of 35 different sites across the City of Frankfurt - the 
Großmarkthalle site was judged to meet the ECB’s requirements in a number of ways: 
• 
it provides sufficient space at a reasonable cost (especially when compared to the financial 
district); 
it  is  large  enough  to  accommodate  potential  future  growth  modules  and  fulfils  the  ECB’s 
security requirements; 
it is well-situated in terms of public infrastructure; 
and, of course, it has a real asset, the Großmarkthalle itself, which is a true landmark. 
• 
• 
In March 2002, a purchase contract for the site was signed between the City of Frankfurt and the ECB. 
This formed the basis for the international urban planning and architectural design competition which 
was launched in November of that year. 
 The phases of the competition 
2.  
At  the  start  of  the  competition,  more  than  300  candidates  from  31  countries  representing  four 
continents  submitted  their  applications.  Of  those,  80  architects  -  70  “established”  architects  and 
10 “emerging  young”  architects  -  were  selected  to  participate  in  the  first  phase  of  the  competition, 
although only 71 actually presented outline proposals for the New ECB Premises. All proposals had to 
be  submitted  anonymously.  A  notary  was  involved  to  make  sure  the  identities  of  the  candidates 
remained secret throughout the competition. 
In  August  2003,  the  12  members  of  the  international  Jury  -  which  was  made  up  of  architects,  and 
representatives of the City of Frankfurt, the ECB and national central banks, and that I had the honour 
to chair - examined the outline proposals. Twelve candidates were selected out of the 71 to participate 
in the second phase and were invited to submit more detailed design concepts. 
On 12 and 13 February 2004, the Jury reconvened and evaluated all 12 design concepts on the basis 
of the criteria set out in the Competition Brief: 
• 
the overall town-planning, architectural and landscaping concept; 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 1
  compliance  with  the  main  features  of  the  functional  and  spatial  programme,  including 
modularity, in line with the ECB’s needs; 
the energy and environmental concept and compliance with the main features of the ECB’s 
technical requirements; and 
compliance with the relevant building and environmental laws. 
• 
In  its  evaluation,  the  Jury  placed  particular  emphasis  on  whether  the  design  concepts  reflected  the 
values  of  the  ECB  and  conveyed  an  appropriate  image  for  the  ECB;  and  to  what  extent  the 
fundamental appearance of the historic Großmarkthalle building was preserved. 
The Jury’s choice of winner for the first prize was based on a very large majority within the Jury (10 in 
favour  out  of  12).  Thereafter,  Jury  members  expressed  their  preferences  for  the  two  designs  to  be 
awarded  the  second  and  third  prizes,  and  the  votes  cast  established  a  clear  ranking.  Given  this 
unambiguous outcome, all members of the Jury accepted the final ranking of the three prizewinning 
designs as the consensual choice. 
Let  me  now  briefly  present  to  you  the  three  winning  designs.  I  am  delighted  that  the  prizewinning 
architects were able to attend today and they will be happy to answer more detailed questions about 
their designs in a moment. 
The three prizewinning designs 
3.  
The first prize was awarded to Coop Himmelb(l)au. Their design concept was viewed by the Jury as a 
powerful  image,  reflecting  values  of  the  ECB,  such  as  transparency,  communication,  efficiency  and 
stability. It is also an appealing and sophisticated design, which is easily readable and establishes a 
strong  and  unique  identity  in  Frankfurt’s  skyline.  The  high-rise  is  a  sculptural  hybrid  of  two  towers 
connected by an atrium. We felt that this multi-purpose atrium reflected the values of transparency and 
communication. We believe this project to be compatible with the City’s urban design concept for the 
whole river Main area. The Großmarkthalle itself is well preserved, both in terms of external visibility 
and  its  interior  architectural  articulation.  The  overall  functionality  of  the  design  proposal,  including 
workspace quality and fulfilment of technical requirements, was appreciated. Overall, the members of 
the Jury considered this project to be the most appropriate concept for the ECB’s future headquarters. 
The second prize was awarded to ASP Schweger Assoziierte. This design makes a strong statement. 
It combines three buildings into one unified composition, which aggregates its constituent parts into a 
clear,  simple  structural  entity.  The  building  represents  a  new  urban  typology  for  high-rise  buildings, 
which would ensure a unique and individual expression for the ECB. The occupants and visitors would 
be  enveloped  and  inspired  by  the  ECB.  The  architects  propose  replacing  the  concrete  roof  of  the 
Großmarkthalle  with  glazing.  This  modification  is  feasible  and  adds  a  new  aesthetic  quality  to  the 
overall appearance of the Großmarkthalle. The contrast between it and the new buildings is striking. 
Overall, the Jury considered this project to have a strong identity. 
The third prize was awarded to 54f architekten in association with T. R. Hamzah & Yeang. Through 
the  contrast  between  the  north-south  axis  of  the  tower  buildings  and  the  horizontality  of  the  lower 
elements, this design offers a clear contrast to the east-west orientation of the Großmarkthalle. The 
free-standing  position  of  the  historic  building  shows  respect  for  the  local  urban  environment.  As  a 
discrete  high-rise  cluster  the  project  integrates  well  into  the  skyline:  the  orientation  allows  both 
openness to the river Main, and visibility from the city centre. While elsewhere the best workplaces are 
located in the southern portion, here the multi-storey gardens are accessible to everybody. The idea of 
combining the climate concept with a public zone was found very convincing. Overall, the Jury judged 
that this design was efficient and commendable. 
The way ahead 
4.  
So where do we go from here? In a revision phase to follow, the Governing Council of the ECB will 
invite  one  or  more  prizewinners  to  review  their  design  proposals.  A  final  design  will  be  agreed  in 
cooperation with the City of Frankfurt. After this revision phase, the Governing Council of the ECB will 
award the contract for planning its new premises to one of the three prizewinning architects. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2004
Once this decision has been made, the ECB will take the next steps, again in cooperation with the City 
of Frankfurt. This will involve developing an urban development plan to allow for the implementation of 
the design concept. In parallel, the detailed planning of the project will get under way. 
I am sure you will appreciate that it is very difficult, at this early stage, to predict the exact timing of the 
next steps. The current users of the Großmarkthalle site - the wholesalers - are scheduled to move to 
a new location in Kalbach this summer. Thereafter, the City of Frankfurt will “clean up” the site, which 
means,  for  instance,  demolishing  adjacent  technical  structures  that  do  not  form  part  of  the  historic 
Großmarkthalle  building.  We  expect  that  the  City  will  be  able  to  hand  over  the  site  to  the  ECB,  as 
agreed, in January 2005. After completing the planning phase and obtaining the relevant permits from 
the  authorities,  we  hope  to  start  construction during  2006 and  look  forward  to  moving  into our new 
home around 2008/2009. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  conclude  by  emphasising  that  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  very  satisfied  that  the 
results of the international architectural competition have fulfilled its expectations. Our new home will 
be functional, aesthetically appealing and, at the same time, reflect the core values of our institution. I 
am  confident  that  the  New  ECB  Premises  will  give  us  all  -  the  ECB,  the  City  of  Frankfurt,  and  the 
architectural profession - a reason to be proud. 
Thank you for your attention. 
It now gives me great pleasure to hand over the prizes to the three prizewinners: 
• 
• 
• 
1st prize: Coop Himmelb(l)au, represented by Prof. Wolf Prix. 
2nd prize: ASP Schweger Assoziierte, represented by Prof. Peter Schweger. 
3rd  prize:  54f  architekten  in  association  with  T.  R.  Hamzah  &  Yeang,  represented  by 
Prof. Johann Eisele. 
I am now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 3
