Eva Srejber: What role do asset prices and credit play in monetary policy 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  The  Adam  Smith 
Seminars, Thun, Switzerland, 30 June 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Sveriges Riksbank’s website. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  inviting  me  for  the  third  consecutive  year  to  speak  at  the 
Adam Smith Seminars. Today I shall discuss the significance of asset prices and credit for economic 
stability.  For  several  years  now  there  has  been  a  dramatic  rise  in  many  countries  in  the  prices  of 
owner-occupied housing as well as in household debt. In Australia, Spain and England, house prices 
have more than doubled since 1997. In Sweden, house prices have risen more than 70 per cent over 
the same period. Before the turn of the millennium it was mainly the sharply rising equity prices and 
highly indebted firms that were in focus. What has been driving these developments, what role has 
been played by monetary policy, and what are the possible future effects on the economy? These are 
questions I shall be discussing today. 
A strong expansion in credit and increasing asset prices have preceded almost all banking crises and 
the majority of deep recessions in countries around the world over the past one hundred years or so. 
In many cases inflation has at the same time been low and stable before the crisis. This is why the 
developments we are seeing today are receiving so much attention.  
Many of these issues were discussed before and after the crisis in the 1930s. Then, as now, emphasis 
was  put  on  the  importance  of  price stability,  and monetary policy  had  therefore  a prominent  role  in 
economic policy. For this reason, it can be interesting to look back at how economists in those days 
viewed the role of monetary policy. 
However, due to the mass unemployment that resulted from the depression in countries such as the 
United States at the beginning of the 1930s, the theory published in 1936 by Keynes in his work “The 
General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money” came to dominate thinking in the area right up to 
the  1980s.  The  crisis  had  been  preceded  by  steep  rises  in  asset  prices  and  a  sharp  expansion  in 
credit, but without any increase in inflation. Those economists that had advocated a long-term focus 
on price stability and had a clearly non-activist view of the ability of policy to reduce fluctuations in the 
economy were considered by many to share the blame for the fact that the depression in the United 
States was so severe and protracted. 
In simplified terms, we can say that the dominant view among economists in the Western world at the 
beginning of the 1900s was that economic policy should be aimed fully at holding prices stable in the 
long  term.  Economists  from  the  so-called  Austrian  School  maintained  that  if  the  central  bank 
attempted to stimulate the economy with an interest rate that was below a long-term equilibrium level, 
it would in itself give rise to sharp fluctuations in the real economy. They also claimed that periods of 
overinvestment,  strong  credit  expansion  and  rising  asset  prices  could  not  be  avoided  in  a  world 
characterised  by  major  technological advances.  Rather,  it  was  a precondition  for  the  dynamics  that 
spurred  growth.  Should  expectations  of  future  profits  prove  to  have  been  overly  optimistic,  the 
imbalances in the shape of high debt and unprofitable investment should be allowed to quickly unwind 
without any attempt through economic policy to soften the resultant fall in output. 
Discretionary stabilisation policy discredited 
After  the  Second  World  War,  the  dominant  view  instead  was  that  economic  policy  should  play  an 
active part to stabilise the economy. Fiscal policy was therefore given a more prominent role, while 
monetary policy and the long-term aim of price stability were pushed into the background. During the 
first two decades stabilisation policy worked well in many countries. Unemployment fell, growth was 
robust and inflation was low. The US currency, which in turn was pegged to gold, served during the 
period as an anchor for inflation and exchange rates in mainly western Europe, where the majority of 
countries  had  joined  the  Bretton  Woods  system.  However,  at  the  beginning  of  the  1970s,  the 
exchange rate cooperation collapsed because of the tensions that had built up due to high, variable 
inflation in and between the participant countries and that had largely originated from the growing US 
budget deficit. Efforts at the time to establish a new credible anchor for inflation failed. The following 
two decades were marked instead by high inflation and low growth in many economies. 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
From the end of the 1970s the pendulum started to swing back slowly, and an increasing number of 
economists  again  highlighted  the  importance  of  price  stability  for  economic  stability  and  long-term 
growth.  Attempts  to  fine-tune  the  economy  via  economic  policy  to  stabilise  growth  had  resulted  in 
burgeoning central government debt in many countries, partly because of the inability of politicians to 
tighten policy sufficiently during booms. The economic debate at the beginning of the 1980s centred 
therefore on the need for regulations and fixed limits to avoid this. 
In  Sweden,  a  last  big  devaluation  in  1982  would  first  enhance  the  competitiveness  that  had  been 
eroded for many years as a result of high inflation. However, it was intended that once the devaluation 
had got the competitive sector on its feet, the fixed exchange rate would thereafter serve as an anchor 
for an inflation rate in line with other countries. The demands that this imposed on fiscal policy proved 
politically impossible to live up to, however. As a result, at the beginning of the 1990s Sweden and 
other Scandinavian countries were hit by both a banking and currency crisis. As before the depression 
in 1930, the crises were preceded by steep rises in asset prices and a very sharp expansion in credit. 
Reform of a tax system that had fuelled debt and that was changed in such a way that caused a rise in 
post-tax  interest  costs,  contributed  to  deepening  the  crisis.  The  lack  of  experience  at  banks  and 
supervisory  authorities  of  acting  in  a  deregulated  environment,  in  combination  with  excessively 
expansionary fiscal policy, were other significant causes of the negative developments. 
But large financial imbalances had already accumulated before the crisis was triggered. This occurred 
without the anchor for inflation, that is the nominal exchange rate, giving sufficient indications in time. 
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  the  overheating  resulted  in  a  real  appreciation  of  the  krona  against  other 
currencies due to inflation, confidence in the fixed exchange rate regime appeared to be fairly stable 
for a long period. This led to substantial, partly short-term, capital inflows increasing demand for the 
krona at the same time as a growing current account deficit reduced krona demand. The demand for 
the  krona  was  partly  due  to  Swedish  firms  demanding  loans  in  foreign  currency.  Consequently, 
monetary policy, which targeted the exchange rate, was not tight enough to prevent the build-up of the 
imbalances. 
History has shown that inflation measured in terms of consumer prices has not always signalled when 
imbalances in the economy have been building up. Many of the countries that were hit by depression 
and  banking  crises  during  the  1930s  had  beforehand  witnessed  steep  rises  in  asset  prices  and  a 
sharp credit expansion without any increase in inflation. In Japan, the recession that followed in the 
wake of a strong credit expansion and rising asset prices during the second half of the 1980s proved, 
as we know, very severe and protracted. Neither in Japan had inflation provided signals in time that 
large imbalances were building up. Also during the latter part of the 1990s we have seen examples of 
crises with a similar course of events, for example in Thailand and other parts of Asia. Banking crises 
are not a necessary condition for countries to be hit hard after such a development. This is shown by 
what happened in the United States and England at the beginning of the 1990s. 
Focus on price stability and financial stability 
During the 1990s, confidence in an economic policy aimed at achieving price stability seems to have 
strengthened in earnest in large parts of the world. World inflation is now back to the levels reached 
before the 1970s, and monetary policy is again playing the leading role in stabilisation policy.  
Modern neo-Keynesian1 research based on theories of nominal rigidities has shown that not only real 
shocks but also monetary shocks can temporarily affect the real economy. According to these theories 
there  is  some  scope  for  monetary  policy  to  take  account  of  the  output  gap  without  necessarily 
threatening price stability in the slightly longer term. An important condition for this, however, is that 
there is considerable confidence in the central bank’s aim to focus on long-term price stability. In the 
long run, monetary policy cannot determine the real interest rate but in the short term the real interest 
rate can be influenced and deviate from its long-term equilibrium position. 
An  increasing  number  of  central  banks  have  adopted  inflation  targets  during  the  1990s.  The 
introduction of statutory price-stability objectives, independent central banks, transparency and - not 
least - regulations that give long-term sustainability in the public finances have also been important 
means for increasing credibility for the ability of economic policy to maintain price stability.  
                                                      
1   E.g. Woodford, Claridas 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
In Sweden, the Riksbank adopted an inflation target as early as 1993. According to this target, inflation 
measured in terms of the change in consumer prices should be 2 per cent per year, with a tolerance 
for  deviations  of  +/-  1  percentage  point.  As  monetary  policy  does  not  have  an  immediate  impact, 
interest  rate  decisions  are  normally  governed  by  forecasts  of  inflation  one  to  two  years  ahead.  To 
avoid the economic costs of excessively sharp fluctuations in economic activity, the Riksbank many 
decide not to take account of price effects that are judged to be temporary. So, it could be said that the 
Riksbank  conducts  a  flexible  policy  of  inflation  targeting.2  In  addition,  the  Riksbank’s  remit  includes 
promoting financial stability.  
Low inflation but sharp fluctuations in asset prices and credit 
At the same time as inflation in the world economy has now stabilised at low levels, fluctuations in 
asset prices have increased. Furthermore, debt levels among households and firms have continued to 
display large cyclical variations. Rising asset prices and the increase in debt that occurred in many 
countries at the end of the 1990s, and which has continued as regards house prices and households, 
has  given  rise  to  concerns  in  many  countries  over  the  stability  of  the  economy  and  inflation  in  the 
slightly longer term. 
That asset prices and debt levels appear to vary more now than ten or fifteen years ago should, at 
least in part, be due to the deregulation and evolution of the financial markets. Here, credit and liquid 
secondary markets can quickly create money that can be transferred around the world to investments 
with the highest expected return. However, so far the low-inflation economy appears to have lessened 
cyclical fluctuations and changed the cycles’ shape. It seems as though the cycles have been longer 
and flatter than before, particularly during expansionary phases. 
Can a build-up of imbalances be prevented through a different monetary policy? 
The focus on price stability, as well as considerable efforts to develop norms and regulations within the 
field of supervision have undoubtedly reduced the risk of imbalances being able to accumulate over a 
long  period.  The  question,  however,  is  whether  a  monetary  policy  that  is  normally  governed  by 
forecasts of inflation in the short or medium term will be able to prevent the kind of imbalances that I 
have discussed from building up? If not - is there then any other way to improve the operationalisation 
of the target for a monetary policy aimed at achieving price stability without abandoning the goal that 
the decisions be rule-based and transparent? In countries that have experienced long periods of high, 
fluctuating inflation, discretionary stabilisation policy has been greatly discredited. 
First, we must point out that even if it is possible with hindsight to say that equity prices, debt levels 
and investment have been fuelled by over-optimistic expectations of future growth, the central bank 
cannot possess perfect knowledge of the future. Rising asset prices and a sharp expansion in private 
credit could be a sign of increased confidence in the economic policy aim of achieving price stability, 
as well as of reduced risks in the future. Lower public debt, which has been part of this policy, could in 
that case be reflected in higher private debt and in rising asset prices. Technological advances can 
also contribute to increasing expectations of future profits and income, and is mirrored in rising asset 
prices and high debt levels. Were central banks via tighter monetary policy to attempt to stop such a 
fundamentally motivated development, it could instead prove costly to the economy. 
Do asset prices and credit play an independent role for the real economy? 
Having said this, we must ask ourselves the following questions:  
(1) 
Is there reason via monetary policy to reduce disturbances that can be expected to have a 
substantial impact on the macroeconomy if this did not affect the forecasts of inflation in the 
medium term?  
Is  there  any  information  in  asset  prices  and  debt  levels  that  is  systematically  not  taken 
account of when forecasting inflation? 
(2) 
                                                      
2   Heikensten, L. & Vredin, A. (2002), “The art of targeting inflation”, Sveriges Riksbank Economic Review 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
Allow me to begin with the first question. Besides the task of maintaining price stability, most central 
banks also have a role as regards financial stability. If systemically important banks are hit by a crisis 
or  by  losses  large  enough  to  cause  a  sharp  decrease  in  the  credit  supply  or  a  disturbance  in  the 
payment  system,  this  results  in  considerable  macroeconomic  disturbances.  If  financial  stability  is 
threatened by a credit expansion in such a way that systemically important banks have not heeded a 
macroeconomic risk that has been identified by the central bank, this could therefore need to be taken 
into  account  when  taking  interest  rate  decisions.  Other  measures  such  as  so-called  moral  suasion, 
whereby the problems are pointed out to the banks and the financial sector, could then also come into 
question. 
It is also reasonable for central banks to take some responsibility for real economic developments in 
addition to those that are judged to affect inflation in the medium term, even if financial stability is not 
under  immediate  threat.  As  I  mentioned,  the  Riksbank  has  decided  to  take  account  of  this  by 
disregarding temporary effects on inflation. We also discuss developments beyond the target horizon 
that normally governs monetary policy. A successful, flexible policy of inflation targeting leads to lower 
fluctuations  in  output  without  giving  rise  for  that  reason  to  higher  average  inflation.  And  that  is  the 
essential aim of the price stability target. 
The  second  question,  however,  is  considerably  more  difficult  to  answer.  Forecasts  of  resource 
utilisation and inflation can be systematically inaccurate because the models and assessments used 
do not take account of the independent role that asset prices and debt can play. Also, as a result of 
structural  changes,  historical  relationships  may  have  changed,  thus  causing  the  central  bank,  for 
example, to come to incorrect conclusions about the output gap and potential growth. This could, for 
instance, result in a monetary policy that pushes up asset prices and debt too high. 
For example, the traditional models, which are grounded in an analysis of the real economy, are based 
on  assumptions  of  rationally  behaving  households  and  firms,  efficient  capital  markets  and  linear 
relationships. That households and firms are rational means that there are no systematic errors in their 
expectations. If these assumptions are a reasonable description of how the economy functions, there 
is likely to be less reason for the central bank to attach any great importance to debt levels and asset 
prices  in  terms  of  economic  stability.  In  that  case,  debt  levels  and  asset  prices  mirror  the  same 
behaviours that are described in theories and models based on the real economy and do not therefore 
contain any new information. 
But there are many studies of, and observations from, the financial markets that could suggest that the 
forecasts do not capture the behaviours that can lead to a build-up of the kind of imbalances that I 
have discussed. Here, I shall confine myself to a few examples. 
Studies have shown that asset prices and credit expansion give rise to each other and therefore play 
an independent role for the course of events in the cycles. Bernanke, Gertler & Gilchrist, for example, 
have shown with their financial accelerator theory that rising asset prices make it cheaper to borrow 
and at the same time increase the supply of credit. Lower financing costs boost investment and equity 
prices,  which  reduce  the  financing  cost,  and  so  on.  They  show  also  that  the  effect  of  the  financial 
accelerator  is  asymmetric,  having  greater  significance  during  an  economic  decline  than  during  an 
upswing.  
It  affects  those  credit  cycles  that  are  usually  described  by  roughly  the  following  course  of  events. 
During an economic boom, rising asset prices facilitate increased borrowing through the higher value 
of  collateral  in  the  form  of  financial  assets,  houses  and  apartments.  When  the  situation  then  turns, 
most  likely  associated  with  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy,  the  value  of  these  assets  falls  and 
households’  financial  situation  deteriorates.  If,  in  addition,  the  valuations  have  been  over-optimistic, 
the price falls can be dramatic. The banks will in any case respond to the deterioration of both their 
own balance sheet and that of their borrowers by contracting their lending. During the following period 
of consolidation, inflation and economic activity will decrease. In a worst case scenario the banks’ loan 
losses will be large enough to threaten financial stability. Apart from the risk that expectations have 
been  irrational,  however,  this  kind  of  credit  cycle  is  considered  to  be  part  of  a  normal  adjustment 
process, which should be a component of forecasters’ informal and formal models. However, as the 
theory of credit cycles is not especially well-developed in the standard models that are taught in the 
field of economics, there is reason to suspect that the relationships are underestimated by forecasters.  
Other economists have pointed out that rises in asset prices that initially are justified by fundamentals, 
also  attract  short-term  investors  who  contribute  to  pushing  up  prices.  The  longer  the  price  rises 
continue, the greater the significance the speculators will have for price developments since investors 
with a longer investment horizon will no longer buy the assets. Finally, it is only the speculators that 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
are fuelling the rise in prices. While they know that the price increases are exaggerated, they do not 
know when the situation will turn. The slightest signs of an imminent change lead to large-scale sell-
offs, and prices plunge. In well-developed markets, participants that judge the price increases to be 
excessive always have the possibility to make a profit by taking offsetting positions. Uncertainty over 
when the situation will turn, coupled with reward systems that encourage short-term gains, are likely to 
result  in  an  insufficient  number  of  investors  taking  offsetting  positions.  Financial  accelerator  effects 
most likely lead to a situation where rising asset prices, regardless of whether they are being driven by 
short-term  investors,  also  affect  the  real  economy  and  thus  can  contribute  to  overinvestment.  As 
regards  house  prices,  the  risk  of  a  purely  speculatively  driven  rise  ought  to  be  lower.  This  is  true 
especially of economies such as the Swedish one, where regulations make it very difficult to own and 
let houses and apartments for speculative purposes. 
Empirical studies also indicate that the risk propensity of investors and lenders appears to increase 
according  as  economic  activity  strengthens,  while  it  decreases  markedly  during  economic  declines. 
So, when economic activity has been improving over a long period, investors appear to interpret this 
as meaning that growth will continue to rise at the same high rate, without taking account of the risk of 
a  slowdown.  Low  risk  premiums,  possibly  based  on  irrational  expectations  of  future  profits,  can 
contribute to overinvestment. 
In  a  recent  study3  Carsten  Detken  and  Frank  Smets  show  that  those  financial  cycles  that  have 
preceded periods with large falls in output, unlike the other financial cycles, have been characterised 
by rapid growth in the real stocks of money and credit at an early stage of the cycle, as well as by a 
sharp  rise  in  property  prices.  They  also  find  that  monetary  policy  has  been  relatively  looser  at  an 
earlier stage during the expansionary phase of such “high-cost cycles”, compared with other cycles. 
So, it seems as if the central bank at an early stage of the cycle is sometimes led to conduct an overly 
loose  policy  and  in  that  way  contributes  to  supporting  unsustainable  developments  in  the  prices  of 
financial assets and property. 
Structural  changes  can,  as  I  mentioned,  also  result  in  the  forecasts  of  inflation  not  showing  that 
imbalances  are  accumulating.  Forecast  models,  formal  and  informal,  are  based  on  experiences 
obtained from data covering a long period of time. This is generally an advantage, but during periods 
of large structural change there is a risk that formal models will be inaccurate as regards extrapolating 
short-term tendencies. 
For example, there are many factors that can result in actual inflation not behaving as assumed in the 
formal forecasting methods. Some can be attributed to the shift to a low-inflation regime. Increased 
credibility for an inflation target can lead to inflation not being as sensitive to variations in resource 
utilisation as before. Low inflation in itself is considered to make it less appealing to raise prices often 
due to the costs that are associated with such rises. The inflation rate becomes more persistent, which 
means that it doesn’t react as strongly to variations in resource utilisation as when inflation was higher. 
Low  inflation  can,  for  example,  result  in  misjudgements  of  the  output  gap  as  well  as  in  overly 
accommodative monetary policy. 
Other  factors  that  can  contribute  to  restraining  inflation  are  more  a  result  of  “bubble  phenomena”. 
Rising asset prices can increase corporate profits and thereby also companies’ ability to narrow their 
profit  margins  so  as  to  cope  with  stiffer  competition.  Another  factor  that  can  temporarily  dampen 
inflation  when  asset  prices  rise  is  the  currency  appreciation  that  can  occur  when  foreign  investors 
invest their money in the country’s equity market in the hope of continued price rises. 
How should monetary policy react? 
To sum up, I have pointed to studies and empirical observations that could lead to a situation where 
central banks with a monetary policy that is mainly governed by medium-term inflation forecasts do not 
observe in time when asset prices and credit developments are indicating that large macroeconomic 
disturbances could be triggered later on. 
But  even  though we  don’t  have sufficient  knowledge  to  be  able  to  identify  a  development  that  may 
result in future macroeconomic disturbances, we have to make monetary policy decisions. If, without 
                                                      
3   Detken C and F Smets: Asset price booms and monetary policy. Paper presented on 11 December 2003 at the Workshop 
on “Asset prices and monetary policy”, European Central Bank. 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 5
being  certain,  we  judge  that  developments  might  lead  to  substantial  disturbances,  the  choice  lies 
between  attempting  in  time  to  avoid  the  accumulation  of  large  imbalances  and  waiting  until  the 
situation turns. 
Many within the central bank world believe that interest rate policy should not react to asset prices and 
credit  expansion  over  and  above  their  estimated  implications  for  inflation  and  real  and  financial 
stability.4  The  reasons  are  that  it  is difficult  to  evaluate  correctly the  price  of an  asset and  that  it  is 
uncertain what level of interest rates would be necessary in a given situation to correct asset prices. 
Those that advocate a more preventive strategy meet this criticism by arguing that, firstly, models for 
asset prices exist and that it should not be more difficult to use these than to estimate the output gap, 
for example, which the majority of central banks make use of today. Secondly, by raising interest rates 
at an early stage when asset prices are starting to accelerate and before the expansion in credit has 
become too sharp, the central bank can indeed achieve somewhat lower inflation than is desirable in 
the short term. But one avoids a subsequent collapse in asset prices that could lead to considerably 
lower output and inflation in the longer term. Thirdly, somewhat tighter monetary policy than otherwise 
would  be  able  to  counter  an  over-optimistic  pricing  of  financial  assets  and  properties.  The  second 
argument is therefore based on the idea that the central banks’ normal forecast horizon of two years is 
too short, while the third argument is based on the assumption of irrational expectations. Lengthening 
the  forecast  horizon  is  relatively  simple  in  principle,  but  in  practice  it  is  more  difficult  of  course. 
Especially if the models used have some of the shortcomings I mentioned earlier. The third argument 
regarding irrational expectations is more difficult to adopt a position on. If we seriously believe that it is 
relevant, a large part of the foundation for the analysis and recommendations on which central banks 
today base their policy collapses at the same time. 
However, “Irrational expectations” could be a result of insufficient availability of information. Therefore, 
it cannot be ruled out that central banks, by pointing out potential problems associated with high debt 
levels, can contribute to reflection among those agents that otherwise would undertake commitments 
that they would not be able to meet when conditions change or in banks that otherwise would take on 
excessive credit risks. Influencing behaviour in this way by spreading information is an important idea 
behind the Riksbank’s Financial Stability Reports. 
Those  that  maintain  that  there  is  too  much  uncertainty  to  dampen  a  price  rise  via  interest  rate 
adjustments  are  thus  of  the  opinion  that  it  is  better  to  wait  until  asset  prices  start  to  decline.  Many 
believe that it is important in such a case to act forcefully so as to prevent a deep recession. However, 
the  risk  of  such  an  approach  is  in  overdoing  it  and  thereby  delaying  a  necessary  adjustment  of 
balance sheets and debt levels. New imbalances in other markets could then arise and the process 
begin  again.  When  the  situation  turns  next  time,  there  is  a  greater  risk  of  quickly  reaching  the 
zero-interest rate level. 
Conclusion 
In my opinion, the economic costs in the shape of sharp fluctuations in demand are likely on average 
to  be  higher  if  the  central  bank  does  not  take  account  of  asset  prices  and  credit  expansion  in  its 
decisions. One reason for this is the costs associated with reaching zero interest rates. However, the 
decisions must be based on an analysis that takes advantage of the knowledge that we nevertheless 
possess about the importance of asset prices and debt in the transmission mechanism. More in-depth 
knowledge of this area is necessary, however. Research must be intensified regarding credit cycles, 
risk behaviour and method development for identifying when rises in asset prices and credit expansion 
can be judged to increase the risk of a sharp fall in output. There may also be reason, based on the 
insights and techniques that we have today, to evaluate and develop the theories expounded by the 
monetary economists from the Austrian School, for example. 
To conclude, I would like once again to point to the need to increase our knowledge of how money, 
credit  and  asset  prices  interact  with  the  real  economy.  We  have  said  that  stable  inflation  does  not 
always lead automatically to stable asset prices and stable credit expansion.  
                                                      
4   For references to the literature, see Dillén, H. and Sellin, P. “Financial bubbles and monetary policy”, Sveriges Riksbank 
Economic Review 2003:3. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2004
The  regulations  that  have  been  created  in  the  past  ten  years  are  in  many  ways  more  robust  than 
before. Their aim has been to reduce costly fluctuations in the economy. A focus on price stability and 
fixed  rules  for  economic  policy  enables  decisions  to  be  evaluated  and  lowers  the  risk  of  arbitrary 
decisions.  But  this  must  not  prevent  a  discussion  of  alternative  ways  to  formulate  decision-making 
rules that, without damaging the confidence in the aim of price stability, also take account of the risks 
associated with excessive credit expansion and elevated asset prices. 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 7
