Christian Noyer: The role of inflation - indexed bonds in the process of setting 
monetary policy: a central banker’s perspective 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the Morgan Stanley seminar on 
indexed bonds, Paris, 9 June 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, [Dear Friends], 
It is a great pleasure for me to address you here in the context of the first “Séminaire de Paris” on 
inflation-linked securities organised by Morgan Stanley. Today, I will focus more specifically on “The 
role  of  inflation  -  indexed  bonds  in  the  process  of  setting  monetary  policy”  from  a  central  banker’s 
perspective, based on my own experience as the former Vice-President of the ECB and the current 
Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France.  Throughout  my  presentation,  I  will  occasionally  refer  to  the 
monetary  policy  strategy  framework  implemented  by  the  Eurosystem  in  which  asset  prices,  in 
particular inflation-indexed government bonds, can play a role in the context of our economic analysis. 
Having  said  this,  I  will  neither  elaborate  further  on  the  ECB’s  framework  nor  comment  on  the  last 
Governing Council’s monetary policy decision. 
Price  indexation  of  financial  contracts  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  According  to  Robert  Shiller1,  the 
world’s  first  known  inflation-indexed  bonds  were  issued  by  the  Commonwealth  of  Massachusetts  in 
1780 during the Revolutionary War. These bonds, the so-called “depreciation notes”, were issued to 
US  Soldiers  as  deferred  compensation  for  their  services.  They  were  mainly  designed  to  deal  with 
severe wartime inflation. Although the bonds were successful, the concept of indexed bonds was set 
aside until the 20th century. Finland introduced indexed bonds in 1945, Sweden in 1952, Iceland and 
Israel in 1955. Since then, indexed bonds have usually appeared in countries experiencing very high 
rates of inflation, such as Brazil in 19642, Chile (1966), Colombia (1967), Argentina (1972) or even the 
UK in 1975, with the issuance of so-called “granny bonds”, i.e. non-marketable indexed-linked savings 
retirement certificates. Later on, in 1981, the UK issued a marketable instrument - the index-linked gilt- 
in a context of rapidly increasing prices. In all of these cases, the issuance of inflation-indexed debt 
instruments by the government was aimed at developing long-term capital markets and improving the 
credibility  of  anti-inflationary  policies.  As  regards  this  last  point,  such  a  rationale  is,  however, 
ambiguous as it can also be argued that debt indexation can fuel the inflationary process by spreading 
inflation-linking to other contracts, such as wage contracts for instance.  
Given  this  historical  background,  it  might  appear  paradoxical  that,  since  1980,  indexed  bonds  have 
largely  been  issued  by  industrialised  countries,  characterised  both  by  low  inflation  rates  and  price 
stability - oriented monetary policies: Australia (1985), Canada (1991), Sweden (1994), New Zealand 
(1995), The United States (1997), France (1998 and 2001) and recently Italy and Greece (2003). The 
rationale behind the issuance of these indexed bonds was mainly to reduce the cost of debt and to 
develop complete financial markets. 
From a central banker’s standpoint, the role of asset prices in general and of inflation-indexed bonds in 
particular  in  the  process  of  setting  monetary  policy  is  mainly  related  to  their  information  content  on 
future economic activity and inflation. As you have already probably noticed, the Governing Council of 
the ECB sometimes refers to the information delivered by the changes in the inflation-indexed bond 
yields both in its introductory statement and in its comprehensive assessment of recent economic and 
financial developments, as presented, for instance, in the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin. 
To elaborate further on this, I will develop three points. First, I will describe the information content of 
inflation-indexed bonds and explain why this information is relevant for central banks. Second, I will 
highlight  some  of  the  main  drawbacks  and  potential  biases  that  may  alter  this  information  content. 
Third, I will briefly review the other indicator variables that we also use in our cross-checking exercise 
at the euro area level. Finally, I will conclude my presentation by raising the issue of what I call the 
                                                      
1   Robert Shiller: “The Invention of Inflation - Indexed Bonds  in Early America”, NBER Working Paper N°10183, December 
2003. 
In the year prior to the introduction of the indexed bond, the inflation rate was at 69.2% in Brazil, 22.2% in Chile, 19.7% in 
Colombia, 34.8% in Argentina, 16,1% in the UK in 1974 and still at 14% in 1980. 
2  
BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
“circularity  problem”,  a  difficulty  encountered  by  every  central  bank  faced  with  a  signal  extraction 
problem, in particular when it tries to get information from asset prices. 
Let me now turn to my first point: 
1. 
What is the information content of inflation-indexed bonds and why is it relevant for a 
central bank? 
Over  the  past  decade,  policy  makers  have  come  to  rely  on  long-term  bond  yields  to  measure  the 
public’s  long-term  inflationary  expectations.  According  to  some  empirical  research3,  “almost  80%  of 
the movement in the long nominal rates appears to be due to changes in expected long-term inflation”. 
According to the Fisherian theory of interest rates, the long-term nominal interest rate depends upon 
the  ex-ante  real  interest  rate  and  the  expected  long-term  inflation,  factoring  in  an  inflation  risk 
premium.  The  main  problem  for  the  central  bank  is  that,  in  practice,  these  three  components  are 
unobservable. In this respect, the central bank faces a signal extraction problem, which has important 
implications in terms of monetary policy decision-making. I will mention three of them. 
First, aggregate spending decisions are generally viewed as more closely related to long-term [real] 
interest rates. This implies that changes in short-term interest rates, used as the operational target for 
implementing monetary policy, will only affect aggregate spending decisions if they impact long-term 
interest rates. Under this rationale, the term-structure of interest rates and the relationship between 
long-term interest rates and long-term expected inflation becomes central to the design of monetary 
policy. 
Second, inflation expectations may be used by policy makers to gain information about the setting of 
short-term interest rates, whereas changes in the nominal yield curve, on their own are of no use. An 
increase in long-term nominal interest rates may be driven by a rise in the long-term expected inflation 
rate or a rise in the inflation risk premium, but it may also reflect an increase in long-term real interest 
rates, driven by some real factors. The two first movements could justify a change in the monetary 
policy  stance,  once  the  nature  of  the  underlying  shock  and  its  likely  duration  have  been  clearly 
identified, but such a change may be inappropriate in the last case. 
Third, information on long-term inflation expectations can provide monetary authorities with a measure 
of the credibility of their commitment to price stability. 
The existence of a market for inflation-indexed securities may provide central banks with very useful 
information, since it may then enable them to identify whether changes in nominal yields mainly reflect 
changes  in  the  expected  long-term  inflation  rate  or  rather  whether  they  are  due  to  changes  in  real 
yields. If one assumes, for instance, that both the conventional bond market and the inflation-indexed 
bond  market  are  efficient  and  arbitraged  by  economic  agents  so  that  they  incorporate  the  same 
information about the real interest rate, then the difference between the conventional nominal rate and 
the  real  rate  would  provide,  by  factoring  in  an  inflation  risk  premium,  a  measure  of  the  expected 
inflation rate over the same period, known as the “break-even inflation rate”. 
Now, if we had both nominal and indexed bonds across the whole maturity spectrum, up to, say, 30 
years which is the maximum maturity at which inflation-indexed bonds are currently issued, then we 
would be able to pin down market expectations of inflation for all the forecast horizons, up to 30 years, 
as well as forecasts of inflation for each year up to the maximum maturity. So you can easily imagine 
the importance of such information for central banks, information which is, moreover, updated on a 
daily basis. Our staff and also private forecasters are unable to routinely produce inflation forecasts in 
such a detail, at such a frequency and for such horizons! 
As  far  as  the  euro  area  is  concerned,  the  reliability  of  both  the  inflation-indexed  yield  and  the 
break-even  inflation  rate  is  strengthened  by  the  significant  development  of  the  market  for  indexed 
bonds over the recent years, which accelerated further in 2003 with the arrival of two new government 
issuers: Greece in March and Italy in September. If we take into account the overall euro area inflation 
market,  it  is  now  the  third  biggest  market  in  terms  of  market  capitalisation,  just  behind  the  United 
States and the United Kingdom. However, in 2003, it was not only the fastest growing market in terms 
                                                      
3   See Barr, D.G. and J.Y. Campbell (1996) : “Inflation, Real Interest Rates and the Bond market: A study of UK Nominal and 
Index-linket Government Bond Prices”, NBER Working Paper, # 5821, November. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
of issuance but also the largest and most liquid inflation derivatives market, characterised by both the 
broadest range of products (government bonds, agency bonds, inflation swaps, etc.) and the largest 
number of frequent issuers (France, Italy, Greece, CADES, CNA, etc.). 
What has the Eurosystem learned to date from inflation-indexed securities? First, since the inception 
of the euro, long-term expected inflation, i.e. the break-even inflation rate, as derived from the French 
OAT indexed bond and the French OATei - indexed on the euro area HICP - has been broadly stable 
in a range of 1,7%-1,9%, i.e. broadly in line with the ECB’s definition of price stability, a year-on year 
increase  of  the  euro  area  HICP  close  to,  but  below,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  This  could  be 
interpreted  as  the  sign  of  the  ECB’s  credibility  and  as  an  illustration  of  its  ability  to  anchor  inflation 
expectations  at  a  fairly  low  level,  consistent  with  price  stability.  However,  since  the  third  quarter  of 
2003, the break-even inflation rate has hovered at around 2.2 - 2.3%, breaking the ceiling defined by 
the Governing council of the ECB. In a context of rising oil prices and soaring commodity prices, this 
may  reflect  concerns  about  future  price  developments  in  the  euro  area  and  thus  accelerating 
inflationary  expectations.  However,  there  is  also  anecdotal  evidence  that  the  demand  for  indexed 
government bonds by insurance companies, pension and hedge funds, has increased slightly over the 
recent months, pushing the prices of indexed bonds up and, consequently, their real yields down. As a 
result,  break-even  inflation  rates  may  have  been  distorted  upward,  for  some  reasons  not  directly 
related to changes in expected inflation. 
This  latter  point  raises  the  issue  of  the  drawbacks  and  potential  biases  affecting  indexed  yields, 
increasing the difficulty to interpret correctly and decipher the movement behind the changes in the 
nominal yields. I will constitute the second point to my presentation. 
The biases in the break-even inflation rate. 
2.  
The  break-even  inflation  rate  may  be  a  good  measure  of  expected  inflation.  It  should  however  be 
cautiously interpreted and analysed as it may also be severely biased. 
When I previously introduced the concept of the break-even inflation rate, I assumed both efficient and 
arbitraged markets but also perfect foresights and no risk or liquidity premia. Since this seems unlikely 
to hold in practice, we should then consider that the break-even inflation rate is only related to, but not 
equal to, inflation expectations. Let me briefly outline some of the biases we need to take into account 
in the context of our economic and financial assessment. For the sake of simplicity, I will distinguish 
two main categories of biases: technical biases and institutional biases, leaving aside the treatment of 
risk aversion considerations, which tends to introduce an upward bias in the break-even inflation rate. 
Technical biases 
The compound and the convexity biases: the definition of the break-even rate as the difference of the 
conventional nominal bond yield and the inflation - indexed bond yield is a first order approximation 
which does not take into account interest rate compounding. Consequently, the break-even rate is an 
upward  biased  estimator  of  expected  inflation  -  provided  that  inflation  expectations  are  positive4. 
Interest rate compounding has also another implication as it implies that bond prices will respond in an 
asymmetric manner to changes in the yield: indeed, bond prices are more sensitive to a fall in yields 
than  to  an  increase  in  yield,  and  therefore,  will  also  rise  when  the  volatility  of  the  yield  increases, 
therefore pushing down the forward rates5. The net convexity adjustment will therefore bias the break-
even inflation rate either upward (the most likely) or downward. 
The  inflation  lag:  by  construction,  bond  cash  flows  can  not  be  adjusted  instantaneously  for  actual 
inflation. This implies that the break-even inflation rate includes another bias reflecting the discrepancy 
between the lagged and the contemporaneous inflation rate. For instance, in the case of the French 
indexed bonds, the lag length is limited to three months, equivalent to that of the US TIPS and the 
Canadian  indexed  government  bond,  but  slightly  below  that  of  the  UK  where  an  eight-month  lag  is 
                                                      
4   To give a magnitude order, a real rate of 4% and an expected inflation rate of 2% would generate a compound bias of 8 
basis point, which is in practice fairly small. 
5   This phenomenon is known as the convexity bias. It grows with maturity, as compounding increases, and may vary across 
time, as volatility in the yield is also likely to change over time. There is no reason to think that the convexity adjustment is 
the same for the conventional forward curve and for the indexed forward curve. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 3
required. As a consequence, because the real yield is distorted, the information content of the break-
even  inflation  rate  will  also  be  affected.  According  to  some  empirical  research6,  this  bias  is  also 
estimated to be fairly small, at around 5 basis points. 
Liquidity bias: Finally, to conclude with this non exhaustive review of technical biases, one should also 
mention that, in general, indexed bonds are relatively less liquid than conventional government bonds. 
Holding periods seem to be longer for the former and this is also reflected in the relatively low trading 
volumes of inflation-indexed bonds. The existence of a liquidity premium results in an understatement 
of the level of expected inflation derived from the break-even inflation rate. Some in-house research 
suggests this bias to be at around 5 to 15 basis points. 
Besides these technical biases, institutional arrangements may also introduce distortions in real yields, 
which impact in turn on the break-even inflation rate. I will mention two examples. 
Institutional biases 
The  tax  bias:  the  main  source  of  distortion  is  probably  related  to  taxation.  Investors  are  primarily 
interested  in  real  net-of-tax  cash  flows,  which  implies  that  differences  in  tax  treatment  between 
conventional  and  indexed  bonds  will  influence  their  relative  prices  and  therefore  the  break-even 
inflation  rate.  In  the  French  case,  where  inflation  compensation  gains  and  interest  rate  income  are 
equally taxed, this bias is generally considered as relatively small - less than 10 basis points. But even 
if it is small, it constitutes another upward distortion in the break-even. 
New regulations - supply and demand factors: as I mentioned, earlier, and I will conclude this section 
by this point, the French OATi, which so far has been the main inflation-indexed indicator used by the 
ECB in its economic and financial assessment, has been distorted by a significant upward demand 
shift which can be, to a certain extent, attributed to the adoption by the French Banking and Finance 
Regulation Committee (CRBF) of a new regulation on Livret A (passbook saving vehicle), aiming at 
linking this savings account partly to inflation . Anecdotal evidence suggests that a surge in demand 
for  OATi  originated  from  banks,  which  tried  to  hedge  against  this  new  regulation.  An  insufficient 
outstanding amount of French inflation linkers relative to the overall demand for hedging purposes led 
to an upward pressure on the prices of other euro area linkers (Greece and Italy). 
To conclude this point, all these biases are likely to be small, but they add together, potentially in a 
non-systematic  way.  They  are  also  likely  to  vary  over  time.  It  is  therefore  difficult  to  smooth  out  all 
these noises to get a good proxy of inflation expectations over the medium to long-term. 
Two main lessons may be drawn from the existence of the various premia and biases affecting the 
break-even inflation rates. First, it may be more informative to focus on the changes in the break-even 
rates rather than on their levels. This is however at a cost since the level by itself conveys relevant 
information for the central bank. Second, break-even inflation rate may provide interesting information 
as  regards  long-term  inflation  expectations,  although  it  is  necessary  to  cross-check  against  other 
inflation expectations’ measures. This leads me to my third and final point. 
Other useful indicators of expected inflation 
3. 
Inflation-indexed  bonds  are  not  the  sole  financial  instrument  to  provide  information  on  long-term 
expectations  of  inflation,  as  similar  information  can  be  extracted  from  inflation-linked  swaps.  The 
market for inflation-linked swaps has developed rapidly since 2002 in the euro area. Companies with 
revenues linked to inflation may use this market to hedge against the perspective of low inflation while 
companies  with  liabilities  linked  to  inflation  may  use  it  to  hedge  against  the  risks  of  high  inflation. 
Compared to inflation-indexed bonds, they provide a wider maturity spectrum for short and medium 
horizons. However, they are affected by the same biases, in particular the inflation risk and liquidity 
premia.  This  tool,  however,  usefully  complements  inflation-indexed  bonds  in  the  Eurosystem’s 
information set7 and, so far, the information provided by this new financial instrument has been broadly 
                                                      
6   See  F.  Alonso,  R.  Blanco  and  A.  del  Rio:  “Estimating  Inflation  Expectations  Using  French  Government  inflation-indexed 
bonds”, Banco de Espana, Documento  de Trabajo, n° 0111, 2001. 
7   See  for  instance  the  box  entitled  “Deriving  euro  area  inflation  expectations  from  inflation-linked  swaps”,  ECB  monthly 
Bulletin, September 2003. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2004
in  line  with  the  information  derived  from  indexed  bonds,  suggesting  an  average  ten-year  expected 
inflation rate of around 2%. 
In addition to financial indicators, central banks, and the ECB in particular, also rely heavily on surveys 
to  extract  relevant  information  as  regards  long-term  inflation  expectations.  I  will  limit  myself  to  two 
examples: 
The first is the quarterly survey that has been carried out by the ECB since 1999, in which information 
is  gathered  from  professional  forecasters.  In  particular,  it  surveys  inflation  expectations  over  the 
medium term, at a 4-year horizon, and delivers very useful information since each forecaster is asked 
about his own probability distribution of inflation over the forecast horizon. It might then be completed 
by other surveys looking at longer horizons, such as the Consensus Forecast for instance. According 
to these surveys, medium to long-term expectations have proven remarkably stable in the euro area, 
standing at a level around 1.8 - 1.9%, in spite of short-term inflation dynamics being adversely affected 
by a series of sizeable supply shocks that have impacted the economy since 2000. 
Another  very  useful  kind  of  survey  is  the  European  Commission’s  harmonised  survey  of  price 
expectations  of  individual  households,  which  completes  the  set  of  alternative  measures  of  inflation 
expectations. Here, households are asked whether they expect price over the next 12 months to rise 
more  or  less  rapidly  than  over  the  past  12  months.  The  time  horizon  here  is  very  short  and,  since 
2000, the survey has delivered more worrisome results. A divergence has actually emerged, both in 
France  and  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  between  actual  inflation  and  inflation  as  perceived  by 
households.  The  proportion  of  households  that  feel  that  prices  have  risen  sharply  has  substantially 
increased, without any correlation to actual developments in the general price level. 
Central banks must also avoid misperception and for that reason, they should not rely on a limited set 
of indicators but should use a comprehensive and rigorous analysis aimed at picturing the economy as 
a complex and permanently evolving system. Central banks also have the difficult task of identifying 
shocks  hitting  the  economy  and  of  addressing  them  appropriately  by  assessing  their  potential 
implications  in  terms  of  risks  to  price  stability.  Model  analysis,  monetary  analysis,  model  -based 
forecasts are additional useful tools employed in this context. This is precisely the approach taken by 
the  ECB,  which  developed  its  two-pillar-strategy  in  order  to  help  to  sort  through  the  wealth  of 
potentially conflicting statistics. 
Conclusion 
Let me now briefly conclude my remarks by asking the question: what information do we really get 
from asset prices, and particularly from inflation - indexed securities? 
Financial markets do indeed play a critical role in the process of setting monetary policy. In effect, the 
influence  of  monetary  policy  on  the  real  economy  and  ultimately  on  prices  is  largely  transmitted 
through asset prices. As pointed out by Blinder, the economic activity is not directly affected by the 
changes in the key policy rates, but rather by long-term interest rates and, where relevant, through 
wealth  effects.  In  short,  monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  through  its  interaction  with  long-term 
expectations, which in turns affect asset prices and then economic activity and inflation. 
But central banks also rely on financial markets for information to help explain their monetary policy 
decisions. This points out to a sort of “circularity problem” whereby it is unclear how informative the 
information  extracted  from  asset  prices  actually  is.  Consider  for  instance  the  stable  break-even 
inflation  rate  at  a  level  close  to  but  below  2%  in  the  euro  area.  Then  suppose  that,  as  sometimes 
observed on other financial markets -as the money market for instance- for any reason, the market for 
indexed-bonds  is  indeterminate  in  the  sense  that  the  market  is  unable  on  its  own  to  determine  an 
ex-ante equilibrium price. Thanks to the existence of a central bank, an equilibrium price may however 
be set if issuers or price-makers believe the central bank will commit to price stability as defined by a 
year-on-year  increase  of  a  consumer  price  index  at  around  2%  over  the  medium  run.  The 
indexed-bond  price  will  then  be  set  on  the  basis  of  the  actual  conventional  bond  prices  and  the 
long-term nominal anchor defined by the central bank, factoring in certain margins or premia. 
This clearly indicates the central bank’s credibility, and a stable break-even inflation rate will reflect this 
aspect.  But  what  else  can  we  draw  from  this  information  to  take  a  monetary  policy  decision?  This 
might be another illustration of what some economists have recently named the “credibility paradox”. 
On the one hand, the information variable of the central bank is consistent with its definition of price 
stability:  therefore  no  cause  for  concern.  On  the  other  hand,  whatever  the  underlying  market’s 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 5
dynamics,  economic  agents  are  convinced  the  central  bank  will  ensure  price  stability:  credibility 
matters.  In  such  a  context,  misperception  from  both  sides  can  generate  aggregate  instability, 
characterised by unsustainable market developments and the emergence of financial imbalances. 
This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  central  banks  have  to  make  use  of  the  widest  possible  set  of 
information  variables  to  cope  with  uncertainties.  In  such  a  context,  asset  prices,  inflation  -  indexed 
bonds  play  an  important  role  as  information  variables;  but  one  has  to  bear  in  mind  that  they  are 
endogenous to the monetary policy decisions via the expectations channel. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2004
