Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and cyclical developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  a  meeting 
hosted by Sparebank 1 at the University Center, Svalbard, 22 April 2004. 
The  text  below  may  differ  slightly  from  the  actual  presentation.  The  address  is  based  on  the  assessments 
presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
21 April, Inflation Report 1/04 and on previous speeches.  
The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 In  many  countries,  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  delegated  to  the  central  bank.  In  Norway,  the 
responsibility for interest rate decisions was delegated to Norges Bank in 1986. The mandate for the 
conduct of monetary policy was laid down by the Ministry of Finance in the Regulation on Monetary 
Policy of 29 March 2001.  
The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent over time. The target is symmetrical - it is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low 
as an inflation rate that is too high. The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for 
inflation expectations. It influences their decisions concerning saving, investment, budgets and wages. 
Experience  shows  that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  lower  unemployment  or  stronger 
economic growth and higher inflation. The task of monetary policy is to provide a nominal anchor. The 
inflation target is such an anchor.  
There are several reasons why it is an advantage that inflation is higher than zero:  
• 
The  structure  of  the  economy  evolves  over  time.  Demand  for  labour  with  different 
qualifications  changes.  This  requires  changes  in  relative  wages.  There  are  rigidities  in 
nominal wage growth. Nominal wages do not readily fall. With some inflation, relative wages 
can change without a fall in some nominal wages. There may also be rigidities in the pricing 
of goods and services. Some degree of inflation will thus oil the economic machinery.  
In periods, inflation and economic growth will be low. It is then appropriate for real interest 
rates to be low, or even negative. Nominal interest rates cannot be set below zero. If inflation 
becomes entrenched at a low level or near zero, the interest rate will be less effective as an 
instrument.  
There  are  different  ways  of  measuring  inflation.  The  consumer  price  index  tends  to 
overestimate actual inflation. The most important source of measurement errors is probably 
the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  between changes  in  the  quality  and  price  of  goods.  In  other 
countries, findings show that the consumer price index overestimates actual inflation to the 
order of ½ -1 percentage point.  
  The inflation target represents a framework for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to 
stabilising  output  and  employment.  This  objective  is  also  expressed  in  the  Regulation  on  Monetary 
Policy. If demand for goods and services is high and there is a shortage of labour, there will normally 
be prospects of higher inflation. When interest rates are increased, demand falls and inflation is kept at 
bay. If demand is low and unemployment rises, there will be prospects of lower inflation. The interest 
rate will then be lowered.  
In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour and capital and by the ability to adapt, but 
in  the  short  and  medium  term  monetary  policy  can  also  have  an  impact  on  the  real  economy.  The 
economy grows over time. Output moves in waves. Output will in some periods lie below long-term 
trend  growth  and  in  others  above  trend.  The  difference  between  trend  output  and  actual  output  is 
called the output gap. Stabilising output growth means seeking to maintain actual output near trend.  
We have had pronounced economic cycles in the Norwegian economy. The downturn at the beginning 
of the 1990s was followed by an upturn from 1993. This upturn peaked in 1998. The economy then 
shifted  from  an  upturn  with  high  growth  rates  to  an  expansion  with  lower  growth  but  low 
unemployment,  labour  shortages  in  many  sectors  and  strong  growth  in  labour  costs.  Since  1998, 
output growth has been low. Growth stalled in winter 2002 and was well below capacity in the first half 
of 2003. Growth in the Norwegian economy has since picked up.  
BIS Review 23/2004 
 1
Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of 
considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact 
on inflation and output. The krone fluctuates. This is not surprising because other countries’ currencies 
also  fluctuate.  Exchange  rate  fluctuation  is a  structural  feature of  open  economies  like Norway  that 
have  their  own  currency.  The  Norwegian  krone  does not stand out  as  particularly  unstable.  On  the 
contrary,  in  countries  like  Sweden,  the  UK,  Switzerland,  Australia,  Canada  and  New  Zealand, 
exchange rate fluctuations are as wide - or wider - than in Norway.  
There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. However, a krone 
that is stable - but too strong - also entails costs in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is 
stable  -  but  weak  -  is  a  source  of  high  inflation.  The  capital  outflow  through  the  Petroleum  Fund 
contributes to both curbing the appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability.  
When inflation in Norway is expected to be broadly in line with that of other countries, the exchange 
rate will normally also return to its normal range following periods when the krone has been particularly 
strong or particularly weak. This may provide a basis for stable exchange rate expectations.  
Normally,  the  interest  rate  is  set  with  a  view  to  achieving  inflation  of  2½  per  cent  at  the  two-year 
horizon. Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to variability 
in inflation as well as to variability in output and employment. Monetary policy affects the economy with 
a  lag.  The  choice  of  a  two-year  horizon  is  thus  based  on  striking  a  balance  between  variability  in 
inflation  and  variability  in  output  and  employment,  and  a  perception  of  how  interest  rates  influence 
these variables. If extraordinary conditions prompt Norges Bank to apply a different time horizon than 
two years, the Bank will provide an assessment of this. The same applies if special emphasis is placed 
on developments in financial markets.  
External cyclical developments and events have had considerable implications for developments in the 
Norwegian economy. The international upturn came to a halt in 2000. The bubbles in equity markets 
burst.  Many  years  of  high  investment  had  led  to  excess  capacity  in  some  industries,  and 
unemployment increased. The terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001 put a new damper on economic 
activity. From summer 2002 to spring 2003, a highly unusual accumulation of negative events in the 
global community - accounting scandals, fear of terror, war and disease - put a brake on growth.  
US  policy  rates,  which  were  sharply  reduced  at  the  beginning  of  the  downturn,  have  subsequently 
been reduced further. Interest rates have also remained low in the euro area. In recent weeks, short- 
and long-term rates have moved up somewhat. This primarily reflects increased confidence that the 
recovery in the US will be sustained since the situation in the labour market appears to have improved. 
Both short and long rates, however, are still at historically very low levels among several of our trading 
partners.  
The economic situation in Norway was more favourable compared with the international trend for a 
long period, and wage growth was surprisingly high in 2002. As a result, the interest rate differential 
against  other  countries  was  high.  This  had  an  impact  on  exchange  rate  developments.  In  addition, 
special factors in the global economy led to a stronger krone than might have been expected from the 
higher interest rate differential alone. Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor 
focus  on  stock  returns  feeds  through  to  exchange  rate  movements.  During  periods  of  political  and 
economic unrest, investors may choose individual currencies as a safe haven. In autumn 2002, the 
Norwegian  krone  was  probably  also  perceived  as  a  safe  haven.  Over  the  past  18  months, 
developments in the interest rate differential between Norway and other countries appear to have had 
a  particularly  marked  impact  on  our  currency.  Norwegian  interest  rates  have  been  pushed  down 
towards the level prevailing abroad.  
Through 2003, the interest rate differential has narrowed as a result of monetary policy easing. The 
interest  rate  has  been  reduced  by  5¼  percentage  points  and  is  now  approximately  the  same  as 
among  our  trading  partners.  Through  2003  and  up  to  March  2004,  the  krone  depreciated  by  about 
15 per  cent,  measured  by  the  import-weighted  index  I-44.  Since  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
March, the krone has appreciated again by about 3½ per cent.  
Inflation  has  edged  up,  but  is  still  low.  In  March,  inflation  stood  at  0.3  per  cent.  Apart  from  some 
temporary, technical factors that may together account for 3-4 tenths of a percentage point, three main 
factors have contributed to explaining the substantial deviation from the inflation target:  
• 
First, the global downturn had considerable implications for the impact of interest-rate setting 
in Norway, via the exchange rate and other channels. The strong krone contributed to low 
inflationary pressures. The depreciation in the krone exchange rate since January 2003 has 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2004
not resulted in a significant rise in prices for imported consumer goods, as might have been 
expected. In recent months, however, there have been signs of higher prices for imported 
goods. Clothing prices in particular slowed in March.  
Second,  low  external  inflation  and  rapid  shifts  in  the  international  division  of  labour  have 
resulted  in  a  fall  in  prices  for  imported  goods  and  services.  This  also  applies  when  these 
prices are measured in terms of what Norwegian importers pay in foreign currency.  
The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in 
prices for clothing, footwear and audiovisual equipment. We have nonetheless observed that 
the  fall  in  prices  for  clothing  has  been  somewhat  more  subdued  in  Svalbard  than  on  the 
mainland,  partly  due  to  the  higher  incidence  of  snowscooter  apparel  here.  Rapid 
technological advances have also pushed down prices for audiovisual equipment.  
Third, competition has probably increased in retail trade and other service sectors in Norway 
in  recent  years.  The  establishment  of  new  firms,  changes  in  operating  parameters  and 
rationalisation in a number of industries may have contributed to this.  
   In  the  first  round,  heightened  competition  affects  companies’  profit  margins.  But  enterprises  will 
respond by reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the individual business, but subcontractors 
will  also  be required  to  reduce  their  prices  and enhance  efficiency.  Increased  competition  therefore 
usually  triggers  higher  productivity  growth  in  the  economy.  Low  inflation  may  thus  be  matched  by 
higher productivity.  
In recent years, declining inflation has also been a feature in the other Nordic countries, where some 
of the same factors have played a role.  
Even  though  consumer  prices  have  been  low  and,  in  some  cases,  falling  in  Norway  and  abroad, 
commodity  prices  in  particular  have  shown  a  sharp  increase.  The  price  of  coal,  for  example,  a 
commodity you are well acquainted with, has shown a marked rise over the past year. Although the 
rise in commodity prices measured in US dollars is to some extent the result of the fall in the value of 
the  dollar,  it  also  reflects  an  increase  in  demand  for  commodities,  which  in  turn  is  partly  related  to 
strong output growth in China.  
Prices for domestically produced goods and services are expected to rise in the period to 2005 due to 
higher capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy. At the same time, domestically produced goods 
and services are affected by exchange rate changes, albeit with a longer lag than is the case for prices 
for imported consumer goods.  
Economic developments 
There are clear signs that the global economy has passed the trough. However, while the outlook is 
brighter, price inflation is still low and interest rates are being kept unusually low. Economic growth is 
high again in the US. After a surprisingly long period of weak labour market developments, the latest 
employment  figures  indicate  that  the  situation  may  now  have  been  reversed,  although  there  is  still 
excess  production  capacity  and  very  low  inflation.  It  may  take  some  time  before  interest  rates  are 
increased substantially in the US. Growth in Asia is solid, but a global rise in interest rates is unlikely to 
start there.  
Inflation is higher in the euro area than in the US and approximately in line with the objective defined 
by  the  European  Central  Bank.  In  the  euro  area,  however,  capacity  utilisation  is  very  low, 
unemployment high and the outlook for growth is weaker. Recently, there have also been signs that 
inflationary  pressures  are  moderating.  Against  this  background,  it  will  probably  take  time  before 
interest rates rise markedly in the euro area.  
Interest  rate  expectations  were  continuously  revised  downwards  up  to  March  this  year,  and  an 
increase  towards  a  more  normal  level  was  postponed  in  the  US  and  the  euro  area.  Interest  rates 
abroad have been unusually low for 2½ years, and are likely to remain low for some time to come, 
despite the above-mentioned signs of a somewhat swifter rise. This has been the greatest challenge 
for our monetary policy.  
In  Norway,  output  growth  has  picked  up  after  a  growth  pause.  The  interest  rate  is  an  effective 
instrument.  The  interest  rate  reductions  since  2002  have  contributed  to  the  turnaround  and  the 
economy has experienced a soft landing, following the years of high cost inflation in Norway and the 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 3
cyclical  downturn  in  the  world  economy.  Lower  interest  rates  in  particular  have  contributed  to 
sustaining  growth  in  private  consumption.  Household  demand  will  probably  be  the  most  important 
driving  force  in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  period  ahead.  Against  the  background  of  high  real 
income  growth,  improved  job  security  and  expectations  of  continued  low  interest  rates  ahead, 
household consumption is expected to exhibit strong growth.  
Petroleum investment exhibited brisk growth in 2003. Growth in petroleum investment appears to be 
continuing  in  2004,  but  probably  at  a  slower  rate  than  in  2003.  Low  interest  rates  and  house  price 
inflation imply higher housing investment in the period ahead. Fiscal policy is also stimulating activity.  
The impact of the interest rate decline on private consumption is likely to be stronger this year than in 
2003. It takes time for changes in Norges Bank’s key rate to feed through fully to interest rates for 
households. Norges Bank’s calculations show that if we look at 2003 and 2004 as a whole, it appears 
that the impact of interest rate changes will result in an overall reduction of about NOK 15 billion in 
household net interest expenses before tax. However, due to the increase in household net debt, net 
interest expenses will fall considerably less than this.  
The impact of the interest rate decline also depends on how long interest rates are expected to remain 
low. When the sight deposit rate was reduced last autumn, longer interest rates showed relatively little 
change. The interest rate reductions in December and January, combined with the decline in inflation, 
have had a stronger impact on long-term interest rates. This indicates that financial market participants 
expect interest rates to remain low for a longer period. The rise in inflation from February to March, 
however, gave rise to somewhat higher interest rate expectations and a stronger krone exchange rate.  
The outlook for the business sector is brighter now. The fall in the value of the krone over the past 
year has strengthened Norwegian business and industry. The business sector is, however, still feeling 
the  effects  of  the  sharp  rise  in  labour  costs  over  a  period  of  several  years.  Relative  labour  costs 
measured in a common currency are in line with the level prevailing in 1990, but approximately 10 per 
cent  higher  than  in  the  mid-1990s.  The  internationally  exposed  sector  has  been  scaled  back. 
Companies that are still in operation may be in a better position to cope with the high wage level.  
In 2003, employment and investment both fell, although investment picked up somewhat towards the 
end of the year. Efficiency-enhancing measures are expected to continue to characterise the business 
sector in 2004. This will curb demand for labour and investment growth this year.  
Both in Northern Norway and in the rest of the country, the situation varies across business sectors. 
Distributive trades and enterprises supplying services to households are expanding as a result of high 
growth  in  private  consumption.  Production  for  the  corporate  market  fell  through  2003.  Demand  for 
services in this market segment will pick up in pace with increased output in manufacturing and other 
industries.  
Strong  competition  has  resulted  in  substantial  restructuring.  In  Norway  and  other  countries, 
manufacturing  production  is  being  moved  to  countries  with  lower  costs.  This  may  continue.  EU 
enlargement, with 10 new members from 1 May, may also increase competition in some industries, 
particularly in the service sector. Public procurement is subject to EU-wide tendering. This may imply 
heightened competition for the service sector in Norway and lead to further efficiency measures.  
Our  regional  network  reports  that  demand  growth  is  high  in  the  construction  industry  in  Northern 
Norway, primarily fuelled by public investment and the Snøhvit oil field project. Similarly, in Western 
Norway  investment  in  shore-based  facilities  has  generated  a  positive  impetus  to  the  construction 
industry. Activity in 2003 in the rest of the country has been held up by public investment projects. 
Information from our regional network indicates that construction activity has picked up markedly in 
most regions.  
In recent year, commercial property investment has accounted for more than a third of total investment 
in services and distributive trades. The large investments in this sector in the latter half of the 1990s 
has led to a high vacancy rate. Statistics Norway’s new price index for office and commercial property 
shows that in Norway as a whole, prices peaked in the first half of 2001 and have since fallen by over 
9 per cent up to end-June 2003. This situation is likely to curb overall investment growth in the years 
ahead.  
In  2004,  many  companies  will  probably  realise  the  gains  provided  by  the  efficiency  measures  that 
have  been  implemented.  Continued  brisk  growth  in  household  demand  is  expected  to  boost 
investment  activity  in  2005  and  2006.  Petroleum  investment  will  also  increase  as  a  result  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 23/2004
development of onshore and offshore infrastructure in order to produce gas from the Ormen Lange 
field.  
At the end of January and beginning of February, our contacts in Region North reported rising demand 
and  output  for  most  industries  since  autumn  2003.  There  are  prospects  of  strong  growth  in  all 
industries except manufacturing for the domestic market. The export industry, however, reported that 
demand growth is moderate. Restructuring has contributed to growth in the fisheries. High activity in 
the metals industry is also contributing to increased activity among enterprises providing services to 
this industry. For the construction industry, demand growth is high. Retail trade continues to show high 
growth in activity. Developments in the service sector are also positive.  
Substantial  growth  in  investment,  however,  is  not  expected.  Only  the  public  sector,  retail  trade  and 
other services are planning to invest somewhat more compared with last autumn.  
Employment in Northern Norway does not seem to be on the rise in the private or public sectors, with 
the  exception  of  the  construction  industry.  Firms  generally  report  that  they  have  considerable  idle 
capacity  and  that  they  are  continuing to  rationalise  operations.  At  the  same time,  selling prices are 
rising  moderately  in  the  export  industry  and  services,  but  falling  slightly  in  manufacturing  for  the 
domestic  market.  Strong  competitive  pressures  provide  limited  scope  for  price  adjustments.  This 
applies  for  example  to  transport  and  logistics  firms,  which  are  expecting  further  pressure  on  prices 
when the EU enlargement on 1 May makes it easier for foreign competitors to enter the market. Some 
equipment  suppliers,  however,  announced  substantial  price  rises  for  some  intermediate  goods. 
Profitability is increasing moderately in all sectors except manufacturing.  
One  third  of  the  labour  force  in  Norway  is  employed  in  the  public  sector.  In  Northern  Norway,  this 
proportion is closer to 45 per cent. The primary industries are important for the counties in Northern 
Norway, especially because of the abundant fish resources in coastal areas. A large part of the fishing 
industry is export-oriented and is increasingly competing with low-cost countries. These industries will 
be vulnerable when the rise in domestic costs is high.  
There are wide regional variations in unemployment. At end-February, an average of 4.5 per cent of 
the  labour  force  in  the  three  northernmost  counties  was  registered  as  unemployed.  This  is  slightly 
higher  than  the  national  average  of  3.9  per  cent.  Even  though  the  region  has  somewhat  higher 
unemployment  than  the  national  average,  the  rise  in  unemployment  in  Northern  Norway  has  been 
relatively low in the last year. Finnmark is one of the four counties in Norway to record the sharpest fall 
in unemployment over the past year.  
This snapshot report on the current situation in this part of the country and similar reports from the 
other regions provide information that is important to interest-rate setting.  
The labour market has improved. The number of persons employed in Norway began to increase in 
summer 2003 and unemployment stabilised. Employment in distributive trades has increased. There 
are also signs that employment is rising in service sectors such as education, the public sector and 
health  and  social  services,  from  the  weak  levels  recorded  in  the  first  six  months  of  last  year. 
Manufacturing  employment  remained  well  below  the  level  one  year  earlier  in  the  fourth  quarter  of 
2003,  but  is  falling  at  a  slower  pace.  Unemployment  has  been  fairly  stable.  Adjusted  for  seasonal 
variations, LFS unemployment stood at 4.4 per cent of the labour force in January.  
Growth in household demand, petroleum investment and increased activity in the business sector are 
paving  the  way  for  a  rise  in  employment  in  the  period  ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  intensified 
competition  and  continued  rationalisation  in  the  business  sector  may  have  a  dampening  impact  on 
labour demand. Employment growth is projected to be fairly moderate this year in relation to growth in 
demand and output. Only a slight decrease in unemployment is projected for 2004. Unemployment is 
projected to edge down in 2005 and 2006.  
After several years of high wage growth, pay increases in last year’s settlement were more moderate. 
Annual wage growth was nonetheless 4½ per cent as substantial increases with effect from 2003 were 
awarded in the 2002 main wage settlement. Wage growth is projected to decline to 3¾ per cent this 
year. The labour market appears to be improving somewhat more rapidly than expected previously. In 
isolation, this may contribute to pushing up wage growth relative to previous projections. The effect is, 
however, expected to be more than offset by the prospects of very low inflation this year. In 2005 and 
2006, wage growth is projected to increase as a result of a tighter labour market.  
In connection with the 2004 wage settlement, the Government has stated that proposals concerning 
employment-based  pensions  will  be  put  forward  this  year,  including  proposals  for  certain  minimum 
BIS Review 23/2004 
 5
standards  that  will  be  apply  to  all  employees  that  are  not  already  included  in  more  favourable 
schemes. The proposal implies that many private sector employees that are not currently covered by a 
company  pension  scheme  will  be  included  in  the  proposed  scheme.  The  proportion  of  employees 
without any employment-based pension is greatest in retail trade, the hotel and restaurant sector and 
the construction industry.  
Financial stability 
Developments in real economic variables are mirrored in credit markets. In recent years, household 
income  has  shown  solid  growth,  and  household  confidence  has  been  high.  However,  corporate 
earnings have been low, and until recently enterprises have primarily focused on enhancing efficiency.  
Credit  developments  are  giving  ambiguous  signals  to  our  interest-rate  setting. Growth  in  household 
borrowing  is  high,  but  enterprises  have  reduced  debt.  The  change  in  the  breakdown  of  credit  may 
have been amplified by banks’ increased eagerness to extend credit to households after a period of 
losses on loans to the business sector. Some reports from our regional network indicate that are some 
liquidity constraints for the business sector in some areas. According to reports from Northern Norway, 
banks  seem  to  have  become  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to  the  business  sector.  Banks  are 
requiring higher levels of capital and earning capacity. Total credit is expanding broadly in line with 
normal growth in nominal GDP.  
Developments in credit to enterprises shadow developments in their investments. Low credit growth 
indicates that corporate investment in the mainland economy has still not picked up even though there 
seem to be signs that the decline is levelling out somewhat. Norwegian households generally finance 
their  mortgages  at  an  interest  rate  that  follows  the  short-term  money  market  rate.  Floating  interest 
rates  tend  to  vary  widely  over  time.  The  interest  rate  level  is  very  low  at  present,  and  long-term 
investments cannot rely on this interest rate spanning the life of a housing loan. According to money 
market expectations, the interest rate will eventually stabilise around 5½ per cent. This is consistent 
with an inflation target of 2½ per cent and a long-term real interest rate in line with the level abroad. 
This  interest  rate,  with  a  mark-up  for  banks’  margins,  provides  a  more  realistic  expression  of  the 
interest rate level that will apply over the loan’s life than the floating interest rate prevailing today.  
When  the  interest  rate  is  abnormally  low,  it  can  be  particularly  challenging  for  borrowers  to  assess 
their  debt-servicing  capacity  over  time.  Such  a  low  interest  rate  also  places  particular  demands  on 
banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers. But experience has shown that the underlying 
cause  of  loan  defaults  can  be  overly  optimistic  assessments  on  the  part  of  both  the  lender  and 
borrower.  
House prices and developments in household credit influence consumption and housing investment. 
We seek to take account of these indirect effects in our interest-rate setting.  
Household debt has increased sharply over the past decade. Developments in debt in the 1990s may 
partly be interpreted as a delayed adaptation to the deregulation of the housing and credit markets in 
the 1980s after many households experienced financial difficulties following the relaxation. We have 
limited scope for restraining structural changes that occur when households increase their debt over 
several years to invest in housing and other property and assets. An interest rate that would effectively 
restrain these structural adjustments would also have an adverse impact on output and employment. 
Debt accumulation is also affected by the business cycle and interest rate changes.  
Household credit demand is closely linked to developments in the housing market. Home-owners with 
dwellings that have risen in value can make use of the opportunity to take up new mortgage-secured 
loans, freeing up home equity to finance consumption and other investments.  
House prices in Norway have on average risen by 9 per cent annually between 1995 and 2002. House 
prices have also increased considerably in other countries. A sharp and sustained rise in house prices 
might contribute to high credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a portion of the 
housing stock is sold each year, there will for a long period be some dwellings that are sold at a higher 
price  than  when  they  were  last  sold.  This  has  contributed  to  sustaining  the  high  level  of  growth  in 
credit to households in Norway even after the rise in house prices moderated through 2002 and into 
2003.  
It is easiest to sell dwellings in the largest cities and some specific areas are particularly attractive. 
Residential property is now a fairly liquid and attractive investment. A persistently high rate of increase 
in  house  prices  may  in  isolation  engender  expectations  of  a  further  rise  and  may  thus  prove  to  be 
6 
 BIS Review 23/2004
self-reinforcing  for  a  period.  Moreover,  there  now  seems  to  be  a  tendency  towards  investing  in 
property  and  taking  up  loans  at  a  more  mature  age  so  that  younger  generations  not  only  inherit 
dwellings, but debt as well. Both debt and wealth are on the rise for these more mature age groups.  
Sharp increases in asset prices and debt accumulation may pose a risk to economic stability. With a 
view to mitigating this risk, it will be appropriate in some situations to apply a somewhat longer time 
horizon than the usual two years to attain the inflation target. At present, however, debt accumulation 
is high only in the household sector. There is little borrowing activity in the enterprise sector. House 
prices are rising, but prices for office space are stable.  
Output and employment are at trend level. Unemployment is on a par with the average for the 1990s, 
wage growth is consistent with the inflation target, credit growth is close to long-term nominal GDP 
growth, relative labour costs and prices are approximately at the same level as the average for the 
past 30 years and the interest rate differential is close to zero.  
But inflation is low, as a result of the lagged effects of the strong krone, low import prices and high 
productivity growth.  
The  analyses  in  the  inflation  report  indicate  that  inflation  will  remain  low  this  year,  picking  up 
thereafter.  The  krone  depreciation  since  January  2003  is  expected  to  push  up  prices  for  imported 
consumer goods. Overall, mainland GDP growth is projected to pick up markedly this year and remain 
relatively high in 2005 and 2006. GDP growth is projected to reach 3¼ per cent in 2004 and 2005, 
followed by a moderate decline to 2¾ per cent in 2006. This rise in overall output will then result in a 
gradual pickup in capacity utilisation in the years ahead.  
Projections are based on the technical assumption that the interest rate will move in line with forward 
rates (4 March 2004). The assumption implies that the interest rate will be somewhat lower in the near 
term, but that it will rise gradually from the summer, largely in parallel with the increase in interest rates 
among our trading partners. The krone is assumed to follow the path of the forward exchange rate 
(4 March 2004), which indicates expectations of a fairly stable exchange rate in the period ahead. A 
path  that  is  in  line  with  the  projections  in  Inflation  Report  1/2004  provides  a  reasonable  balance 
between the prospects for reaching the inflation target and stable developments in the real economy.  
The  aim  of  monetary  policy  is  higher  inflation.  When  inflation  is  as  low  as  it  is  at  present,  it  is 
appropriate  to  be  particularly  vigilant  with  regard  to  developments  in  consumer  prices,  although 
consumer  prices  may  show  random  variations  from  one  month  to  the  next.  Later  this  year,  we  will 
receive confirmation of whether consumer prices are rising in line with our projections. When inflation 
increases from a very low level, this will provide a basis for gradually moving towards a more normal 
short-term  interest  rate  level  in  Norway.  This  may  counter  excessive  credit  growth  and  excessive 
pressures on domestic resources in the medium term. Interest rate developments in other countries 
may also have a considerable impact on the krone and hence on Norwegian interest rates.  
Interest  rates  were  left  unchanged  at Norges  Bank’s  Executive Board  meeting  on  21  April  2004.  In 
reaching  its  decision,  the  Executive  Board  had  weighed  the  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  to 
target and stabilising inflation expectations against the risk that output growth may eventually become 
too strong. Furthermore, according to Norges Bank’s assessment, with a sight deposit rate of 1.75 per 
cent at present, the probability that inflation two years ahead will be lower than 2½ per cent is greater 
than the probability that it will be higher.  
BIS Review 23/2004 
 7
