Jean-Claude Trichet: The international financial architecture - where do we 
stand? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference 
“Dollars, Debt and Deficits - 60 Years after Bretton Woods”, Madrid, 14 June 2004. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Madrid  at  the  invitation  of  the  Banco  de  España  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund.  The  60th  anniversary  of  the  Bretton  Woods  institutions  is  indeed  an 
important opportunity to take stock of key events, developments and issues that have shaped and are 
shaping  the  international  financial  system.  Let  me  thank  the  organisers,  and  especially  our  host 
Jaime Caruana, for setting up a very interesting programme for this conference that encompasses all 
these  key  topics.  Tonight,  I  would  like  to  offer  some  thoughts  on  the  question  “the  international 
financial architecture - where do we stand?” In my remarks, I will first have a short look back at the 
changes to the international architecture over time, before concentrating on reform efforts that have 
been  undertaken  in  four  areas,  namely  the  institutional  setup,  transparency  and  best  practices, 
regulation of financial markets and crisis prevention and resolution.  
Let me briefly look at the changes to the international financial architecture over time. The key 
aim of today’s policy makers has not changed compared to those at the Bretton Woods times - it has 
been,  and  still  is,  global  prosperity  and  stability  -  but  the  environment  in  which  we  are  acting  has 
changed profoundly. The founders of the IMF and the World Bank wanted to create institutions that 
prevent countries from falling back into autarky and protectionism and that help them to raise growth 
and increase stability in a world of fixed exchange rates with still a large degree of capital controls. 
Today we are striving for stability of the international financial system in a world of free capital flows 
with a growing importance of private flows and increasing trade and financial integration. Among the 
major factors that we have to take into account, I would like to mention in particular:  
• 
The financial globalisation phenomenon: capital market liberalisation, both domestically and 
internationally, technological advances and buoyant financial innovations have contributed to 
set up a totally unknown degree of financial globalisation - with great benefits, but also new 
risks.  
The policy responsibility which still lies mainly with sovereign states; thus, the challenge is to 
promote  global  financial  stability  very  largely  through  national  actions  enlightened  and 
co-ordinated through a larger degree of intimate international co-operation.  
A very large consensus on giving the private sector and markets a central role on the one 
hand,  and  relying  upon  sound  public  institutions  to  provide  market  participants  with  the 
appropriate  environment  on  the  other  hand.  This  shift  from  direct  public  involvement  to 
private activities is particular striking when looking at financial flows to emerging markets: in 
the  1980s,  official  flows  were  dominant,  reaching  on  average  over  60%  of  total  flows  to 
emerging markets. By contrast, the 1990s saw a dramatic increase in private flows, which on 
average accounted for around 85% (in the period from 1990 until 2003). Equally striking is 
the  shift  from  bank  loans  to  negotiable  securities  as  the  major  financing  tool  for  the 
developing countries. 
The  integration  of  the  European  Union,  reinforced  with  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  has 
increased the economic, monetary and financial  stability of a region that constitutes today 
the world’s largest trading partner and the second largest economy. The EU has also been 
crucial  in  anchoring  the  transition  process  in  central  and  eastern  Europe,  and  in  fostering 
stability and prosperity in this region.  
   The dynamics of today’s world call for continued adjustment at a global level. New challenges have 
been  added  to  existing  ones,  such  as  poverty  reduction.  New  actors  gained  prominence  on  the 
international scene, with developing and emerging markets becoming progressively full participants in 
the globalised economy. The financial crises of the 1980s and the 1990s, characterised by large and 
sudden  private  financial  flow  reversals,  marked  by  a  very  powerful  contagion  phenomenon  and 
demonstrating some of the potential and actual vulnerabilities of the newly globalised financial system, 
led to an ambitious reform agenda to strengthen the international financial architecture.  
BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
Let me focus on the lessons from the crises in the 1990s and the ensuing work on the international 
financial architecture.  
On the basis of the experience with the Mexican crisis in 1994/95, the G7 summit in Halifax in June 
1995  initiated  work  on  improved  crisis  prevention  and  management.  It  called  for  improved 
transparency,  both  at  the  level  of  individual  countries  and  at  the  IMF,  and  for  strengthened  IMF 
surveillance.  The  Halifax  summit  also  pointed  to  the  importance  of  effective  financial  regulation, 
market-reinforced  prudential  supervision  and  enhanced  international  co-operation  among  regulators 
and supervisors. As for crisis management, concrete proposals were presented in the Rey report to 
G10 Ministers and Governors in May 1996.  
Work  was  stepped  up  in  the  aftermath  of  the  Asian  crises,  which  revealed  further  vulnerabilities  in 
national and international financial systems. But most importantly, the crises in the later 1990s showed 
that the systemic changes in the world’s financial markets required systematic changes in the policy 
framework  that  underlies  the  international  financial system.  Almost  a  decade  later,  we  can say  that 
many of these proposals have been implemented. Let me now focus on four different areas, which I 
consider most important: 
The  first  area  concerns  the  international  institutional  set-up,  which,  in  my  view,  has  been 
strengthened  significantly  since  the  1990s.  The  existing  international  financial  institutions,  in 
particular the IMF, the World Bank and the BIS maintained their central role in the system. But they 
were subject to several changes to sharpen their respective focus, to reinforce their policy advice and 
financial  support,  to  enhance  their  transparency  and  accountability  and  to  strengthen  their 
governance. The Bretton Woods institutions, and particularly the IMF, underwent profound changes to 
adapt to the new environment. In addition, new fora have been created in response to the widening of 
the  number  of  actors  in  the  global  economy  and  the  growing  importance  of  international  financial 
markets. The creation of the G20 in 1999 constituted in my view a decisive and highly welcomed step 
to reflect adequately the newly globalised economy. The G20 has turned into the international forum 
for  appropriate  dialogue  and  consensus  building  between  all  economies  that  have  a  systemic 
influence, whether industrialised, emerging, or in transition. Equally important is the Financial Stability 
Forum,  which  is  the  first  informal  grouping  to  fully  recognise  the  existence  of  a  global  integrated 
economic and financial system. It is also the first forum to set the goal of systemic optimisation of each 
of  the  subcomponents  of  the  system,  whether  it  is  banking  surveillance,  insurance  surveillance, 
securities market control, accounting rules, good practices of public and private sectors, functioning of 
the major market places, governance of the IFIs etc. At the regional level, the European Union has 
established a whole universe of arrangements for co-operation that is constantly being adjusted to its 
changing  needs  and  European  institutions  are  becoming  increasingly  involved  at  the  international 
scene, for instance with the EU-US regulatory dialogue.  
Overall,  improving  the  governance  of  the  international  institutions  and  optimising  the  work  of  the 
informal groupings will always remain a moving target given that these entities permanently will have 
to adapt to a changing environment. However, with the changes introduced in the recent years, the 
foundations of the international financial system have been strengthened considerably.  
The  second  area  I  would  like  to  highlight  regards  the  work  to  enhance  transparency  and 
promote best practices, where significant progress has been achieved in a number of fields. 
Indeed, a wide-spread consensus has developed, which considers reliable and timely information on 
economic and financial data as a precondition for well-functioning markets, since it facilitates better 
risk  assessment  and  management  and  hence  strengthened  market  discipline.  The  IMF’s  special 
standard  for  dissemination  of  economic  and  financial  data  has  become  a  widely  recognised 
benchmark  to  which  a  large  and  increasing  number  of  countries  have  subscribed.  There  is  now  a 
presumption  that  IMF  papers  on  Article  IV  consultations  and  on  Fund  programmes  are  published. 
International codes of good practices have been agreed upon, such as the ones on transparency in 
fiscal policy and on transparency in monetary and financial polices. Moreover, countries’ compliance 
with the 12 most important standards and codes are regularly examined by the IMF and the World 
Bank in so-called ROSCs (Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes), many of which are 
made  publicly  available  and  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  market’s  assessments  of  the  countries 
concerned.1 I consider that the progress made in the field of transparency after the Asian Crisis is one 
                                                      
1   The  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have  recognised  12  standards  as  useful  for  their  operational  work.  These  comprise 
accounting;  auditing;  anti-money  laundering  and  countering  the  financing  of  terrorism  (AML/CFT);  banking  supervision; 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
of the main explanations for the absence of contagion in the emerging world when the Argentine crisis 
erupted. 
Transparency in the private sector is also crucial for well-functioning international financial markets. 
Reliable  and  timely  company  information  are  one  key  element  to  transparency,  which  is  provided 
mainly through financial statements. Recent corporate scandals have again brought to our minds the 
crucial role that accounting standards play in this respect. In this context, I attach great importance to 
the  reform  of  the  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS)  and  the  key  role  of  these  standards  in 
advancing the European single market. The IAS, which will apply to all listed companies in the EU, are 
expected to have a major impact on the European banking system. The banking sector will particularly 
be  affected  through  the  proposed  valuation  rules  for  financial  instruments  and  through  the rules  on 
disclosure.  
The ECB has a strong interest in this debate mainly from its focus on contributing to the maintenance 
of  financial  stability.  Thus,  the  primary  objective  of  this  reform  has  our  full  support  as  it  aims  to 
minimise the gap between the reported information and the true risk profile of a company. I am also 
fully  aware  of  the  complexities  stemming  from  the  interrelation  of  accounting  standards  with  other 
reporting schemes for supervisory and statistical purposes. However, some proposals have given rise 
to  concerns  also  within  the  ECB.  In  particular,  those  proposals  relating  to  an  extensive  use  of  fair 
values raised concerns about the possible adverse implications on the volatility of bank income and, 
eventually, on bank behaviour and on financial stability. As a consequence, the ECB contributed to 
this debate, highlighting the concerns and showing their relevance. The more recent proposals from 
the IASB moved into the direction of limiting the use of fair values for those items that can be reliably 
measured. The revised proposals should help to avoid undesirable consequences such as an artificial 
increase in income volatility. At the current juncture, the ECB is carrying out an exercise to check the 
likely impact of the new standard.  
While these issues apply to all financial markets, the EU faces a particular challenge relating to the 
advancement of the single market. The introduction of harmonised EU rules regarding the setting-up 
of  financial  statements  are  considered  to  be  a  crucial  step  towards  the  further  integration  of  the 
financial  markets  in  the  euro  area  and  the  European  Union.  Indeed,  improved  comparability  of 
disclosed information would facilitate cross-border investment and further market integration. Thus, in 
2002  the  European  Parliament  and  Council  adopted  a  Regulation  requiring  listed  companies  to 
prepare consolidated financial statements in accordance with IAS from 1st January 2005. A specific 
endorsement  process  is  in  place  to  ensure  legal  certainty  and  consistency  with  EU  public  policy 
concerns.  This  process  already  allowed  to  endorse  all  IAS  with  the  exception  of  the  two  standards 
concerning  recognition,  measurement  and  disclosure  of  financial  instruments.  Recently,  in  order  to 
deal  with  the  remaining  controversial  issues,  the  Commission  took  the  initiative  to  establish  a 
high-level  dialogue  between  all  the  constituencies  interested  in  high  quality  accounting  principles.  I 
remain  confident  about  the  positive  impact  of  prudently  implemented  International  Accounting 
Standards on the stability and efficiency of financial markets in the EU. 
The third area relates to the strengthening of financial regulation in industrialised countries. 
Here, let me recall that recent crises exposed weaknesses in the risk management practices on the 
part  of  creditors  and  investors  in  industrial  countries,  pointing  to  the  importance  of  financial  market 
regulation and supervision.  
We  all  are  aware  of  the  importance  of  effective  financial  regulation  and  supervision  to  maintain 
financial stability and protect consumers, also in light of the increased complexity of financial services 
and products. Let me say one word on one important aspect of financial regulation, which is the reform 
of the Basel Capital Accord, coined Basel II. I am convinced that our host, Mr. Caruana, who is the 
chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  could  off  hand  fill  the  evening  by 
elaborating over the main features of this reform. From what I gather, your efforts are bearing fruits 
and  we  may  expect  a  final  text  to  be  hopefully  endorsed  by  the  G10  Governors  and  the  Heads  of 
banking supervisory authorities in the forthcoming weeks.  
The Basel II reform is of key importance. New and bold developments in the banking industry are the 
ultimate reason for engaging in this reform.  
                                                                                                                                                                      
corporate  governance;  data  dissemination;  fiscal  transparency;  insolvency  and  creditor  rights;  insurance  supervision; 
monetary and financial policy transparency; payments systems; and securities regulation. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 3
The ECB has expressed on various occasions its supportive stance to the new framework. The ECB 
was  also  among  the  first  to  point  out  the  possible  macro-financial  implications  of  any  banking 
prudential  scheme,  highlighting  the  potential  procyclical  effects  that  might  be  induced  by  any 
framework relying on a comprehensive real time risk analysis. These concerns have been taken into 
account in the final version of the new framework which aims at being neutral over the cycle. Looking 
ahead, we have to recognise that we stand at the beginning of the road. The success of this reform 
will  crucially  hinge  on  a  sound  implementation  of  the  new  framework  requiring  strong  co-ordinating 
efforts among the supervisory authorities on a global basis. With regard to the EU context, the new 
institutional setting based on the Lamfalussy framework comprising a two-tier structure of regulatory 
and  supervisory  committees  is  expected  to  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  a  more  uniform  and 
flexible  EU  regulation  and  consistent  implementation  resulting  from  convergence  in  supervisory 
practices.  
As fourth and last area, I would like to mention crisis prevention and management. Of course, 
the various efforts I mentioned so far should be conducive to prevent crises from happening. However, 
crisis prevention primarily rests with every single country with strengthened macroeconomic policies 
and financial systems. In that context, the experience of the past decade has highlighted the crucial 
importance of well-functioning domestic rules, regulations and institutions namely the legal framework, 
the  regulatory  system,  the  enforcement  mechanisms,  and  authorities  that  shape  and  permit  the 
optimal functioning of a market economy with its financial markets. This includes, in particular, central 
bank  independence,  rules  for  monetary  policy  and  for  fiscal  policies,  appropriate  supervisory 
frameworks  and  authorities.  There  is  strong  evidence  linking  well-functioning  institutions  and  good 
governance to positive economic and social outcomes. Institutional factors appear to be as important 
as productive factor endowments or any other explanations in determining cross-country differences in 
the overall level of development.  
I  am  confident  that  these  lessons  feed  into  improving  domestic  policy-making  in  emerging  market 
economies, making them more resilient to withstand shocks. The continued efforts to strengthen IMF 
surveillance play also a crucial role in that respect.  
It is clear that crisis prevention must remain the key area of all our efforts. Crises are costly for the 
countries  concerned  and  also  for  the  international  system.  Given  the  increasing  economic  and 
financial importance of emerging markets, major events in these countries are bound to have spill-over 
effects to the rest of the world. Let me underpin this argument with some figures: In the last four years, 
major  emerging  markets  contributed  to  about  half  of  global  real  GDP  growth  (in  PPP  terms), 
accounted for roughly 30% of world exports and received about 20% of global FDI.  
Turning  to  crisis  management,  important  lessons  have  been  learnt.  There  has  been  a  growing 
recognition that more predictability is required on the side of the official sector in order to set the right 
incentives for all the actors involved. Moral hazard concerns and the limited availability of official funds 
also  led  to  increasing  discussions  about  the  appropriate  involvement  of  the  private  sector  in  crisis 
management. Of course, every single crisis is different and hence there is in each case the need to 
find  the  appropriate  balance  in  the  triangle  of  domestic  adjustment,  private  sector  involvement  and 
official support. Therefore, crisis management in practice still has to struggle with the inherent tension 
between rules and clarity on the one hand and discretion and flexibility on the other.  
However, considerable progress has been achieved. First, specific criteria and procedures have been 
set  up  last  year  to  make  exceptional  access  to  Fund  resources  subject  to  rules  and  hence  more 
predictable. We in Europe have been very much in favour of setting such clear rules and clear limits to 
Fund financing in view of the very large financing packages provided to countries in the 1990s. The 
IMF’s debt sustainability analysis will play an important role in that context, since clear limits to official 
financing must be respected especially when a country faces an unsustainable debt burden and hence 
requires a debt restructuring. All IMF shareholders now need to stick by these rules, not least in order 
to provide the right signals to the markets and to avoid the impression that the official sector suffers 
from time inconsistency between the approval of policy principles and their actual implementation.  
Second,  following  Mexico’s  bond  issue  with  Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)  in  February  2003, 
several  emerging  markets  included  CACs  in  bonds issued  under  New  York  law.  More  than  70%  of 
new  bond  issues  since  early  2004  include  CACs.  As  you  probably  know,  no  discernible  impact  on 
borrowing  costs  could  be  detected.  In  order  to  help  making  CACs  a  standard  feature  in  sovereign 
bond  contracts,  the  EU  Member  States  committed  themselves  to  include  CACs  when  issuing  new 
bonds under foreign jurisdiction. All this progress is very remarkable, especially when comparing it to 
the rather sceptical stance many countries and many private sector representatives had taken in the 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2004
past vis-à-vis the recommendations in the Rey report after the Mexican crises. Of course, so far these 
clauses  have  not  been  tested  in  practice  and  it  will  take  some  time  until  CACs  are  included  in  the 
entire stock of debt. 
Finally, work is proceeding on a so-called Code of Good Conduct, which I suggested myself at the IMF 
Annual Meetings in September 2002. Such a Code would define best practices and guidelines for the 
behaviour  of  debtor  countries  and  creditors  regarding  information-sharing,  dialogue  and  close  co-
operation in times of financial distress. While the IMF and the G7 encouraged further work and the 
G20 is closely following the process, at present the official sector confines itself to a catalysing role 
and leaves the floor to the true stakeholders in the process, i.e. emerging market issuers and private 
sector representatives. I understand that currently intensive discussions are taking place on the main 
elements  of  such  a  Code.  I  would  like  to  encourage all  parties  to  be  as  active  and  constructive  as 
possible  in  working  out  what  could  be  a  significant  new  tool  to  prevent  and  help  solving  potential 
crises.  
Closing remarks  
We have the unique chance of living in a world which is full of opportunities, very inspiring and very 
complex,  very  rewarding  and  very  demanding,  full  of  chances  and  of  risks.  We  have  all  been  the 
witness of two incredible transformations of the global economy over the last twenty five years. The 
technological surge which has permitted to compute and to transfer information at practically no cost. 
The globalisation process which aims at connecting all economies and finances of the world within the 
same  market-economy  based  framework.  So  that  goods,  services,  capital,  technologies,  concepts, 
ideas are moving very rapidly or even instantaneously all over the globe, expanding considerably, in 
quality and in quantity, the domain of the Ricardian comparative advantage. The significant surge of 
labour productivity in a number of industrialised economies, the taking off of India, China and a very 
large number of emerging countries, the rapid race of global growth. These are great successes of 
today’s economic world of which global finance, mirror-image of a global economy, is both the emblem 
and  the  very  powerful  tool.  But  there  is  no  economic  success  without  risks.  We  have  been  living 
permanently  in  a  risky  environment  over  the  last  twenty-five  years.  Amongst  many  risks,  we  might 
mention:  the  debt  crisis  during  the  1980s,  starting  with  Poland  and  Mexico  and  spreading  to  Latin 
America, Africa, the Middle East and the Soviet Union; the stock exchange fall in 1987; the Mexican 
crisis in 1994; the bond market crash in 1994; the Asian crisis starting in 1997; the LTCM and Russian 
crises in 1998; the recent stock exchange fall and the collapse of the technology bubble in 2000. We 
have surmounted all these crisis episodes. We have learned a lot and we have improved a lot in these 
occasions.  One  of  my  friends  used  to  say:  “Good  management  comes  out  from  experience  and 
experience comes out from bad management!” I think we are pretty experienced now and I take it that 
thanks to the lessons drawn we have now achieved a level of crisis prevention which is much better. 
But we should never forget that the risks are still there because they are intimately associated with the 
structural transformation of the global economy. This is not, in any respect, a time for complacency. 
If  I  had  to  sum  up  what  should  be  our  today’s  mottos,  I  would  make  the  following  five 
recommendations: 
• 
improvement  of 
the  present  global  economy.  The  constant 
Let us not forget the crucial role of the IFIs, in particular the Bretton Woods institutions, in the 
management  of 
their 
management and instruments is key; 
Let  us  tirelessly  improve  transparency  in  all  fields:  it  is  the  best  recipe  for  avoiding  both 
misallocation of capital and global crisis contagion; 
Let us continuously improve the flexibility of our economies through bold structural reforms. 
Not only because it improves efficiency but also, all the more, because it improves resilience 
in a world where shocks are to be expected; 
Let us reinforce our methodology to ensure that we do not amplify “pro-cyclical” phenomena: 
the  best  envisaged  at  a  local  or  sectoral  level  can  be  the  enemy  of  the  good  at  a  global 
systemic  level.  In  this  respect  such  informal  groupings  like  the  G20  and  the  Financial 
Stability Forum are of the essence;  
Let us join efforts to improve our scientific knowledge of the new world economy. Still today, 
academics  and  practitioners  are  observers  and  actors  within  the  environment  of  largely 
uncharted territories. The more profoundly we understand the functioning of today’s global 
    BIS Review 37/2004 
 5
economy, the more efficient we will be to weather stocks, to prevent crisis, and to pave the 
way for continental and global job creation, steady growth and overall stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 37/2004
