Susan Schmidt Bies: Financial markets and corporate governance 
Remarks by Ms Susan Schmidt Bies, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, at the Economic Club of Memphis dinner, Memphis, 19 February 2004. 
 I am so pleased to be back in Memphis tonight and to speak to the Economic Club of Memphis, an 
organization that I once had the honor to chair. Some of you have asked about my experience as a 
member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and I find that I am dealing with 
familiar  issues  that  I  have  frequently  addressed  in  my  business  career,  but  from  a  different 
perspective. Tonight, I want to touch on one of those areas, corporate governance, but I also want to 
focus  on  the  way  a  central  banker  considers  corporate  governance  issues,  particularly  how  these 
issues affect the performance of financial markets and the functioning of the economic system. 
The  governance  problems  that  have  come  to  light  over  the  past  couple  of  years  have  focused 
attention on the quality of accounting standards, the professionalism of auditors, and the governance 
practices  of  major  companies  and,  most  recently,  of  mutual  funds.  These  scandals  have  been  the 
topic of much debate and have triggered a spate of regulatory reforms. 
However, rather than review the litany of scandals and regulatory responses, I would like to step back 
and  discuss  some  broader,  longer-term  issues  that  affect  accounting  and  corporate  governance. 
Looking  beyond  the  isolated  cases  of  outright  fraud,  I  believe  a  fundamental  problem  is  this:  as 
organizations  have  grown  in  size  and  scope,  innovative  financing  techniques  have  made  it  more 
difficult  for  outside  investors  to understand  a  particular  firm’s  risk  profile  and the  performance  of  its 
various  lines  of  business.  Traditional  accounting  standards  have  not  kept  pace  with  the  risk-
management  tools  employed  by  sophisticated  corporations.  Thus,  more  meaningful  disclosure  of 
firms’  risk-management  positions  and  strategies  is  crucial  for  improving  corporate  transparency  for 
market participants. 
The second issue I want to explore is how corporate governance in the United States is shaped by the 
increasing  importance  of  institutional  investors,  such  as  mutual  funds  and  pension  funds,  as  major 
holders of corporate equity. Two themes will emerge. The first is that institutional investors may play a 
role as delegated monitors in helping to promote efficient governance. The second is that delegated 
monitors are subject to their own governance challenges. Unfortunately, this last point is illustrated all 
too well by the governance problems that have recently surfaced in the U.S. mutual fund industry. 
Financial innovations and disclosure 
Over the past few decades, firms have acquired effective new tools with which to manage financial 
risk.  For  example,  securitization  helps  a  firm  manage  the  risk  of  a  concentrated  exposure  by 
transferring  some  of  that  exposure  outside  the  firm.  By  pooling  assets  and  issuing  marketable 
securities, firms obtain liquidity and reduce funding costs. Of course, moving assets off the balance 
sheet  and  into  special purpose  entities,  with  the  attendant  creation  of  servicing  rights  and high  risk 
residual interests retained by firms, generates its own risks and reduces transparency unless the firm 
takes additional steps to enhance disclosure. 
Several types of securitization have grown rapidly over the past decade. One of the fastest growing 
has been asset-backed commercial paper, which soared from only $16 billion outstanding at the end 
of  1989  to  about  $690  billion  as  of  year-end  2003.  Commercial  mortgage  securitizations  have  also 
proliferated noticeably since the early 1990s. The dollar amount of outstanding securities backed by 
commercial  and  multifamily  mortgages  has  risen  from  $36  billion  at  the  end  of  1989  to  just  under 
$450 billion  as  of  this  past  September.  In  addition,  commercial  banks  and  finance  companies  have 
moved  business  loans  off  their  books  through  the  development  of  collateralized  debt  obligations. 
Securitized business loans amounted to $100 billion in the third quarter of 2003, up from a relatively 
miniscule $2 billion in 1989. 
Firms also use derivatives to manage their risk exposures to price fluctuations in currency, commodity, 
energy, and interest rate markets. More recently, firms have used credit derivatives, a relatively new 
type of derivative that allows them to purchase protection against the risk of loss from the default of a 
given  entity.  By  purchasing  such  protection,  financial  and  nonfinancial  firms  alike  can  reduce  their 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 1
exposures  to  particular  borrowers  or  counterparties.  Credit  derivatives  also  allow  financial  firms  to 
achieve a more diversified credit portfolio by acquiring credit exposure to borrowers with which they do 
not have a lending relationship. For example, European insurance companies reportedly have used 
credit derivatives to acquire exposure to European corporations that, because they rely primarily on 
bank lending, have little publicly traded debt outstanding. 
The  improvements  in  technology,  the  quick  pace  of  financial  innovation,  and  the  evolving  risk-
management  techniques  almost  ensure  that  businesses  will  increasingly  use  almost  limitless 
configurations of products and services and sophisticated financial structures. Accordingly, outsiders 
will have ever more difficulty understanding the risk positions of many large, complex organizations. 
These  developments  represent  significant  challenges  to  standard  setters  and  to  firms.  For  market 
discipline to be effective, accounting standards must evolve to accurately capture these developments. 
Company  managers  must  also  do  their  part,  by  ensuring  that  public  disclosures  clearly  identify  all 
significant  risk  exposures  -  whether  on  or  off  the  balance  sheet  -  and  their  effects  on  the  firm’s 
financial condition and performance, cash flow, and earnings potential. With regard to securitizations, 
derivatives, and other innovative risk transfer instruments, accounting measurement of a company’s 
balance sheet at a point in time is insufficient to convey the full effect of a company’s financial risk 
profile. Therefore, disclosures about how risks are being managed and the underlying basis for values 
and other estimates must be included in financial reports. 
Unlike typical accounting reports, information generated by risk management tends to be oriented less 
to  a  particular  time  and  more  to  a  description  of  the  risks.  To  take  an  example  from  the  world  of 
banking,  in  which  the  discipline  of  risk  management  is  relatively  well  developed,  a  fair  value  report 
might  say  that  the  value  of  a  loan  portfolio  is  $300  million  and  has  dropped  $10  million  from  the 
previous report. However, the bank’s internal risk report would show much more extensive information, 
such as the interest rates on the loans, the credit quality of the underlying assets, and the range of 
values the portfolio would take under alternative future scenarios. Thus, unlike a user of the fair value 
report,  the  user  of  a  risk-management  report  could  determine  whether  the  fall  in  value  was  due  to 
declining credit quality, rising interest rates, or sales or payoffs of loans. Corporate risk officers have 
developed other types of reports that provide information on the extent to which the total return in a 
particular line of business compensates for the line’s comprehensive risk. A reader of such a report 
can determine whether the growing lines of business have risk exposures that tend to offset those in 
other business lines - thereby resulting in lower volatility for the earnings of the corporation as a whole. 
I particularly want to emphasize that disclosure need not be in a standard framework nor exactly the 
same for all organizations. Rather, we should all be insisting that each entity disclose the information 
that its investors need in order to evaluate the entity’s risk profile in the most convenient and useful 
way.  And  we  should  keep  in  mind  that  disclosure  without  context  may  not  be  meaningful. 
Transparency means that the information presented provides an accurate understanding of the entity’s 
transactions. 
To achieve greater transparency, organizations should continue to improve their risk management and 
reporting functions. When they are comfortable with the reliability and consistency of the information in 
these reports, they should begin disclosing this information to the market, perhaps in summary form, 
paying due attention to the need for keeping proprietary business data confidential. Disclosures would 
not only provide more qualitative and quantitative information about the firm’s current risk exposure to 
the market but also help the market assess the quality of the risk oversight and risk appetite of the 
organization. 
Less  than  fully  transparent  disclosures  are  not  limited  to  “complex”  off-balance-sheet  transactions. 
One glaring example is the treatment of expenses associated with defined-benefit pension plans. In 
recent years we have seen how the accounting rules for these plans can produce, quite frankly, some 
very misleading measures of corporate earnings and balance sheets. In effect, firms use expectations 
of  the  long-term  return  on  assets  in  defined-benefit  plans  to  calculate  current-period  pension  costs 
(income) while disguising the volatility actually occurring in the portfolio. At the same time, they use a 
spot  rate  to  discount  the  future  liabilities.  This  accounting  is  reconciled  with  economic  reality  by 
gradual amortization of the discrepancies between the assumed and the actual returns experienced 
on pension assets. As many of you are aware, this smoothing feature can create very large distortions 
between economic reality and the pension-financing cost accruals embedded in the income statement. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2004
Moreover,  a  recent  study  by  Federal  Reserve  staff  indicates  that  “full  disclosure”  of  the  underlying 
details, by itself, does not appear to be a panacea.1 The study adopts the premise that most of what 
investors  need  to  know  about  the  true  pension-financing  costs,  not  the  mixed  attribute  accounting 
costs, can be reflected in two numbers disclosed in the pension footnote. These two numbers are the 
fair market value of pension assets and the present value of outstanding pension liabilities. The study 
finds that these direct measures of pension assets and liabilities tend to be ignored by investors in 
favor  of  the  potentially  misleading  accounting  measures,  and  as  a  result,  the  average  firm  with  a 
defined-benefit  plan  in  2001  may  have  been  5  percent  to  10  percent  overvalued  relative  to  an 
otherwise similar firm without a defined-benefit plan. 
In  general,  the  test  for  useful  disclosure  should  be  the  following  questions:  Are  the  firm  and  its 
accountants providing investors with what is needed to accurately evaluate the financial position of the 
firm and the risks that it faces? And is the information provided in a manner that facilitates accurate 
assessments by investors? Ultimately, improved transparency would benefit corporations by reducing 
uncertainty about the value of their securities, which would lower the cost of, and increase access to, 
market funding. 
In the past few years, capital markets have shown themselves to be a powerful force in disciplining 
and rewarding firms. In the summer of 2002, after corporate bond investors had been badly burned by 
over-leveraged telecommunication firms and a wave of corporate accounting scandals, risk spreads 
on corporate bonds ballooned toward record levels. However, substantial declines in risk spreads of 
corporate bonds over the past year reflect the increased emphasis on corporate governance and audit 
quality and stronger corporate balance sheets accomplished through lengthening the average maturity 
of  liabilities  and  de-leveraging.  These  narrower  debt  spreads  have  significantly  reduced  the  cost  of 
capital  to  firms,  particularly  at  the  lower  end  of  the  credit  quality  spectrum,  where  the  average  risk 
spread  on  junk-rated  corporate  bonds  has  fallen  about  700  basis  points,  to  its  lowest  level  since 
mid-1998. 
Financing patterns and corporate governance 
Besides  the  changes  in  transparency  to  which  I  have  already  alluded,  another  key  development 
affecting corporate governance has been the increasing portion of public equity held by institutional 
investors on behalf of households. According to the Flow of Funds accounts published by the Federal 
Reserve, the combined share of corporate equity managed by mutual funds, pension funds, and life 
insurance companies grew from only 3 percent in 1952 to 48 percent by the third quarter of 2003, the 
latest  period  for  which  data  are  now  available.  As  of  that  date,  pension  funds  held  21  percent  of 
corporate  equity  in  the  United  States.  Mutual  funds  held  another  21  percent,  and  life  insurance 
companies held 6 percent, mainly through separate accounts that, in effect, were mutual funds with 
insurance wrappers. 
These  changes  are  indeed  dramatic,  but  it  is  not  obvious  whether  we  should  be  comforted  or 
concerned  that  an  increasing  share  of  corporate  equity  is  in  the  hands  of  institutional  investors.  A 
primary  issue  is  whether  institutional  investors  are  more  “active  shareholders”  than  individual 
investors.  That  is,  compared  with  individual  investors  -  especially  those  with  large  holdings  -  are 
institutional  investors  more  likely  to  actively  monitor  and  influence  both  management  actions  and 
corporate  governance  mechanisms  at  the  firms  in  which  they  invest?  Shareholder  activism  may 
provide  market  discipline  directly  by  preventing  management  from  pursuing  its  own  interests  at  the 
expense  of  shareholders.  Shareholder  activism  may  also  pave  the  way  for  other  forms  of  market 
discipline  -  such  as  corporate  takeovers  and  changes  in  share  prices  and  funding  costs  -  by 
eliminating management-takeover protections and by inducing greater transparency. 
Unfortunately, whether institutional investors have more or less incentive to be activist shareholders 
than  individual  investors  is  not  clear.  On  the  one  hand,  because  institutional  investors  make  large 
investments  in  companies,  they  will  have  more  bargaining  power  with  company  management  than 
individual  investors  have,  and  they  will  derive  more  benefits  from  mitigating  corporate  malfeasance 
than individual investors will. Among institutional investors, pension funds and insurance companies 
                                                      
1   Julia Coronado and Steve Sharpe, “Did Pension Accounting Contribute to a Stock Market Bubble?” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity, July 2003.   
BIS Review 12/2004 
 3
are thought to benefit the most from shareholder activism because they tend to have relatively long-
term investment horizons. 
On the other hand, managers of index mutual funds may have little interest in shareholder activism 
since they merely adjust their holdings when the mix of the index changes and want only to follow the 
index, not influence it. In addition, mutual funds and pension funds may have conflicts of interest that 
encourage passivity. Activism by a mutual fund complex or a pension fund manager could strain its 
relationships with corporate clients. For example, a fund manager bidding for the management of a 
firm’s 401(k) plan may be reluctant to vote against the board of directors’ proxy recommendations. 
In practice, institutional investors appear to have been relatively passive shareholders, in the sense 
that they have tended to initiate relatively few reform proposals. Before the past twenty years, most 
reform  proposals  were  submitted  by  a  handful  of  individuals  and  religious  groups.  Since  the 
mid-1980s, some institutional investors - mainly large public pension funds and a few union funds - 
have stepped up to the plate and offered their own proposals, but corporate pension funds, mutual 
funds, and insurance companies have remained on the sidelines. 
Appearances can be misleading, however. Some institutional investors are active behind the scenes, 
preferring direct contact with the management of the firms in their portfolios to indirect action through 
reform proposals. Moreover, passive institutional investors may still benefit shareholders as a whole 
by facilitating the building of shareholder coalitions that are initiated by others or by posing a possible 
threat to managers who might fail to act in the interest of shareholders. In addition, there have been 
reports that institutional shareholders are picking up the pace of their activism. For instance, according 
to  the  Investor  Responsibility  Research  Center,  labor  union  funds  initiated  a  record  number  of 
shareholder proposals in 2003. And institutional shareholder activism may soon receive a boost from a 
rule  that  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  has  proposed  to  increase  the  power  of 
institutional  investors.  The  rule  specifies  circumstances  under  which  shareholders  with  at  least 
5 percent  of  outstanding  shares,  held  for  at  least  two  years,  must  be  allowed  by  management  to 
publish  nominations  for  board  members  on  the  company’s  proxy  statement.  However,  increasing 
shareholder  access  to  the  proxy  statement  may  not  be  without  costs.  Some  have  argued  that  the 
democratization of the nomination process may pave the way for special interests to undermine the 
goal of maximizing shareholder value. 
Ultimately, the question of whether institutional investors mitigate corporate governance problems is 
an empirical one. Academic work in this area has not convincingly linked institutional holdings to firm 
performance. But some studies have shown that institutional shareholder activism does appear to be 
motivated by efforts to increase shareholder value, and other studies have confirmed that institutional 
activism is associated with a greater incidence of corporate governance events, such as shareholder 
lawsuits and corporate takeovers. Based on these findings, it would be premature to conclude that the 
rising  share  of  corporate  equity  held  by  institutional  investors  is  clearly  good  in  terms  of  sound 
corporate governance. That said, believing that institutional shareholder activism has benefits and that 
these benefits may help pave the way for market discipline in a broader sense does seem reasonable. 
Corporate governance at mutual funds 
Perhaps  another  reason  for  being  cautious  about  the  benefits  of  institutional  ownership  is  that 
institutional  investors  have  their  own  governance  problems.  As  you  are  no  doubt  aware,  such 
problems  at  mutual  funds  have  been  manifest  in  headlines  over  the  past  year.  I  would  now  like  to 
discuss both the conflicts of interest that lie at the heart of many of the recent mutual fund scandals 
and the responses by investors and regulators. 
Arguably the most fundamental conflict of interest at mutual funds occurs because the compensation 
of mutual fund managers and management companies is generally tied to the value of the assets they 
manage. As a result, managers have an incentive to attract cash, and they may do so by methods 
which  impose  costs  on  long-term  shareholders.  For  example,  as  was  heralded  in  the  press,  a  few 
mutual  fund  firms  allowed  late  traders  to  exploit  stale  share  prices  by  rapidly  trading  mutual  fund 
shares.  Long-term  shareholders  suffered  reduced  investment  returns,  but  management  companies 
collected  extra  fees  on  the  “hot  money”  while  it  was  in  their  funds.  Importantly,  long-term  investors 
were not informed of these deals. 
Another method for attracting cash is to compensate mutual fund brokers for bringing in new money. 
So-called “directed brokerage”, for example, is a means of rewarding a broker who sells mutual fund 
shares  by  giving  the  broker  a  slice  of  the  fund’s  securities  trading  business.  Such  compensation 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2004
arrangements clearly give brokers an incentive to sell these mutual funds regardless of whether the 
funds  are  appropriate  for  their  clients.  What  is  particularly  troubling  about  these  “kick-backed” 
commissions is that most shareholders never learn about them, since portfolio securities trading costs 
are  not  included  in  the  expense  ratios  and  fee  summaries  that  mutual  funds  publish  in  their 
prospectuses and annual reports. 
A related problem is “soft dollars”, which allow mutual fund portfolio managers to pay brokers for a 
bundled combination of trade execution and “research” services. Like directed brokerage costs, soft 
dollars are lumped into the costs of trading portfolio securities and are not disclosed up front in mutual 
fund  fee  summaries,  so  they  are  virtually  invisible  to  most  investors.  The  definition  of  soft-dollar 
research is quite broad, so an investment adviser can purchase Wall Street Journal subscriptions and 
Bloomberg  accounts  with  soft  dollars,  without  reporting  these  costs  to  shareholders.  In  short,  soft-
dollar  arrangements  are  ripe  for  abuse,  and  the  SEC  is  now  considering  whether  to  impose  new 
restrictions on their use and to require more meaningful disclosure of their cost to investors. 
Of course, mutual fund managers are not the only ones to blame for the mutual fund scandals. Late 
trading, which illegally diluted the returns of long-term investors in mutual funds, was accomplished 
primarily with the help of brokers and intermediaries. So we must keep in mind that the problems and 
their solutions involve more than just the firms that operate mutual funds. 
Not surprisingly, the breadth of the scandal and the cost to investors has led many to reassess the 
benefits of owning mutual funds. One-third of respondents to a recent Gallup survey indicated that the 
scandal had made them less likely to invest in mutual funds, and three-quarters said they would pull 
assets  out  of  a  mutual  fund  complex  that  admitted  to  wrongdoing.  The  scandal  has  also  affected 
institutional investors, such as pension-fund sponsors, whose fiduciary duties require them to assess 
whether a particular investment is prudent and in the interest of plan participants and beneficiaries. 
Both  retail  and  institutional  investors  have  pulled  back  sharply  from  some  investment  management 
companies where abuses occurred. Yet, mutual fund investors have shown little, if any, aggregate net 
reaction, perhaps because investors pulled cash out of funds with problems and reinvested it in other 
mutual  funds.  In  the  three  months  before  September,  when  the  New  York  Attorney  General  first 
publicly described the trading abuses, $56 billion on net was invested in long-term mutual funds. Net 
investment actually increased in the next three months, to $59 billion. 
Why didn’t the scandal cause a large pullback from the mutual fund industry? The recent strength of 
the  stock  market  is  part  of  the  explanation.  And  to  be  sure,  many  mutual  funds  have  remained 
untainted  by  the  scandal,  and  some  of  them  received  a  disproportionate  share  of  the  new  cash 
invested  in mutual  funds  in recent months.  But  mutual  funds  have  maintained  their position  in  U.S. 
families’ portfolios primarily because they continue to offer low-cost access to highly liquid, diversified 
portfolios. The lasting importance of mutual funds for so many U.S. households makes it all the more 
pressing that the problems arising from these conflicts of interest be addressed. 
Addressing these problems, however, is proving to be a difficult task. Each month the scope of the 
scandal seems to grow. The Wall Street Journal’s “Mutual Fund Scandal Scorecard” now lists sixteen 
mutual  fund  complexes,  nine  brokerage  firms,  three  hedge  funds,  and  a  bank.  As  the  roster  has 
expanded and new forms of malfeasance have come to light, the list of suggested reforms has itself 
become rather lengthy. 
Consider first the reforms that are intended to combat market timing of mutual funds. Ironically, the 
scandal  headlines  have  publicized  the  profitability  of  market  timing,  so  rule  changes  are  urgently 
needed  to  prevent  additional  dilution.  One  interesting  proposal  would  be  to  allow  mutual  funds  to 
adopt,  voluntarily,  a  delayed-pricing  rule,  under  which  transactions  today  would  receive  tomorrow’s 
market-close  prices.  Long-term  investors  who  wish  to  avoid  market-timing  dilution  could  purchase 
shares of delayed-pricing funds, and investors who want same-day pricing could purchase shares of 
funds that price by current rules. 
Other reforms are aimed at strengthening governance structures. The SEC recently adopted new rules 
requiring  each  mutual  fund  to  adopt  formal compliance procedures  and  to  have  a  chief compliance 
officer  who  reports  directly  to  the  fund’s  independent  directors.  By  centralizing  the  responsibility  for 
compliance in one officer’s hands, the rules should improve mutual funds’ internal controls and give 
shareholders’ interests an authoritative voice within the management company. I hope that measures 
like this will end some of the more egregious breakdowns of internal controls at mutual funds, such as 
the situations in which marketing departments overruled portfolio managers in allowing late trades of 
mutual funds. 
BIS Review 12/2004 
 5
Proposed rules mandating greater strength and independence for mutual fund boards might also give 
greater  weight  to  shareholders’  interests  in  mutual  fund  decision-making.  But  it  is  worth  noting  that 
governance reforms alone may not accomplish much. One mutual fund family, for example, has an 
independent  chairman  and  a  board  that  is  80  percent  independent.  Yet  this  firm  is  alleged  to  have 
tolerated some of the industry’s worst abuses. 
The transparency of mutual funds is also being addressed. Recent SEC and congressional proposals 
would require mutual funds to disclose their fees in dollars, explain in writing why fees are reasonable, 
report the costs incurred to trade portfolio securities, and disclose policies on handling market timers. 
And a recent reform proposal published by the SEC only a few weeks ago would mandate the type 
and format of disclosures to clients that a broker would need to make about the compensation he or 
she would receive for selling a particular mutual fund. 
Although  I  applaud  these  moves  toward  enhanced  disclosure  and  increased  transparency,  I  have 
concerns  similar  to  those  expressed  earlier  about  the  difficulties  of  rules-based  accounting.  In 
particular, the relationship between mutual funds and brokers has become extraordinarily complex and 
lucrative. Further, as financial innovation continues, conflicts of interest will continue to arise. 
Enterprise-wide risk management 
One of the challenges the Federal Reserve System has as the umbrella supervisor of financial holding 
companies  is  to  encourage  the  evolution  of  corporate  governance  within  organizations  that  keeps 
pace with changing business strategies. Earlier in my remarks I referred to the challenges to investors, 
managers, and boards of directors in understanding complex organizations. As supervisors, we have 
similar  challenges  in  monitoring  and  evaluating  the  effectiveness  of  corporate  governance, 
compliance, and internal controls in financial institutions. Further, as risk exposures change, we need 
to  modify  the  capital  rules  for  banking  organizations  to  better  reflect  the  diversity  of  their  risk 
exposures. 
One  common  theme  that  has  recurred  in  the  scandals of  the  past  two  years  -  whether  it  is  Enron, 
Arthur  Anderson,  Tyco,  stock  research,  mutual  fund  trading,  or  Parmalat  -  is  that  the  interest  of 
individual officers can easily conflict with that of the firm as a whole. Many times the problem results 
from the failure to identify conflicts of interest among various lines of business. Too often firms are 
governed  through  silos  by  individual  lines  of  business  without  a  comprehensive  risk  review  by 
executive officers and the appropriate committee of the board of directors. 
Financial institutions are being encouraged to establish enterprise-wide risk management functions to 
ensure that risks of all types, including conflicts of interest, are identified; risk appetites are defined; 
appropriate  mitigating  controls  are  effective;  and  exceptions  are  rigorously  reviewed  at  a  high  level 
within  the  organization.  Enterprise-wide  risk  management  is  also  rapidly  developing  at  nonfinancial 
firms. Later this year, the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission will 
issue  a  framework  for  effective  risk  management  that  is  versatile  enough  for  all  types  and  sizes  of 
firms to use. Risk management and good corporate governance should be thought of as more than 
expense  centers.  If  these  functions  are  effectively  managed,  they  can  mitigate  losses  and  reduce 
surprises  to  the  market  that  can  disrupt  customer  relationships,  increase  the  cost  of  capital,  and 
tarnish the reputation of the firm. Further, as in any corporate function, focusing on the risks in what is 
done day-to-day can help identify opportunities to improve operations. 
Conclusion 
Enterprise-wide risk-management and stronger internal governance structures are needed. However, 
the  mutual  fund  scandal  reminds  us  that  monitors,  even  boards  of  directors,  may  have  their  own 
governance problems. Full and meaningful disclosure will always be crucial for limiting the ability of 
companies  to  pursue  their  own  interest  at  the  expense  of  investors.  Indeed,  many  of  the  problems 
uncovered at mutual funds and in the corporate world can be traced to relationships or transactions 
that were hidden from view. I am confident that greater transparency will provide the foundation for 
more effective corporate governance in the future. 
6 
 BIS Review 12/2004
