John Hurley: Euro area monetary policy and EU enlargement 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland, 
to ACI Ireland, Dublin, 22 March 2004. 
 First,  let  me  say  how  pleased  I  am  to  have  the  opportunity  to  share  some  thoughts  with  you  this 
evening. I would like to begin by saying a little about the euro area monetary policy framework, which 
was reviewed and clarified last year, before going to outline how monetary policy in the euro area has 
been conducted in the first five  years of EMU. I will  then turn my attention to the current monetary 
policy environment and recent exchange rate developments, before looking at some broader structural 
and fiscal policy issues and, finally, speaking briefly about the imminent enlargement of the EU.  
The euro area monetary policy framework 
Turning on to euro area monetary policy, for just over five years now the euro area has had a single 
currency  and  a  single  monetary  policy  conducted  by  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The 
introduction of the single currency has been an historical landmark. In twelve countries, the euro has 
replaced the national currency and rapidly become part of everyday life. For the business community, 
intra-euro area exchange rate volatility and the uncertainty it caused for trade and investment have 
been eliminated. In the financial area, the role of the euro in global markets and the growth in the use 
of the new currency outside the euro area over the past five years have also been impressive. The 
euro has very quickly become an important part of the global financial system and the evidence of the 
past five years is that its role will continue to grow for some time yet.  
Within  the  euro  area,  the  key  challenge  has  been  to  formulate  and  implement  the  single  monetary 
policy. Since it is a “one size fits all” policy, many doubts were initially expressed about whether it was 
possible or not to formulate a common monetary policy for such a diverse area. I think our experience 
to date is that the policy is successful. In practice, the Governing Council formulates policy in much the 
same way as many other central banks, that is, it focuses on controlling inflation. There are significant 
benefits to be derived from keeping inflation low: it supports consumers purchasing power; it avoids 
the misallocation of resources associated with inflation or deflation; it serves to reduce uncertainty and 
risk premia in financial markets, ultimately facilitating lower medium and long-term interest rates, and it 
is  an  important  anchor  for  wage  developments  and  for  the  enhancement  of  competitiveness  in  the 
economy. In short, maintaining price stability is the key contribution that monetary policy can make to 
achieving sustainable growth and job creation. 
Being clear about its mandate, and how it fulfils it, helps a central bank to foster credibility. To ensure 
that  monetary  policy  firmly  anchors  inflation  expectations  from  the  very  start  the  Governing  Council 
adopted  a  monetary  policy  strategy  which  is  forward-looking,  focussed  on  the  medium-term  and 
broadly based. To be successful in maintaining price stability it is also important that the rationale for 
decision-making is clearly understood. As I am sure you are aware, this is an area which had been the 
subject  of  some  criticism  in  the  past.  Reflecting  this,  after  four  years  of  experience,  the  monetary 
policy strategy was reviewed and clarified in 2003.  
Two  important  points  of  clarification  emerged  from  this  exercise,  which  address  misunderstandings 
which  had  emerged.  First,  as  regards  the  definition  of  price  stability,  it  has  been  clarified  that  the 
objective is to maintain inflation, for the euro area as a whole, at a rate below but close to 2 per cent 
over the medium-term. Second, as regards the assessment of the risks to price stability, the review 
clarified  the  way  in  which  the  Governing  Council  integrates  the  signals  coming  from  the  economic 
analysis, on the one hand, and the monetary analysis, on the other. In particular, it is made clear that 
the  monetary  analysis  mainly  serves  as  a  means  of  cross-checking,  from  a  medium  to  long-term 
perspective, the short to medium-term indications for inflation coming from the economic analysis.  
The conduct of monetary policy since 1999 
Having outlined how the Governing Council formulates and implements euro area monetary policy, I 
would now like to make a short assessment of the conduct of that policy over the past five years. In its 
early  years,  the  single  monetary  policy  has  been  conducted  in  a  very  testing  environment, 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 1
characterised by a series of shocks. At various times in the past five years there have been periods of 
exceptional economic, financial and geopolitical uncertainty. The first 18 months witnessed a tripling of 
oil prices, the peak of the dotcom boom and a significant fall in the value of the euro. The subsequent 
correction  of  the  sizeable  imbalances  generated  by  the  late  1990s  boom,  allied  to  heightened 
geopolitical tensions, then triggered the most critical and sustained period of economic and financial 
uncertainty  witnessed  in  decades.  This  uncertainty  persisted  until  last  Spring,  and  while  it  has 
unwound considerably since then, some of its effects still linger. On top of all this, we have also seen a 
sharp appreciation of the euro, particularly against the dollar, which has taken it to a level that is higher 
than at its initial launch. From that short outline, it is clear that the economic and financial environment 
of the past five years has provided a stiff test of the single monetary policy.  
Given this background, what has been the outcome? Over the past five years, the evidence indicates 
that both inflation and inflation expectations, which signal the rate of price increase anticipated in the 
future,  have  remained  firmly  under  control.  Since  the  beginning  of  1999,  indicators  of  long-term 
inflation expectations in the euro area have remained below but close to 2 per cent. This suggests that 
the new single monetary policy has been successful in anchoring long-term inflation expectations and 
that the public and the markets are convinced about the determination to maintain price stability over 
the medium-term. This has been a very significant achievement in a relatively short period of time and 
has  been  an  important  factor  in  permitting  euro  area  interest  rates  to  fall  to  their  lowest  levels  in 
decades. 
It should also be recalled that, before the establishment of the euro and the single monetary policy, 
there  were  significant  differences  in  long-term  interest  rate  levels  across  countries.  A  key 
achievement,  and  also  an  indication  of  the  credibility  of  European  Monetary  Union,  has  been  the 
convergence of long-term interest rates to the lowest level prevailing in the area and not just to the 
average level. This has helped to improve financing conditions in many parts of the euro area. Allied to 
the fact that intra-euro area exchange rate volatility is also now a thing of the past, this has created a 
much more favourable environment for consumers, the business community and investors. 
Recent developments and background 
In recent years, the main influence on monetary policy, both in the euro area and globally, has been 
the  heightened  economic  and  financial  uncertainty  which  persisted  until  mid-2003,  and  the 
after-effects of which have still not fully dissipated. Against this background, already exceptionally low 
global  interest  rates  were reduced  further.  In  the euro  area,  with  inflation  and  inflation  expectations 
under control, the Governing Council lowered interest rates on two occasions, March and June 2003, 
effectively bringing rates to levels equivalent to post-World War II lows. 
For the euro area, 2003 was the third successive year in which economic growth decelerated. For the 
year as a whole, the euro area economy grew by only 0.4 per cent, a most disappointing performance, 
considering that the economy had already registered below potential growth in both 2001 and 2002. 
However, these average figures mask the fact that, after several years of below par growth, a gradual 
recovery in activity has been underway since around the middle of last year. The main impetus to the 
euro area recovery has come from the improvement in the global economic performance, which, in 
turn, reflects a number of factors. Initially, there was the unwinding of geopolitical uncertainties, which 
facilitated a rebound in confidence, especially business confidence, over the second-half of last year. 
More  fundamentally,  however,  the  recovery,  particularly  in  the  US,  has  acquired  considerable 
momentum  from  the  sizeable  policy  stimulus  put  in  place  in  recent  years;  indeed  the  scale  of  this 
stimulus  itself  poses  some  medium-term  risk  to  the  continuation  of  the  recovery  there.  Further 
contributory  factors  were  the  performance  of  equity  markets,  which  rallied  considerably  over  the 
course of last year, and also the unwinding of the investment overhang created during the late 1990s 
boom,  which  removed  an  important  headwind  to  growth.  The  improvement  in  the  global  economic 
environment, however, does not simply reflect developments in the US. Growth has also resumed in 
Japan, and accelerated in both the UK and East Asia, where, in both instances, the slowdown had 
been less pronounced. 
The current euro area monetary policy environment 
In  the  case  of  the  euro  area,  the  recovery  clearly  has  lagged  that  of  most  of  the  other  major 
economies. As was the case elsewhere, the strong gains in euro area business confidence, from last 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2004
summer  onwards,  suggested  that  growth  was  going  to  gather  momentum.  While  third  quarter  data 
seemed  to  confirm  that  recovery  was  taking  hold,  activity  was  being  driven  by  a  solid  pick-up  in 
exports, with domestic demand remaining weak. Notwithstanding the rise in the value of the euro, the 
stimulus from a more strongly growing global economy was driving euro area growth. 
The  scenario  which  appeared  to  be  unfolding  at  that  stage  was  one  where  stronger  export  growth 
would generate a recovery in production. This would stimulate investment and would be followed, in 
turn, by a pick-up in consumer spending. 
Although  this  recovery  scenario  remains  broadly  in  place,  progress  has  been  slow.  While  we  have 
seen  an  externally-led  rebound  which  has  boosted  industrial  production  and helped  generate  some 
rebound  in  investment,  the  recovery  has  not  yet  become  broadly  based.  In  particular,  domestic 
demand remains subdued. To a large extent, this reflects the weakness of consumer spending, which 
has  yet  to  show  much  sign  of  improvement.  There  has  been  only  a  modest  recovery  in  consumer 
confidence since the middle of last year. Continuing uncertainty about labour market prospects and job 
security  have  not  helped  and  may  be  leading  households  to  maintain  savings  at  somewhat  higher 
levels for precautionary motives. Moreover, more recently, the signals with regard to the nature of the 
recovery have become somewhat mixed. They continue to point to expansion, but at a gradual pace. 
For example, neither the level nor composition of recent fourth quarter GDP growth, where sluggish 
consumption and net trade were offset by a strong inventory build-up, suggest that the momentum of 
recovery is likely to accelerate in the near term.  
Notwithstanding this, many of the conditions needed for a recovery in private demand are in place. 
Most  of  the  headwinds  that  have  held  back  economic  activity  in  the  past  couple  of  years  have 
dissipated. Real short-term and long-term interest rates are very low, making financing conditions very 
favourable. In addition, the strong global recovery should help offset some of the drag resulting from 
the strengthening of the euro.  
However, while this should help ensure that the recovery continues, the pace of improvement seems 
set to be slow. Against this background, there is likely to be little upward pressure on inflation and the 
outlook for price stability in the medium-term is favourable. 
That the recovery is taking so long to gain traction reflects the fact that there are still uncertainties and 
risks to the outlook. In the near term, as I have mentioned already, these relate to the prospects for 
euro area consumer spending. Until there is some improvement on this front, the euro area recovery 
will continue to be unconvincing. The longer-term risks relate to concerns about the sustainability of 
economic growth at the global level given the persistence of, both internal and external, imbalances in 
some  parts  of  the  world.  Both  sets  of  risks  suggest  that  a  sustainable  recovery  cannot  yet  fully  be 
taken for granted, though it still remains the most likely prospect. While our view is that the current 
stance of monetary policy remains appropriate, I can assure you that the Governing Council remains 
vigilant and will closely watch developments in coming months. 
Exchange rate developments 
I  would  now  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  exchange  rate  developments,  which,  of  course,  the 
Governing Council takes into account as part of the overall economic analysis. In the early years of 
EMU, the relatively weak exchange rate of the euro placed exporters to markets outside the euro area 
in a relatively favourable position. This is no longer the case. While exchange rate appreciation helps 
to  dampen  inflation  and  ultimately  improve  purchasing  power,  it  also  obviously  impacts  on  the  net 
trade position. So far, the positive effect of stronger global growth has outweighed the negative impact 
of exchange rate appreciation on euro area exports. More recently, however, there has been some 
evidence from sentiment indicators of a moderation in export orders, and industrial production fell in 
January. 
The euro has been trending upwards, both against the dollar and in overall terms, for just over two 
years now, and there have been sizeable movements in exchange rates over the past six months. In 
particular  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  accelerated  considerably  against  the  dollar  and  also  Asian 
currencies  in  late  2003  and  the  first  half  of  January  2004.  These  movements  were  linked  with 
imbalances  at  the  level  of  the  global  economy,  such  as  the  US  current  account  deficit.  They  also 
reflected the fixity of some Asian currencies vis-à-vis the US dollar, which led them to depreciate in 
line  with  the  US  currency.  The  speed  and  strength  of  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  over  this  period 
raised concerns and, while the gradual and smooth correction of global imbalances is an important 
medium-term issue for the global economy, it must be achieved in an appropriate manner. Viewed in 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 3
this  way,  excess  volatility  and  disorderly  movements  in  exchange  rates  are  undesirable.  The  G-7 
statement issued in Florida on 7 February recognised this risk. The statement emphasised that greater 
flexibility in exchange rates is desirable for major countries or economic areas that lack such flexibility 
to promote smooth and widespread adjustment in the international financial system, based on market 
mechanisms. While I recognise that there have also been other factors at work, I am encouraged by 
the fact that since the recent G-7 meeting, we have seen greater stability in foreign exchange markets.  
The importance of an appropriate policy mix 
I will now briefly touch on the issue of the euro area policy mix. There is sometimes a misconception 
that the single monetary policy is in some way anti-growth. I can assure you that the single monetary 
policy is not anti-growth. Not only has it had the positive effects I have described earlier - anchoring 
long-term inflation expectations, thus, facilitating low short and long-term interest rates - the ethos of 
the  policy  is  not  in  any  way  opposed  to  growth.  In  fact  the  opposite  is  true.  The  aim  is  to  support 
growth. The Maastricht Treaty makes it clear that,  while the primary objective of monetary policy is 
price stability, the Eurosystem should, without prejudice to this objective, also take into account the 
broader economic goals of the European Community. Sometimes it is overlooked that monetary policy 
operates  in  tandem  with  other  policies  and  there  are  strong  complementarities  between  them. 
Monetary policy has been successful in ensuring price stability and delivering low short and long-term 
interest  rates.  However,  other  elements  such  as  a  sound  fiscal  policy,  a  stable  macroeconomic 
framework and sufficiently flexible labour and product markets are also necessary to achieve strong 
and sustainable growth. 
Structural Reform 
Reflecting this, an important commitment of the Irish Presidency of the EU is to progress the structural 
reform  agenda.  As  a  member  of  the  Governing  Council,  I  welcome  this  initiative.  Why  is  structural 
reform  an  issue  for  a  central  bank?  There  are  a  number  of  reasons.  Increasing  the  efficiency  with 
which  markets  operate  raises  potential  growth.  Importantly,  also,  a  more  efficiently  functioning 
economy will utilise the resources available to a greater extent and, in doing so, will be less prone to 
inflation.  This  extends  the boundaries  within  which  all  economic policies,  including  monetary  policy, 
can operate without generating inflation. In effect, the economy will have a higher growth “speed limit” 
i.e. it will be able to grow faster before inflation is likely to become a problem. 
The structural reform agenda, set out in the Lisbon Strategy of 2000, aims to improve the functioning 
and  flexibility  of  euro  area  product  and  labour  markets.  This  is  to  be  achieved  through  raising 
employment rates, education and skills levels and promoting technological innovation. While, in terms 
of time, we are nearly halfway through the Lisbon process, progress in meeting targets has been slow. 
While  most  EU  countries  have  undertaken  initiatives  for  labour  market  reforms  in  recent  years, 
achieving  the  target  employment  rate  of  70  per  cent  of  the  working  age  population  is  still  far  off. 
Moreover, further reforms are needed to allow wages to reflect more strongly regional and sectoral 
productivity differences and also to improve education and training systems. The emphasis placed on 
these  issues  is  to  be  welcomed  and  their  achievement  has  the  potential  to  contribute  materially  to 
boosting the long run sustainable growth rate of the euro area. 
Stability and Growth Pact 
The link between monetary and fiscal policy is, I think, readily appreciated. The Stability and Growth 
Pact,  together  with  the  Maastricht  deficit  and  debt  objectives,  constitutes  the  euro  area’s  fiscal 
framework. There are two main reasons why we need such a framework. First, given the divergent 
structure between centralised monetary and exchange rate policy, on the one hand, and decentralised 
fiscal policies (i.e. at the national level), on the other, a rule-based fiscal framework is necessary to 
avoid  conflicts  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  By  adhering  to  fiscal  rules,  within  a  broad 
framework,  divergent  fiscal  behaviour  of  individual  Member  States  can  be  contained.  This  fiscal 
discipline,  in  turn,  supports  low  interest  rates,  which  is  essential  for  good  long-term  economic 
performance.  Secondly,  and  this  will  become  increasingly  important  in  the  years  ahead,  low  public 
debt will help Member States to prepare for the budgetary impact of ageing populations.  
As you are aware, however, there have been difficulties in the application of these rules. The recent 
budgetary experiences of some large Eurozone countries demonstrate clearly the problems that can 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2004
arise in relation to the 3% deficit limit, especially when insufficient provision is made during economic 
upturns.  The  decision  by  ECOFIN  on  November  25th  to  “hold  in  abeyance  for  the  time  being”  the 
excessive deficit procedure against these countries has given rise to much talk about the status of the 
Pact. Clearly the Governing Council is concerned about this situation, because of the impact such an 
action can have on the ECB’s core mandate to attain and maintain price stability, and it respects the 
Commission’s decision to seek legal clarity in this regard. But, it is important to emphasise that, while 
the  Governing  Council  does  not  see  a  need  for  change  in  either  the  Treaty  or  the  Pact,  it  does, 
however, agree that it is possible to improve its implemention in certain respects. For instance, the 
analysis of structural balances and the incentives to pursue sound fiscal policies in good times could 
be strengthened and improved. And there si also scope to enhance the clarity and enforcability of the 
framework overall. These are undoubtedely issues that will be considered in the future. 
Enlargement 
On 1 May, we look forward to having ten new members of the European Union. While the immediate 
contribution (5 pre cent) to the level of output may be relatively modest, at a stroke the area of the EU 
will expand by 25 per cent and its total population by 20 per cent. 
In  due  course,  also,  enlargement  could  have  major  implications  for  the  governance  of  the  ECB. 
Several acceding countries have signalled their intention to adopt the euro within the next few years, 
and, most, if not all, may well be part of the euro area by the end of this decade. In the meantime, 
there  is  much  ground  to  be  covered.  The  starting  point  for  the  acceding  countries  is  that,  once  a 
country joins the EU, it is obliged to treat its exchange rate policy as a matter of common interest and 
it  is  in  that  context  that  the  question  of  participation  in  the  exchange  rate  mechanism  arises.  An 
acceding country is not obliged to participate in ERM II, but is expected to do so and it can join the 
mechanism at any point, subject to agreement on the central rate and fluctuation margins. Economic 
conditions among the acceding countries differ greatly, as far as nominal and real convergence are 
concerned:  to  give  just  one  example,  GDP  per  capita,  as  a  percentage  of  the  euro  area  average, 
ranges  from  37%  in  Latvia  to  80%  in  Cyprus;  but  there  are  also  significant  differences  in 
unemployment,  inflation  rates,  and  fiscal  positions.  It,  therefore,  makes  sense  that,  throughout  the 
process leading to the adoption of the euro, assessment be carried out on a case-by-case basis.  
Participation  in  ERM  II  is  something  to  which  we  in  the  Governing  Council  attach  considerable 
importance,  as  a  preparation  for  the  rigorous  regime  that  lies  ahead.  For  the  acceding  countries, 
however, the focus is on the adoption of the euro, which will bring considerable benefits in terms of 
greater  policy  credibility  and  the  absence  of  exchange  risk  for  much  of  their  external  trade.  But, 
ultimately, in the interests of the acceding countries themselves and in the interests of a successful 
euro, the bottom line is that all those adopting the euro must be able to live with its constraints. Hence 
the need for adequate preparation before adopting the euro and, indeed, joining the exchange rate 
mechanism. 
We in Ireland may have something to offer from our experience. Some of you will recall in the early 
1980s, we had 20% inflation and twin deficits well into double figures. We resolved these difficulties by 
the late 1980s, but still experienced pressure on exchange rate and monetary policy through most of 
the  wide  band  period  as  we  tried  to  achieve  nominal  convergence,  while  containing  some  of  the 
pressures  generated  by  real  convergence.  Some  acceding  countries  are  facing  similar  issues.  Our 
experience underscores the need for policy makers to be aware of the changes needed to help them 
prepare for EMU. But, having said that, these are essentially short-term matters. Over the longer term, 
the positive impact of accession on the EU economy could be immense. In particular, I would expect 
the energy and dynamism released by the catching-up process to percolate through to the rest of the 
EU,  not  least  as  a  catalyst  in  creating  a  more  competitive  environment  and  in  hastening  structural 
reform. Enlargement on this scale is unique, and we in Ireland, who currently occupy the presidency of 
the EU, are privileged to have enlargement on our agenda.  
Conclusion 
The first five years of EMU can be considered a success. More than three hundred million consumers 
and investors in the euro area have enjoyed the benefits of price stability, low nominal interest rates in 
a single money market and the convenience of dealing in a single currency over a wide geographic 
area. By maintaining price stability, monetary policy provides the basis for sustainable growth in output 
and employment. But, for growth to materialise, the active support of fiscal policy and structural reform 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 5
is also required. I believe that there is a growing awareness across the euro area of the need for both 
to play their part in addressing current problems and to prepare for the coming challenge, especially 
that of ageing populations. I expect these issues to be centre stage over the next five years.  
6 
 BIS Review 18/2004
