David A Dodge: The Bank of Canada’s commitments to Canadians 
Remarks by Mr David A Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, at the Town Hall Meeting, Ottawa, 
18 May 2004.  
 Good morning everyone and welcome. Welcome also to those of you joining us by videoconference. 
Today’s gathering is very important, so I’m glad you have taken the time to attend. 
Before  I  begin  I  want  to  say  hello  to  the  members  of  the  Management  Forum  and  Executive 
Management Committee who are with us today. 
These Town Halls are becoming a bit of a springtime tradition. The snow melts and the time comes for 
us to get together. We take stock of where we are, where we’re going, and how we want to get there. 
As  you  know,  many  institutions,  both  governmental  and  private,  are  currently  concerned  about 
governance structures, accountability and rules of behaviour. 
Of course we focused on these issues a couple of years ago when we established our Compass. And 
it’s our Compass I’d like to focus on now. It is an amazing document. I think it captures the essence of 
who we are. 
And  one  of  the  truly  great  things  about  it  is  how  it  came  to  be.  Creating  the  Compass  was  a 
comprehensive exercise. It was top down, bottom up and side to side. Staff had an opportunity to take 
part in the consultation, debate, and careful consideration that went into the making of it. Together, we 
produced a remarkable set of commitments to Canadians, to excellence, and to each other. 
We really don’t need to worry about producing something new. But it is useful as we get together, to 
remind ourselves of what it is that we created. 
Our  commitment  to  Canadians  placed  our  legislated  mandate  into  very  concrete  terms.  Canadians 
need to have confidence in the value of the money they earn and the quality of the bank notes that 
they carry around. They need to have confidence in Canada’s financial system. They want to know 
that the Bank is managing the government’s funds with integrity. And that we are communicating and 
being accountable for what we do. When we say we are committed to Canadians, we’re saying we’re 
committed to fostering their confidence in our integrity as a central bank. 
Our  second  commitment  is  to  excellence.  It  reflects  the  high  standards  we  set  for  ourselves  in  our 
work on behalf of Canadians. It goes hand in hand with the statement we made when we launched the 
Compass and the Medium Term Plan. 
Namely: that we are committed to performance that is second to none among the central banks of the 
world. 
It was a challenging goal then, and it still is. But we’re getting there. We’re doing outstanding work in 
monetary policy; I’m very proud of the way we have continued to meet our inflation control targets. 
In  the  area  of  currency  we’re  producing  new  bank  notes  in  the  Canadian  Journey  series.  The  new 
$100 bill represents the first of three new notes being issued this year; notes that are designed to be 
secure, durable and well-accepted. 
Here at the Bank we are fostering an ongoing atmosphere of trust, respect and innovation through our 
strong  system  of  values.  We  continue  to  place  a  strong  emphasis  on  research  and  analysis  in  all 
aspects of our work. 
How else is our commitment to excellence in evidence? There are the partnerships we are cultivating 
both  within  and  outside  the  Bank.  We  are  communicating  clearly  and  openly.  We  are  nurturing 
leadership at all levels. And we are cultivating diversity, both of people and of ideas. 
Together, in all of these ways, we have been achieving excellence. 
The  third  commitment  we  made  was  to  each  other.  We  were  clear  that  we  wanted  our  work 
environment to be founded on a strong set of values. 
The first of these is that we articulate our own ideas and listen to those of others. We agreed to share 
knowledge and experience so that we could all learn from each other. 
BIS Review 35/2004 
 1
Then, there was a pledge to develop our talent and careers to achieve personal excellence. Your own 
development,  of  course,  has  always  rested  first  and  foremost  with  you.  But  the  Bank  has  been 
providing some of the impetus, and helping to create an environment that is conducive to learning and 
growing and an environment where the two official languages are used interchangeably. “Knowledge 
sharing” is vital to our organization. I hope that together we can progress further in making the Bank a 
true  knowledge-sharing  institution  as  we  complete  our  medium-term  plan.  And  while  the  Bank  is 
encouraging you to excel by developing yourself, there is also the recognition of the fact that you have 
a life outside the Bank. 
We committed ourselves to working in an environment where each employee is respected. When we 
respect  each  other  as  individuals,  then  we  can  have  the  kind  of  debates  that  we  need  to  help  us 
become the best we can be. We can have clashes of ideas secure in the knowledge that there are no 
winners or losers. Or rather, that we’re all winners, because what we’re doing is exploring all aspects 
of an issue. 
And finally, we said we would recognize those who demonstrate our commitments. I encourage you to 
continue to think about ways that you can recognize people in your areas who live these values. We 
need to celebrate their successes. We need to share their ideas. 
That was the direction we laid out. Three strongly stated commitments, and a number of simply stated 
values intended to help us meet them. 
I was impressed by the Compass when it was written, and I’ve been impressed by how well we are all 
living by it. You showed real leadership in making this strong statement about who we are and what 
we  stand  for.  The  Compass  serves  us  well.  But  as  you  know,  with  today’s  emphasis  on  corporate 
governance  and  accountability,  other  organizations,  both  private  and  public,  are  now  searching  for 
ways to achieve what we have already achieved. Many of these organizations are setting about doing 
this by putting in place a set of highly detailed rules to constrain behaviour. 
But I am sure that a lot of highly detailed rules is not the answer for us. I don’t think we need much 
more than the Compass. I think, to a large extent, it is a part of us now. And I think the proof of that is 
that integrity - your integrity - is clearly one of the towering strengths of this institution. 
So  I  don’t  think we  need a  lot of  new rules  to  govern our  behaviour.  And where  we  do  need more 
explicit guidelines and procedures, I’d like us to tread rather lightly. 
But I do want to say a couple of words today about two particular areas: disclosure of wrongdoing and 
conflict of interest. 
First, let me deal with disclosure of wrongdoing. 
We have had a policy for some time now, but we on the Executive Management Committee thought it 
was  important  that  we  also  have  procedures  that  conform  more  generally  with  procedures  that  the 
government of Canada is proposing. 
I encourage you to examine those procedures closely; if you have any questions, please talk to your 
manager. 
The second point I wanted to make was regarding our conflict of interest policy. The sign-off we all do 
here is important. Not because anything wrong is going on, but because our policy helps ensure that 
we don’t run into these kinds of conflicts. 
So we do have, as an organisation, a few things in place beyond the Compass. But the Compass is 
what  I  always  find  myself  coming  back  to.  Practically  everything  we  need  is  in  there.  And  it’s  a 
respectful  document.  It  gives  each  of  us  the  responsibility  of  exercising  good  judgment.  And  more 
importantly, it says that we trust each other to do so. 
I’m  really proud  to  be  in an  institution where  we can  operate  that  way.  And the  fact  that we can  is 
something I believe each of you should take pride in. 
Because, let’s face it, it’s not something that happened by itself. It’s not a coincidence. It was your 
ideas  that  shaped  the  Compass.  And  it’s  no  coincidence  that  the  Compass  is  even  more  relevant 
today than when we put it together. 
So, congratulations not only for creating it, but for living by it. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2004
