Toshihiko Fukui: Toward the reform of corporate finance in Japan 
Keynote speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the JSLA Symposium on 
“New Corporate Finance to Revitalize Japan”, Tokyo, 17 November 2003. 
 Introduction  
I  am  honored  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  this  symposium  sponsored  by  the  Nihon  Keizai 
Shimbun  and  the  Japan  Syndication  and  Loan-trading  Association  (JSLA).  In  the  brief  three  years 
since its founding in January 2001, the JSLA has contributed greatly to establishing the infrastructure 
for the syndicated loan market: not only devising a standard form of sales contracts for loan assets 
and promoting its wider adoption, but also working toward better disclosure of information relating to 
loan  assets  trading.  On  behalf  of  the  Bank,  I  would  like  to  express,  at  the  outset,  our  sincere 
admiration for the JSLA's energetic efforts in this regard.  
In constructing a revitalized and dynamic economic system in Japan, I believe that it is increasingly 
important  to  direct  our  efforts  towards  reform  of  the  framework  for  corporate  financing,  just  as  the 
JSLA has done to date. Today, I would like to share with you my thoughts on reforming the system 
governing corporate financing in Japan.  
Role of corporate financing  
I.  
Let  me  start  by  discussing  the  fundamental  role  of  corporate  financing  within  the  economy  from  a 
purely theoretical standpoint.  
We can classify a vast number of decisions taken daily at companies into two broad categories: those 
that  relate  to  operations,  including  production,  sales,  and  investment;  and  others  relating  to  the 
company's  financing  decisions  such  as  procurement  of  debt  and  equity.  Let  us  take  a  completely 
hypothetical example, where no friction exists in economic activities, no asymmetry of information is 
found between sellers and buyers or between borrowers and lenders, and no one even has to worry 
about the threat of bankruptcy. In such a world, companies should devote themselves purely to the 
production and sale of attractive products and services, and there would be no active decisions to be 
made  regarding  financing.  In  other  words,  the  company's  financing  activities  would  simply  and 
passively follow the development of its business.  
In  reality,  however,  we  face  various  uncertainties.  In  particular,  there  are  always  significant 
informational  asymmetries  between  borrowers  and  lenders,  and  these  force  borrowers  to  make 
appropriate decisions on financing as well as operational decisions. In deciding their optimal capital 
and  liability  structures,  firms  need  to  consider  the  idiosyncratic  risk  profiles  associated  with  their 
particular businesses. A firm operating a high-risk business should have a sufficient capital base. If 
liabilities were high relative to capital, it would be difficult for the firm to maintain an appropriate degree 
of  liquidity  in  the  face  of  market  concerns  about  the  materialization  of  risk,  and  the  firm's  ability  to 
continue operations would come into question. Furthermore, the awareness of the risks involved in a 
firm's business operations varies depending on the stage of development at which the firm finds itself. 
A  start-up  firm  that  lacks  sufficient  creditworthiness  is  required  to  maintain  a  proportionately  higher 
capital  base.  Similarly,  the  optimal  composition  of  capital  and  liabilities  also  varies  with  the  macro 
business cycle. When recession brings the possibility of bankruptcy to the forefront of firms' minds, 
they should respond by strengthening their capital bases.  
While  narrowing  the  information  gap,  we  must  also  ensure  the  smooth  flow  of  funds  between 
borrowers and lenders, that is, between firms and banks/investors. To this end, corporate financing 
should not simply involve the unilateral determination of the levels of debt and equity by one party, but 
should be a process which allows players on both supply and demand sides adequate input into the 
determination of optimal financing and fund management arrangements.  
The  key  to  this  process  is  the  ability  to  assess  the  risk  and  return  involved  in  a  given  transaction 
accurately and efficiently. A fund provider which is highly competent in this area can earn more profits. 
On the other hand, if a fund-raising firm lacks the ability to judge how to combine different means of 
financing,  including  new  financing  facilities,  so  as  to  minimize  both  the  costs  of  financing  and  the 
possibility  of  bankruptcy,  it  becomes  difficult  for  the  firm  to  maintain  efficiency  and  stability  when 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 1
managing  its  business.  This  is  an  ability  that  requires  expertise,  and  as  a  result,  banks,  securities 
companies, institutional investors, credit-rating agencies, and firms' finance divisions all have crucial 
roles to play.  
Accurate  assessment  of  risk  and  return  is  vital  not  only  at  the  microeconomic  but  also  at  the 
macroeconomic level. If many companies raise funds to finance investments whose returns are low 
relative to the degree of risk involved, macroeconomic productivity and the economic growth rate will 
decline in line with the reduced rate of return on the savings. The same can be said if sufficient funds 
are not provided for investments that are expected to yield high returns but which carry only modest 
risks. Both of these phenomena have been evident in Japan's economy and financial markets since 
the emergence of the asset price bubble and its subsequent collapse.  
New corporate governance  
II.  
I would now like to look briefly at the past history of corporate financing in Japan, in order to identify 
what reforms are necessary to revitalize the Japanese economy.  
As is often pointed out, until relatively recently corporate financing in Japan was dominated by fund 
provision  under  the  main  bank  system.  Banks  extended  loans  not  based  on  their  evaluations  of 
individual  operations  or  projects,  but  based  on  their  evaluations  of  individual  borrower  firms.  In 
determining the eligibility of corporate borrowers, banks were less interested in diligently assessing the 
state  of  cash  flow  than  in  gauging  the  extent  of  the  real  estate  holdings  that  could  be  offered  as 
collateral. They focused on the long-term and comprehensive profitability of overall transactions with 
each borrower, rather than the profitability of each loan transaction. Within this framework, main banks 
accumulated  extensive  information  about  borrower  firms,  and  decisions  about  the  granting  or 
rolling-over of loans were based on this information. The main bank's decision then acted as a signal 
which other banks typically followed. From the viewpoint of corporate governance, the main bank was 
not only, clearly, a major creditor of the borrowing firm, it was often also one of its shareholders. In a 
sense, therefore, banks, and in particular the main bank as the most important stakeholder, acted to 
discipline corporate activities.  
During the years of high economic growth and rising real estate prices the main bank system had its 
own underlying rationality. Indeed, Japan could not have achieved high economic growth under the 
system if it had not been rational.  
However, the system has gradually become incompatible with the changing economic environment. 
This  change  was  already  evident  even  before  the  emergence  of  the  asset  price  bubble,  and  it  has 
been further confirmed since the bubble's collapse. Yet, there does not yet appear to be a consensus 
explanation of the reasons behind the malfunctioning of the system. In contrast to the period of high 
economic  growth  and  its  ensuing  afterglow,  economic  globalization  has  forced  firms  to  take  up  the 
challenge of high risk businesses and projects. I believe that a new framework for corporate financing 
is required in order to control such risks. Banks' assessments of borrowers' profitability become less 
well-defined  if  they  cling  to  the  conventional  criteria  of  “long-term  and  comprehensive  profitability.” 
They  can  no  longer  compete  with  other  financial  services  providers  that  offer  highly  specialized, 
cutting-edge financial services.  
I should remind you, however, that I am not insisting on a simple shift from bank-dependent financing 
to capital-market-dependent financing. We will not be able to identify an optimal system for corporate 
financing by perfunctorily repeating such questions as: “Which is more desirable, financing mainly from 
banks or from capital markets?” For business projects to contribute to economic growth, there has to 
be someone collecting and analyzing data about these projects, and assessing the risks involved and 
the likely rates of return. No matter how we change the overall structure of the financial system, we will 
always require somebody to perform this fundamental role. What is called for at present is a complete 
revamping  of  the  ways  in  which  information  on  risk  and  return  is  gathered  and  dealt  with,  as  an 
integral part of building a new system of corporate governance to replace the main bank system.  
Japan is not the only country that is searching for alternative forms of corporate governance. In the 
past,  U.S.  firms  were  seen  as  providing  the  role  model  for  corporate  governance.  However,  in  the 
wake of a series of incidents such as the failure of Enron, they too appear to be entering a new phase 
of corporate governance. As a result there is no particular textbook model that we can apply to for 
guidance regarding corporate governance, and we must work hard to produce an original one.  
2 
 BIS Review 2/2004
Recent developments in corporate finance  
III. 
Over  the  past  few  years  there  have  been  a  number  of  new  developments  in  the  area  of  corporate 
finance in Japan that seem to signal further changes in the future.  
First, firms have been reducing their levels of debt. This has been a major trend since the 1990s.  
The  corporate  sector  has  registered  a  net  surplus  since  fiscal  1998,  with  savings  exceeding 
investment, and the outstanding amount of loans extended to firms by banks has decreased on a net 
basis since 1994. The straightforward reasons for these debt reductions have been firms' need to get 
rid of the excess debts built up during the asset price bubble in the late 1980s, and also the increasing 
difficulty  of  finding  new  investment  opportunities  in  the  years  of  economic  downturn.  More 
fundamentally, both firms and banks have become increasingly aware of the need to optimize their 
capital and liability structures to adapt to changes in the economic environment. For firms this involves 
carefully assessing the risks and returns associated with projects, as well as recognizing the need to 
achieve an optimal structure in terms of their relative holdings of capital and interest-bearing liabilities. 
Meanwhile, banks are striving to enhance their risk management by taking better note of their capital 
situations, and to set interest rates that reflect the credit risks associated with individual borrowers so 
as to improve the profitability of lending.  
Second, banks are rushing to unwind their cross-shareholdings.  
The amount outstanding of stocks held by banks fell by 48 percent, that is, by 21 trillion yen, over the 
past two years. This is not of course to say that there are no circumstances under which banks should 
hold stocks. However, cross-shareholdings may have a serious and unpredictable impact on banks' 
business  given  their  limited  capital  bases.  In  this  sense,  banks'  reductions  of  cross-shareholdings 
represent an attempt to restore themselves to financial soundness. At the same time, I believe that, 
having  freed  their  capital  from  stock  price  volatility,  they  will  be  able  to  increase  their  extension  of 
loans to firms.  
Third,  many  banks  have  been  starting  to  measure  the  economic  value  of  loans,  particularly 
nonperforming loans (NPLs).  
For example, banks made use of the discounted cash flow (DCF) method in their fiscal 2002 financial 
statements  and  made  subsequent  increases  in  provisioning.  Improvements  of  this  nature  in  the 
evaluation of NPLs enable them to be traded on markets more easily, thus helping expedite banks' 
disposals of their NPLs. They also encourage corporate restructuring funds and other institutions to 
increase their purchases of NPLs, speeding up the process of corporate revitalization.  
Fourth, new credit markets, led by the markets for syndicated loans, asset-backed securities (ABSs), 
and credit derivatives, are growing rapidly.  
The arrangement of syndicated loans totaled about 11 trillion yen in 2002, marking a sharp increase 
from around 3 trillion yen in 1999, while over the same period ABSs also rose significantly, to slightly 
less than 5 trillion yen from roughly 2 trillion yen. Such instruments aid the smooth transfer of funds 
and risks through markets. For example, a new risk management method is being adopted for ABSs 
which involves diversification of risk by pooling individual loan assets. Banks are also actively working 
on new lending products, such as small-value business loans and non-recourse loans.  
Future direction of corporate finance  
IV.  
These  recent  developments  I  have  mentioned  basically  indicate  that  we  are  heading  in  a  desirable 
direction.  
At the same time, however, it is true that there are still many challenges ahead. For instance, banks 
often say that business relationships with customers tend to make risk-based pricing of lending rates 
easier said than done. Japanese firms often rely heavily on relatively low and fixed-rate loans from 
banks for much of their external funding, and these loans are often regarded as “quasi-equity.” From 
the point of view of firms, pricing interest rates to reflect risk is rather like suddenly turning equity into 
debt, and it is scarcely surprising that they show resistance to the idea.  
Those working at the frontlines of corporate finance have different perspectives on these issues. Loan 
officers at banks that have a long history with their customers find it difficult to reach agreement on the 
specifics of adopting risk-based rates. This is because, although customers may be able to understand 
the need for such risk-based rates in an abstract sense, alternative capital markets, such as markets 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 3
for corporate bonds, have not yet been fully developed, and this makes it harder to discuss specific 
rates. On the other hand, institutional investors find it difficult to invest in corporate bonds because the 
amount issued is still small and insufficient. This is often attributed to the extremely low interest rates 
charged  on  bank  lending.  Meanwhile,  firms,  especially  small  and  medium-sized  firms  with  low 
creditworthiness, point to difficulties experienced even in borrowing from banks, let alone in issuing 
corporate  bonds.  Each  party,  therefore,  has  a  different  perspective,  and,  from  their  various 
standpoints, all seem to me to make sense. Solving these kinds of interrelated problems is somewhat 
like trying to determine which came first, the chicken or the egg.  
Nevertheless, this does not absolve us from doing everything we can in order to deal with the problem. 
In  this  regard,  corporate  financing  based  upon  an  accurate  evaluation  of  risk  and  return  is  all 
important.  Although  the  term  may  still  be  somewhat  new,  what  we  are  talking  about  here  is  the 
establishment  of  a  “credit  culture.”  It  is  this  that  I  believe  to  be  the  crucial  issue  facing  Japanese 
corporate finance today.  
Although not perhaps comprehensive solutions, from a strategic viewpoint I would like to emphasize 
the significance of the following two points.  
First, it is vital to establish an infrastructure to facilitate the use of information.  
Corporate financial information, such as details about products and transactions, need to be disclosed 
appropriately and efficiently so that providers of funds can understand accurately the risk and return of 
particular projects. The establishment of the JSLA's criteria for the disclosure of loan asset information 
is  one  example  of  such  efforts.  Databases  of  firms' financial  information  enable  processing  of  such 
data  and  make  investors'  risk  management  more  efficient.  Data  on  trade  volume  and  the  size  of 
financial markets are also useful. Information vendors are planning to provide information relevant to 
the secondary markets for NPLs.  
Bank  loans  have  been  the  dominant  means  of  corporate  financing  in  Japan.  Under  the  main  bank 
system,  borrower  information  has  been  shared  only  between  the  borrower  and  its  main  bank,  and 
neither  party  has  been  especially  averse  to  this  arrangement.  It  is  always  difficult  to  change  such 
established  practices.  For  this  reason,  persistent  efforts  will  be  required  not  only  to  establish  an 
infrastructure to facilitate the use of information, but also to convince market participants to change 
their thinking on this matter.  
Second,  the  revitalization  of  credit  markets  using  cutting-edge  financial  engineering  techniques  is 
indispensable.  
We see technological innovation in many industries but it is particularly rapid in the financial sector. A 
variety  of  statistical  methods  have  been  introduced  which  use  information  such  as  accounting  data 
and bankruptcy ratios to obtain quantitative estimates of credit risk and also to evaluate the overall risk 
inherent in particular portfolios. These techniques have facilitated the rapid development of markets for 
syndicated loans, ABSs, and small-value business loans based on scoring models, as well as markets 
for  non-recourse  loans  and  credit  derivatives.  When  arranging  ABSs,  these  techniques  enable  the 
classification of cash flows from pooled assets into tranches, such as senior, mezzanine, and equity, 
reflecting  different  degrees  of  risks,  enabling  investors  to  select  the  tranche  best  suited  to  their 
individual risk preferences.  
Expectations for syndicated loan market  
V. 
Next, I would like to focus on syndicated loans in the context of reforming corporate finance in Japan. 
Syndicated loans are considered sophisticated because they incorporate devices for both producing 
and managing information efficiently. I believe that the development of this market will play a leading 
role  in  the  reform  of  corporate  finance  in  Japan,  and  is  likely  to  accelerate  the  establishment  of  a 
“credit culture.” There are two features of this market that are worth specific mention.  
First, contracts make clear stipulations regarding the relationships between borrowers and banks, and 
between  agent  banks  and  participating  banks.  They  also  stipulate  precisely  the  obligations  of 
contracting  parties  and  the  compensation  to  which  they  will  be  entitled.  For  example,  the  contract 
between a borrower and its bank includes covenants that establish certain conditions on profitability 
and asset quality to which the borrower agrees to be subject. Such covenants allow borrowers more 
operational freedom, since they can prevent unnecessary intervention of banks. On the other hand, 
they also allow lenders to take necessary measures quickly when the borrower becomes unable to 
fulfill  its  obligations  under  the  covenant.  In  the  United  States,  where  the  syndicated  loan  market  is 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2004
firmly  established,  covenants  are  seen  performing  a  triggering  role:  when  borrowers  experience 
difficulties in honoring the terms of their covenants, this prompts discussions with their banks and the 
implementation of recovery measures. A separate set of contracts for syndicated loans is also signed 
between agent banks and participating banks. Under these contracts, agent banks are responsible for 
disclosing information on the borrower and monitoring its observance of the covenant, a service for 
which  they  receive  a  compensatory  commission.  This  gives  agent  banks  incentives  to  monitor 
borrowers' financial situations accurately.  
Second,  syndicated  loan  assets  are  designed  specifically  with  the  secondary  market  in  mind.  If 
borrowers allow lenders to transfer loans to a third party, this will dramatically change the landscape of 
Japan's financial markets. In the past, there were close and exclusive relationships between borrowers 
and  lender banks,  especially  the  main  bank,  and  borrowers  were  extremely  resistant  to  the  idea  of 
having their loans transferred to a third party. Indeed, they were reluctant even to see changes in the 
share  of  their  total  borrowing  that  came  from  banks.  This  explains  the  existence  of  contracts  for 
syndicated loans in Japan that explicitly limit the scope for transferring loans to third parties.  
For transactions in the secondary market to take off, syndicated loan assets should be priced in such a 
way that banks other than the existing lenders, or institutional investors, may purchase them in the 
market. If this happens, it will allow borrowers and agent banks to consider current market prices for 
loan assets when fixing the terms governing lending in the primary market. A positive growth cycle in 
secondary markets can be envisioned with more institutional investors entering the credit market.  
Of  course,  expansion  of  syndicated  loan  market  alone  does  not  complete  the  reform  of  corporate 
financing in Japan. However, if the transfer of loan assets becomes more widely accepted through the 
development of a secondary market for syndicated loans, the market liquidity of new vehicles such as 
ABSs will improve. Moreover, if covenants allow borrowers and agent banks to respond more promptly 
when firms become financially distressed, the amount of lending and investment that goes to finance 
low-return projects will gradually decrease, and this should accelerate the shift of economic resources 
to highly-profitable businesses and industries.  
I look forward to seeing the JSLA continue to contribute actively in this area.  
VI. 
The Bank of Japan's initiatives  
Three pillars of the monetary easing policy  
A. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  is  making  every  possible  effort  to  ensure  that  the  effects  of  monetary  easing 
permeate  the  economy  more  fully,  so  as  to  overcome  deflation  and  put  the  economy  back  on  a 
sustainable growth path. Let me elaborate on our efforts in this regard.  
First, the Bank is providing extremely ample liquidity to financial markets. This so-called quantitative 
monetary easing acts to ensure the stability of financial markets, thereby firmly supporting economic 
activity.  
Second, the Bank has committed itself to continue this quantitative easing policy. Often termed the 
“policy  duration  effect,”  the  effect  of  this  commitment  is  to  stabilize  public  expectations  about  the 
direction of future policy, and to keep relatively long-term interest rates at lower levels. Specifically, the 
Bank's commitment is to keep the current framework until the annualized growth rate of the consumer 
price index (CPI) stabilizes above zero percent. At the Monetary Policy Meeting in October, the Bank 
further clarified its commitment in simple and clear terms.  
Third, the Bank is striving to enhance the transmission mechanism of monetary easing. For the effects 
of quantitative monetary easing to reach every corner of the corporate and household sectors, credit 
should  be  extended  either  by  banks  and  other  financial  services  providers,  or  through  financial 
markets, not only widely but also effectively. In this regard, the reform of corporate finance is intimately 
related to the Bank's current conduct of monetary policy. Such reform is also extremely important for 
the future of Japanese economy because, in the creative and dynamic economy that we envision for 
the  future,  I  believe  that  it  will  be  essential  that  the  firms  intending  to  identify  new  sources  of 
value-added, which are actively undertaking risks, should be able to obtain sufficient support to meet 
their specific financial needs.  
BIS Review 2/2004 
 5
Efforts to revitalize credit markets  
B. 
Based on this thinking, the Bank has stepped up its efforts to revitalize credit markets in Japan.  
First, the Bank has provided substantial support for private efforts to improve the functioning of such 
markets. In addition to the traditional credit markets such as for loans, commercial paper (CP), and 
corporate  bonds,  we  consider  it  crucial  to  promote  the  development  of  new  credit  markets  for 
syndicated loans, ABSs, and credit derivatives. The Bank, in cooperation with the JSLA and a large 
number of market participants, has continued to support steadily efforts to improve new credit markets, 
in such areas as devising standard forms for contracts, streamlining transaction practices, as well as 
collecting  market  data  and  publishing  statistics.  A  recent  example  is  the  Bank's  decision  to  start 
publishing statistics on syndicated loans from December 2003, in response to earnest requests from 
market participants. The Bank has also conducted quantitative and theoretical research using a variety 
of data to capture movements in financial markets and at financial services providers, and has sought 
to share professional views with market participants by publishing the results of its analyses.  
Second, the Bank has been enhancing the settlement infrastructure for financial markets. The Bank 
started online operation of its funds transfer system in 1988, and of the transfer system for Japanese 
government  securities  (JGS)  in  1990.  As  for  CP,  corporate  bonds,  and  stocks,  the  Bank  has 
cooperated  with  private-sector  settlement  systems  to  introduce  online  settlements  as  well  as 
simultaneous  settlements  of  securities  and  funds,  the  delivery  versus  payment  (DVP)  system.  The 
Bank will continue its proactive support for ongoing projects, including the complete online settlement 
of corporate bonds and stocks.  
Third, the Bank has continuously reviewed the effects of its various policy measures and operations, 
adjusting these in light of prospective changes in financial markets and at financial services providers. 
In 1999, the Bank began to accept ABSs as collateral for its market operations to provide liquidity, and 
since then it has expanded the scope of ABSs as eligible collateral. Currently, the Bank is also working 
on detailed ways of using syndicated loans as collateral, a project for which it has sought the opinions 
of market participants.  
In  the  summer  of  2003,  the  Bank  launched  operations  to  purchase  ABSs.  This  represents  an 
unconventional policy measure for a central bank. However, since the market for ABSs is still in an 
embryonic  stage,  with  relatively  few  market  participants  willing  to  assume  the  associated  risks  and 
with difficulties in arranging the securities, the Bank decided to shoulder the credit risk of holding ABSs 
itself.  Although  it  is  conceivable  that  this  intervention  by  the  Bank  may  distort  the  price  discovery 
function  of  the  market  and  thereby  jeopardize  its  sound  development,  the  Bank's  design  and 
management of the purchase scheme makes careful allowances for this risk.  
The  Bank  wishes  to  make  every  effort  to  cooperate  with  market  participants  in  the  revitalization  of 
credit  markets.  To  this  end,  the  Bank  has  inaugurated  a  “Workshop  on  Securitization.”  I  hope  that 
various market participants, including both originators and investors, will take part in the workshop and 
suggest further ways to nurture and improve these credit markets. I expect this workshop to provide 
valuable insights in these areas.  
Concluding remarks  
To achieve a dynamic economy in Japan, efficient allocation of economic resources through market 
mechanisms is indispensable. In this regard, it is of the utmost importance to reform the framework for 
corporate  financing  so  that  participants  can  accurately  evaluate  the  risk  and  return  associated  with 
transactions and products. This, I would like to emphasize, is the core message of my speech today.  
The traditional framework for corporate financing in Japan worked well in the economic environment 
and structures of the past, which explains why it will take a substantial amount of effort and energy to 
change its direction. All the parties concerned, including companies, financial services providers, and 
the  relevant  authorities,  should  tackle  the  issues  boldly  by  sharing  new  ideas  and  promoting 
innovations.  
Let me conclude by stating that the Bank commits itself to playing a leading role in such efforts and 
cooperation.  
Thank you for your kind attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 2/2004
