Jaime Caruana: Announcement of Basel II 
Opening remarks of Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the press conference announcing the publication of Basel II, 
Bank for International Settlements, Basel, 26 June 2004. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  President  Trichet  for  his  kind  words,  which  I  will  certainly  share  with  my 
colleagues. On behalf of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, I am honoured to join him in 
announcing the publication of the revised framework for bank capital adequacy, a document that we 
have officially entitled, the “International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: 
a Revised Framework.”  
I  will  not  go  into  details  about  the  document  in  my  opening  remarks,  although  of  course  I  will  be 
delighted  to  answer  questions  afterwards.  What  I  would  like  to  say  is  that  the  new  framework 
represents a significant step towards achieving a more comprehensive and risk sensitive supervisory 
approach. It also represents an unparalleled opportunity for banks to improve their capital strategies 
and risk management systems. And finally, it provides supervisors with an opportunity to improve their 
ability  to  identify  banking  risks  and  to  enhance  the  dialogue  with  the  industry  and  among  banking 
supervisors. 
This new approach can be expected to play a significant role in reinforcing the soundness of individual 
banks  and  thereby  enhancing  financial  stability.  Our  objective  is  also  to  ensure  a  consistent 
application across jurisdictions. 
As you know, many individuals inside our member agencies devoted substantial efforts to the Basel II 
process. We are indebted particularly to the leadership of Bill McDonough, our prior chairman and the 
former President of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, who championed this new approach to 
capital  supervision.  We  appreciate  as  well  the  leadership  and  excellent  work  of  Danièle  Nouy,  the 
former  Secretary  General  of  the  Committee’s  highly  professional  Secretariat,  and  that  of  her 
successor, Ryozo Himino. 
Given  that  the  capital  framework  serves  as  a  cornerstone  to  the  safe  and  sound  operation  of  the 
banking system, we sought to conduct our discussions in a highly transparent process. We engaged in 
extensive  discussions  with  many  interested  parties  on  the  domestic  and  international  levels,  and  I 
would like to thank in particular two groups of external organisations and individuals who supported 
our efforts. 
First, I should mention the countless representatives of banking organisations, industry associations, 
and  other  private  sector  bodies  who  devoted  time  and  energy  to  sharing  their  views.  They  offered 
hundreds  of  comment  letters,  as  well  as  data  to  test  the  quality  of  the  rules,  and  they  engaged  in 
exhaustive hours of discussion with the Committee, its working groups and member authorities. Above 
all, banks and other private sector bodies helped us to ensure that supervision would be more closely 
aligned to sound industry practices. 
A second group would be those supervisory agencies, central banks, multilateral financial institutions, 
and  other  public  authorities  around  the  world  who  shared  with  us  the  perspectives  and  needs  of 
banking systems that are based in many different markets, economies, and legal systems. Thanks to 
discussions  with  these  colleagues,  such  as  through  joint  working  groups  like  the  Core  Principles 
Liaison  Group  and  through  regional  consultations  and  meetings,  the  Committee  was  better  able  to 
ensure that the new framework would be relevant to many different kinds of banks and economies that 
are  in  various  stages  of  growth  and  development.  The  cooperation  of  so  many  public  authorities 
worldwide has helped to make Basel II a truly global product. The Committee will continue to seek 
opportunities to deepen its relationships, and its opportunities for discussion, with other supervisors 
and central banks in the months and years ahead. 
Of course, this work would have been impossible without the sponsorship of the Bank for International 
Settlements. I would like to offer my sincere thanks to Malcolm Knight, the General Manager of the 
BIS, for his institution’s support of our work on Basel II. The BIS has been a staunch ally and advocate 
for our work over the entire thirty-year history of the Committee. With regard to Basel II itself, the BIS 
is  fostering  a  greater  understanding  of  the  new  framework  among  central  bankers  and  supervisors 
BIS Review 38/2004 
 1
worldwide  through  programs  organised  by  its  Financial  Stability  Institute,  the  “FSI”.  The  Committee 
looks forward to continued collaboration with the BIS on matters related to financial stability. 
Basel II represents a genuine success story in international cooperation. And we know that our need 
to cooperate and to collaborate does not end when we release this framework. Indeed, under Basel II, 
supervisors and central bankers will need to work even more closely together in the future, especially 
in view of the evolutionary nature of Basel II. 
And  the  Committee  has  a  full  agenda  ahead  of  it.  We  must,  of  course,  continue  to  work  on  the 
specifics related to the implementation of the framework and its calibration. We must also ensure that 
the  new  framework  keeps  pace  with  market  developments  and  advances  in  risk  management 
practices.  As  we  carry  out  this  work,  the  Committee  intends  to  continue  its  discussions  with  the 
industry and other supervisors in the same open and transparent manner as we have to date. 
It has been an honour for me to participate in and help to lead this process, and I look forward to the 
next phase of the Basel II project as we turn toward national adoption and implementation. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2004
