Y V Reddy: The global economy and financial markets - sustaining the 
recovery  
Statement  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  and  Leader  of  the  Indian 
delegation on behalf of Bangladesh, Bhutan, India and Sri Lanka, to the International Monetary and 
Financial Committee (IMFC), Washington, DC, 24 April 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman  
The global economic environment has improved significantly since we met last September in Dubai 
when  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  was  weighed  down  by  some  uncertainties  and  risks.  The 
recent  strengthening  of  the  global  recovery  process  has  been  led  by    buoyant  growth  in  emerging 
Asia, especially China and India and,  of course by a robust turnaround in the US.  Incipient recovery 
appears  to  have  set  in  in  the  Euro  area  while  the  economic  activity  in  Japan  has  exceeded 
expectations. The resurgent growth in many emerging market economies (EMEs) is now accompanied 
by  significant  resilience  and  EMEs  are  now  positively  contributing  to  the  world  growth.  The 
determinants of global growth and the policy requirements for sustaining the present momentum, both 
at regional and multilateral levels, need to be evaluated in the light of this beginning of a significant 
rebalancing of economic strengths and activity.  
The improved global recovery has been accompanied by a strong acceleration in world merchandise 
trade, particularly from emerging Asia, Japan and Euro Area. With renewed improvement in sentiment, 
investment  has  also  picked-up  in  most  regions,  which  should  in  the  normal  course  augur  well  for 
sustaining the recovery process. Reflecting improved investment opportunities and receding systemic 
risks, capital flows to emerging markets have also improved. At the same time, the risk of deflation in 
several industrial countries has begun to subside with growing recovery and rising commodity prices. 
Risks  have  been  mitigated  by  improved  liability  management  through  readjustment  of  maturity 
structure  of  external  debt,  build  up  of  foreign  exchange  reserves,  and  improved  credit  quality.  The 
domestic bond market has also received added fillip in many countries. International financial markets 
have remained orderly and buoyant. While resilience against shocks in EMEs has strengthened, it is 
still  an  open  question  whether  the  anecdotal  “herding  behaviour”  of  investors  is  tempered  by  the 
“maturation process” of the investing community across the globe. This factor continues to be a critical 
issue for policy-makers in EMEs.  
Although  overall  global  growth  prospects  have  improved  markedly,  uncertainties  still  remain. 
Significant  challenges  and  risks  which  still  persist  include  possibilities  of  disruptive  global  currency 
adjustments,  continued  structural  problems  and  hardening  of  interest  rates.  The  impact  of  currency 
and interest rate movements needs to be carefully assessed on the balance sheets of households, 
corporates and financial institutions. While the adjustment of the US dollar has been orderly so far, 
there  is  a  need  to  be  vigilant  about  inflation  and  interest  rate  risks  that  could  be  generated  in  the 
process of correction of the high order of current external imbalances.  
To sustain the recovery process and to correct the global imbalances in an orderly manner, there is an 
imperative  need  for  a  coordinated  and  cooperative  approach.  Key  elements  of  this  coordinated 
approach should include different policy responses in different countries/regions. In the US, there is 
need to curb household and government borrowings and strengthen national savings. However, US 
policies would need to delicately balance a gradual withdrawal of fiscal stimulus without hurting the 
recovery and, at the same time, without disruptive adjustment of the US dollar. The Euro area, which 
continues to depend largely on external demand, needs to pursue some structural reforms, especially 
labour policies, to boost domestic demand and broad-base the recovery. Japan needs to continue to 
take some concrete measures to strengthen its financial system, restructure the corporate sector, and 
reduce large fiscal imbalances. There is a growing perception that flexibility in exchange rate policies 
in emerging market economies in Asia is worth considering on pragmatic grounds but as appropriate 
to each country’s circumstances. As the recovery gains further momentum, interest rates which are at 
historically lows, may have a tendency to firm up. The transition to higher interest rates would have to 
be  managed  carefully,  particularly  in  countries  with  high  household  indebtedness  and  exposure  to 
housing and mortgage markets.  
There  is  need  for  bold  leadership  in  resolving  some  of  the  issues  confronting  the  international 
community.  Despite  the  fact  that  past  episodes  of  crises  have  exposed  various  deficiencies  of  the 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
international  financial  system,  progress  towards  developing  a  sound  system  has  been  slow. 
Accumulation of foreign exchange reserves by several Asian countries seems to be not only linked to 
the exchange rate policies and the related trade as well as employment implications but also, to the 
lack of confidence of these countries in the existing architecture. Concrete steps need to be initiated in 
right earnest to redesign the international financial architecture. There is also a need to move swiftly in 
reviving trade talks. The protectionist postures by industrialised countries need to be shed, particularly 
in agriculture and textiles sectors, especially when developing countries have started, at last, to get out 
of their protectionist mindsets. Developing countries are increasingly realising that trade is, after all, 
not  a  zero  sum  game  but  a  win-win  proposition  for  both  the  trading  partners.  In  this  context,  as 
presented  eloquently  by  most  eminent  policy-makers  in  industrialized  countries,  the  recent 
protectionist measures by some countries against business process outsourcing misses out not only 
the efficiency gains from such outsourcing but also the employment gains from resources saved in the 
process and deployed in other employment generating sectors.  
Coming  to  countries  in  my  constituency,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  their  performance  has  been  a 
matter of satisfaction. The Indian economy has moved on to a high growth path. The GDP growth of 
India  during  2003-04  is  expected  to  be  over  8  percent.  Following  good  monsoons,  the  agriculture 
growth has rebounded and is expected to be over 10 per cent. Industrial sector continues to remain 
buoyant. The corporate restructuring undertaken in recent years and further opening up of the external 
sector  have  started  to  yield  dividends  through  higher  productivity  and  better  balance  sheet 
management.  Various  indicators  suggest  that  the  investment  climate  during  the  year  has  improved 
considerably. Infrastructure has been accorded renewed priority. India’s external sector continues to 
be a source of strength. In particular, exports witnessed robust growth despite not so favourable an 
external environment. Growing export of services and remittances have helped maintain a marginal 
surplus in the current account in spite of a growing trade deficit. Reflecting the improved fundamentals, 
capital inflows have been buoyant, but manageable for the conduct of monetary policy. The health of 
the financial sector has also been improving. Improved risk management measures have enabled an 
absolute reduction in the non-performing assets of the public sector banks for the first time since the 
initiation  of  reforms.  Financial  markets  in  general  and  the  equity  markets  in  particular  have 
demonstrated robust performance. Notwithstanding some pressure on prices at the beginning of the 
year,  inflation  continues  to  be  under  control.  The  main  challenge  of  macroeconomic  management 
today  continues  to  be  fiscal  consolidation.  However,  there  are  definitive  signs  of  progress  towards 
deficit reduction. The fiscal deficit of the central government as a proportion of GDP has also declined 
considerably.  Revenues  are  buoyant,  the  disinvestment  programme  has  picked  up  speed,  and 
expenditure  control  and  management  measures  are  firmly  in  place.  The  Fiscal  Responsibility  and 
Budget Management Acts, operating at the Centre and several States can be expected to deliver solid 
progress on the fiscal consolidation front.  
Sri  Lanka  has  made  further  progress  in  2003  towards  economic  stability  and  recovery  with  the 
continuation of sound macroeconomic policies and structural reforms in the context of the continuing 
ceasefire,  and  improvements  in  the  global  economic  environment.  The  international  community  has 
extended support for the government’s economic progress and peace process. There were elections 
in early April and a new government is in place. The Sri Lankan authorities are committed to making 
further  progress  on  the  peace  front,  growth  and  poverty  reduction  and  to  sustain  macroeconomic 
stability.The new government will continue discussions with the Fund on the Poverty Reduction and 
Growth Facility/Extended Fund Facility (PRGF/EFF) arrangement.  
Bangladesh  has  continued  steadfast  implementation  of  reform  measures  under  the  PRGF  program 
with a view to moving the economy to a higher and sustainable growth path. Substantial progress has 
been made in implementing an ambitious agenda of reform measures. A composite strategy is being 
pursued  to  mitigate  the  risks  arising  from  the  scheduled  phasing  out  of  MFA  quotas  at  end-2004. 
Some differences, which are inevitable in a democracy, should not make the international community 
feel that the country’s commitment to economic reforms is lagging. Bangladesh values the financial 
and technical assistance from the international community.  
Bhutan continues to experience strong macroeconomic performance with a robust real GDP growth 
and subdued inflation. Keeping in view the strategy to benefit from integration with the rest of the world 
and through membership of multilateral bodies including the World Trade Organization (WTO), Bhutan 
is undertaking important structural reforms and strengthening the institutional framework.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
Crisis prevention and IMF surveillance across the membership: priorities, tools and modalities  
We  welcome  the  initiatives  taken  by  the  IMF  to  strengthen  the  overall  framework  of  bilateral  and 
multilateral  surveillance.  The  recent  initiatives  undertaken  by  the  Fund  including  the  proposal  to 
integrate the ‘balance sheet approach’ into Fund operations, the proposal to redesign the framework 
for  debt  sustainability  in  low-income  countries  and  the  recent  decision  to  further  strengthen  data 
provision  under  IMF’s  Article  VIII  Section  5,  reflects  the  Fund’s  commitment  towards  adopting  an 
effective  framework  for  vulnerability  assessment.  While  the  above  measures  will  help  member 
countries  to  strengthen  their  statistical  systems  and  for  the  Fund  to  enhance  the  value  of 
country-specific  information  system,  it  is  essential  to  emphasize  that  the  cooperative  and  voluntary 
nature of data provisioning as laid down under the Article needs to be preserved.  
For strengthening surveillance, we welcome the thorough analysis of its various dimensions proposed 
for the next biennial review, including an impact analysis in select countries. We welcome a separate 
study on impact analysis. There is an increasing feeling that the framework of surveillance should be 
more focused in terms of its objectives and targets. While strengthening vulnerability assessment is an 
important element of the surveillance process, the fundamental objective of surveillance is to review 
and analyse macroeconomic policies for ensuring the soundness and stability of the domestic as well 
as the international monetary and payment system.  
The increasing complexity of financial markets have rendered the existing instruments of surveillance 
such  as  Article  IV  consultations,  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program/Financial  System  Stability 
Assessment  (FSAP/FSSA),  and  Reports  on  Observance  of  Standards  and  Codes  (ROSCs)  less 
effective than what was assumed so far, in identifying and preventing crises. In this context, there may 
be a need to reach an appropriate framework of vulnerability assessment based on high frequency 
data, duly taking into account data availability and methodological details. Second, integrating the use 
of high frequency data into the IMF surveillance process would also require a successful identification 
of more stable methodological apparatus as compared to the ones that are presently available. Third, 
the Fund may require rebalancing its objective of vulnerability assessments with respect to developed 
countries  vis-à-vis  developing  countries,  given  the  increasing  empirical  evidence  that  the  primary 
maladjustments  that  lead  to  crises  have  sometimes  emanated  from  developed  financial  markets. 
Finally  and  perhaps  of  paramount  importance,  we  would  like  to  stress  that  increased  transparency 
resulting from assessments of a member country’s incipient vulnerabilities may, in turn, exacerbate a 
crisis  even  when  such  a  country  does  not  face  any  liquidity  problems  and  its  macroeconomic 
conditions  are  stable.  Thus,  there  is  need  to  reconsider  the  issue  of  the  optimal  degree  of 
transparency in such vulnerability assessments.  
Enhancing IMF support to low-income members: instruments and financing; IMF - World Bank 
collaboration; and promoting debt sustainability  
The official development assistance (ODA) by to developing countries falls significantly short of the 
committed  target  of  0.7  per  cent  of  their  gross  national  product  (GNP).  Further,  a  large  part  of  the 
actual  increase  has  been directed  not  to  financing  the  incremental  cost  of  Millennium Development 
Goals (MDGs) but enlarging the scope of debt forgiveness or aiding the war on terror, thus crowding 
out development aid. Net official flows to developing countries have in fact declined. There is also no 
clear picture emerging that donors have moved towards targeting aid better for countries with better 
policies and institutions, and away from imposing excessive transaction costs on recipients, thereby 
impairing efficiency.  
The efforts put by the IMF together with the World Bank towards poverty reduction, debt sustainability 
and  achieving  Millennium  Development  Goals  (MDGs)  are  commendable.  We  appreciate  the 
emphasis on efficient use of available resources, providing cushions for exogenous shocks, expanding 
the  institutional  capacity,  managing  additional  resources,  and  chalking  out  pragmatic  and  effective 
debt  restructuring  mechanism.  The  recent  studies  on  different  aspects  of  financing  should  help  to 
improve  the  flow  of  funds  to  Low  Income  Countries  (LICs)  and  also  strengthen  their  capacity  to 
withstand exogenous shocks and service their debt without jeopardizing their economic growth. We 
agree  that  the  focus  for  future  Fund  engagement  with  LICs  should  include  (a)  an  assessment  of 
policies, (b) dealing with shocks, (c) technical assistance, (d) donor support coordination, and (e) debt 
sustainability analysis for donors.  
Given  the  likely  scenario  of  reduced  annual  lending  capacity  under  the  self-sustained  PRGF 
programme  from  2006,  there  exists  a  need  for  additional  resources.  To  ensure  efficient  use  of 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
available  resources,  concessional  arrangements  should  be  made  more  effective  without  going  for 
substantial  changes  in  existing  arrangements.  We  support  greater  selectivity  in  use  of  PRGF 
resources and tapering of access norms for successive arrangements. On the proposed amendments 
in  instruments  and  financing  for  PRGF,  the  efforts  for  clarifying  blend  criteria,  formalizing  the  low 
access PRGF arrangements are welcome. Greater clarity in the principles of PRGF augmentation for 
addressing  exogenous  shocks  and  the  need  for  Fund  engagement  with  emergency  post-conflict 
countries are also necessary.We are not in favour of duplicating surveillance in the form of Enhanced 
Monitoring Policy (EMP). The drawing up of an explicit exit strategy and introduction of differentiated 
rate  of  charge  for  prolonged  users  as  a  signaling  device  appear  necessary.  Moreover,  a  staff 
monitored  programme,  preferably  after  the  second/third  PRGF  arrangement,  may  ensure  improved 
ownership.  Considering  the  required  efforts  to  be  put  up  by  the  LICs  in  balancing  their  needs  for 
resources and ability to service their debt, we are in favour of developing an operational framework for 
debt sustainability and promoting LICs’ economic growth.  
While it is widely recognised that rising exports could effectively reduce debt service burden, for the 
LICs the quantum of exports has fallen short of the desired target. In this context, there is a need to 
focus  on  remittances  as  a  supplementary  source  of  resources  to  mitigate  debt  service  burden. 
However,  while  trade  in  commodities  has  expanded  over  the  years,  and  cross  border  capital  flows 
exploded,  growth  in  mobility  of  labour  has  not  been  encouraging.  Moreover,  the  demographic 
transition in advanced economies with a declining proportion of the population in the working-age adds 
urgency to the consideration of the issue of cross border mobility of labor. The International Financial 
Institutions  (IFIs)  can  play  a  crucial  role  in  developing  a  harmonised  framework  for  enhancing 
cross-border labour movement and channeling of remittances.  
Progress with crisis resolution initiatives  
Designing a globally accepted institutional framework has been the core issue for achieving “private 
sector  involvement”  in  crises  resolution.  The  introduction  of  ‘Collective  Action  Clauses  (CACs)’  in 
sovereign  bonds  is  increasingly  being  recognized  as  a  tool  that  would  help  mitigate  the  problems 
associated  with  the  free  rider  and  holdout  litigation  involved  in  debt  restructuring  exercises.  In  this 
context, we welcome the recent inclusion of CACs in many of the sovereign debt issues which has not 
resulted in any additional premium. The role of the IMF and other fora such as the G-10 in popularising 
the concept has been commendable. The efforts to develop a 'Code of Conduct’ by initiatives from 
G-20, in addressing the coordination problems that arise in a restructuring exercise is valuable and 
proactive. However, a prescriptive or standardized approach should not be followed in the formulation 
of the Code and the role of the IFIs should be limited to providing overall support to the development 
of  such  a  code.  Finally,  we  welcome  the  adoption  of  the  Evian  Approach  by  the  Paris  Club  for 
redressing debt sustainability concerns of the non-HIPC countries.  
Combating money laundering and financing of terrorism  
We reiterate that India vehemently opposes all forms of terrorism. We also restate our commitment to 
fight against the abuses of the financial system, including money laundering and terrorism financing. In 
India,  a  comprehensive  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering  Act  has  been  passed  to  deal  with  money 
laundering and financing of terrorism.  
We commend the Fund/Bank staff on the overall success of the pilot program and also welcome the 
participation by the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) and the FATF Style Regional Bodies (FSRB) 
in  the  pilot  progrm.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Pilot  program  has  been  achieved  through  the 
deepening of international attention to Anti-Money Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism 
(AML/CFT) issues. However, on AML/CFT issues, the Fund should remain within its mandate as laid 
out in its Articles of Agreement, without getting involved in law enforcement or non-macroeconomic 
issues. Proliferation of areas beyond its core competence may dilute the Fund’s efficiency in its core 
area of functioning. Such an involvement may also not augur well for the co-operative principles that 
must  underpin  IFIs’  engagement  in  this  area.  It  may  be  desirable  to  maintain  the  current  policy  of 
limiting  the  IMF/Bank  involvement  to  responsibilities  for  assessment.  For  rest  of  the  work,  the 
independent AML experts should be financed from external resources.  
4 
 BIS Review 25/2004
to 
increase 
technological  support 
to  multi  member  constituencies 
IMF quotas, voice and representation  
The  problem  of  a  democratic  deficit  and  transparency  in  IMF’s  governance  is  well-recognized.  The 
public  discussion  about  the  process  of  appointing  a  new  Managing  Director  has  again  brought  this 
issue  into  sharp  focus.  A  number  of  measures  have  been  suggested  to  strengthen  voice  and 
representation of the developing countries. We are supportive of the proposals to provide increased 
administrative  and 
their 
effectiveness. We are also open to considering additional chairs to make the two very large African 
constituencies more manageable. However, we have concerns that the Boards may become unwieldy, 
unless  immediate  consideration  is  given  to  merging  or  reducing  the  number  of  chairs  allotted  to 
countries that are one monetary union and/or one trading bloc.  
We reiterate that these measures are not a substitute to real reforms, i.e., structural changes in the 
Board and reform of quota formulas and voting rights. It is worthwhile recalling that similar discussions 
last year culminated merely in some additional posts being created in the two largest constituencies.  
For  real  and  substantive  reform,  a  package  of  measures  must  be  adopted  simultaneously,  and  the 
central  issue,  namely  distribution  of  voting  rights  and  representation  of  member  countries  on  the 
Executive Board, addressed squarely. We appreciate the enormous complexities involved in such an 
exercise,  but  the  current state  of  impasse  on  this  owes  a  great deal  to  the reluctance  of the  major 
shareholders to give up their present disproportionate strengths.  
The  present  quotas,  based  on  a  flawed  formula  with  variables  and  weights  chosen  to  produce  a 
pre-determined result, do not reflect positions that are truly representative of many countries’ profile in 
the world economy. A new formula based on a transparent and objective set of criteria is needed. In 
order to be truly representative of the size of economy and capacity to contribute to Fund resources, 
the  chosen  formula  should  assign  maximum  weights  to  GDP  and  reserves,  and  GDP  should  be 
computed  on  Purchasing  Power  Parity  (PPP)  terms.  This  could  be  accompanied  by  increasing  the 
share of basic votes which have declined from 12.1 percent of the total at the time of Fund’s inception, 
to just 2.1 percent. It may also be worthwhile to review the requirement of supermajority for important 
decisions.  In  conclusion,  we  would  like  to  emphasize  the  need  for  a  comprehensive  approach,  as 
piecemeal  measures  implemented  singly  will  have  only  a  marginal  overall  impact  for  developing 
countries as a whole.  
Activities of the Independent Evaluation Office (IEO)  
The Independent Evaluation Office (IEO) set up in July 2001 continues to play an important role. The 
IEO has come out with final reports on three topics and are in the process of completing another three 
studies. All the three reports released so far have been well received. They have provided an objective 
assessment  of  arguably  some  of  the  most  controversial  and  contentious  issues  relating  to  the 
functioning of the Fund. The IEO has lived up to the expectation.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 5
