T T Mboweni: The South African economy: an overview 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  School  of 
Economics Awards Evening, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 8 July 2004. 
 World economic growth has gained momentum since the middle of last year and amounted to 3,9 per 
cent for 2003 as a whole. Early indications are that activity remained brisk in the first half of 2004, with 
China  and  India  recording  sparkling  performances.  The  global  economic  recovery  has  created 
favourable  conditions  for  higher  commodity  prices.  However,  consumer  price  inflation  remained 
subdued in most parts of the world. Global inflation concerns has, however, arisen due to the relatively 
high  price  of  crude  oil.  A  number  of  central  banks  already  pre-emptively  raised  interest  rates 
moderately  to  contain  future  inflation,  but  on  balance  the  level  of  short-term  interest  rates  remains 
relatively low. 
Favourable  export  prices,  low  interest  rates  and  growth-supportive  fiscal  policy  assisted  domestic 
economic activity and South Africa has now experienced eighteen consecutive quarters of economic 
expansion.  Growth  in  South  Africa’s  real  gross  domestic  product  picked  up  decisively  in  the  first 
quarter of 2004 to a seasonally adjusted annualised rate of 3 per cent - more than double the pace 
attained in any of the four quarters of 2003. 
The acceleration in real output in the first quarter of 2004 was broad-based. Real output in important 
sectors  of  the  economy  such  as  manufacturing  and  agriculture,  which  had  contracted  throughout 
2003, increased markedly in the first quarter of 2004. Platinum producers brought about an increase in 
the production of the mining sector, while construction activity expanded briskly and the tertiary sector 
again recorded a solid growth performance. 
Preliminary  indications  for  the  second  quarter  of  2004  are  that  real  manufacturing  and  mining 
production continued to increase. 
In  contrast  to  the  acceleration  in  domestic  production  growth,  the  pace  of  expansion  in  real  gross 
domestic expenditure lost some of its earlier momentum in the first quarter of 2004. This was largely 
due to a much slower pace of inventory accumulation than in the fourth quarter of 2003. The pace of 
growth in real expenditure nevertheless continued to exceed the pace of growth in real production. 
Real fixed capital formation recorded an exceptionally high rate of increase in the first quarter of 2004 
as  private  business  enterprises  stepped  up  fixed  capital  outlays  and  as  the  South  African  Airways 
acquired several aircraft. The increased production capacity flowing from investment expenditure gives 
good reason for optimism about future growth. 
Growth in real household consumption expenditure also gained further momentum in the first quarter 
of 2004, supported by solid increases in households’ real disposable income and lower interest rates. 
Tax  reductions  and  relatively  high  wage  settlements  supported  growth  in  real  disposable  income. 
Expenditure  on  durable  and  semi-durable  goods  increased  at  a  brisk  rate.  Real  government 
consumption expenditure also rose further mainly on account of the acquisition of another corvette. 
Preliminary  indications  for  the  second  quarter  of  2004  are  that  growth  in  real  gross  domestic 
expenditure probably remained fairly strong. Solid consumer confidence and buoyant retail trade sales 
point towards this conclusion, as well as a quarter-on-quarter rate of increase of 3,6 per cent in new 
vehicle sales. 
Formal non-agricultural employment declined at an annualised rate of 1,7 per cent in the first quarter 
of 2004. Both the public and private sectors experienced declines. Nominal remuneration per worker 
rose at a year-on-year rate of 9,4 per cent over the same period. Overall labour productivity increased 
at a year-on-year rate of 3,3 per cent in the first quarter of 2004 containing unit labour cost to a year-
on-year rate of increase of 5,9 per cent. 
Notwithstanding  the  recovery  in  world  economic  growth,  the  volume  of  South  African  exports 
contracted further in the first quarter of 2004. However, the value of exports increased on account of 
the  marked  improvement  in  the  prices  of  South  African  export  commodities.  Import  volumes  also 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 1
declined  somewhat  in  the  first  quarter  of  2004  because  of  a  decrease  in  crude  oil  imported. 
Accordingly, the deficit on the current account of South Africa’s balance of payments receded slightly 
to 1,6 per cent of gross domestic product. At this level it was easily financed by inflows of direct and 
portfolio investment. 
Preliminary information for April and May 2004 indicates a possibly slightly weaker trade balance in 
the second quarter of 2004. However, in the second quarter of 2004 the proceeds from the Republic of 
South Africa’s global bond issue of $1 billion supported investment flows into South Africa. 
In the first half of 2004, the Reserve Bank continued its accumulation of foreign exchange reserves 
and the strengthening of its international liquidity position. The potential impact of these transactions 
on domestic money-market liquidity was sterilised by means of open-market operations. 
The exchange rate of the rand against a basket of currencies strengthened by 16 per cent in the year 
ending December 2003 and, on balance, appreciated by a further 8,2 per cent in the six months to the 
end of June 2004. This appreciation occurred despite the setback to international prices of commodity 
exports  in  the  second  quarter  of  2004  in  response  to  indications  that  steps  would  be  taken  to  cool 
down buoyant economic growth in China. While these movements of the exchange rate of the rand 
reduced the international competitiveness of South African producers, it resulted in a decline in the 
year-on-year  change  of  imported  goods  over  the  past  14  months,  notwithstanding  a  significant 
increase  in  the  international  price  of  crude  oil  over  this  period.  Goods  price  inflation  therefore 
moderated further both at the production and consumer level. By May 2004, CPIX inflation had been 
maintained within the 3 to 6 per cent target range for nine months in succession and the year-on-year 
rate of increase amounted to 4,4 per cent in each of the three months to May. 
Twelve-month growth in M3 remained brisk though it decelerated from 12,6 per cent in April 2004 to 
11,9 per cent in May. Credit extended by banks by means of mortgages, instalment sale and leasing 
advances  to  the  domestic  private  sector  recorded  strong  growth  in  2004  under  conditions  of  lower 
interest rates, rapidly increasing domestic expenditure and rising house prices. Growth in total loans 
and advances to the private sector nevertheless decelerated from 10 per cent in April 2004 to 9,1 per 
cent in May owing to a decline in overdrafts. 
Yields  on  long-term  South  African  government  bonds  increased  sharply  from  8,87  per  cent  on 
17 January 2004 to 10,26 per cent on 15 June in response to the weaker exchange value of the rand 
and  inflation  concerns  arising  from  strong  real  economic  activity  and  the  higher  price  of  oil. 
Subsequently, bond yields fell back by about 50 basis points as the recovery in the external value of 
the rand scaled down inflation concerns. On balance, the trend in domestic yields closely followed that 
of US government bond yields from the beginning of March 2004. In the share market, prices on the 
JSE Securities Exchange SA fell back by 9,7 per cent from a recent peak in March 2004, in contrast to 
the bull rally in the preceding ten months. The real-estate market remained buoyant and house prices 
continued  to  increase  at  a  brisk  pace,  recording  nominal  year-on-year  rates  of  increase  of  around 
24 per  cent  in  the  first  half  of  2004.  However,  month-on-month  rates  of  increase  in  nominal  house 
prices indicate that the prolonged boom in this sector could be losing some momentum in 2004. 
The authorities continued to pursue a cautiously expansionary fiscal policy, recording a public-sector 
borrowing  requirement  of  3,2  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product  in  fiscal  2003/2004  -  higher  than 
before,  but  nevertheless  in  accordance  with  widely  accepted  principles  of  fiscal  prudence.  It  is 
envisaged that this ratio will decline to 2,7 per cent in fiscal 2006/07. Rising capital expenditure by the 
public  sector  not  only  contributes  to  a  more  efficient  functioning  economy  but  public  works 
programmes also enhance skills and create employment. 
From  this  brief  description  of  recent  economic  developments,  it  can  be  concluded  that  domestic 
growth  prospects  seem  positive.  The  exchange  value  of  the  rand  remains  firm,  and  the  improved 
foreign  exchange  reserve  position  could  contribute  to  rand  strength  and  stability.  In  general  most 
factors favour a containment of inflation within the target range, and market participants also seem to 
be scaling down inflation expectations. However, in the short-term, developments in international oil 
prices, through their impact on domestic fuel costs, are likely to be a source of upward pressure on 
inflation and it is conceivable that the rate of increase in CPIX could temporarily breach the upper level 
of the target range towards the end of 2004 and the early part of 2005. 
Forward-looking monetary policy remains focussed on the expected trend of inflation; policy decisions 
will be guided by the mandate to maintain CPIX inflation within the target range. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2004
Collaboration between the Reserve Bank and universities 
In conclusion I want to emphasise that the South African Reserve Bank has a vision of responsible 
and effective monetary policy formulation and continually strives to be an institution of excellence and 
innovation. In this regard, the Bank remains committed to capacity building and enhancing its skilled 
human resources, providing high-quality and relevant research, and facilitating and stimulating debate 
on pertinent monetary policy issues. I therefore wish to make use of this opportunity to emphasise the 
Bank’s  commitment  to  continuous  interaction  and  involvement  with  the  academic  world  on  both 
theoretical  and  empirical  aspects  of  economic  research,  monetary  policy 
formulation  and 
implementation. 
As  you  are  well  aware,  the  Bank’s  professional  staff  members  embark  on  a  career  at  the  Reserve 
Bank after obtaining formal qualifications from a university or other tertiary institution. Many of our staff 
members are encouraged to develop further skills and continue with postgraduate studies by utilising 
the bursary scheme of the Bank which is available to all our staff members. In fact, it makes me proud 
to see that tonight we are honouring no fewer than three of our employees who received their PhDs at 
the fall 2004 graduation ceremony of the University of Pretoria. They are joining the ranks of many 
other  highly  reputable  senior  bank  officials  who  also  obtained  their  postgraduate  training  at  this 
illustrious  university.  I  would  furthermore  like  to  add  that  the  Bank  supports  human  resources 
development in general and has now developed a new bursary system to support deserving students 
pursuing studies in economics, finance and ICT. These areas are central to our work at the Bank. 
The collaboration between the Bank and the University of Pretoria has a proud history. I am therefore 
very keen that this close relationship be expanded further. This can be particularly beneficial for both 
our institutions in the field of monetary economics, which does not seem to receive enough attention in 
South  Africa.  Such  a  collaboration  will  be  in  line  with  developments  elsewhere  in  the  world. 
Internationally, establishing strategic partnerships between central banks and universities has become 
a  norm.  There  is  collaboration  between  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  Goethe  University  in 
Frankfort and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Georgetown University, to 
name just two. 
I  realise  that  the  University  of  Pretoria,  and  particularly  the  Department  of  Economics,  is  already 
making a substantial contribution to training, research and policy analysis through the activities of the 
Bureau of Economic Policy and Analysis (BEPA), the Investment and Trade Policy Centre (ITPC), the 
Southern  African  Tax  Institute  (SATI)  and  the  African  Institute  for  Economic  Modelling  (Afrinem). 
Monetary economics, however, is perhaps not receiving the attention it deserves. This can perhaps be 
rectified in collaboration with the Reserve Bank. 
Apart from the fact that the University of Pretoria is ideally situated in close proximity to the Bank, it 
stands to reason that formalising a partnership between the Bank and the University of Pretoria will 
create  economies  of  scale  to  the  benefit  of  both  institutions.  The interactions  between  the  Reserve 
Bank  and  the  University  of  Pretoria  could  play  an  important  role  in  advancing  our  intellectual 
capabilities and the deepening of our knowledge regarding the intricacies of monetary economics in 
general and central banking in particular. The collaboration between the two institutions is therefore 
fundamental for the fulfilment of our commitment to excellence, not only in terms of training but also in 
terms of economic analysis and research. 
I hope that our respective officials will finalise the proposal they are considering in this regard. I am 
absolutely excited about the potential for this. 
Now, let me congratulate the Award winners tonight. Well done. We depend on you to research, write 
and publish on economic theory, empirical issues and inform on policy development. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 3
