Mark W Olson: The Federal Open Market Committee and the formation of 
monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  W  Olson,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System,  at  the  26th  Conference  of  the  American  Council  on  Gift  Annuities,  Orlando,  Florida, 
5 May 2004. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  here  this  evening.  When  my  longtime  friend  Lance  Jacobson 
extended  this  invitation  more  than  a  year  ago,  I  readily  accepted.  Several  months  later,  the  2004 
calendar of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings was released, and I discovered that 
this  meeting  would  occur  on  the  day  following  the  Committee's  May  meeting.  Because  FOMC 
members observe a blackout on discussions of the economy for the week before and the week of the 
FOMC meetings, I prefer not to talk about current economic conditions. However, I can provide you 
with some insight into the way the FOMC functions and the impact of monetary policy on the U.S. and 
global economies. My former Federal Reserve colleague Laurence Meyer provided the blueprint for 
this  presentation  in  a  1998  speech  entitled  “Come  with  Me  to  the  FOMC.”1  That  title,  in  turn,  was 
borrowed  from  remarks  given  back  in  1951.  While  my  remarks  are  not  identical  in  either  style  or 
substance, I have borrowed heavily from Larry's presentation, and you have the assurance that they 
have a long history. 
First,  a  comment  or  two  on  who  we  are.  Nineteen  policymakers  participate  in  FOMC  meetings, 
although at most only twelve vote at any one time. At times vacancies on the Board mean that the 
FOMC has fewer than twelve voting members. The Board has now operated at full strength for almost 
two years, after several years with two vacancies. Each of the Board members is appointed by the 
President of the United States and confirmed by the Senate. Our Chairman, Alan Greenspan, has two 
designations: The President has appointed him both as a Board member and as Chairman. A Board 
member's  term  is  fourteen  years,  and  the  Chairman  has  a  term  of  four  years.  Though  
Alan  Greenspan's  chairmanship  expires  this  June,  his  term  as  a  Board  member  extends  through 
January 2006. As you may know, President Bush announced last year that he intended to reappoint 
Mr. Greenspan as Chairman. The Board Vice Chairman is also appointed by the President for a four-
year term. The current Vice Chairman, Roger Ferguson, was reappointed last fall. 
In addition to the Board of Governors, five of the twelve Reserve Bank presidents vote in any given 
year.  The  President  of  the  New  York  Fed  is  a  permanent  voting  member  whereas  the  other  Bank 
presidents vote every other or every third year. If you find this construct confusing, or unduly complex, 
perhaps a bit of background is in order.  
The Federal Reserve System is generically described as the central bank of the United States. In the 
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries there were two attempts to establish a central bank of 
the  United  States,  and  neither  endured  for  more  than  twenty  years  -  in  contrast  to  most  European 
nations, where central banks were well established by the nineteenth century. Though you may not be 
familiar with the history of our central bank, you may well remember learning about the debates on the 
concept  of  federalism  by  our  nation's  founders,  when  the  forces  favoring  decentralization,  led  by 
Thomas  Jefferson,  fought  the  proponents  of  a  more  centralized  government,  led  by  Alexander 
Hamilton.  The  Jeffersonian  forces  largely  prevailed.  As  a  result,  the  United  States  lacked  a  strong 
central bank presence but had no authority even to grant national charters to commercial banks until 
the Abraham Lincoln Administration. All bank charters were originally granted by the states and, as a 
consequence, the United States at one time had more than 25,000 bank charters. Today, we have 
about  8,000  separate  bank  charters.  By  contrast,  most  other  developed  nations  have  fewer  than 
100 separately chartered banks.  
In the early part of the last century, a monetary panic stimulated the legislation leading to the Federal 
Reserve Act of 1913. And consistent with our tradition of dispersed economic power, the new central 
bank of the United States was created with a significant grass roots component. As a result, twelve 
Federal Reserve Banks were created, owned by member banks in each District, headed by a Reserve 
                                                      
1   Come with Me to the FOMC, Laurence H. Meyer, the Gillis Lecture, Williamette University, Salem Oregon, April 2, 1998.  
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
Bank president, and supervised by the Federal Reserve Board in Washington. To give you a sense of 
the  dispersal  of  resources  within  the  Federal  Reserve,  more  than  22,000  employees  work  in  the 
System, meaning both the Banks and the Board. Of that number, about 1,700 work for the Board in 
Washington,  and  the  remaining  20,000-plus  work  in  the  twelve  Banks.  Of  the  1,700  Washington 
employees,  roughly  250  are  Ph.D. economists,  the  majority  of whom support the  Board's monetary 
policy responsibilities. 
The  FOMC  has  eight  scheduled  meetings  each  year,  roughly  every  six  weeks.  Financial  markets 
follow the FOMC's actions very carefully and examine each word in the statement released after each 
meeting.  Today  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  my  perspectives  gleaned  from  thirty  months  on  the 
Board and twenty FOMC meetings. 
I  was  most  impressed  at  my  first  FOMC  meeting  in  December  2001  by  the  extraordinary  level  of 
preparation by and for the FOMC members. Let me begin by describing the contributions of the twelve 
Bank  presidents.  Each  of  the  twelve  Banks  is  staffed  with  economists  who  monitor  the  economic 
conditions in their respective Districts. A summary of the regional analysis is compiled in what we call 
the Beige Book (because it has a beige cover) and released to the public about two weeks before the 
FOMC meeting. Today we are in Florida, which is part of the Atlanta Fed's District, so let me speculate 
on how developments in this area's economy may enter our deliberations. Jack Guynn, president of 
the  Atlanta  Fed,  comes  to  the  meeting  prepared  to  discuss  the  outlook  for  the  entire  Sixth  Federal 
Reserve District. With respect to this particular part of the District, Jack may discuss Florida's citrus 
crop,  the  relative  health  of  the  tourism  industry,  and  trends  in  Florida  real  estate  prices.  Because 
Florida is also a gateway to Latin America, he may also discuss factors affecting trade with that part of 
the world.  
Similar preparations take place at each of the other eleven Banks. Though only five presidents vote at 
each meeting, all twelve prepare reports and participate fully in FOMC discussions. The president of 
the New York Federal Reserve Bank is accorded a special role on the FOMC. That person - currently 
Timothy  Geithner  -  is  always  a  voting  member  and  is  traditionally  elected  as  Vice  Chairman  of  the 
FOMC. This role is largely a reflection of the New York Fed's responsibility for implementing monetary 
policy decisions through its open market desk operations. 
Typically, after the approval of the minutes of the previous FOMC meeting, the first order of business 
is  a  report  from  the  System  Open  Market  Account  (SOMA)  Manager  at  the  New  York  Fed.  The 
Manager discusses market activity since the most recent FOMC meeting and may also report on any 
other domestic or international market activity that may reflect trends in the U.S. and world economies. 
The SOMA Manager's report is followed by reports by senior Board economists, including the directors 
of  the  Division  of  Research  and  Statistics  and  the  Division  of  International  Finance.  Each  report 
summarizes what we refer to as the Greenbook, which is prepared by a team of economists. The time 
between  receipt  of  the  Greenbook  and  the  reports  by  the  directors  is  a  time  of  intense  study  and 
preparation by the FOMC members. Governors often schedule briefings from Fed economists besides 
conducting their own individual reviews. The materials typically arrive on our desks late Thursday or 
early Friday and our Board review of economic conditions occurs the following Monday morning. In our 
household, my family has learned that my time during the weekend before an FOMC meeting is often 
largely consumed in preparation for it.  
While the preparation for FOMC members is very intense, I would be remiss if I did not give full credit 
to the effort of the economists preparing the reports. Fed staff economists hold off their Greenbook 
preparation  until  the  last  possible  minute  and  supplement  it  just  before  the  meeting  with  the  most 
up-to-date economic data releases and developments.  
The Federal Reserve Board has, over time, developed powerful econometric modeling tools to assist 
our understanding of the many interrelated economic forces. In large part because human behavior 
cannot be modeled, we cannot fully anticipate all the factors that can affect our economic policy, and 
no econometric model can predict perfectly. Therefore we often review alternative scenarios that may 
reflect different ways in which the economy may respond in a variety of situations.  
After the economists' reports, we turn to the presidents and governors. Typically the presidents report 
first  on  regional  economic  developments  as  well  as  on  their  independent  views  on  the  national 
economy. Not surprisingly, economists from the Banks and the Board largely agree, but occasionally 
discernable differences exist, particularly with respect to economic forecasts. The presidents' reports 
often include anecdotal updates from businesses or other sources to provide real-time information on 
regional economic activity. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
Following  the  presidents'  presentations,  the  Fed  governors  provide  their  individual  analyses.  Our 
presentations focus largely on analysis of the current condition of the economy and, for the most part, 
do not contain monetary policy recommendations. 
After each of the FOMC members has spoken, the director of the Division of Monetary Affairs presents 
the  Bluebook,  with  prospective  policy  options  for  the  Committee's  consideration.  In  my  time  on  the 
FOMC, generally two or three options have been presented, each accompanied by a list of pros and 
cons. After the presentation of policy alternatives, FOMC members resume their discussion, focusing 
now on their policy preferences. In the twenty FOMC meetings in which I have participated, Chairman 
Greenspan's  participation  in  the  discussion  until  this  point  has  been  limited.  I  suspect  that  this  fact 
might surprise most FOMC observers as Chairman Greenspan, like virtually all of his predecessors, is 
considered  almost  the  personification  of  monetary  policy.  Yet  before  the  Chairman  offers  his  first 
substantive comments at these meetings, eighteen other participants, representing literally hundreds 
of hours of study and analysis, have provided their input. 
Considering the complexity of the U.S. economy and the implications of monetary policy on the world 
economy, the issue facing each FOMC member is deceptively simple. We establish a target interest 
rate  for  what  is  known  as  federal  funds  -  or,  more  commonly,  fed  funds.  Fed  funds  constitute  an 
interbank arrangement that allows banks with surplus balances at their Federal Reserve Bank to loan 
those funds overnight to banks that temporarily need to borrow to meet their balance requirements. An 
individual bank's balances on their Federal Reserve accounts can vary significantly depending on the 
dollar amount of the checks cleared that day, the volume and sequence of wire transfers in and out of 
the bank's account, and changes in investment or lending at the bank. In the aggregate, fed funds are 
an important indicator of liquidity in the banking system and, by implication, the money supply. All fed 
funds loans are for a single day, and the interest rate is reestablished daily. Fed funds rates thus are 
an excellent barometer of both the price of money and the changes in the money supply.  
The Federal Reserve Act requires that monetary policy promote maximum employment, stable prices 
and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.  Happily,  in  this  instance,  congressional  intent  is  also  sound 
monetary policy. Former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker once said, “No central bank can - or 
should,  in  my  judgment  -  conduct  policies  for  long  that  are  out  of  keeping  with  basic,  continuing 
objectives  of  the  political  system.”2  When  I  was  a  young  banker  in  the  1960s,  many  of  my  loan 
customer's  decisions  were  affected  at  least  in  part  by  memories  of  the  Great  Depression.  While 
depression fears were widespread, the ravages of high inflation elsewhere, such as post-World War I 
Europe,  had  not  been  experienced  here.  In  fact,  many  people  had  a  positive  view  of  inflation  as 
leading rising property values and were not convinced that inflation was inherently bad. Public policy 
decisions  with  inflationary  implications  -  often  expressed  as  funding  both  "guns  and  butter"  -  were 
broadly  supported.  Only  after  the  high-inflation  years  of  the  late  1970s  and  early1980s,  after  the 
spending  power  of  incomes  had  been  seriously  eroded,  were  the  consequences  of  inflation  fully 
understood. Part of the success in achieving consistent economic growth in the United States is due in 
significant part to broad public support for our mandated monetary policy objectives. 
FOMC  monetary  policy  affects  the  money  supply  through  the  Open  Market  Desk  at  the  New  York 
Federal Reserve Bank. A team of young (I mean young - half my age or less), whip-smart men and 
women begin each workday by analyzing all the factors affecting the money supply. They then gauge 
the appropriate amount of buying or selling for the Fed's portfolio of government securities required to 
maintain  our  target  rate.  When  more  liquidity  is  required,  the  Domestic  Trading  Desk  purchases 
securities.  If  tightening  is  in  order,  the  Desk  sells  into  the  market,  replacing  idle  balances  with 
investment  securities  and  thereby  marginally  reducing  the  liquidity  in  the  banking  system.  Though 
these  professionals  are  young,  money  market  activity  conducted  by  the  New  York  Fed  is  an 
established discipline more than eighty years old. As a result, the team knows from experience how 
best to maintain the target rate. The daily determination to buy or sell is communicated to a group of 
pre-selected  securities  dealers  known  as  primary  dealers,  which  ensures  a  consistent  and  reliable 
group  of  market  participants  and  a  competitive  bid  process  for  these  transactions.  The  buy  or  sell 
orders are communicated electronically to the primary dealers early each day, and when the bidding is 
opened shortly after 9:30 a.m., the day's transactions are completed within seconds. 
                                                      
2   The Human Factor and the Fed, Paul C. Volcker, in David C. Colander and Dewey Daane, eds., The Art of Monetary Policy, 
(Armonk, N.Y.: 1994), pp. 21-33. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
However,  the  FOMC  members  know  that  our  decisions  affect  more  than  the  money  supply.  Many 
other interest rates are indexed directly or indirectly to the fed funds rate. Further, FOMC decisions are 
viewed as an indication of the economy's underlying strength or weakness. In part, because of these 
broad implications, efforts have been made in recent years to improve our communication practices. 
The FOMC's current practice is to issue a news release after our regular meetings, about 2:15 p.m. 
(ET). The release currently has three parts. The first part states the fed funds target rate of interest; 
the  second  briefly  explains  and  updates  our  analysis  of  current  economic  conditions.  The  third 
provides our assessment of the balance of risks with respect to the prospects for price stability and 
economic growth.  
The FOMC decision is communicated to the Domestic Trading Desk at the New York Fed, and the 
revised  policy  is  then  initiated  and  becomes  the  policy  guideline  for  the  next  six  or  seven  weeks. 
However, the FOMC can reconvene and reconsider its monetary policy stance at any time, at the call 
of the Chairman, as changes in the economy warrant. 
I said earlier that one of my first impressions of FOMC meetings related to the extraordinary level of 
preparation by both economists and members. Let me share two other impressions as well. 
At  most  FOMC  meetings,  the  vote  on  the  final  FOMC  target  and  the  accompanying  statement  has 
been unanimous. This pattern raises an obvious question as to the extent to which votes contrary to 
the will of the Chairman - or the majority - are tolerated. Having spent several years on Capitol Hill 
where unanimous votes on major issues rarely occur, I am particularly conscious of the contrast. One 
reason many votes are unanimous is that there is no “loyal opposition bloc” within the Committee. The 
FOMC contains neither caucuses nor coalitions representing either political or philosophic differences. 
Second, and in stark contrast to other environments, there is a notable absence of posturing, which I 
define as an isolated or “throw away” vote to make a statement or to call attention to an individual 
cause. 
Yet there are clearly discernable differences in economic philosophy among FOMC members. Over 
the years, FOMC watchers have labeled some of the Committee members as either inflation-fighting 
hawks or growth-promoting doves based on previous voting patterns and public statements. In recent 
months, news articles have pointed out the different approaches to policy represented by Governors 
Ben  Bernanke  and  Donald  Kohn,  the  Board's  two  newest  members.  Governor  Bernanke,  a  widely 
respected researcher and monetary policy textbook author, has advocated inflation targeting - that is, 
publicly identifying an acceptable range for inflation. Several other monetary authorities, including the 
Bank  of  England,  have  adopted  this  approach.  Governor  Kohn,  a  career  Federal  Reserve  System 
economist  with  an  equally  stellar  reputation  in  his  field,  disagrees,  preferring  that  FOMC  members 
establish  monetary  policy  not  with  a  predetermined  range  of  acceptable  inflation  rates  but  by 
considering  a  broader  range  of  economic  factors.  I  find  this  relatively  public  debate  to  be  both 
instructive  and  healthy.  It  provides  evidence  of  the  depth  of  understanding  and  analysis  by  FOMC 
members and supports the integrity of FOMC voting patterns when observers note that Ben and Don 
have recorded identical votes during their tenures. 
One  other  thought  on  the  FOMC  tendency  for  unanimous  votes  concerns  the  nature  of  Chairman 
Greenspan's  leadership.  The  Chairman  encourages  forthright  and  thorough  discussion.  He  seeks 
consensus  among  FOMC  members,  and  the  personal  views  he  interjects  into  the  discussion  serve 
more as a beacon than a command. As a result, he achieves consensus through the quality of his 
leadership and the depth of his analysis. 
A  final  observation  concerns  the  limitations  of  monetary  policy.  During  the  months  between  my 
nomination  and  swearing-in  to  the  Board,  I  read  numerous  articles  and  talked  with  many  monetary 
policy  authorities.  A  common  theme  during  that  time  of  preparation  concerned  monetary  policy's 
limitations. In his Come with Me to the FOMC article, Larry Meyer wrote eloquently on this very point. I 
will try to make the same point.  
The primary role of monetary policy is to achieve price stability. Inflation, as Milton Friedman famously 
said, is always a monetary phenomenon. To control the supply of money is also, in the long run, to 
control the rate of inflation. By contrast, monetary policy does not as directly influence employment or 
output. Therefore, much of the historic strength and resilience of the U.S. economy is only tangentially 
influenced  by  monetary  policy.  Obviously,  output  and  employment  benefit  from  the  environment  of 
price stability that monetary policy works to achieve. 
Monetary  policy  is  also  a  blunt  instrument.  It  does  not,  and  cannot,  target  a  particular  segment  of 
society or of the economy. FOMC members become very conscious of this fact as every part of the 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
economic  cycle  seems  to  benefit  some  and  penalize  others.  Overwhelmingly,  however,  monetary 
policy aimed at achieving price stability and maximum sustainable employment over time provides the 
best environment for job creation and improving living standards. 
It  has  been  my  privilege  to  associate  with  the  men  and  women  who  constitute  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee.  Without  exception,  it  is  a  dedicated,  committed,  and  talented  group  that  fully 
understands  both  the  responsibilities  and  the  limitations  of  making  monetary  policy  for  the  United 
States. I hope this presentation has provided some insight into how we carry out our responsibilities. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 5
