L Wilson Kamit: Monetary policy, supervision and governance of the financial 
system in Papua New Guinea 
Speech delivered by Mr L Wilson Kamit, CBE, Governor of the Bank of Papua New Guinea, at the 
workshop of the New Ireland Forum for Development on ‘Partnership in development - understanding 
the issues’, at the Institute of Public Administration, Port Moresby, 14 August 2004. 
 Rt. Honourable Sir Julius Chan 
Ambassador Noel Levi 
Other distinguished guests and speakers 
Organisers of the New Ireland Forum for Development 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introduction 
I  am  honoured  to  be  here  today  to  address  the  New  Ireland  Foru  m  for  Development.  The  overall 
theme,  ‘Partnership  in  Development  -  Understanding  the  Issues’  is  an  ideal  one,  given  the  current 
state  of  our  socio-economic  and  political  development,  as  well  as  the  on-going  changes  within  our 
nation and society. Thank you Mr. Stephen Mokis for the invitation. 
The new Central Banking Act (CBA) of 2000 requires greater transparency and accountability in the 
Central  Bank’s  activities.  We  are  required  to  publicise  economic  information  through  the  Quarterly 
Economic Bulletins (QEB), Annual Reports, Semiannual Monetary Policy Statements (the latest was 
dated  30  July)  and  the  monthly  Kina  Facility  Rate  (KFR)  announcements.  This  also  requires  giving 
talks and presentations to different sectors of the business and civic community on what we do, as 
opposed to the past where we shied away from such invitations to speak publicly. Over the years, I 
had had the opportunity to address graduation ceremonies of educational institutions, given talks to 
business  grouping  and  have  made  presentations  at  various  forums  around  the  country.  With  the 
Central Bank Board, we have held Board meetings at Alotau, Lae, Wewak, Kavieng and Goroka. On 
other business, staff and I have visited Manus, Mount Hagen and Kokopo on different occasions to 
give public talks. There were also briefings to the National Executive Council (NEC) and the Economic 
Ministers. In July last year (2003), I was invited to address the Provincial Governors’ Conference in 
Kavieng. It was the first time for the Central Bank to address a large number of politicians and public 
servants under one roof. 
Today’s  invitation  is  one  such  meeting  that  we  are  happy  to  attend.  The  presentation  is  however 
slightly  different,  because  whilst  my  talk  on  ‘Monetary  Policy,  Supervision  and  Governance  of  the 
Financial System’ has a national emphasis, this forum has a provincial focus. 
I  have  divided  my  talk  into  the  three  areas  mentioned,  namely,  monetary  policy,  supervision  and 
governance. 
Managing and implementing monetary policy 
The  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  deals  with  the  monetary  policy  of  the  country,  one  of  the  major 
economic  policies  of  the  Government.  The  other  policies  include  the  fiscal  or  budget,  wages,  and 
employment policies. By October this year, Papua New Guinea will have had a floa ting currency for 
ten years. We floated in 1994. 
The new CBA 2000 outlines the main objective of monetary policy as ‘achieving and maintaining price 
stability’. Stable prices, which include stable exchange rates, and low interest rates and inflation, are 
important to promote economic efficiency and growth in the long run. Experiences show that countries 
with high inflation have poor economic performance, due to amongst other things, poor functioning of 
product and labour markets, distributional effects, and high cost of doing business. 
Maintaining  price  stability  in  a  small  open  economy  such  as  PNG  requires  amongst  other  things, 
relative stability in the exchange rate. Downward pressure on the kina exchange rate can come about 
from domestic sources, mainly fiscal imbalances and too much private sector credit, and from external 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
sources,  such  as  developments  in  international  markets  or  natural  disasters  such  as  the  El  Nino 
drought and frost. 
The appropriate monetary policy response to a depreciating currency and rising inflation is to tighten 
monetary conditions (increase interest rates). This would encourage domestic residents to keep their 
wealth in kina denominated assets, as well as discourage domestic consumption and import demand. 
However,  increasing  interest  rates  to  tighten  monetary  conditions  would  also  discourage  domestic 
investment, resulting in a decline in private sector activity and employment. On the other hand, when 
the currency is stable or appreciating and with inflation falling, then monetary policy would be eased 
(reducing interest rates). 
Monetary policy was tightened from mid-2002 up to mid-2003 due to inflationary pressures as the kina 
depreciated to an all time low. The recent fiscal discipline of the Government, improved international 
commodity prices and exports, and confidence in the macroeconomic management of the economy 
has seen a recovery in our economy. This has lead to high international reserve levels at the Central 
Bank,  stability  in  the  exchange  rate  and  declining  inflation.  The  Central  Bank  therefore  eased 
monetary  policy  in  the  second  half  of  2003  and  has  maintained  this  stance  in  2004  to  stimulate 
economic activity. Whilst there are favourable economic indicators, lending by the commercial banks 
remain flat. 
International reserves at the Central Bank now totals around US$612 million (almost K2 billion), the 
exchange  rate  has  sta  bilised  at  around  0.3110  US  dollar  and  inflation  has declined  to  2.9  percent 
over the year to March 2004. Economic activity as measured by the gross domestic product (GDP) is 
projected to increase by 2.8 percent this year, while employment in the formal private sector continues 
to grow. 
These  gains  however  should  not  allow  us  to  become  complacent.  Rather,  we  have  to  continue  to 
maintain vigilance in ensuring appropriate policies and actions are pursued so that we can continue to 
gain on these hard won achievements. 
An effective monetary policy requires a sound financial system. The Central Bank ensures this through 
its supervisory function. I will now discuss this second major function of the Central Bank. 
Supervision of the financial system 
At  the  Bank  of  PNG,  following  the  passing  of  several  legislations  (CBA  2000,  BFIA  2000,  Life 
insurance and Superannuation Acts) our responsibility now covers the supervision of almost the whole 
financial system in the country. Besides the commercial banks, finance companies, and savings and 
loan  societies,  we  now oversee  the  life  insurance  companies,  superannuation  funds,  and  the  micro 
credit schemes. This is in addition to our other responsibility of managing monetary policy. We take 
seriously these responsibilities because we are mindful of the profound impact of our decisions and 
actions  or  inactions  on  the  economy  and  society  as  a  whole.  We  insist  on  the  same  standards  we 
expect from those the Bank supervises. 
The  Central  Bank  also  encourages  the  establishment  of  savings  and  loan  societies  to  provide 
complementary financial services to those provided by the banks, finance companies and the existing 
Savings  and  Loan  societies.  There  were  two  types  of  saving  and  loan  societies  until  recently: 
employer-based  societies  such  as  Teachers  and  Elcom;  and  provincial-based  societies  like  the  Niu 
Ailan Savings and Loan society. Provincial-based societies are flavoured in a fashion that membership 
is open to those living in the province and those who are from the province but are living or working 
outside  the  province.  There  is  now  an  addition  to  the  type  of  societies  available  -  only  yesterday  I 
launched  the  service  centre  for  the  Nasfund  Savings  and  Loan  Society.  This  society  is  open  to 
membership  from  contributors  of  the  Nasfund,  which  covers  a  cross-section  of  employees  in  the 
private sector. 
As at the end of June 2004, there were twenty-one (21) active savings and loan societies, of which, 
the Niu Ailan Savings and Loan Society Limited is one. I will talk briefly on the Niu Ailan Savings and 
Loan Society. 
I have to first of all express my condolences on the passing of the founding Chairman of the society, 
the Late Mr. Greg Luka. Under his stewardship, the Society has grown to become one of the success 
stories. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
The  New  Ireland  Provincial  Government  was  the  promoter  of  the  establishment  of  the  Niu  Ailan 
Savings and Loan Society, with a cash donation of K50,000 when it was registered in March 1995. 
Annual grants of K50,000 from the provincial government were given in 1995 and 1996, and in kind up 
until April 2002. The success of the society is shown in its membership, which grew from 167 in March 
1995 to 5,754 at the end of June 2004. As I’ve already mentioned, membership is open to all New 
Irelanders living in or outside the province. So Stephen, if you decide to migrate to Australia or Fiji, you 
can still be a member. The only hitch is your deposits mus t be paid in kina (not dollars). Oh, I also 
doubt if the society will accept deposits in mis either, but kina and toea, they will accept. 
The society is also in a financially strong and viable position. As at the end of June 2004, total assets 
of the soc iety were K6.5 million, while total deposits and liabilities were K5.3 million and K5.5 million, 
respectively. Total loans amounted to K2.8 million. 
The success of the society is based on good management and sound business practice, and I have 
acknowle  dged  the  stewardship  of  the  Late  Greg  Luka  in  this  area.  This  prudent  management  and 
good  corporate  governance  will  have  to  continue  for  the  society  to  maintain  its  satisfactory 
performance. 
We have also created a microfinance unit in the Bank to deal with microfinance issues. Early this year, 
we launched the Wau Microbank in the Morobe province. Microfinance is an area of increased interest 
and we are considering appropriate legal framework to oversee this industry. 
We are all familiar with the illegal money schemes or pyramid schemes. The Central Bank continues 
to  work  with  the  law  enforcing  agencies  to  stamp  up  these  illegal  schemes,  which  have  created 
financial  problems  for  many  of  our  people.  We  have  taken  out  advertisements  listing  the  licensed 
financial  institutions  and  warning  the  public  on  the  illegal  schemes.  We  need  the  public’s  support 
- your support - to help us stop and prosecute the operators of these schemes. 
As part of the international community, we are not immune from financial threats and illegal activities 
from  abroad.  The  Central  Bank  is  working  with  other  Government  agencies  in  implementing 
appropriate mechanisms to deal with money laundering, terrorism financing and proceeds from crime. 
Not only must we safeguard our financial system from domestic threats, but also from external ones. 
At this point, one may ask; who then supervises the supervisor? Who supervises the Governor? This 
is an important question given all that I have talked about on our increased responsibilities. 
At  the  Central  Bank,  the  recently  passed  legislations  explicitly  state  that  the  Governor  is  solely 
responsible for managing monetary policy and supervision of the financial system. We have in place a 
Board  of  Directors  drawn  from  a  cross-section  of  the  community  -  comprising  representation  from 
accountants,  trade  unions,  churches,  businesses,  and  prominent  individuals.  This  Board  is  very 
vigilant  and  their  statutory  role  is  to  ensure  that  the  Governor  performs  his  roles  diligently  and 
prudently in the conduct of monetary policy and supervision of the financial system. Performance can 
be gauged from the achievement of the objective of monetary policy, which is ‘price stability’, as well 
as  the  soundness  of  the  financial  system.  The  Central  Bank  can  also  be  called  up  by  the 
Parliamentary Public Accounts Committee. 
Governance of the financial system 
The supervision of our financial system requires sound management of the institutions at all levels. 
Governance, and in particular, good corporate governance has become an important part of our daily 
work and language. Together with the other buzz-words of transparency, independence and integrity, 
what do good governance and accountability entail? 
One cannot stress enough the importance of good governance and accountability for an individual, an 
organisation and society as a whole. It has to become part of our work culture and ethics. Whilst we 
can spend all day talking about development and making plans, our best policies and strategies will 
not  work  if  good  governance  is  missing  in  their  implementation.  And  in  PNG,  we  have  had  a  poor 
record - but it is improving. 
The lack of corporate governance and accountability in many of our institutions has been an area of 
concern.  Our  past  history  and  record  of  management  in  Papua  New  Guinea,  especially  in  public 
institutions  which  are  guardians  of  the  nation’s  interests  and  wealth,  has  given  rise  to  the  need  to 
re-establish proper procedures and order.  
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
The  on-going  work  of  the  Parliamentary  Public  Accounts  Committee,  which  is  an  attempt  to  instill 
accountability on the use and management of public resources, iscommendable. So are the efforts of 
the  Ombudsman  Commission,  the  Institute  of  Directors,  Inc.,  Transparency  International  and  other 
organisations  that  aim  to  promote  good  governance  and  accountability.  These  institutions  not  only 
advocate  the  use  of  proper  rules  and  guidelines  in  conducting  business,  but  also  the  use  of  one’s 
good sense and due diligence. 
Whilst it is one thing to have in place the best rules and regulations, it is another thing to practice them 
using common sense. The collapses of large companies abroad, some due to accounting fraud but 
others due to carelessness and neglect, highlight the need for continued diligence. Closer to home, 
the turn around of the former PNG Banking Corporation, prior to its sale, other financial institutions that 
the  Bank  supervises,  such  as  superannuation  funds  (case  of  NPF)  from  loss-making  institutions  to 
profitable ones in a short space of time was based on one thing alone; the newly appointed Board and 
management  of  these  institutions  ensured  that  everyone  was  diligent  and  followed  the  established 
rules and guidelines re-sounding good governance. The important lesson here is, do not take short 
cuts. 
It is important that we all remain a “Fit and Proper” person for purposes of directorships, management 
appointments and general community recognition and acceptance. This applies equally to a Managing 
Director of a company as it does to an Honorary Treasurer of a Church. This good reputation must 
come to us over time and we must work at it - we cannot buy an excellent reputation. We must earn it. 
Conclusion 
The  theme  of  this  workshop  is  a  very  meaningful  and  timely  one:  Partnership  in  Development  - 
Understanding  the  Issues.  We  all  have  a  part,  those  in  Government,  the  private  sector, 
Non-Government  organisations,  and  the  in-formal  sectors  in  ensuring  that  the  real  benefits  of 
economic development is passed on down to our people. 
The Central Bank realises that its policies and activities cannot be done in isolation from those of other 
organisations.  Monetary  policy  on  its  own  cannot  deal  with  the  problems  of  this  country.  It  has  its 
strengths, as well as its limitations. 
However, working together, understanding the issues, abiding by established rules and procedures, as 
well as practising good governance would enable organisations and institutions to perform effectively. 
This  would  go  a  long  way  in  ensuring  our  people  receive  tangible  benefits,  and  achieving  a 
harmonious and better society for all our people. 
In  conclusion,  may  I  once  again  thank  the  Convenor  of  this  Forum,  Mr.  Stephen  Mokis,  and  his 
Committee, for your invitation and all of your contribution and participation at this event. 
Thank you and God bless all. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2004
