Hermann Remsperger: Reforms must continue 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Barclays Capital Roundtable, Frankfurt, 10 February 2004. 
 In terms of both economic development and economic policy 2003 was a year of important changes. 
The German economy, which had been stuck in a cyclical downturn during the first six months of the 
year,  was  finally  able  in  the  second  half  of  the  year  to  begin  to  break  free  from  the  underlying 
stagnation that had been persisting for approximately three years. In December the way was cleared 
for economic policymakers to introduce a whole raft of reform legislation, which came into force on 
1 January 2004.  
Although  the  agreed  measures  will  set  in  train  the  long-overdue  process  of  reform  in  Germany,  it 
would be unrealistic to assume that they alone will completely remove the impediments to growth in 
the  country.  Further  efforts  are  essential  for  that.  The  focal  points  of  the  reforms  are  well  known: 
greater flexibility on the labour market, reform of social security and consolidation of public finances. I 
will have something to say on these areas of reform in the second part of my talk. However, I would 
first like to shed some light on the current economic situation.  
Economic situation and outlook  
I 
The economy in Germany took a turn for the better during the second six months of 2003. During this 
period real GDP after adjustment for seasonal and working-day variations rose by an estimated ¼% 
compared with  the  first six  months when  it  had  declined by  a similar  amount. That  decline and  the 
sluggish  start  to  2003  have  meant  that  -  according  to  initial  preliminary  figures  from  the  Federal 
Statistical Office - aggregate output fell by 0.1% on an annual average.  
The economic trend in 2003 was determined by persistently weak domestic final demand. Enterprises 
reduced  investment  for  the  third  year  in  succession.  There  was  also  a  further  decline  in  residential 
building. Moreover, private consumer spending, which had already been muted, was again below the 
previous  year’s  level.  Inventory  investment  provided  considerable  positive  growth  stimuli  as  the 
process of destocking - to the extent identifiable - slowed down markedly. While exporters saw their 
turnover  rise on  an  annual  average,  they  lost  international  market  shares,  not  least  because  of  the 
appreciation of the euro. Despite significant improvements in the terms of trade, the external sector 
had a discernible retarding effect on GDP growth as there was also a relatively strong rise in imports.  
Although  in  the  case  of  Germany  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  means  a  considerable  loss  of  price 
competitiveness since October 2000, based on long-term averages the implications for the country’s 
competitive position should be largely considered neutral. The cost advantages enjoyed by German 
suppliers within the euro area provide a certain counterbalance to movements in the dollar exchange 
rate.  
Of course, just as much attention should be paid to imports as to exports. After all, imports of goods 
and services account for almost one-third of GDP in Germany. 
In contrast to exports, German imports of goods rose in seasonally adjusted terms in the fourth quarter 
of last year compared with the third quarter. The increase was particularly pronounced in the case of 
imports  from  China,  which  now  account  for  about  5 %  of  Germany’s  total  imports.  In  addition, 
significantly more goods were imported from the emerging economies in South-East-Asia and from the 
central and east European transition countries than in the reference period. Owing to the appreciation 
of  the  euro,  most  of  these  countries  improved  their  competitiveness  over  euro-area  suppliers.  By 
contrast, imports from other euro-area countries increased more moderately. 
Overall,  the  economic  outlook  for  2004  is  encouraging.  From  October  through  December,  for 
example, the orders received by industry picked up markedly, and in the case of foreign demand the 
positive trend which had set in during the third quarter continued. In the final quarter of 2003, orders 
as a whole exceeded the third-quarter level by a seasonally adjusted 3.8%. The fact that the business 
climate  in  the  manufacturing sector  also  improved further  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  is consistent 
with this picture.  
BIS Review 9/2004 
 1
According  to the  IMF  forecast,  the  growth  of global  GDP  in  2004,  estimated more  than  4%,  will  be 
stronger than at any time since the boom year of 2000. The OECD forecast estimates that in 2004 
world trade will increase by just under 8% compared with 4% in 2003. Despite the strengthening of the 
euro in the past few months, there is a good chance that the German economy will continue to benefit 
considerably from this world economic trend. 
The strong impetus expected from the external sector will probably also boost investment in Germany. 
The substantial adjustments achieved by domestic firms in the past few years are also important in 
this connection. Other encouraging factors are that the cost of debt financing has been low for some 
time  and  equity  prices  are  picking  up  significantly.  It  is  not  yet  clear  to  what  extent  exchange  rate 
volatility will affect German propensity to invest. 
Price developments in Germany are still favourable. According to initial estimates, consumer prices 
in January were 1.3% above last year’s level. The high degree of price stability is an important factor 
in encouraging private consumption, which continues to suffer from the declining level of employment. 
This is all the more important given the fact that, following the reform of the health service, the inflation 
rate for January contains a sharp rise in healthcare costs which more than offsets the base line effect 
resulting from the discontinued impact of the increase in indirect taxes at the beginning of 2003. An 
important statistical effect that should be noted in this context is that, as patients’ own contributions to 
healthcare costs are being increased, the HICP will show an increase in inflation even if the market 
prices of the goods concerned remain unchanged. The overall price situation continues to be one of 
the German economy’s great assets. 
On the cost side, lower prices for commodities and intermediate goods due to the euro’s appreciation 
will  ease  the  burden  on  enterprises.  This  is  becoming  particularly  marked  in  the  case  of  crude  oil 
prices; these are currently at a very high level in US dollars but in euro are much lower than a year 
ago. It is to be hoped that wages and salaries will continue to rise at only a moderate pace. There will 
be relief in the case of non-wage labour costs if - as already announced - a number of statutory health 
insurance institutions lowers their contribution rates in the course of 2004. However, the fall in rates is 
likely to be less than the federal government expected when it was devising the healthcare reform that 
has now come into effect. 
Compared to 2003, there are almost five additional working days in Germany this year. However, it is 
not clear to what extent this additional working time will actually be used for production. If these days 
were  to  be  used  for  production  purposes  on  the  customary  scale,  GDP  could  grow  by  between 
1½% and  2%  although  at  present  the  lower  bound  of  the  range  seems  more  likely.  That,  however, 
would mean that the significant output gap which has already occurred would not be reduced on an 
annual average. 
The  improved  cyclical  outlook  must  not  blind  us  to  the  prevailing  risks.  In  view  of  the  German 
economy’s considerable dependence on the global economic situation, it is particularly susceptible to 
external shock. 
The US current account deficit is just as unsustainable in the long term as the public budget deficits in 
some industrial countries. Although the recent depreciation of the US dollar is tending to counter the 
external imbalances, they cannot be remedied in this way alone. Instead, countries with weak growth 
performance, including Germany, must do more to accelerate their own growth rate by pushing on with 
domestic reforms. 
II 
Reasons for sluggish growth and possible solutions  
Problem area 1: labour market 
From as far back as the mid-1970s a high and rising unemployment rate has been one of German 
economic  policymakers’  greatest  challenges.  Since  that  time  unemployment  has  risen  during  each 
cyclical downturn but in every subsequent upturn policymakers have been quite unable to restore it to 
its original level. At the beginning of 2004 seasonally adjusted about 4.3 million people were officially 
registered as unemployed in Germany. According to the definition of the Federal Employment Agency, 
this was 10.2% of the civilian labour force. Germany’s unemployment rate is also disproportionately 
high when compared with that of other EU countries.  
Inflexible structures and protective mechanisms which, for the most part, were designed for an ideal 
situation of full employment are largely to blame for the difficulties on the German labour market. That 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2004
in  what 
is why structural reforms are necessary first and foremost to reduce persistent unemployment. This is 
a task for the legislators, on the one hand, and management and labour, on the other.  
A start has already been made here. It began with the Job-AQTIV-Gesetz, an act which was designed 
to get people back into work and which came into force on 1 January 2002, and was followed at the 
beginning  of  2003  by  the  first  two  pieces  of  legislation  to  promote  modern  labour  market  services, 
better known as “Hartz I” and “Hartz II”. Hartz I deals mainly with the new personnel service agencies 
which are intended to make job placement more efficient. Hartz II is concerned with the creation of 
new employment opportunities in the form of one-person businesses and mini or midi-jobs, as they are 
called. 
With the adoption of the Agenda 2010 the federal government launched a series of bold reforms. This 
applies in particular to the tightening of job-acceptance criteria for the long-term unemployed and the 
amalgamation  of  unemployment  assistance  and  social  assistance 
is  known  as 
Arbeitslosengeld  II  or  “unemployment  benefit  II”.  This  could  create  an  important  precondition  for 
restoring a market at the lowest end of the wage scale. This market segment, which has come under 
increasing  pressure  as  a  result  of  globalisation,  could  open  up  better  employment  opportunities  to 
relatively unskilled persons with low productivity.  
These  measures,  especially  the  lowering  of  unemployment  assistance  to  the  lower  level  of  social 
assistance and the reduced offsetting of earned income against benefits, will create greater incentives 
to take up paid employment. The greater obligation now placed on the unemployed to take a more 
active  part  in  looking  for  work  and  the  shortening  of  the  entitlement  period  for  drawing  “normal” 
unemployment benefit, Arbeitslosengeld I, have a similar objective. At the same time, it is expected 
that these measures will reduce the incentive to exploit benefit entitlements. 
Furthermore, the raising of the threshold triggering formal employment protection measures at small 
enterprises as well as the limitation of the “social criteria” which inhibit the employer’s discretion in the 
event of compulsory redundancies were the first, if somewhat timid, attempts to reduce the barriers to 
entering  the  labour  market.  The  reform  of  the  Crafts  Code  is  also  making  it  easier  to  set  up  new 
businesses.  
All of these measures are helping to restore the satisfactory functioning of the labour market. Even so, 
major barriers to entering the labour market remain. Large sections of labour law need to be critically 
reviewed.  As  vaguely  defined  legal  terms  and  catch-all  clauses  such  as  “important  reason”  in  the 
employment protection legislation or the “favourability principle” are to be widely found here, judicial 
decisions  are  of  vital  importance.  Yet  the  judges  do  not  always  take  sufficiently  into  account  the 
economic implications of their rulings. Especially in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises 
which  cannot  afford  to  have  a  legal  department  of  their  own  it  is  often  difficult  to  keep  up  with  the 
current  legal  position.  All  of  this  results  in  enterprises  being  reluctant  to  recruit  staff,  and  this  has 
correspondingly negative consequences for the labour market.  
To solve the labour market problems is not the responsibility of the legislature alone. Management and 
labour also have a duty. Indeed, employers and the unions have done a few things in the past couple 
of  years  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  employment  contracts.  Examples  worth  noting  are  the  working 
hours  accounts  that  have  now  become  commonplace  in  many  sectors,  the  pay  corridors  in  the 
chemical industry, and the renegotiation of the traditional Christmas bonus in some sectors.  
However, further steps are imperative. This applies primarily to the favourability principle, which should 
be  interpreted  more  widely  to  include  measures  that  safeguard  existing  jobs.  Furthermore,  national 
and  sectoral  labour  contracts  should  contain  flexibility  clauses  permitting  plant-level  agreements  so 
that prevention measures can be taken before a crisis situation develops.  
Particularly in the wake of advancing globalisation and the transfer of production to more cost-effective 
countries,  the  employment  structure  in  Germany  has  shifted  significantly  in  favour  of  high-skilled 
labour at the expense of low-skilled labour in the past few years. If we are to improve the steering and 
market  clearing  functions  of  wages,  negotiated  wage  policies  must  be  even  more  flexible.  In  the 
middle and upper wage segments there is a need to create incentives to acquire higher qualifications 
through appropriately rewarding vocational training. In the less skilled segment remuneration must be 
brought more into line with the productivity profile of the job concerned. As already mentioned, this will 
probably be made easier by the recent decision to amalgamate unemployment assistance and social 
assistance. 
In times of high and persistent unemployment it is not only measures to improve the efficiency of the 
labour  market  that  are  important.  Wage  policy  also  plays  a  key  role.  What  we  need  is  a  moderate 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 3
wage policy which has a steadying effect (ie stabilises expectations), one which gauges the scope for 
real income distribution conservatively and does not fully exhaust it. The basic rule should be that the 
increase  in  the  real  product  wage  remains  below  the  (genuine)  increase  in  productivity  in  order  to 
make more jobs viable in the long term and to maintain competitiveness. 
Problem area 2: public finances/consolidation 
Like the labour market, the area of public finance has also significantly weakened economic growth 
momentum  in  Germany.  The  burden  of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions  rose  considerably 
during the 1990s. Last year this burden amounted to almost 42% and was far greater than in 1991. 
Taxes were not the reason for this. Their share of GDP has actually declined somewhat, particularly 
as a result of the sluggish rate of growth over the past few years and the reduction in income tax rates. 
Yet  the  burden  of  social  security  contributions  has  grown  considerably  even  though  an  increasing 
proportion of the expenditure in this area has been financed through taxation.  
At 4.0% of GDP, the general government deficit last year reached its highest level in more than two 
decades. According to our calculations, by far the greatest part of this deficit is of a structural nature 
and is not to be attributed to cyclical developments and other temporary influences. Since the autumn 
of last year the federal government has been assuming that the deficit ratio will again be over 3% for 
the current year. In an updated version of the German stability programme from January it forecasts a 
ratio  of  3½%  in  the  main  scenario  for  2004.  This  would  mean  that  for  the  third  time  in  succession 
Germany would exceed the reference value for the deficit ratio laid down in the EU Treaty, namely 3%.  
In accordance with the Stability and Growth Pact, the next step in the excessive deficit procedure 
should  therefore  have  been  launched  against  Germany.  However,  the  Ecofin  Council  rejected  a 
recommendation  to  this  effect  from  the  European  Commission  on  25  November  last  year.  This 
precedent  has  greatly  undermined  the  Commission’s  credibility  with  respect  to  the  threat  of  using 
sanctions  when  a  country  continues  to  pursue  an  undesirable  fiscal  policy.  I  share  the  European 
Commission’s  concern  about  the  action  of  the  Ecofin  Council  and  respect  its  decision  to  take  the 
matter to the European Court of Justice for legal clarification.  
The Ecofin Council’s decision reveals an in-built flaw in the pact, namely that to some extent sinners 
are passing judgement on sinners. Even so, I am sceptical about amending the EU Treaty or the pact. 
There  is  a  danger  in  every  amendment  to  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  especially  in  the  present 
situation, that the existing rules will be relaxed. By contrast, the potential advantages seem to me to be 
comparatively small. However, I do think that the implementation of the pact could be improved.  
In my opinion, undermining the pact poses considerable risks in the medium to long term, not least for 
growth potential. If fiscal policymakers are given politico-economic incentives to borrow, it could mean 
that in some countries excessive deficits would in the future tend to become the rule rather than the 
exception. They may also feel more inclined to neglect the objective laid down in the pact, namely of 
achieving a budgetary position which is at least close to balance in the medium term. It is not only on 
account  of  the  growing  interest  burdens  that  rising  government  debt  ratios  restrict  the  available 
budgetary  policy  options  for  growth-promoting  investment  in,  for  example,  education  and  make  it 
harder to tackle the challenges posed by the foreseeable budgetary burdens arising from demographic 
developments.  Persistently  increasing  government  borrowing  might  push  up  capital  market  interest 
rates, and this would have a negative impact on economic growth potential and employment trends. It 
is precisely in the present situation that unresolved budgetary problems give rise to uncertainty about 
future  fiscal  policy.  This  encourages  consumers and  investors  to  adopt  a  wait-and-see  attitude  and 
thereby possibly curbs economic growth in the short term, too.  
For that reason, I do not consider consolidating public finances and complying with the pact as ends in 
themselves or as a pedantic adherence to the rules. Nor are these objectives an impediment to an 
economic  upturn.  Instead,  they  promote  medium  and  long-term  growth  prospects  and  are  in 
Germany’s best interests.  
Against  this  background,  I  think  the  results  achieved  by  the  Mediation  Committee  at  the  end  of 
December have to be assessed in a differentiated manner. For the current year it is now likely that the 
general government deficit will be somewhat smaller than what the government had led us to believe 
at the beginning of the inter-House mediation hearing. The main reason for this is that only part of the 
third  stage  of  the  tax  reform  will  be  brought  forward  to  2004.  Another  positive  point  is  that  further 
subsidies were abolished or tightened through the partial realisation of the Koch-Steinbrück proposals. 
On the other hand, the grant to home buyers and the tax relief on commuters’ travelling costs were not 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2004
cut  nearly  so  dramatically  as  the  government  had  originally  announced.  As  these  cost-cutting 
measures would not have exerted their full effect until later years, larger deficits than the government 
had originally planned can be expected from 2005. As things now stand, there is still no guarantee that 
in  the  coming  year  Germany  will  not  exceed  the  3 %  deficit  ceiling  although  that  is  essential  if  the 
country is to comply with its European commitments. 
The persistently precarious state of public finances also needs to be borne in mind during the present 
debate on a further tax reform. In principle, any tax reform which makes it possible to lower tax rates 
by a further substantial amount through the abolition of subsidies and exemptions and, at the same 
time, greatly simplifies tax law is very much to be welcomed. It might release growth potential through 
improving  incentive  structures.  In  the  present  situation,  however,  a  reform  of  this  kind  must  be 
designed in such a way that it has a neutral impact on revenue. 
Problem area 3: social security 
Not only fiscal policy but the social security funds, too, must play a substantial part in reducing the 
growth-inhibiting  levy  wedge.  Between  1990  and  2003  contribution  rates  rose  from  35½%  to  42% 
even though the proportion of expenditure for social security financed from tax increased significantly. 
Over  the  longer  term  a  further  rise  in  the  contribution  rates  to  the  statutory  pension,  health  and 
long-term  care  insurance  schemes  is  inevitable,  primarily  as  a  result  of  the  growing  proportion  of 
elderly people in the total population. This trend has to be limited. At the same time, an effort must be 
made to ensure that the increase does not result in rising labour costs. 
The  fact  that  healthcare  spending  could  account  for  an  increasing  proportion  of  gross  domestic 
product  is  not  problematical  in  itself.  This  may  simply  reflect  the  preferences  of  an  ageing  and 
increasingly  affluent  society.  Under  the  present  system  of  financing  the  statutory  health  insurance 
scheme,  however,  it  would  place  an  even  greater  burden  on  labour  as  a  factor  of  production.  The 
result would be a curtailment of employment and growth.  
To that extent, the measures approved last autumn for the statutory health insurance scheme are to 
be welcomed. A further rise in contribution rates has been avoided. Such an increase would otherwise 
have been necessary in order to prevent the health insurance institutions from running up new deficits 
and to pay off the debt incurred during the past few years. Patients’ increased personal contributions 
towards costs will probably act as an incentive to deploy funding more efficiently.  
Even so, these measures must be seen as no more than an initial step. In the light of demographic 
trends, there is a pressing need to restrict the increasing burden on labour caused by social security 
contributions.  In  my  opinion,  this  can  succeed  only  if  the  funding  of  the  statutory  health  insurance 
scheme  is  decoupled  from  wages.  Proposals  on  this  are  already  on  the  table.  These  envisage 
switching to a system of standard premiums for all insured persons with a supplementary tax-financed 
element  of  social  equalisation.  Another  requirement  is  to  organise  the  healthcare  system  more 
efficiently on the supply side through increased competition.  
Without  the  measures  approved  at  the  end  of  2003  an  increase  in  the  contribution  rate  to  the 
statutory  pension  insurance  scheme  would  also  have  been  necessary  this  year.  However, 
stabilising the contribution rate was possible only by drawing to a not insignificant extent on capital 
assets and thereby incurring greater general government deficits. In the long term, future increases in 
contribution rates can be avoided only if the level of pensions is lowered or the statutory retirement 
age is raised. It seems to me that a combination of both approaches makes sense. With respect to the 
level  of  pensions  the  federal  government  has  already  made  appropriate  proposals  with  the 
introduction  of  a  “sustainability  factor”.  The  resultant  gap  in  pension  benefits  can  be  closed  by 
increasing the weight of supplementary private pension schemes. A gradual increase in the statutory 
retirement age, which would take account of increasing life expectancy, has been postponed by the 
government. The decisive factor is ultimately the curbing of the contribution burden. Only in this way 
can employment and thereby the financing base of the social security system be safeguarded on a 
permanent basis.  
Summary 
Generally speaking, major reforms were initiated last year to counteract the weak economic growth in 
Germany. However, I think they are not sufficient. In my opinion, what is now important is to avoid 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 5
being lulled into a feeling of security through the emerging cyclical revival. There is still considerable 
need for action and reform to improve long-term growth perspectives. 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2004
