Alan Bollard: Supervising overseas-owned banks: New Zealand’s experience 
Address  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  the  Trans-Tasman 
Business Circle, Sydney, 11 August 2004. 
 In  many  respects  the  Australian  and  New  Zealand  economies  are  similar.  With  banking,  however, 
there is a big difference - the New Zealand banking system comprises banks owned overwhelmingly 
from abroad, whereas in Australia the banks are mainly Australian-owned.  
Of course, the main overseas-owned banks in New Zealand are Australian-owned banks and, in this 
sense,  it  might  be  said  that  banking  is  another  thing  we  have  in  common.  But  that  would  be  to 
overlook  that  banking  authorities  in countries  with predominantly  overseas-owned  banks face some 
additional, and different, issues from those in which the banks are mainly locally-owned.  
These differences include different roles in the supervision of banks, depending on whether one is the 
supervisor of the “home” country parent bank, or, as is predominantly the role of the RBNZ, a “host” 
supervisor of overseas-owned banks.  
More  broadly,  and  more  importantly,  for  a  country  whose  banking  system  comprises  predominantly 
overseas-owned  banks,  there  are  different  issues  concerning  the  capacity  of  its  banking  system  to 
weather a crisis. In this regard, overseas ownership can be both an undoubted strength, but also a 
potential risk.  
There  are  also  issues  concerning  the  depth  and  breadth  of  financial  services  that  overseas-owned 
banks  provide  to  the  local  economy.  In  New  Zealand  we  are  a  very  welcoming  host  of  overseas-
owned banks, but we also look for our “guests” to be good guests, and to make a positive contribution 
to the New Zealand economy. 
A number of things have happened recently to raise interest in these issues. First, there has been the 
take-over  by  the  ANZ  of  the  National  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  previously  owned  by  the  British  bank, 
Lloyds TSB. This means that about 85 per cent of New Zealand’s banks, measured by total assets, 
are now Australian-owned. Australia and New Zealand also now share the same “big four” banks. The 
ANZ owns the merged ANZ National in New Zealand; NAB owns the BNZ; the Commonwealth owns 
ASB; and Westpac in New Zealand trades as a branch operation. 
Second,  early  this  year  the  New  Zealand  Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Australian  Treasurer  put 
trans-Tasman  banking  supervision  on  the  initial  agenda  of  issues  for  working  towards  a  single 
trans-Tasman  economic  market.  The  other  issues  identified  for  consideration  were  accounting 
standards and competition policy. On banking supervision, Ministers commissioned New Zealand and 
Australian officials to report jointly on trans-Tasman mutual recognition and harmonisation possibilities. 
This process is now well advanced, with a report currently before Ministers. I expect that Ministers will 
be indicating soon the direction to be taken. 
Third, there have been issues in New Zealand in relation to the seemingly small amount of tax the 
banks have been paying.  
And  this  has  all  been  happening  at  a  time  when  the  RBNZ  has  been  seeking  to  reinvigorate  the 
regulatory  arrangements  for  New  Zealand’s  banking  system,  to  give  it  more  resilience  in  times  of 
financial stress. This has been behind our policies to require systemically-important banks (and some 
others) in New Zealand to be incorporated in New Zealand, that better ensure effective banking sector 
corporate governance, and that place some constraints on banks out-sourcing key operations. 
I will say more on these policies, and on our approach to banking supervision in New Zealand more 
generally,  in  a  moment,  but  before  doing  that  I  would  like  to  provide  some  context.  Banking 
supervision  policy  needs  to  be  viewed  against  the  backdrop  of  the  importance  of  the  role  of  the 
banking system in the economy. 
Why the banking system matters 
Banks play a key role in mobilising and allocating the economy’s resources - mobilising from those 
who, for the meantime, have surplus resources, and allocating to where resources can be put to best 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
use.  This  role  is  particularly  important  for  meeting  the  funding  requirements  of  growing  small-  and 
medium-sized  firms,  given  that  these  firms  have  limited  abilities  to  access  funding  directly  from  the 
securities  markets,  or  from  abroad.  With  SMEs  comprising  a  large  share  of  the  New  Zealand 
economy, as is also the case in Australia, this makes the banking system important for the economy’s 
growth prospects. 
Equally as critical is the role banks play in the payments system. The overwhelmingly-used means of 
payment these days is the bank deposit, whether it be to pay for the groceries, to pay wages, to make 
settlement on a property transaction, or to settle dealings in the wholesale financial markets. And we 
use a number of bank-provided systems to make these payments. These include EFTPOS, cheques, 
telephone banking, and internet banking.  
If it were not for the fact that a small number of banks dominate the banking system, bank failures 
might not be so much of a problem. But to shut down a bank with a 20 per cent plus market share, and 
thus to shut down the ability of perhaps 20 percent of the economy to access working capital and to 
make payments, is quite another thing - to say nothing of the risk that one bank failure can precipitate 
others, and wider financial system collapse. 
Banks therefore play a critical role, but at the same time they are potentially fragile organisations. They 
are different from most other firms, because their ability to operate is so dependent on maintenance of 
market  confidence  in  their  financial  soundness.  If  a  manufacturing  firm’s  solvency  is  in  doubt,  the 
public  generally  does  not  suddenly  stop  buying  the  product.  But  if  there  is  material  doubt  in  the 
market-place  about  a  bank’s  ability  to  meet  its  financial  obligations,  without  official  intervention  to 
restore public confidence, it can no longer operate. 
This fragility is inherent in what banks do. Their business is to take deposits and make loans, which 
means that, necessarily, they are very highly geared. No other industry operates with a capital ratio as 
low as 8 per cent. 
And  for  deposit  liabilities  to  serve  as  a  means  of  payment,  they  need  to  be  liquid.  Hence,  banks 
generally have a balance sheet structure also characterised by borrowing short and lending long. With 
this  financial  structure,  the  margins  for  error  are  fine  and,  in  an  uncertain  and  competitive  market-
place, there are always risks. 
Indeed, banks on occasion do get into trouble, and probably more often than is commonly thought. 
Recently in Australia, there have been some high profile incidents at the NAB. In the late 1980s and 
early 1990s, both Australia and New Zealand had much more serious incidents to deal with. There 
was the failure of state banks and the parlous condition of Westpac in Australia, and similar problems 
at the BNZ and DFC in New Zealand. Before that, in 1979, there was the problem at Bank of Adelaide, 
and both countries have experienced fringe financial institution failures.  
None  of  this  makes  Australia  and  New  Zealand  unique.  It  is  easy  to  find  other  countries  that  have 
experienced banking system difficulties that were even more serious. Sweden, Finland and Norway all 
experienced systemic banking collapses in the early 1990s, which required fiscal support in the vicinity 
of 5-10 per cent of GDP. In the Asian financial crisis later in the 1990s, Indonesia, Korea and Thailand 
all needed to provide fiscal support to their banking systems in excess of 30 per cent of GDP. Other 
cases include Japan (8 per cent of GDP), Spain (16 per cent) and the United States saving and loan 
crisis (3.2 per cent).1
And these are just the fiscal costs. The cost of bank failures is not limited to the cost of rescuing banks 
or bailing out depositors. The real economy costs can be greater and longer term, including weakened 
investor and consumer confidence, higher borrowing costs, potentially protracted credit contractions 
and, in consequence, lower economic growth. 
Given this combination of critical importance and potential fragility, no country can afford to view its 
banking  system  with  indifference.  The  banking  system  is  something  that  is  central  to  a  nation’s 
economy. And that applies whether the banks are locally- or foreign-owned. Indeed, some countries, 
including Australia, appear to see banks - at least the large, systemically-important, ones - as being so 
central to their economy as to preclude them from being foreign-controlled.  
                                                      
1   Source:  Hoggarth  G,  and  V  Saporta,  “Costs  of  banking  system  instability:  some  empirical  evidence”,  Bank  of  England  Financial 
Stability Review, June 2001. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
By contrast, in New Zealand, as a matter of policy, we don’t restrict foreign ownership in banks, and all 
our  systemically-important  banks  are  foreign-owned.  But,  while  we  have  seen  no  need  to  restrict 
foreign  ownership,  we  do  see  a  need  for  regulation  of  overseas-owned  banks  so  as  to  provide 
reasonable assurance that the New Zealand banking system could weather a period of banking stress.  
Sometimes it is suggested that having banks that are owned by substantial foreign-owned banks is 
actually an advantage, because the foreign owners can be relied on to mount a bail out if the need 
arises. While this may often be true, I think it would be imprudent to rely on such an assumption.  
To  be  sure,  experience  indicates  that,  usually,  parent  banks  do  stand  behind  their  overseas 
operations,  since  not  to  do  so  could  seriously  undermine  market  confidence  in  the  parent’s  own 
financial  position,  and  would  involve  writing  off  the  franchise  value  embedded  in  their  overseas 
investment. But there will be occasions when an overseas owner is either unable, because of its own 
financial weakness, or because of home country regulatory constraints, to provide that support.  
These cross-border issues are something that many countries, particularly the growing number with a 
significant  foreign  bank  presence,  are  having  to  come  to  grips  with.  Increasingly  we  are  being 
confronted with the fact that shareholders, customers, and taxpayers, not only have different interests 
in the banking system, but increasingly reside in different jurisdictions.  
The international framework for supervision of multi-national banks  
The  internationally-agreed  framework  for  the  supervision  of  multinational  banks,  as  devised  by  the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, is known as the Basel Concordat (not to be confused with 
the  Basel  Accord  on  capital  standards  for  banks).  The  Concordat  assigns  clear,  and  deliberately 
overlapping,  roles  to  the  supervisors  of  multinational  banks  in  those  banks’  “home”  and  “host” 
countries.  
The  home country  supervisor  is  responsible  for  consolidated  supervision  of  the  global  bank.  It  sets 
standards  to  be  met  on  a  group  consolidated  basis,  for  example,  that  group  capital  is  sufficient  to 
support the global business. (Some home country supervisors additionally set standards to be met by 
the  bank  in  its  home  country  alone  -  so-called  “solo”  standards.)  Host  supervisors,  that  is,  the 
authorities in the other countries where the bank operates, are charged with supervising the bank in 
their  individual  jurisdictions.  This  framework  recognises  the  reciprocal  and  over-lapping,  though  not 
identical, interests of the respective authorities, and the importance of sharing information. 
As  mainly  a  host  supervisor,  the  prime  role  of  the  RBNZ  is  to  promote  sound  banking  by  the 
overseas-owned  banks  operating  in  “our  patch”.  We  do  this  mainly  for  our  own  purposes,  in 
recognition of the vital role of our banking system to the New Zealand economy, but there is also a 
significant element of contributing to the effective supervision of the multinational banking groups of 
which the overseas-owned New Zealand banks are a part.  
In  return,  we  have  a  close,  reciprocal  interest  in  the  parents  of  the  overseas-owned  banks  in  New 
Zealand,  and  in  the  supervision  of  those  banks  by  the  relevant  overseas  authorities.  With  New 
Zealand’s banks almost entirely foreign-owned, there is at least as large a probability that shocks to 
the New Zealand banking system will originate from abroad as from within New Zealand. 
RBNZ supervision for promoting banking soundness 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand, as the New Zealand banking supervisor, conducts its supervision 
of New Zealand banks that are overseas-owned within this internationally-agreed framework. (In New 
Zealand, unlike in Australia, the central bank is also the bank supervisor.)  
The RBNZ’s responsibility to supervise banks in New Zealand is prescribed in the Reserve Bank of 
New  Zealand  Act.  This  Act  requires  us  to  use  the  powers  it  gives  to  the  Bank  to  promote  the 
soundness and efficiency of the New Zealand financial system, and to avoid significant damage to the 
financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank.  
There are three central pillars to how we promote sound prudential management by banks, including 
by overseas-owned banks, in New Zealand.  
First, we  look  to  the banks  themselves  for self-regulation.  This  is  about  policies and  structures  that 
promote  effective  governance  by  banks’  boards  of  directors,  including  effective  oversight  by  local 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
boards of the local banks’ managements. We expect high standards of corporate governance from the 
boards of New Zealand banks, and this expectation is reinforced by some quite severe penalties that 
could apply should a bank’s directors fail to properly discharge their responsibilities.  
In these regards, we have observed a trend for overseas-owned banks in New Zealand increasingly to 
adopt “matrix management” arrangements, under which the reporting and accountability lines of local 
managements to their local boards may be weakened by direct reporting lines to overseas head-office 
managements.  Hence,  we  took  the  opportunity  when  approving  the  amalgamation  of  the  ANZ  and 
National  banks,  to  reinforce  that  the  board  of  the  merged  bank  must  carry  prime  responsibility  for 
oversight of the bank in New Zealand. Consistent with this, we have required that the chief executive 
of the bank must be appointed by, and be primarily accountable to, the New Zealand board.  
We  will  be  consulting  with  other  systemically-important  banks  about  the  application  of  similar 
requirements to them. We are also reviewing more generally the governance arrangements in banks 
to ensure that bank boards are sufficiently empowered to oversee the management of their bank in 
New Zealand and that they bear the appropriate accountabilities in performing their responsibilities. 
A  second  pillar  is  market  discipline.  For  many  years,  banks  in  New  Zealand  have  been  subject  to 
obligations to make quite comprehensive quarterly financial and prudential disclosures to the market-
place.  These  disclosures,  combined  with  a  policy  of  not  bailing  out  failed  institutions,  help  to 
strengthen market scrutiny of banks, and the market disciplines that go with that. 
This is an area of policy where the RBNZ has played a leading role, although other countries’ banking 
authorities too are now seeing an important place for disclosure by banks as a means of reinforcing 
prudential discipline. Globally, banks are making much fuller disclosures to the market than used to be 
the  case,  and  that  trend  will  be  reinforced  by  new  international  disclosure  requirements  being 
introduced  as  part  of  the  new  Basel  2  capital  requirements,  on  which  I  will  say  a  little  more  in  a 
moment.  
Third, we have some regulatory and supervisory requirements. Although our regulatory framework is 
somewhat  less  intrusive  than  that  of  many  countries,  it  nonetheless  contains  most  of  the  standard 
features. The IMF in its Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) review of the New Zealand 
financial system last year confirmed that we have a good model for host country supervision.  
The  centre-piece  of  the  regulatory  requirements  is  a  requirement  that  banks  in  New  Zealand  be 
adequately  capitalised.  We  apply  the  standard  Basel  I  capital accord  in  much  the  same way  as  do 
other supervisors. In the case of overseas-owned banks, we require the bank in New Zealand to be 
sufficiently capitalised in its own right, with not less than 8 per cent capital. This serves two purposes. 
It reinforces the responsibilities of the local board and management, since they have a balance sheet 
for which they are clearly responsible. And it provides a financial buffer should the bank incur losses in 
New Zealand, or should the parent bank fail and its New Zealand subsidiary have to be “cut loose”.  
Banking supervision and failure management  
This brings me to the second element of our statutory responsibilities - to avoid significant damage to 
the financial system that could be caused by the failure of a registered bank. Absolutely critical in this 
situation would be that the New Zealand authorities have the ability to take control of the failed bank in 
New Zealand. Without that ability to take control, and to take control quickly, we could not manage the 
situation.  
And in the case of a systemically-important bank, just shutting the doors generally would not be an 
acceptable  response.  In  most  cases,  our  objective  would  be  to  maintain  the  provision  of  critical 
banking services, but without resorting to a bail-out; certainly not a bail-out of existing shareholders, 
and  desirably  not  of  depositors  and  creditors,  who  could  expect  to  bear  some  of  the  losses.  To 
achieve  those  outcomes,  the  New  Zealand  authorities  would  need  to  have  access  to  the  critical 
operating and information systems necessary to operate the bank, and more or less immediately on 
the failure occurring. 
I  should  hasten  to  add  that  none  of  this  means  that,  in  the  event  of  a  bank  crisis  involving  an 
overseas-owned bank, the RBNZ’s first preference would be to act unilaterally. In most situations a 
co-ordinated response involving home and host country authorities would be much preferred - from 
both authorities’ points of view.  
4 
 BIS Review 45/2004
But a co-ordinated response requires that both authorities have a capacity to manage the situation in 
their  jurisdiction.  It  would  also  be  unrealistic  to  assume  that  co-ordination  would  always  be  readily 
achievable,  as  there  would  be  a  risk  that  the  interests  of  the  different  regulatory  authorities  would 
diverge. This could occur if, for example, an economic shock places stress on the financial system in 
one  country,  but  not  the  other;  or  the  respective  regulators  in  the  two  jurisdictions  have  different 
priorities in terms of the future of the failed bank.  
This is why we focus on ensuring that we have an effective failure-management capacity in respect of 
banks operating in New Zealand, including those that are owned from abroad. That in turn requires 
those banks, at least those that are systemically-important, to have key systems and key management 
available,  either  on  the  ground,  or  at  least  within  our  jurisdictional  reach.  This  is  another  issue  we 
addressed with the ANZ in the context of the ANZ-National Bank amalgamation, and intend also to 
take up with the other systemically-important banks. 
Another key requirement, if local authorities are to be able to manage a bank failure, is that there is 
clarity about the local bank’s balance sheet, that is, clarity on what its financial obligations are, and on 
what assets it has to meet those obligations. That clarity is not readily achievable for a bank that is a 
branch  of an  overseas  bank because, legally,  the  assets and  liabilities of  a  branch  are  inseparable 
from those of the overseas parent or head office. This is the main reasoning behind most countries’ 
requirements that systemically-important banks be incorporated locally, a requirement that now also 
applies in New Zealand. 
All  systemically-important  banks  in  New  Zealand  currently  comply  with  the  requirement  to  be 
incorporated locally, except for Westpac. Westpac has always been a branch bank in New Zealand. It 
has been engaged in discussions with us on this issue for some time, and currently has before us a 
proposal under which it would “buttress” its present branch structure, in ways it believes would deliver 
the policy outcomes we are seeking. However, as the proposal is still under our consideration, it would 
be inappropriate for me to comment further on that alternative structure at this time.  
Are these RBNZ banking supervision requirements burdensome? 
Our requirements of overseas-owned banks in New Zealand are not onerous or costly for those banks. 
Let me explain why not.  
First, there is nothing in what we require that APRA would not require of an overseas-owned bank that 
was  systemically  important  to  Australia.  I  say  “would  not”  because  Australian  policy  to  date  has 
precluded systemically-important overseas-owned banks in Australia.  
Second, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act requires that we promote the efficiency as well as the 
soundness of the New Zealand financial system. This is a responsibility we take seriously, and it is 
reflected in what we do in a number of ways. Not least, we see retaining the openness of the New 
Zealand banking system to overseas ownership as important for promoting competition and innovation 
in the New Zealand banking market.  
Another feature of our approach to banking regulation, as it applies to all banks in New Zealand, not 
just overseas-owned banks, is that it is largely “principles” based, and relatively light on “black-letter” 
regulation.  
Our approach to banking supervision is sometimes described as “light-handed”. That is a description 
that may give the wrong impression, at least if it gives the impression that we are not serious about our 
role. We are serious about the principles we apply, and in seeing to it that they are applied. But we 
endeavour to supervise in a way that not only is effective, but also is cost-efficient, including for the 
banks.  The  way  to  achieve  that,  we  think,  is  to  get  the  basic  structures  and  incentives  right  - 
particularly  the  incentives  for directors  to  monitor and  to  exercise  effective  oversight so  as  to  avoid 
having to disclose bad news.  
Also, as already outlined, our supervision of overseas-owned banks is conducted very much within the 
internationally-agreed framework of “home-host” supervision. We seek to ensure that our requirements 
do not cut against home-country requirements and, consistent with meeting our own responsibilities, 
dovetail as much as possible with those requirements.  
My more general point here is that avoiding unnecessary compliance costs is something we attach 
importance to. On the whole, I think we have been quite successful in achieving that. And, as part of 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 5
the effort to enhance trans-Tasman co-ordination, we will be reviewing our requirements to see where 
we could achieve better alignment.  
It also bears stating that our requirements do not deny the many overseas-owned banks operating in 
New  Zealand  the  benefits  of  large  overseas-bank  parentage,  nor  overseas  banks  the  benefits  of  a 
New Zealand presence.  
New Zealand banks with overseas parentage benefit a lot from that parentage. Parent banks generally 
are a source of capital, a source of rating strength, which helps to lower New Zealand bank funding 
costs, as well as a source of risk management and systems expertise.  
For overseas banks, New Zealand is an open and welcoming market, with a level playing field for local 
and  overseas  participants.  And  for  the  Australian-owned  banks,  New  Zealand  has  provided  a 
significant addition to their home market, and one that, in recent years, has been very profitable. With 
operations on both sides of the Tasman, the Australian banks are well placed to service trans-Tasman 
customers,  and  our  banking  supervision  requirements  place  few,  if  any,  impediments  in  the  way  of 
that.  
Next steps 
Having said all that, the recent report to Ministers that I mentioned in my opening remarks has usefully 
sharpened the focus on achieving increased coordination of trans-Tasman banking supervision. We 
already have a formal Memorandum of Understanding with APRA2 and we will be looking to work with 
APRA  on  how  best  the  two  organisations  can  coordinate,  both  in  terms  of  day-to-day  prudential 
supervision and crisis management. New Zealand certainly will be prepared to carry its share of the 
regulatory burden under such co-ordinated arrangements. 
At  the  same  time,  co-ordination  need  not  mean  that  our  requirements  need  always  be  identical  to 
those of APRA. On some matters we may adopt different approaches. One that is starting to receive 
some  publicity  concerns  the  implementation  of  new  Basel  2  capital  adequacy  standards  for  banks. 
Under Basel 2, national authorities will have a choice between adopting a more sophisticated, internal 
model-based, approach to calculating capital requirements, or a simpler methodology that is closer to 
the existing Basel 1 regime.  
APRA  has  indicated  that  it  proposes  to  apply  the  internal  model-based  regime  in  its  consolidated 
supervision  of  Australian  banks’  global  operations,  which,  of  course,  encompass  their  operations  in 
New Zealand. In considering this issue, we will be looking to ensure that the adoption of Basel 2 does 
not  result  in  a  general  weakening  in  the  capital  adequacy  of  New  Zealand  banks,  and  our  general 
preference  is  for  a  simpler  rather  than  more  complex  approach,  in  part  to  keep  compliance  costs 
down. But we are also aware that if our and APRA’s requirements are not reasonably well-aligned, 
that could increase compliance costs, and we will be seeking to avoid that.  
More  generally,  given  the  high  degree  of  integration  of  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  with  the 
Australian  banking  system,  there  may  well  be  an  opportunity  to  develop  arrangements  for  trans-
Tasman  banking  supervision  into  a  world-class  model  of  “home-host”  supervision.  One  area  where 
more  coordination  may  be  possible 
international 
developments  in  accounting  and  disclosure  standards  will  have  implications  for  both  countries. 
Another area where more structured co-ordination obviously would be useful is in crisis management.  
is  banks’  disclosure  requirements,  where 
Concluding remarks 
By way of conclusion let me recap on what I see as the main points.  
First,  the  banking  system  matters.  For  any  country,  the  banking  system  is  one  of  the  most  critical 
elements of its economic infrastructure. This is as true for a country whose banking system comprises 
mainly overseas-owned banks, as it is for one whose banks are predominantly locally-owned. In that 
sense,  while  almost  all  the  banks  in  New  Zealand  are  overseas-owned,  the  banking  system  as  a 
whole must still meet New Zealand’s needs - in fair weather and foul. 
                                                      
2 
http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/banking/supervision/0137035.html. 
6 
 BIS Review 45/2004
Second,  it  is  essential  that  the  New  Zealand  authorities  can  supervise  the  New  Zealand  banking 
system and can respond quickly, decisively and effectively to a banking crisis. All countries need to 
shoulder the responsibility for the sound functioning of their banking systems. This is why we require 
systemically-important banks in New Zealand to be incorporated locally. And it is why we require such 
banks to maintain the capacity to function on a stand-alone basis, if required. Without that capacity, 
there is a material risk of the banking system becoming dysfunctional in a banking crisis. Avoiding that 
risk  we  see  as  being  fundamental  to  the  soundness  of  the  New  Zealand  financial  system.  The 
measures we are introducing to counter that risk recently have been affirmed by Standard and Poors, 
who have noted that they “could well enhance the strength of the New Zealand banking sector and its 
ability to withstand a period of financial stress”.3
Third, the Reserve Bank is concerned to ensure that its supervision is efficient as well as effective. 
This  is  reflected  in  our  emphasis  on  principles,  and  structures  that  emphasise  incentives  and 
accountabilities, rather than detailed prescriptive, or “black-letter”, regulation. It is also reflected in the 
internationally-agreed framework for the supervision of international banking groups, within which we 
operate. This sets up a basis for co-ordination amongst home and host country authorities, and avoids 
unnecessary duplication.  
With regard to the supervision of trans-Tasman banks, we already have a formal arrangement with 
APRA which provides, mainly, for information sharing. In the period ahead we will be looking to build 
on that arrangement, in a way that ensures that  our supervision of Australian-owned banks in New 
Zealand  is  both  effective  and  cost-efficient.  Indeed,  with  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  now 
comprising  predominantly  Australian-owned  banks, 
to  develop 
arrangements for the supervision of trans-Tasman banks that would be a world-class model of cross-
border banking supervision. 
there  exists  an  opportunity 
                                                      
3  Standard and Poors Ratings Direct, “Robust local operations and strong parents fortify credit quality of New Zealand banks, 
 
despite profit moderation”, 28 July 2004.  
BIS Review 45/2004 
 7
