Zhou Xiaochuann: Preventing future accumulation of large NPLs by the 
commercial banks after the present round of reform 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuann, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the China Summit of the 
7th Beijing International Science Industry Expo, Beijing, 21 May 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This Summit is a very important meeting. I appreciate this opportunity to share my observations with 
all  of  you.  The  topic  I  am  going  to  talk  about  relates  to  one  of  the  functions  of  the  institution  I  am 
working  for,  which  is  how  to  prevent  the  commercial  banks  from  accumulating  new  NPLs  after  the 
present round of banking reforms. 
The answer to this question and the resolution to the problem involve systemic engineering. To solve 
this problem the utmost is that the commercial banks must take measures themselves to make sure 
large amount of NPLs will not be accumulated in the future through strengthening internal reforms and 
putting into place good institutional mechanism. Internal reforms refer to establishing good corporate 
governance,  setting  up  internal  control  system  and  risk  management  system,  optimizing  credit 
procedures, updating the information system and establishing clear internal incentives of reward and 
punishment schemes. The purpose of these reforms is to develop an effective new mechanism to help 
commercial  banks  avoid  accumulating  large  amount  of  new  NPLs.  Representatives  from  the 
commercial banks must have deeper thoughts on this issue and should be invited to speak on this 
topic.  My  speech  today  will  focus  on  aspects  of  reform  that  goes  beyond  the  internal  reforms  of 
commercial banks and which cannot be accomplished by the commercial banks alone but rather with 
the crucial help from other institutions and the whole society. 
I am going to talk about the following issues: 
Reforms of commercial banks’ customers, especially those in the corporate sector. 
1. 
After the structural change at commercial banks, the task of avoiding accumulating large amount of 
NPLs, to a large extent, depends on the reforms and overall quality of their customers. In recent years, 
despite the fact that the consumer lending and housing mortgage lending are in a surge, the major 
client group of the commercial banks are enterprises that involve in different lines of business and are 
of  varied  ownership.  Whether  the  commercial  banks  can  prevent  large  amounts  of  new  NPLs  from 
occurring  will  hinge  on  the  success  of  enterprise  reforms.  Only  when  the  enterprises  improve  their 
operation and profitability, can they strengthen their ability to repay debts, which will lead to lower loan 
default rates and low NPL ratios. 
Banks  face  different  clients  under  different  market  conditions.  In  a  mature  market  economy,  bank 
clients are of good quality and a credit culture is well established in the society. This in turn makes it 
possible  to maintain relatively  low  NPL  ratios.  In a  transitional economy,  it  takes  time  for  the  credit 
culture to be established and for enterprises to improve their quality. As a result efforts from the whole 
society are required. 
In the reform process, when applying for loans, enterprises should be required to provide true, reliable 
and complete information, which include not only financial statements and the organizational structure 
of the enterprise but also the true purpose of borrowing. For specific projects, the borrowing enterprise 
should also be required to provide true information about the projects. In practice, there have been 
cases where the enterprises provided false information to banks in order to swindle bank loans. False 
information  can  take  the  form  of  manipulated  financial  statements,  which  depends  on  whether 
accounting  standards  are  appropriately  applied  and  whether  there  is  independent  auditing.  False 
information  can  also  take  the  form  of  the  fraudulent  information  about  the  projects  to  be  financed. 
Recent fall-outs of a few enterprises reveal that before being exposed they had taken advantage of 
complicated,  non-transparent  company  organizational  structure  unknown  to  other  people  and  a 
complicated controlling structure to conduct connected borrowing through varied channels of financing 
they  controlled  or  through  obtaining  shares  at  a  number  of  financial  institutions  or  quasi-financial 
institutions. From a legal perspective, using false information to defraud financial facilities from banks 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
or other non-bank financial institutions is illegal. Laws and regulations that can discipline and punish 
such acts should be put into place. 
The  second  aspect  of  enterprise  reform  is  to  quicken  the  steps  of  reform  to  build  up  enterprises’ 
capital.  Generally,  enterprises  with  inadequate  capital  pose  a  serious  problem.  Even  though  the 
situation has improved compared to that in the early half of the 1990s, the enterprises’ own capital still 
remains at a low level in regard to the rules of market economy. This situation not only reflects the 
financing structure of the whole society but also closely relates to the progress of enterprise reforms. 
In a society where indirect financing is dominant, the first problem caused by low capital level is the 
high  leverage  ratio,  which  implies  relatively  low  risks  for  borrowing  enterprises  and  high  risks  for 
banks. In this regard, good risk management requires the banks to find out the proper leverage ratios 
for different enterprises under different circumstances. If the enterprises fail to undertake necessary 
reforms,  it  would  be  difficult  for  them  to  raise  capital  to  appropriate  levels.  As  a  result,  enterprises 
would take on high external leverage ratios and expose banks to greater market risks and potential 
NPL risks. 
The third aspect is that attention should be paid to factors that affect normal default rates. Since risks 
are inherent in all markets, in ordinary business activities enterprises may make investment mistakes 
and be subject to risks in the market. This creates default risks for their banks. Defaults due to the play 
of market risks are related to the location, the industry, the scale and the share-holding structure of 
enterprises. Normal defaults are unavoidable. So attention should be given to differentiate the normal 
and abnormal defaults. The default rates in economies in transition are different from those in market 
economies.  As  a  developing  country,  China’s  default  rates  are  similar  to  those  in  other  developing 
countries.  In  emerging  market  economies,  the  default  rates  are  subject  not  only  to  the  workings  of 
market risks but also to abnormal institutional factors which are sometimes installed by administrative 
intervention. An ordinary enterprise that is capable of servicing its debt may be liable to default under 
administrative  intervention.  In  the  same  vein,  the  default  rates  may  also  be  excessively  high  in  a 
unsound  legal  or  regulatory  environment.  In  other  words,  if  the  conditions  under  which  the  banks 
clients  are  operating remain  unchanged,  the  default  rates  may  be  higher  than  normal  levels  due  to 
market risks as well as complicated institutional factors. If such factors are not addressed, it remains 
possible for commercial banks to incur large amount of non-performing assets. 
Furthermore, the enterprise reforms are conducive to strengthening budget discipline, which usually 
determine the ability of enterprises to repay their debts and thus directly affect NPL level at banks. The 
budget  discipline  of  enterprises  has  evolved  from  a  soft  budget  constraint  in  the  1980’s  to  a  much 
harder one now. Further progress in this regard will have a bearing on the development of NPLs. 
2.  
The development of NPLs will be closely related to progress in market-based interest 
rate reform. 
You  may  have  noticed  that  many  of  the  Party  and  government  documents  have  listed  gradually 
moving toward market-based-interest rates as one of the directions and objectives of financial reform. 
Although in the recent past the bands of interest rates fluctuation have gradually widened, they are not 
determined solely by market conditions.  
The relation between interest rate reform and NPLs is reflected in the discretion banks have in pricing 
loans.  In  a  market  economy,  the  prices  of  loans  vary  due  to  the  cost  of  funds,  credit  rating  of  the 
borrowers and the outlook of projects to be financed. Since risks are always present in commercial 
activities,  the  different  risks  of  different  borrowers  and  their  different  projects  should  be  offset  by 
different risk premiums charged. This requires the commercial banks to charge interest to offset and 
cover the risk premiums, which is also for the purpose of absorbing losses from defaults which have 
low  probability  of  occurring  and  account  for  only  a  small  portion  of  the  total  loans.  The  nature  of 
banking  business  is  to  take  deposits,  issue  loans  and  make  profits  out  of  interest  spreads.  Not  all 
loans issued can be recovered. There is always a percentage of loans that result in losses and need to 
be absorbed by higher interest rate income. Thus, it is crucial for banks to be able to decide on the 
prices charged to different clients so that they can prevent large amount of NPLs from forming or be 
able to dispose of them. If a one-size-fit-all interest rate is charged to different types of enterprises, the 
loss of some risky loans would not be covered. If accumulated, even losses on a small scale could 
evolve into large amount of NPLs. In sum, the progress of interest rate reform will have a bearing on 
the source and disposal of NPLs.    
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
Market-based interest rate should not only be reflected in pricing of loan products and other assets, 
but also be extended to pricing of all kinds of services and deposits. In absence of good customers, 
the commercial banks could adjust their business strategy in two directions: one is to reduce activities 
on  the  asset  side  and  expand  business  on  intermediate  service,  which  surely  involves  pricing  of 
services; the other is to cut business on both the liability side and the asset side. Active management 
of  the  liabilities,  either  expansion  or  reduction,  would  surely  require  commercial  banks  to  exercise 
discretion  in  pricing  products  on  the  liability  side  of  the  balance  sheet,  including  deposits.  In  this 
regard, deposit interest rates shall remain flexible too. 
3.  
Commercial banks shall be allowed to make full provisioning and write off losses. The 
related tax polices shall be revised accordingly. 
Bank loans are always subject to a certain degree of economic risks, and at some stage of business 
operation, the financial risks faced by banks are rather high. The commercial banks have to rely on 
operational  income  and  profits  to  offset  losses.  We  can  see  that  in  mature  economies,  banks  are 
required to put aside all kinds of reserves, including risk reserves and others to guard against different 
types of risks. 
In the case of China, for a long time, commercial banks were not allowed to make full provisioning. 
One reason was that the reforms of commercial banks had not been completed. The other was that 
there was  a  lack  of  financial  resources.  It  was  not  until  mid  1990s  the  practice  of  provisioning  was 
overhauled.  However,  generally  speaking,  the  proportion  and  scale  of  provisioning  are  insufficient, 
implying that commercial banks are not financially strong enough to write off all of the bad loans. As a 
result, only a small portion of the bad loans was written off and overtime, large amount of NPLs has 
been accumulated. In order to prevent this from happening again after the reforms, commercial banks 
should build up loan reserves based on stricter accounting rules and loan classification standards and 
be given discretion to write off losses in a timely manner. 
Directly  relating  to  loan  provisioning  is  the  reform  of  relevant  tax  polices,  which  involves  tradeoffs 
between  the  state  interests  and  the  sound  development  of  the  banking  sector.  Banks  in  China  are 
levied not only the corporate income tax but also the unique business tax. If provisions are included in 
the  taxable  income,  commercial  banks  are  subject  to  heavier  tax  burden  and  their  ability  to  absorb 
NPLs is weakened.   
Markets to trade risk products and non-performing assets should be developed. 
4.  
Just as Mr. Schwab has talked about a while ago, in order to help identify risks in bank assets, price 
and transfer risks through normal transactions, we need to develop a market where risk products can 
be traded.  
In a typical market for risk products, the products traded are mainly CDS (Credit default swap) and 
CDO  (collateralized  debt  obligation).  Through  buying  and  selling  risk  products,  the  probability  of 
default is priced and traded. If such risk products are absent or a market where such products can be 
traded is absent, it would be difficult for the banks to efficiently identify risks and estimate the potential 
scale and value of loss if defaults materialize. In such circumstances, the commercial banks cannot 
sell the risks they want to part with in managing their balance sheets. Meanwhile, institutions that have 
financial resources and are willing to bear higher risks so as to receive higher returns, would find it 
difficult  to  buy  such  risk  products.  In  this  regard,  a  risk  product  market  is  required  to  facilitate 
commercial banks managing their risks.  
Similarly, for the NPLs already accumulated by the commercial banks, a market to trade NPLs needs 
to be established to facilitate disposal of NPLs according to the market rules. After the Asian financial 
crisis,  four  asset  management  companies  were  set  up  in  China  in  1999  to  dispose  of  the  NPLs 
removed  from  the  books  of  four  state-owned  commercial  banks.  Foreign  investors  and  domestic 
institutional  investors  have  been  encouraged  to  get  involved  in  disposing  of  NPLs.  With  these 
developments,  the  NPLs  transfer  market  is  forming  and  developing.  The  existence  and  maturity  of 
such a market is crucial for the banking sector to solve the historical NPL problem.  
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
5.  
Measures should be taken to encourage the development of a variety of service 
intermediaries necessary for the growth of the banking sector. 
The  development  of  the  banking  sector  requires  the  support  of  a  variety  of  highly  specialized 
intermediaries.  When  banks  screening  customers,  they  need  accounting  firms  to  audit  the  financial 
situation of these customers; when providing sophisticated financial services, they need law firms to 
verify and justify the legality of the business of their customers; when estimating customers’ assets, 
they  need  professional  asset  quality  estimators  to  determine  their  value;  when  conducting  asset 
management  through  transactions  of  financial  securities,  they  need  rating  agencies  to  rate  the 
financial products for the purpose of pricing these products.  
It is common understanding that the growth and development of these specialized intermediaries will 
contribute  to  the  development  of  capital  market.  From  the  prospective  of  developing  the  banking 
sector,  for  the  commercial  banks  to  improve  asset  quality  and  effectively  prevent  the  NPLs  from 
growing, we must place enough emphasis on the role and development of specialized intermediaries.  
Usually, it takes a long time for the specialized intermediaries to grow and develop and often involves 
complicated  issues.  Given  the  time  constraint  and  that  I  have  spoken  about  this  issue  on  earlier 
occasions, I will not further explore it. What I would like to emphasize is that we need to adopt a more 
open  attitude  toward  fostering  the  development  of  domestic  intermediaries  on  the  one  hand,  and 
further opening the service sector and tapping external resources on the other. As a result, there will 
be more high quality, accountable and specialized service providers in the credit market.  
6.  
Consideration shall be given to removing the institutional barriers in the process of 
improving corporate governance. 
In  the  process  of  commercial  bank  reforms,  many  have  stressed  the  importance  of  corporate 
governance.  It  is  noteworthy  that  in  addition  to  the  efforts  by  the  commercial  banks  and  their 
shareholders, we should also consider whether there are some inappropriate policy constraints that 
relate to our thinking and traditional practice. 
As have been mentioned by Mr. Schwab, the concept of corporate governance has evolved into the 
concept of international corporate governance that originated from a research on the subject by the 
OECD in the early 1990’s. Later the OECD released Principles on Corporate Governance. Although 
the  five  principles  are  general  guidelines,  their  implementation  in  China  would  encounter  a  few 
institutional constraints. The expressions of some concepts are not applicable, such as the issue of 
conflict  of  interest.  In  addition,  there  are  some  remaining  administrative  approvals,  and  institutional 
and  organizational  arrangements  that  continue  to  hamper  the  development  and  improvement  of 
corporate governance. Following this vein, based on the common understanding of the importance of 
corporate governance, we need to consider what the institutional constraints are and how to remove 
them in order to establish good corporate governance.    
7.  
In order to effectively prevent large amount of NPLs from being accumulated at the 
commercial banks, actions shall be taken to smooth out business cycles. 
Indeed,  the  biggest  concern  for  banks  is  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  macro-economy.  When  the 
economy is in boom, it is apparent that banks are in good conditions with handsome profits and better 
asset quality. For example, in recent years all of us have seen that the NPLs of the state banks were 
being reduced by 3 to 5 percentage points every year. However, once the economy experiences ups 
and downs, especially during the down times, the encouraging trend might reverse and it is likely that 
large  amount  of  NPLs  may  emerge  and  make  the  situation  difficult  to  manage.  Similar  situations 
occurred before and after the Asian financial crisis as reflected in the NPL data of Thailand, Korea and 
Singapore,  where  when  the  economies  began  to  plunged  into  recession,  the  ratios  of  NPL  rose 
sharply. 
In a market economy, the fluctuations in the business cycle are inherent. In transition economies, the 
fluctuations  in  business cycles cannot be  avoided  completely.  In  this  regard,  the  commercial  banks 
shall establish a capable macroeconomic research team, which can help make good judgments about 
the  coming  shifts  in  the  business  cycle  so  that  proactive  measures  can  be  taken  to  guard  against 
potential  risks.  In  China,  during  the  period  of  planned  economy,  the  interest  rates  were  set  by  the 
state. The commercial banks and insurance companies regarded their losses due to the interest rate 
changes being incurred by the related state policies. This perception has become out of date now. In a 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2004
market economy, the commercial banks as well as non-bank financial institutions must be capable of 
predicting future economic fluctuations so that good performance can be achieved during booms and 
risks be hedged during fluctuations. The commercial banks should especially consider how to improve 
their work in this regard.  
Here, I would like to cite an example. Two or three years ago, inflation in China was so low that there 
was even a deflation. The Ministry of Finance issued 10-year and 30-year bonds with very low rates. A 
number  of  big  commercial  banks  purchased  these  bonds.  Retail  investors  were  not  able  to  predict 
future interest rate development due to limits in research ability. However, the big commercial banks 
should have strong analytical capacity. If they also bought these bonds at a very low price, it might 
indicate that they had not assessed the long-term risks adequately. This is an issue they should pay 
attention to.  
From a macroeconomic perspective, to prevent the economy from experiencing stop-and-go cycles, in 
addition to deploying the appropriate monetary policy tools at appropriate time, we should especially 
stress  the  importance  of  avoiding  asset  bubbles.  Once  bubbles  have  formed,  it  is  difficult  to  make 
adjustments. This is exemplified by what has happened in Japan. That is why we are going to do our 
best  to  prevent  asset  bubbles  from  occurring.  For  China  as  well  as  for  the  rest  of  the  world,  the 
greatest concerns lie in the asset bubbles in the equity and real estate markets. However, in China the 
bubbles may occur in a different form, in that they may occur in the manufacturing industry, processing 
industries or the raw materials in the form of excess capacity in production. If excess capacity exists, 
the  investments  and  consumption  ratios  and  their  proportion  in  regard  to  GDP  would  appear 
disproportionate.  In  this  regard,  doing  a  good  job  in  macroeconomic  adjustment  and  aggregate 
analysis will help the commercial banks not only to identify future risks, but also avoid accumulating 
NPLs in economic downturns through mitigating fluctuations in business cycles. 
Even though there are many more aspects that can be discussed on this topic, I have only focused on 
the above seven points. Another interesting topic is building a society-wide credit system. Since I don’t 
have much time, I will not dwell on this topic. It is noteworthy that, sometimes even commercial banks’ 
internal  reforms  require  support  and  assistance  from  outside.  These  reforms  include  how  to  retain 
quality  staff,  how  to  develop  effective  incentive  schemes,  how  to  establish  a  favorable  environment 
that foster fast growth of good institutions and force poor ones to undertake reform, and how to help 
the commercial banks to compete domestically and internationally when our commitments to the WTO 
come due. All of these topics require in-depth research. 
Thank you very much for you attention.  
BIS Review 46/2004 
 5
