Koh Yong Guan: Review of Singapore’s economy and financial sector 
Opening remarks by Mr Koh Yong Guan, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of Singapore, at 
the press conference releasing the MAS’s Annual Report, Singapore, 21 July 2004. 
 Introduction 
Good  morning,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  Let  me  first  give  you  a  quick  overview  of  current  economic 
conditions. 
Supporting non-inflationary economic growth 
I 
As  you  know,  the  Singapore  economy  experienced  a  difficult  first  half  last  year.  Global  economic 
conditions  had  improved  markedly  since  then,  providing  support  for  a  rebound  in  the  domestic 
economy. We have since recorded four consecutive quarters of solid growth. 
The latest economic data released by MTI showed that GDP in second quarter this year grew a robust 
9.1% on a seasonally adjusted annual rate basis. 
Looking ahead, the prospects for the external economy remain bright. Notwithstanding the risks from 
rising interest rates, higher oil prices and a sharper than expected slowdown in China, the upturn in 
the global economy is likely to be sustained through the rest of this year and will support the continued 
expansion in the domestic economy. Barring any major shocks, Singapore is on track to achieve GDP 
growth of 5.5% to 7.5% this year. 
Following  an  extended  period  of  very  low  domestic  inflation,  signs  of  inflationary  pressures  have 
emerged in recent months. The forecast for CPI inflation in 2004 was hence revised upwards to the 
1.5-2.0% range. The labour market is also expected to strengthen, with the unemployment situation 
improving  for  the  rest  of  the  year.  Against  this  backdrop,  MAS  shifted  to  a  policy  of  modest  and 
gradual appreciation of the S$NEER in April 2004. This policy stance was assessed to be supportive 
of economic growth, while ensuring low and stable inflation over the medium term. 
Let me now turn to other aspects of MAS’ work during the past year. 
Regulation and supervision 
II 
First, in the area of regulation and supervision, we issued the “Objectives and Principles of Financial 
Supervision  in  Singapore”  monograph  earlier  this  year.  This  will  help  the  financial  institutions  we 
regulate and supervise better understand the desired outcomes of our supervision. 
Let me say a few words specifically on risk-based capital. We issued details of changes to the capital 
adequacy  requirements  for  Singapore-incorporated  banks  in  May  2004.  We  believe  the  new 
requirements are prudent but competitive, and more sensitive to the banks’ actual risk profiles. These 
changes will give the banks greater flexibility to manage their capital while maintaining a prudent buffer 
against future shocks. 
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision finalised the New Basel Capital Framework last month. 
We intend to adopt the New Framework at the same time as the G10 countries. We will continue to 
work closely with the Singapore-incorporated banks to assess the impact of the New Framework and 
determine how best to adapt the proposals for Singapore. 
We expect to implement the risk-based capital frameworks for life and general insurance companies in 
the third quarter of 2004. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
Enhancing market discipline 
III 
On enhancing market discipline, we began inspection for compliance with the Financial Advisers Act 
(FAA) last year. We noted a number of best practices during these inspections and have published 
them in a paper. 
To alert investors here, we intend to publish a list of unlicensed entities based outside Singapore who 
are  suspected  of  conducting  activities  regulated  under  the  Securities  and  Futures  Act  and/or  FAA. 
Details will be released by the end of the week. 
To  help  consumers  become  more  self-reliant  in  their  financial  affairs,  MAS  has  worked  with  other 
public sector agencies to launch MoneySENSE, a national financial education programme, in October 
2003.  In  the  next  few  months,  MoneySENSE  will  conduct  a  national  financial  literacy  survey  to 
benchmark  the  current  level  of  financial  literacy  among  Singaporeans.  We  are  also  facilitating  the 
development of an integrated dispute resolution scheme for the financial sector. 
Developing the financial sector 
IV 
On the developmental front, the wealth management industry grew considerably, both in institutional 
asset management and private banking. Financial institutions enjoyed fresh inflows of funds as well as 
substantial  appreciation  in  the  value  of  their  assets  under  management.  The  alternative  asset 
management industry also saw good growth, with the entry of hedge fund managers. During the year, 
apart  from  enhancing  the  regulatory  environment,  MAS  worked  with  other  government  agencies  to 
improve  the  tax  and  legal  environment  for  financial  institutions  involved  in  the  wealth  management 
business.  The  new  Trustees  Act  is  expected  to  come  into  force  later  this  year.  MAS  will  also  be 
introducing  a  framework  to  regulate  trust  companies.  The  proposed  framework  will  ensure  high 
standards  of  business  conduct,  professionalism  and  competence  in  the  trust  services  industry  in 
Singapore. 
The Singapore dollar bond market has developed beyond serving the needs of just local borrowers 
and  has  attracted  a  diversified  base  of  foreign  issuers  as  an  alternative  venue  for  cost-effective 
funding. Large issuers, including Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae and Asian Development Bank have found 
cost-effective opportunities to tap our bond market. In five years, the market has grown significantly in 
breadth and depth. Product range has also increased significantly. Structured products now account 
for  more  than  half  of  the  Singapore  dollar  bond  market.  The  asset  securitisation  market  has  also 
gained traction, recording a fivefold increase since 1999. 
To further enhance the attractiveness of Asian capital markets, MAS has, over the past year, worked 
with various governments in the region to encourage investor demand, and to address market access 
and  market  infrastructure  issues.  The  Asian  Bond  Fund  or  ABF  is  one  such  initiative.  After  the 
successful launch of ABF 1, the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central Bankers or EMEAP 
is making good progress on ABF2 to invest in local currency-denominated Asian bonds. The EMEAP 
Group believes that ABF2 will promote the development of index bond funds in the regional markets. 
We are also working with our ASEAN counterpart on an investors seminar to take place later in the 
year to raise global awareness of our capital markets. 
The treasury industry continued to grow robustly. Foreign exchange and credit trading activities were 
underpinned by market volatility and a slew of bond issuance in Asia. 
To support the broad-based growth in the financial services sector, much attention was placed over 
the  past  year  on  manpower  and  skills  development.  The  Financial  Sector  Manpower  Conversion 
scheme, launched recently, will contribute to ensuring a ready supply of skilled manpower in relevant 
growth areas. 
Playing a more active role in the international arena 
V 
Over  the  last  year,  we  have  continued  our  active  role  in  regional  cooperation,  formulation  of 
international  regulatory  standards,  and  active  dialogue  with  our  regional  and 
international 
counterparts.  This  reflects  our  recognition  of  the  importance  of  closer  cooperation  in  a  highly 
interconnected  global  market.  These  efforts  are  also  in  keeping  with  Singapore’s  role  as  an 
international financial centre. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
We work closely with our ASEAN counterparts to speed up financial sector liberalisation in the region. 
Beyond ASEAN, we are actively involved in EMEAP. Last week, we successfully hosted the EMEAP 
Governors’ Meeting as well as the first EMEAP-Eurosystem high-level seminar. 
In  the  international  regulatory  front,  we  recently  assumed  the  chair  of  the  Asia  Pacific  Regional 
Committee (APRC) of the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and sit on 
the IOSCO Executive Committee. We have also assumed the chair of the EMEAP Working Group on 
Banking Supervision, which will facilitate the region’s discussion on implementation of Basle II. We are 
committed to regional and international co-operative efforts that help to foster a stable global financial 
system. In that regard, we contributed actively to initiatives of other forums such as BIS, FSF, IAIS and 
FATF, in the areas of financial stability, regulation and supervision, corporate governance and anti-
money laundering. 
Ensuring business continuity 
VI 
In the area of Business Continuity Management (BCM), MAS conducted several exercises last year to 
ensure  the  effectiveness  of  our  BCM  plans.  We  also  inspected  BCM  plans  of  major  financial 
institutions (FIs) and found that FIs are generally prepared. For example, during the recent blackout, 
affected  FIs  continued  operations  smoothly  on  back-up  power  and  activated  their  incident 
management  process  to  verify  that  their  buildings  and  operations  were  functioning  normally.  The 
blackout had minimal impact on the financial sector. 
Accounts 
VII 
Let me now move on to the MAS’ financial statements. 
MAS’ total assets grew 16.8% during the year ended 31 March 2004 to S$ 179.7 billion. The Currency 
Fund’s  assets,  at  the  financial  year-end,  exceeded  the  S$ 14.6b  currency  in  circulation,  providing 
110% asset backing. MAS posted a net profit of S$ 5.0 billion for the year due to higher returns from 
MAS’ foreign investments in buoyant financial markets globally. 
Further enhancing transparency of MAS’ operations 
VIII 
In this annual report, we have included a new section that highlights our key achievements and work in 
progress. To enhance transparency of our decision making framework, we also disclosed details of the 
Board Committees in the annual report. 
Conclusion 
In closing, MAS continues to be focused on supporting non-inflationary economic growth, developing 
the financial sector and enhancing the supervisory framework for a sound and resilient financial sector. 
The  economy  is  expected  to  do  well  this  year.  The  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  System  Stability 
Assessment concluded that our financial sector is robust, and our legal, supervisory and institutional 
framework is sound. Rating agencies like Standard & Poors, Moody’s, and Fitch continue to re-affirm 
the strength of our economic fundamentals, which underpin our status as the only Asian country with a 
triple A sovereign credit rating on both domestic and foreign currency debt. 
We are committed to Singapore’s vision as a leading financial centre. We continue to stay abreast of 
market  developments  and  industry  concerns  and  uphold  our  high  standards  of  regulation  and 
supervision. We will work with the industry to continue to develop a more dynamic, competitive and 
vibrant financial sector. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
