Liu Tinghuan: China’s real estate finance and policy implications 
Speech by Mr Liu Tinghuan, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 1st Jiangxi High-
level Forum on Real Estate Development and Financial Support, Jiangxi, 26 June 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to attend the 1st Jiangxi High-level Forum on Real Estate Development 
and Financial Support organized by the Land Institute and the Financial Institute of Jiangxi Province. I 
would like to take this opportunity to share with you my personal observations on china’s real estate 
finance and policy implications. My remarks will fall into three parts: first, I would like to give a brief 
overview of the current situation and analyze problems in China’s real estate financial market；then I 
will make an analysis of approaches, methods and channels to develop China’s real estate finance 
centering on how to provide financial support to the growth of the real estate sector; finally, I will touch 
on the issues of supervision and regulation of the real estate financial market. 
I.  
Overview and analysis of the current situation of China’s real estate finance 
China’s real estate finance has developed rapidly in recent years. 
1.  
Since  the  reform  and  opening  up,  China’s  real  estate  finance  has  witnessed  rapid  growth,  from 
nowhere  to  a  considerable  size,  along  with  the  reform  of  national  housing  system  and  continuous 
growth of the real estate market. Especially since 1998, financial support to the real estate industry 
has  been  extended  from  previous  single  enterprise  development  loan  to  both  investment  and  sale 
credit. The current development of China’s real estate finance has the following characteristics: 
First,  property  development  and  personal  housing  consumption 
lending  experienced 
accelerated growth year by year. The outstanding balance of property development loans rose to 
RMB665.74  billion  yuan  in  2003,  or  3.2  times  of  202.89  billion  yuan  in  1998.  Personal  housing 
consumption  loans  grew  rapidly  likewise,  by  RMB1135.36  billion  yuan  or  26.64  times  during 
1998-2003, accounting for as high as 75-97 percent of consumer credit. 
Second,  the  growth  of  property  development  loans  outpaced  the  growth  of  total  lending  of 
financial institutions markedly. The average annual growth rates recorded 29.43 and 14.62 percent 
respectively during 1998-2003. While total real estate loans including personal housing loans grew at 
an average rate of 44.35 percent, highlighting out-performance over other loans.  
Third, real estate trust financing expanded rapidly, emerging as the most vigorous financing 
means  recently.  China’s  trust  industry  has  been  back  on  the  track  of  rapid  growth  after  period  of 
rectification.  Vigorous  development  of  real  estate  trust  is  especially  eye-catching.  At  end-2002  trust 
assets that went to the real estate sector totaled RMB2.4 billion yuan, up 1.26 billion yuan or 109.93 
percent from the beginning of the year and accounting for 2.82 percent of total trust assets. In 2003 
real  estate  trust  continued  its  strong  growth,  with  the  funds  raised  by  real  estate  trust  projects 
exceeding RMB5 billion yuan, more than doubled compared with 2002.  
Fourth,  the  prolonged 
interest  rate  policy  contributed  to  rapid  growth  of  the 
capital-intensive real estate sector. Now interest rates of financial institutions stand at historical lows 
after eight interest rate cut in a row since 1996. The official one-year term loan interest rate is 5.31 
percent, while housing loan interest rates are lower by one tranch correspondingly. Cheap money not 
only  lessened  interest  payment  burden  of  property  developers,  thus  increasing  profits,  but  also 
improved households’ power to purchase houses and boosted growth of property demand. Based on 
the regression analysis, interest rates fall every 1 percentage point, the national housing climate index 
for the period rises by 0.5 percentage points. 
low 
China’s real estate financial market is still underdeveloped. 
2.  
We  should  see  that  compared  with  developed  countries,  China’s  real  estate  financial  market  is  still 
underdeveloped with limited products, heavy reliance on bank loans and some difficulty in real estate 
financing.  In  mature  real  estate  financial  markets  various  financial  intermediaries  provide  abundant 
financing products besides traditional lending for property enterprises, such as public stock issuance, 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
project financing, corporate bond, equity financing, industry fund and real estate trust. In addition, a 
mature market is featured by a developed secondary market of assets securitization. The secondary 
market  not  only  improves  liquidity  of  real  estate  assets  and  provides  effective  means  for  funding 
financial  institutions  to  diversify  and  manage  risks,  but  also  offers  diversified  financial  products  for 
investors  and  stabilizes  the  financing  sources  for  the  real  estate  sector.  Furthermore,  a  sound  real 
estate financial market system has been put in place in mature market economies thanks to efforts for 
long,  comprising  comprehensive  market  structure,  function  and  regulatory  framework.  By  contrast, 
China’s real estate financial market is still underdeveloped, having obvious lag and imbalance, which 
are reflected in the following aspects: 
Single real estate financing channel highlights risk concentration.  
(i)  
First, bank lending constitutes the major channel of real estate financing. According to estimates, over 
80 percent of funding for land purchase and property development comes from bank lending directly or 
indirectly.  
Second, market risk and credit risk of real estate investment are highly concentrated on commercial 
banks.  Of  the  capital  chain,  bank  lending  penetrates  the  whole  process  of  the  real  estate  industry 
including  land  reserve  and  transaction,  property  development  and  house  sales.  Commercial  banks 
incur market and credit risks directly or indirectly in all the activities of the real estate financial market 
by extending various types of loans including housing consumption loan, property development loan, 
working capital loan for construction enterprises and land reserve loan.  
Third,  some  commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  suffer  from  irrational  and  irregular 
business behavior. Commercial banks aggressively grant real estate credit as kind of “good assets”, 
thus they tend to loosen credit requirements and seek quick success. For instance, to woo customers 
some  commercial  banks  lower  the  threshold  conditions  for  customer  qualifications,  oversimplify 
examination formalities and speed up the process of extending real estate loans. Some commercial 
banks feel overoptimistic over projects guaranteed by the government and lose sight of the risks. In 
the meantime, potential default risks of personal housing consumption loans deserve due regard. The 
business  has  only  developed  for  three  years,  so  some  problems  are  prone  to  be  concealed  and 
ignored due to small basis, rapid growth and long maturity of housing loans. Furthermore, absence of 
individual  credit  information  system  makes  it  difficult  for  commercial  banks  to  conduct  strict 
examination and monitoring of borrowers’ credit standing and debt servicing capability. 
(ii) 
Without an integrated real estate financial market framework in place, the market structure is 
simple, mirrored in the following areas:  
First,  lacking  a  multi-tier  real  estate  financial  institution  framework.  The  current  market  is  mainly 
composed  of  commercial  banks  and  some  trust  and  investment  companies,  with  no  presence  of 
specialized  mortgage  institutions,  investment  institutions,  guarantee  institutions  and  insurance 
institutions which usually are most important players in mature markets. 
Second, lacking a diversified and standardized real estate financial product system. On the one hand, 
securities offerings of the real estate industry are quite limited. Increasing real estate enterprises have 
gone listed in recent two years. At end-2003, there are over 70 listed real estate companies with total 
market  capitalization  reaching  around  RMB150  billion  yuan.  But  bond  offerings  by  real  estate 
enterprises  are  very  small,  and  the  ratio  of  debt  financing  is  on  the  decline.  On  the  other  hand, 
although real estate trust is dynamic, the size is relatively small with inherent weakness. At present 
real estate trust mainly serves as “bridge loans”, proving early-stage trust funds for real estate projects 
unqualified for bank loans, failing to perform the function of asset portfolio and transfer of maturities. 
Besides,  real  estate  industrial  fund,  mortgage  securitization  and  other  real  estate  financial  products 
are only under discussion or on a pilot program, far from mature. 
Third, lacking an independent and effective intermediary service system. At present, the intermediary 
service system hasn’t been put in place in China’s real estate financial market. With unclear nature, 
complex  subordination  structure,  and  non-market  operation  and  management,  specialized 
intermediaries  such  as  asset  appraisal,  credit  rating,  risk  evaluation,  financial  guarantee  and  legal 
consultancy agencies are still weak. More importantly, lacking a sound credit environment, especially 
weak  credit  awareness  of  enterprises,  is  no  good  for  the  healthy  development  of  the  real  estate 
financial market. 
Fourth, lacking an integrated primary market for real estate finance as well as a secondary market. In 
the primary market (mortgage market), basically only commercial banks are providing mortgage loans, 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
unfavorable for a diversified and competitive market. The long maturity of mortgage loans necessitates 
the  establishment  of  a  secondary  market  (mortgage  transfer  market)  to  improve  liquidity.  But  the 
secondary market has not yet been built in China due to shortage of mortgage operators. Low level of 
mortgage  securitization  and  asset  liquidity  make  financial  institutions  unable  to  effectively  manage 
risks. Likewise, it is the lack of a harmonious and integrated primary and secondary market framework 
that  makes  the  dynamic  real  estate  trust  unable  to  fulfill  the  function  of  maturity  transfer  and  risk 
management. 
Regulation and supervision mechanism for the real estate financial market is to be improved.  
(iii) 
The  real  estate  financial  market  is  still  fresh  in  China  on  the  whole.  We  need  to  explore  and 
summarize  the  experiences  of  regulating  and  supervising  markets  and  institutions  in  practice.  At 
present, legal system construction lags quite behind the development of the real estate market. Except 
for the provisions on the establishment of banks and uses of funds in the Commercial Banking Law, 
there  is  no  special  regulatory  framework  for  real  estate  finance.  Standards  on  real  estate  financial 
businesses need to be established promptly. Under the current separate supervision structure of the 
financial sector, supervisory agencies are unable to conduct effective and integrated supervision due 
to various constraints. While promoting the strong growth of this market, the rapid development of the 
real estate market and the opening up of the financial sector also add difficulties to the regulation and 
supervision of the real estate financial market. 
II.  
1.  
Speeding up the development of the real estate financial market to provide financial 
support for the growth of the real estate sector. 
Encouraging real estate financing product innovation and actively expanding 
financing channels for real estate enterprises. 
According  to  international  experiences,  financial  innovation  has  brought  more  and  more  financial 
products for the real estate financial market, including various equity, bonds, funds, trust securities and 
mortgage negotiable securities and so on. Therefore, great efforts need to be devoted to developing 
diversified  real  estate  financing  products  and  channels  along  with  improving  traditional  channel  of 
bank lending. 
First,  encouraging  qualified  real  estate  enterprises  to  finance  through  equity  market.  Fund 
raising through equity market is not only an important financing channel for real estate enterprises, but 
also a good way to lift their brands and reputation. Take Mr. Lee Ka-shing’s Cheung Kong Limited as 
an  example,  net  assets  of  the  company  grew  from  over  100  million  when  listed  in  1972  to  over 
130 billion  in  2003,  making  the  company  an  international  real  estate  player.  Given  China’s  specific 
circumstances  and  relevant  provisions  of  the  Law  on  Securities,  at  present  China  shall  encourage 
those  truly  competent  and  law-abiding  developers  to  get  listed.  In  addition,  taking  into  account  the 
current  small  size  and  large  volume  of  developers,  qualified  small  and  medium  sized  real  estate 
enterprises can be encouraged to finance through the second board equity market. 
Second, fostering and developing real estate bond market. The existing Company Law imposes 
strict requirements on bond issuers, providing that only shareholding limited companies, wholly state 
owned companies and limited liability companies established by over two state-owned enterprises or 
other state-owned investment agencies are qualified for issuing bonds apart from other conditions on 
asset-liability ratio, capital level and guarantee. Further more, China’s bond market features small size 
and  great  interest  rate  risks.  Therefore,  relevant  issues  such  as  qualifications  for  real  estate 
enterprises  to  issue  corporate  bonds  and  risk  management  should  be  studied  to  actively  explore 
effective  means  and  rational  channels  of  bond  financing  by  real  estate  enterprises.  It  deserves  our 
attention that some real estate enterprises have successfully issued off balance sheet bonds based on 
the property development project in recent years. Off balance sheet bonds (excluded from the balance 
of  sheet  despite  the  issuance  in  the  name  of  property  project)  are  different  from  on  balance  sheet 
bonds in many ways such as risks and accounting treatment. So relevant regulations should make a 
distinct line between them. 
Third, transforming property fund trust to real property trust. At present a lot of so-called property 
trust  are  executed  in  line  with  relevant  provisions  of  bank  lending,  serving  as  the  proxies  of  bank 
lending to a large extent. While trust companies are at a disadvantage to banks in terms of capabilities 
of  monitoring  and  managing  trust  loans,  operations  and  experiences,  hardly  playing  the  role  in 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
effectively  diversifying  and  managing  risks.  Therefore,  as  supervision  over  real  estate  trust  is 
strengthened,  trust  financing  should  be  standardized  and  developed  to  improve  the  real  estate 
financial market and to offer comprehensive financial services to each activity of the real estate sector 
including development, acquisition, purchase and sale, leasing and management. 
Fourth,  actively  advancing  real  estate  finance  innovation  and  developing  various  real  estate 
financial products for which conditions are ripe. In particular, study on effective means to develop 
real estate loans securitization shall be made a priority at present. So far the discussions on mortgage 
securitization are dominated by on balance sheet practice of China Construction Bank and off balance 
sheet  practice  of  the  China  Development  Bank.  Some  questions  like  whether  to  conduct  asset 
securitization  within  the  financial  institution  or  to  establish  a  separate  specialized  agency  can  be 
explored further based on China’s reality. All in all, experimental action shall be taken actively rather 
than hanging around theoretical debates. 
2.  
Accelerating the development of the primary real estate financial market and steadily 
pushing ahead with the development of the secondary market. 
First,  the  primary  market  shall  be  developed  into  a  diversified  and  competitive  market  with 
considerable size. On the one hand, the primary market with considerable size can not only provide 
sufficient  funding  sources  for  the  growth  of  the  real  estate  market,  but  also  lay  the  groundwork  for 
setting up and developing the secondary market. In the U.S housing mortgage assets securitization 
was introduced in the 1970s, and commercial mortgage securitization began in early 1990s. Whilst as 
early as the beginning of the 1970s, even before the birth of mortgage-backed assets securitization, 
the primary mortgage market had reached a substantial size with the outstanding balance hitting near 
USD300 billion. On the other hand, diversified primary market is conducive to fostering competition of 
fund supply and demand and improving efficiency of resource allocation. The U.S. primary real estate 
finance market mainly consists of savings and loan associations, commercial banks, credit unions, life 
insurance companies and real estate trust investment funds. Hence, it is necessary to study effective 
channel,  timing  and  method  to  introduce  new  financial  institutions,  broaden  financing  sources  and 
expand the primary real estate financial market. 
Second,  mortgage  securitization  shall  be  pushed  forward  to  build  the  secondary  real  estate 
financial  market.  Mortgage  securitization  refers  to  conversion  of  mortgage  loans  extended  by 
financial institutions to securities (mainly bonds against mortgage loans as collateral), which can be 
traded on the secondary market and resold to investors, thus fulfilling the purpose of financing and 
transferring risks of mortgage loans to myriad market investors. Functioning of the secondary market 
not only provides stable funding sources for the primary market, but also greatly enhances security 
and liquidity of mortgage loans, thus achieving the objectives of diversifying and managing risks and 
proving  a  medium  and  long  term  investment  instrument  with  relatively  good  credit  rating  for  the 
securities  market.  In  the  U.S.  mortgage-backed  securities  guaranteed  by  the  Federal  financial 
intermediaries  have  similar  credit  ratings  to  government  bonds.  Furthermore,  because  of  higher 
yielding in the secondary market, mortgage-backed securities enjoy good popularity among medium 
and long term investors such as insurance and pension funds. 
3. 
Stepping up the development of real estate financial intermediaries to improve the 
institutional structure of real estate financial market. 
In line with the objective of an integrated real estate financial market, a multi-tier real estate financial 
institutional structure shall be put in place. Various financial institutions engaged in mortgage lending, 
real  estate  financial  guarantee,  property  trust,  property  leasing  and  property  insurance  shall  be 
included in the institutional framework. First, feasibility of other financial institutions’ entry to the real 
estate market (such as insurance companies and investment fund) shall be studied actively. Second, 
the  development  and  improvement  of  other  real  estate  financial  institutions  such  as  trust  and  fund 
shall  be  encouraged.  Third,  agencies  that  engage  in  operating  real  estate  loans  securitization  and 
guarantee  provision  shall  be  fostered  and  developed  to  establish  an  institutional  structure  of 
secondary market. Fourth, real estate financial insurance system with mortgage insurance at the core 
shall be put in place. Mortgage insurance and property quality insurance shall be developed forcefully 
together with the existing moderate housing property insurance, real estate liability insurance, and real 
estate personal insurance. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2004
4.  
Fostering specialized intermediary service institutions actively to build the service 
supporting system for the real estate financial market. 
With  the  establishment  and  perfection  of  the  socialist  market  economy,  labor  division  will  be 
increasingly diversified. If financial institutions are to survive, grow and succeed in the complex market 
environment, they have to rely on a comprehensive and efficient supporting system. At present the 
information supporting system needs to be worked out urgently, because in face of such a complex 
and volatile market it is impossible and uneconomical to rely on one or a couple of real estate financial 
institutions to collect and analyze all the information needed for lending decisions. Therefore, relevant 
parties shall take an active approach to foster a sound policy and legal environment and nurture an 
independent,  fair  and  standardized  institutional  framework  of  specialized  intermediary  service 
agencies that adapt to modern financial system. 
Specifically  speaking,  first,  efforts  shall  be  made  to  foster  and  develop  a  number  of  intermediary 
service agencies with sound competence and professional integrity, such as credit rating, asset and 
project evaluation, property and specialized project consulting agencies. Second, relevant government 
departments shall also set up and develop consulting, evaluation and service agencies in response to 
the  needs  of  market  growth  so  as  to  provide  specialized,  rapid  and  efficient  public  services  to  the 
market in the areas of collecting, processing and publishing information. Only when independence and 
advantages  of  those  specialized  institutions  in  mining  market  information  and  building  market 
discipline mechanism be brought into full play, can capabilities of real estate financial institutions in 
risk analysis and management be improved effectively. Third, the establishment of information network 
of  real  estate  and  finance  shall  be  speeded  up  to  push  forward  the  computerization  of  transaction, 
settlement, management and surveillance. 
III.  
1.  
Strengthening policy guidance and regulation and improving legislation to promote 
healthy and orderly development of the real estate financial market. 
Strengthening supervision over the real estate financial market and standardizing 
financing behavior of real estate enterprises. 
Efforts shall be made to enhance supervision of property lending as well as to continuously support 
growth  of  the  real  estate  sector.  Drawing  on  the  historical  lessons  of  non  performing  loans  buildup 
when credits were highly concentrated in the processing industry (such as refrigerators, color TVs and 
washing machines) in early 1980’s and the real estate sector in early 1990’s (the real estate bubble in 
Hainan Province and in Beihai City of Guangxi Province), close attention shall be paid to the issue of 
real estate lending concentration so as to guide commercial banks to expand other lending businesses 
in  a  timely  manner.  Meanwhile,  real  estate  credit  management  shall  be strengthened  to  investigate 
and punish property lending irregularities and intensify risk management and prevention. 
2.  
Working out relevant policies to create a sound external environment for the 
development of real estate finance. 
First, regulatory agencies shall explore rational and effective supervisory approaches to keep up with 
the  market  developments.  Second,  property  lending  structure  shall  be  adjusted  to  improve  the 
operation mechanism and build a diversified, multi-tier and competitive institutional framework of real 
estate  financial  market.  Third,  public  service  system  for  the  real  estate  financial  market  shall  be 
established and continuously developed. Efforts need to be made in speeding up the construction of 
individual  credit  information  system,  building  market  risk  early  warning  system  and  statistics  index 
system and imposing information disclosure practice. 
3.  
Establishing policy real estate financial institutions to guide the development of the 
market. 
Without the secondary market in place, commercial banks incur great liquidity risks of mortgage loans. 
Hence policy real estate financial institutions shall be introduced based on international experiences 
combined  with  China’s  reality.  Under  current  circumstances,  specialized  policy  real  estate  financial 
institutions can be considered to be initiated with a view to setting specific standards and providing 
mortgage guarantees for medium and low income earners. 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 5
4.  
Building and improving the legal and regulatory system of the real estate financial 
market as soon as possible to provide legal guarantee for the market evolution. 
For the time being China’s legislation and regulation on real estate finance are far from mature, which 
are  reflected  in  the  following  aspects:  First,  the  administrative  level  of  legislation  is  not  high. 
Regulations governing real estate finance complementary to the Law on the People’s Bank of China 
and the Commercial Banking Law need to be established over the current low efficacy administrative 
rules. Second, relevant laws and regulations are dispersed without a holistic approach. Third, some 
laws and regulations fail to keep up with rapid development of China’s real estate finance and thus 
need to be adjusted and amended. Fourth, some clauses of laws are abstract and weak in operation. 
Therefore  we  shall  speed  up  the  legislation  and  improvement  of  laws  and  regulations  on  the  real 
estate  financial  market.  Study  of  legal  environments  in  mature  markets  shall  be  intensified  to  learn 
from  their  experiences.  Next,  overhaul  of  the  existing  laws  and  regulations  shall  be  expedited  to 
amend  and  complement  them  in  line  with  the  reality  of  the  market  developments  and  pratical 
requirements. Finally, regulations on real estate financial products for which conditions are ripe or the 
market is dynamic and has an urgent demand shall be enacted as soon as possible. Industrial fund is 
a good case in point, which needs early regulations as legal basis of operation. 
Paying close attention to property asset prices to prevent financial risks. 
5.  
The international experiences have shown that real estate prices are closely related to the quality of 
financial  assets  and  the  stability  of  financial  market  in  market  economies.  Instability  of  the  property 
market  may  directly  lead  to  real  estate  financial  market  turbulence  and  financial  risks,  endangering 
macro-economic  stability.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  for  the  central  bank  to  pay  close  attention  to 
property asset prices, to regulate the market and prevent and mitigate financial risks through monetary 
and credit policies. 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
China is in the historical stage of new industrialization, urbanization and building a moderately affluent 
society in an all-round way. Real estate development and finance have broad prospects. I hope that 
property developers and financial institutions can collaborate and seek common growth to make new 
and greater contributions to the healthy development of China’s real estate industry. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2004
