Ernst Welteke: Germany and Europe - recovery in 2004! 
Speech  by  Mr  Ernst  Welteke,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  British  Chamber  of 
Commerce, IHK Frankfurt, 3 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank  you  very  much  for  your  warm  welcome.  I am  glad  to  be  here  with  you  tonight.  I very  much 
appreciate the opportunity to speak to, and discuss matters with, such a distinguished audience from 
the business sector. 
My remarks today are grouped into three sections. I would like to start with some comments on the 
economic recovery in Germany and in Europe. To widen the perspective, I shall then outline a number 
of major shifts in the composition of global growth and world trade flows. Finally, I shall give you my 
view  on  structural  reforms  for  a  more  dynamic  economy  in  order  to  meet  the  demographic  and 
competitive challenges that lie ahead. 
First of all, however, I would like to tell you that the Executive Board of the Bundesbank has decided to 
advocate a renewal of the Gold Agreement after the current agreement expires in autumn. The terms 
and conditions should be similar to those of the current agreement. Sales of around 2,000 tonnes of 
central banks’ gold over a period of five years would translate into annual sales of about 400 tonnes. 
The Bundesbank envisages a quota of about 120 tonnes a year, which is equivalent to 4% of the total 
stock. 
The gold reserves have been accumulated from external economic activities over a prolonged period. 
Hence,  it  is  appropriate  to  manage  this  asset  in  a  manner  which  safeguards  its  underlying  value. 
Future generations should also be able to derive benefit from this asset. I will soon be taking up talks 
with  the  Federal  Government  and  the  parliamentary  parties on  the specifics of  how  to  manage  this 
asset. 
Developing economic recovery 
1. 
A whole series of indicators is pointing to an ongoing recovery in the world economy. After hitting a 
trough last March, stock markets -which show some leading indicator properties - have accomplished 
a powerful turnaround. Business sentiment indicators started to change for the better in summer. For 
some weeks now, releases of economic data have been providing confirmation that economic activity 
is picking up. I am confident that autumn saw a change for the better.  
Europe and Germany 
1.1  
In the wake of accelerating growth in the USA and in Asia, world trade is returning to considerably 
higher growth rates. External demand has been the main factor behind the initial signs of improving 
economic activity in the euro area. 
In the third quarter - the most recent quarter for which detailed data are available - external demand 
was  the  only  component  to  make  a  positive  contribution  to  the  GDP  growth  rate.  Consumption 
essentially  stagnated,  while  stock-building  and  investment  made  a  negative  contribution.  The 
components added up to a 0.4% growth in GDP on the quarter. 
Leading indicators point to a strengthening of economic activity during the final quarter of 2003. New 
industrial  orders  have  come  in  stronger  since  the  beginning  of  the  final  quarter.  At  the  same  time, 
there has been an increase in capacity utilisation — for the first time since October 2002. 
National data from Germany have bolstered the latest euro-area indicators. In Germany, new orders 
and industrial output have been on a remarkable uptrend. The Ifo business climate index showed a 
ninth successive increase in January. High-flying business expectations are now being underpinned 
by an improved assessment of the current business situation. 
The Bundesbank’s estimate of fourth quarter GDP growth is +0.25%. However, the initial estimate of 
German GDP in 2003 is only -0.1% growth on the year. All in all, most recent data are encouraging, 
although they do not yet make for a vigorous economic expansion. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 1
For the export-driven recovery to lead to a self-sustaining expansion, domestic demand would need to 
pick  up  -  both  consumption  and  investment.  Consumer  confidence  in  the  euro  area  has  stabilised 
recently at a rather low level. A weak job market and the need for pension provisioning are weighing 
on  private  consumption.  On  the  other  hand,  there  seems  to  be  a  considerable  amount  of  pent-up 
demand. German cars that are currently on the road, for example, are fairly old on average. Stable 
prices underpinned by the euro exchange rate are bolstering incomes in real terms. 
In an environment of favourable financial conditions - which have prevailed for quite some time now - 
firmer  expectations  of  increasing  sales  should  spark  investment  demand  even  though  capacity 
utilisation  is  far  below  its  maximum  level.  Nominal  and  real  interest  rates  are  low  and  there  is  no 
shortage of liquidity. Loans to the private sector are on an upward trend. 
Businesses’ export expectations remain generally upbeat despite some concern about a potential loss 
of  price  competitiveness  following  a  marked  rise  in  the  external  value  of  the  euro.  Certainly,  any 
currency appreciation tends to imply a loss of price competitiveness unless it is offset by an increase 
in productivity or by cost-cutting. 
It is important not to overestimate the effect the euro appreciation has on overall export demand and, 
even more so, on the economic recovery. The impact of world trade and world growth dynamics far 
outweighs the influence of the exchange rate. A strong currency is an asset. The strong Deutschmark 
served Germany well.  
Risks inherent in the export-led recovery 
1.2  
The economic outlook for the euro area and for Germany are rather good, although some serious risks 
remain. The US twin deficits are a concern in this respect. In the late 1990s, the US current account 
deficit  had  its  domestic  counterpart  in  high  investment  spending.  It  was  financed  by  foreign  private 
investors seeking an opportunity to invest in the US corporate sector. Today’s current account deficit 
has  a  domestic  flip  side  in  terms  of  a  high  budget  deficit.  It  is  financed  to  a  large  extent  by  Asian 
central banks which purchase US treasuries by intervening in the foreign exchange markets. 
Exchange  rate  movements  like  the  dollar  depreciation  help  to  unwind  imbalances  in  the  world 
economy, even though they cannot do the trick entirely on their own. The domestic causes of those 
imbalances  need  to  be  addressed.  For  Europe,  the  main  task  in  this  respect  is  to  boost  growth 
potential by embarking on structural reforms in order to ease existing economic rigidities. 
The monetary policy strategy of the euro area does not target the exchange rate. The external value of 
the euro is one of many factors shaping the prospects for price stability. The ECB Governing Council 
closely  monitors  developments  in  the  euro’s  exchange  rate.  Currently,  the  strong  euro  allows  us  to 
keep interest rates at a low level in an environment where demand is picking up and excess liquidity 
persists. 
One  of  the  reasons  for  the  marked  improvement  in  German  sentiment  indicators  is  the  confidence 
generated  by  the  evolving  reform  process.  Any  perception  that  reforming  zeal  is  weakening  might 
therefore  do  harm  to  the  recovering  economy.  Moreover,  reforms  are  crucial  for  enhancing 
competitiveness.  
Trends in the world economy 
2. 
I would like to widen my perspective at this point and discuss some rather global topics. Globalisation, 
deregulation  and  market  orientation  have  helped  to  change  the  shape  of  the  world  economy 
significantly  over  the  past  few  decades.  We  have  witnessed  the  integration  of  more  and  more 
countries into the world markets and a sharp rise in global trade. 
During  the  past  30  years,  the  cross-border  exchange  of  goods  and  services  increased  ninefold  (in 
terms of volume) to more than US$ 7,000 billion in 2003. At the same time, substantial changes in the 
regional composition of trade flows have occurred. While the industrial countries’ real share in world 
exports  has  gone  down  from  70%  to  60%,  that  of  developing  countries  has  gained  ground.  The 
fast-growing economies in East Asia, in particular, have been extremely successful in integrating into 
the world economy. Their market share of world exports went up from 6% in the 1970s to about one-
fifth in 2003. By no later than 2010, East Asia, including Japan, might account for more than one-third 
of  world  trade  and  thus  become  the  world’s  most  important  trading  area,  ahead  of  the  European 
Union.  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2004
The  export-oriented  development  strategy  of  the  Asian  economies  -  in  contrast  to  the  more 
inward-looking  approach  in  Latin  America -  has brought  a considerable  measure  of success.  It  has 
stimulated  not  only  cross-border  trade  but  also  economic  growth.  Developing  Asian  economies 
currently account for nearly one-quarter of global production. They have exploited their capacity for 
fast growth by 
• 
• 
• 
efficiently mobilising their physical and human resources 
adapting foreign technology and 
utilising  the  opportunities  for  specialisation  resulting  from  their  integration  into  the  world 
economy. 
As  a  consequence,  they  have  roughly  doubled  their  economic  weight  over  the  past  30 years.  Real 
convergence - as suggested by growth theory - seems to work if the right conditions are in place. 
At the same time, advanced economies, most notably west and east European countries, have lost 
significant  market  shares  in  world  production.  Slow  population  growth,  modest  gains  in  productivity 
and  the  breakdown  of  the  former  Communist  planned  economies  have  hampered  their  economic 
performance. At present, advanced economies, while representing no more than about one-sixth of 
world  population,  account  for  55%  of  global  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  based  on  purchasing 
power parity (PPP) valuation - about 5 percentage points less than in 1980. The transition countries’ 
share of global GDP has gone down from 12½% to 6½%, although there has been a small increase 
recently. For the sake of completeness, let me say that the United States’ share of global GDP has not 
changed much over this period. 
However,  in  recent  years  China  has  been  the  most  outstanding  example  in  terms  of  economic 
performance. Over the past ten years the Chinese economy has grown on average by more than 8% 
annually  in  real  terms  -  faster  than  other  Asian  countries  and  very  much  more  than  the  advanced 
economies  (2½%).  Admittedly,  China  is  still  a  relatively  poor  country,  but  the  pace  at  which  it  is 
catching up is remarkable. Measured in terms of purchasing power parities, China currently accounts 
for about 12½% of world production and 5% of world trade. 
Bearing these shifts in mind, one is inclined to ask how the world economy might look in 10 years or 
so.  Some  experts  forecast  that  the  Asian  economies  (excluding  Japan),  and  especially  China,  will 
grow rapidly over this period. As a consequence, they see China and the United States having roughly 
equal levels of GDP in 2015 (assuming PPP valuation).  
Time  will  tell  how  realistic  those  projections  are.  Some  risks  are  evident  in  the  case  of,  say,  the 
necessary transformation of loss-making state enterprises and urgent reforms in the financial sector in 
China  -  to  mention  just  two  economic  factors.  With  respect  to  the  United  States,  we  have  recently 
observed  relatively  high  productivity  growth  rates,  which  might  contribute  to  higher-than-expected 
GDP levels in the US, but the risks arising from the twin deficits in the medium term should not be 
underrated. 
Irrespective  of  the  question  of  which  economy  will  be  in  pole  position  in  2015,  unwinding  global 
imbalances  and  strengthening  economic  growth  pose  difficult  challenges  for  the  international 
community. 
Economic and social reforms 
3. 
About a year ago, Germany was undergoing a deep crisis of confidence. At the time, only staunch 
optimists  would  have  thought  possible  what  is  now  law  in  Germany.  We  are  being  serious  about 
economic reform. Under the heading of “Agenda 2010”, the state as we know it is being transformed. 
A new balance is to be struck between the public and the private sector. This process may well be 
described as a paradigm shift.  
The old ideal of providing social justice through a highly redistributive state is fading away. The ideal 
has simply failed to live up to expectations. The role of the state is now being redefined as a more 
subsidiary  one.  The  other  side  of  the  equation  is  that  people  are  being  increasingly  allowed  -  and, 
indeed, expected - to manage their own affairs. Efficient markets and a proper set of incentives are 
reinforcing this trend. In short, members of the public are being called upon to take responsibility for 
themselves and to make their own decisions. Only those who are unable to do that can count on the 
state for support. For a large part of Europe, this approach amounts to a minor revolution. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 3
Reforms accomplished 
3.1 
Early  last  year,  the  Bundesbank  published  a  paper  entitled  “Ways  out  of  the  crisis”.  The  paper 
proposed applying a coherent overall strategy for structural reforms in the labour market, the social 
security  systems  and  fiscal  policy.  Despite  some  shortcomings,  a  major  portion  of  the  reforms  now 
being implemented are in line with our proposals. 
I would like to stress the enhanced flexibility of the labour market that has now been accomplished. 
Fixed-term  contracts  can  be  used  more  extensively  when  setting  up  a  new  business. 
Dismissal-protection rules have been eased for small businesses, thus lowering a major hurdle to new 
recruitment. Incentives to work in the low-wage sector have been increased by reducing the period of 
entitlement to transfer payments from 18 to 12 months in most cases. Furthermore, the Crafts Code 
has been deregulated to enable more people to set up their own business. 
Germany has begun to cut back subsidies such as tax breaks for commuters or new home-owners. In 
the  statutory  health  insurance  system,  patients  now  share  the  costs  of  any  treatment  they  seek. 
Over-use  of  what,  up  to  now,  have  been  regarded  as  “free”  health  care  services  might  thus  be 
contained to a certain extent.  
Unfinished reform business 
3.2 
There is a lot of unfinished business on the German reform agenda. But, at least, Germany has made 
a start. Our partner states in Europe and elsewhere are taking note of this. Now is not the time to take 
a rest, as we still have a long way to go before the German economy has truly regained its former 
dynamism. We need to build on the newly acquired momentum for reform. There has to be a further 
improvement in the supply side conditions, red tape has to be cut back, and setting-up a business has 
to be made easier. 
The labour market would clearly benefit if employers and employees were allowed to depart from the 
terms  of  centralised  wage  agreements  provided  jobs  can  be  secured  in  that  way.  A  general 
broadening of the scope for non-centralised wage settlements at the individual company level might 
also help to improve labour market flexibility. 
Non-wage  labour  costs  have  reached  a  level  that  acts  as  a  major  impediment  to  employment  and 
economic  growth.  The  rapid  ageing  of  the  population  will  put  the  systems  under  further  pressure 
unless they are reformed speedily and thoroughly. 
In order to contain the cost dynamics in the health care system without compromising quality, higher 
levels of competition and transparency are needed on the supply side. Insurance contributions have to 
be made separate from employment contracts. Funding of the pension system must be broadened. As 
benefits  paid  out  in  the  pay-as-you-go  pension  system  will  have  to  be  cut  back  for  future  retirees, 
private  provisioning  should  be  expanded.  Furthermore,  the  younger  generations  will  have  to  work 
beyond the present retirement age of 65 years. Postponing reforms in the social security systems will 
ultimately render them only more costly. 
Fiscal issues 
3.3  
Social  security  systems  have  contributed  significantly  to  deteriorating  public  finances.  Fiscal 
consolidation is a priority issue for governments not only in Germany.  
There must be no further weakening of the Stability and Growth Pact. Modifying the pact would be as 
short-sighted an option as non-compliance. In the longer run, there can be no sound money without 
sound public finances.  
Public finances must be consolidated on the expenditure side. This is entirely in line with the objective 
of a more subsidiary role for the state. Past experience has also shown it to be the most effective road 
to  achieving  sound  public  finances.  The  economic  upswing  opens  a  window  of  opportunity  to  get 
serious about fiscal consolidation. 
An overhaul of the income tax that broadens the tax base while lowering tax rates might help to raise 
the  growth potential  of  the  economy. The  ideal  tax  system would  be simple,  fair  and  efficient.  That 
ideal is the benchmark for any upcoming tax reform. 
Although my remarks on necessary reforms referred to the situation in Germany, the problem areas 
are  -  albeit  to  varying  degrees  -  basically  the  same  in  most  European  countries:  social  security 
4 
 BIS Review 7/2004
systems  facing  ageing  populations,  high  budget  deficits  and  growth-hampering  structural  rigidities. 
Especially with regard to such rigidities, the UK’s flexible economy is in quite an enviable position.  
Concluding remark 
4. 
However  large  the  need  for  reform,  the  euro  area  has  a  major  asset:  its  currency.  The  euro  has 
delivered  a  high  degree  of  macroeconomic  stability  previously  unknown  to  most  of  the  300 million 
people  who now use  the single  currency.  I firmly  believe  that  the  past  five  years with  their  external 
shocks - terrorist attacks, financial market turmoil, sharp oil price movements - would have been even 
less pleasant for Europe if not for the stabilising factor of the euro. 
Should the UK join the euro area? 
Personally, I would appreciate Anglo-Saxon free-market enthusiasm within the Eurosystem. Adopting 
the  single  currency  would  lower  transaction  costs  considerably  as  the  UK  and  the  euro  area  are 
already  the  most  important  trading  partners  for  each  other.  It  therefore  makes  sense  to  integrate 
financial and product markets further by having a common currency.  
I am fully aware of how contentious an issue the euro is in the United Kingdom. Even so, in my humble 
opinion, the UK joining the euro area would be mutually beneficial. You would be most welcome. 
BIS Review 7/2004 
 5
