Klaus Liebscher: The euro area and the challenges of enlargement 
Speech  by  Dr  Klaus  Liebscher,  Governor  of  the  Austrian  National  Bank,  at  the  European  Lawyer 
Conference “Advising Clients in an Expanded Europe”, Vienna, 29 April 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be with you today. My contribution will focus on two milestones of European 
integration: the enlargement of the European Union (EU) and the establishment of a monetary union 
within the EU. As Austria’s central bank, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, has largely contributed to 
both forms of integration, I am pleased to share with you some of my views.  
Over the last half century, Europe has followed an impressive path of voluntary integration of nations. 
In  parallel  to  the  successive  deepening  of  Economic  integration,  the  European  Union  has  been 
gradually  enlarged.  At  present,  we  are  at  the  threshold  of  a  further  historic  enlargement  stage.  On 
Saturday,  ten  countries  -  five  Central  European  and  three  Baltic  countries  as  well  as  two 
Mediterranean islands - will join the European Union, expanding the EU’s population by 20%.  
This  enlargement  round  is  not  only  the  most  important  one  to  date  in  terms  of  scale,  diversity  and 
economic growth potential, but also - as Commissioner Verheugen once put it - the best prepared in 
the  history  of  the  European  Union.  I  would  like  to  state  very  clearly  that  we  highly  welcome  the 
acceding countries’ joining the European Union. After the fall of the “iron curtain” 15 years ago, the 
Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  have  undergone  an  impressive  and  successful,  if  often 
painful,  process  of  transformation  and  we  see  their  joining  our  Union  as  a  well-deserved  step  of 
historic dimensions. 
The forthcoming enlargement of the European Union comes at a moment when the euro area sees 
increasing signs of a gradual recovery in economic activity. While growth has been relatively modest 
so  far,  both  external  and  domestic  factors  give  reason  to  expect  a  strengthening  of  the  recovery 
through 2004 and beyond. On the external side, all recent indications confirm that global economic 
growth in 2004 will be robust and broadly based across different regions of the world. On the domestic 
side,  the  conditions  for  a  recovery  in  private  demand  are  in  place  and  there  have  been  signs  over 
recent months of a pick-up in investment. The positive growth outlook is supported by a favourable 
outlook for price stability in the euro area. While over the short term, inflation may show some volatility 
reflecting  temporary  factors,  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  remain  in  line  with  the  Eurosystem’s 
definition  of  price  stability  of  below[,  but  close  to]  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Neither  wage 
developments nor inflation expectations are to date considered a major risk to this assessment.  
Economic and trade integration in Europe has proven a fruitful co-operation for all involved parties. 
The  current  EU  member  states  experienced  deepened  trade  integration,  a  speeding  up  of  the 
convergence  process  of  income  levels,  and  better  access  to  a  broader  knowledge  pool.  Intensified 
peer  pressure  increased  incentives  to  stick  to  sound  macroeconomic  policies  and  to  implement 
overdue  structural  reforms.  All  these  factors  contributed  to  a  stable  and  favourable  economic 
environment, even though many challenges still remain to be tackled.  
Now, on the eve of EU enlargement, it is time to look ahead. I am convinced that all involved parties 
are going to benefit from this further integration in Europe. The new Member States will certainly gain 
most from their new status, but also the current EU Member States, especially those with strong trade 
links towards the enlargement area as for example Austria, will also experience positive effects. While 
there may be initial adjustment costs in some sensitive areas these costs should be of a temporary 
nature  and  will  be  outweighed  by  far  by  the  positive  long-term  effects,  related  to  trade  creation, 
increased competition and intensified foreign direct investment flows. Actually, in this respect one does 
not even have to look to the future; a considerable part of the expected benefits has become reality 
even  today.  The  European  agreements  eliminated  trade  barriers  already  in  the  second  half  of  the 
1990s, causing imports from Central and Eastern European countries to the EU to double in the first 
five years. Supported by intensified trade, the stabilization of expectations and the decrease in interest 
rates, the acceding countries experienced a GDP growth rate of 3.6% in 2003, well above the euro 
area average.  
Since  January  1,  1999,  when  eleven  EU  member  states  entered  the  third  stage  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  (EMU)  by  adopting  the  common  currency,  the  euro  has  gained  international 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 1
importance. Further to its role in trade and financial markets, where it has been well received, the euro 
has  asserted  itself  as  an  important  official  reserve  currency  and  as  an  anchor  in  exchange  rate 
regimes in many non-euro area countries. 
Increased price transparency, lower interest rates and transaction costs, and the import of stability and 
credibility  are  only  some  of  the  manifold  benefits  of  the  euro.  I  would,  however,  like  to  stress  one 
specific aspect of monetary integration that proved most relevant for the success of EMU in Europe: 
Through  the  irrevocable  fixing  of  exchange  rates  countries  are  no  longer  exposed  to  harmful 
intra-European exchange rate tensions and are also better protected from negative external shocks. 
Indeed,  major  global  developments  in  recent  years,  like  the  bursting  of  the  equity  bubble,  the 
repercussions  of  the  terrorist  attacks  and  the  substantial  depreciation  of  the  U.S.  dollar  might 
otherwise have led to phases of instability within the European economy. Yet EMU provided a stable 
framework for weathering these turbulences. 
Upon  entering  the  European  Union,  the  ten  new  member  states  also  become  members  of  the 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  While  they  will  not  yet  take  part  in  EMU  to  the  full  extent,  as  they 
cannot  adopt  the  euro  immediately,  they  are  already  required  to  observe  a  number  of  obligations 
embodied in the stability architecture of EMU: They generally have to bring into line their economic 
and monetary policies with the overall goals of EMU. Their central banks will be represented in the 
General Council of the ECB, which supports the ECB in its advisory and coordinating functions. The 
new member states will participate in the coordination of economic and monetary policies and in the 
multilateral  fiscal  surveillance.  Moreover,  they  shall  treat  exchange  rate  policies  as  a  matter  of 
common interest, as the functioning of the single market must not be weakened by real exchange rate 
misalignments or excessive nominal exchange rate fluctuations. 
From  the  point  of  view  of  a  country  that  already  enjoys  the  benefits  of  the  common  currency,  it  is 
essential that the next step of European integration, the adoption of the euro in the acceding countries, 
is  as  well  prepared  as  all  past  integration  steps.  I  am  convinced  that  each  of  the  new  EU  Member 
States is a good potential candidate for the single monetary policy as defined by the economic theory 
on optimal currency areas: They can all be characterized as open economies with strong economic 
linkages with the euro area, a steadily increasing degree of business cycle synchronization with the 
euro area and a high level of flexibility to adjust to new economic circumstances.  
While  in  general  most  of the  advantages  of  monetary  integration  will  increase  with  the scale  of  the 
euro area, it is crucial that countries are sufficiently prepared for this intensified integration before they 
adopt the euro. The Treaty with its convergence criteria provides the appropriate framework to assess 
whether a country shows a record of stability-oriented monetary and fiscal policy and therefore can be 
regarded  as  ready  for  monetary  integration.  Let  me  at  this  point  recall  some  of  the  convergence 
criteria to evaluate where the group of new EU Member States stands at the moment.  
A key convergence criterion is a high degree of price stability. A low level of inflation is a precondition 
for the provision of a favorable growth environment. The group of new EU Member States has shown 
an impressive record of disinflation with inflation in some cases dropping from more than 20% in the 
mid-1990s to levels consistent with price stability in recent months. While we certainly welcome this 
disinflation  trend  it  should  be  born  in  mind  that  it  is  related  to  the  current  central  policy  focus  on 
inflation reduction as well as to past appreciations of the currencies and that is hardly sustainable to 
the  full  extent  for  the  near  future.  The  continuing  income  convergence  process  as  well  as  the 
deregulation of administered prices will put inflation back onto the list of national policy challenges.  
Another criterion requires the sustainability of the government financial position as expressed by the 
deficit and debt ratios to GDP. Only a stability-oriented fiscal policy allows the countries of a monetary 
union to fully profit from one of the major benefits of monetary integration: a low level of risk premia 
and therefore interest rates. Fiscal discipline will be one of the major challenges for the coming years 
as many acceding countries recently experienced difficulties in sticking to previously announced deficit 
targets.  Let  me  at  this  stage  emphasize  the  commitment  of  the  Eurosystem  to  the  achievement  of 
sound budgetary positions. Recent developments in some euro area countries give reason for concern 
and  underline  the  importance  of  using  the  expected  upward  phase  of  the  cycle  to  eliminate 
imbalances  over  the  coming  years.  All  countries  would  benefit  from  the  strengthening  of  the 
sustainability of their public finances. 
The exchange rate criterion requires formal participation in the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) for 
at least two years with no devaluations and without severe tensions. ERM II is designed to provide for 
flexibility  and  adjustability  as  well  as  for  enough  stability  to  help  anchor  expectations.  In  this  view, 
participation  in  ERM  II  should  contribute  to  real  and  nominal  convergence.  To  ensure  a  smooth 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2004
participation in ERM II it is essential that major policy adjustments are undertaken prior to participation 
in  the  mechanism  and  that  a  credible  fiscal  consolidation  path  is  being  followed.  Exchange  rate 
policies within ERM II have to be in line with the general policy framework: with monetary, fiscal and 
structural policies.  
Overall I’d like to emphasize the importance of considering the time period between EU enlargement 
and the adoption of the euro in the new EU Member States as an essential test period to assess the 
stability  of  their  policies  and  their  readiness  for  this  next  integration  step.  The  speed  of  further 
monetary  integration  must  not  compromise  its  quality.  Consequently,  there  will  also  be  no  uniform 
appropriate strategy concerning participation in the exchange rate mechanism and the adoption of the 
euro due to differences in the economic situation, the history and background of exchange rate and 
monetary policies.  
Decisions have to be taken in accordance with the legal foundations on a case-by-case basis, and, 
simultaneously,  equal  treatment  between  new  and  current  EU  Member  States  must  be  ensured 
throughout  the  whole  process.  The  acceding  countries  are  in  the  midst  of  an  integration  and 
catching-up  process,  and  their  equilibrium  exchange  rates  will  be  subject  to  gradual  changes  and 
shocks  over  time.  Therefore,  any  premature  euro  area  participation  has  to  be  avoided.  An 
enlargement of the monetary union by well prepared countries will be a benefit for all member states 
and will continue the success story of European integration.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
From my point of view, it is vital for the new member countries to keep attaining strong but sustainable 
real economic growth that permits their income-per-capita levels to gradually approach the average 
income level in the present EU member countries. Therefore, economic policies of the new member 
countries  and  any  further  steps  in  monetary  integration  should  be  oriented  towards  achieving 
sustainable  real  and  nominal  convergence,  as  both  convergence  processes  are  complementary  to 
each other and should be pursued in parallel. 
Let me conclude with expressing my conviction that the enlargement of the European Union and the 
economic and monetary integration of the acceding countries will not only strengthen the role of the 
European  Union  as  a  global  player  in  the  long  term,  but  also  make  a  sustainable  contribution  to 
stability, peace and welfare in Europe. Therefore, I am looking forward to this new era that lies in front 
of us, characterized by a larger number of Member States and, in terms of ideas, by an even larger 
potential of human beings.  
BIS Review 24/2004 
 3
