Toshihiko Fukui: The challenges for sustained economic growth under 
changing economic, social and international environments 
Opening  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  11th  International 
Conference  sponsored  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  Bank  of  Japan,  Tokyo, 
5 July 2004.  
 Introduction  
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I am very pleased to address the 11th international conference 
hosted  by  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies.  On  behalf  of  my  colleagues  at  the 
Bank of Japan, I welcome the participants from all over the world.  
This  year’s  conference  is  focused  on  “The  Challenges  for  Sustained  Economic  Growth  under 
Changing  Economic,  Social  and  International  Environments.”  Over  the  two-day  conference,  we  will 
explore  a  broad  range  of  issues  on  economic  growth.  What  are  the  major  engines  of  economic 
growth?  What  are  the  long-term  effects  of  uneven  growth  over  the  economies  on  global  resource 
allocation? What roles should a government and a central bank play in promoting sustained economic 
growth?  
Major engines of sustained economic growth  
Our understanding of economic growth has advanced significantly since the revival of growth theory in 
the  mid-1980s.  For  the  last  two  decades  economic  growth  has  been  one  of  the  most  sought-after 
subjects of economic research. The new “endogenous” growth theory has provided various systematic 
expositions of technological progress, such as creation, accumulation and diffusion of new ideas.  
The standard growth theory tells us that economic growth in per capita basis comes from mainly two 
sources:  capital  deepening  and  total  factor  productivity  growth,  or  TFP  growth.  Capital  deepening 
increases  output  along  the  production  function.  TFP  growth  increases  output  by  pushing  the 
production  function  upward.  The  former  faces  the  diminishing  marginal  productivity  as  capital 
deepening progresses, and the latter becomes increasingly important in achieving sustained growth in 
the long-term.  
As the new endogenous growth theory suggests, TFP growth is closely related to accumulation of the 
intangible capitals, such as human capital and research and development. We see a lot of evidence 
that  such  investments  have  actually  trended  upward.  In  particular,  workers  with  high  educational 
backgrounds and those engaged in research and development have both increased in major industrial 
countries.  
Interactions between trend growth paths and business cycles  
Growth  theory  tends  to  focus  on  the  trend  growth  paths  in  the  long  run.  Observed  growth  paths, 
however,  are  not  smooth.  There  exists  a  dynamic  interaction  between  trend  growth  paths  and 
business cycles. How do macroeconomic fluctuations influence the trend growth paths? How do the 
trend growth paths in turn influence the short-term fluctuations in the economy?  
For  example,  during  the  past  three  decades,  we  have  seen  a  contrast  in  the  cyclical  and  trend 
behaviors of real output between Japan and the United States. From the 1970s to the mid-1980s, the 
Japanese economy moved in a less volatile manner around the higher trend growth path, compared 
with  the  US  economy.  From  the  mid-1980s  such  an  observation  was  reversed.  The  Japanese 
economy moved in a more volatile manner around the lower trend growth path.  
Indeed,  the  1990s  are  often  referred  to  as  the  “lost  decade”  for  Japan’s  economy.  Average  growth 
declined from the mid-three percent in the 1980s to the mid-one percent in the 1990s. The recoveries 
in the 1990s were not strong enough to lead to self-sustained growth. The recessions were deep and 
long enough to weaken the economic fundamentals.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
Now the Japanese economy is finally reaching the end of the long and painful path of the post-bubble 
adjustments. Our economy has achieved significant progress in overcoming structural impediments. It 
is gradually gaining momentum for the restoration of sustained growth, and is showing more signs of 
recovery,  spreading  from  manufacturing  to  non-manufacturing  industries,  from  large  to  small  firms, 
and from metropolitan to regional areas.  
Yet we should remain vigilant. We cannot say for sure that the current recovery will be durable and 
strong enough to push the economy back to a sustained growth path. Thus, the questions we should 
ask here are what makes the current economic upswing different from the past two recoveries, and 
whether such differences are sufficient for the economy to reach the sustained growth path.  
The Japanese and U.S. experiences in the past three decades I mentioned before remind us of three 
things. First, such experiences confirm the importance of technological progress as a major engine of 
economic growth. Second, at the same time, they suggest the possibility that some additional factors 
also  play  a  key  role  in  determining  sustained  economic  growth,  such  as  financial  systems  and 
globalization.  Third,  they  indicate  that  a  low  inflation  environment  emerges  as  a  new  challenge  for 
sustained economic growth.  
Now  I  will  elaborate  on  some  important  but  often-ignored  or  newly-emerged  factors  in  achieving 
sustained economic growth. This year’s conference takes up such issues in a well-balanced manner. I 
am convinced we will be able to broaden and deepen our understanding of economic growth here.  
Implications of globalization  
Let  me  begin  by  focusing  on  the  implications  of  globalization  for  economic  growth.  The  increased 
global linkages promote economic growth in the world through two key mechanisms: the division of 
labor and the international spillovers of knowledge.  
In  this  context,  the  current  recovery  in  the  Japanese  economy  is  taking  place  in  tandem  with  the 
growing interdependence with the rest of the world, particularly with the other East Asian economies. 
The direct investment of Japanese businesses to East Asian economies accelerates the reallocation 
of  their  production  bases.  Consequently,  between  Japan  and  the  other  East  Asian  countries,  both 
exports and imports are growing substantially.  
Exchange rate movements have the short run and long run influence on an economy. As for the short 
run  effects,  exchange  rate  movements  influence  the  economy  through  changing  relative  prices 
between goods at home and abroad. Recent empirical studies, however, show such short run effects 
become small because the exchange rate pass-through to import prices declines.  
On  the  contrary,  exchange  rate  movements  still  play  an  important  role  in  facilitating  more  efficient 
resource  allocations  in  the  long  run.  At  the  previous  conference,  Professor  Maurice  Obstfeld  here 
mentioned  in  his  keynote  speech  that  exchange  rates  still  have  significant  expenditure-switching 
effects  through  influencing  firms’  decisions  on  production  bases  and  production-goods  suppliers 
across  borders.  In  fact,  the  recent  increase  in  intra-firm  trading  enables  businesses  to  shift  their 
activities  across  borders  smoothly,  thereby  strengthening  the  response  of  economic  activity  to 
exchange rate movements in the long run.  
Asset price fluctuations and financial systems  
Asset price fluctuations have important implications for promoting more efficient resource allocations 
and achieving sustained growth in the long run. The staff at the Institute will present an analysis on 
how  asset  price  fluctuations  and  subsequent  structural  adjustments  influence  sustained  economic 
growth,  based  on  Japan’s  experience  since  the  second  half  of  the  1980s.  They  emphasize  the 
viewpoint  that  the  protracted  economic  stagnation  in  Japan  derives  from  incomplete  economic 
adjustments to significant changes in relative prices.  
In view of the incomplete economic adjustments during the post bubble distress, we fully realize that 
the malfunction of financial intermediation impedes the resource allocation mechanism in the financial 
markets. With weak balance sheets, banks tend to continue lending unprofitable businesses and leave 
them existing. Such lending policy hampers the factor reallocation to more profitable businesses.  
Good news is that banks’ lending attitude seems to be gradually becoming far more accommodative 
than in the previous recoveries. This shows that major banks in Japan have made good progress in 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
solving non-performing loan problems. The resultant improvement in bank balance sheets is expected 
to enhance their loan capacity.  
Well-functioning financial systems are important in achieving sustained economic growth. They play a 
crucial role in channeling household savings into the corporate sector and allocating investment funds 
among firms.  
Demographic changes  
The  aging  and  decreasing  population  is  a  serious  problem  in  many  developed  countries  today.  In 
Japan’s  case,  these  demographic  changes  are  taking  place  at  a  more  rapid  pace  than  any  other 
country has ever experienced.  
The aging and declining population will have far-reaching impacts. Declining fertility rates will possibly 
increase immigration. The structure of family and society will inevitably change.  
A new challenge in a low inflation environment  
Now let me proceed with a new challenge in a low inflation environment. During the past two decades, 
inflation has fallen to a low level in major industrial countries. A low rate of inflation itself now poses a 
new challenge of achieving and promoting sustained economic growth in the global economy.  
For example, a low inflation economy has a higher risk of deflation, and the interest rates find no other 
way  than  declining.  However,  in  spite  of  the  general  perception  that  monetary  policy  should  be 
conducted so as to avert deflation, a central bank cannot lower interest rates below the zero lower 
bound.  
The  downward  rigidity  of  nominal  wages  is  often  pointed  out  as  a  factor  that  prevents  the  smooth 
adjustment  of  real  wages  under  very  low  inflation.  This  impediment  to  the  real  wage  adjustment  is 
likely to hamper the reallocation of labor forces among sectors and regions.  
As a sequel to this story, the snag is that the inflation expectations could firmly anchored at low level, 
even after the demand-supply conditions turned to be tighter, aided by the high anti-inflation credibility 
of the central bank. By the time prices and wages start rising, a potential risk of inflation mounts. In 
addition,  if  worse  to  come,  in  the  shadow  of  relatively  stable  movements  of  prices  in  goods  and 
services, mortgage and the other asset price spikes  tend to be ignored. As a result, if any, a likely 
possibility is that the monetary policy stays longer behind the curve.  
Japan has experienced the asset price bubble in the fairly favorable price environment and resultant 
long-lasting  economic  stagnation  in  the  last  two  decades.  Japan’s  experience  suggests  the 
importance  of  assessing  the  sustainability  of  price  stability  over  a  fairly  long  period,  which  many 
central  banks  have  emphasized  in  recent  years.  This  implies  that  “price  stability”  does  not  always 
correspond to the achievement of a specific rate of inflation in terms of a specific price index within a 
specific time horizon.  
Conclusion  
I have reviewed the challenges for sustained economic growth under changing economic, social and 
international  environments.  I  expect  that  through  discussion,  those  from  both  academic  circles  and 
central banks will learn more, share insights, and make the most of the wisdom for the future conduct 
of  monetary  policy.  I  certainly  welcome  discussions  on  how  central  banks  can  best  contribute  to 
sustained economic growth and sound development of the global economy.  
Thank you.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
