Franz-Christoph Zeitler: The Stability and Growth Pact 
Speech  by  Professor  Franz-Christoph  Zeitler,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Forum for discussion of the Friends of Europe, the Hanns Seidel Foundation and 
the Konrad Adenauer Foundation, Brussels, 16 February 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I extend my thanks to the organisers - the Friends of Europe, the Hanns Seidel Foundation and the 
Konrad Adenauer Foundation - for cordially inviting me to speak at this forum. I thank you for drawing 
attention  to  one  of  the  fundamental  elements  of,  and  pillars  of  confidence  in,  monetary  union:  the 
Stability and Growth Pact! 
I 
 If we look more closely at the short and snappy term “Pact” and analyse it from a legal standpoint, we 
see that it is an umbrella term that covers three legal instruments. 
– 
A  Council  Regulation  on  speeding  up  and  clarifying  the  implementation  of  the  excessive 
deficit procedure (Regulation (EC) No 1467/97 of 7 July 1997). 
A Council Regulation on the strengthening of the surveillance of budgetary positions and the 
surveillance and coordination of economic policies (Regulation (EC) No 1466/97). 
A European Council Resolution taken at the Amsterdam summit on 17 June 1997. 
– 
Naturally, the “mother of all rules” remains the Treaty on European Union; Article 104 (1) states clearly 
that “Member States shall avoid excessive government deficits.”  
Article 104 of the Treaty also regulates the monitoring and infringement procedure. What the above 
Regulations and the Council Decision do is merely specify and expedite the procedure. I think that one 
thing deserves to be emphasised. 
Contrary to contemporary popular usage, the “Pact” is NOT just an intergovernmental agreement, but 
rather an instrument to apply and implement primary and secondary European legislation.  
II 
Maybe this relatively complicated legal construction, which the general public is not widely aware of, is 
why the Stability and Growth Pact is wittingly or unwittingly described as “rigid”, “too legalistic” and “too 
economically  inflexible”.  This  is  also  why  it  is  our  job,  as  central  bankers,  to  communicate  the 
economic and fiscal policy aims of the Pact. The Stability and Growth Pact does not exist for its own 
sake, nor is it the “hobby horse” of some central bankers; rather, it is a requirement for the long-term 
effectiveness of monetary union.  
I would like to explain this by emphasising three factors at work here. 
1. 
The  specific  approach  underlying  European  monetary  union,  the  well-known  “Maastricht 
approach”,  is  based  on  a  single,  independent  monetary  policy  while  fiscal  policy  remains 
under  national  responsibility,  albeit  coordinated  and  rule-based.  This  sets  the  euro  area 
apart  from  other  single  currency  areas.  A  rule-based  fiscal  policy  is  necessary  to  avoid 
conflicts between monetary policy and fiscal policy. Such conflicts can result from the fact 
that  excessive  deficits  and  the  resultant  excessive  debt  make  government  budgets 
increasingly sensitive to interest rates. In cases of excessive debt, fiscal policymakers are 
tempted to put pressure on monetary policymakers to solve their problems at the expense of 
long-term price stability. 
In addition, the danger of such a conflict is even greater if public debt is increasingly financed 
using short-term debt. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 1
When  I  say  that  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  avoids  conflicts  that  could 
undermine the functioning and the internal cohesiveness of monetary union, there are other 
important aspects to consider. 
Prior to monetary union, every country’s fiscal policy was judged by the markets, and if it was 
inadequate, adverse market reactions in terms of exchange rates and interest rates were to 
be expected. However, in monetary union a potential “market risk premium” is spread across 
the whole euro area - with the exception of perceptible but relatively narrow spreads in long-
term  bonds.  This  means  the  Pact  is  a  type  of  “insurance”  against  the  age-old  human 
temptation to be a “free rider” and to make others pay for one’s own actions.  
Another equally important reason for the Pact is an economic reason. Balanced budgets, or 
at least low deficits and acceptable levels of debt, are an important condition for growth and 
prosperity.  Excessive  deficits  are  accompanied  by  high  government  shares  in  GDP  -  in 
Germany, the spending-to-GDP ratio in 2003 was 49% (up from 39% in 1970). What a high 
spending-to-GDP  ratio  and  the  resultant  high  tax  and  social  security  ratio  do,  however,  is 
reduce  general  efficiency,  promote  the  relocation  of  investment  and  jobs,  cause  adverse 
changes in the behaviour of economic agents (eg an increase in the “shadow economy”) as 
well as strain important resources of society, resulting in moves to avoid taxes and levies as 
well as to obtain transfers and subsidies, a practice also termed “rent-seeking”.  
Conversely, balanced budgets or at least low deficits and low levels of debt allow for lower 
taxes and facilitate private investment and also government investment. Low interest rates 
give the public sector more scope for investment to improve the public infrastructure.  
A  comparison  of  growth  rates  in  Europe  confirms  that  countries  with  lower  deficits  have 
faster growth rates, whereas countries like Germany, which have repeatedly exceeded the 
Pact’s 3% deficit limit (2002: 3.5%, 2003: 4%, also expected to be well over 3% in 2004), 
have to battle persistent stagnation and unemployment. 
The  Pact  is  therefore  also  a  sort  of  insurance  against  the  typical  risks  to  growth  and 
prosperity in modern societies with a high spending-to-GDP ratio. It is insurance against the 
temptation to use lavish government benefits to buy votes in the present and pass the bill on 
to future generations which are not yet eligible to vote. 
“Sustainability” is not just an ecological principle; it is also a principle of fiscal responsibility. It 
is particularly important against the backdrop of the demographic strains and the attendant 
hidden government debt caused by an ageing society. 
We need to remember that “economy”, in the sense of its Greek root word oikonomiā, simply 
translates to “management of a household or family”, ie rule-based behaviour.  
Thirdly, the obligation to keep government deficits below the 3% limit is by no means rigid. 
Weighing up all the pros and cons, it is an appropriate and sound course of action. 
– 
The Pact strives to achieve balanced budgets throughout the entire economic cycle. 
Budgetary  positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  in  good  years  allow  automatic 
stabilisers  (cyclically-related  lower  tax  revenue,  higher  costs  of  unemployment)  in 
economically bad years.  
Practical experience (eg abeyance if a member state has promised to take measures 
which  have  not  yet  been  implemented)  has  shown  that  the  monitoring  and 
infringement procedure is quite time-consuming. In practice, the process from “early 
warning” to “recommendations” to “defining a deadline for adaptation” to the imposition 
of  an  interest-free  loan  to  a  fine  may  last  two  to  three  years  -  giving  governments 
sufficient time to take flexible adjustment measures.  
Finally, what is often forgotten is that the 3%-limit was chosen for Maastricht against 
the background of an expected nominal growth rate of 5% and a real trend growth rate 
of 3% (3% nominal deficit in terms of 5% growth result in a trend debt level of 60%). 
Today  we  know  that  these  assumptions  regarding  potential  growth  were  very 
optimistic  and  that  actual  growth  has  been  much  lower.  The  3%-limit  is  therefore 
relatively generous. 
  BIS Review 10/2004
2. 
3. 
2 
 III 
The  Ecofin  council’s  decision  on  25  November  2003  not  to  act  further  on  the  basis  of  European 
Commission  recommendations  regarding  France  and  Germany  subjected  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact to a crisis and an acid test. Prior to the decision, some said that if the procedure was not pursued 
properly in accordance with Article 104 (8) and (9) of the Treaty, the Pact was effectively “dead”. The 
press was rife with black humour - “obituaries” of the Pact were published. I do not share this view. A 
look at everyday life shows us that violating a rule or norm does not automatically invalidate or “kill” it. 
However, we must do all that we can to implement the Pact, to reactivate it and thus to restore the 
weakened public confidence in the “Maastricht rules”. 
The evident confusion and obvious differences of opinions about the fundamental questions regarding 
the workings of the Stability Pact as defined by the Treaty and the Council Regulations are cause for 
concern.  Does  the  Council  of  Finance  Ministers  have  leeway  for  continuing  the  procedure  if  it 
materially  shares  the  Commission’s  view  that  a  member  state  has  not  sufficiently  complied  with  its 
obligations? Can the Council adopt a new recommendation (Article 104 (7)) even if a member state 
did  not sufficiently  comply with  earlier  recommendations, causing  and  the  Commission  therefor  has 
submitted another proposal (cf Article 104 (13))?  
Finally, does the official declaration of the Heads of State or Government made in Amsterdam in July 
1997, according to which the Council of Finance Ministers 
“is invited always to impose sanctions if a participating Member State fails to take 
the  necessary  steps  to  bring  the  excessive  deficit  situation  to  an  end  as 
recommended by the Council”, 
have only political significance, or does this not also imply that they have committed themselves to 
comply with the terms of the Stability and Growth Pact? Article 31 (3) of the Vienna Convention on the 
Law  of  Treaties  expressly  recognises  the  possibility  of  such  “subsequent  agreement  between  the 
parties regarding the interpretation of the treaty or the application of its provisions”. It has therefore 
become such a fundamental question of credibility that the Commission, in its role as the “guardian of 
the EU treaties”, filed an objection to the Ecofin council’s decision of 25 November with the European 
Court of Justice. It is also necessary to avoid “contagion of other members” other member states or 
acceding countries. 
Until the European Court of Justice has decided on the issue, I certainly believe it is not necessary to 
discuss changes to the Pact. There may indeed be some well-meaning and reasonable suggestions 
out  there with  the  intent  of  improving the  Pact’s  effectiveness,  such  as  the  idea  of  “giving the  Pact 
more muscle” in the event that a member state fails to reduce structural deficits in good years and 
thereby robs itself of the discretionary scope to stay under the 3%-limit in not-so-good years.  
Despite all the proposals, it must be borne in mind that loosening the rules of the Pact might open up a 
Pandora’s  box,  and  a  new  legal  framework  could  have  potential  damaging  effects  on  growth  and 
conflict  avoidance  in  monetary  union.  The  aim  must  always  be  to  achieve  effective,  operable  and 
transparent procedures. As the ancient Romans told us, “Quidquid agis ... respice finem”. 
BIS Review 10/2004 
 3
