M R Pridiyathorn Devakula: Consumer finance  
Opening address by Mr M R Pridiyathorn Devakula, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the “FITCH 
Rating’s Annual Conference 2004 an Consumer Finance”, Bangkok, 16 September 2004. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentleman 
I  would  like  to  welcome  all  of  you  to  this  highly  relevant  conference  an  consumer  finance  and 
securitization  appropriately  organized  by  FITCH  Ratings  Thailand.  I  would  also  like  to  show  my 
appreciation to FITCH for inviting me to give today’s opening remarks. 
Ladies and Gentleman 
Although consumer finance has long been a staple of banking in the west and developed economies, 
it  is  still  a  relatively  new  and  open  frontier  for  Thailand.  As  I  thought  of  my  opening  remarks,  I  am 
reminded of two stories that can capture the reality and the impact of this new world in the context of 
Thailand’s dual economy. It is not all from my memory since as you may agree I am still too young for 
historical anecdotes. 
As a university student some 30 ycars ago, I met two fellow classmates that came from completely 
opposite  family  backgrounds.  The  first  came  from  a  well-off  family  that  supplied  him  with  cars, 
expensive clothes and a lot of disposable income. Tbe second one was from a poor family and had 
just enough money for food and public transportation. The wealthy friend did not graduate from college 
and was later sent to the US to finish his bachelor’s degree, while the second successfully earned his 
bachelor’s degree and won a scholarship for graduate school also in the US. 
Neither man changed his ways while living abroad. The first continued his unencumbered spending 
spree with cars, expensive apartment, and credit cards. The second, more studious and frugal of the 
two, worked long and hard and was able to bring home his Masters degree on time. His hard work 
ethic  stuck  with  him  as  he  got  older,  and  today  he  is  one  of  Thailand’s  successful  business 
entrepreneurs. 
The other person however, left the States without any degrees but with a trail of unpaid credit card bills 
for his parents to repay. He started working in Bangkok but could not stay in any place for long. He 
started his own small business which loss money and ultimately failed. Unable to change his spending 
habits, he had to sell his assets and house in order to make good on his debts. To this day, he has no 
stable income, and must rely on the kindness of people around him for help. 
One  of  the  lessons  that  1  have  drawn  from  the story  is  that  immature  adults,  when  presented  with 
easy  access  to  credit,  may  form  the  habit  of  spending  beyond  their  means  until  they  themselves 
become a burden on their community and society. 
A  more  recent  story  that  comes  to  mind  involves  two  factory  workers  who  earn  approximately 
6,000 baht per month. Both were invited to apply for a credit card but only one signed up for the offer. 
This  worker  first  used  his  credit  card  to  purchase  a  TV  set,  which  he  could  easily  finance  with  his 
salary. Nevertheless, the TV was followed by a washing machine and a motorcycle, which eventually 
pushed his monthly debt payment to exceed his income. As he exhausted all of his savings, and could 
no  longer  borrow  from  family  and  friends,  his  belongings  were  repossessed  by  the  creditors,  and 
finally he had to quit his job in hopes of running away from his remaining creditors. 
The  story  highlights  a  dangerous  combination  in  the  fabric  of  Thai  society  and  that  is  low-income 
earners who lack financial literacy, or the ability to effectively manage their finances, but yet have very 
high  marginal  propensity  consume.  They  in  turn  are  more  susceptible  to  unknowingly  consume 
beyond their means, and like my previous story, become a burden an society. That burden is further 
intensified by the difficulty in finding and obtaining new employment. This probable risk demands that 
stakeholders take a more cautious approach to ensure quality growth in Thailand’s consumer finance 
market. 
Ladies and Gentleman, 
In  reality  there  are  more  than  one  type  of  savings  behavior  in  the  world,  but  most  importantly  the 
savings behavior should be appropriate for the developmental needs of each country. In a developing 
economy  such  as  Thailand,  the  customary  savings  behavior  is  to  save  first  and  spend  later. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
Developing  economies  can  and  should  benefit  from  this  type  of  behavior  since  it  allows  for  vital 
investments to be madc using domestic savings, thereby lessening reliance on extemal capital inflow, 
while at the same time promoting an economically viable savings-investment gap. 
On the other hand, the savings behavior of the west and developed economies tend to lean toward 
spend now save later. This type of behavior is practicable in western countrics due to many factors 
that can be summed up under the heading of high level of economic development. The existence of 
social welfare systems, mature capital markets, diversified economy, and highly educated workforce 
are  a  few  factors  that  allow  such  countries  to  be  able  to  grow  under  a  relatively  low  savings 
environment. Without such factors, a country could find it difficult to grow and develop without straining 
its finances. 
Coming back to Thailand, it is possible to say that with more widespread usage of credit cards and 
other types of consumer loans, we can expcct Thailand’s savings behavior to become more in line with 
those of the developed economies. This trend is a double-edge sword that if not managed carefully 
can  cause  a  severe  negative  savings-investment  gap.  Such  predicament  will  worsen  Thailand’s 
dependence an extcrnal capital inflow that historically has shown its ability to change direction rapidly 
and  jeopardize  macroeconomic  stability.  It  is  thus  with  the  need  for  further  economic  and  social 
development that consumer finance should expand in line with domestic savings.  
Ladies and Gentleman, 
Once again we are back at the regulator’s dilemma of regulating without dampening the exuberance 
and vitality of the market. Consumer finance need not be damaging as long as we can be sure that the 
individual or household have the prerequisite responsibility, maturity and financial literacy to manage 
their finances. 
Both the service provider and regulator must share the task of addressing these concerns and issues. 
lt is hoped that service providers will not only focus on improving their bottom line but to also consider 
the social impact of their business model. Through the use of gimmicks, service providers risk enticing 
under-qualified and immature applicants whose inability to manage their finances will only exacerbate 
social costs and NPLs. 
As  such,  if  social  impact  considerations  become  embedded  in  the  process  of  determining  business 
strategy for consumer finance, service providers could easily address the social concerns previously 
mentioned, while at the same time securing quality growth in the consumer finance market. 
However,  it  is  understood  that  competition  may  pressure  service  providers  to  leave  behind  these 
social concerns. Thus it is the duty of the regulators to issue rules and guidelines that will level the 
playing field in order to prevent consumer finance from causing an unsustainable bubble. The industry 
has  already  seen  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  forays  into  the  credit  card  market  with  rules  governing 
minimum monthly incomc, interest rate ceiling, fees etc. Going forward, we may come out with social 
impact rules such as minimum age, or rules to limit the number and types of gimmicks currently being 
used by somc service providers to attract new customers. 
Maintaining Thailand’s cconomic growth and vitality is a goal that all of us in this room share, and it is 
my hope that we all will work together towards preserving Thailand’s existing savings culture, in order 
to keep it an integral part of Thailand’s economic development for tomorrow and beyond. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
