Glenn Stevens: Better than a coin toss? The thankless task of economic 
forecasting1 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Economic 
Society  of  Victoria  and  the  Australian  Industry  Group  “Economic  Focus  -  Australia’s  Prospects”, 
Melbourne, 17 August 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Reserve Bank of Australia’s website. 
 One  of  my  best  forecasts  was  made  by  accident.  In  mid  1999,  at  one  of  the  regular  Parliamentary 
hearings we have each six months, I was asked about the prospects for the rate of unemployment, 
which at the time had been fluctuating around 7½ per cent for several months.2 My answer was that 
unemployment would fall to ‘the low sevens, 7 per cent, something like that’ by the end of that year. A 
decline of up to half a percentage point in half a year was, I thought, a reasonably bold forecast; I 
didn’t think it was likely to go below 7 per cent at that stage. But the Hansard reporters recorded my 
words  as  ‘below  7’,  not  ‘the  low  sevens’.  Hence  I  was  recorded  as  in  effect  saying  that  the 
unemployment rate would decline quite quickly, and before long have a six before the decimal point 
for the first time in about a decade. I was worried at the time that this seemed much too bold, but the 
unemployment rate did indeed fall below 7 per cent around the end of 1999. Hence I am happy to 
have that forecast on the record, even though I didn’t actually intend to make it. Perhaps that says that 
chance plays as big a role in forecasting as it seems to in many other areas of life.  
These  days  I  am  more  of  a  consumer  of  economic  forecasts  than  a  producer  of  them,  and  while  I 
suppose a former forecaster never entirely loses interest in the forecasting process, it is in the capacity 
of  user  that  I  have  come  here  today.  Hence  I  do  not  propose  to  make  any  forecasts  -  there  are 
presumably more than enough to choose from as a result of the conference. I will rather offer a few 
observations about the general processes of forming and using forecasts. 
Making economic forecasts remains an occupational necessity, but something of a chore, for many 
economists  including  those  giving  policy  advice.  For  those  receiving  advice  and  charged  with  the 
responsibility  of  helping  to  make  decisions,  key  issues  remain  deciding  how  much  to  stake  on  a 
particular view of the outlook, and how to think about the consequences of the forecast and associated 
policy being wrong. For both producers and users of forecasts, it is also worth looking back at forecast 
errors - not to berate the forecasters, but rather to see what we can learn from those errors about the 
way the economy works. 
Evidence on accuracy 
It  has  long  been  understood  that  economic  forecasts  are  not  all  that  good.  Most  elements  of  the 
round-up that I gave five years ago3 still seem apposite. 
First, forecasts are better than a coin toss - that is, an economic forecast can more often than not be 
expected to outperform a random process or some very simple extrapolative rule - though often not by 
all  that  much.  This  is  not  true,  however,  for  some  financial  variables,  where  the  economics 
profession’s forecasting embarrassment is greatest. 
There is some evidence that, in Australia, forecasts improved in the past decade. The table shows that 
the average absolute error of one-year-ahead forecasts for both GDP growth and CPI inflation in The 
Age Survey from 1994 to 2003 declined to just over half what it had been in the preceding 10 years. 
Of course, that period has been one of much reduced volatility in the economy, a fact that has been 
                                                      
1  
2   Because of data revisions, the unemployment rate for May 1999 is today recorded at 7.0 per cent. But this was originally published 
Jonathan Kearns provided invaluable assistance in preparation for this speech. 
as 7.5 per cent. 
3   Stevens (1999). 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
noted before.4 So maybe it was just easier to make forecasts in that period, and the real test will come 
when the economy enters rougher waters. 
A crude way of assessing this would be to see whether a comparison of The Age forecasts with those 
from  a  naïve  forecast  rule  -  that  the  future  value  is  the  same  as  the  current  one  -  revealed  an 
improvement. The second column gives the forecast errors for such a naïve rule. The Theil statistic in 
the final column shows the ratio of the two errors. ‘Good’ forecasts have a value less than unity - that 
is, the forecasters add value in the sense of lowering forecast errors compared with the naïve rule.  
While  The  Age  panel’s  performance  improves  a  lot  in  the  past  decade,  so  does  that  of  the  naïve 
forecast rule. The Theil statistic suggests that the forecasters were adding some value in both periods, 
but with no major changes between the two. 
So  we  shouldn’t  get  too  carried  away  by  lower  forecast  errors  in  recent  years.  To  give  Australian 
forecasters  their  due,  however,  arguments  that  a  more  stable  economy  is  easier  to  forecast 
presumably apply just as much to the US economy (at least for most of the period), but the evidence 
from the US Survey of Professional Forecasters is that there was no absolute improvement in forecast 
accuracy over the past decade. The extent of value added by the forecasters, as measured by this 
simple test, actually declined. 
  1984-1993 
1994-2003 
 1984-1993 
1994-2003 
Forecast Errors* 
Percentage points 
Australian CPI Inflation 
Australian GDP Growth 
Absolute 
forecast 
error 
1.77 
0.92 
Naïve 
rule error 
Theil 
statistic 
 2.61 
1.63 
1984-1993 
1994-2003 
0.68 
0.56 
(The Age Survey) 
Absolute 
forecast 
error 
1.81 
0.88 
Naïve 
rule error 
Theil 
statistic 
2.68 
1.11 
0.67 
0.79 
US CPI Inflation 
US GDP Growth 
Absolute 
forecast 
error 
0.67 
0.60 
Naïve 
rule error 
Theil 
statistic 
 0.82 
0.62 
0.82 
0.96 
1984-1993 
1994-2003 
(Survey of Professional Forecasters) 
Absolute 
forecast 
error 
1.12 
1.35 
Naïve 
rule error 
Theil 
statistic 
2.05 
1.47 
0.55 
0.92 
*  Mean absolute forecast errors for one-year-ahead forecasts. 
 
 
A second key finding is that the accuracy of forecasts tends to decline somewhat as the forecasting 
horizon lengthens. For most countries, the accuracy of inflation forecasts is superior to that of growth 
forecasts at short horizons. I conjecture that this reflects the facts that inflation has a fair bit of inertia. 
GDP growth, on the other hand, has much less inertial behaviour and its measurement is probably 
subject  to  more  sampling  error.  Hence,  forecasts  one  or  two  quarters  ahead  for  inflation  are  pretty 
good compared with growth forecasts. But over longer horizons where inertia weakens, this advantage 
for the inflation forecasters diminishes. 
                                                      
4   My thumbnail sketch is in a paper with David Gruen in Gruen and Stevens (2000). A more sophisticated analysis is Simon (2001). 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
The RBA has been compiling a survey of private forecasts of inflation for about a decade. Participants 
- which  include  some  of  you  here  -  are  asked  for  a  forecast  of  the  CPI  over  a  one  and  two-year 
horizon. We have eight years of data from about fifteen forecasters which enables us to make some 
observations about the way accuracy diminishes with horizon. As expected, the mean absolute error 
of the year-ended forecasts increases quickly out to about a year. In part this is mechanical as the 
number of quarters actually being forecast rises from one to four, but the underlying quarterly errors 
probably get a bit larger too. But between a five quarter and an eight quarter horizon, there isn’t that 
much  loss  of  accuracy.  So  those  comfortable  with  a  horizon  of  just  over  a  year  shouldn’t  have  too 
much trouble accepting a two-year forecast. That said, the confidence interval for this set of forecasts 
is still fairly wide.  
Graph 1 
 Third, extreme movements are rarely well-forecast. Late in 2000, Consensus forecasts for US GDP 
growth  in  2001  were  about  3½  per  cent.  But  as  we  now  know,  the  US  economy  experienced  a 
recession in 2001, and recorded year-average expansion in GDP of about 1 per cent. This was not 
well-anticipated by the forecasters. Recessions seldom are.5 Other major events - like financial crises - 
have  likewise  usually  not  been  well-predicted  even  though  in  most  cases,  with  hindsight,  several 
warning signs can be seen to have been flashing. 
Fourth, structural shifts which are not business cycle events, but which have profound implications for 
the course of the economy over the medium term, are not well-forecast either and often are not even 
recognised for some time after their emergence. The rise in US productivity growth in the 1990s is a 
case in point. (So was the slowing in productivity growth in the mid 1970s.) The permanent downshift 
in Australia’s inflation rate in the 1990s is another. 
Finally, it is hard to find evidence that any one forecaster is consistently superior. Indeed, one study of 
Australian  forecasters  suggests  that  outstanding  performance  in  one  year  has  a  high  likelihood  of 
being  followed  by  very  poor  performance  in  the  next.6  Most  studies  find  that  averaging  a  panel  of 
forecasters will give a better consistent forecast than using any individual forecaster. 
These points are all familiar, and leave all of us with much about which to be modest. But I don’t wish 
to denigrate forecasters. The effort to make a forecast, to articulate it, and to describe how and why it 
                                                      
5  
In fact, given the amount of noise in statistics, combined with their publication lag, it is quite common that professional observers 
cannot detect (from the figures anyway) that the economy is even in recession until the contraction has been going on for some 
time. The NBER recession dating committee, for example, did not declare the March 2001 peak in the US economy until November 
that year. 
6   Norman (2001). 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
might be wrong has some value. We just need to keep in mind that numerical forecasts are not much 
more  than  opinion  formed  (hopefully)  within  a  coherent  and  disciplined  framework.  They  are  not 
guarantees  of  performance,  and  should  always  be  accompanied  by  a  discussion  of  risks.  That 
discussion is likely to be at least as useful as the point estimates themselves. 
Use of models versus judgement 
Let me turn now to some questions to do with the formation of forecasts. One of the perennial ones is 
the respective roles of formal models and subjective judgement. 
It seems to me obvious that we need both. Any judgemental forecast embodies some notion of how 
the economy works, unless the numbers really are drawn from a dart board. Most forecasters make 
some  effort  to  ensure  their  forecasts  for  different  variables  are  consistent  with  each  other,  and  tell 
some sort of story that can be related to presumed behaviour. That is to say, they have a model of 
sorts, even if a fairly informal one. 
Econometric models are a more formal way of representing the relationships in the historical data. It is 
usually helpful occasionally to confront the notions in our heads with the data to see if there is any 
validation for our prejudices. 
That said, formal models come, or should come, with various usage warnings. To begin with, there 
seems  to  be  some  evidence  that  simple  models  often  are  more  useful  than  more  complex  ones, 
perhaps because they are more robust and so less likely to come unstuck due to structural change, 
etc.  Because  their  workings  are  more  transparent,  users  may  also  be  able  to  spot  problems  more 
easily when they start to break down. Simplicity, of course, has to be traded off against the general 
principle  that  the  economy  has  many  complex  interactions,  which  simple  models  can  miss.  But,  in 
general, complex is not always better, especially for short-term forecasting.7 
Second, some modelling techniques which are thought to be best practice for describing history may 
not be optimal for forecasting purposes. A case in point is the use of cointegration models, where the 
deviation  from  an  estimated  long-run  equilibrium  level  can  be  a  powerful  factor  affecting  short-run 
forecasts  of  changes,  as  the  model  wants  to  move  the  dependent  variable  towards  the  supposed 
long-run equilibrium. But if there has been a level shift in the equilibrium relationship, such a forecast 
will be highly misleading, and probably less accurate than a forecast from a model in differences, even 
though the latter is often considered theoretically less pure.8 
Another warning is that many models which are in use today are not directly estimated from the data. 
Many  are  ‘calibrated’  -  which  is  to  say  that  certain  properties  such  as  means  and  variances  are 
standardised against the actual data - but that is not the same as testing hypotheses embodied in the 
model against the data. These models often have very strong theoretical properties, to which most of 
us would sign up as general propositions, but which can drive the behaviour of the model over the 
horizon relevant for business cycle forecasting to a substantial degree. Such models have their place, 
particularly for long-term simulation exercises. But, in my opinion, their use for short-term forecasting 
in a policy context needs particular care. 
In  the  end,  we  will  probably  get  the  most  useful  forecasts  by  combining stable,  simple  models  that 
capture  empirically  the  most  important  macroeconomic  dynamics  in  the  economy,  with  judgement 
informed  by  the  vast  array  of  non-model,  and  sometimes  non-quantitative,  information  about  the 
current state of the economy which is available in the plethora of partial indicators (not all of which are 
published by the official statistical agencies). 
A finding in the US literature is that the Federal Reserve staff forecasts compiled in the Green Book 
outperform  both  private  forecasts,  particularly  for  inflation,  and  pure  model  forecasts  (Romer  and 
Romer (2000)). Sims (2002), reviewing this evidence and confirming the finding, attributes a good deal 
of the performance improvement to the effort to get a more accurate estimate of the current state of 
the  economy,  so  reducing  the  errors  in  the  very  early  period  of  the  forecast.  In  other  words,  the 
judgement of specialist data watchers, combined with insights of well-understood models of both the 
formal and informal variety, works better than any single technique. I find this a plausible conclusion. 
                                                      
7   See Hendry and Clements (2001). 
8   For a more detailed discussion of this sort of issue in forecasting using models, see Sims (2002) and Hendry and Clements (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2004
Learning 
To this we can add that learning is crucial, which is to say that observing the pattern of forecast errors 
and seeking to draw conclusions for our ‘model’ of the economy and therefore its future behaviour can, 
hopefully, improve future forecasts. This is a rather Bayesian idea: we can’t know what the economy’s 
parameters  are,  and  we  should  not  view  them  as  set  in  concrete  anyway  -  they  are  subject  to 
variation. One starts with some priors about what these parameters are, i.e. how the economy works. 
These  priors  are  then  confronted  by  a  data  sample,  and  the  result  is  the  posterior  distribution  of 
parameter values - that is, better-informed guesses about the way things work. As time goes by and 
new  data  become  available,  this  working  hypothesis  of  the  economy’s  properties  and  likely  future 
behaviour is updated. While I could not say that we implement this idea rigorously quarter by quarter in 
practice, I find it quite appealing as a way of conceptualising both the forecasting of the economy and 
the conduct of policy. 
Let us then look at two examples of forecast errors, and see what they teach us. The first chart is for 
year-ahead forecasts of US GDP growth, from the Survey of Professional Forecasters. The shaded 
area is the range of forecasts, with the inter-quartile range - the middle 50 per cent of forecasts - in a 
darker colour. The average forecast is the line in the middle of this range. The forecasts are plotted 
forward by one year, so that they can be compared with actual year-ended growth, the blue line in the 
graph. 
For several years in the second half of the 1990s, virtually all forecasters persistently underestimated 
the pace of US growth. Time does not permit a detailed decomposition of the errors into their various 
causal components. Suffice to say that, as is now well-known, productivity growth in the US picked up, 
and so therefore did the US economy’s potential growth rate, at least for a period of several years. If 
we looked as well at forecasts of US inflation, we would find that unexpectedly high growth was not 
generally accompanied by unexpectedly high inflation. So strong demand growth was met with rapid 
supply  growth.  In  other  words,  a  high-level  treatment  of  the  forecasting  errors  points  us  to  the 
productivity  story.  (Of  course,  having  understood  that  did  not  make  forecasters  much  better  at 
predicting the 2001 recession. The ‘new economy’ was as prone to cyclical setbacks as the old.) 
Graph 2 
The  second  chart  shows  some  forecasts  closer  to  home:  those  enunciated  by  the  RBA  in  the 
Statements on Monetary Policy in the late 1990s. The chart shows underlying inflation as measured 
 BIS Review 46/2004 
 5
either by the Treasury underlying series or by the median CPI change (since 1998).9 Starting from the 
middle of each year, it shows the RBA’s outlook as set out in the Statement on Monetary Policy (or the 
previous  quarterly  article  on  The  Economy  and  Financial  Markets  before  the  Statements  became 
quarterly) which appeared in August.  
Graph 3 
 Several  points  are  of  interest.  First,  through  1997  and  1998,  inflation  was  below  the  2-3  per  cent 
target, but was expected to rise over the ensuing period. The rise in inflation did eventually occur, but 
took longer than originally expected. What was going on here? 
One important feature of the behaviour of inflation in the late 1990s and the early part of this decade 
was that changes in the exchange rate had less effect over a one- to two-year horizon than previous 
experience  had  suggested.  We  began  to  detect  this  as  time  went  by,  and  accordingly  lowered  our 
estimates of the short and medium-term impact of exchange rate changes on the CPI. 
For  2000  and  2001,  forecasts  tended  to  be  a  little  on  the  low  side.  We  believed  that  inflation  was 
generally tending to increase and this turned out to be right, but the trend was ultimately a bit stronger 
than forecasters expected.10 
The downward move in inflation since the peak has proceeded in two phases. The forecasts seemed 
to have had errors on both sides during that period. The most recent forecasts, as you know, suggest 
that inflation will remain about where it is at present for a few quarters and then move up during 2005, 
as the effects of the earlier rise in the exchange rate gradually wane. These forecasts are a little higher 
than ones made earlier in the year partly because the exchange rate is not as high as it was then.11 
So looking back over this period of seven years we find that, early on, our inflation forecasts tended to 
persistently  be  a  bit  high  (a  pattern  observed  for  a  few  years prior  to  1997  as  well).  Lessening  the 
                                                      
9   The inflation target is, of course, for the CPI (since 1998). But the main forecasting approach is to forecast a measure of underlying 
inflation, then add known or assumed 'special factors', mainly oil prices or tax changes, to get the CPI forecast. So for the purposes 
here, it is most useful to consider the forecasts for underlying inflation. 
10   Forecasting was very difficult indeed in the period around the time of the GST, when the price level was due to show a substantial, 
but once only, rise over several quarters, with the exact quarterly profile highly uncertain. We made no public forecast of a time path 
through the period from 1 July 2000 to June 2001 (hence the dotted segment of the lines), but made forecasts of where inflation 
would settle thereafter. 
11   In fact, differences in the exchange rate outcome from what was assumed are often a significant contributor to forecast errors. A full 
treatment of forecast performance, for which there is not space here, would need to take that into careful account. 
6 
 BIS Review 46/2004
expected  impact  of  exchange  rate  changes  seems  to  have  helped  to  improve  the  forecasts.  There 
appears, though, to have been some residual tendency to underestimate how far inflation would go in 
a new direction once it had turned. 
I don’t have a graph which characterises as neatly the forecast errors on growth, but I think it is well-
known that the Australian economy has over the same period surprised on the upside more often than 
on  the  downside.  What  have  we  learned  from  that?  One  lesson  is  that  the  economy’s  improved 
inherent  flexibility  has  helped  it  cope  with  shocks  which  in  previous  times  would  probably  have 
derailed growth. 
Another conclusion, at least on my own part, is that the structural change in household balance sheets 
which has been under way since about 1995 has consistently been an expansionary factor. Let me 
mount one of my hobby horses for a moment here. Reverting back to the discussion of models of the 
economy, informal or formal, this points to an important gap in knowledge. Conventional models of the 
macro  economy  are  long  on  detail  about  demand,  output  gaps,  inflation  and  so  on,  but  relatively 
underdeveloped  in  the  financial  sphere.  But  with  agents  facing  fewer  and  fewer  capital  market 
imperfections, the relationships between asset price changes and balance sheet adjustments seem to 
be  of  increasing  importance  to  the  course  of  the  economy  over  time.  This  is  where  more  attention 
needs to be focused by modellers and forecasters, as well as policy-makers.  
Forecasts and decision making 
Turning to the role of forecasts in making decisions, the task of preparing some sort of forecast is one 
that,  while  thankless,  nonetheless  must  be  performed.  Decisions  based  on  looking  in  the  rear-view 
mirror are unlikely to be optimal; trying to look forward, as difficult as that is, should help to achieve 
better outcomes. This is particularly the case when the decision is one, as in monetary policy, whose 
effects take a long time to show up, but I think this point generalises to decisions in, say, investment 
management. 
Decision-makers will therefore want to have not just a set of numbers but a sensible story about the 
future.  Regardless  of  how  a  forecast  was  arrived  at  -  from  a  formal  model,  judgement,  some 
combination - it is more useful to decision-makers if its main features, and the factors driving them, 
can be fairly simply explained. The plausibility test of a view is most effectively applied when the story 
is  kept  as  straightforward  as  possible  (though  not  more  so).  A  forecast  is  even  more  useful  if  the 
forecaster  can  identify  key  assumptions,  be  they  about  exogenous  variables  or  the  structure  of  the 
economy, and what the consequences would probably be were those assumptions to be astray. 
We can, of course, look to the statistical properties of econometric models to give some indication of 
the size of likely confidence intervals around a central forecast, and that is a reasonable place to start 
a  discussion  of  uncertainty  and  risks.  Consumers  of  forecasts  should  routinely  be  told  something 
about the size of past errors. 
But anyone looking to make a decision on the basis of a set of forecasts - like an investment manager, 
or an economic policy-maker - looks for some judgement about possibilities to which history may not 
be  a  good  guide.  What  if  the  underlying  structure  of  the  economy  is  changing  -  i.e.  the  model 
parameters  are  shifting?  Suppose,  for  example,  the  responsiveness  of  inflation  to  exchange  rate 
changes  is  less  than  it  used  to  be?  What  if  the  economy  is  more  responsive  than  it  used  to  be  to 
recent  changes  in  interest  rates?  For  that  matter,  what  if  it  is  less  responsive?  If  an  outcome  is 
different from the central forecast for some key variable, is it more likely to be higher or lower? 
Decision-makers,  in  other  words,  are  interested  in  forming  a  judgement  about  the  balance  of  risks. 
That  judgement  can  only  be  subjective,  to  be  sure  -  but  that  is  where  the  experience  of  a  good 
forecaster is most valuable. The decision-maker will then want to combine that subjective assessment 
of the risks with some sense of the relative costs and benefits of the possible outcomes, and decide 
which risks they should most avoid, and which they are prepared to run. 
This much is, I hope, well understood these days: the question asked of forecasters shouldn’t just be 
‘what’s the number?’ It should also be ‘how could you be wrong?’ Hopefully you will probe some of 
these sorts of questions later today. 
Forecasters also need to cast their minds a bit further afield than just the next quarter or two. Perhaps 
this  is  where  many  private  forecasters,  with  a  horizon  driven  by  the  short-term  demands  of  the 
financial  markets,  part  company  with  official  forecasters  who  do  not,  and  should  not,  share  that 
imperative to focus so heavily on the next figure. The conduct of policy needs to adopt a medium-term 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 7
focus,  and  possibly  more  so  than  in  the  past.  The  economy’s  heightened  short-term  stability  and 
flexibility quite possibly delays the consequences of inappropriate policy settings. But it surely does not 
eliminate them. Some of the recent issues with which we have had to deal, moreover, like the run-up 
in housing prices and credit, play out over a longer time horizon than the typical short-term forecast 
covers. So we could easily have been lulled by a reassuring one-year forecast into ignoring problems 
that would be likely to build up beyond that horizon. 
Realistically,  forecasters  cannot  be  expected  confidently  to  predict  how  some  of  these  longer-term 
dynamics  will  play  out.  But  there  is  little  doubt  that  such  things  are  becoming  more  important. 
Forecasters will be more useful the more they can help decision-makers to think through what might 
happen, even if they cannot say with precision what will happen. 
Conclusion 
One of the old forecasters’ clichés is to say that, on any particular occasion, there is more than the 
usual  degree  of  uncertainty.  Most  forecasting  meetings  I  recall  seemed  to  start  that  way  -  even  in 
periods which, we now know with hindsight, turned out to have been remarkably stable by historical 
standards. Most of the time, such comments are surely an exaggeration. It might be more correct to 
say that at any one time there are undoubtedly new sources of uncertainty, which people find hard to 
quantify because they have no historical comparison to go by. In this sense, forecasting has grown no 
easier despite the advances in statistical and analytical technology over the years. 
Given the above, it would seem that it is very important to keep in mind the idea that any forecast is a 
working hypothesis, based on an understanding of the economy’s properties which is likely to continue 
evolving. Further, a simple focus on a single central forecast alone is unlikely to be as useful as an 
approach  that  contemplates  one  or  more  alternative  possibilities,  and  helps  decision-makers  think 
through their implications. 
I wish you all the ideal combination of insight and luck in your forthcoming deliberations. 
8 
 BIS Review 46/2004
