Lee Hsien Loong: Connecting India and Singapore 
Keynote address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore, at the Standard Chartered Bank’s Singapore Conference, Mumbai, 
16 January 2004. 
 Introduction 
I am delighted to be here today to address the Standard Chartered Bank’s Singapore Conference.  
We stand on the threshold of a major transformation in Asia. With a combined population of 3 billion 
people, Asia is the largest and most promising region in the world today. It includes Japan, not fully 
recovered from its post-bubble malaise, but still the second largest economy in the world, with deep 
capabilities and advanced technology. It includes South Korea, which took painful measures to open 
up its economy and restructure its chaebol-centred industrial system. And it includes Southeast Asia, 
whose countries have put behind them the trauma of the Asian Financial Crisis, and are growing and 
attracting investments again.  
The  biggest  stories  in  Asia  are  China  and  India.  It  has  been  projected  that  China’s  GDP  could 
overtake Germany in the next four years, Japan by 2015, and the US by 2039. India too is opening up 
and growing strongly, and could become the 3rd largest economy in the world within 30 years.  
Globalisation plays a big part in Asia’s vitality. It has resulted in more Foreign Direct Investments (FDI) 
into  Asia,  and  created  jobs  and  prosperity  for  Asians.  MNCs  are  outsourcing  or  transferring  call 
centres, business processing functions, and R&D activities from North America and Europe to India. 
Factories  in  the  Pearl  River  Delta  in  China  export  goods  to  the  whole  world.  Professionals  cross 
borders freely, to do business and oversee operations all around the globe.  
But globalisation has its downside too. Competition is now borderless and intense, and those who fail 
to  keep  up  fall  hard,  be  they  countries,  companies  or  workers.  In  the  past,  during  a  downturn  a 
company would halt production, retrench some workers and run down its inventory. Now, the whole 
company may uproot itself and migrate to a cheaper site elsewhere. Thousands of jobs may disappear 
overnight, never to return. Governments also find themselves with less manoeuvring room. In the past, 
they  could  raise  taxes  to  redistribute  wealth,  or  impose  tariffs  to  protect  local  businesses.  But  with 
globalisation,  high  taxes  drive  talent  elsewhere,  while  high  tariffs  leave  the  protected  industries 
inefficient  and  ultimately  non-viable.  Besides  economic  worries,  many  countries  fear  the  impact  of 
foreign influences on their indigenous culture and way of life.  
For good or ill, we live in a more globalised world, and it will only become more integrated year by 
year.  Asia’s  dynamism  is  largely  a  result  of  a  successful  response  to  globalisation.  Today,  I  will 
describe how Asia has successfully ridden the tide over the past few decades. I will explain why in this 
era of globalisation, it makes sense to strengthen the linkages between Southeast Asia and India, and 
how Singapore, a small and open country whose survival is totally dependent on globalisation, can 
play a role in deepening these linkages.  
ASEAN since the early 90’s 
For  more  than  a  decade  until  1997,  Southeast  Asia  enjoyed  remarkable  growth.  As  governments 
opened up economies, investments flowed in, exports grew, and prosperity was everywhere. People 
talked about the Asian Miracle and the Pacific Century.  
Then  we  met  the  darker  face  of  globalisation.   Euphoria  turned  to  gloom  when  the  Asian  Financial 
Crisis struck. A seemingly minor problem in Thailand rapidly developed into a widespread panic in the 
region.  One  country  after  another  succumbed  as  investors  stampeded  out,  stock  markets  and 
currencies crashed, and economies nearly collapsed. In Indonesia, the Crisis triggered deep political 
and social changes, resulting in a very difficult transition. A new and very different dispensation is only 
now recrystallising.  
Even  though  the  Crisis  has  passed,  we  have  not  returned  to  the  status  quo  ante.  The  world  has 
changed permanently. Globalisation has advanced even further, and competition is now fiercer. India 
and China are major new players which totally alter the landscape. From the point of view of other 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 1
Asian  countries,  they  are  formidable  competitors  for  investments,  but  also  offer  immense  new 
opportunities.  The  future  belongs  to  those  countries  which  recognise  and  adapt  quickly  to  these 
changes, so as to ride the new wave instead of being overwhelmed by it. 
The  September  11th  attacks  in  the  US  revealed  another  peril  of  globalisation -  extremist  terrorism. 
Soon  after  September  11th  we  discovered  in  Southeast  Asia  extremist  groups,  obtaining  funding, 
training  and  support  from  Al  Qaeda,  and  carrying  out  terrorist  attacks  in  our  own  countries.  The 
terrorist  network  is  therefore  a  true  MNC.  Southeast  Asian  countries  are  mindful  of  the  threat  of 
terrorism  to  investors’  confidence,  and  are  co-operating  to  battle  against  these  extremist  elements. 
This is a long-term, worldwide struggle. 
Despite these setbacks, Southeast Asian countries have not turned inwards, or tried to shut out the 
world. They continue to embrace globalisation as the best option for securing their future, and remain 
committed  to  plugging  themselves  into  the  global  grid.  Individually,  they  continue  to  promote  FDI, 
encourage exports, and pursue linkages with the outside world. They know that to try to keep out new 
investments,  technologies  and  competition  and  go  it  alone  will  condemn  them  to  poverty  and 
stagnation. 
As a group, ASEAN is strengthening economic cooperation among its members. Intra-ASEAN trade in 
manufactured goods is already practically tariff-free. Last October, ASEAN leaders went a step further, 
and committed to creating an ASEAN Economic Community by 2020. This will be a single market for 
goods, services, capital and professionals. Externally, ASEAN is negotiating an FTA with China, and is 
targeting  to conclude  the goods chapter  by  middle  of  this  year.  In  parallel,  ASEAN  is  working  on  a 
Comprehensive  Economic  Partnership  arrangement  with  Japan.  The  US,  too,  has  announced  the 
Enterprise ASEAN Initiative, under which it will pursue agreements with individual ASEAN countries, 
taking into account their respective progress in economic liberalization.  
Southeast Asia’s adherence to economic liberalisation and freer trade has helped the region to stay on 
investors?  radar  screen.  Most  of  its  economies  have  recovered  from  the  Crisis.  Confidence  has 
returned and the economies are growing again. Stock markets have rallied as capital flowed back into 
the region. The countries have made progress remedying the structural weaknesses that contributed 
to the crisis. Their finances are now much sounder - with balance of payments in surplus, and foreign 
reserves accumulating.  
Thailand is doing particularly well as the fastest growing economy in Southeast Asia. Malaysia, has 
maintained  satisfactory  growth  rates,  as  has  Indonesia  despite  the  political  and  security  issues. 
Vietnam escaped the Asian Financial Crisis and is now opening up and taking off. Singapore’s fortune 
has  been  more  mixed.  It  weathered  the  initial  storm  well,  but  then  got  hit  hard  first  by  the  global 
electronics downturn and then by SARS. After all these tribulations the Singapore economy is now at 
last picking up and on a growth path again. 
Over  the  longer  term,  Southeast  Asia  remains  a  region  of  promise,  with  strong  fundamentals.  It  is 
outward oriented, with a large and young population, strong emphasis on education, a positive work 
ethic, good infrastructure, and abundant natural resources. These enduring traits are embedded into 
our geography and culture, and will serve us well for many years.  
India since the early 90’s 
India  too  has  been  opening  up  since  the  early  1990s,  although  not  at  a  uniform  pace.  Since 
independence, India had adopted an economic model that emphasised self-sufficiency, strong central 
planning,  and  the state controlling  the commanding heights  of  the  economy. By  the  late  1980s  this 
model had run into difficulties. In 1991 Prime Minister Narasimha Rao started to deregulate and open 
up the Indian economy. Countries in Asia watched with close interest successive budgets of Finance 
Minister Manmohan Singh, as decisions that had hitherto been made centrally were devolved to the 
private  sector,  the  Rupee  was  devalued,  subsidies  were  reduced,  state-owned  enterprises  were 
privatized, and industries opened up to competition and foreign participation. They looked forward to a 
dynamic, prosperous India, participating fully in the regional economy. 
But the political situation in India changed after several years, and the pace of reform slowed down, or 
so  it  seemed  to  those  watching  India  from  afar.  However,  in  the  last  few  years  under  the  BJP 
government led by Prime Minister Vajpayee, not only have the reforms resumed, but a new spirit and 
vigour  have  manifested  themselves  across  the  country.  Last  week’s  mini-budget  announcements 
show the resolve of the government to press on with the reforms. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2004
India is now a fast growing economy. Bangalore has transformed itself from a provincial capital into a 
world  class  centre  for  the  global  IT  industry.  Mumbai  is  a  thriving  commercial  centre.  MNCs  are 
outsourcing backroom functions and call centres to India, attracted by India’s highly skilled, English 
speaking,  and  cost  competitive  professionals.  In  manufacturing,  India  is  doing  well  in  automobile, 
pharmaceuticals and chemicals. The recent BJP victory in state elections is widely seen as the Indian 
people  reaffirming  their  support  for  reforms.  The  current  thaw  in  relations  with  Pakistan  is  another 
positive  sign.  Worldwide,  people  are  becoming  persuaded  that  the  momentum  for  economic 
liberalization that has built up is irreversible.  
A  subcontinent  is  on  the  move.  Nowhere  is  this  more  evident  than  in  the  self-confidence  of  Indian 
companies. As one consultant commented, 5-10 years ago his assignments in India were about how 
to  withstand  the  competitive  threat.  But  today  the  question  is  how  to  grow  the  companies  beyond 
India. Therein lies an opportunity for India and Singapore to work together.   
Responding to globalisation 
Both  India  and  ASEAN  are  opening  up,  reforming  their  economies,  and  pursuing  the  path  of 
globalisation.  The  rapidly  changing  and  highly  competitive  environment  requires  countries  to  make 
many changes in policies and strategies, and to cooperate more closely with others, especially in the 
region, for mutual benefit. 
Internal restructuring 
Singapore, being such a small and open economy, feels the need to remain competitive, adapt and 
upgrade most acutely. We are getting used to the fact that there is no more life-time employment or 
iron rice-bowl anywhere in the world. To meet competition, we need to keep our business costs and 
overheads low. So we have lowered our tax rates and employers’ contributions to the national pension 
scheme. To adapt to changing conditions, we need flexibility. So the government is working with the 
unions  and  private  sector  to  promote  more  flexible  wage  systems.  To  upgrade,  we  need  new 
competencies. So we are encouraging workers to acquire new skills, as well as new mindsets in order 
to remain employable. Only thus can we continue to attract foreign investments, grow our economy, 
and improve our people’s lives.  
In manufacturing, we are moving out of low value-added activities, where we enjoy little comparative 
advantage, such as pure assembly, to focus on higher technology and higher value-added activities. 
We  are  growing  new  industry  clusters,  such  as  nanotechnology  and  biomedical  sciences.  We  are 
doing more design engineering and R&D, in order to add value and complement other countries with 
more abundant land and labour. We continue to leverage on existing strengths, such as our strong 
supply  chain  infrastructure,  skilled  manpower  and  harmonious  industrial  relations.  As  a  result,  our 
trade with India and China, exports as well as imports, has grown rapidly, especially in intermediate 
components.  
In services, we see a tremendous market opportunity in the hundreds of millions of affluent consumers 
in the region. India alone has a growing rising middle class of 200 to 300 million people. Increasingly, 
they  will  want  quality  services,  be  it  tourism,  education,  healthcare  or  financial  services.  We  are 
actively  promoting  all  these  areas,  capitalizing  on  our  reputation  and  brand  name.  Singapore 
welcomed 380,000 Indian tourists in 2002, 11% more than the year before. We especially value Indian 
visitors, who stay longer and spend more than tourists from elsewhere. To attract more tourists from 
India, we have relaxed visa requirements, and made multiple entry visas more available.  
We  are  also  wooing  corporate  customers  from  the  region,  to  use  our  financial,  legal  and  other 
professional  services.  Many  Indian  companies  choose  Singapore  as  the  venue  for  their  arbitration 
proceedings.  We  liberalised  our  financial  sector  thus  freeing  our  capital  markets  and  wealth 
management  industry  to  grow.  Indian  companies  that  are  expanding  need  capital,  and  will  find 
Singapore a viable location to raise funds, be it debt or equity. The companies can tap into a large and 
growing  investor  base  in  Singapore.  Close  to  200  international  fund  management  firms  and  150 
venture capitalists operate out of Singapore, managing over US$200 billion in assets. 
To support the growth of our economy, we are investing heavily in human capital, upgrading our skills 
and refreshing our knowledge. But in a small country of three million people, the talent pool is never 
big  enough. We will  therefore continue  to  attract  talent  globally. Over  the  years, we  have benefited 
greatly  from  an  inflow  of  talent  from  India,  as  well  as  of  NRIs  from  around  the  world,  and  we  will 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 3
continue  to  welcome  them.  Beyond  augmenting  our  talent  pool,  foreigners  living  and  working  in 
Singapore  enrich  our  culture  and  diversity.  They  help  us  to  develop  an  even  more  cosmopolitan 
outlook, and keep our city state abuzz with vibrancy and energy.  
External linkages 
Besides restructuring our domestic economy, we also need to expand outwards, to invest in the region 
and  ride  on  its  growth.  To  do  so,  we  need  to  expand  our  horizons,  to  understand  more deeply  the 
world  around  us,  of  which  South  Asia  is  a  major  focus  of  our  interest.  The  Singapore  Economic 
Development Board will be setting up an office in Mumbai. This will be its first office in India, to better 
service Indian companies which are looking at investing in Singapore and our region.  
More importantly, our companies also need to venture out of Singapore, to ride the growth of India. To 
better  appreciate  conditions  and  opportunities  in  India,  Singapore  plans  to  set  up  a  South  Asian 
Institute (SAI) later this year. The Institute will be part of the National University of Singapore. It will 
track economic and political developments in the subcontinent and collaborate with key institutes in 
India and elsewhere. The SAI will complement the work of the current East Asian Institute (EAI) and 
Institute  of  Southeast  Asian  Studies (ISEAS).  Together,  these  institutes will  provide us with  a  more 
comprehensive assessment of the region within a seven-hour flight radius, and so encourage more of 
our  companies  to  venture  abroad.  In  fact,  Singapore  companies  have  already  entered  into  many 
businesses  in  India,  including  IT,  telecommunications,  hotels,  township  development,  professional 
services, port management and other infrastructure projects.  
Earlier  this  week  I  visited  the  Information  Technology  Park  in  Bangalore -  a  development  led  by  a 
consortium of Singapore companies with Indian partners. It is quite a sizeable park - 28 hectares - with 
its own power generation and even sewerage treatment plants. The Park has attracted many tenants 
to  Bangalore,  and  will  be  expanding  further  in  the  third  phase  of  its  development.  Other  Singapore 
companies  such  as  Singapore  Telecommunications,  Parkway  Holdings  and  the  Port  of  Singapore 
Authority have also invested in India. To-date, investments by Singapore companies in India amount 
to US$2bn. I expect this figure to rise strongly, as the Indian economy continues to open up and the 
business environment becomes more conducive. 
Economic cooperation is best led by the private sector, which can operate on a commercial basis and 
react  quickly  to  opportunities.  But  governments  can  do  much  to  support  the  private  sector. 
Governments  set  the  tone  and  framework  for  economic  liberalization  and  integration.  They  should 
promote  cross  border  economic  activities,  dismantle  trade  and  investment  barriers,  harmonise 
regulatory  standards,  and  jointly  agree  on  steps  to  enhance  our  business  environments.  These 
government efforts make a lot of difference to the commercial calculations of the private sector, and 
catalyse the flow of people, goods and investments.   
30. India and ASEAN have been actively engaging each other for several years. India has acceded to 
the Treaty of Amity and Co-operation in Southeast Asia (TAC) and adopted the Joint Declaration for 
Cooperation to Combat International Terrorism, signalling its strong commitment to ensure peace and 
security in the region. India is now a dialogue partner with ASEAN at the Summit level. Last year, the 
leaders  adopted  the  suggestion  of  Indian  Prime  Minister  Vajpayee  and  signed  the  ASEAN-India 
Framework  Agreement  on  Comprehensive  Economic  Cooperation,  an  interim  step  towards  an 
eventual ASEAN-India FTA. Both sides have agreed to start negotiations on trade in goods this year, 
including an ?early harvest programme? to boost trade in selected sectors. Singapore supports this 
far-sighted initiative and will work actively with India and other ASEAN members to fulfil this vision.  
The India-Singapore CECA 
Bilaterally,  India  and  Singapore  are  already  negotiating  a  Comprehensive  Economic  Co-operation 
Agreement  (CECA),  which  will  be  a  firm  basis  for  expanding  the  India-ASEAN  relationship.  The 
rewards are not only economic, but also strategic. Singapore naturally hopes to gain freer access to 
the  Indian  market.  But  the  benefits  extend  well  beyond  this.  Singapore  wants  to  strengthen  its 
economic ties with many different centres of prosperity and growth, and not be overly dependent on 
one or two major trading partners. A strong relationship with India will complement our rapidly growing 
links with China, and help us to realise the strategy of growing two external wings in the region, with 
the two emerging economic giants. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2004
On  the  part  of  India,  since  Singapore  is  already  nearly  completely  tariff  free,  major  gains  will  be  in 
investment and services. India’s economic reform and liberalisation has brought in foreign investments 
and benefited India for over a decade. Similarly, a CECA that opens up more opportunities to investors 
from  Singapore,  improves  the  business  environment  and  strengthens  the  protection  that  their 
investments enjoy, will encourage more high-value investments to flow from Singapore into India. With 
India’s  growing  strengths  in  services,  a  comprehensive  agreement  in  services  will  open  up  new 
opportunities for Indian companies in Singapore and the region. 
Strategically, a CECA will anchor India’s position in Southeast Asia. It will ensure that India joins in the 
opportunities that Southeast Asia offers, just as companies from the US, Japan, and China are already 
doing.  It  will  also  spur  other  ASEAN  countries  to  expand  their  ties  with  India.  This  is  exactly  what 
happened  with  the  US-Singapore  FTA,  and  with  the  Japan-Singapore  Economic  Cooperation 
Agreement. After Singapore made these two agreements, other ASEAN countries started to pursue 
similar arrangements with the US and Japan. Singapore is happy at this, as we will benefit when our 
neighbours too are promoting freer trade and investment flows. 
I  hope  our  CECA  negotiators  will  complete  their  work  soon,  and  deliver  a  comprehensive  and 
substantive agreement that both countries can be proud of.  
Singapore as a launchpad 
From  the  business  point  of  view,  a  CECA  is  the  ideal  platform  for  both  countries  to  broaden  and 
deepen  bilateral  co-operation,  and  advance  our  shared  interests.  Singapore  makes  an  excellent 
partner for Indian companies embarking on a strategy of regionalisation or globalisation. Because of 
our  historical  and  cultural  ties,  Indians  are  very  comfortable  in  Singapore’s  social  and  corporate 
culture. Singapore is a good base for Indian companies to engage Southeast and East Asia. They can 
take full advantage of Singapore’s trade and business networks in these growth markets, in particular 
China.  
Singapore  is  also  a  major  transportation,  logistics  and  financial  centre  in  Asia.  We  welcome  Indian 
companies to make use of our international network of air, sea and telecommunications linkages, and 
tap the network and resources of 6,000 MNCs in Singapore.  
Already  over  1,000  Indian  companies  are  in  Singapore.  In  the  last  3  years  alone,  over  150  Indian 
companies have set up substantial presence. Several large companies that are globalising are using 
Singapore  as  a  marketing  and  operations  centre  for  their  regional  businesses.  For  start-ups, 
Singapore  serves  as  an  ideal  incubator  to  prototype  innovative  ideas  and  technologies.  This  is  a 
promising way of marrying India’s large talent pool with Singapore’s emphasis on such industries and 
with our framework of intellectual property protection. Numerous start-ups are now incubating in the 
Indian  Centre  and  several  have  secured  funding,  penetrated  markets  and  grown  into  mature 
companies.  Building  on  these,  a  second  centre  is  being  planned  with  the  Confederation  of  Indian 
Industry.  
All these make Singapore a natural gateway connecting India to ASEAN and East Asia, as well as a 
launch pad for products and services of the future.  
Conclusion 
These  are exciting  times  in  Asia. Countries have  the  opportunity  to  transform  their  economies,  and 
substantially  improve  the  lives  of  their  people.  For  companies,  many  opportunities  are  opening  up, 
which will surely be seized, if not by you then by your competitors.  
Globalisation is an unstoppable phenomenon, presenting opportunities to those who are prepared but 
threatening the unconverted. It will not be easy for countries to realise this promise of globalisation, 
and avoid its many hazards each on their own. They need to look beyond their borders to tap and 
leverage on one another’s strengths. I believe that Southeast Asia will rise to the challenge, hold its 
own as an attractive market and investment destination, and at the same time be an integral part of a 
booming Asia. India is a major part of the Asian story. I look forward to deepening and broadening the 
ties between these two regions, and in particular between India and Singapore, to the benefit of our 
economies, our private sectors, and our peoples.  
BIS Review 3/2004 
 5
