Ishrat Husain: Economy of Pakistan - past, present and future 
Keynote address by Mr Ishrat Husain, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Conference on 
Islamization and the Pakistani Economy, Washington DC, 27 January 2004. 
 In this shrinking global village internet chats, cable TV, talk shows and transmissions through satellite 
dishes have made perceptions more powerful than realities in influencing public opinion. There is a 
widely held perception in Pakistan - right or wrong - that the popular American view of the U.S.S.R. as 
an evil empire and communism as a threat to economic and social stability of the world is beginning to 
resonate itself with Islam replacing communism and Pakistan and other Muslim countries, standing in 
for the USSR. 
Those who hold this perception point out, as an example, to the recent Council of Foreign Relations - 
Asia Society Task Force Report which aptly sums up the popular American view about Pakistan in the 
following  sentence:  “Pakistan  presents  one  of  the  most  complex  and  difficult  challenges  facing  US 
diplomacy.  Its  political  instability,  entrenched  Islamist  extremism,  economic  and  social  weaknesses 
and dangerous hostility towards India have cast dark shadows over this nuclear-armed nation”. 
It is in this context that the Woodrow Wilson Center deserves our commendation for organizing this 
Conference to explore in depth one of the elements of this newly emerging conventional wisdom about 
Islam and Pakistan - although each one of the components of the above statement deserves further 
analysis and discourse to sift out the facts from myths. 
I  hope  that  the  candid  discussion  today  will  enlighten  many  of  us,  clarify  a  number  of  issues  and 
debunk some of the popular myths surrounding Islam and Pakistan’s economic direction. 
I have chosen to focus my remarks today on the one aspect of Pakistan and Islam that is, in my view, 
hardly discussed, least known but creates a lot of jitters in the U.S. This issue has received increased 
importance since the elections of October 2002 when an alliance of religious parties won power in the 
province of NWFP. I propose to walk you through the past and current trends of Pakistani economy, 
sketch the future direction and offer my own assessment of how the adoption of an Islamic economy, if 
it indeed happens, will affect Pakistan’s future. 
This paper is divided into six sections. 
The first section deals with the past achievements and failures of Pakistan’s economy. The second 
section  presents  a  synopsis  of  economic  performance  during  1999-2003  -  a  period  of  intensive 
restructuring and reforms of the economy. 
Section III distils the policy lessons learnt from the historical and most recent experience of Pakistan’s 
economic  management.  Section  IV  attempts  to  lay  down  the  contours  of  the  future  direction  of 
Pakistan’s economy based on the lessons learnt and development experience gained from in-country 
and crosscountry record. 
Section  V  assesses  as  to  how  the  attempts  to  introduce  Islamic  economic  model  in  the  country,  if 
successful, will impact upon this future direction. The final section provides insights into the economic 
prospects of Pakistan in the medium term. 
Section I 
Past achievements and failures: 
Pakistan was one of the few developing countries that had achieved an average growth rate of over 
5 percent  over  a  four  decade  period  ending  1988-89.  Consequently,  the  incidence  of  poverty  had 
declined from 40 percent to 18 percent by the end of the 1980s. Table I lays down the main economic 
and social indicators in 1947 and compare them with 2003. The overall picture that emerges from a 
dispassionate examination of these indicators is that of a country having made significant economic 
achievements  but  a  disappointing  record  of  social  development.  The  salient  features  of  Pakistan’s 
economic history are: 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 1
        A Country with 30 million people in 1947 couldn’t feed itself and had to import all its food 
requirements from abroad. In 2002, the farmers of Pakistan were not only able to fulfill the 
domestic needs of wheat, rice, sugar, milk of 145 million people at a much higher per capita 
consumption level, but also exported wheat and rice to the rest of the world. 
An average Pakistani earns about $500 in 2003 compared to less than $100 in 1947. In US 
current Dollar terms the per capita income has expanded more than five fold and in constant 
terms three times. 
Agriculture  production  has  risen  five  times  with  cotton  attaining  a  level  of  more  than 
10 million bales compared to 1 million bales in 1947. Pakistan has emerged as one of the 
leading world exporter of textiles. 
Pakistan  hardly  had  any  manufacturing  industries  in  1947.  Five  decades  later,  the 
manufacturing  production  index  is  12,000  with  the  base  of  100  in  1947.  Steel,  cement, 
automobiles,  sugar,  fertilizer,  cloth  and  vegetable  ghee,  industrial  chemicals,  refined 
petroleum and a variety of other industries manufacture products not only for the domestic 
market but in many cases for the world market too. 
Per  capita  electricity  generation  in  2003  was  10,160kwh  compared  to  100  in  1947. 
Pakistan’s vast irrigation network of large storage reservoirs and dams, barrages, link canals 
constructed during the last five decades has enabled the country to double the area under 
cultivation to 22 million hectares. Tubewell irrigation provides almost one third of additional 
water to supplement canal irrigation. 
The  road  and  highway  network  in  Pakistan  spans  250,000  km  -  more  than  five  times  the 
length  inherited  in  1947.  Modern  motorways  and  super  highways  and  four  lane  national 
highways link the entire country along with secondary and tertiary roads. 
Natural gas was discovered in the country in the 1950s and has been augmented over time. 
As  of  now,  almost  26  billion  cubic  meters  of  natural  gas  is  generated,  transmitted  and 
distributed for industrial, commercial and domestic consumption. 
Private consumption standards have kept pace with the rise in income. There are 30 road 
vehicles  for  1000  persons  in  2001  relative  to  only  one  vehicle  for  the  same  number  of 
population in 1947. Phone connections per 1,000 persons have risen to 28.6 from 0.4. TV 
sets which were nonexistent adorn 26.3 out of every 1,000 houses. 
These  achievements  in  income,  consumption,  agriculture  and  industrial  production  are  extremely 
impressive and have lifted millions of people out of poverty levels. But these do pale into insignificance 
when  looked  against  the  missed  opportunities.  The  largest  setback  to  the  country  has  been  the 
neglect of human development. Had adult literacy rate been close to 100 instead of close to 50 today, 
it is my estimate that the per capita income would have reached at least $1000 instead of $500. 
Pakistan’s  manufactured  exports  in  the  1960s  were  higher  than  those  of  Malaysia,  Thailand, 
Philippines  and  Indonesia.  Had  investment  in  educating  the  population  and  upgrading  the  training, 
skills  and  health  of  the  labour  force  been  up  to  the  level  of  East  Asian  Countries  and  a  policy  of 
openness to world market would have been maintained without any break, Pakistan’s exports would 
have  been  at  least  $100  billion  instead  of  paltry  $12  billion.  Had  the  population  growth  rate  been 
reduced  from  3  percent  to  2  percent,  the  problems  of  congestion  and  shortages  in  the  level  of 
infrastructure  and  social  services  would  have  been  avoided,  the  poor  would  have  obtained  better 
access to education and health and the incidence of poverty would have been much lower than what it 
is today. 
But as if this neglect of human development was not enough, the country slacked in the 1990s and 
began to slip in growth, exports, revenues, and development spending and got entrapped into deep 
morass  of  external  and  domestic  indebtedness.  As  a  result  the  incidence  of  poverty  rose  from 
18 percent  in  1988-89  to  33  percent  by  the  end  of  the  1990s.  This  was  due  to  both  fundamental 
structural and institutional problems as well as to poor governance and frequent changes in political 
regimes.  With  short  life  spans,  succeeding  governments  were  hesitant,  if  not  outright  unwilling,  to 
reform  the  rent-seeking  activities  of  the  ruling  elite-  consisting  of  a  small  class  of  politicians, 
bureaucrats businessmen, feudal landlords and other vested interests and desisted from taking tough 
unpopular economic decisions to set the economy right. Understandably, they were more preoccupied 
with the imperatives of retaining political power and making such decisions could have further exposed 
them  to  the  risk  of  removal  from  office.  Moreover,  the  average  lifespan  of  two  to  three  years  was 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2004
clearly  inadequate  for  meaningful  policy  or  institutional  change.  The  external  environment  was  also 
unfavourable as the inability of successive governments to meet their commitments with international 
financial institutions led to a serious credibility gap among the donors and intermittent withdrawal of 
assistance. The event of May 1998, when Pakistan conducted its first nuclear test, and its aftermath 
led  to  further  economic  isolation  of  Pakistan  and  a considerable erosion  of  confidence  by domestic 
and  non-resident  Pakistanis.  Economic  sanctions  were  imposed  against  Pakistan  by  the  western 
governments.  By  the  late  1990s  Pakistan  had  entered  almost  a  critical  state  of  paralysis  and 
stagnation in its economy particularly in its external sector. The freezing of foreign currency accounts 
had resulted in a significant drop in workers’ remittances, export growth was negative, IMF programme 
and  World  Bank  assistance  were  suspended,  bilateral  donors  had  terminated  their  aid  while  debt 
payments  due  were  in  far  excess  of  the  liquid  foreign  exchange  resources  the  country  possessed. 
Pakistan was almost at the brink of default on its external payments. 
Section II 
Economic performance 1999-2003: 
It was at this stage that the military government under General Pervez Musharraf assumed power in 
October  1999.  The  initial  period  was  devoted  by  the  economic  team  of  the  new  government  in 
managing the crisis and making sure that the country avoided default. A comprehensive programme of 
reform was designed and implemented with vigour and pursued in earnest, so as to put the economy 
on the path of recovery and revival. The military government did not face the same constraints and 
compulsions as the politically elected governments. It was therefore better suited to take unpopular 
decisions  such  as  imposing  general  sales  tax,  raising  prices  of  petroleum,  utilities  and  removing 
subsidies so badly needed to bring about fiscal discipline and reduce the debt burden. The IMF and 
the  World  Bank  were  invited  to  enter  into  negotiations  on  new  stand-by  and  structural  adjustment 
programmes. 
Although  the  canvas  of  reform  in  Pakistan  was  vast  and  corrective  action  required  on  a  number  of 
fronts,  there  was  a  conscious  effort  to  focus  on  achieving  macroeconomic  stability,  on  certain  key 
priority  structural  reforms  and  improving  economic  governance.  The  structural  reforms  included 
privatization, financial sector restructuring, trade liberalization, picking up pace towards deregulation of 
the  economy  and  generally  moving  towards  a  market-led  economic  regime.  A  stand-by  IMF 
programme was put in place in November 2000, which was successfully implemented followed by a 
three-year Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGP), which will expire in November 2004. What 
have been the outcomes of the economic reforms undertaken during the past four years? 
Macroeconomic stability: 
There has been considerable progress in achieving macroeconomic stability. Strong fiscal adjustment 
has led to primary budgetary surplus and significant reduction of the fiscal deficits. Current account 
has  turned  around  from  chronic  deficit  to  a  surplus  of  more  than  5  percent  of  GDP,  mainly  due  to 
renewed  export  growth  and  resurgence  of  workers’  remittances.  Monetary  aggregates  have  been 
contained and inflation rate is below 4 percent. External debt burden has been reduced in absolute 
terms from $38 to $35 billion and as a proportion of GDP from 62.5% to 46%. The risk of default on 
external debt, which loomed large on the horizon in 1999 and 2000, was mitigated and the country's 
capacity  to  service  its  restructured  debt  has  considerably  improved.  Exchange  rate  has  not  only 
stabilized but appreciated during the last two years. Table II shows the changes in the key economic 
indicators between October 1999 and September 2003. 
Structural reforms - privatization, deregulation, liberalization: 
The Musharraf Government actively pursued an aggressive and transparent privatization plan whose 
thrust was sale of assets in the oil and gas industry as well as in the banking, telecommunications and 
energy  sectors,  to  strategic  investors,  with  foreign  investors  encouraged  to  participate  in  the 
privatization  process.  This  plan  is  being  followed  by  the  newly  elected  government  under  Prime 
Minister Jamali. 
To  demonstrate  the  seriousness  of  the  government  in  encouraging  foreign  investment  flows  in 
Pakistan;  there  has  been  a  major,  and  perceptible  liberalization  of  the  foreign  exchange  regime. 
Foreign investors can now bring in and take back their capital, remit profits, dividends and fees etc., 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 3
without any restrictions. Foreign Portfolio Investors (FPI) can also enter and exit the market without 
any  restrictions  or  prior  approvals.  In  the  Karachi  Stock  Exchange  with  a  market  capitalization  of 
$15 billion, over 700 listed companies showed average returns of 15 per cent that were higher than 
those  in  most  emerging  countries.  This  makes  Pakistan  an  attractive  place  to  invest  for  foreign 
portfolio investors. As part of this liberalization, non-residents and residents are allowed to maintain 
and operate foreign currency deposit accounts, and a market-based exchange rate in the inter-bank 
market is at work. 
Allied to this effort, the trade regime has been opened up and the maximum tariff rate has been cut 
down to 25 per cent with only four slabs and the average tariff rate is down to 14 percent. 
The financial sector too, has been restructured and opened up to competition. Foreign and domestic 
private banks currently operating in Pakistan have been able to increase their market share to more 
than  60  percent  of  assets  and  deposits.  The  interest  rate  structure  has  been  deregulated  and 
monetary  policy  uses  indirect  tools  such  as  open  market  operations,  discount  rates  etc.  Domestic 
interest rates on lending have dropped to as low as 5 percent from 20 percent substantially reducing 
financial costs of businesses. 
Central to the economic reforms process has been a clear progression towards deregulation of the 
economy.  Prices  of  petroleum  products,  gas,  energy,  agricultural  commodities  and other  key  inputs 
are  determined  by  market.  Imports  and  domestic  marketing  of  petroleum  products  have  been 
deregulated  and  opened  up  to  the  private  sector.  The  markets  do  not  always  function  effectively. 
Independent  regulatory  agencies  have  been  set  up  to  protect  the  interests  of  consumers  and 
end-users of utilities and public services. Despite this movement towards a liberalized and deregulated 
regime,  old  habits  die-hard.  Bureaucratic  hassles  at  lower  levels  continue  to  be  irritants  for  the 
business community. 
Tax reforms: 
Taxation reform has figured prominently on the government's agenda, as this is another area where 
the business community has innumerable grievances and dissatisfaction with the arbitrary nature of 
tax administration. Tax reforms are aimed at broadening the tax base, bringing in tax evaders under 
the  tax  net,  minimizing  personal  interaction  between  tax  payer  and  tax  collector,  eliminating  the 
multiplicity  of  taxes  and  ultimately  reducing  the  tax  rate  over  time.  A  massive  survey  and 
documentation  drive  was  undertaken  to  widen  the  tax  base,  extend  incidence  to  all  sectors  of  the 
economy  and  develop  the  data  for  purposes  of  assessment.  Despite  these  reforms,  the  business 
community  remains  dissatisfied  with  the  performance  and  attitude  of  tax  officials  particularly  at  the 
lower level. Complaints of delays in refunds of sales tax persisted throughout the three-year period. 
The  Central  Board  of  Revenue  (CBR)  is  being  restructured  to  improve  tax  administration  including 
taxpayer facilitation. 
Economic governance: 
The  most  dramatic  shift  introduced  by  the  military  government  is  in  promoting  good  economic 
governance. Transparency, consistency, predictability and rule-based decision-making have begun to 
take  roots.  Discretionary  powers have been significantly  curtailed.  Freedom of  press  and  access  to 
information has had a salutary effect on the behaviour of decision makers. The other pillars of good 
governance are, (a) devolution of power to the local governments who will have the administrative and 
financial authority to deliver public services to all citizens, and (b) an accountability process which will 
take to task those indulging in corruption through a rigorous process of detection, investigation and 
prosecution. 
Despite these positive outcomes and their impact on the business community and other stakeholders, 
within  the  country  as  well  as  abroad,  the  incidence  of  poverty  is  still  quite  high  and  unemployment 
rates are worrisome. The challenge therefore for the next phase of the reform process is to accelerate 
growth rate and reduce poverty and unemployment. 
4 
 BIS Review 9/2004
Section III 
Policy lessons learnt: 
I now turn to the policy lessons learnt from the experience of last 50 years and the success achieved 
in  reforming  and  restructuring  Pakistan’s  economy  during  the  last  four  years.  With  experiments 
running from state controls, liberalization, socialism, reversal to market mechanism, deregulation and 
privatization,  there  is  today  almost  a  consensus  on  the  broad  contours  of  economic  policy  in  the 
country although the modalities, policy instruments and nuances differ as they ought to. My reading of 
the last 15 years suggests that the general thrust of Pakistan’s economic policies broadly reflects the 
following lessons learnt from the past: 
(a) 
Central planning has been a failure as it leads to low productivity, lack of innovation, lack of 
incentives,  poor  quality  goods  and  services  and  low  investment  in  human  resources. 
Bureaucratic  judgment  is  a  poor  substitute  for  market’s  judgment  on  allocation  of  scarce 
resources. 
Licensing  to  open,  operate,  expand,  close  business  by  the  government  functionaries  is  a 
sure way to promote rent-seeking in the economy for the benefits of a few while keeping the 
majority poor. The basic business decisions should not be made for the businessmen by the 
bureaucrats. 
Public sector ownership and management of business, production, distribution and trade do 
not capture the commanding heights but lead to a fall into the deep morass of inefficiency, 
waste and corruption. 
Import substitution behind high tariffs not only protects a few thousand inefficient producers 
but also penalizes the millions of consumers with shoddy and expensive goods, which they 
do  not  particularly  want.  Profits  at  world  prices  are  negative  in  these  protected  industries 
thus leading to inefficient utilization of capital and labour. 
Over regulation, controls and inspection of all kinds on the private sector not only hike up the 
cost of doing businesses, subdues entrepreneurship but also make a few wily politicians and 
bureaucrats  rich  at  the  expense  of  the  prosperity  of  the  country.  Private  monopolies  and 
oligopolies were nurtured under the cover of these controls. 
High  tax  rates  on  individuals  and  corporates  are  counter-productive  as  they  raise  costs, 
discourage  effort  and  initiatives  and  lead  to  widespread  tax  evasion  and  have  unintended 
consequences of lowering overall revenue collection. 
Banks and financial institutions owned and managed in public sector offering cheaper credit 
and/or directed credit have a pernicious effect on economic growth as credit decisions are 
made on the basis of political connections rather than on the merit of the proposal. Value 
subtracting enterprises are set up while real opportunities for businesses that contribute to 
output and employment are missed. 
Administered  prices  of  key  commodities  and  utilities  are  the  worst  possible  means  of 
insulating the poor segment of the population from the onslaught of market forces. Instead 
these  prices  create  shortages  in  the  economy  and  hit  the  poor  hardest  by  denying  them 
access to essential commodities or services. 
Subsidies  on  inputs  such  as  fertilizers,  seeds,  electricity,  water,  gas,  petroleum,  etc.  incur 
heavy  budgetary  costs  but  benefit  the  well-to-do  classes  and  highly  influential  individuals 
rather than those for whom the subsidies are intended. 
Foreign investment and multinational corporations are not evils that should be shunned but 
are the most important conduits for transfer of technology, managerial skills, organizational 
innovation  in  addition  to  much  needed  capital  and  foreign  exchange.  They  should  be 
welcomed and made to feel comfortable in their operations. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
(j) 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 5
Section IV 
Future direction: 
The lessons learnt from its historical experience, the development literature based on Cross-Country 
record and the imperatives of globalization have led to emergence of a broad consensus on some key 
policies and parameters. 
These  views  are  shared  by  majority  political  parties,  military,  businesses,  bureaucracy  and  other 
stakeholders in Pakistan. It will be fair to surmise that investors in Pakistan should feel confident that 
the future direction of economic policy making will be guided by the following principles although in a 
dynamic and ever changing world, economic management will have to be responsive to the needs of 
the time and events. 
i. 
Outward-looking  strategy  that  promotes  exports  and  integrates  Pakistan  into  the  world 
economy is in the best interest of the country for accelerating growth and reducing poverty. 
Tariff reductions have been quite drastic from 220 percent to current maximum of 25 percent 
helping the businesses to become cost competitive. Anti-export bias has been significantly 
removed and export promotion is the stated policy objective. 
Private sector is the main vehicle for producing and exchanging goods and services for the 
domestic  economy  as  well  as  the  rest  of  the  world.  Prices  should  be  determined  by  the 
market forces but monopolies regulated by independent agencies. 
The role of the state is to provide security of life and property, have an independent judiciary 
that  can  arbitrate  disputes  and  enforce  contracts,  build  physical  infrastructure,  nurture 
human skills and train manpower and maintain an enabling macroeconomic and regulatory 
environment in which businesses can flourish. 
Public  sector  enterprises  and  government  trading  houses  should  be  privatized  through  a 
transparent  process  so  that  the  Government  can  focus  its  attention  on  its  basic 
responsibilities to the citizens. Selling these enterprises to private entrepreneurs has stopped 
the hemorrhaging of government finances. 
Pakistan  will  continue  to  have  a  liberal  foreign  exchange  and  low  tariff  regime  without 
recourse to any non-tariff barriers. Raw materials, components, machinery and equipment, 
consumer goods can enter the country free of restrictions. Foreign investors are free to bring 
in and repatriate capital, dividends, profits, remittances, royalties, etc. without any approvals. 
The  value  of  Pakistani  currency  in  relation  to  other  foreign  currencies  will  be  determined 
through supply and demand in the foreign exchange markets and not by administrative fiat of 
the Central Bank. A freefloating exchange rate policy is being pursued at present and will 
continue in the future. 
The  Central  Bank  or  the  Government  no  longer  controls  interest  rates  on  government 
securities, corporate borrowing, deposits, etc. They are totally deregulated and the banks are 
free  to  charge  the  spreads  according  to  risk  assessment  of  the  borrowers.  There  are  no 
priority  sectors  to  which  credit  is  directed.  Government  is  not  allowed  to  borrow  from  the 
banking system beyond a specified limit. 
Foreign  companies,  individuals,  multinational  corporations  can  own  100  percent  shares  in 
locally  incorporated  or  unincorporated  firms.  They  can  raise  equity  through  national  stock 
markets, borrow from the local banking system and sell their goods or services abroad or 
domestically. They enjoy a level playing field with the domestic investors and do not face any 
barriers  to  entry  or  exit.  They  can  expand  capital  or  wind  up  business  without  permission 
from any government department. 
Consumers have choices to purchase foreign goods or domestically produced goods. This 
has compelled the domestic manufacturers to improve the quality and reduce the prices of 
their  products  or  face  extinction  at  the  hands  of  imported  goods.  The  competitiveness  of 
industry has been boosted by the unhindered availability of foreign goods. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
viii. 
ix. 
6 
 BIS Review 9/2004
Section V 
Impact of islamization on the future direction: 
I now turn to the main theme of the Conference today. The basic premise of this Conference is that 
there  are  many  protagonists  in  Pakistan  who  are  pushing  the  country  towards  adopting  an  Islamic 
economic system. Western analysts and observers view such a move with apprehension and feel that 
this  will  lead  to  Pakistan’s  decoupling  from  the  global  economic  system  and  its  isolation  from 
mainstream economic thinking. In their minds such behaviour will create greater instability and amplify 
risks for the rest of the world. 
Pakistan  is  a  moderate  and  progressive  Islamic  country  that  is  committed  to  the  war  against 
extremism and terrorism and, thus, any suggestion that it will adopt policies that may be risky for the 
rest of  the  world  is  untenable.  President  Musharraf  is  already  paying  a  high price  in combating  the 
menace of terrorism and extremism in the country. These policies may have short- term costs but are 
essential to set the country on its course of enlightened moderation.  
Unfortunately,  most  of  the  assumptions  and  premises  on  which  the  hypotheses  about  the  Islamic 
economic  system  have  been  constructed  are  seriously  flawed.  Pakistan  is  and  will  remain  a 
responsible  member  of  international  community  and  is  committed  to  utilize  the  vast  opportunities 
provided  by  globalization and  financial  integration  of  world  markets  for  the benefit  of  its  population. 
There is no suggestion whatsoever by any significant group of people or political parties in favour of 
isolation or withdrawal from international economic system. Secondly, the pre-conditions for a robust 
and well functioning Islamic economic system are missing in Pakistan. The Islamic moral values that 
emphasize  integrity,  honesty,  truthfulness  and  full  disclosure  and  transparency  are  not  yet  widely 
practiced by Pakistani businesses. Once these pre-conditions are established the adoption of a real 
Islamic economic system will lead to superior welfare outcome for the majority of Pakistani population. 
How can the Islamization of the economy affect this future direction of Pakistan economy and improve 
the welfare of its people compared to the present system? The extensions that the true practice and 
application of Islamic economic model can bring about will, in fact, help in overcoming the weaknesses 
inherent in the capitalist model of economy. Before that, let us recapitulate the basic principles upon 
which Islamic economic system is built upon. 
Unlike  positive  economics  the  entire  edifice  of  Islamic  economy  is  built  upon  a  set  of  objectives  or 
maqasid. In other words, Islamic economics is normative in nature with the objective of the Shariah 
being to promote the well being of all mankind which lies in safeguarding their faith, their human self, 
their intellect, their posterity and their wealth. 
At the micro level, the precepts of profit maximization and utility maximization are retained intact but 
are supplemented by a set of interlinked objective functions. Islamic system tries to promote a balance 
between  market,  family,  society  and  the  state.  It  does  so  by  promoting  both  the  material  and  the 
spiritual  urges  of  the  human  self,  foster  peace  of  mind,  enhance  family  and  social  solidarity.  Some 
western  thinkers  and  anti-globalization  activists  decry  the  western  economic  model  as  being 
suppressive of collective human rights, community and social well being, disruptive of family values 
and  too  much  focused  on  selfish  individual  interests.  Behavioral  economists  have  also  begun  to 
challenge  the  assumption  of  rationality  in  the  choices  and  preferences  an  individual  makes  in 
day-to-day life. Thus, the merit of Islamic economic model therefore lies in its extension of western 
model in some fundamental and beneficial ways. It introduces into the objective function an additional 
argument  which  keeps  self  interest  within  the  bounds  of  social  interest  by  limiting  individual 
preferences  to  conform  with  social  priorities  and  eliminating  or  minimizing  the  use  of  resources  for 
purposes that frustrate the realization of the social vision. This may help promote harmony between 
self-interest and social interest. 
This second argument complements the market mechanism by making the allocation and distribution 
of resources subject to a double layer of filters. It attacks the problem by first changing the behaviour 
and preference scale in keeping with the demands of the normative goals. Claims on resources are 
then exposed to the second filter of market prices. In this process, the influence that initial resource 
endowments  are  able  to  exercise  in  the  allocation  and  distribution    of  resources  may  be  reduced 
substantially. Faith tries to accomplish this by giving self-interest a longer-term perspective - stretching 
it beyond the span of the world to the Hereafter. This interest in Hereafter cannot be served except by 
fulfilling  his  or  her  social  obligations.  This  may  induce  individuals  to  voluntarily  hold  their  claims  on 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 7
resources within the limits of general well being and thus create harmony between self-interest and 
social interest even when the two are in conflict. 
The promotion of simple living and the reduction of wasteful and conspicuous consumption may help 
reduce excessive claims on resources and thereby release a greater volume of resources for need-
fulfillment by others who are not so well off. It may also help promote higher savings and investment 
and thereby raise employment and growth. 
At the macro level, Islamic economic model in its ideal form tends to combine the positive aspects of 
the capitalist economy and socialist economy while minimizing their negative consequences. Capitalist 
economy  based  on  private  property  and  market  mechanism  allocates  resources  efficiently  but  as  it 
takes initial resource endowment as given, equity considerations do not figure in this system. Socialist 
system is very much concerned with equity and welfare of its population and ensures benefits from 
cradle  to  grave  for  its  citizens.  But  as  it  relies  on  state  ownership  and  bureaucracy  it  is  poor  in 
allocating  resources  thus  creating  inefficiency,  waste  and  value  subtraction.  Islamic  System 
overcomes the deficiencies of both the systems as it is solidly based on private property and market 
mechanism  but  has  also  explicitly  built  in  equity  and  distribution  through  compulsory  deduction  of 
Zakat  i.e.  transfer  payments  from  the  asset  holders  to  the  poor  segments  of  the  population.  The 
western economic  model  is  criticized  today  as  it  is  unable  to  address  the  issues  of  unemployment, 
poverty  and  income  inequities  in  developing  countries.  Islamic  economic  model  addresses  the 
distribution issues explicitly after market has allocated the gains. It does so by a compulsory deduction 
of 2.5 percent of tangible wealth and net asset holdings from the incomes generated by the market 
mechanism for transfer among the vulnerable, sick, handicapped, indigenes and poor segments of the 
society. Although the deduction is compulsory the transfers are made voluntarily by the well-to-do to 
their  poor  relatives,  neighbours  and  other  whom  they  know  to  have  legitimate  needs.  Thus  the 
leakages, waste and corruption that are inherent in a state administered system of welfare payments 
are conspicuous by their absence under this system. Only really deserving persons and families or 
mustahaqeen  receives  these  payments.  In  Pakistan,  it  is  estimated  that  private  transfers  made 
voluntarily to the poor account for 2 percent of GDP annually. These welfare payments are a potent 
force  in  reducing  poverty,  helping  the  vulnerable  to  earn  their  own  livelihoods  and  lower  income 
disparities. 
At  the  sectoral  level,  the  introduction  of  Islamic  banking  should  result  in  deepening  of  the  financial 
sector. There are believers in Islamic Faith who do not use the Conventional banking system because 
of their strongly held views that this system is based on riba. They will willingly deposit their savings 
into Islamic banks and borrow from these banks for expansion of their businesses or new investment. 
Thus a significant segment of population that is currently outside the organized financial sector will be 
brought into its fold deepening financial markets. 
The primary principle of Islamic Banking is the prohibition of Riba (usury), which is believed to be a 
means of exploitation of the masses. Trade is the preferred mode of business in Islam. The goal of the 
banking is the general economic improvement of the public at large rather than of few groups. 
What are the characteristics of the Islamic bank? 
• 
One of the most distinguishing features of Islamic banking is that being part of a faith-based 
system, it is obligatory on Islamic banks from pursuing activities that are detrimental to the 
society  and  its  moral  values.  Thus  Islamic  banks  are  not  allowed  to  invest  in  casinos, 
nightclubs  and  breweries,  etc.  It  is  pertinent  to  note  that  casinos  are  one  of  the  prime 
vehicles  used  for  money laundering  and  dealing with  them  could  expose  the  conventional 
banks to such risk. 
The second distinguishing feature of the Islamic banking is that in addition to the rules and 
regulations  applicable  to  the  conventional  banks,  the  Islamic  banks  have  to  go  through 
another test, i.e. fulfill exhaustive requirements to be Shariah compliant. This requires that 
the clients of Islamic banking must have business that should be socially beneficial for the 
society  creating  real  wealth  and  adding  value  to  the  economy  rather  than  making  paper 
transactions. Therefore, a stringent Know Your Customer (KYC) policy is inherently an inbuilt 
requirement for an Islamic bank since the Islamic bank has to know the customer and his 
business before getting into a socially responsible Shariah compliant transaction. KYC is the 
first line of defense against money laundering in any banking system. 
Third,  by  their  very  nature,  Islamic  mode  of  financing  and  deposit  taking  discourages 
questionable/undisclosed  means  of  wealth  that  form  the  basis  of  money  laundering 
  8 
 BIS Review 9/2004
operations.  The  disclosure  standards  are  stringent  because  the  Islamic  banks  require  the 
customers to divulge the origins of their funds in order to ensure that they are not derived 
from  un-Islamic  means  e.g.  drug  trade,  gambling,  extortion,  subversive  activities  or  other 
criminal  offences.  On  the  financing  side,  the  Islamic  banks  must  ensure  that  funds  are 
directed  towards  identifiable  and  acceptable  productive  activities.  Most  Islamic  financing 
modes  are  asset  backed,  i.e.  they  are  used  to  finance  specific  physical  assets  like 
machinery, inventory, equipment, etc. 
Fourth, the role of the bank is not limited to a passive financier concerned only with timely 
interest payments and loan recovery. The bank is a partner in trade and has to concern itself 
with  the  nature  of  business  and  profitability  position  of  its  clients.  In  the  case  of  loss  in 
business, the Islamic financier has to share that loss. To avoid the loss and reputational risk, 
the Islamic banks have to be extra vigilant about their clientele. 
 To sum up, it can be said that banks that judiciously follow Islamic banking principles are less likely to 
engage  in  illegal  activities  such  as  money  laundering  and  financing  of  terrorism  than  conventional 
banks. However, the existence of rogue elements cannot be ruled out in any type of organization. It is 
the  duty  of  the  state  and  the  regulators  to  ensure  that  despite  these  in-built  safeguards,  there  are 
adequate pieces of legislation, regulations, and enforcement mechanisms to take action against the 
potential offenders. 
Pakistan  has  taken  a  policy  decision  that  it  will  allow  both  the  Conventional  and  Islamic  banking 
systems to operate in parallel. The choice will be left to the consumers whether they wish to migrate 
from the Conventional to the Islamic system or stay with the Conventional system. The State Bank of 
Pakistan  has  a  transparent  system  of  licencing,  regulating  and  supervising  the  Islamic  banks  in 
Pakistan. There are three ways in which this type of banking can be set up (a) through a stand-alone 
exclusive Islamic bank (b) the existing Conventional banks establishing a subsidiary or (c) earmarking 
some of their branches for Islamic banking. 
A Shariah Board consisting of scholars, economist, accountant and banker as members will determine 
whether  the  products  and  bankers  as  members  will  determine  whether  the  products  and  services 
offered by these institutions are compliant with Shariah or not. 
The  MMA  Government  in  NWFP  has  earmarked  one  of  the  branches  of  a  Provincial  Government 
owned bank as Islamic bank and only on the basis of the experience gained they will gradually move 
to convert other branches to this mode. You can therefore see that contrary to the alarmists’ cries the 
Provincial  Government  has  been  extremely  prudent  and  responsible  in  moving  gradually  in  this 
direction. They have fulfilled all the standard requirements which the Central bank had stipulated and 
no  exception  was  made  in  granting  the  licence  for  this  branch.  Business  and  Commercial 
considerations will determine the future evolution of Islamic banking in the province. 
To  sum  it  up,  Islamization,  if  adopted  and  practiced  in  its  true  form,  at  any  time  in  the  future  will 
strengthen  the  economy  particularly  income  distribution  and  poverty  alleviation  which  have  proved 
elusive  under  the  present  economic  model.  This  will,  in  fact,  eliminate  the  sources  of  instability, 
violence and propensity towards terrorism arising from a sense of deprivation. 
Section VI 
Economic prospects in the medium term: 
As the full fledged operation of a true Islamic economic system in any of the Muslim Countries and 
particularly Pakistan is far from realization in the near future, only gradual and slow changes will take 
place.  Thus,  the  burning  issues  of  poverty,  income  distribution  and  unemployment  will  remain  to 
preoccupy the attention of economic managers and policy makers - as the remedies available under 
the Islamic economic system to resolve them are unlikely to be applied. Under this scenario what does 
the future hold for the Pakistan economy and what are the prospects for addressing these issues? 
Empirical  evidence  from  the  past  history  of  Pakistan  suggests  that  there  is  a  direct  relationship 
between rapid economic growth and poverty reduction. After the annual economic growth rate crosses 
the threshold of 6 percent or more on a sustained basis there is a strong probability that the incidence 
of poverty will begin to decline. 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 9
There is little doubt that GDP growth rate can recover to the historic levels of an average of 6 per cent 
and  more  provided  structural  reforms  are  continued  and  further  deepened,  productivity  gains  in 
agriculture  sector  are  achieved  and  a  set  of  non  economic  factors  including  governance  are  put  in 
place. This will not only reduce the incidence of poverty but also unemployment and to some extent 
regional disparities. It is also projected that the inflation rate will remain contained within the 6-8 per 
cent range provided appropriate monetary and fiscal policies are followed. The latter is geared to bring 
the budgetary deficit down to 3 per cent of GDP in the next three years; increasing the Tax-GDP ratio 
to over 15 per cent, containing the growth in non-development expenditure but raising the share of 
social and poverty-oriented programmes. 
What  is  the  agenda  for  getting  back  on  this  trajectory?  The  realization  of  the  projections  outlined 
above  will  depend  upon  the  interplay  of  evolution  in  political  and  social  developments,  economic 
policies  to  be  pursued,  the  quality  of  governance  and  institutions,  external  environment  and  most 
important, investment in human development. It has become quite obvious from both Pakistan's own 
history and the experience of other developing countries that sustained economic growth and poverty 
reduction cannot take place merely on the strength of good economic policies. Political stability, social 
cohesion, supporting institutions, and good governance are equally important ingredients coupled with 
a  benign  external  environment  for  achieving  economic  success.  The  economy  will  suffer  from 
temporary shocks, both domestic and externally induced, but will develop resilience to tolerate these 
shocks with minimum disruption and dislocation if these ingredients are present. So what do essential 
ingredients for transforming Pakistani economy entail? What are the pillars on which the foundations 
of Pakistan’s rapid economic development will be built in the future? 
Pakistan's chequered and uneven record on political instability and lack of democracy has deprived 
the country of a long-term vision, direction and continuity of economic policies. The rapid turnover of 
governments  and  the  actual  and  imminent  threat  of  the  dismissal  of  governments  through  extra 
constitutional means have certainly proved to be an inhibitor to investment, innovation and institutional 
development. Democracy in Pakistan is still interpreted in a fairly narrow sense, i.e. holding general 
elections and allowing political parties to compete. While this is necessary, other pre-requisites of a 
well functioning democracy, i.e. rule of law, civil liberties, freedom of expression, checks and balances 
on the powers of different organs of state and religious and ethnic tolerance have not yet taken root. 
Parliamentary elections are not meant to provide licence to those elected to rise above the law and do 
whatever  pleases  them.  Separation  between  executive  and  legislature,  with  the  latter  exercising 
effective controls on the former, is still missing due to the entrustment of executive powers to the ruling 
party  in  the  legislature.  As  there  is  no  other countervailing  mechanism, excesses  committed  by  the 
executive  have  only  been  corrected  by  dismissals  or  extra-constitutional  measures.  These 
extraordinary steps create uncertainty and unpredictability, which are inimical to long-term economic 
growth. Thus an effective watchdog legislature and a vigilant judiciaryenforcing rule of law including 
enforcement of contracts and protection of private property will obviate the need for frequent changes 
in the government. Political parties themselves have to shift the emphasis on dialogue to broad-based 
strong growth rather than narrow-minded slangs and personality-oriented cults. A stable and orderly 
political  system  ingrained  and  practicing  all  the  elements  of  democracy  is  the  first  pillar  for 
transforming the economy. 
Although democracy does mediate between different ethnic, religious and regional groups, Pakistan 
has witnessed growing polarization and division along sectarian, ethnic, linguistic, and cultural lines in 
the  decade of  1990s  particularly  after  the  defeat of the  Soviet  forces  in  Afghanistan.  Social  capital, 
which is a glue for fostering economic development has been depleting. Although Islam teaches us 
tolerance and harmony, the violent sectarian killings and the consequential law and order problems 
need to be curbed effectively. Social cohesion, trust and tolerance and inter-provincial harmony on the 
back of a true participatory and well functioning democracy, a vibrant civil society and a shared sense 
of fair play in allocation of national resources are the second pillar for robust economic transformation. 
Recent empirical evidence and common sense strongly suggest that sound economic policies cannot 
make any difference to the lives of the common citizens if the country does not have strong institutions 
to implement those policies. Pakistan had inherited a strong civil service, judiciary, and police, which 
could  meet  the  demands  of  thirty  million  people.  But  as  population  expanded,  and  the  nature  of 
problems  became  more  complex,  the  capacity  of  these  institutions  did  not  keep  pace  with  the 
emerging demands of the economy. On the contrary, these institutions were politicized and captured 
by a small elite group to serve their own narrow interests and those of their masters. The consideration 
of common good was replaced by self-aggrandizement and the process of institutional decay crept in 
10 
 BIS Review 9/2004
and  gradually  eroded  the  foundations  of  most  of  these  institutions.  These  dysfunctional  institutions 
were unable to deliver the basic services to ordinary citizen. 
Crude estimates suggest that if institutions and legal system were working well Pakistan's GDP would 
grow  at  least  by  two  percentage  points  faster  e.g.  if  the  land  titles  were  clear,  actively  traded, 
mortgaged  and  exchanged  without  much  hassle;  if  tax  assessment,  tax  code  and  tax  collection 
methods  were  simplified,  made  less  arbitrary  and  free  from  discretion  of  tax  officials,  the  tax  base 
would  be  much  wider  and  Tax-GDP  ratio  much  higher;  if  the  court  system  is  unclogged  the 
enforcement of contracts would be quicker and reduce transaction costs substantially. 
The fourth pillar is good governance. There is an overlap between  the other three pillars described 
above and good governance. Rule of law, transparency, predictability are the essential elements of 
good governance. Authoritarian governments have relatively better record of governance in Pakistan, 
but  these  gains  have  proved  to  be  short  lived.  Only  democratic  governments  with  clear  rules  of 
transition and strong functioning institutions can provide the platform for embedding good governance 
in  the  work  ethic.  It  has  to  be  demonstrated  during  the  next  five  years  that  democracy  and  good 
governance  are  not  mutually  incompatible  and  that  a  democratically  elected  government  can  also 
serve collective interests in contrast to their personal interests, and that the quality of governance can 
be better. The interplay of voice and accountability, civil liberties and free media, which form the core 
of democracy reinforce the quality of governance. 
Three recent steps, devolution of powers to local governments, National Anti-Corruption Strategy and 
National Accountability Bureau and encouragement of private-public-community partnerships, will fill in 
the missing gaps in effective implementation of governance. 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 11
Table I  Long-terms structural change and growth 
 
Population 
Income 
 
 
 
 
Agriculture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Industry 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infrastructure 
 
 
 
Consumption 
 
 
 
Social indicators 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
12 
  
In million 
GDP(current m.p.) Rs.bln 
GDP (US $)billion 
Per Capita Income (Constant Rs.) 
Per Capita Income (US $) 
Per Capita Income (Current Rs.) 
Production Index 
Fiber Production Index 
Water Availability (MAF) 
Wheat Production (m. tons) 
Rice Production (m. tons) 
Cotton Production (m. bales) 
Fertilizer per ha. Crop (kg) 
Manufacturing Production Index 
Steel Production (000 tons) 
Cement Production (000 tons) 
Chemical Production (000 tons) 
Sugar Production (000 tons) 
Veg. Ghee Production (000 tons) 
Cloth Production (000 Sq. meter) 
Per Capita Electricity Generation (Index) 
Per Capita Electricity (kwh) 
Road Length (km) 
Area under Canal Irrigation(mill. ha) 
Natural Gas billion cu. Meters 
Road Vehicles per 1,000 Persons 
Phone Connections per 1,000 Persons 
TV Sets per 1,000 Persons 
Primary Enrolment Rate 
Population per Doctor 
Population per Nurse 
Literacy Rate 
Infant Mortality Rate 
Total Fertility Rate 
Population with Access to Safe Water 
Under Five Mortality Rate 
1947 
33 
58 
3.8 
1,638 
85 
405 
100 
100 
55 
3.3 
0.7 
1.1 
0 
100 
0 
292 
0 
10 
2 
1970 
60 
151 
10.8 
2,541 
170 
809 
219 
172 
76 
7.3 
2.4 
3.0 
23 
2346 
0 
2656 
130 
610 
126 
29,581 
1000 
6 
50,367 
60,544 
1950 
63 
72,153 
7.9 
0 
1 
0.4 
0 
5 
 2.9 
3 
2.5 
1.5 
22 
23,897 
369,318 
4,231 
13,141 
11 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
N.A. 
20 
117 
6,3 
25 
191 
2001 
146 
3,231 
72.3 
5,383 
495 
28,980 
530 
921 
97 
19.2 
4.8 
10.4 
212 
12,633 
2203 
11,000 
445 
3686 
743 
576,000 
10,160 
520 
249,959 
18.0 
26.1 
30 
28.6 
26.3 
74 
1,484 
3,560 
51 
84 
4,7 
85 
109 
BIS Review 9/2004
The devolution of powers to local governments since 2001 is undergoing a phase of consolidation and 
is  facing  some  teething  problems.  But  this  devolution  has  an  in-built  capacity  to  respond  to  the 
demands of the common man for obtaining basic services such as security, education, health, water 
supply, sanitation, etc. This system is facing fierce resistance from all those groups who had vested 
interests  in  the  old  centralized,  highly  personalized  top-down  system  of  Administration.  The  system 
needs to be carefully nurtured, monitored, its structural and operational deficiencies and weaknesses 
removed, but any attempt to dislodge it or make it impotent will adversely affect the access of the poor 
and disenfranchised to public expenditures and public goods.  
Finally,  most  important  among  all  the  factors  that  will  impinge  upon  the  future  shape  of  Pakistan’s 
economy is accelerated investment in human development. In fact, this underdevelopment of human 
capital is the most daunting challenge facing Pakistan. High population growth - one of the fastest in 
the world - has given rise to a young dependent population and increased unemployment among the 
youth. One half of the population is illiterate making it more difficult to impart new skills to the ever-
burgeoning  labour  force.  The  average  years  of  schooling  remains  quite  low.  Investment  in  higher 
education,  science  and research  has  been  almost  insignificant  and  has  hurt  the  competitiveness  of 
Pakistani firms in world market. Low level of female education and literacy have made one half of the 
population less than adequately prepared to participate in the domestic labor markets and deprived 
the country of many externalities that arise from a literate female population. 
A  comprehensive  package  of  educational  sector  reforms,  a  medium  term  health  strategy,  fiscal 
restructuring and devolution of administrative and financial powers to local government, public-private 
partnership  in  delivery  of  social  services,  community  involvement  and  participation  are  some  of  the 
ways that need to be put in practice with full commitment. 
The above survey of Pakistan’s past, present and future should reassure the Western Community that 
if  and  when  Islamization  of  the  economy  takes  place  it  will  not  pose  a  threat  to  Pakistan’s  journey 
towards stability, growth and poverty reduction. Along with good policies, good governance and good 
luck it will create conditions that are conducive for growth and poverty reduction Pakistan is very much 
and will remain integrated into the world economy and fully utilize the opportunities thrown open by 
globalization to benefit its population. 
BIS Review 9/2004 
 13
Table II Changes in key macronomic indicators 
 
GDP growth rate 
Inflation 
Fiscal deficit/GDP 
Current account/GDP 
Domestic Debt/GDP 
External Debt 
Remittances 
Exports 
Tax Revenues 
Rupee-Dollar Parity 
Foreign Direct Investment 
Foreign Exchange Reserves 
Poverty Incidence 
Poverty related expenditure 
Unemployment 
October 1999 
September 2003 
4.2% 
5.7% 
-6.1% 
-3.2% 
52.0% 
5.3% 
3.3% 
-4.0% 
+5.0% 
43.4% 
$ 38 billion 
$ 35 billion 
$ 88 million per month 
$ 300 million per month 
$ 7.8 billion 
Rs. 391 billion 
Depreciating 
$ 472 million 
$ 1.6 billion 
33% 
Rs. 133 billion 
6% 
$ 12 billion 
Rs. 510 billion 
Appreciating 
$ 500 million 
$ 12.0 billion 
Data not available but 
perhaps rising 
Rs. 161 billion 
8% 
Negative 
Positive 
Negative 
Change in the 
Indicator 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Positive 
Note:  All  indicators  in  Column  1  pertain  to  1998-99  or  October  1999.  All  indicators  in  Column  2  pertain  to  2003-04  or  end 
September 2003. 
14 
 BIS Review 9/2004
