Toshiro Muto: What lies beyond this cyclical recovery? 
Speech by Mr Toshiro Muto, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Japan Society, London, 
7 June 2004. 
 Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen. Today, after touching on a short-term outlook for the Japanese 
economy, I will talk about further challenges Japan faces. 
Short-term outlook for the Japanese economy 
I. 
The outlook for the Japanese economy is reasonably good for the foreseeable future. As you see in 
Chart 1, economic growth, after showing 3.2% for fiscal 2003, will be 3.1% for fiscal 2004 according to 
the median forecast by the Bank of Japan’s Policy Board at the end of April. 
The ongoing economic recovery is the third of its kind since the bursting of the bubble in the early 
1990s. During the so-called “lost decade,” we had two economic recoveries: one with 3.6% growth for 
fiscal  1996,  and  the  other  with  3.0%  growth  for  fiscal  2000.  The  first  recovery  was  immediately 
followed by a sharp slowdown and the second by negative growth. Compared to these two cases, now 
the chances are better that the recovery will be sustained. Behind that are three factors. 
The first factor is an encouraging outlook for the world economy in spite of some risks associated with 
persistently high oil prices. Many economists believe that the United States will grow at a faster pace 
than its potential growth rate. While the economic growth of China is expected to decelerate somewhat 
from the overheated pace, it is still likely to be fairly rapid. 
The second factor is great demand for digital consumer electronics at home and abroad. This provides 
favorable business conditions for Japanese manufacturers, whose competitive edge lies in high-end 
electronic  devices  including  flat-screen  panels.  This  is  an  important  reason  for  the  recovery  in 
business fixed investment. The Bank’s corporate survey Tankan shows that nominal capital spending 
by large manufacturers will increase by more than 7% for fiscal 2004 after a 9% increase for fiscal 
2003. 
Third  and  the  most  important  factor  behind  the  good  economic outlook  is  progress  in  the  structural 
adjustments.  Chart  2  illustrates  that  the  ratio  of  corporate  debt  to  cash  flow  has  been  declining 
steadily. The improvement is observed even in the small and medium-sized nonmanufacturing firms, 
the  sector  which  was  once  under  a  particularly  heavy  debt  burden.  As  for  the  adjustment  in  labor, 
Chart 3 shows that the share of labor costs in the nominal GDP declined to the lowest level since the 
early 1990s. 
In  connection  with  the  structural  adjustments,  as  Chart  4  shows,  progress  has  also  been  made  in 
reducing  nonperforming  loans.  As  far  as  major  banks  are  concerned,  they  as  a  whole  seem  to  be 
hitting the March 2005 target, namely, lowering the share of nonperforming loans in total credits to half 
of that in March 2002. Of course, Japan’s financial institutions are still facing quite a few problems. In 
this regard, they should step up their efforts to reduce nonperforming loans and contribute to corporate 
restructuring.  And  they  should  be  well  prepared  for  the  removal  of  the  blanket  deposit  insurance, 
which is scheduled for April 2005. 
As the structural adjustments have progressed, an opportunity for sustained growth is finally arising. In 
order  to  turn  this  nascent  opportunity  into  full-scale  revitalization  of  the  economy,  both  the  private 
sector and the government should work harder. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II. 
On the part of the Bank of Japan, we continue to maintain the monetary conditions which should help 
deflation come to an end. Chart 5 shows that deflation has been easing but the year-on-year change 
in the consumer price index (CPI) has not yet reached positive territory even with the help of upward 
one-off factors including a rise in rice prices. Based on the assessment that the underlying trend of the 
CPI is still moderately negative, the Bank is conducting an extremely accommodative policy with three 
features. 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 1
First, the Bank is providing unusually ample liquidity to financial markets. The so-called “quantitative 
monetary  easing”  keeps  short-term  interest  rates  at  almost  zero,  thereby  ensuring  the  stability  of 
financial markets, which in turn supports economic activity. 
Second,  the Bank  is conducting  its  policy  with  the commitment  to  continue  quantitative  easing until 
deflation  ends.  The  resultant  “policy  duration  effect,”  by  working  on  expectations  about  future 
monetary policy, contributes to further stabilizing financial markets. 
Third,  the  Bank  is  making  efforts  to  enhance  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing.  For 
instance, the Bank has already been expanding the types of money market operations. Moreover, the 
Bank is eagerly communicating with market participants and other authorities as to how to expand the 
securitization market. 
Of the three features of the current monetary policy, let me elaborate on the second one: the Bank’s 
policy commitment. In this commitment, the Bank will maintain quantitative easing until the core CPI 
registers stably zero percent or an increase year-on-year. More specifically, before the Bank considers 
terminating  quantitative  easing,  certain  conditions  must  be  met:  the  core  CPI  inflation  has  been 
positive over a few months and it is forecast to remain positive in the future. 
As for the inflation forecast, the semiannual Outlook Report at the end of April shows that the Board 
members’ median outlook for the core CPI for fiscal 2004 is –0.2%. Although the narrowing output gap 
and the lagged effects of a rise in commodity prices will contribute to moderating CPI deflation, they 
will not be strong enough to make year-on-year CPI firmly positive for fiscal 2004. 
I  believe  that  sustained  reforms  in  both  the  private  and  the  government  sectors,  together  with  the 
Bank’s commitment to keep monetary easing, will help the economy gather momentum, which in turn 
will lead to a better possibility that deflation comes to an end. 
Longer-term issues for the Japanese economy 
III. 
Despite the encouraging short-term outlook, the aging and declining population is a source of concern 
for economic growth in the long run. Any attempt to address this concern would cause a conflict of 
interests  with  regard  to  income  transfer  and  risk  sharing.  How  to  deal  with  this  type  of  conflict  is  a 
particularly daunting challenge. 
Challenges arising from population aging 
Let  me  explain  how  serious  the  demographic  change  is  in  Japan.  As  is  shown  in  Chart  6,  Japan’s 
population is expected to start declining in 2007. Moreover, the share of elderly people of 65 and older 
has been increasing since around 1990 and is now approaching 20%. In 2050, the share is expected 
to reach 36%, the second highest in the world after Spain. Not only is the share among the highest, 
but the rising pace of the share is unparalleled. There are calculations by the United Nations as to how 
many  years  it  takes  for  the  elderly  people’s  share  of  each  country  to  double  from  10%  to  20%: 
42 years  for  Spain,  70  years  for  Germany,  75  years  for  the  United  Kingdom,  but  only  21  years  for 
Japan. 
The rapid population aging will certainly have significant impacts on the economy. First, the labor force 
will decrease. According to the Bank’s research staff, assuming that the labor participation rate at any 
given age stays constant, the decline in the labor force caused by the demographic change will pull 
down the economic growth rate by 0.5% in the 2010s. 
The second impact of population aging is on the savings rate. Chart 7 illustrates that the household 
savings rate in Japan has already been declining in line with population aging. It declined from about 
15% in the early 1990s to merely 6.4% in 2002. Assuming that the declining savings rate restrains 
capital  formation,  the  Bank’s  research  staff  estimated  that  the  economic  growth  rate  in  the  2010s 
would be reduced by 0.5%. Together with another 0.5% decline coming from the labor factor that I 
mentioned, the economic growth rate overall will decline by as much as 1%. 
The third problem caused by the population aging is increasing doubt about the sustainability of the 
pension system. Chart 8 shows that the Japanese birthrate has been steadily declining, with the most 
recent  figure  being  as  low  as  1.32.  If  it  continues  for  the  next  hundred  years,  a  rough  estimate 
suggests that Japan’s population will become only one-third of the current population. While a much 
higher  birthrate  is  required  to  maintain  the  current  pension  system,  raising  the  birthrate  in  a  short 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2004
period  of  time  is  not  realistic.  Therefore,  there  is  an  imminent  need  for  massive  pension  reform, 
notwithstanding the difficulty in allocating the huge losses carried over from the past system. 
Inevitable rise in the cost of the social safety net 
As the population ages, not only pension benefits but also demand for medical services and elderly 
care will increase. However, younger generations are unsure as to whether the increasing demand will 
be  met.  According  to  a  survey  conducted  by  the  Bank’s  affiliate,  the  Central  Council  for  Financial 
Services  Information,  among  the  households  headed  by  those  under  60,  19%  were  “very  worried” 
about retirement in 1995, and the share more than doubled to 45% in 2003. 
Changes  in  the  social  structure  and  lifestyle  may  also  be  sources  of  uncertainty  about  the  future. 
Traditionally,  family  members  cared  for  their  aged  parents  and  neighbors  helped  each  other,  while 
businesses,  under  the  so-called  “lifetime  employment  system,”  provided  employees  with  education, 
welfare,  and  job  security.  However,  as  lifestyles  have  been  changing  and  companies  have  been 
involved  in  increasingly  fierce  global  competition,  those  traditional  safety  nets  have  become  less 
dependable. This puts the public sector in a position where it has to play a greater role in providing 
social safety nets. 
As for the national burden, there appears to be some room for enhanced safety nets. Chart 9 shows 
that  the  “national  burden,”  defined  as  the  sum  of  taxes  and  social  security  contributions,  currently 
stands at 36% of national income. The ratio is much smaller than those for some European countries. 
If  we  use  the  “potential  national  burden,”  which  includes  the  fiscal  deficit,  the  same  conclusion  still 
holds. Although this suggests that shouldering a somewhat heavier burden for somewhat better safety 
nets is a reasonable option for Japan, the question of how much remains. 
All in all, it is not easy to achieve a national consensus on how much higher benefits and burdens will 
be appropriate. It may take some time before Japanese people make a choice. 
To the second stage of structural reforms 
IV. 
The worst scenario is that Japan will fall into a “heavy burden but insufficient benefit” society, which 
might actually take place without a gain in productivity. It is exactly in this context that the structural 
reforms  should  be  propelled  further.  Among  many reform agenda,  I  will  focus  on  the  importance of 
facilitating further integration of Japan into the global economy. 
Further integration into the global economy 
Although at home resources are constrained by the declining population, there is a great source of 
usable  technology,  labor,  and  management  skills  abroad.  I  believe  that  what  determines  a  nation’s 
long-term  economic  growth  is  not  its  population  but  its  flexibility  in  taking  advantage  of  globally 
available  resources.  Let  me  discuss  two  aspects  of  globalization:  use  of  the  foreign  management 
resources and use of foreign labor force. 
The  first  aspect  is  to  introduce  more  foreign  management  resources.  As  Chart  10  shows,  although 
foreign  direct  investment  into  Japan  has  been  increasing  considerably,  the  stock  of  direct  inward 
investment as a ratio to nominal GDP is still much lower than the same ratio for other countries. 
One good example is the United Kingdom in the 1980s. Tax incentives, infrastructure improvements, 
and  other  measures  were  taken  to  promote  foreign  inward  investment.  Japanese  manufacturers, 
encouraged by the U.K. government, decided to build their factories here; Nissan was an early good 
example  and  many  others,  particularly  automobile  companies  and  electrical  appliances  companies, 
followed suit. The core of the reform in the United Kingdom was perhaps its willingness to be open to 
the world. 
Many  years  later  in  the  late  1990s,  it  was  again  Nissan  that  became  a  model,  this  time,  of 
demonstrating the merits of learning from foreign management. Mr. Carlos Ghosn came to Nissan as 
a new president, transforming the company at a crisis into one with years of record performance. The 
revival of Nissan, by creating a more competitive environment, contributed to invigorating the entire 
automobile industry and triggered a large-scale restructuring of suppliers. 
The second aspect of global integration is more extensive use of foreign labor. Some people express 
their  concern  that  if  the  introduction  of  foreign  workers  is  too  rapid,  unbearable  friction  will  arise, 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 3
particularly  for  a  homogeneous  country  like  Japan.  However,  in  certain  areas  of  the  economy,  for 
example the service industry, the growth potential hinges on the availability of the labor force. There 
must  be  a  balance  between  expanding  foreign  employment,  directly  or  through  outsourcing,  and 
avoiding excessive socioeconomic changes. 
After all, many countries are getting more active in the global allocation of resources, and Japan has to 
compete with them. Under these circumstances, a key to economic prosperity lies in a continuous trial 
and  error  process  of  combining  globally  available  technology,  management,  and  human  resources 
with the merits our economy has on its own. 
Concluding remarks 
As I have discussed, Japan’s economy is still facing many challenges, particularly in the long run. On 
the other hand, prospects of a continued economic recovery are good at least for the time being. The 
Bank  of  Japan,  for  its  part,  will  continue  making  every  effort  to  bring  deflation  to  an  end,  thereby 
creating a better environment for further progress in structural reforms. 
Thank you for listening. 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2004
