Jaime Caruana: 60 years after Bretton Woods - a central banker’s view 
Opening remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Conference  “Dollars,  Debt  and  Deficits  -  60  years  after 
Bretton Woods”, Bank of Spain, Madrid, 10 June 2004. 
 Mr  Managing  Director  of  the  IMF,  Mr  Second  Vice-President  of  the  Government  and  Minister  of 
Economy and Finance, ladies and gentlemen: 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  Banco  de  España  and  to  the  inauguration  of  this 
conference, which is jointly organised by the International Monetary Fund and the Banco de España in 
commemoration  of  the  60th  Anniversary  of  the  Bretton  Woods  Agreements.  For  our  country,  which 
previously hosted the annual meetings of the Fund and the World Bank on the occasion of the 50th 
anniversary  of  these  agreements,  in  autumn  1994,  it  is  a  source  of  satisfaction  that  this  meeting 
should be held ten years later in Spain. I am also particularly pleased to welcome our distinguished 
audience - both from Spain and abroad - of representatives from official institutions, from academia 
and the private sector, who are going to participate in the busy sessions scheduled over the next two 
days. 
The Banco de España and the International Monetary Fund are tied by long-standing and deep-rooted 
links.  Not  only  have  we  worked  hand-in-hand  for  many  years  on  various  matters;  we  also  share  a 
similar mission and vocation, as well as similar concerns in many respects. 
The world has changed in the past 60 years, and the transformations both institutions have undergone 
bear witness to this. We have moved from a system of fixed but adjustable exchange rate parities to 
one  where  floating  is  the  norm.  Economic  integration  has  made  enormous  headway  during  these 
years,  both  multilaterally  and  through  regional  agreements,  the  European  Union  being  perhaps  the 
most advanced. From a world of widespread capital controls and multiple exchange rates, we have 
moved to a very different one in which enormous cross-border flows take place daily in the form of a 
wide array of financial instruments, among which derivatives, which were virtually non-existent at the 
end of the Second World War. 
Undoubtedly, free capital movements have contributed to a significant improvement in the allocation of 
global  saving  to  more  profitable  uses,  although  they  have  also  entailed  a  swifter  transmission  of 
financial shocks across highly integrated markets, a phenomenon behind some of the recent crises. 
Economic  policies  -  fiscal,  monetary  and  structural  -  have  been  increasingly  geared  to  providing  a 
framework  of  stability  and  appropriate  incentives  for  decision-making  by  agents.  In  addition  to 
contributing to smoothing cyclical fluctuations, these policies help set in place the right conditions to 
achieve  sustained  economic  growth  based  on  flexible,  competitive  and  efficient  markets  where 
comparative advantages are tailored to the changing circumstances of international markets.  
The International Monetary Fund has adapted to these changes, seeking to respond in its capacity as 
the guardian of international monetary stability to the new problems that have arisen. It has evolved 
from  focusing  essentially  on  monetary  stability  and  on  countries’  external  transactions  and  the 
management of their exchange rates, to areas more related to the overall quality of macroeconomic 
policies  and  to  the  design of  structural policies  and sound  institutions. More recently,  the  Fund has 
devoted particular attention to financial stability. 
To  a  certain  extent,  central  banks  have  also  undergone  changes  similar  to  those  at  the  Fund. 
Developments in macroeconomic theory and the experience built up over the years have forged an 
increasingly broad consensus on the need to apply stability-oriented macroeconomic policies and, in 
particular,  to  conduct  an  independent  monetary  policy  with  the  primary  objective  of  achieving  and 
maintaining  price  stability,  which  is  vital  for  sustained  economic  growth.  Central  banks  have  also 
focused  increasingly  on  financial  stability  issues,  both  in  countries  where  the  central  bank  is  the 
supervisor  of  the  banking  system  and  in  those  where  such  functions  are  entrusted  to  a  different 
supervisory  agency.  In  the  case  of  the  Banco  de  España,  these  transformations  have  also  been 
induced by far-reaching changes in our environment and in the role of the central bank, including most 
notably  the  adoption  of  the  euro  as  the  single  currency  for  an  ample  group  of  European  Union 
countries. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
Spain’s relationship - and that of the Banco de España - to the International Monetary Fund is certainly 
today very different from what it was in 1958, when our country joined the Bretton Woods institutions. 
In  the  early  years  of  its  participation  in  the  Fund,  Spain  received  financial  and,  most  importantly, 
technical assistance from this institution, as part of the process of external openness and liberalisation 
that  allowed  its  economic  take-off  in  that  period.  The  Fund’s  excellent  technical  guidance  in  this 
process  supported  those  economic  sectors  in  favor  of  liberalization,  who  nevertheless  met  notable 
resistance  in  pushing  through  their  programme  of  reforms.  I  believe  that  Spain,  since  then,  has  a 
considerable debt of gratitude with the International Monetary Fund. 
Currently, the framework for our relationship to the Fund is very different. As part of the euro area, 
monetary policy discussions take place in a broader context spanning the whole of the euro area. As a 
member  of  the  Eurosystem  however,  the  Banco  de  España  remains  deeply  involved  in  such 
discussions. In other realms, relations with the Spanish authorities remain on a bilateral footing, as is 
notably  the  case  with  the  close  contact  each  year  on  the  occasion  of  the  analysis  of  the  Spanish 
economy  via  the  Article  IV  report.  That  said,  the  European  dimension  is  becoming  increasingly 
important. Beyond the single monetary policy, there  are various areas of European co-ordination in 
IMF-related matters although, as is well known, the different European states are represented on an 
individual basis in the Bretton Woods institutions. 
Spain, which adhered to the New Arrangements to Borrow (NAB) as from their creation in 1998, is 
today an IMF creditor country. And though we continue to benefit from the Fund’s excellent technical 
advice, we also provide technical assistance, in some cases in collaboration with the Fund, to other 
countries  in  the  process  of  implementing  systems  or  procedures  in  which  we  have  a  certain 
comparative advantage. Moreover, the Spanish authorities and, in particular, the Banco de España, 
co-operate increasingly closely with the Fund on matters relating to national and international financial 
stability. As I indicated earlier, this issue is becoming more and more important, and the objectives and 
the  interests  of  the  Fund  tend  to  coincide  in  this  connection  with  those  of  the  competent  national 
authorities. 
The reasons why national and international authorities pay greater attention to financial stability can 
be found in the crises a significant number of countries have undergone in recent years. These have 
highlighted the complex linkages between the real sector and the financial sector and the risk that the 
latter may not only be a source of instability, but also amplify the imbalances or shocks generated in 
other  sectors  of  the  economy.  The  links  between  exchange  rate  crises  and  banking  crises  -  the 
so-called twin crises - and the feedback mechanisms between the two are, along with the propagation 
and contagion channels from one country to another, matters of particular importance here. 
National  regulators  and  supervisors,  in  addition  to  their  initial  aim  of  safeguarding  the  solvency  of 
individual institutions, have given increasing importance to combining the presence of flexible, efficient 
financial markets and intermediaries with the absence of excessive volatility on financial markets and 
to  prevent  the  so-called  systemic  risks  -  which  affect  the  whole  of  the  financial  system  -  from 
materialising.  International  financial  institutions  have  also  become  increasingly  oriented  towards  the 
need to ensure a proper functioning of international financial markets and to limit the transmission of 
shocks from one country to another in a world of ever deeper and swifter linkages. 
The  relationship  between  national  and  international  financial  stability  is  obviously  all  the  more 
important for countries, such as Spain, whose banking system has a significant presence abroad. The 
expansion  of  Spanish  banks  into  Latin  America  explains  why  the  Banco  de  España  has,  in  recent 
years, promoted the monitoring and analysis of financial stability problems in this region in particular, 
and  in  the  emerging  market  economies  in  general,  an  area  in  which  the  role  of  the  International 
Monetary Fund has become increasingly important. 
Key lessons may be drawn from the recent crises that have affected emerging economies - though not 
only them - which should be borne in mind when designing mechanisms to reduce their frequency and 
cost. They include most notably: the need for a sound and well-designed institutional framework that 
protects  property  rights,  prevents  excessive  public  -  or  private-sector  debt  from  accumulating  and 
ensures economic stability; the importance of ensuring consistency between the exchange rate regime 
and the domestic economic policies and institutional framework; the risks entailed by the vulnerability 
associated with exchange rate instability processes for the balance sheets of different sectors in the 
economy, especially when there is a high degree of dollarisation; the marked sensitivity of emerging 
market economies to potentially very volatile capital flows, the direction of which can change suddenly 
due,  at  times,  to  factors  that  may  even  be  exogenous  to  the  country  experiencing  them;  the 
importance  of  an  appropriate  regulatory  and  macro-prudential  supervisory  system  to  prevent  crises 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
generated in the financial system and to alleviate the ensuing costs if such crises finally occur, and to 
cushion  the  effects  of  shocks  stemming  from  the  real  sector  of  the  economy;  and,  finally,  the 
importance  of  distinguishing,  as  far  as  possible,  between  liquidity  and  solvency  crises  in  countries’ 
external debt and in governments’ public debt, as a first step towards applying suitable remedies for 
resolving each type of crisis. 
As  a  result  of  these  crises,  and  in  collaboration  with  other  international  agencies  and  with  national 
authorities,  the  Fund  conducted  a  far-reaching  review  of  the  so-called  “international  financial 
architecture”.  Numerous  initiatives  were  adopted  over  recent  years  with  the  aim  of  lessening  the 
frequency  and  cost  of  crises  and  of  improving  the  stability  of  the  international  monetary  system. 
Accordingly,  there  has  been  a  notable  effort  to  increase  the  transparency  of  member  countries’ 
economic policies and to improve the information at the disposal of economic agents and, in particular, 
international financial markets so that the latter may exert market discipline more effectively. Specific 
measures have been adopted to reinforce financial systems. And it has also been sought to improve 
the  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution  mechanisms  available  to  the  international  financial 
community,  including  those  particularly  difficult  cases  in  which  sovereign  debt  restructuring  proves 
inevitable. Moreover, instead of relying on exhaustive international regulations which, as experience 
has shown, are difficult to approve and even harder to implement, all these reforms have relied on 
voluntarily  mechanisms,  based  frequently  on  the  adoption  of  codes  of  best  practices,  international 
standards and systems that offer incentives for their application.  
Over  the  next  two  days  the  Conference  will  address  these  and  other  matters  of  interest  to  us  all, 
among  them  the  risks  associated  with  the  persistent  imbalances  between  the  current  account 
positions of the main economic areas; the consequences of adopting different exchange rate regimes 
in  the  current  environment  of  free  capital  flows;  the  problems  that  arise  from  excessive  public  debt 
levels both in the emerging and industrialised countries; and the role of the Fund in the face of the 
challenges of economic and financial globalisation. 
All these issues have interested authorities, the private sector and the academic community for many 
years,  although  the  way  to  deal  with  them  has  evolved  in  step  with  changes  in  the  international 
economy. In what is an exceedingly dynamic environment, then, it is crucial to identify the root of the 
problems and possible solutions for them, which is precisely the chief aim of conferences such as this. 
We  have  an  intense  and  fascinating  agenda  for  discussion.  It  highlights,  once  more,  the  need  for 
national authorities, international financial institutions and the academic community to work together in 
areas of common interest, taking advantage of their experience and comparative advantages and with 
the degree of technical excellence these matters require. I trust that these sessions will shed light on 
how  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  global  economy  and,  in  particular,  the  international monetary 
system. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 3
