Zhou Xiaochuan: Some issues concerning the reform of the state-owned 
commercial banks 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the IIF Spring Membership 
Conference, Shanghai, 16 April 2004. 
 First of all, I’d like to thank the organizer of the conference for introducing myself. I am very pleased to 
attend the Conference to exchange opinions with such a distinguished audience on China’s financial 
market, monetary policy and financial reform. Many of you have paid close attention to the reform of 
China’s  state-owned  commercial  banks,  and  today  I’d  like  to  offer  my  personal  views  on  this  issue 
based on what all other speakers have elaborated this morning.  
Advantages and disadvantages for the reform of the state-owned commercial banks 
I.  
The reform of state-owned commercial banks demands some preconditions, similar to any particular 
reform. It should be noted that the occurrence of the Asian financial crisis has, to some extent, turned 
some disadvantages for the reform of state-owned commercial banks into advantages. The outbreak 
of  the  crisis  sharpened  the  awareness  of  all  walks  of  life  of  the  importance  of  the  sound  and  safe 
operation  of  the  banking  system,  enhanced  the  acknowledgement  of  the  enormous  financial  risks 
inherited  in  the  vulnerability  of  the  financial  system,  and  strengthened  the  resolve  of  the  decision-
makers  to  restructure  the  system  of  state-owned  banks.  China  tided  over  the  Asian  financial  crisis 
smoothly,  achieved  sustained  and  stable  economic  growth  in  the  mid-  and  late  1990s,  and  thus 
created  favorable  conditions  for  further  reform  of  the  state-owned  commercial  banks.  Resource 
advantages generated by sustained economic growth rendered it feasible to restructure state-owned 
commercial banks. Besides, the outbreak of the Asian financial crisis alerted the regulators to pay high 
attention to the issue of cutting down non-performing loans (NPLs). By now, the NPL ratio of China’s 
state-owned commercial banks has decreased by nearly 50 percent from that recorded in the Crisis 
period. 
I recalled that the issue of NPLs in China’s state-owned banks had been a hot topic for the overseas 
media  for  some  time  during  the  fourth  quarter  of  2002  and  the  first  quarter  of  2003.  Overseas 
magazines and  newspapers of  finance and economics,  like Times,  Business Week,  Economist  and 
Far  East  Economic  Review,  all  published  articles  of  significant  weight  discussing  the  issue  that  the 
enormous  NPLs  in China  might  threaten  its sustained  economic  growth.  Some  even  estimated  that 
NPLs  of  state-owned  commercial  banks,  if  classified  in  line  with  prevalent  methods,  would  have 
accounted  for  more  than  50  percent  of  their  total  assets.  They  in  turn  lost  confidence  in  China’s 
state-owned  commercial  banks,  dampening  enthusiasm  of  foreign  capital  entering  China’s  financial 
industry. From the perspective of the current situation, however, the reality is much better. At present, 
the reform of China’s state-owned commercial banks has come to the implementation period, and their 
operational  performance  has  been  improving.  Statistics  show  that  NPL  ratio  of  state-owned 
commercial banks has been decreasing by 3-5 percent year-on-year in recent years. 
The central bank has conducted a survey on the formation and composition of NPLs of state-owned 
commercial  banks  accumulated  since  the  reform  and  opening  to  the  outside  world.  The  survey 
indicates that those as a result of imperfect operation and management by state-owned commercial 
banks didn’t account for a high proportion. Instead, the NPLs, historically speaking, came mainly from 
excessive government intervention, poor legal environment, inadequate management of the customer 
bases. Concretely speaking, of the total NPLs by state-owned commercial banks, 30 percent was due 
to  intervention  by  the  central  and  local  governments,  30  percent  resulted  from  mandatory  credit 
support  to  state-owned  enterprises,  10  percent  arose  from  poor  legal  environment  and  weak  law 
enforcement  in  some  regions,  and  10  percent  stemmed  from  industrial  restructuring  in  some 
enterprises  (including  those  in  the  military  industry)  by  the  government  through  closing  down, 
suspending  operation,  merging  with  others  or  shifting  to  different  line  of  production.  All  in  all,  only 
20 percent  was  ascribed  to  business  operation  and  management  of  the  state-owned  banks 
themselves.  
What deserves noting is that attention has been attached to all the above factors in the wake of the 
Asian financial crisis in 1997, and great improvement has been achieved in some aspects. First, the 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
government  has  basically  abandoned  administrative  intervention  in  the  business  operation  of  the 
state-owned  commercial  banks.  The  government  has  established  from  the  legal  point  of  view  the 
independence of the commercial banks in the decision-making of loan issuance. Second, in terms of 
policies and regulations, it was stated in the lending guidelines for state-owned commercial banks in 
the  1980s  and  1990s  that  state-owned  commercial  banks  were  required  to  grant  credit  support  to 
state-owned enterprises. Since the mid-1990s, however, the government has given up this guideline. 
At  present,  state-owned  banks  have  no  obligation  any  longer  to  extend  loans  to  state-owned 
enterprises.  According  to  the  survey  conducted  by  the  PBC  in  2003,  of  the  current  total  loans  by 
state-owned  commercial  banks,  more  than  50  percent  is  granted  to  non-state-owned  enterprises 
(including  foreign-funded  and  private  enterprises)  and  individuals  (through  housing  mortgage  loans 
and  consumer  loans).  Third,  with  the  deepening  of  the  reform  of  state-owned  enterprises  and  with 
some  progress  achieved  to  that  effect,  some  large-sized  state-owned  enterprises  have  gradually 
turned  into  listed  companies,  and  improvement  in  operation  of  state-owned  enterprises  has  also 
rendered it possible for commercial banks to solve the problem of high NPL ratios. Fourth, for a quite 
long period of time, there was no bankruptcy law in China. In some court cases concerning banking 
loans,  there  existed  disputes  over  the  fairness  of  the  ruling,  and  there  even  existed  poor  law 
enforcement  and  intervention  on  judicial  affairs  by  local  governments  in  some  regions.  What  is 
note-worthy  is  that  some  laws  and  rules,  like  the  Bankruptcy  Law,  the  Securities  Law  and  the 
Company  Law,  are  already  in  the  process  of  further  revision  and  amendment.  Generally  speaking, 
although  there  is  a  huge  amount  of  NPLs  in  state-owned  commercial  banks,  the  reform  is  still 
promising as the ratio is not too high for the NPLs that are ascribed to business operation of the state 
owned commercial banks themselves.  
Initial development of the reform of state-owned commercial banks 
II. 
The sequence of reform on state-owned commercial banks in the whole process of economic reform, 
has all along been a strategic choice, and thus needs to be analyzed historically. In the early stage of 
the reform, fiscal and financial resources were mainly appropriated to support agricultural reform, the 
reform of state-owned enterprises and the reform of the trade sector through concessionary means. 
Reforms in various fields consumed considerable resources. Whereas fiscal resources were scarce 
and the system lacked flexibility, it was the financial industry that carried the burden of cost of reform. 
One outcome was that the banking industry accumulated immense NPLs and meanwhile the financial 
reform lagged behind. Undoubtedly, when the reform evolves into a certain stage, the focus of reform 
shall be shifted to the financial industry to remove the historical burden.  
In retrospection, the development of the reform of state-owned commercial banks could be divided into 
the  following stages.  First,  in  1998,  special  treasury bonds  of  RMB270  billion  yuan  were  issued  for 
recapitalization  of  the  state-owned  commercial  banks.  In  1999-2000,  NPLs  were  partially  divested 
through the setup of assets management companies (AMCs). Second, existing resources were utilized 
to write off NPLs. Funds for the purpose of write-off of NPLs mainly included reserves, profits before 
provisioning and the original capital. Relative to the big amount of the NPLs, the coverage of reserves 
by  state-owned  commercial  banks  was  lower  than  desired.  In  line  with  the  five-category  loan 
classification, the reserves were even not enough to cover the loan losses. In terms of the operational 
profits of state-owned commercial banks in recent years, it is necessary and possible as well to utilize 
part of the profits to make up for the reserves. Through the above ways, two pilot reform banks will 
write off basically all historical loan losses. Third, some foreign exchange and gold reserves were used 
to recapitalize the state-owned commercial banks. It should be noted that recapitalization constitutes 
only one step of the whole process of reform of state-owned commercial banks. In order to transform 
state-owned  commercial  banks  into  real  commercial  banks,  efforts  shall  be  made  to  fully  clean  up 
assets in state-owned commercial banks in line with international accounting rules and requirements 
of listed companies, to improve internal risk control and corporate governance. Efforts shall also be 
made to prevent excessive new NPLs under new circumstances and to guarantee good profits and 
returns on injected funds. Besides, regulatory authorities should also emphasize on monitoring capital 
adequacy  ratios  and  pay  close  attention  to  how  the mechanism will  prevent  the  occurrence  of  new 
big-amount NPLs. 
Generally  speaking,  only  through  the  share-holding  reform  with  clear  targets  will  state-owned 
commercial banks be able to establish and improve the structure of corporate governance and will the 
reform achieve practical effects. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
Possible disputes regarding reform of state-owned commercial banks 
III.  
Various disputes might emerge in the course of the reform of state-owned commercial banks. I’d like 
to share my opinions on two of them and discuss others during Q & A sessions. 
(I) 
Should the reform be pursued through strengthening management or through the 
corporate or share-holding reform? 
For sure, this dispute is a hot issue in the discussion of choice of reform alternatives. One opinion is 
that priority shall be placed on management, and on the basis of good management efforts are then 
made to implement share-holding reform. Looking back into the reform of state-owned enterprises, we 
found out quite similar disputes, i.e. did the problem come from poor management or from corporate 
mechanism?  Was  it  a  personnel  problem  or  a  mechanism  problem?  If  the  management  were  not 
qualified, then through replacement of the management team would there be a fundamental turn for 
the  better  in  terms  of  operation  of  the  banks?  On  the  basis  of  better  operation  and  with  profit 
accumulation  for  some  time,  would  reform  of  corporate  system  and  share-holding  arrangement 
improve the bank performance? Experience for many years indicates that the effect was not optimistic 
as with the reform of state-owned enterprises by following the above perception. To trace the problem 
to its source, we find that the problem of state-owned entities lies not only in weak management but 
also in the more fundamental problem of corporate system. Hence, the 16th Congress of the CPC and 
its  third  Plenary  Session  both  emphasized  once  again  the  direction  of  the  reform  of  state-owned 
enterprises. 
Comparing  state-owned  banks  with  state-owned  enterprises,  it  will  be  easy  to  find  out  the  high 
similarity between them. If in the past state-owned enterprises acted like government organizations or 
featuring “quasi-bureaucratic system” to some extent, then state-owned commercial banks are more 
like  government  organizations  instead  of  commercial  entities.  State-owned  commercial  banks  have 
instituted  apparent  administrative  hierarchy  and  officialdom 
terms  of  personnel  system, 
remuneration  system, staff  benefits, social security  and  internal  incentives system.  Decision-making 
power of the persons in charge of state-owned commercial banks is more than often limited, and lacks 
market-oriented  incentives.  Although  there  is  big  difference  in  the  responsibility  assigned  to  a  bank 
clerk for savings counter and to a credit officer with high ability of risk control, there is no big difference 
in terms of remuneration. With inadequate internal incentives and deficient outside pressure, reform of 
state-owned  commercial  banks  might  long  protract  if  solely  emphasizing  on  the  improvement  of 
management.  
Documents of the 16th Congress of the CPC have clearly stated the direction of share-holding reform. 
Efforts  shall  be  made  to  change  the  operation  mechanism  of  enterprises  in  real  earnest  through 
changes in the structure of corporate governance. This idea should also fit in with the reform of state-
owned commercial banks. The reform of state-owned commercial banks is also reform of state-owned 
enterprises in its very nature. 
in 
(II) 
Whether or not to actively push state-owned commercial banks to be public listed 
companies? 
One  opinion  mistakes  listing  in  the  stock  market  as  the  ultimate  target  of  the  reform.  Some  people 
believe that going public is aimed at financing for capital infusion of banks and for internal incentives of 
the management team. It is certain that the purpose of listing of state-owned commercial banks is not 
confined only to this. 
Public listing is only one stage in the process of the reform. Now that the state is capable of injecting 
capital into state-owned banks, listing is not mainly aimed at raising funds or at establishing incentives. 
The ultimate target of reform rests in the establishment of a whole set of market system of incentives 
and constraint. Emphasis is placed on the investors’ interests. It is aimed at completely shattering the 
“quasi-bureaucratic  system”  of  state-owned  commercial  banks,  at  changing  the  operational  targets 
which  are  set  based  on  the  officialdom,  and  at  changing  state-owned  commercial  banks  into  real 
market participants through rational incentives mechanism based on performance and complete risk 
control and capital constraint,  
As  an  important  step,  the  key  to  listing  lies  in  the  resolution  of  some  long-standing  and  difficult 
problems, in particular, the problem of administrative constraint from other government departments. 
For  instance,  taxation  on  commercial  banks.  For  a  long  period  of  time,  there  have  been  some 
regulations of taxation on commercial banks not in line with the law of market economy. The taxation 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
authority also recognize the fact. As there are too many taxes and tax rates to be reformed, there shall 
be  a  sequence.  It  is  very  difficult  to  place  on  the  agenda  the  reform  of  the  tax  arrangement  for 
state-owned  commercial  banks  before  they  are  really  confronted  with  the  capital  market  and  public 
investors. With the count-down plan of listing for the state-owned commercial banks, the resolution of 
these problems will be placed on the agenda. The same goes with the reform of personnel, benefits, 
social  security,  operation  autonomy  of  the  state-owned  banks.  Only  when  state-owned  commercial 
banks  are  confronted  with  the  urgency  of  going  public  will  coordination  and  synergy  by  various 
government  departments  and  corresponding  reforms  become  a  priority.  In  fact,  without  enough 
outside pressure, no competent authorities will take initiative in giving up their power and the process 
of reform might be protracted. 
From the perspective of corporate governance in the broad sense, the operation of commercial banks 
is closely related to public interests and calls for enhanced transparency and strengthened monitoring 
by the general public. Through share-holding reform and going public, state-owned commercial banks 
must  meet  the  requirements  of  information  disclosure  as  a  listed  company.  Listing  creates  the 
condition for public monitoring in the real sense. The importance of recapitalization by the government, 
therefore, lies more in establishing a financial intermediation efficient in utilizing savings rather than in 
polishing  the  balance  sheets  of  banks.  In  a  more  substantive  sense,  therefore,  only  through  going 
public and exerting enough outside pressure will the structure of corporate governance be established 
and improved, shattering the bureaucratic operation mechanism and ensuring the success of reform of 
state-owned commercial banks. 
The  reform  of  some  large-sized  state-owned  enterprises,  in  particular,  their  changes  after 
share-holding  reform  and  going  public,  provide  precedents  for  reform  of  state-owned  commercial 
banks.  It  is  observed  that  some  large-sized  state-owned  enterprises  were  much  like  government 
organizations  before  going  public.  Lack  of  clearly  defined  ownership  resulted  in  immense  insider 
control, inefficiency of operation and poor performance. After share-holding reform and going public, 
supervision of enterprises does not rest only in the level of competent authorities of the government. 
Instead, regulatory requirements from public and institutional investors at home and abroad and from 
securities regulatory bodies would force listed companies to take into consideration the concerns of 
shareholders in terms of information disclosure, business operation and market strategy. It is certain 
that the internal pressure for reform might not be powerful enough to transform the mechanism without 
share-holding  reform,  without  outside  pressure  from  going  public,  without  monitoring  by  strategic 
institutional investors and public investors and without introduction of independent directors. Reform 
will  not  probably  achieve  practical  effect  without  listing  in  the  stock  market,  without  adjustment  of 
shares  distribution  and  without  adequate  outside  monitoring  and  pressure.  The  same  goes  with 
commercial  banks.  After  going  public,  they  are  subject  to  monitoring  of  shareholders,  regulatory 
authorities,  the  general  public  and other  related parties.  They  shall  disclose  information  in  detail  as 
required  and  shall  take  into  consideration  the  concerns  of  shareholders  in  line  with  complete 
accounting standards. Only through going public will it be possible to facilitate the overall change of 
the  game  rules  and  to  strengthen  corporate  governance,  effectively  preventing  the  phenomenon  of 
“going back and forth in the reform”. 
Outlook of the banking reform: potentials and difficulties 
IV. 
As  for  the  advantages  for  the  reform,  it  is  observed  that  China’s  financial  market  is  still  in  its 
preliminary  stage,  without  abundant  financial  products  and  without  sophisticated  application  of 
financial engineering. Of the whole financing structure, however, indirect financing accounts for a big 
ratio,  with  the  ratio  of  M2  to  GDP  close  to  200  percent.  Plus,  the  Chinese  market  boasts  of  an 
enormous advantage of large population. The above advantages provide immense potential and room 
for  development  in  carrying  out  traditional  business  and  innovating  new  products,  like  intermediary 
business,  trans-market  financial  products,  consumer  credit,  mortgage  loans  etc.  In  terms  of  interest 
rate  structure,  the  differential  between  deposits  and  loans  is  still  in  the  high  range  with  promising 
outlook for profits of commercial banks. 
As for the disadvantages, China is still lacking talents for the financial industry. It is observed from the 
experience  of  other  professional  sectors  that  cultivation  of  specialized  talents  takes  some  time. 
Generally speaking,  however,  Chinese  people  are  diligent  and good at  learning.  A  large number  of 
college  graduates  is  also  an  advantage.  They  will  catch  up  and  adapt  to  competition.  At  present, 
young people are very enthusiastic with the subject of finance. It is believed that cultivation of talents 
will  meet  the  requirements  if  supported  with  proper  incentives.  Although  there  is  perhaps  a  lack  of 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2004
talents in financial innovation in the short run, talents for financial operation and financial engineering 
could soon be cultivated. It is believed that human resources will grow rapidly with the reform under 
way  and  in particular with  the  incentives system put  in  place,  including absorbing  overseas  talents. 
The  Confucian  culture  of  China  has  the  tradition  of  respecting  knowledge,  plus  the  existing  good 
education system, they should help the training of professional talents. The problem of talents will be 
readily solved in the process of reform. Of course, emphasis will be currently placed on resolving the 
problem of lacking high-quality managerial talents who will meet the requirements of modern finance 
and international competition. 
We cannot underestimate the difficulties in the reform of banks. Globally speaking, the reform of the 
financial  system  meets  bigger  difficulties  than  that  in  other  fields.  Whether  it  is  shock  therapy  or 
gradual reform, there is a common point that efforts shall be made to cultivate the institutions that do 
not exist under the system of planned economy but could serve the market economy, and to establish 
corresponding systems of laws and rules. The building of institutions and improvement of laws and 
rules will take a long period of time to accomplish. The reform will face immense difficult problems of 
insufficient  development  of  institutions.  First,  financial  institutions  of  banking,  securities,  insurance, 
trust and fund management have yet to grow up. Second, the underdevelopment of the customers of 
financial institutions. On the borrowers’ side, it is related to the reform and growth of the enterprises, 
e.g. the soft budget constraint identified by Janos Kornai. On the depositors’ side, the problem is more 
related  to  the  cultivation  of  investment  assessment  and  perception.  Third,  the  buildup  of  financial 
regulatory  bodies,  including  the  straightening  up  of  the  supervisory  mechanism,  clear  definition  of 
targets and responsibilities, gathering of quality talents, as well as the justice, integrity and cleanness 
of these institutions, all takes time to achieve. Fourth, reform of the accounting standards. There is a 
big  gap  between  the  accounting  system  under  the  planned  economy  and  that  under  the  market 
economy. It is very difficult to produce instant results by directly introducing the western accounting 
system in the understanding of the basic principles and absence of good certified accountants. On the 
other  hand,  there  also  exists  a  problem  as  to  whether  each  step  of  the  reforms,  if  carried  out  in  a 
gradual way, will meet requirements of the overall reform. Fifth, cultivation of accounting firms, assets 
assessment institutions and rating agencies. It is a process starting from nowhere and calls for a long 
period  of  time  to  finish,  combining  self-development  with  opening  to  the  outside  world.  Sixth,  the 
evolution  of  the  Bankruptcy  Law  and  law  enforcement.  They  call  for  legislative,  judiciary  and 
administrative  reforms.  Without  a  good  bankruptcy  law  and  related  procedures,  a  poor  credit 
environment  and  higher  than  desired  NPL  level  will  likely  arise.  Seventh,  taxation  reform  and 
enhancement of credibility of the public finance. As the exemplar for individual and corporate finances, 
fiscal departments at all levels shall resolve the problems of soft budget constraint and malpractices. 
Eighth, construction of risk management market. The financial industry shall have a market system for 
risk transfer and prevention. Ninth, the growth of institutional investors. This constitutes an inevitable 
link to facilitate the development of the capital market and financial products. The institution growth to 
that effect calls for a relatively long period of time. Without a sound development of these institutions, it 
is not realistic to expect a low level of NPLs in the banking sector, a relatively clean capital market with 
few scandals, and a very healthy insurance sector. It is hoped that the development of institutions will 
be quite successful while at the same time we should remain sober about the challenges lying ahead. 
Financial reform and institutions building are mutually re-enforcing.  
A note-worthy issue in the short term is that competition over selected customers will be intensified 
after  foreign-funded banks  enter China.  According  to  statistics  and  analyses  by  some countries,  for 
commercial banks, the most important source of profits comes from high-end customers, accounting 
for 10 percent of all customers. These high-end customers can produce almost 80 percent of the total 
profits.  The  most  fierce  competition  between  the  foreign-funded  banks  and  the  state-owned 
commercial banks will be for these high-end customers. Although China’s banking industry boasts of 
extensive service network and broad customer base, there will emerge big problems if they fail in the 
competition for high-end customers. In the mid and long term run, we are confident in China’s banking 
reform and hope that more foreign-funded financial institutions will participate in this market to promote 
competition, innovate and improve services and strengthen economic prosperity and development.  
BIS Review 41/2004 
 5
