European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 8 January 2004. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  welcome  to  the  first  press  conference  of  2004.  Let  me  express  the 
Vice-President's  and  my  own  best  wishes  to  you  all  for  the  New  Year.  We  will  now  report  on  the 
outcome  of  today's  meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  which  was  also  attended  by  the 
President of the ECOFIN Council, Mr McCreevy, and Commissioner Solbes.  
Following  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analysis,  we  continue  to  judge  the  current  stance  of 
monetary policy as appropriate to preserve price stability over the medium term. Accordingly, we have 
decided to leave the key ECB interest rates unchanged at their low levels. The available indicators 
point  to  an  ongoing  economic  recovery  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  has  not  fundamentally 
changed. Although recent exchange rate developments are likely to have some dampening effects on 
exports, export growth should continue to benefit from the dynamic expansion of the world economy. 
Import  price  developments  in  the  euro  area  should  become  somewhat  more  favourable,  thereby 
helping to contain inflationary risks. We will continue to carefully monitor all developments that could 
affect our assessment of risks to price stability over the medium term. 
Let me now explain our decision in more detail. 
Starting with the economic analysis, recently available indicators confirm that world economic growth 
is progressing. For the euro area too, the latest information on production and confidence is consistent 
with an ongoing recovery in economic activity, and the momentum for growth should strengthen in the 
course  of  2004.  This  assessment  is  supported  by  all  available  forecasts  from  official  and  private 
sources, as well as by developments in the financial markets.  
On the external side, recent exchange rate developments are having a negative impact on the price 
competitiveness  of  euro  area  exporters,  but  thus  far  this  should  be  partly  compensated  for  by  the 
ongoing expansion of global demand. Overall, euro area exports should therefore continue to grow. 
On the domestic side, investment growth should benefit from the ongoing adjustment efforts of firms to 
enhance  productivity  and  profitability,  as  well  as  from  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  generally 
favourable  financing  conditions.  Private  consumption  should  receive  support  from  real  disposable 
income growth, partly due to favourable effects on terms of trade and inflation stemming from the past 
appreciation of the euro. 
The short-term risks to this outlook remain balanced. Over longer horizons, the uncertainties continue 
to  be  related  to  persistent  external  imbalances  in  some  regions  of  the  world  and  their  potential 
repercussions on the sustainability of global economic growth. This is a challenge to be addressed by 
sustainable  macroeconomic  policies  and  structural  reforms  which  foster  a  sound  balance  between 
savings  and  investment  in  all  major  partner countries,  enhance  the  production  potential  in  the  euro 
area and support a further expansion in trade of goods and services at the global level.  
With  regard  to  price  developments,  HICP  inflation  rates  over  the  short  term  are  still  expected  to 
fluctuate  around  the  2%  level,  following  a  rate  of  2.1%  in  December,  according  to  Eurostat's  flash 
estimate. As I have explained on previous occasions, adverse food price developments, the evolution 
of oil prices and increases in indirect taxes and administered prices have all adversely affected the 
short-term outlook for inflation.  
However, in the course of this year we expect inflation rates to fall and to remain in line with price 
stability thereafter. This expectation is based on the assumption that wage developments will remain 
moderate in the context of a gradual economic recovery. Moreover, the past appreciation of the euro 
should  dampen  price  pressures.  These  views  are  also  reflected  in  the  available  forecasts  and 
projections. We are, of course, fully aware of the conditional nature of these forward-looking exercises 
and therefore bear in mind all elements of risk to the outlook for price stability. In the same vein, we 
continue to closely monitor inflation expectations. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the strong monetary growth of the last few years means that there 
is significantly more liquidity available in the euro area than needed to finance non-inflationary growth. 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 1
At  the  same  time,  the  growth  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  has  been  rising  over  recent  months, 
benefiting  from  the  low  level  of  interest  rates  and  the  general  improvement  in  the  economic 
environment.  
In our view, the accumulation of excess liquidity should not be of concern for price stability as long as 
the  economic  recovery  is  gradual.  However,  should  excess  liquidity  remain  high  once  there  is  a 
significant strengthening of economic activity, it could lead to inflationary pressures over the medium 
term. We will therefore carefully examine monetary developments as they unfold. 
In  summary,  the  economic  analysis  continues  to  indicate  that  the  main  scenario  for  price 
developments  in  the  medium  term  is  in  line  with  price  stability.  This  picture  is  confirmed  by 
cross-checking with the monetary analysis.  
Concerning  fiscal  policies,  2004  will  be  a  crucial  year  for  strengthening  the  credibility  of  the 
institutional framework and confidence in the soundness of public finances of Member States across 
the  euro  area.  Together with  the  Treaty  provisions,  the  overall  fiscal  framework  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact remains of central importance and must be fully respected. These are the foundations for 
trust  and  confidence  in  EMU.  They  are  key  not  only  to  stability  but  also  to  growth,  and  are  a 
precondition  for  preserving  low  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  We  therefore  strongly  urge 
governments and the ECOFIN Council to live up to their responsibilities and to the commitments they 
made last November.  
Finally,  the  Governing  Council  strongly  supports  ongoing  efforts  by  a  number  of  governments  to 
proceed with structural reforms - in the fiscal domain, and in labour and product markets. Building on 
what  has  already  been  implemented,  further  reforms  are  required  to  make  the  euro  area  economy 
more  flexible,  to  allow  a  better  allocation  and  utilisation  of  capital  and  human  resources,  and  to 
enhance the euro area's growth potential. The process of structural reform would be greatly enhanced 
if  social  partners  were  to  fully  commit  themselves to  the  objective  of  making  the  euro  area  a  more 
dynamic,  innovative  and  competitive  economy.  Such  common  efforts  should  help  to  better 
communicate to the public the benefits of effectively responding to the main challenges of the euro 
area:  bringing  down  the  high  level  of  structural  unemployment,  enhancing  the  production  potential, 
increasing productivity, reducing the inefficiencies of the tax system as well as preparing the health 
and pension systems for the ageing of the population. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2004
