Lars Heikensten: The integration of European banking - some regulatory 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  seminar  “The  Integration  of 
Financial Markets in Europe”, at the “Riksdagshuset” (Swedish Parliament), Stockholm, 21 April 2004. 
 Thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  share  my  views  on  the  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe.  We 
have just heard about the positive role capital markets might have in fostering economic growth and 
stability.  We  have  also  heard  about  how  the  regulatory  process  has  been  changed  to  promote  the 
growth of an integrated European market for capital and securities. It is my hope that also the area of 
bank  regulation  will  become  part  of  this  simplified  process.  It  is  certainly  needed.  Compared  to  the 
European securities market, the banking market is lagging many years behind in terms of integration. 
True, large companies may have access to foreign bank funding as well as to international debt and 
equity markets. When it comes to choosing your bank at the retail level, however, Swedish households 
and  small  and  medium  sized  companies  are  left  to  a  market  which  is  to  more  than  90 percent 
dominated  by  Swedish  banks.  This  situation  is  shared  by  most  other  EU  countries.  This  is  not  a 
problem in itself. Swedish (or, in general, domestic) banks might very well be excellent. However, most 
of  us  tend  to  believe  that  cross-border  integration,  just  as  trade,  is  something  good  because  it 
increases competition. Higher competition, in its turn, improves the efficiency, which ultimately leads to 
higher quality and lower prices for consumers. Indeed, this is one of the main ideas underpinning the 
European  single  market.  This  idea  is  undoubtedly  true  also  for  the  banking  industry.  There  is 
increasing  evidence  of  the  positive  link  between  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system,  of  which 
banking is the most important part, and the wealth and growth of the real economy. Thus the potential 
benefits of a more efficient financial system are substantial. 
Considering  that  most  financial  services  bought  by  consumers  (private  individuals  and  SMEs)  are 
bought from their bank, the low integration (and in many cases low efficiency) of European banking is 
a significant hindrance to creating an overall efficient market in financial services. 
Barriers to integration 
Why then is integration of European retail banking not happening or only happening very slowly? The 
first  and  second  bank  harmonisation  directives  and  more  recently  the  many  initiatives  within  the 
Financial Services Sector Plan, FSAP,  have set the legal framework for cross-border expansion. In 
principle, any European bank can easily set up or acquire a subsidiary in another member state. More 
importantly,  a  bank only  needs  one single  banking  licence  in one  member  state  to  be  able to  offer 
banking services in all EU member states. 
So why are we not seeing serious integration of European banking? A number of possible reasons 
have been cited. These could roughly be divided into three kinds: economic, regulatory, and political. 
Starting with the economic reasons, academics have been arguing that scale and scope economies 
are limited in banking and perhaps even negative once a certain size has been reached. The standard 
argument goes like this: banking is a “relationship business”, where a large part of a bank’s value lies 
in its customer-relationships. It is from these relationships the bank’s value-added comes in the form of 
its expert knowledge about the financial needs and risks of its customers and its understanding of the 
local economy. So a bigger bank cannot create more value, because it’s all about being close to and 
knowing your customer. Size just increases bureaucracy. And, if the bank would expand abroad, the 
sources  of  value  are  less  obvious,  since  it  would  lose  its  natural  expert  knowledge,  and  be 
disadvantaged compared with the incumbents. Hence, the economic case for integration would not be 
as strong in banking as in other sectors. 
I question this view. On the academic side, more recent banking research actually finds evidence of 
scale  economies.  After  all,  to  a  large  extent,  modern  banking  is  about  efficiency  in  running  huge 
operations consisting of vast branch networks, IT-systems and thousands of employees. That scale 
economies exist is also supported by the domestic consolidation taking place in the US as well as in 
individual  EU  countries.  The  banks  that  are  best  at  running  their  operations  should  have  plenty  of 
good reasons for expansion. Why would the most efficient retail bankers not be able to export their 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
concept,  just  as  IKEA,  McDonald’s,  or  American  Express,  to  name  a  few  other  retail  service 
companies, have done in their industries? 
However,  there  are  economic  obstacles  related  to  the  cost  of  entry  into  new  markets.  Major 
cross-border  expansion  must,  with  few  exceptions,  be  made  through  mergers  or  acquisitions.  The 
success of a cross-border deal depends on the ability to realise synergies. This takes a number of 
tough  decisions  regarding  reductions  in  staff  numbers  and  overlapping  or  inefficient  systems  and 
operations. If then to this entry cost are added extra hurdles in the form of regulations and politics it is 
easy  to  see  that  the  difficulties  related  to  cross-border  expansion  might  seem  insurmountable  to  a 
bank manager. On the margin, I think these extra hurdles or barriers might be more important than the 
inherent economics of banking. 
Generally, in countries where the costs of entering the national banking market are relatively low, the 
market  share  held  by  foreign  banks  tends  to  be  higher.  In  the  last  decade,  countries  with  less 
developed banking systems and few or no powerful incumbents have seen extensive entry by foreign 
banks.  Witness  the  expansion  by  European  and  American  banks  into  emerging  markets,  e.g.  in 
Central and Eastern Europe and Latin America. In the EU, in contrast, national banking markets are 
generally  well  developed  and  incumbents  are  strong,  making  entry  costs  much  higher.  Hence,  the 
insignificant degree of EU cross-border banking integration is probably partly explained by economic 
factors. 
However,  the  existence  of  large  differences  in  profitability  and  efficiency  between  individual  EU 
countries’  banking  systems  indicates  potential  for  cross-border  expansion  also  within  the  EU.  In 
competitive industries, such differences do not exist for a longer period, as less efficient firms would be 
pushed out of business or acquired by more efficient competitors. These wide profitability gaps should 
attract more efficient entrants. 
Against this background, it is interesting to note that many European banks seem more attracted to 
the US banking market. The US banking system is by many considered as the most developed and 
competitive in the world. You would indeed expect EU-based banks to find it easier to expand within 
the EU than into the US. Still, several major European banks have much larger retail operations in the 
US  than  they  have  in  neighbouring  European  countries,  e.g.  HSBC,  ABN  Amro,  and  BNP  Paribas. 
One cannot avoid the question of whether larger obstacles to cross border banking exist in Europe 
than in the US. 
Regulatory schemes and practices still a major problem for integration 
Given  the  gradual  increase  in  harmonisation  of  EU  banking  and  financial  sector  legislation,  it  is 
perhaps surprising to find regulation to be one of the most important barriers to further integration. In 
my view, there are two issues here. First, although the general legal framework has been converging, 
the practical implementation of rules and regulations still differs widely between member states. EU 
level  harmonisation  often  applies  to  high  level  principles  and  minimum  requirements,  while 
implementation, additional requirements and enforcement is left to the member states. In practice, this 
becomes  a  barrier  to  integration.  An  EU  bank  will  be  subject  to  as  many  different  reporting 
requirements  and  regulatory  relationships  as  it  has  countries  of  operation.  For  a  banking  group 
involved  in  life  insurance  and  securities  trading  this  number  should  be  multiplied  by  three.  For 
instance, ABN Amro is rumoured to be dealing with 47 different regulators only in the EU. Second, 
today’s  banking  regulation  was  originally  designed  to  protect  the  soundness  and  stability  of  the 
national  banking  system  and  sometimes  even  to  politically  control  it.  Thus,  supervisors  as  well  as 
central banks have national mandates and responsibilities vis-à-vis their politicians and citizens. This 
was  all  fine  in  the  so  called  good  old  days  of  closed  national  markets.  Now,  however,  it  may 
sometimes be in conflict with the ultimate goal of a single market in financial services. 
Some of the work needed in these areas has already been started. The Brouwer reports to the Ecofin 
well describe some of the difficulties. The BSC Task Force on Crisis Management has taken the first 
steps  towards  a  more  structured  approach  to  crisis  management  of  cross-border  banking  groups, 
through  the  signing  of  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding.  CEBS  (Committee  of  European  Bank 
Supervisors) is also trying to take on some of these issues, in particular regarding the convergence of 
supervisory  practices.  And  very  recently  the  Financial  Services  Committee  decided  to  further 
investigate  (1)  how  to  manage  supervision  of  cross-border  banking  groups,  whether  subsidiary  or 
branch structure, and (2) arrangements for cross-border crisis management. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2004
So, which are the developments in cross-border banking that have necessitated further consideration 
of the existing rules, policies and structures? Which are the regulatory challenges indicated in the title 
of this speech? I think the convergence of regulations is a process that, although being long and slow, 
is already going in the right direction. Even though, as mentioned earlier, there are still way too many 
differences  in  implementation  and  actual  practices.  But  when  it  comes  to  the  genuine  conflicts  of 
interest between nationally motivated regulators and an integrated European financial market, we are 
just in the beginning of a major rethinking. 
The challenges regulators have to face 
At the heart of the matter lies the emergence of large foreign subsidiaries and branches. The presence 
of foreign subsidiaries and branches is not new. What is new is that they might make up a substantial 
part of your domestic financial system. Whereas the typical bank group might be described as “Big 
mama, small daughter”, the opposite may now be increasingly true in many cases, and in particular if 
seen in relation to the size of the home and host countries. This is already true in most of the acceding 
countries.  To  give  an  example,  more  than  90  percent  of  Czech  banking  assets  are  held  by  foreign 
owned  banks.  What  might  this  development  then  imply?  Consider  the  following  three  areas: 
supervision, deposit guarantee systems and crisis management. 
Supervision. There are good reasons for banks to expand through branches and so be able to slim 
down  their  own  internal  bureaucracy,  and  have  a  single  point  of  contact  with  supervisors  and  a 
substantially  reduced  reporting  burden.  But  would  this  be  accepted  by  national  authorities?  Home 
supervisors would become responsible for banks with in some cases a systemic presence in foreign 
markets.  Host  supervisors  would  find  themselves  legally  limited  in  supervising  even  systemically 
important institutions in their own domestic market. The traditional home-host principle simply does not 
work for systemically important branches. The fact that we have not yet seen much of cross-border 
branching indicates there are some “invisible” barriers. One of these barriers probably is scepticism 
from  national  supervisors.  With  a  few  exceptions  banks  still  expand  through  subsidiaries,  which  is 
costly  and  makes  synergies  hard  to  realise,  and  thus  hampers  integration.  Can  we  find  a  way  to 
secure financial stability without limiting the positive drive for further integration? 
Deposit Insurance Guarantees. Minimum standards are set by the EU, but in practice the national 
guarantee systems differ widely. Notwithstanding the existence of limited deposit guarantee systems, 
for larger banks the government will probably have to pay up the main part in the case of problems, 
due to lack of funds. This might be politically acceptable as long as depositors are domestic residents. 
However, cross-border branching extends the government guarantee to deposits of foreign residents. 
Would it be acceptable to use tax-payers money to refund foreign depositors at a larger scale? This 
might pose problems both for the home and host country. The wide divergence of national systems 
clearly  needs  attention.  Potential  solutions  might  include  increased  co-operation  and  harmonisation 
regarding fees and entry and exit rules. 
Crisis management. National central banks have national mandates in extending emergency liquidity 
assistance. In a future integrated European financial market, the mandate of the lender of last resort 
will  not  be  as  clear-cut.  How  should  this  function  be  organised  when  the  largest  banks  might  be 
systemically  important  in  several  EU  member  countries?  There  will  also  be  banks  that  are  very 
important in one country while being completely insignificant in a European context. Another issue is 
whose interest a national supervisor will protect in a crisis involving a cross-border banking group - 
strictly its own national interest (the case now) or the interest of all member countries where the group 
might have operations? 
Conclusions 
These issues, or challenges, are essentially political. They are about how to share the risks and costs 
of financial integration. And as long as these challenges are left unaddressed they constitute political 
barriers to integration. We all say we want financial integration but as usual, nothing comes for free. 
Financial integration brings some difficult issues for authorities and politicians. Public authorities will 
have to rethink their roles and priorities. Politicians cannot make beautiful declarations about providing 
their citizens with the best possible financial services at the lowest possible prices without facing the 
consequences of that. In practice, this might mean stopping the nurturing of national champions. At 
the moment it is quite obvious that in banking no significant cross-border deals can be made without 
the silent approval from concerned governments. No wonder, banking integration is slow. 
BIS Review 22/2004 
 3
To  conclude:  in  order  to  gain  the  full  benefits  of  financial  integration,  we  must  build  a  regulatory 
framework which minimizes the costs and barriers of cross-border expansion. This does not have to 
mean less regulation, but certainly more efficient and harmonized regulation. Again, there must be an 
efficient  process  to  continuously  update  banking  regulation  to  take  account  of  developments  in 
banking activities, instruments and structures. At the same time, we must adjust our supervisory and 
crisis management arrangements so that we can deal with this new banking landscape in an adequate 
way. We have had enough of declarations. Let us now move to attack the real political problems. 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2004
