Bodil Nyboe Andersen: A common currency or separate currencies? 
Speech by Mrs Bodil Nyboe Andersen, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, at the Conference 
on  the  Economy  in  the  Danish  Commonwealth  hosted by  the  North  Atlantic Group  of  the  Folketing 
(Parliament), Christiansborg, 25 May 2004 
 The organisers have asked me to give a speech on “A common currency or separate currencies?” As 
agreed, my speech will mainly be a technical presentation of the various options. The decision on the 
actual regime is a political one. My aim is merely to lay out the alternatives and their implications. 
My approach is solely economic. I will not look into national law issues or other legal issues. However, 
the legal issues would play a decisive role in a specific decision on change. 
What is a currency? 
1.  
Let us begin by looking at the characteristics of a currency. A specification of the basic criteria can be 
useful, although they are normally known in practice: 
1. 
2. 
Banknotes and coins denominated in the currency must exist as legal tender. 
There must be a central bank with the required net capital and foreign-exchange reserves, 
and the central bank must be responsible for the currency. 
The banks in the currency area must be able to make deposits and raise collateralised loans 
at the central bank. 
There must be access to an interbank payment system, possibly via the central bank. 
In  a  liquidity  crisis,  solvent  banks  must  be  able  to  use  the  central  bank  as  “lender  of  last 
resort”. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Decisive  factors  for  an  independent  currency  are  thus  that  a  central  bank  is  responsible  for  the 
currency, and that the central bank is able to conduct monetary and foreign-exchange policy in the 
currency area in question. 
One central bank cannot undertake the responsibility for two different currencies. Similarly, two central 
banks cannot undertake the responsibility for one currency. 
Currencies in the North Atlantic region 
2. 
According  to  these  criteria  Iceland  evidently  has  its  own  currency,  the  Icelandic  króna,  and  its  own 
central bank, Sedlabanki Íslands. The currency is associated with the country of Iceland. 
Denmark, the Faroe Islands and Greenland employ the same currency, the Danish krone. Danmarks 
Nationalbank is responsible for this currency. Let us look at the use of Danish kroner within the Danish 
Commonwealth in the light of the five criteria. 
Re 1) Danish kroner are available as banknotes and coins and can be used in the entire area. I will go 
into the issue of the special Faroese banknotes a little later. 
Re 2) Danmarks Nationalbank is responsible for the currency, which is the Danish krone. Danmarks 
Nationalbank has a considerable net capital and a large foreign-exchange reserve, which safeguard 
the stability and credibility of the currency. 
Re 3) The private banks and credit institutions in Denmark, in Greenland and on the Faroe Islands 
may hold accounts at Danmarks Nationalbank and may make deposits or raise collateralised loans. 
Danmarks Nationalbank is “banker to the banks” in the entire Danish Commonwealth. 
Re 4) The payment and clearing system can be used by Danish, Faroese and Greenlandic banks. 
Re 5) Danmarks Nationalbank is the central bank to all banks in the Danish Commonwealth. It may 
thus provide liquidity support to a solvent bank with liquidity problems. This function is called “lender of 
last resort”. It is very rarely used, but it has happened. 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 1
The special Faroese banknotes 
Act No. 248 of 12 April 1949 stipulates that The Faroe Islands shall have their own banknotes as legal 
tender  on  the  Islands.  These  banknotes  are  printed  and  issued  by  Danmarks  Nationalbank.  The 
Faroese banknotes in circulation are included together with the Danish banknotes in circulation in the 
item  “Banknotes”  on  the  liabilities  side  on  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  balance  sheet.  The  Faroese 
banknotes can be exchanged for Danish banknotes on a 1:1 basis. Danmarks Nationalbank has cash 
depots on the Faroe Islands to supply banknotes to the local banks. 
Although  the  special  Faroese  banknotes  can  be  used  for  cash  transactions  on  the  Faroe  Islands, 
contracts,  bank  deposits  and  financial  transactions  are  conducted  in  Danish  kroner.  Banknotes  in 
circulation  consist  of  the  special  Faroese  banknotes,  but  the  money  stock  is  otherwise  made  up  of 
bank deposits in Danish kroner. 
The international ISO currency code for Danish kroner is DKK. This currency code is also used on the 
Faroe Islands. 
The  Faroese  banks  use  Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  monetary-policy  instruments  and  the  Danish 
payment systems. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank’s  decisions  relating  to  monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy  -  including 
interest-rate decisions - apply fully and directly to the Faroe Islands. 
It must thus be concluded that the Danish krone is used as the currency of the Faroe Islands today. 
The Faroese banknotes should be regarded as banknotes issued by Danmarks Nationalbank with text 
in  Faroese,  even  though  this  is  not  explicitly  indicated  on  the  banknotes.  This  corresponds  to  the 
situation in Scotland where special Scots banknotes are used, but the currency is the pound sterling, 
and the Bank of England is the central bank for all of the UK. 
The Faroese banknotes are a special version of the currency Danish kroner. On no account - neither 
fully nor partially - do they constitute a separate currency, although in some places the wording of the 
Act of 1949 may indicate this. 
The currency of the Danish Commonwealth 
At present the Danish krone is thus the currency of Denmark, Greenland and the Faroe Islands. And 
Danmarks Nationalbank is the central bank for the entire Danish Commonwealth. 
Are there any alternatives? 
3.  
Besides a presentation of the current system the organisers also asked me to present alternatives. 
That means a situation where Denmark retains its currency, but the Faroe Islands and/or Greenland 
get their own currencies, abandoning the common currency. 
For the sake of simplification I will describe alternative exchange-rate regimes for the Faroe Islands 
only. In principle, the same would apply to Greenland, however. 
At  the  moment  an  independent  currency  for  the  Faroe  Islands  is  not  an  issue  since  the  political 
announcements  are  that  monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy  should  still  be  conducted  by  the 
Danish national authorities. 
Nevertheless, let us make the theoretical assumption that it is decided that monetary and foreign-
exchange policy should be conducted by the home rule of the Faroe Islands. In that case there are 
three  main  options:  a  currency  union  with  Denmark,  a  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  or  a  floating 
exchange rate. Let us look into these three options. 
A currency union 
If  home  rule  is  introduced  in  the  field  of  monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank will not be able to continue its activities on the Faroe Islands. It will be an entirely new 
situation.  If  the  Faroe  Islands  wish  to  continue  with  the  Danish  krone,  an  agreement  must  be 
concluded  with  Denmark  on  a  currency  union.  This  decision  cannot  be  made  unilaterally  by  the 
Faroese authorities. Continued use of Danish kroner in this situation would thus require an agreement 
to be approved by the Danish and Faroese Parliaments. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2004
As  mentioned,  each  currency  area  can  have  only  one  monetary-policy  authority.  Furthermore, 
elements  of  Denmark’s  monetary  and  foreign-exchange-policy  competence  are  not  likely  to  be 
delegated to the home rule of the Faroe Islands. A currency union would thus entail that the Faroese 
authorities  acknowledge  -  formally  and  clearly  -  that  the  decision-making  competence  regarding 
monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy  rests  solely  with  the  Danish  national  authorities,  including 
Danmarks Nationalbank. 
In a currency union the situation would, in practice, be unchanged. The currency would still be Danish 
kroner, and Danmarks Nationalbank would continue to conduct monetary policy. This means that the 
Faroese  authorities  would  have  no  autonomy  as  regards  monetary  and  interest-rate  policy.  This  is 
unchanged from the current situation. 
Thus,  it  appears  that  delegation  of  monetary  and  foreign-exchange  policy  to  the  home  rule  with 
simultaneous conclusion of a currency union with Denmark would be a complex way of maintaining 
status quo. 
Separate currency - fixed-exchange-rate policy 
If a decision is made for the Faroe Islands (or Greenland) to have their own currency, the options are 
the  same  as  in  other  currency  areas.  However,  the  currency  would  be  very  small,  and  the  narrow 
business structure would present a number of special challenges. 
The  “strongest”  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  is  a  currency  board,  whereby  the  local  currency  is 
completely fixed vis-à-vis another currency. This regime is used today by e.g. Estonia, which applies a 
currency board with a fixed exchange rate vis-à-vis the euro. 
An initial option for the Faroe Islands could be a currency board vis-à-vis the Danish krone in a ratio 
of 1:1. 
A currency board entails the establishment of a central bank to set the monetary-policy interest rate 
and  intervene  in  the  foreign-exchange  market  to  stabilise  the  exchange  rate.  However,  the  central 
bank’s  options  are  rather  mechanical.  These  -  often  statutory  -  restrictions  on  the  central  bank  are 
imposed to ensure credibility. 
History  shows  examples  of  successful  currency  boards,  e.g.  Estonia,  and  total  failures,  e.g.  the 
currency board in Argentina. 
A country opting for a currency board has to defend its own currency. In case of speculation against 
the currency no help should be expected from the country to whose currency the currency in question 
is pegged. Speculation may therefore require dramatic interest-rate increases. 
Elimination of the risk of collapse in the event of speculation requires a guarantee agreement with a 
highly credible external party. For the Faroe Islands, this could e.g. mean a guarantee from the Danish 
central  government  that  the  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  the  Danish  krone  could  be  maintained.  This 
unlimited guarantee in terms of amount and time would make the regime more credible, unless there 
was speculation against abolishment of the government guarantee. 
However, the Danish central government cannot be expected to furnish such an unlimited guarantee 
without gaining some insight into or control over other economic-policy measures implemented under 
the currency board or by the Faroese authorities. In addition, the monetary-policy interest rate would 
be determined entirely by interest rates in Denmark. 
In practice this scheme would not give the Faroe Islands any more economic-policy autonomy than the 
current direct use of the Danish krone as their currency. It must be emphasised here that the existence 
of special Faroese banknotes is no indication that the Faroe Islands today apply a currency board. 
It  would  be  very  difficult  for  the  Faroe  Islands  to  pursue  a  conventional  fixed-exchange-rate  policy 
since the economy is small and catch volumes and fish prices may fluctuate substantially. In several 
periods  the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  has  been  problematic  even  for  Iceland,  a  much  larger 
economy. On several occasions the Icelandic króna was devalued considerably. Today Iceland has 
abandoned the fixed-exchange-rate policy. 
A conventional fixed-exchange-rate policy where the authorities seek to stabilise the exchange rate by 
means  of  intervention  and  through  interest  rates  sometimes  requires  extremely  harsh  economic 
measures  to  safeguard  its  credibility.  Denmark’s  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  vis-à-vis  the  euro  and 
previously vis-à-vis the D-mark today enjoys a high degree of credibility. This credibility is founded on 
BIS Review 31/2004 
 3
Denmark’s success in maintaining a fixed exchange rate for more than 20 years and willingness to 
tighten monetary as well as fiscal policy if required to protect the currency against speculative attacks. 
Floating exchange rate 
A freely floating Faroese currency could be subject to very strong fluctuation, again due to the narrow 
business structure  and  the  fact  that  the  currency would  be a  small  one.  Like  Sweden  and Norway, 
Iceland  has  opted  for  a  floating-exchange-rate  regime  where  monetary  policy  is  anchored  in  an 
inflation  target.  This  model  would  be  difficult  for  the  Faroe  Islands  to  apply  since  only  a  small 
proportion  of  the  consumer  goods  are  manufactured  locally.  The  direct  effect  of  interest  rates  on 
inflation would therefore be limited. Interest rates will mainly impact on the economy via the effect on 
the exchange rate. 
In  an  international  context,  floating  exchange  rates  have  generally  yielded  poor  results  for  small 
economies. If the exchange rate fluctuates too much, private individuals and companies are tempted 
to use one or more foreign currencies instead in order to achieve greater stability. 
In recent years the problems encountered by small currencies have led to growing interest in currency 
unions and common currencies, most notably reflected by the introduction of the euro. 
Conclusion 
4. 
In conclusion I would like to point out that a decision for the Faroe Islands and/or Greenland to have 
their  own  currency  can  obviously  be  made.  Nevertheless,  to  protect  such  an  independent  currency 
from  speculation  and  very  strong  fluctuation  it  must  be  strongly  attached  to  another  currency  -  the 
Danish krone in these examples. As a consequence of this attachment the economic scope would not 
be greater than in the current situation where the Danish krone is used as the currency of the entire 
Danish Commonwealth. 
I  would  like  to  end  by  emphasising  that  the  financial  markets  are  very  sensitive  to  expectations  of 
change. 
If  a  debate  on  the  introduction  of  an  independent  currency  is  initiated  on  the  Faroe  Islands  or  in 
Greenland,  there  is  a  risk  that  the  debate  itself  would  generate  speculative  movements.  This  could 
lead to a “run” on the local banks to transfer deposits to Danish banks. It could also lead to extensive 
exchange of Faroese bankotes for Danish ones. The latter is a harmless phenomenon, but extensive 
transfer of deposits from local banks could entail considerable difficulties for the business community. 
Monetary  and  foreign-exchange  issues  should  therefore  be  approached  with  caution  by  the 
authorities. If a change is to be made, there must be an exact plan for the whole process and for how 
the currency will be anchored, that means how the value of the money will be protected under the new 
regime. The financial markets hate uncertainty, and money can be moved in an instant if uncertainty 
arises. 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2004
