Joseph Yam: Banking sector risks and challenges 
Luncheon talk by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong 
Kong Institute of Bankers, Hong Kong, 16 June 2004. 
 The turnaround 
Thank you for inviting me to talk to you today. It is a pleasure to be here and I am delighted to see 
such an enthusiastic attendance. I was recently looking over past speeches (not, let me assure you, 
with the aim of recycling them), and I noted that the last time I spoke at one of the Institute’s lunches 
was on 24 October 2001. This has prompted me to reflect on how much we have all been through 
over the past 32 months - both as a financial community and in the larger community. When I last 
spoke to you the world was just six weeks on from the 9-11 attacks. There was a strong sense that we 
were heading for difficult times, with a worsening global environment, and with deepening deflation, 
unemployment, a budget deficit, falling asset prices and a rising number of negative equity mortgages 
within Hong Kong. Conditions were likely to get worse before they got better, I concluded.  
Well, after a period of great difficulty, in which things got considerably worse than I think any of us had 
imagined, conditions are now at last improving. Since around the middle of last year Hong Kong has 
been  enjoying  a  strong  and  broadening  recovery.  The  economy  has  now  regained  much  of  its 
dynamism.  The  key  economic  numbers  are  providing  the  confirmation.  Economic  growth  has  been 
impressive. The unemployment rate has been coming down, albeit slowly. Deflationary pressure has 
been easing. The external sector has been active and we are running a substantial current account 
surplus. The residential property market, on which the wealth of many in our community depends, has 
bottomed out from a falling trend that had lasted for over five years. Domestic consumption has been 
picking  up.  Of  more  direct  interest  to  us  in  the  HKMA,  the  risks  to  monetary  and  banking  stability, 
which had been worrying us for some time, have receded. The very fast dissipation in the number of 
cases of personal bankruptcy and negative equity mortgages is very welcome indeed.  
The turnaround in the Hong Kong economy and, consequently, the improvement in the asset quality of 
banks, were made possible by the more favourable global economic environment and by measures 
taken  to  strengthen  economic  ties  between  Hong  Kong  and  the  Mainland.  Indeed,  banks  in  Hong 
Kong have also benefited directly from two of these measures. The first is the granting of easier and 
greater access to the Mainland banking market under CEPA from 1 January 2004 and the second is 
the  introduction  of  personal  renminbi  business  in  February.  These  will  in  time  help  to  broaden 
meaningfully,  I  am  sure,  the  scope  of  banking  business  for  banks  in Hong  Kong.  I  should  add  that 
there  are  other  initiatives being  developed,  with  the  aim  of  positioning  the banking  system  of  Hong 
Kong to take advantage of further financial liberalisation in the Mainland. I hope they can be agreed, 
announced and introduced soon.  
Short-term risks 
However, the generally good news in recent months should not blind us to the problems that remain in 
our economy or to the risks that face us. While the economy has been recovering strongly, it has not 
been creating as many jobs as we all would like to see. It is also uncertain to what extent the budget 
deficit  will  be  reduced,  as  government  revenues  recover  along  with  the  economy.  To  be  sure,  the 
difficult  investment  environment  is  not  helping  us  in  our  attempt  to  meet  the  budgeted  investment 
income  for  the  fiscal  reserves.  Disappointments on  these  fronts may  affect  market  sentiment  in  the 
short  term,  although  the  determination  and  ability  on  the  part  HKSAR  government  in  tackling  the 
remaining, structural components of these problems should not be in doubt. Furthermore, there is a 
risk  that  our  financial  markets  could  over-react  to  external  developments,  notably  stronger  than 
expected  monetary  tightening  in  the  US,  macro-economic  adjustments  in  the  Mainland  and  sharp 
increases in oil prices. Although it is unlikely that these external factors would derail our economy, and 
so  this  risk  seems  small,  under  extreme  market  conditions,  short-term  volatility  in  financial  markets 
could have a bearing on monetary and financial stability in Hong Kong.  
In contrast, there are also concerns about the effects of continuing easy monetary conditions within 
Hong Kong. During the past few months, economic recovery has resulted in inflows of funds into the 
Hong  Kong  dollar  to  the  extent  that  the  Aggregate  Balance  of  the  banking  system  has  become 
BIS Review 37/2004 
 1
extraordinarily  high  (despite  some  outflows  recently  associated  with  the  corrections  in  the  financial 
markets). As you know, under the Currency Board system there is not much that we can do to dampen 
easy monetary conditions: this is a question that the Sub-Committee on Currency Board Operations of 
the Exchange Fund Advisory Committee has given a great deal of thought to. If there continue to be 
capital inflows on the back of sustained growth and confidence in Hong Kong’s prospects, the current 
account  surplus  and  continuing  talks  about  a  possible  revaluation  of  the  renminbi,  the  risk  of 
overheating  in  the  economy  and  in  asset  markets  will  increase.  I  am  not  suggesting  that  this  will 
happen soon, or making a warning. But banks in particular will need to keep the situation under close 
watch and adopt appropriate risk mitigation measures if the market situation warrants it. Overheating 
is, after all, something of an unfamiliar risk after such a long period of economic difficulty, and we do 
not wish to be caught off our guard.  
Longer-term risks 
So  much  for  the  more  immediate  risks  and  potential  risks,  which  both  you  as  banks  and  we  as 
supervisor must pay attention to. What about the longer-term risks facing the banks in Hong Kong? Or, 
to put the question in a larger context, what are the longer-term processes shaping the banking sector 
that carry risks as well as opportunities? We in the HKMA have identified a few of these in an internal 
exercise that is still ongoing but I would like to share with you today our preliminary views on five of 
them. They are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In the remainder of this talk, I shall deal with each of these areas in turn, focusing more on how we 
think banks  in  Hong  Kong  should  tackle  these  processes  and risks,  and  less  on  our corresponding 
supervisory responses or strategies, which in any case are still being developed. My main message is 
that, while banks need to focus clearly on the short-term risks I have already outlined, we should not 
lose sight of the more fundamental forces that will shape the landscape of the banking sector in the 
years to come. If they do not take these forces into account, individual banks not only face growing 
risks, but they could be in danger of losing their competitiveness. 
structural shift in the banking sector  
China risk  
technology risk  
diversification risk  
changing international standards.  
Structural shift in the banking sector 
First,  the  structural  shift  in  the  banking  sector.  Over  the  past  few  years  the  HKMA  has  been 
encouraging  banks  to  consider  consolidation  as  a  way  of  improving  competitiveness  -  technology, 
among other factors, has obviously moved the optimum size of a retail bank towards the larger end. 
The banking industry has responded positively: the number of locally incorporated banks has fallen 
from 31 three years ago to 24 at present, the result, I am happy to say, of consolidation and not of 
abandonment  of  Hong  Kong.  As  expected,  the  various  consolidation  exercises  have  produced  the 
economies  of  scale  intended  and,  in  some  cases,  immediate  financial  benefits  for  the  institutions 
concerned.  
As consolidation continues, and with the subsidiarisation of the local operations of a few major foreign 
retail banks, the structure of the banking sector will become increasingly polarised. At one end will be 
several large banks; at the other end will be a number of much smaller players. The smaller players 
will increasingly face two disadvantages: on the one hand they will find it difficult to compete; on the 
other hand, they will find that the opportunities for consolidation will dwindle over time, as the number 
of possible targets for consolidation declines.  
It may not be quite right to classify this structural shift as purely a long-term risk. In fact, the trend is 
already there and the effects of consolidation on the industry as a whole will begin to be seen very 
soon. Smaller banks, if they wish to continue to thrive, should, as a matter of priority, carefully review 
their strategic direction. They should, for example, consider whether it is desirable to grow in size or 
develop into niche players. Neither option is an easy one. The opportunities for organic growth in the 
local market are limited, while competition for niche operations is intense.  
2 
 BIS Review 37/2004
China risk 
The second important process is the continuing and accelerating integration of the economies of Hong 
Kong  and  Mainland  China,  which  will  be  hastened  in  the  years  to  come  by  further  financial 
liberalisation. I have already mentioned the arrangements under CEPA, in which more medium-sized 
Hong Kong banks will be able to access the Mainland market. Let us not overlook movement in the 
opposite direction, in which more Mainland banks will seek to enter the Hong Kong market. On the 
macro level, as the renminbi moves at a measured pace towards full convertibility, it seems inevitable 
that an increasing proportion of the balance sheet of banks in Hong Kong would be denominated in 
that currency. The opportunities arising from the developments are promising, but they carry risks as 
well.  
The  growing  banking  relationship  between  the  Mainland  and  Hong  Kong  will  provide  important 
business opportunities for banks in both places. The question for Hong Kong banks seeking to take 
advantage  of  this  process  is  whether  they  have  the  requisite  expertise  to  properly  analyse  the 
business and compliance risks. Failure in this task will additionally give rise to substantial operational 
and reputation risk, particularly for the banks that have only recently become eligible under CEPA to 
set up branches on the Mainland. So far, the medium-sized banks seeking to benefit under CEPA are 
doing so primarily to follow their customers into Mainland China. This simple business model should 
not pose too much risk for the banks concerned. But banks that are contemplating more aggressive 
expansion plans, such as tapping the local consumer market, will need at least to be aware of the risks 
involved and be in a position to manage them prudently.  
There  is  a  more  general  and  important  aspect  about  this  process  of  growing  banking  relationship 
between the Mainland and Hong Kong. This process is likely to be characterised by policy shifts that 
are more frequent than any other banking environment that we are familiar with. These policy shifts - 
mostly in the Mainland rather than in Hong Kong, and in monetary as well as regulatory policies - are 
an inevitable feature of a monetary and financial system that is going through reform and liberalisation. 
And in the absence of deep and sophisticated financial markets in the Mainland to provide the signals 
and  instruments,  the  task  of  risk  identification  and  management  associated  with  the  more  frequent 
than normal policy shifts is, to put it mildly, a difficult one. An ability to understand, closely monitor and 
anticipate monetary and financial market developments in the Mainland is therefore crucial, for banks 
and for us as supervisor. I urge banks to put in the necessary efforts. Insofar as we are concerned, I 
think we have developed, in a limited way, such ability and will, as in the past, share with the banking 
community our analyses so that banks can continually adjust their operations to meet changing market 
and regulatory needs.  
Technology risk 
The third set of forces arises out of banks’ increasing use of, or rather reliance on, technology. We 
have seen a spate of fake bank websites and attempted email scams over the past year: indeed, the 
rate of discovery of such cases relevant to Hong Kong has averaged about 1.4 per month over the 
past 13 months. It should be pointed out that we have no report of any customer in Hong Kong having 
been taken in by these attempts at fraud. Nevertheless, the proliferation of fake websites indicates that 
careful  precautions  and  constant  vigilance  are  necessary.  And  a  further  area  of  technology-related 
crime - ATM skimming fraud - has had its victims, both in Hong Kong and overseas. Increased security 
and heightened customer awareness, we believe, have helped defeat this form of crime: there have 
been no new cases in Hong Kong for seven months. Even so, the elementary, “low-tech” nature of 
these  frauds  demonstrates  also  that  there  are  many  dimensions  of  the  banks’  vulnerability  to 
technology.  
In  addition  to  protection  against  technology-related  crime,  the  IT  framework  of  banks  also  requires 
business  continuity  planning  (or  BCP).  Banks  in  Hong  Kong  made  great  strides  in  BCP  during  the 
preparations  for  the  onslaught  of  the  Y2K  bug.  Although  the  onslaught  never  came,  we  were  soon 
reminded of the importance of BCP by the 9-11 attack, which alerted us to the need for robustness in 
payment, clearing and settlement systems, among other things. Then the outbreak of SARS last year 
put the BCP capability of banks in Hong Kong to a real test. I am pleased to say that the contingency 
arrangements of banks - whether of a technical or personnel nature - performed very well during that 
difficult time. Nevertheless, the recurrence of disasters and their unpredictable nature should always 
be a feature of BCP and its continuous review. Indeed, the probability of occurrence of these events 
seems to have increased, along with heightened geo-political tension and the trend of globalisation, 
not just of trade and markets but also of terrorism and disease.  
BIS Review 37/2004 
 3
A further area that falls broadly under technology risk comes from outsourcing. Continuing pressure on 
profitability  will  no  doubt  result  in  more  banks  seeking  to  outsource  their  operations  to  lower-cost 
centres  outside  of  Hong  Kong.  This  will  in  turn  give  rise  to  additional  operational  risks  for  banks, 
including the risks of service outage and leakage of confidential customer data.  
My main observation from recent experience with handling technology risk is that bank management 
should  adopt  a  more  proactive  approach  towards  increasing  the  overall  robustness  of  the  IT 
environment, from both the crime prevention and BCP perspectives. In dealing with these IT-related 
incidents, we noticed the concerns sometimes expressed by bank management about the likelihood of 
causing unnecessary public panic if these matters were given publicity. Many preferred to deal with 
the problems quietly. The desire to be cautious and to avoid negative publicity is quite understandable. 
However, we have found that, far from causing panic, our insistence on publicity has been helpful in 
alerting members of the public of the nature of risks that they are exposed to as bank customers and 
how they can protect themselves. It enhances public education on the issues at hand and promotes 
the  exercise  of  a  degree  of  care by  bank  customers  that  the  situation  demands,  not  just  to  protect 
themselves  but  also  to  help  in  protecting  the  integrity  of  the  system.  Interestingly,  nowadays,  we 
sometimes  receive  reports  of  fake  web-sites  from  members  of  the  public  even  before  the  banks 
affected become aware of them.  
Diversification risk 
The fourth major force shaping the industry is the continued effort of banks to diversify their income 
source.  This  is  an  ongoing  and  inevitable  trend  given  the  increasing  competition  in  the  banking 
market, but it has gathered pace in recent years in response to the increasing pressure on interest 
income. The net interest margin of the retail banks in Hong Kong as a whole has substantially declined 
from over 2.19% in 1997 to an annualised level of 1.67% for the first quarter of 2004. The new sources 
of income include most notably the sale of investment and insurance products.  
The  key  challenge  for  banks  is  simply  whether  they  are  capable  of  managing  the  risk  arising  from 
these new intermediary activities. This is particularly so when, encouraged by advanced technology, 
the range of products being offered to customers expands from plain vanilla types to more complex 
structured  instruments.  Furthermore,  the  awareness  of  customers  about  their  consumer  rights  has 
increased, thus exposing banks to greater compliance, legal and reputation risks when venturing into 
these new areas of activities. We have seen in recent years an abundance of cases against the mis-
selling of products by banks even in jurisdictions with more developed financial markets. Banks will 
need  to  properly  equip  themselves,  including  substantially  upgrading  their  compliance  and  internal 
audit processes, in order to rise to this challenge.  
International standards 
The fifth set of influences affecting the banking industry is the number of key international standards 
that will be introduced over the next few years. These include regulatory and accounting standards, 
and Basle II is the standard most prominent in our minds. Another example is the implementation of 
IAS 39. The adoption of these standards will have profound implications for the operation of banks in 
Hong Kong.  
Time  is  limited,  and  this  is,  after  all,  a  luncheon  speech,  so  I  shall  not  go  into  detail  about  these 
standards. The point to make here is that, as an international financial centre, we have no alternative 
but to implement these standards as fully as we possibly can and as soon as international agreements 
have been reached on them. Many of these standards will be, to put it mildly, quite onerous. In this 
connection,  I  wish  to  ensure  you  all  that  the  HKMA  has  been  adopting  a  proactive  approach  in 
participating  in  the  relevant  international  standard  setting  forums  and  in  influencing  the  standard 
setting processes in the best interests of Hong Kong. We have also consulted widely in Hong Kong. 
Insofar as the banks are concerned, there is a clear need for bank management to allocate adequate 
resources to the process of implementation, which will involve substantial changes to IT systems and 
compliance  arrangements.  For  Basle  II,  for  example,  banks  should  not  be  acting  under  the 
misapprehension that they can simply sub-contract the implementation processes to third party service 
vendors, such as their external auditors. Active involvement of bank management is crucial in ensuring 
that most, if not all of these international standards are properly incorporated into the daily operations 
of banks, especially since each bank may face different focuses and challenges in the process.  
4 
 BIS Review 37/2004
Conclusion 
I have drawn attention to five processes that are likely to have an impact on the banking industry in the 
future, if they are not already having an impact. Each of these will, of course, have a different degree 
of impact depending on the nature of the operations of each bank - though I think it is fair to say that 
no  bank  can  ignore  them.  To  be  sure,  facing  up  to  them  has  important  implications  for  the  limited 
resources that banks have. In formulating business strategies for the coming five years, it is essential 
for bank management to take into account these processes in planning their affairs. This goes for the 
HKMA as well, since there are important implications for the manner in which we could perform our 
supervisory  functions  effectively.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  are  currently  carrying  out  an  internal 
review  on  this  subject.  As  a  result  of  this  internal  review,  there  may  be  a  need  for  us  to  make 
adjustments to our supervisory policies; but there will be, as usual and as necessary, full consultation 
with the industry before we proceed.  
BIS Review 37/2004 
 5
