Tom Alweendo: The exchange rate 
Speech by Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, during a breakfast meeting of the 
Namibia Economic Society, Windhoek, 17 August 2004. 
 I  have  been  asked  to  talk  to  you  this  morning  about  ‘the  exchange  rate’  and  against  my  better 
judgment I agreed to do so. Specifically, the question everyone is asking is whether it is not high time 
that the monetary authorities do something to depreciate the exchange rate through monetary policy 
operations. At the center of the argument for action to depreciate the exchange rate is the negative 
effect a high exchange rate has on the export sectors of the real sectors.  
At the risk of stating the obvious, let’s all establish and agreement that an exchange rate is a price of 
one currency in terms of another currency. Therefore, like other prices, exchange rates are determined 
by the interaction of supply and demand. This interaction will sometimes results into a depreciation or 
appreciation of a currency. Intervening in this process is in itself an interference with the free market 
concept, where the market is supposed to be efficient, guided by an invisible hand. I am, however, 
happy that there are now a number of market players who understand that the market is not always 
perfect and that there is sometimes a justifiable need to intervene in order to correct the market. 
In order for us to appreciate the exchange rate today, let us look at the movement in the exchange 
rate over the last fourteen years. In 1990, the average NAD/US$ exchange rate was NAD2.59 and the 
average inflation was about 15%. By 2000 the exchange rate has depreciated by more than 100% to 
NAD6.87. In 2002 the exchange rate reached a record low of NAD10.52. During 2003 the exchange 
rate started to appreciate and most people were not expecting an appreciation, but were expecting 
depreciation.  Because  of  this  mismatch  in  expectation  and  what  transpired,  the  effect  of  the 
appreciating exchange rate is made to sound much worse than it really is. 
Those who argue that the monetary authority should do something to depreciate the currency, suggest 
two  methods.  Firstly  they  say  that  the  central  bank  should  reduce  interest  rate  and  secondly  the 
central bank could buy US$. With the first method, the local currency will become less attractive and 
there will be less funds flowing into the local economy and hopefully this will translate into a weaker 
exchange rate. This all sounds well but may only work as long as the inflation is kept in check. The last 
think you want to do is to reduce interest rate without reference to the inflation, and to be forced to 
hike  interest  rates  soon  afterwards.  We  have  also  noticed  that  last  year  the  monetary  authorities 
reduced the interest rate, but capital continued to flow into the South African capital market and the 
exchange rate continued to appreciate. Clearly, cutting interest rates is not in itself an effective way to 
move the exchange rate. 
The  option  to  buy  foreign  currency  is  also  appealing  but  it  has  its  own  downside  if  not  handled 
properly. When  buying  foreign currency,  the  ultimate  effect  is  that  you would have  injected  into  the 
local  market  an  equivalent  amount  in  local  currency.  Given  the  prevailing  liquidity  position  in  the 
market, such injection of liquidity into the market might have to be removed at a cost, and given the 
current  interest  rate  differential,  that  cost  could  be  as  high  as  8%.  You  are  also  probably  aware  of 
experiences  where  central  banks  wasted  huge  amount  of  financial  resources  trying  to  defend  a 
desired exchange rate. The result in most cases was speculation on the currencies. It is therefore not 
a cost-free exercise to say that the central bank must buy US$. 
An important issue is therefore whether policymakers should respond to exchange rate movements 
when they formulate monetary policy. There is ample evidence that suggest that for central banks to 
respond to either an appreciation or depreciation will transmit unnecessary volatility into inflation and 
therefore the real economy. In my view, we should recognize the fact that the exchange rate is not 
mechanically related to the interest rate. The exchange rate is subject to shocks and these shocks are 
an  indication  that  the  exchange  rate  conveys  information  in  its  own  right.  It  will  also  mean  that  the 
exchange rate will have an impact on the economy apart from what comes through its response to 
shifts in the monetary policy instrument. 
Here I am not suggesting that the exchange rate is not an important factor when considering monetary 
policy  actions.  Indeed,  the  exchange  rate  is  important  price  information  in  the  economy  and 
policymakers  should  form  a  view  about  the  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  as  part  of  the  holistic 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
approach in policy setting. However, we must avoid the oversimplification of the linkage between the 
exchange rate and the interest rate. 
A related question that is being asked now and then is whether a country should prefer a weaker or 
stronger  exchange  rate.  The  general  answer  usually  goes  like  this:  if  you  are  a  mostly  exporting 
country, you should prefer a weaker exchange rate because you will be competitive in terms of price. 
On the other hand, if you are mostly an importing country, you should prefer a stronger exchange rate, 
again on the account of price competitiveness. 
To my mind, this is a generalized answer, at best, and it leaves out a number of realities. For example 
a weaker currency is generally associated with expectation of higher inflation. We are also well aware 
of the danger of inflation and to therefore rely on a weaker exchange rate for price competitiveness 
may only be beneficial in a very short term. For long term prosperity a country will be better off to rely 
on its total factor productivity levels. 
Lastly, ladies and gentlemen, I now want to answer the questions I was asked: “Are there economic 
reasons to celebrate the strong NAD?” My short answer to that question is maybe and maybe not. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
