Toshihiko Fukui: Significance of efficient financial services for the future of 
Japan’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  to  the  Japan  Center  for  Economic 
Research, Tokyo, 22 July 2004. 
 Introduction 
I  am  pleased  to  be  here  today  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience  drawn  from  Japan’s 
economic and financial circles, who naturally have a strong interest in the future of Japan’s economy. 
Against the background of new business strategies including mergers and acquisitions underway in 
the financial sector toward the planned full removal of blanket deposit insurance in April 2005, today I 
will discuss the roles that efficient financial services should play in the future in Japan’s economy. 
I. 
Need for efficient financial services 
Current state of the Japanese economy and financial system 
A. 
The  Japanese  economy  has  been  recovering  since  the  latter  half  of  last  year,  driven  by  a  virtuous 
cycle in which an increase in exports leads to a pickup in production and corporate profits, which in 
turn raises capital spending. Recently, the household sector has also been recovering in line with the 
improvement in employment. To support the ongoing recovery, the Bank of Japan is continuing with its 
current  quantitative  easing  policy  until  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  core  consumer  price 
index (CPI) registers zero percent or higher in a stable manner. In this regard, let me emphasize our 
firm commitment to maintain the accommodative monetary policy. 
To  achieve  sustainable  economic  growth  and  strengthen  the  dynamism  of  the  Japanese  economy 
over the long run, a smoothly functioning financial system is an obvious necessity. 
Let me begin with the current state of Japan’s financial system. A reduction in nonperforming loans 
(NPLs), one of the most significant problems requiring resolution, has been proceeding steadily. The 
ratio of NPLs to total outstanding loans at major banks decreased to almost 5 percent at the end of 
March 2004. Even regional banks that seemed to be slowing in their reduction of NPLs were able to 
lower their ratio to below 7 percent. In addition, approximately 90 percent of both major banks and 
regional banks posted positive net income for the fiscal year ended March 2004. For the current fiscal 
year starting from April 2004, I am confident that we will come closer to resolving the NPL problem, as 
corporate profits are expected to increase further and banks are accelerating their efforts to revitalize 
firms with large debts. So, as we move toward the full removal of blanket deposit insurance planned 
for next April, I think it is fair to say that Japan’s financial system is on track to restore its soundness 
and stability. 
In addition to tackling of the NPL problem, reforms have been implemented in various areas such as 
accounting,  taxation,  and  bankruptcy  laws,  and  a  framework  has  been  established  for  improving 
corporate governance. The rules and practices that have been supporting economic growth in Japan 
up  to  recent years  have emphasized  long-term  relationships  among  firms  as well  as  between  firms 
and  banks,  based  on  the  assumption  that  high  growth  would  continue.  These  rules  and  practices 
enabled  firms  to  expand  their  business  over  the  long  term  while  absorbing  moderate  economic 
shocks. Nonetheless, they are no longer adequate to address the problems resulting from the ever-
changing nature of today’s global economy. We have made substantial progress in reforming the rules 
and practices that used to support the economy but had grown obsolete. Without such progress, we 
might never have been able to reach the point where we now stand: on the verge of achieving a solid 
footing  for  the  revitalization  of  our  economy.  The  more  than  ten  years  following  the  bursting  of  the 
bubble  have  often  been  termed  the  “lost  decade”.  They  were  longer  than  expected,  but  may  have 
been necessary to achieve the step-by-step reforms. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
Roles of financial services in the future 
B. 
We must keep forging ahead because, from now on, both firms and financial institutions will need to 
continuously improve their competitiveness to create new business value. 
Firms’  operating  environments  are  changing  significantly.  For  example,  competition  from  emerging 
economies has intensified, and rapid progress in IT has reduced the life span of existing competitive 
strengths by lowering the barriers of time and geography. Japanese businesses have been making 
great efforts to survive this tidal wave of structural change. Their performance depends on not only 
business  activities,  such  as  the  development  of  new  goods  and  services  as  well  as  company-wide 
increases in productivity, but also financial activities, such as reduction of funding costs and control of 
market- and payment-related risks. 
We can also observe changes in the financial needs of households. The diversification of employment 
and rapid aging of the population have been significantly affecting how people, both young and old, 
plan their lives. This is evidenced by the fact that pension reform became a major issue in the recent 
election for the House of Councillors. Such a change in the attitude of households has inevitably come 
to influence their financial activities such as choices of asset investment, life insurance, and consumer 
loans. Demand for financial services has grown quite diversified among differing generations and at 
different stages of individuals’ lives. 
Let me describe the roles of financial services that are expected by both businesses and households 
based on their ever-changing needs. 
The  first  role  is  to  support  dynamism  in  corporate  activities.  Firms  require  sophisticated  financial 
services  such  as  financing  of  newly  developed  businesses,  arranging  of  capital  to  satisfy 
shareholders, reorganizing of global businesses, and hedging of wide-ranging business risks. 
The second role is to contribute to increasing households’ wealth. The financial system as a whole 
should  efficiently  provide  a  broad  range  of  financial  products  and  services  enabling  households  to 
invest  and  raise  funds  according  to  their  various  financial  needs.  By  performing  these  roles 
appropriately, financial institutions will both contribute to increasing households’ wealth and promote 
revitalization of the economy through the efficient allocation of resources. 
Challenges of creating a new financial system 
C. 
Thus,  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  enable  firms  and  households  to  expand  their  potential 
activity  and  participate  vitally  in  the  future  of  Japan’s  economy.  In  this  regard,  a  wide  range  of 
institutions involved in financial services should take on three challenges. 
Efficient division of labor and provision of services through diversified channels 
1. 
The first challenge is to establish an efficient division of labor in the financial services industry and the 
provision  of  services  through  diversified  channels.  The  financial  services  industry  is  immense, 
developing a variety of financial products, taking on various risks through the sale of such products, 
and reallocating these risks to economic agents. As such, it can be described as not only a provider of 
financial services but also a manufacturer and distributor of these services. 
In nonfinancial industries, particularly manufacturers who are in the front rank of global competition, 
we observe various types of division of labor in the efficient provision of goods and services. Similarly, 
I think that in the financial services industry there should be a more diversified division of labor, not 
only  within  each  financial group,  but  also among  a wide  range  of  economic agents  with substantial 
expertise in the development and sale of financial services as well as in risk-taking methods. Under 
such a system, institutions with superior monitoring capability should focus on extending loans. Those 
with  a  customer  base  of  affluent  households  should  focus  on  providing  investment  and  savings 
services. And those with highly-advanced financial engineering techniques should focus on performing 
advisory  functions  in  cutting-edge  financing  activities  such  as  securitization.  In  this  way,  various 
combinations of division of labor could produce multiple business models. 
As for the extension of credit, I have been advocating the need for diversified channels by constructing 
a  “seamless  credit  provision  system”,  in  which  customers  can  choose  any  type  of  credit  in  the 
spectrum from borrowing from banks to raising funds in capital markets. Such a seamless system for 
credit provision can be developed within the context of a diversified division of labor. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
If and when a diversified division of labor is achieved, the discussion on the ideal number of financial 
institutions  is  likely  to  lose  its  meaning.  Currently,  we  hear  comments  about  the  rather  complex 
situation of Japan’s financial system. For example, some have voiced criticism that the provision of 
financial services is not sufficient, while others say that Japan’s financial system is over-banked. As 
the division of labor becomes diversified, however, the complex situation should gradually be resolved. 
2. 
Improvement of integrated risk management and prompt and appropriate actions to changes 
in the environment 
The second challenge is how to make the integrated risk management framework more sophisticated 
as  well  as  take  prompt  and  appropriate  actions  to  respond  to  changes  in  the  environment.  Many 
financial institutions need to take on various risks over the short term and long term to smoothly satisfy 
their customers’ needs. The more capital a financial institution holds, the more risks it can manage. 
What  is required  of  financial  institutions  is  to  take  on  risks  using  a  finite  amount  of  capital,  thereby 
satisfying customer needs and maximizing their profits. 
Thus, financial institutions need an entity-wide framework in which they can handle various types of 
risks stemming from routine businesses and carefully judge the balance between risks and financial 
strength  as  well  as  sector-by-sector  profitability.  This  framework  is  called  the  “integrated  risk 
management system”. 
Under this system, we measure the magnitude of various risks such as market risks and credit risks, 
and  integrate  the  results using  Value-at-Risk  and  other benchmarking  methods.  Then,  we calculate 
the magnitude of entity-wide risks and appropriately allocate risk capital to various business areas. It is 
inevitable that the risk profiles taken on by financial institutions will change as the financial needs of 
firms and households become more diversified and complex. Consequently, we should continuously 
upgrade  the  framework  of  risk  management  by  adopting  the  most  recent  theories  of  finance  and 
utilizing new financial engineering techniques. 
Having said this, let me emphasize that the most significant factor for the effective functioning of the 
risk management framework lies in human judgment, particularly that of the top management. 
In fact, operating environments sometimes move in a direction different from that initially expected due 
to factors such as a change in the economic situation, the volatile movement of market prices, and the 
emergence of geopolitical risks. On such occasions, financial institutions’ management should be able 
to make decisions calmly and promptly. Such ability depends on continual updating and preparation 
on a daily basis. 
For financial institutions to be able to react promptly and appropriately to changes in the environment 
depends  on  the  efforts  of  both  staff  and  management.  For  example,  staff  should,  regularly  and 
concretely, provide management with information and analysis about not only the current situation but 
also future scenarios such as demand forecasts. At the same time, management should always strive 
to retain a broad perspective, solid insight, strategic ability, and strong determination. 
Reform of public finance including the postal savings system 
3. 
The  third  challenge  is  the  need  to  reform  the  postal  savings  system  and  other  public  financial 
institutions. It has been pointed out that a fairly large portion of funds is intermediated outside of the 
market mechanism, reflecting the substantial share of postal savings among financial assets in Japan. 
Some claim that this may result in distorting the efficient allocation of resources. 
Furthermore, due to the full protection of demand deposits, the share of deposits with public protection 
is  extremely  high  among  financial  assets.  In  such  an  environment,  individuals  are  less  inclined  to 
closely review risk-return profiles of various financial assets and hold diversified types of savings. This 
appears to be one of the obstacles hindering innovation in Japan’s financial system. The Japanese 
government  has  therefore  already  taken  action.  For  private  banks,  the  removal  of  blanket  deposit 
insurance is scheduled in April 2005, a little more than eight months from now. The privatization of 
Japan Post is also under serious discussion. 
In discussing the privatization of the postal savings and insurance system, we consider three points 
especially important from the viewpoint of the central bank. First, equal footing with private banks must 
be maintained. Second, a sufficient risk management system must be established and profits must be 
earned.  Third,  financial  businesses  must  be  clearly  insulated  from  the  risks  associated  with 
nonfinancial businesses. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
I  strongly  hope  that  the  discussion  of  postal  savings  privatization  will  produce  a  concrete  blueprint, 
which contributes to fair competition and further innovation in the financial system. 
Effects of sophisticated financial services on the economy 
II. 
The financial services industry offers a variety of services, including payment and settlement services, 
means for customers to raise funds and invest, hedging of risks, managing of assets for customers, 
and provision of information. I will now take up some of these categories and use them as examples to 
show the kind of sophisticated services required by firms and households. 
A. 
Supporting firms’ activities 
Provision of credit 
1. 
When  providing  credit  to  firms,  financial  institutions  need  to  continually  find  ways  to  satisfy  the 
complex and diverse requirements of their customers in developing new business. In fact, Japanese 
financial  institutions  have  started  to  review  their  heavy  dependence  on  real  estate  collateral,  and 
expand the scope of loans that are without collateral and based on the evaluation of future cash flow. 
To promote this trend, financial institutions should improve their methods for evaluating cash flow in 
line  with  new  business  projects  created  by  firms.  They  also  need  to  make  use  of  various  forms  of 
tangible  and  intangible  assets  such  as  accounts  receivable  and  intellectual  property  in  order  to 
complement credit in place of real estate collateral. 
For  large  corporations  with  easy  access  to  capital  markets,  the  role  of  intermediation  through 
securities  business  is  vital.  For  example,  some  domestic  and  foreign  securities  firms  recently 
underwrote  convertible  bonds  (CBs)  publicly  issued  by  internationally  active  Japanese  firms, 
separated the bonds into equity options and straight bonds, and sold them to a wide range of investors 
including foreign investment funds. Going forward, financial institutions need to perform higher levels 
of credit intermediation to satisfy both firms and investors. 
Moreover, it is also important for financial institutions to establish deeper relationships with firms. The 
relationships between lenders and borrowers are so complex that much research has been conducted 
in areas such as the “principal-agent problem” and “information asymmetry”. 
I think the traditional relationship between banks and firms in Japan may have been behind the strong 
tendency  toward  mutual  restraint  and  interdependence  as  exemplified  in  cross-shareholdings. 
Moreover, the traditional business practices of pursuing profitability not of individual transactions but 
rather  of  business  as  a  whole  may  have  weakened  business  discipline  between  lenders  and 
borrowers. 
For  financial  institutions,  maintaining  close  relationships  with  firms  is  critical  to  fully  utilizing  their 
information production capability. If such a relationship creates too much mutual restraint and weakens 
mutual  discipline,  however,  it  may  result  in  inefficiency  and  work  unfavorably  in  a  competitive 
environment  as  both  financial  institutions  and  firms  face  continual  and  frequent  change.  This 
relationship cannot be regarded as desirable. 
The long-term close relationship between firms and banks in Japan has attracted attention globally as 
a model for corporate finance. But it is now necessary to modify this relationship into one that is more 
suitable to a world in which lenders and borrowers make proactive proposals and check each other. 
Under such new relationships, both firms and banks are expected to take advantage of opportunities. 
For example, banks should closely monitor the condition of a firm’s business, and promptly revise the 
conditions  attached  to  credit  when  the  firm’s  situation  changes  substantially.  The  firm  can  then 
accelerate its actions to improve performance in response to the changes, and both firms and financial 
institutions can move forward in a dynamic environment. To this end, it may be useful to clarify the 
covenants  of  loans  from  their  origination,  or  to  differentiate  debt  and  equity  functions  by  utilizing 
financial techniques such as giving a lender an option to purchase new stocks issued by a borrower in 
the future. If we are able to rebuild the sophisticated relationship between firms and banks, eventually 
it may even be possible to present this as a “new” model for corporate finance. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2004
Hedging of risks 
2. 
Firms are exposed to a wide range of risks in the form of foreign exchange risks, market risks, and 
credit risks of business counterparties. Financial institutions play an important role in providing firms 
with  financial  services  including  hedging  of  risks.  It  is  expected  that  the  request  for  risk  hedging 
tailored to the business profile will increase as business activities diversify further in the future. The 
development of financial theories and cutting-edge technologies has enabled financial institutions to 
hedge even extremely complex risks. And yet, it is not easy to satisfy such demands with specialized 
hedging. The more specific the request, the more difficult it will be to find risk takers. 
Financial  institutions  that  routinely  bear  broader  risks  may  nonetheless  be  able  to  unbundle  the 
customized risks into standardized risks and take on the risks by themselves or transfer them in the 
relevant derivatives markets. In the process of unbundling and transferring risks, the division of labor 
may be effective among a wide range of financial institutions with specialized skills. The provision of 
risk-hedging tools to firms will be of primary importance on a par with the provision of loans. 
B. 
Supporting households’ activities 
Investment 
1. 
Turning to households, I will begin by looking at investment needs. The risk preferences of households 
occasionally shift in response to changes in the environment. For example, the year-on-year growth in 
banknote issuance outstanding reached 16 percent in April 2002 when blanket deposit insurance was 
partially  lifted.  Currently,  the  growth  rate  has  declined  as  low  as  the  1-2  percent  level  as  stability 
returns gradually to the financial system. Furthermore, households began to take a positive attitude 
toward equity investment as corporate profits recovered. As a result, the share of equities traded by 
individuals increased to over 20 percent in fiscal 2003, second only to nonresident investors. 
Financial institutions have already started taking advantage of this opportunity. For example, the sales 
of mutual funds and insurance products through bank branches have increased dramatically over the 
past  two  years.  The  increase  may  be  partly  due  to  deregulation.  It  may  also  partially  reflect  the 
successful  division  of  labor  between  banks  and  providers  of  these  products  such  as  asset 
management companies and insurance companies, which work effectively to satisfy a wide range of 
customer demand. Furthermore, the government is taking up the challenge to satisfy the diversified 
investment  needs  of  households  by  increasing  the  issuance  amount  of  government  bonds  that 
specifically  target  individual  investors.  In  the  retail  financial  area,  from  now  on  various  business 
strategies implemented by financial institutions will emerge following the efforts of the most advanced 
retailers. 
In this regard, I emphasize the importance of solidifying mutual trust between financial institutions and 
households rather than focusing on marketing techniques. If financial institutions can establish solid 
relationships with households as well as explain to them the risk profile of each product and the effects 
of  diversification  and  if  households  can  make  wise  decisions  about  portfolio  management  with  full 
understanding  of  the  information  provided  by  financial  institutions,  this  system  will  lead  to  a  more 
efficient allocation of resources. From the perspective of consumer protection, financial products are 
already  governed  by  various  regulations.  However,  solid  and  well-maintained relationships between 
households and financial institutions could potentially protect consumers even more effectively than 
such regulations, and therefore help to promote the efficient allocation of resources. 
Financing 
2. 
Next, I will turn to the issue of how to support households to raise funds. In the past, when households 
in Japan needed temporary and short-term funds, they appeared to prefer to withdraw money from 
time deposits or sell financial assets such as stocks rather than borrow money. This may be partly 
because  the  consumer  loan  market  in  Japan  is  dysfunctional:  for  example,  there  is  a  substantial 
divergence  between  interest  rates  on  consumer  loans  by  banks  and  those  offered  by  consumer 
finance companies. Such a large gap may indicate the existence of unsatisfied financing demand of 
households. Although there may still be difficulties in risk management of consumer loans as distinct 
from corporate loans, the law of large numbers is as effective a way as any other to manage credit 
risks of consumer loans. I do not think there is any problem with the method of risk management. 
Financial institutions are utilizing their extensive branch network to improve their marketing strategies 
for consumer loans, or strengthening business alliances across different types of institutions in light of 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 5
the current situation in which banks, credit card companies, and consumer finance companies are all 
segmented. These efforts will contribute to the improvement of financial services. 
Role of the Bank of Japan 
III. 
Finally, I will touch upon the role of the Bank in improving the efficiency of financial services. 
Sophisticated financial services and financial system stability 
A. 
First, I should mention the relationship between enhancing the activities of financial institutions and 
maintaining financial system stability. The Bank has been striving to ensure financial system stability 
by  providing  ample  liquidity  to  the  market  and  by  fulfilling  the  function  of  the  lender  of  last  resort. 
However, if too much emphasis is put on the goal of minimizing the risks taken on by banks to avoid 
failures,  the  financial  intermediary  function  may  lose  its  vigor  and  financial  innovation  may  become 
difficult  to  promote.  After  the  removal  of  blanket  deposit  insurance,  we  should  think  dynamically  by 
aiming to maintain financial system stability with the assumption that new entries into and exits from 
the financial system naturally occur. 
In this regard, the new Basel Capital Accord that was published on June 26, 2004 is based on the 
assumption that banks may fail. The new regulation requires banks to hold minimum capital to cover 
the maximum annual loss which may occur once in 100 years. 
In case of even larger losses, a bank may go bankrupt. Conversely, if there are 100 banks with the 
bare minimum of capital, one bank could fail per year. After the removal of blanket deposit insurance, 
we  must  strike  a  balance  between  maintaining  managerial  flexibility  of  financial  institutions  and 
avoiding systemic risks. 
Furthermore,  it  will  become  increasingly  important  in  the  future  to  design  bank  supervision  and 
regulation  to  avoid  hampering  financial  innovation  by  the  private  sector.  Such  thinking  has  already 
been adopted in the new Basel Capital Accord. In the new regulation, the manner in which the amount 
of required capital is calculated has become more sophisticated. A framework has been adopted that 
carefully  reflects  the  risk  profiles  of  various  assets  and  allows  banks  with  greater  risk  management 
skills to use their internal risk management models. Thus, the new regulation has been designed to 
give banks an incentive to further improve their own risk management systems. 
In  general,  regulation  or  supervision  of  financial  institutions  should  not  be  conducted  by  giving 
institutions  detailed  instructions  in  advance  on  how  to  act,  which  proved  workable  during  the  crisis 
mode.  Rather,  we  should  respect  the  unique  management  of  each  bank  and  back  managerial 
innovations  by  financial  institutions.  On-site  examinations  by  the  Bank  are  being  conducted  with  a 
recognition of the importance of supporting such innovation. 
Financial market functioning and monetary policy 
B. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  relationship  between  financial market  functioning  and monetary  policy.  A  look  at 
economic  developments  at  home  and  abroad  during  the  last  decade  indicates  that  central  banks 
should make an appropriate evaluation of economic and financial conditions in conducting monetary 
policy, with a view to not only developments in real economic activity but also the interaction between 
real economic activity and financial activity. This issue appears to be a common one for the world’s 
central  banks  given  the  rapid  and  continuous  expansion  of  financial  and  capital  markets,  and  the 
dramatic rise in the role of these markets against the background of deregulation, globalization, and 
developments in IT. 
For  example,  such  interaction  was  a  factor  behind  the  increased  and  prolonged  interdependence 
between economic and financial developments after the bursting of the bubble economy as well as the 
economic turbulence in affected countries at the time of the Asian financial crisis. Currently, the need 
for  close  communication  between  the  central  banks  and  markets  has  become  more  important  than 
ever  in  the  discussion  of  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  after  the  long  period  of  low  interest  rates 
around  the  globe.  This  should  also  be  understood  in  the  context  of  the  interaction  that  I  just 
mentioned.  The  Bank  will  do  its  utmost  to  pursue  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  while  closely 
monitoring the changes in financial markets and their influence on the activities of financial institutions 
and firms as well as on the economy as a whole. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2004
We must continue improving the functioning of financial markets and financial institutions. This is very 
important, particularly in Japan, from the viewpoint of strengthening the transmission mechanism of 
monetary policy and nurturing the dynamism of the Japanese economy over the long run. 
To improve the functioning of financial markets, the Bank has been expanding the scope of assets that 
are  eligible  to  be  purchased  or  to  be  pledged  as  collateral  for  open  market  operations.  We  will 
continue  to  work  together  with  market  participants  to  enhance  the  functioning  of  financial  markets 
including credit markets. 
To  improve  the  functioning  of  financial  institutions,  the  Bank  will  use  its  on-site  examinations  and 
off-site  monitoring  to  provide  an  environment  in  which  banks  can  build  new  business  models  and 
function efficiently with a highly sophisticated and integrated risk management system. 
Conclusion 
Today I have focused my talk on the future of financial services. I strongly hope that financial services 
in Japan will open up new possibilities for firms and households and contribute to strengthening the 
economy. Let me conclude by expressing my wish that Japan’s financial institutions will export new, 
enhanced financial technologies and services from Japan and play a greater role in the development 
of the world economy. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 7
