Tarisa Watanagase: Thai financial sector and the challenges ahead 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the conference on 
Asian Finance & Capital Markets 2004, Bangkok, 8 July 2004. 
 Good morning, 
Let me first begin by thanking Euro Events for inviting me to address this distinguished audience. I am 
delighted to be here to share with you some of my thoughts on the Thai financial sector and where it is 
heading,  especially  since  a  lot  is  happening  at  this  juncture,  with  the  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan 
being implemented. I trust therefore that we will have much to learn from each other, given the diverse 
background  of  participants  in  this  conference,  ranging  from  banking  and  government  officials  to 
investment managers and business leaders. 
Since you will engage in absorbing debates on practical issues on finance and capital markets, my 
presentation will deal with the broader issue of prospects and challenges for the financial market in the 
Thai  perspective.  While  the  discussion  will  be  based  on  the  experience  of  Thailand,  some  of  the 
challenges will be commonly faced by other emerging economies. Thus, it is my sincere hope that the 
implication drawn from this presentation will also be applicable and useful for participants from other 
countries. 
I will first touch on the structure of the Thai financial sector and the assessment of where the banking 
sector  currently  stands.  This  is  then  followed  by  a  discussion  on  the  authorities’  major  policies  to 
further strengthen financial institutions’ positions in view of more intensified competition and changing 
financial environment, including the implications of these policies. Finally, I will conclude this morning’s 
talk  by  highlighting  some  challenges  and  benefits  of  capital  market  development  for  the  banking 
sector. 
The  Thai  financial  system  consists  of  four  main  institutional  categories,  in  the  order  of  their 
importance:  the  banking  sector,  the  capital  market,  specialized  financial  institutions  and  non-bank 
financial intermediaries. The first two categories are the backbone of the Thai financial system, while 
the  third  provides  funding  for  specific  developmental  purposes  in  accordance  with  the  government 
policy, and the last supplements the others. Despite the stock exchange boom last year and the pick 
up of the bond market in recent years, the banking sector remains the primacy of our financial system 
in every sense. Not only does it provide the bulk of lending that amounted to about 5.5 trillion baht as 
of end-2003, or equivalent to 93 percent of GDP, the banking sector also mobilizes savings from the 
public and provides means of payment and settlements that sustain the well-functioning economy. 
With  the  recapitalization  effort  and  commendable  operational  improvement,  the  banking  sector  has 
emerged much stronger after the 1997 crisis, with all performance indicators pointing to the direction 
of resiliency. The banking sector’s net profit has turned positive for the past three years; this figure 
more than doubled in 2003 from the previous year. Operating profit also rose at a higher rate in 2003, 
helped  by  both  increasing  interest-  and  non-interest  incomes,  and  falling  operating  expense. 
Meanwhile, the growth of loan* portfolio maintained its momentum well at the rate of 5.6 percent at the 
end of 2003 compared with 4.9 percent a year earlier, in tandem with the robust economic recovery. 
On the stability front, the banking sector’s average provisioning was well above the required provision 
by about 35 percent, and capital to risk-weighted asset ratio remained comfortably above regulatory 
requirement in 2003, with a ratio of 13.7 percent for Thai banks and 20.5 percent for foreign banks. 
Moreover, the non-performing loans continued a declining trend with the ratio of 12.8 percent to total 
loans in 2003, compared to 15.7 percent in the previous year. The number is still high, admittedly; but 
one only needs to recall that we started with an NPL ratio of nearly 50 percent right after the crisis to 
realize that we have come a long way. The remaining NPLs do not pose a significant downside risk 
because of the over-provisioning and the continued robust performance of the economy. However, we 
will  not  be  complacent.  Regulations  will  be  forthcoming  to  further  expedite  the  resolution  of  the 
remaining NPLs - an issue that will be revisited later. 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 1
re-engineering.  Moreover,  capitalizing  on 
At  the  same  time,  banks  have  made  substantial  progress  on  productivity,  with  improvements  on 
many fronts. Operating costs have been drastically cut by means of organizational restructuring and 
work  process 
their  extensive  network  of  over 
3,000 branches, banks have widened the arrays of services to include distribution of corporate bonds 
or debentures, unit trusts, IPO shares and other debt instruments. Such efforts pay off with tangible 
result. Within four years, banks’ ratio of net interest- and non-interest income to average number of 
employees rose from 0.8 to 2.6 million baht per person per year in 2003. 
We also witness improvement in the area of customer access. Crowded customers at micro-branches 
speak volumes for the success of banks’ strategy to approach customers outside their office hours. In 
response to more sophisticated demand, banks introduced new channels of services such as internet 
banking  and  tele-banking  to  satisfy  the  technology  savvy  demands  of  emerging  new  generation  of 
customers. 
These efficiency gains have been achieved without forsaking comprehensive risk management. On 
the contrary, banks have begun to move away from collateral-based lending to risk-based approach. 
At the same time, financial literate Board of Directors has bolstered its oversight function to ensure 
that banks are managed in a sound manner. In the area of credit risk management, credit scoring has 
been widely applied in the retail loan originating process, whereas internal credit rating models have 
been  used  for  significant  corporate  loan  portfolios.  Moreover,  banks  also  have  in  place  security 
measures, contingency plans and auditing standards within their system of internal control to monitor 
reputational risk, strategic risk and other risks. 
The logical question to ask here is how do we ensure that these positive developments will maintain 
their momentum and that the banking sector will remain strong and sound amidst a more liberalized 
environment, fierce domestic and external competition, and the advent of more advanced technology 
and financial innovation? We can wait passively for external forces to inflict changes on us, or we can 
chart our own path of development in anticipation of any change. The Asian crisis brought it to the fore 
that complacency when met with abrupt and radical reforms as a result of external forces could entail 
enormous  output  loss  and  social  cost.  Thus,  we  must  do  what  we  can  to  ensure  that  the  banking 
system is up to meeting any challenge. This brings us to the second point I want to make - what the 
authorities  intend  to  do  to  enhance  the  financial  system’s  competitiveness  and  its  capability  to 
withstand forces of change in this age of globalization. 
The  authorities  are  quick  to  grasp  the  opportunity  of  healthy  economic  and  banking  conditions 
conducive  to  embarking  on  a  structural  reform,  with  the  announcement  of  the  Financial  Sector 
Master Plan. Thorough discussion on the Master Plan will require a separate session of its own. So, 
let me just pick some of its key features that will have the most significant impacts on the structure and 
efficiency of the banking industry. 
First and foremost, under the “One Presence” principle, existing financial institutions must choose one 
form  of  deposit-taking  financial  institutions;  be  it  a  commercial  bank,  retail  bank,  foreign  bank 
subsidiary or foreign bank full branch. This principle will foster a new structure that is clear, competitive 
and efficient. Specifically, the structure whereby many types of financial institutions offer essentially 
the same services to the same pools of customers and whereby a financial group has more than one 
type  of  deposit-taking  institutions  must  go.  Financial  institutions  will  therefore  have  to  address  the 
issue of redundancy resulting from this principle. 
Moreover,  the  Master  Plan  has  introduced  additional  competitive  pressure  to  the  banking  industry. 
Qualified foreign banks that opt to upgrade to subsidiaries will be able to open some branches, adding 
healthy competitive pressure to the market. 
On the part of regulators, we will streamline regulations to ensure a smooth transition process and to 
provide  adequate  flexibility  for  banks  to  conduct  their  businesses.  For  instance,  the  authorities  are 
working to resolve tax impediments to mergers. Moreover, banks have been allowed to outsource their 
administrative works and cut cost on redundant operations by back-office sharing. 
While the structural reform is under way, we continue to forge ahead with our prudential supervision 
to maintain banking system soundness. In this regard, there are a few key regulations in the pipeline, 
some aiming at expediting the NPL resolution and others at strengthening the risk-based supervision. 
The Bank of Thailand is rolling out a new measure in the second half of this year with a view to giving 
banks  a  nudge  to  deal  with  NPLs  head  on.  For  NPLs  that  have  long  been  pending  without  proper 
restructuring  or  legal  actions,  financial  institutions  will  be  required  to  set  aside  provisions  for  the 
collateral at an increasing rate, depending on the overdue period. Essentially, banks will be required to 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2004
make provision in full, regardless of the collateral value, for loans that have been non-performing for 
over four years. Also, the Asset Management Corporation, set up exclusively to buy NPLs from the 
finance companies that were closed down during the crisis, will be enabled to buy NPLs of banks. We 
are now in the process of amending the Corporation’s charter. 
On  risk-based  supervision,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  issued  a  Market  Risk  Supervision  Policy 
framework at the end of last year - a timely move given a possible upward trend of interest rates. This 
measure will ensure that financial institutions instill mechanism to manage market risk commensurate 
with  their  risk-taking  activities,  especially  in  the  trading  book.  Recognizing  the  need  for  financial 
institutions to adjust, the Bank of Thailand will implement the measure in transitional phases. By June 
2005, banks will be required, for the first time, to maintain capital fund against market risk. Prior to 
that, they will have to comply with guidelines on internal control and trading book policy, as well as 
submit call reports on the calculation of the volume of trading book transactions and the calculation of 
the capital charge against market risk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Another  factor  which  will  have  crucial  implications  for  the  banking  sector  is  the  Basel II 
implementation. With the recent release of the Basel II framework, it is inevitable that we get ourselves 
ready  for  this  international  standard  of  capital  adequacy.  We  all  would  agree  that  the  New  Capital 
Accord  is  for  the  betterment  of  banking  system  soundness  for  it  signifies  a  move  away  from  the 
one-size-fits-all approach to credit risk assessment in accommodation of evolving more sophisticated 
risk  management  of  modern  banking.  Specifically,  under  the  New  Accord,  it  provides  more 
comprehensive and risk sensitive approach to calculate regulatory capital, augmented by supervisory 
review process of Pillar II and market discipline enforcement of Pillar III. 
Despite  the  novel  complexity  of  capital  calculation  under  Pillar  I,  if  a  bank  adopts  the  standardized 
approach,  its  calculated  regulatory  capital  is  only  a  proxy  of  the  actual  risks.  I  suspect  that 
standardized  approach  is  the  one  that  most  banks  in  emerging  markets  will  adopt  before  they  can 
meet the preconditions of IRB, or the internal-rating-based approach, especially in the areas of data 
quality and risk management practices. Therefore, only through proper Pillar II supervisory review can 
we understand the true risk profile of banks, so that capital requirement is set in line with the risks 
assumed by banks. To carry out this task, the authorities need to have the right prudential rules in 
place,  as  well  as  the  supervisory  capability  and  capacity.  At  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  we  are 
developing prudential standards and risk-focused on- and off-site examination practices and manuals 
so that each supervisor can work on a common structured approach to risk analysis. Moreover, a lot of 
resources have gone into supervisory training to equip our supervisors with the necessary tools and 
build up their sound judgment for the implementation. 
In parallel, the Bank of Thailand has proposed the New Financial Institutions Businesses Law to the 
Parliament to give us the necessary legal basis to implement both effective banking supervision and 
Basel  II.  To  foster  Pillar  III  market  discipline  enforcement,  the  authorities  are  working  on  an 
appropriate safety net to replace the blanket guarantee that undermines the functioning of the Pillar III. 
It’s  obvious  that  without  lifting  the  blanket  guarantee,  market  discipline  will  not  work  no  matter  how 
much disclosure is required. At present, the Ministry of Finance is in the process of reviewing the draft 
legislation on Deposit Insurance Agency before submitting it to the Parliament. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now let me turn to the issues that directly impact the banking industry: what might be the implications 
for financial institutions as a result of the measures discussed earlier, and what are the challenges 
ahead for the banking sector? I would like to point out a few: 
First, in the new financial landscape following the implementation of the Master Plan, we anticipate a 
structural change in the banking sector with more industry consolidation and emergence of financial 
conglomerates,  embraced  by  the  “One  Presence”  principle.  Such  processes  should  lead  to  larger 
size and falling number of financial institutions. Although not a sure ticket to success, size will allow 
the  working  of  economies  of  scale  and  scope  -  to  eliminate  redundancies  in  administrative  and 
operational functions, reduce costs from more diversified portfolio of clients and enhance income from 
provision of wider range of services. For the first time ever in the Thai banking history, banks will have 
the opportunity to do all these and grow through consolidation and/or forming a financial group. Up 
until  now  cost  cutting  and  income  enhancement,  for  example,  were  possible  only  through 
reorganization  and  re-engineering  within  the  same  organization.  Of  course,  there  were  cases  of 
mergers  in  the  history,  but  they  were  mainly  out  of  necessity  to  solve  the  problem  of  some  weak 
BIS Review 43/2004 
 3
banks, not as a calculated move for growth. Therefore, in my opinion, the first major challenge in the 
next couple of years for banks is to reap the benefits from such an opportunity offered by the Master 
Plan. In doing so, a bank’s Board and senior management must give its full attention and be fully 
committed  to  articulating  a  strategic  plan,  successfully  integrating  their  operations,  streamlining 
various business processes, as well as finding their niche markets or areas of comparative advantage. 
Second, banks must prepare themselves for the new Basel Accord. Most banks in Thailand will start 
with the standardized approach in the calculation of their regulatory capital, because of the reasons I 
talked about earlier. Adopting the standardized approach does not require much preparation, since it 
is quite similar to the existing Accord, with only some differences in the risk weights of some assets. 
However, if banks stay on the standardized approach for too long, they will not be as risk sensitive as 
those which adopt the IRB approach, resulting in higher risk and higher need for capital, which means 
that they will not be able to compete well as internationally active banks. Therefore, the ultimate goal 
for  those  who  wish  to  compete  internationally  would  be  to  move  to  the  IRB  approach,  after  some 
extensive  preparations.  These  preparations,  in  particular  those  on  improving  data  quality  and  risk 
management, are in fact something that banks would like to do any way to be safe and sound, with or 
without moving to the IRB approach. Hence, the second major challenge for banks is to put in place a 
good data base and systems to identify, measure and manage all banking risks to optimize their use of 
capital  and  price  their  products  according  to  risks.  In  addition,  when  taking  into  account  the  risk 
associated  with  business  cycle,  banks  must  be  prepared  to  beef  up  financial  strength  during 
favorable economic conditions so that they could weather vulnerability during the downturns. These 
are daunting tasks and again require the full attention and commitment of the Board. 
Banking  is  all  about  customer  relation;  this  is  particularly  true  for  personal  banking  segment.  The 
needs  for  financial  institutions  to  properly  take  care  of  customer  complaints  are  occasionally 
highlighted  by  a  few  high  profile  cases  in  the  media.  This  type  of  issue  will  gain  more  importance, 
given the growing retail banking sector. To remain competitive and maintain customers’ trust, banks 
must  be  fair and  transparent  about  their  provision  of  financial  services,  a  challenge  which  is  very 
much in line with the Basel II’s Pillar 3. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I have not forgotten the capital market, another integral part of the financial market, which makes it 
vibrant and offers diversification in terms of channels of financial intermediation. Deeper and broader 
capital market can avert or at the very least lessen the liquidity crunch effect on corporations in the 
event of a banking crisis. Efforts, therefore, have been made to develop the capital market to curtail 
dependence on the banking sector. In the past years, the private sector has raised financing more and 
more from the capital market. In particular, the bond market’s outstanding corporate debt instruments 
more than doubled in five years, surging from 180 billion baht or 4 percent of GDP at the end of 1998 
to 556 billion baht or 9.4 percent of GDP at the end of 2003. When combining the market capitalization 
of the equity market to the bond market, the capital market’s outstanding financial instruments stood at 
5.4 trillion baht or 91 percent of GDP at the end of 2003, nearly equal lending from the banking sector. 
With  its  growing  share  in  the  financial  market,  the  capital  market  offers  both  opportunities  and 
challenges  to  the  banking  sector.  Through  their  extensive  branch  networks,  banks  can  further 
enhance fee-based income by increasing their roles as arranger, underwriter, facilitator and custodian. 
In direct competition with the capital market for corporate clients, banks must sharpen their competitive 
edge by being cost efficient without compromising quality of services, so that they can offer corporate 
loans  at  competitive  pricing  at  par  with  the  capital  market.  This  again  underscores  the  critical 
importance  of  risk  management-banks  with  more  advanced  tools  in  risk  management  are  likely  to 
have  an  edge  over  those  without,  since  the  former  can  better  price  risk  and  use  their  capital  more 
efficiently. Moreover, instead of competing for corporate loans at fine margin, banks can also explore 
other niche sectors that may have been somewhat neglected such as SMEs. 
In  summary,  I  would  like  to  conclude  that  so  far,  the  Thai  financial  system  has  shown  signs  of 
resilience with promising prospects for the future. But we will continue to press on with the structural 
reforms  to  achieve  sustainable  growth  and  soundness  of  the  banking  industry.  The  Master  Plan 
provides  us  with  a  road  map  to  a  more  balanced  and  efficient  financial  system.  While  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  will  continue  to  strengthen  risk-based  supervision  and  foster  observance  of  corporate 
governance for financial system stability, financial institutions will need to continuously and vigorously 
improve their risk management capacity for the upcoming formidable challenges in order to thrive in 
the new financial landscape. 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2004
