Kazumasa Iwata: Recent economic and financial developments 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Kazumasa  Iwata,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Center  for 
Financial Industry Information Systems (FISC), Tokyo, 9 December 2003. 
The references can be found on the Bank of Japan’s website. 
Click on ko0312d.pdf (35KB) to download figures.  
 It is an honor to be invited to speak at this seminar sponsored by the Center for Financial Industry 
Information Systems. Today, I will talk about recent economic and financial developments in Japan 
with  special  focus  on  deflation  and  monetary  policy.  At  the  outset,  I  should  say  that  the  views 
expressed here are those of my own and do not reflect those of my colleagues on the Policy Board or 
the Bank of Japan.  
Third economic recovery since the bursting of the bubble  
I.  
During the current recovery, which started in January 2002, real GDP has grown at an annualized rate 
in the mid-2 percent range, and increased for six consecutive quarters. This is the third recovery since 
the bursting of the bubble. The first was from October 1993 through May 1997, and the second from 
January 1999 through October 2000.  
Let me describe the current recovery by comparing with the two previous ones.  
First,  exports  and  business  fixed  investment  are  the  driving  forces  as  was  the  same  in  the  two 
previous  recoveries.  Although  in  terms  of  contribution  to  GDP  growth  business  fixed  investment  is 
playing  a  greater  role  than  net  exports,  the  recovery  in  industrial  production  and  business  fixed 
investment  is  in  fact  triggered  by  the  increase  in  exports.  In  the  meantime,  domestic  demand  is 
generally  sluggish  because  of  adjustment  pressures  on  balance  sheets  as  well  as  equipment  and 
labor.  
In the current recovery, China, in addition to the United States, is greatly contributing to the increase in 
exports.  This  is  in  contrast  to  the  second  recovery  from  1999  through  2000  during  which  period 
imports  from  China  played  an  important  role.  Other  Asian  countries  are  also  contributing  to  the 
increase in exports from Japan in the current recovery.  
Second, in terms of inventory cycle, the current recovery resembles the first. In the first recovery from 
1993  through  1997,  the  economy  was  about  to  enter  an  inventory  adjustment  phase  against  the 
backdrop of the rapid appreciation of the yen against the U.S. dollar in 1995. However, once the yen 
started  to  depreciate,  the  economy  began  to  see  increasing  inventory  investment  from  a  very  low 
level. In the current recovery, inventory is at a historically low level, and the inventory to shipment ratio 
is following a similar pattern as in 1995 (Chart 1). Thus, inventory investment is expected to increase 
as production and shipments rise. In the United States, inventory is also at a low level, and inventory 
investment is expected to increase, thus offsetting the slowdown in the growth of final demand until 
mid-2004.  
Third, the business fixed investment cycle in the current recovery is following a similar pattern as in the 
second  recovery  from  January  1999  through  October  2000.  According  to  the  September  Tankan, 
business  fixed  investment  plans  of  large  manufacturers  for  fiscal  2003  are  expected  to  increase 
11 percent in nominal terms. This rate of increase is almost the same as that of large manufacturers 
for fiscal 2000.  
The 11 percent increase in business fixed investment is quite high in real terms when we consider the 
decline  in  prices  of  fixed  investment  goods.  In  fact,  the  deflator  for  business  fixed  investment  fell 
5.8 percent  year  on  year  in  the  July-September  quarter.  This  deflator  may  overstate  the  decline  in 
prices  of  fixed  investment  goods,  as  I  will  discuss  later.  If  we  assume  that  the  true  extent  of  price 
decline is half of the observed data, the 11 percent increase in business fixed investment in nominal 
terms will be translated into an approximate 15 percent increase in real terms.  
The current expansion of business fixed investment centers on IT-related investment as was the case 
in the second recovery, though the range of products is much wider. Such investment is related to not 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 1
only  semiconductors but  also  new  household  electronic  products,  including  digital  cameras,  plasma 
display  panel  television  sets,  and  DVD  recorders.  An  increase  in  renewal  investment  is  also  being 
planned in the steel and chemical as well as transportation industries. This is against the background 
that exports to China are increasing not only in the IT-related goods area but also in heavy industries 
such as steel and chemicals, and that equipment in the manufacturing sector has become obsolete. 
Current  business  fixed  investment  has  declined  to  roughly  the  same  as  that  of  fixed  capital 
consumption. If we apply the business cycle theory of Hicks, Japan's business fixed investment has 
bottomed out and is starting to expand. Furthermore, it is an encouraging sign that a number of small 
firms, among both manufacturers and non-manufacturers, plan to increase fixed investment reflecting 
the recent improvement in business sentiment.  
The current recovery is similar to the previous two recoveries in that it greatly depends on the recovery 
of the world economy, particularly the economies of the United States and China. However, it seems 
more  robust  than  the  previous  two  recoveries  because  this  time  cyclical  factors  in  the  domestic 
economy, such as inventory and fixed investment, are gaining momentum.  
Sustainability of recovery and risk factors  
II.  
Private  forecasts  of  real  GDP  growth  for  fiscal  2003  and  2004  are  generally  lower  than  the  Bank's 
forecast in the mid-2 percent range for both years as presented in Outlook and Risk Assessment of 
the Economy and Prices (hereafter the Outlook Report) in October 2003.  
However,  private  forecasts  for  fiscal  2003  are  currently  being  revised  upward.  This  is  because  the 
annualized growth rate of real GDP increased by 1.4 percent in the July-September quarter, higher 
than  private  forecasts  of  zero  percent  or  a  slight  increase  based  on  the  slowdown  in  private 
consumption due to the cool summer. After revision, real GDP growth for fiscal 2003 may reach close 
to 2.7 percent, which is the highest among the nine Board members' forecasts in the Outlook Report 
published in October.  
One of the reasons why private forecasts for fiscal 2004 are more pessimistic than the Bank's forecast 
is  that  they  anticipate  inventory  adjustment  or  a  slowdown  in  business  fixed  investment.  As  I 
mentioned, the current recovery is fairly robust thanks to the favorable impact of the cyclical upturn in 
inventory  and  fixed  investment.  In  fact,  the  more  than  10  percent  annualized  rate  of  increase  in 
exports during the July-September quarter is supporting the growth of industrial production.  
Another reason for pessimistic private forecasts is that the U.S. economy may rapidly slow down in 
mid-2004 after the effects of recent tax cuts have run their course. However, labor productivity growth 
has  been  quite  remarkable,  recording  7.0  percent  and  9.4  percent  on  an  annualized  basis  in  the 
second  and  third  quarters  of  fiscal  2003,  respectively.  Of  course,  such  rapid  growth  will  not  be 
ever-lasting, but it is expected to remain relatively high for all industries, including services industries, 
in the fourth quarter and thereafter. Productivity growth would improve corporate profits, which would 
not only finance business fixed investment but also contribute to an increase in wages. An increase in 
total household assets aided by a rise in employment and wages as well as in stock prices could offset 
the  waning  effect  of  tax  cuts  in  the  middle  of  next  year.  Thus,  the  U.S.  economy  is  highly  likely  to 
continue growing at around 4 percent from the fourth quarter of this year through the end of next year.  
China  and  other  Asian  economies  are  rapidly  recovering.  The  euro  area  has  hit  bottom  and  is 
expected to be on a growth track of around 1.5 percent in 2004 as business sentiment improves. As a 
result, 2004 could be a year of synchronized recovery in the world economy.  
The main obstacles to this scenario are the rapid depreciation of the U.S. dollar and geopolitical risks.  
Many argue that the stronger U.S. dollar causes a widening of the U.S. external imbalance. However, 
it is the income effect from the growth of trading partners, not the price effect of the exchange rate that 
is  far  more  effective  in  correcting  the  external  imbalance.  The  situation  where  the  U.S.  economy 
continues  to  be  the  sole  engine  for  growth  is  not  desirable  for  a  sustainable  recovery  of  the  world 
economy. Hence, it is a top priority policy agenda for Japan, other Asian countries, and also European 
countries to achieve a full-fledged economic recovery.  
A rapid depreciation of the U.S. dollar would reduce capital inflows to the United States, and lead to 
the fall of both bond and stock prices, which would, in turn, weaken momentum for economic recovery.  
Since 1985, Japan's current account to nominal GDP ratio has hardly changed from around 3 percent 
in spite of large fluctuations in the yen exchange rate from 260 yen to 80 yen against the U.S. dollar. 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2004
This shows that the size of a country's external imbalance over the medium to long term is determined 
by the difference from the rest of the world in terms of such fundamental determinants for economic 
growth as technological progress, population growth, and national savings rates.1  
Economic growth rate and bias in the price index  
III.  
From the viewpoint of overcoming deflation, we need to understand the bias in the price index as well 
as how it relates to changes in the relationship between real growth and potential growth. If there is no 
bias  in  the  price  index  and  real  GDP  growth  exceeds  potential  growth  by  about  1  percent  for  two 
years, we will have the possibility of escaping from deflation in view of the relationship between the 
pace of narrowing output gap and current size of the output gap.2 To the contrary, if the price index 
bias is large and real GDP growth is overvalued compared with potential growth, the output gap will 
not narrow and it will be difficult to escape from deflation.  
Economists have long been debating the “index problem,” namely what the true cost of living index is 
and which price index is the closest to it. Regrettably, no ideal price index exists. Among various price 
indices, the Fisher chain-weighted price index has been considered to be relatively close to the ideal 
price  index.  It  is  the  geometric average  of  a  Laspeyres  price  index  with  base-year weighting  and  a 
Paasche price index with current-year weighting.  
The  CPI  and  the  corporate  goods  price  index  (CGPI)  in  Japan  are  Laspeyres  indices  based  on 
weightings  in  2000.  On  the  other  hand,  the  GDP  deflator  is  a  Paasche  index  based  on  1995 
weightings in National Income Statistics, which is obtained by dividing nominal GDP by real GDP. The 
fact that real GDP has a base year preceding that for the CPI does affect the price index bias.  
While a Laspeyres price index tends to overstate the increase in the cost of living, a Paasche price 
index tends to overstate the decline in the cost of living.3 A Laspeyres price index has an upward bias 
because  it  does  not  necessarily  incorporate  the  shift  of  consumer  behavior  from  more  expensive 
goods to less expensive ones as prices of various goods change to a different extent over the years 
(intertemporal substitution effect). Other factors contributing to this bias are (1) the increase in new 
products, (2) the increase in discounted products and sales campaigns, and (3) qualitative changes 
due  to  diversification  and  technological  innovation.  To  the  contrary,  a  Paasche  price  index  has  a 
downward  bias  because  it  takes  account  of  the  substitution  effect  by  putting  a  relatively  smaller 
weighting on goods whose prices have been increasing, thereby overstating the decline in the cost of 
living.  
Real  GDP  growth  may  be  overstated  since  the  GDP  deflator,  which  is  a  Paasche  price  index, 
overstates the decline in the cost of living.  
How  great  is  the  bias  in  the  Paasche  price  index?  During  the  July-September  quarter  of  2003,  the 
private  consumption  deflator  fell  1.4  percent,  and  the  underlying  trend  of  core  CPI  fell  around 
0.5 percent4 (Chart 2). The difference between the deflator and the core CPI was about 1 percent. All 
                                                      
1   Hamada and Iwata (1989) analyzed the external imbalance of Japan and the United States using a neo-classical growth 
model in an open economy, and found that the observed imbalance was smaller than that suggested by the model. The 
difference was likely attributable to the preference of residents to hold domestic assets rather than foreign assets (“home 
bias”) and also the existence of non-tradable goods. 
2  The acceleration or deceleration of inflation depends on not only the current size of the output gap but also the difference 
between the actual real GDP growth rate and potential growth  rate. This can be derived from the Phillips curve and the 
formation of expectations for expected inflation. The year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI was minus 0.8 percent in 
fiscal 2002, turning to plus 0.1 percent in October 2003. Special factors such as a tobacco tax hike, an increase in medical 
treatment costs, and a rise in rice prices pushed up the CPI in October 2003 by 0.4 percent to 0.5 percent. The remaining 
improvement compared with the CPI in fiscal 2002 was due to the following. The price increasing effect of a reduction in the 
output gap, that is, real GDP growth being higher than potential growth, outweighed the price-reducing effect stemming from 
the output gap itself. I express my appreciation to Mr. Laurence Meyer for his insight that the change in inflation depends on 
not only the level of the unemployment rate but also change in the unemployment rate. 
In retrospect, the history of the “index problem” reveals that a Laspeyres price index indicates the maximum value of a true 
cost-of-living index, and a Paasche price index its minimum. In terms of production, a Laspeyres price index indicates the 
minimum value of a production possibility index for a given level of production, and a Paasche price index its maximum. For 
discussion of the “superlative index,” see Diewert (1976) and Sakuramoto (1999). 
In Japan, the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI was higher than that in the private consumption deflator and the 
GDP  deflator  in  the  1990s,  though  there  had  been  little  difference  between  these  three  indices  in  the  preceding  period. 
There seems to have been a large difference between the three indices since the mid-1990s when deflation measured by 
4  
3 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 3
of this cannot be regarded as the bias in the Paasche price index because CPI, which is a Laspeyres 
price  index,  has  an  upward  bias.  The  Fisher  price  index  is  less  biased  than  other  price  indices. 
Considering that it is the geometric average of the Paasche and Laspeyres price indices, we may say 
that the size of a downward bias in the private consumption deflator, which is a Paasche price index, is 
roughly  a  half  of  one  percent.  If  the  difference  of  decline  between  the  business  fixed  investment 
deflator and the price index for business fixed investment goods in the CGPI was 3 to 4 percent, a 
downward  bias  in  the  business  fixed  investment  deflator  would  be  about  half  of  this  difference.5 
Accordingly,  both  the  downward  bias  in  the  GDP  deflator  in  National  Income  Statistics  and  upward 
bias in real GDP growth lie between 0.5 percent and 1 percent. Personally, I think both of these biases 
are closer to 0.5 percent.  
The  potential  GDP  growth  rate  is  estimated  from  observed  real  GDP  data  in  National  Income 
Statistics. Roughly speaking, the trend of real GDP growth rates in the past is used as the potential 
growth  rate.  In  the  White  Paper  on  Economic  and  Fiscal  Policy  Management  for  fiscal  2003,  the 
potential growth rate is estimated at around 1 percent, which has an upward bias.  
It  should  be noted  that  the  qualitative  improvement in  products  due  to  technological  innovation  has 
been  captured  more  appropriately  and  reflected  in GDP  data  since  2000  when  the  wholesale  price 
index  (WPI)  was  changed  to  the  CGPI.  However,  from  1995  to  2000,  the  WPI  was  still  used  in 
National  Income  Statistics,  and  the  improvement  in  quality  and  productivity  due  to  technological 
innovation  was not captured  as well  as  it  has  been  since  2000. If  the  increase  in productivity  were 
substantial during this period, the potential growth rate would be understated.  
Considering an upward bias due to the Paasche price index and understatement due to the WPI, we 
should  use  the  current  estimate  of  the  potential  growth  rate  as  it  is  until  structural  adjustment  is 
complete. When structural adjustment has ended, the effect of productivity improvement due to the IT 
revolution  may  materialize,  raising  the  potential  growth  rate  to  1.5  percent  to  2  percent  as  recently 
asserted by Jorgenson (2003).  
To summarize, we will have better prospects of overcoming deflation as the output gap narrows if the 
following  two  conditions  are  fulfilled:  (i)  the  real  growth  rate  exceeds  the  potential  growth  rate  by 
1 percent  after  taking  account  of  the  Paasche  price  index  bias  for  the  two  years  of  structural 
adjustment period, designated by the government; and (ii) the output gap remains around 1 percent.6  
In addition, the higher-value-added new products in the manufacturing industry, the recovery of pricing 
power through consolidation and integration in raw material industries, and the stronger preference of 
the  household  sector  for  higher-value-added  products  suggest  that  a  business  model  with  new 
value-added-products are in the process of being created after a period of price destruction. This also 
contributes to overcoming deflation.  
Four prescriptions for overcoming deflation  
IV. 
So far, I have discussed the possibilities of overcoming deflation based on the data. Turning to the 
theoretical aspect, let me introduce the following four prescriptions for overcoming deflation:  
(i) 
The  central  bank  purchases  a  large  amount  of  foreign  bonds,  targeting  a  given  exchange 
rate to achieve a desirable inflation rate.  
The  central  bank  purchases  a  large  amount  of  government  bonds,  targeting  a  desirable 
inflation rate.  
The central bank increases the monetary base in an appropriate manner with the support of 
fiscal policy, targeting a desirable price level.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
                                                                                                                                                                      
the GDP deflator began. It will probably be worthwhile examining the extent of difference between the three indices once the 
economy returns to a normal situation. 
5   Morgan  (2003)  focuses  on  the  difference  between  the  fall  in  the  business  fixed  investment  deflator  and  the  decline  in 
business fixed investment goods prices in the Corporate Price Index, and asserts that 50 percent of the annualized growth 
rate of 3.9 percent during the April to June period was due to the distortion of price indices. 
6   The output gap that may trigger inflation is shown in Chart 3. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2004
(iv) 
The  central  bank  increases  the  monetary  base,  aiming  at  desirable  rates  of  inflation  and 
potential  growth  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  under  fiscal  policy  targeting  a  zero  primary 
balance.  
Svensson  (2001)  proposed  the  first  prescription.  He  argues  that  the  central  bank  should  continue 
purchasing foreign bonds by creating money to achieve a target exchange rate consistent with a target 
inflation  rate.  Or,  the  country  should  adopt  a  crawling  peg  exchange  rate  system,  in  which  the 
exchange  rate  depreciates  by  the  same  amount  as  the  difference  between  inflation  at  home  and 
abroad. This prescription aims at overcoming deflation by raising import prices with lower exchange 
rates.  
Auerbach  and  Obstfeld  (2003)  proposed  the  second  prescription.  They  argue  that  a  target  inflation 
rate is announced beforehand, and the central bank continues purchasing government bonds through 
money market operations until the target inflation rate is achieved. They focus on a combination of the 
future increase in monetary base and the current positive long-term interest rates. The latter indicates 
that market participants expect short-term interest rates to become positive in future.  
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) as well as Bernanke (2003) proposed the third prescription. They 
argue that the central bank should increase monetary base in an appropriate manner with the support 
of fiscal policy to achieve a target price level. For example, the target price level can be set at a level 
immediately before  the  CPI  begins  to fall.  For example,  a  money-financed  tax  cut  is  one  promising 
policy  measure.  This  is  a  path  dependent  policy  in  which  a  larger  increase  in  inflation  becomes 
necessary if the target price level is not achieved.  
I personally recommend the fourth prescription, which can be applied to the Japanese economy. Let 
us assume the following. Japan's potential growth rate is between 1 percent and 1.5 percent over the 
medium to long term, and that a desirable inflation rate is between 1 percent and 2 percent in terms of 
the core CPI. The central bank increases the monetary base, while paying due attention to the change 
in the trend of the income velocity of money, to realize both the potential growth rate and desirable 
inflation.  Fiscal  policy  is  implemented  to  achieve  a  zero  primary  balance  in  the  early  2010s.  Under 
such circumstances, both the nominal balance of government bonds and the monetary base continue 
rising. The private sector can raise its utility by substituting the expected increase in the real balance 
of financial assets for consumption. Thus, private spending would increase.  
A money-financed tax cut does not require the new issue of government bonds. Similarly, fiscal policy 
aiming at a zero primary balance does not require the redemption of existing government bonds by a 
future tax increase. The balance of government bonds remains in the future. This is a typical case of 
non-Ricardian fiscal policy. When non-Ricardian fiscal policy is implemented and the monetary base is 
increased,  households  would  increase  spending  so  that  the  future  real  balance  of  financial  assets 
would  not  become  too  large.7  In  fact,  the  household  savings  rate  in  Japan  became  negative  in  the 
most recent flow of funds survey. This may be partly due to temporary factors, but there is a possibility 
that the spending expansion mechanism that I just described may be at work for senior citizens and 
pensioners.  
The year-on-year rate of increase in the monetary base is currently around 17 percent to 20 percent. 
This  is  large  enough  to  realize  Japan's  potential  growth  rate  and  a  desirable  inflation  rate  over  the 
medium to long term.8 If the central bank announces that it is prepared to increase the monetary base 
                                                      
7  The  effect  of  increasing  spending  can  be  called  the  “intertemporal  Pigou  effect,”  which  is  independent  from  the  portfolio 
rebalancing effect. Or, it can be called the “intertemporal Walras Law” because it focuses on the effect on budget constraint 
of the fact that the discounted present value of the real balance of debt of the government sector, which is equal to the 
discounted  present  value  of  the  real  balance  of  financial  assets  of  the  private  sector,  will  not  become  zero  even  in  the 
distant future. This effect is created because the private sector anticipates an increase in its wealth in the future. Another 
prescription  similar  to  the  one  proposed  in  the  speech  is  a  combination  of  non-Ricardian  fiscal  policy  and  the  policy  of 
increasing  the  monetary  base  by  k  percent  as  suggested  by  Benhabib  et  al.  (2002).  My  prescription  differs  from  the 
prescriptions of Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) as well as Benhabib et al. because it focuses on the trend change in the 
income velocity of the monetary base, which is influenced by interest rate fluctuations, the rate of change in inflation, and 
the progress of nonperforming loan disposals. 
8   The decrease in the trend change in the income velocity of the monetary base is currently around minus 11 percent. Adding 
a desirable nominal growth rate as well as the difference between the desirable nominal growth rate and the actual nominal 
growth rate to the 11 percent would produce a desirable rate of increase in the monetary base, which would achieve the 
desirable nominal growth rate. 
BIS Review 2/2004 
 5
to the extent necessary to achieve medium- to long-term policy targets, the private sector will feel less 
uneasy about increasing spending, which, in turn, will make monetary policy more effective.  
The Bank of Japan clarified its commitment to continue its quantitative easing policy, which began in 
March 2001, specifying the following from the viewpoint of enhancing transparency.  
The Bank will continue its current quantitative easing policy until, 
(i) 
the underlying trend of the year-on-year rate of increase in the core CPI marks zero percent 
or higher for a few months, and 
the  majority  of  Policy  Board  members  forecast  that  the  prospective  year-on-year  rate  of 
increase in the core CPI will register above zero percent during the forecasting period. 
(ii) 
These two conditions are necessary conditions. In some cases, the Bank may judge it appropriate to 
continue quantitative easing even if these conditions are fulfilled.  
To overcome deflation, the Bank aims to stabilize not only short-term interest rates but also longer-
term  rates  through  its  commitment  to  continue  its  zero  interest  rate  policy  in  the  future.  This 
commitment is consistent with that regarding monetary base that I just described. We can strengthen 
the commitment by modifying the condition regarding the prospective rate of inflation in such a way 
that the Bank continues quantitative easing until the year-on-year rate of increase in inflation reaches 
1 percent. This 1 percent is the lower bound of the numerical target for price stability, which I think 
desirable from the viewpoint of adjusting an upward bias in the CPI and maintaining a sufficient buffer 
so that the economy will not easily fall into deflation again.  
The announcement of a numerical target for price stability would stabilize people's expectations for the 
future, thereby stabilizing long-term interest rates and reducing the adjustment period to reach a new 
equilibrium with positive price increases.  
Many  aspects  of  my  proposal  have  already  been  implemented.  And,  I  believe  we  can  raise  the 
probability  of  overcoming  deflation  by  combining  the  policy  commitment  effect  and  the  monetary 
expansion effect.  
6 
 BIS Review 2/2004
