Rachel Lomax: Inflation targeting - achievement and challenges 
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax,1 Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Bristol Society at the 
University of the West of England, Bristol, 18 February 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to be here in Bristol tonight. 
Bristol and the Bank go back a long way. Our Agent in the South West, the late Michael Knight, was a 
founder member of this Society. And nearly two centuries ago - in 1827 to be exact - Bristol was one 
of the first branches that the bank established outside London. Not that it was plain sailing. The Bank’s 
first  Agent  in  Bristol,  Mr  John  May,  resigned  after  only  a  few  years  complaining  of  the  unhealthy 
situation  of  the  branch  premises,  situated  as  they  were  next  to  the  City  Poor  House  and  a  pool  of 
stagnant water, at risk of cholera and - this was the time of the great Reform Bill - riots and fire. By 
these standards, our present Agent, Kevin Butler, has no grounds for complaint. 
My subject tonight is a more recent episode in our economic history: the improvement in economic 
performance associated with the adoption of inflation targets just over a decade ago. I’ll look first at 
why this approach to monetary policy seems to work, and then consider what challenges remain for 
policy makers. 
Historical overview 
One of the more dramatic developments in the final decades of the last century was the sharp fall in 
inflation  worldwide.  This  remarkable  phenomenon  brought  inflation  almost  everywhere  to  levels  not 
seen for the best part of fifty years. Set against the long sweep of history, it is the 1970s and 1980s 
that now stand out - as a major, but time limited, episode of high global inflation.2 In the UK, the period 
since 1992 has seen a shift to low and stable inflation combined with sustained economic growth, and 
steadily  falling  unemployment.  Slightly  miraculous  as  these  developments  may  still  seem  to  the 
generation  that  came  of  age  during  the  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  -  remember  ‘stagflation’?  -  the 
happy fact is that for anyone in their mid-thirties, low inflation, steady growth and low interest rates are 
the norm. 
Success  has  many  parents,  and  the  trend  to  low  inflation  is  no  exception.  But  there  is  a  broad 
consensus that better monetary policies run by more independent and more open central banks can 
claim a significant share of the credit. The Short History of Twentieth Century Monetary Policy goes 
roughly as follows. For the first time since the collapse of Bretton Woods - arguably since the Gold 
Standard  -  after  decades  of  unhappy  experiments  with  fine  tuning,  incomes  policies  and  monetary 
targets, buffeted by the explosive growth of financial markets and often misled by economic dogma, 
governments have finally found an approach to monetary policy that seems to work. And it works by 
setting clear limits on the role of governments themselves. 
This  is  of  course  a  caricature.  But  it  is  certainly  true  that  the  1990s  were  a  period  of  considerable 
reform and innovation in central banks across the world; many new central banks were established 
and many established central banks were given greater independence from their governments, often 
in exchange for a clear commitment to meet specific targets for inflation. From the time when we left 
the  Exchange  Rate  Mechanism  in  1992,  the  UK  has  led  this  wave  of  change.  Looking  back,  the 
adoption of formal inflation targets in 1992 marks a decisive break with the past. 
The other key date is 1997, when the Bank of England was granted operational independence; the 
institutional framework then put in place entrenched and enhanced the credibility of inflation targeting, 
and has been widely admired. Moreover, in the UK, as in many other inflation targeting countries, a 
                                                      
1 
I would like to thank Jens Larsen for research support and Luca Benati, Melissa Davey, John Power and Sally Srinivasan, 
whose  work  I  have  drawn  on  extensively.  I  have  also  benefited  from  comments  from  many  colleagues  at  the  Bank, 
especially Peter Andrews, Charlie Bean, James Proudman and John Keyworth. The views expressed here are mine, and do 
not necessarily reflect those of the Bank of England or the Monetary Policy Committee. 
2  Rogoff,  K  (2003),  ‘Globalization  and  global  disinflation’,  paper  prepared  for  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City 
conference on ‘Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a changing economy’. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
track record of success, built up over more than a decade, has progressively reinforced the credibility 
of these targets. As a result, people and firms have increasingly come to expect inflation to stay close 
the official target - a belief which itself helps to keep it there. 
Clearly  the  world  has  changed.  For  sure,  there  is  still  much  we  do  not  understand  both  about  the 
ebbing of global inflationary pressures over the past decade and about the impact of low inflation on 
the  way  that  people  behave.  And  there  have  been  crises,  such  as  the  stock  market  crash  and 
September 11. By past standards, though, modern monetary policy is a less melodramatic affair. 
Has policy making become easier? I don’t think so, though I suspect it looks that way. But let met give 
a fuller answer by setting out how the present approach to setting interest rates works; and outlining 
some of today’s challenges. 
The policy framework 
I’ll start with inflation targeting, as it has been implemented in the UK since 1997. 
The institutional framework is set out in some detail in the 1998 Bank of England Act. This is extremely 
clear both about the aims of monetary policy and about the respective roles of the Government and 
the Bank. On the one hand, the Bank of England is required set interest rates so as ‘to maintain price 
stability and subject to that to support the economic policy of HM Government, including its objectives 
for growth and employment’. On the other, the Government is required to specify what its economic 
objectives are, including what is meant by price stability. The remit of the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC) must be set out in writing at least annually and it must be published. 
The remit has always had important elements of flexibility. For example, while the MPC is directed to 
aim for the target ‘at all times’ and to treat deviations from target symmetrically, it is not expected to 
react mechanically. Instead, if inflation deviates from target by more than 1%, the Governor is required 
to write to the Chancellor explaining the circumstances and setting out what action the MPC considers 
necessary to return to target. No letter has been written so far, but only because circumstances have 
not warranted it. 
There  is  an  explicit  understanding  that  operational  independence  must  be  accompanied  by 
transparency and clear accountability to Parliament and the general public as well as to Government. 
The Bank’s forecasts are published in the quarterly Inflation Report, the minutes of MPC meetings are 
published  within  two  weeks,  and  the  nine  members  of  the  MPC  appear  regularly  in  front  of 
Parliamentary  committees  as  well  undertaking  between  them  some  50-60  regional  visits  a  year  to 
different parts of the UK. 
The Committee has a distinctly individualistic bias, in contrast to the consensus seeking traditions of 
many other central banks. It includes four external members who are appointed for their expertise, not 
as  representatives  of  interest  groups;  and  all  members  are  individually  accountable  for  their  votes, 
which are made public with the minutes. Both the markets and the press take a keen interest in the 
pattern of voting, and members will often find a way to explain their thinking in more detail. 
All this adds up to a powerful set of incentives for members of the MPC to focus on maintaining price 
stability; to pay attention to all relevant information; to weigh up the risks; to take timely decisions; and 
to explain them clearly. Moreover, clarity about the aims of policy and the transparency of the decision 
taking process give the MPC significant scope to influence the longer term interest rates set by the 
market.  It’s  a  far  cry  from  previous  policy  regimes,  when  the  main  players  faced  very  different 
incentives.  Prior  to  1997  the  key  decision  makers  were  politicians,  who  both  set  objectives  for 
monetary policy and took responsibility for the technical judgements needed to meet them. Politicians 
can rarely afford the luxury of focussing on one objective to the exclusion of all others. Attempts to win 
credibility  by  constraining  their  discretion,  notably  through  setting  monetary  targets,  were  a  fairly 
comprehensive failure. 
Interest  rate  decisions  have  been  the  subject  of  some  famous  tussles  between  Number  10  and 
Number 11 Downing Street under successive Governments. Here is Chancellor Denis Healey, writing 
in his memoirs3 about a spat with the Prime Minster of the day: 
                                                      
3  Healey, D (1989), The time of my life, Michael Joseph London. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
‘At this time my own relations with Jim were shaken by an incident just after the 
Party Conference. On October 6 I had asked him to let me raise interest rates by 
another 2 per cent to the then unprecedented level of 15 per cent…He refused. I 
said I wanted to take the matter to Cabinet that morning. ‘All right’ he replied ‘but I 
will not support you.’ Nevertheless I insisted…’ 
In the event this did not prove necessary: Callaghan backed down, leading Healey to comment wryly 
that 
‘This was the only time I have ever used the threat of resignation to get my way.’ 
The new framework has taken the politics out of interest rate decisions without sacrificing democratic 
accountability or oversimplifying the policy process. It is an elegant institutional solution to the lengthy 
debate between those who favoured untrammelled discretion and those who advocated rules (such as 
monetary  targets);  one,  moreover,  which  manages  to  respect  the  constitutional  priorities  of  a 
parliamentary system. 
Achievements 
Performance over the six years since the Bank became independent has been impressive. Against the 
target of 2.5% for RPIX which ran from 1997 until December 2003, average inflation was 2.4%. For 68 
out of the 79 months, inflation was within 0.5 percent of the target - below it for 42 months, above it for 
30, and on target for the remaining seven. Notwithstanding the stock market crash and the slowdown 
in  world  activity,  the  UK  economy  has  continued  to  grow  steadily  and  employment  has  remained 
strong. 
On  a  longer  term  view,  the  decade  of  inflation  targeting  since  1992  looks  remarkably  stable  by 
post-war  standards.4  The  recent  slowdown  has  been  exceptionally  mild  compared  with  all  previous 
slowdowns since the beginning of the 1970s, and since 1992 growth in both real GDP and consumer 
spending  has  also  been  significantly  less  volatile,  with  46  quarters  of  positive  growth,  and  no 
significant  downturn  in  consumption  since  mid  1994.  Prior  to  the  1970s,  recessions  were  virtually 
absent, but real GDP was much more volatile than it has been in the past decade. 
Of course, better monetary policy and low inflation are only part of this story. It matters that monetary 
policy  has  been  supported  by  fiscal  discipline.  Just  as  important  are  the  many  labour  and  product 
market  reforms  that,  over  a  long  period  of  time,  have  given  us  a  more  flexible  and  competitive 
economy,  which  is  capable  of  adapting  quickly  to  sudden  change  without  prolonged  periods  of 
unemployment and under-utilised capacity. 
Attitudes towards inflation 
American economist Alan Blinder once said: “Price stability is when ordinary people stop talking and 
worrying about inflation”. Has low inflation entered our bloodstream yet? This is a hard one but there 
are some clues. 
Expectations  about  future  inflation  seem  to  have  fallen  steadily  over  the  past  decade  and  are  now 
clustered around the Bank’s target. This is supported by survey evidence, including surveys of trade 
union officials, and evidence drawn from financial market prices. A recent Bank of England survey of 
the general public5 pointed to interesting though small differences across age groups, with younger 
people expecting lower inflation on average than their parents. When it comes to inflation, people have 
very long memories. 
The evidence also suggests that firms and wage bargainers are now more disposed to expect inflation 
to revert to target if something happens to throw it off course: in that sense inflationary expectations 
are better anchored. This should make the task of policy makers easier. After all, if wage bargainers 
and firms themselves act as if the Bank will take action to offset any potential disturbance to inflation, 
the need for the Bank itself to actually change interest rates will be that much less. This, in a nutshell, 
                                                      
4  Benati,  L  (2004),  ‘Investigating  Inflation  Persistence  across  monetary  regimes’,  Bank  of  England  Working  Papers, 
forthcoming. 
5   Lombardelli, C, and Salaheen, J, (2003), ‘Public expectations of UK inflation’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, Autumn. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 3
is the intuitive reason why a credible policy regime should help to produce more stability in output as 
well as inflation. 
Challenges 
Inflation is low, expectations are well anchored, and the real economy works better as a result. These 
achievements are important and they were hard won. We mustn’t take them for granted. But nor can 
we live in the past. So what are today’s challenges? I see these in three main areas: assessing current 
economic developments; effective communication; and understanding the new trends that will shape 
the future. 
Assessing current developments 
(i) 
Broadly speaking, the task for the MPC is to control inflationary pressure by ensuring that the level of 
aggregate demand in the economy is more or less in line with aggregate supply. The first and most 
basic challenge comes in translating this deceptively simple idea in to practice. 
It is hard enough to estimate how fast demand is growing now from incomplete, preliminary or just 
plain puzzling information. It is harder still, and even more important, to look ahead over the two or 
three year horizon relevant to setting interest rates. But that’s only part of the story. The rate at which 
demand can be allowed to rise without leading to an upturn in inflation depends both on how much 
spare capacity there is in the economy now and on factors that determine the future growth in supply, 
such  as  productivity  and  labour  availability.  And  finally,  we  need  to  consider  what  effect  our  own 
actions will have on longer-term interest rates and through them on the wider economy. 
Inflation  targeting  provides  a  credible  framework  within  which  these  complicated  issues  can  be 
properly considered. That’s important, but it does not change the need to make judgements, or even 
make  the  judgements  any  easier.  Data  get  revised;  models  over  simplify;  forecasts  are  fallible.  It’s 
essential to invest in state of the art techniques; indeed the Bank has just introduced a new macro 
economic model. But progress depends just as much on recognising all the uncertainties and allowing 
for them in a systematic way. 
The monthly interest rate decision requires a complex assessment of all the evidence. We need to be 
both sceptical and open minded, if we are to avoid major error: sceptical when it comes to interpreting 
the data, but alert for signs that we may be getting it wrong. The decision to raise rates in February, 
while inflation was still well below the new target, reflected a top line view that inflationary pressures 
were likely to build over the next couple of years. While this has been the emerging picture for some 
months now, we have been surprised by a number of developments pointing in different directions, 
which have needed careful evaluation - notably, the resilience of household spending and the strength 
of the exchange rate. We have also had an opportunity to reconsider earlier judgements, especially 
about the amount of spare capacity and the likely growth in potential supply. That is the nature of the 
exercise. 
March will be another month. There can be no foregone conclusions when it comes to setting interest 
rates. Every month I may have a fairly well developed view not just about this month’s interest rates, 
but about where interest rates are likely to need to go in the future, to achieve the inflation target. But 
that view may - indeed should - change in the light of new information, better research, another set of 
forecasts, perhaps a different view of the risks. In that sense every month is a fresh decision. What 
doesn’t change is what we are trying to achieve. This clarity about aims is what gives us the flexibility 
to learn, so important if we are to avoid major error. 
Effective communication 
(ii) 
Maintaining this clarity through effective communication is critical. The MPC aims to be as open and 
straightforward as possible. Sometimes this involves lengthy explanations of rather arcane issues. A 
recent example is the change in the inflation target. As you probably know, in January the Chancellor 
replaced the target of 2.5% as measured by the RPIX by a 2% target as measured by the new CPI. 
We  have  used  speeches,  Parliamentary  appearances  and  short  articles  to  set  out  as  clearly  as 
possible the nature of this worthwhile but essentially technical change, in order to underline one simple 
message: that the change in target in no way weakens the commitment to price stability, and indeed 
has no material implications for monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2004
It has been harder work to explain our thinking about the altogether more newsworthy subject of the 
strong growth in household spending, and its relationship with escalating house prices and household 
debt. Bad memories of boom and bust in the late ’80s and early-’90s get in the way of more nuanced 
explanations which try to reflect how the world has changed in the past decade. The truth is that the 
present situation is rife with uncertainties. For example, while it is not difficult to think of reasons why 
the level of house prices relative to income might have risen significantly in recent years, at no less 
than  40%  above  their  long  average,  current  levels  definitely  stretch  the  imagination.  Are  people 
behaving rationally? Hard to say - individuals are notoriously prone to over-optimism about their own 
prospects, but it is not obviously misguided to base decisions on a view of the future which reflects the 
record  of  macro  economic  stability  I  described  earlier.  What  clearly  is  irrational  is  to  assume  that 
current rates of house price inflation will continue indefinitely. 
It has also been a challenge to explain how house price inflation and borrowing fit within an inflation 
targeting framework. One commentator has claimed that they are ‘the targets that dare not speak their 
name’. This is not so. True, the Committee has debated endlessly how far a strong housing market 
can explain the resilience of household spending, and the risk that a sharp correction in house prices 
will dent consumer confidence, and administer a nasty deflationary shock. Inevitably such questions 
do  not  have clear cut answers  -  for example,  the  relationship between  house prices  and consumer 
spending, never well defined, has shown tantalising signs of weakening over the past few years. 
But the message we have tried to get across is that house prices and borrowing are part of the wide 
range  of  evidence  we  review  monthly  in  assessing  the  outlook  for  inflation.  They  have  also  been 
important in shaping our view of the balance of risks. They do not have a special role, as targets, in 
driving interest rate decisions. 
Detecting future trends 
(iii) 
Let me come to my final set of challenges: understanding the new forces that are shaping the future, 
or, if you prefer, detecting the bends in the trends. This is what successful businesses have to do, and 
we need to share their insights. There is an important role here for the Bank’s regional Agents. Their 
most valuable input to the MPC can be the stories that illuminate their regular surveys of their 8000 
contacts  around  the  country  and  bring  to  mind  Nobel  prize-winner  George  Stigler’s  quip  that  ‘The 
plural of anecdote is data’. 
Let me give you an example. Since the 1996, the National Accounts have painted a picture of a boom 
in household spending, with the volume of personal consumption growing by 3 ¾ per cent a year on 
average, compared with real GDP growth of 2 ¾ per cent. But for the past couple of years at least, the 
Bank’s Agents have been talking about a much tougher world ‘out there’, with demanding shoppers on 
a  ceaseless  ‘search  for  value’  using  new  technology  to  search  out  bargains  as  well  as  to  make 
purchases, driving an endless round of discounting across a wide range of consumer goods. 
It’s a fact that in value terms, the growth in household spending has been slowing since the middle of 
2000. Much of the strength in the volume of consumption reflects lower prices which have boosted 
consumers’ spending power, for given incomes. Since 1998 the price of durables has fallen by 14%, 
while the price of other goods and services has continued to rise. The falls have been spread across a 
range of categories, including cars, clothing and  sports goods, though the fall has been particularly 
marked in IT/audio visual goods. So it is not surprising that spending on durables accounts for virtually 
all the growth in the volume of consumption - an average of over 8 per cent a year compared with 
around 2 per cent on other goods and services. 
The interesting questions are why this has happened, how far it will go and how long it will last. 
We know that the UK’s terms of trade have improved substantially since the mid 1990s, as the price of 
our imports has fallen more than the price of our exports, boosting domestic spending power. But this 
seems to be partly an IT story, much of it concentrated in capital rather than consumer goods; and 
lower prices may be related to exchange rate changes, which could be temporary. 
Clearly new technology is playing an increasing part in helping consumers to search out bargains as 
well as to make purchases. While the total value of on-line sales remains relatively small, it is clearly 
growing  very  rapidly.  Comprehensive  data  is  still  hard  to  come  by,  but  one  source  suggests  that 
on-line  sales  have  risen  more  than  ten  fold  over  the  last  four  years.  Several  recent  reports  have 
pointed to a sharp acceleration in the second half of last year, as the habit of e-shopping spreads. 
Structural changes within the retail sector are also part of the story. High street retailers are facing stiff 
competition from the major supermarket groups across a wider range of products. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 5
What is driving these changes? No doubt there are many factors at work, but I find the Agents’ picture 
of an increasingly demanding consumer quite thought provoking. We live in a consumer society, and 
shopping, in one form or another, is what many people do much of the time; helped by technology, 
why wouldn’t they learn to do it rather well? And indeed one of the benefits of low inflation is that price 
signals carry more information, making price comparisons worthwhile. 
Understanding what is happening is relevant to monetary policy. To the extent that a fierce competitive 
struggle is squeezing retail margins, it is likely to affect the shortrun outlook for inflation. While such a 
squeeze won’t have an effect on inflation in the longer term, it could herald a lasting improvement in 
productivity across the sector as a whole. 
This brings me to my final issue: whether productivity in the UK will accelerate as it seemingly has in 
the  US.6  Since  1995  the  growth  of  US  productivity  has  doubled  and  the  improvement  has  been 
sustained  through  the  stock  market  crash.  This  is  directly  relevant  to  current  thinking  about 
US monetary policy. If faster productivity has indeed helped to create a high level of spare capacity 
and contributed to a higher growth in underlying supply, holding interest rates at historically low levels 
for some time should not add to inflationary pressures, even if demand grows rapidly. This is a key 
reason why the Fed believes it can be ‘patient’ in raising interest rates. 
The US evidence does seem to suggest that productivity has accelerated and that ICT has played a 
substantial role in raising productivity in non ICT sectors. This answers one puzzle, neatly posed by 
US economist Robert Solow when he commented that ‘You can see computers everywhere but in the 
productivity statistics’. But it also raises the equally interesting question of why no such acceleration 
has  yet  been  detected  in  the  UK  (or  continental  Europe)  despite  huge  ICT  investment  in  the  late 
1990s. 
The possible answers to this question cover the full range from the pessimistic - it is never going to 
happen because there are institutional and other barriers to realising the benefits of ICT, in the shape 
of regulations, planning restrictions, or restrictive labour practices - to the optimistic - it will definitely 
happen given time, but the lags are long and variable. 
The truth is, of course, that we don’t really know, despite much research both in the US,  here and 
elsewhere. For what it is worth, I take it as read that realising the benefits from investment in ICT is 
about much more than buying kit. As anyone who has ever run a business knows, investment in ICT 
must be accompanied by changes in the way the job is done. Managing change is a notoriously costly 
and  disruptive  business. So  some  temporary slowdown  in  productivity  growth  in  the wake  of  heavy 
investment in ICT is not surprising. 
If that’s right, the questions for monetary policy makers become harder: namely, when, where and by 
how much will productivity growth eventually pick up? What’s the likely impact on potential supply? As 
it happens the projections in the February Inflation Report do project a pick up in supply over the next 
few years, but that reflects improved labour availability rather an assumption that there is an ICT led 
productivity miracle in the making. But we could easily be wrong. Given recent experience, there is 
clearly some risk of undue pessimism, though it has to be said that past policy errors have more often 
been the result of too much optimism. One thing is for sure: we can’t afford to sit back and wait for the 
data to tell us the answer. By the time we have that degree of certainty policy will have moved on. So 
productivity will remain a key issue for us over the coming years. 
Conclusion 
Which  brings  me  to  my  final  challenge  for  policy  makers:  how  to  handle  uncertainty  in  taking  and 
presenting policy decisions. 
The  MPC  has  met  this  challenge  head  on  from  the  beginning.  Within  the  discipline  imposed  by  a 
shared  inflation  target,  the  Committee  has  been  very  open  both  about  uncertainty  and  about  the 
disagreement that is likely to go with it. Published MPC forecasts have explored rather than glossed 
over risks and uncertainties. The individual accountability of MPC members reduces the incentive to 
search for consensus. MPC members have always voiced their different views in public, and while this 
                                                      
6   Basu, S, Fernald, J G, Oulton, N, and Srinivasan, S (2003), ‘The case of missing productivity growth: Or, does information 
technology explain why productivity accelerated in the United States but not the United Kingdom?’, forthcoming in Gertler, M 
and Rogoff, K (eds) NBER Macroeconomic Annual 2003, MIT Press. Available from the NBER website: www.nber.org. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2004
is  not  without  risk  to  the  clarity  of  the  message,  and  has  occasionally  led  to  an  uncomfortable 
personalising of decisions, I see it as an inherent part of system not a quirk of particular personalities. 
The big prize is long term credibility, and nowadays there is no credibility without openness. This is 
what  gives  the  present  framework  the  flexibility  to  respond  to  changing  circumstances,  and  allows 
members of the MPC to change their minds in the light of experience. And in an uncertain world this 
openness to learning is a precondition for success under any policy regime. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 7
