Lars Heikensten: The economic situation and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Lars Heikensten, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish embassy, London, 
20 September 2004. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  the  Swedish  embassy  and  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  about  the 
economic situation and Swedish monetary policy. It is important for the Riksbank to come to London 
occasionally  to  meet  the  participants  in  the  financial  markets  that  regularly  follow  the  Swedish 
economy and our work. 
My intention today is to give a broad picture of my views concerning the inflation outlook in the years 
ahead. The starting point will be the most recent Inflation Report in May and the assessments in the 
press releases that the Riksbank has published thereafter. I will also discuss particularly some issues 
that  have  recently  been  touched  upon  in  the  monetary  policy  debate:  oil  price  developments  and 
household  indebtedness  as  well  as  developments  in  residential  property  prices.  Following  my 
introduction I look forward to a lively discussion. 
International developments  
The  Riksbank’s  assessment  in  the  latest  Inflation  Report  in  May  was  that  international  economic 
activity would continue to strengthen this year and during the coming two years. During the summer 
we concluded that there was reason to be somewhat more optimistic about economic growth this year. 
The high oil price was indeed judged to stifle growth somewhat, but not to such an extent that would 
derail the upswing.  
Developments  have  differed  somewhat  between  various  regions.  Our  assessment  in  May  was  that 
economic growth in the United States would slow at the end of this year, chiefly due to the assumption 
that  fiscal  policy  would  be  less  expansionary.  Coupled  with  gradually  rising  interest  rates,  it  was 
judged that this would dampen private consumption and housing investment somewhat. Despite the 
slowdown, however, the economic outlook was expected to be mainly bright over the coming years. 
Data  for  the  second  quarter  indicates  that  private  consumption  has  slowed  somewhat  earlier  than 
anticipated. It is possible that this is partly due to the high oil price, which has lowered households’ real 
incomes. Even though more recent data from the United States has given a mixed impression, I think 
there is reason to be somewhat less optimistic about developments in the United States in the period 
ahead than indicated in the assessment in May. Growth this year of almost 4½ per cent now appears 
likely. In 2005 and 2006 there is reason today to expect about 3½ per cent annual GDP growth.  
Growth  in  the  euro  area  was  judged  in  the  latest  Inflation  Report  to  increase  gradually  this  year 
following a very weak development in 2003. New information during the summer broadly confirms this 
outlook. In Germany it is mainly net exports that are contributing positively to GDP growth, while in 
other  countries,  notably  in  France  and  Spain,  it  seems  to  be  domestic  demand  that  is  growing 
relatively quickly. For the euro area, it now appears reasonable to expect growth of 2 per cent this year 
and a slightly higher figure in the next two years. 
For the Nordic region, the UK and the rest of Europe as well as for Latin America and Asia, many 
analysts have revised up their growth forecasts since the end of the spring. This is partly because of a 
number  of  new  statistics  releases  from  these  areas  which  have  been  more  robust  than  many  had 
expected.  Russia  and  some  Latin  American  countries  are  also  benefiting  from  the  high  prices  of 
commodities. As regards Asia it is primarily the outlook for the Japanese economy that has become 
increasingly  optimistic.  At  the  end  of  last  year  economic  growth  there  was  at  its  highest  in  fifteen 
years. There are many indications that there has been a slowdown in the Japanese growth rate very 
recently  but  in  relation  to  the  developments  of  recent  years  it  is  still  relatively  strong.  China  has 
experienced a rapid industrial expansion with average annual growth of almost 10 per cent in the past 
ten years. This year, too, growth has been high. One contributory factor to the strong growth is that 
investment  has  increased  sharply.  Nevertheless,  most  analysts  expect  growth  in  China  to  be 
somewhat lower in the years ahead, owing to the measures now being taken to dampen demand.  
Taken together it is possible that there now, as at the time of the monetary policy meeting in August, is 
reason to be somewhat more optimistic about economic growth abroad this year compared with the 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 1
Riksbank’s assessment in May. The high oil price could indeed dampen the upswing somewhat and 
there  have  been  some  less  positive  signals  over  the  summer  from  the  United  States,  among  other 
countries.  But  it  appears  that  this  will  be  countered  by  growth  in  other  parts  of  the  world,  which 
seemingly will be more robust than forecast in May.  
In this context it may be worth noting that Sweden’s trade with countries such as China and India is 
still  relatively  small,  but  that  the  countries  outside  the  OECD  area  (OECD-19)  together  account  for 
about 20 per cent of Swedish export markets. This can be compared, for example, with the United 
States, whose share of Swedish exports is just over 10 per cent. If the performance of these countries 
is strong, it is of course of great significance for Sweden.  
Financial market developments during the summer have not entirely been in line with expectations. 
Equity  price  developments  have  been  relatively  weak.  Both  short-term  and  long-term  interest  rates 
have accordingly been weaker than we anticipated. The cause of this weaker development in interest 
rates has been uncertainty, primarily about the strength of the US economic upswing and the effect of 
the  high  oil  price  on  global  growth.  However,  the  uncertainty  seems  again  to  have  diminished 
somewhat recently, partly as a result of more robust labour market data in the United States. This has 
led to a recovery in the stock market.  
When the Riksbank in its Inflation Reports looks ahead a couple of years, it is important not to be too 
influenced  by  the  recent  weeks’  movements  in  the  financial  markets,  but  rather  to  stick  to  our 
fundamental,  longer-term  assessment  of  economic  developments.  As  long  as  we  don’t  markedly 
change our view of future economic prospects and the inflation outlook, there is, in my opinion, neither 
any  reason  to  change  the  view  from  the  early  summer  of  future  financial  conditions.  Interest  rates 
today  are  low  in  an  historical  perspective  and  they  can  be  expected  to  rise  somewhat  as  global 
resource utilisation picks up. At the same time, the krona should appreciate somewhat, partly due to 
the continued substantial surpluses in Sweden’s trade with other countries.  
The oil price and monetary policy 
In May, the Riksbank forecast international inflation to increase during the year, primarily as a result of 
rising global resource utilisation. Developments since then point to a somewhat stronger rise in prices 
than expected. To some extent this is due to the unexpectedly high price of oil. A couple of weeks ago 
the oil price reached record-high levels and is today roughly as high as during the oil crisis in1979-80.  
An unexpectedly steep increase in global demand for oil, not least from the rapidly growing Chinese 
economy, seems to have been a significant driving force behind the rise in the oil price in 2004. This 
has  led  to  a  marked  decrease  in  the  idle  capacity  in  the  oil  sector.  Other  relevant  factors  include 
unease over the situation in the Middle East and the various circumstances surrounding the Russian 
company Yukos. The rapid, short-term changes that have characterised the price formation in the oil 
market  also  point  to  a  not  insignificant  element  of  speculation.  Exactly  what  weight  should  be 
attributed to different factors from time to time is difficult to establish. But it is clear that the overall 
price rise in 2004 has been demand-driven to a larger degree compared with other occasions when 
the oil price has risen sharply. The increases in the oil price in 1973-74, 1979-80 and 1990 were as we 
know essentially a result of reductions in the oil supply.  
The demand for oil will of course play an important part for price developments in the period ahead as 
well. A key aspect is that more and more countries that previously were economically undeveloped will 
take the step towards more energy-intensive production. Even if new innovations can be put to use in 
a couple of years, the fast growth in many developing countries points to a relatively high oil price in 
the period ahead, too. Nevertheless, most analysts expect the supply to be so large that the oil price 
will fall back fairly sharply from current levels in the next few years, as geopolitical concerns diminish. 
Futures prices indicate that the oil price will fall by between USD 5 and 10 per barrel in the coming two 
years.  In  the  long  run  it  can  also  be  expected  that  the  oil  price  will  be  held  back  as  more 
energy-efficient  production  methods  are  gradually  introduced  also  in  the  recently  industrialised 
countries, in the same way that happened in the West after the oil crises in the 1970s. But this is likely 
to be a process that takes a fairly long time.  
An increase in the oil price is often problematic from a stabilisation policy perspective. This is because 
it tends to push up inflation at the same time as it has a dampening effect on the real economy. This 
makes  it  difficult  to  simultaneously  stabilise  inflation  and  output.  The  appropriate  policy  must  quite 
simply be determined from case to case and is due in part to the persistence of the rise in the oil price, 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2004
how other prices in the economy are affected, and to what factors that otherwise drive the inflation 
process.  
There are some aspects to the current situation that may be worth highlighting in this context. As I said 
earlier, the rise in the oil price in the past year has, more than previously sharp oil price increases, 
been due to a pickup in the demand for oil owing to world economic expansion. A rise in the price of oil 
that is largely a result of high international growth is likely to have less negative consequences for the 
real economy than a more outright supply shock.  
In addition to this, of course, the economies in the West - and particularly the Swedish one - are far 
less dependent on oil than they were during the oil crises in the 1970s. This should mean that the 
impact of oil price rises on both the real economy and inflation would be considerably more limited 
than what proved to be the case at that time. The assessment of most analysts today seems also to 
be that the increase in the oil price in 2004 could indeed curtail somewhat the international economic 
upswing but that the recovery will not be derailed.  
The impact of the oil price on inflation, too, should be less than before. Since the oil price shocks in the 
1970s there has been a shift in the economic policy regime in many countries which has meant that 
low,  stable  inflation  has  become  one  of  the  central  targets  of  economic  policy.  Today,  low-inflation 
policies seem to enjoy high credibility in most countries, which is indicated in part by the fact that the 
rise in the oil price at least so far has had small effects on inflation expectations. The risk of an oil price 
rise  spreading  to  wages  and  other  prices  in  the  economy  is  therefore  also  likely  to  be  low. 
Furthermore, in the case of Sweden it should be added that inflation is rising from a low level and that 
agreements  in  the  labour market  have  been  settled  for  2005  and  2006,  further  reducing  the  risk  of 
contagion effects via the jobs market. 
To sum up: the fact that the increase in the oil price is partly a demand-driven phenomenon, that the 
dependency on oil has decreased and that inflation-targeting regimes enjoy high credibility suggests 
that the higher oil price should mainly be reflected in a temporary, limited rise in inflation and that the 
effects  on  the  real  economy  should  be  fairly  small.  If  this  is  correct,  the  general  economic  and 
inflationary developments are more significant for monetary policy than developments in the oil price. 
This brings me to a discussion of the broad outlook for the Swedish economy in the years ahead. 
Economic activity in Sweden   
Despite  the  Riksbank’s  relatively  optimistic  outlook  for  the  Swedish  economy  compared  with  other 
forecasters, we have gradually revised up our forecasts in the past year. Our assessment in May was 
that  economic  activity  in  Sweden  would  continue  to  strengthen  in  the  period  ahead  owing  to  both 
relatively loose monetary and fiscal policy and an expected economic upswing abroad. GDP growth 
was forecast to average almost 3 per cent from 2004 to 2006.  
One reason that there now is cause to revise up the growth forecast is that exports once again have 
increased unexpectedly fast. Export growth has been robust because international demand in general 
has grown more rapidly than anticipated and because the relative price of Swedish exports has been 
unexpectedly  low.  As  I  pointed  out  earlier,  some  20  per  cent  of  Swedish  exports  go  to  countries 
outside the OECD area where economic growth has been vigorous. During the first half of this year 
exports of goods, measured in current prices, rose 9 per cent compared with the same period in 2003. 
Swedish exports have also benefited in part from the revival in the IT and telecommunications sectors. 
However,  robust  growth  in  exports  is  not  unique  to  Sweden;  average  export  growth  in  the  EU  has 
been roughly as strong during the first half of this year. 
Another positive signal is that a pickup in investment, which the Riksbank and other forecasters have 
been waiting a long time for, seems to have begun. This was a major contributory factor to our more 
positive outlook for the Swedish economy at the latest monetary policy meeting in August.  
Since  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  August,  the  government  and  its  collaboration  parties  have 
announced proposals, intended to be presented in more detail in the budget bill, which may entail a 
more expansionary fiscal stance in the period ahead. These proposals include cutting income tax for 
households,  abolishing  inheritance  and  gift  tax,  lowering  wealth  tax  and  increasing  support  to  local 
governments. In total, this is estimated to provide a stimulus of just over SEK 20 billion in 2005 and 
2006. How large the impact of this will be on economic growth and inflation is not so easy to forecast. 
This  is  partly  dependent  on  the  extent  to  which  households  save  their  increased  incomes.  Using 
traditional rules of thumb it could entail a few tenths of one per cent higher GDP growth in both 2005 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 3
and 2006. As things stand, therefore, there is reason to expect growth to average above 3 per cent in 
the coming two years. 
In spite of the fact that the economy has performed fairly well for almost two years, developments in 
the labour market so far have been weak.  Even though the demand for labour is still low, the situation 
is  nonetheless  judged  to  have  stabilised  somewhat.  The  historical  pattern  is  for  employment  to  lag 
behind a change in output somewhat. It is common for economic upswings to begin in manufacturing, 
which  then  results  in  a  rise  in  manufacturing  employment.  Gradually,  there  is  also  an  increase  in 
output in the services sector, which boosts employment in that sector. Our judgement is that this will 
also be the case this time. At the same time, it is important to remember that a process of structural 
change has been underway in the Swedish economy for some time, where jobs in the manufacturing 
sector have been replaced by jobs in the private services sector. This development, too, is likely to 
continue  in  the  period  ahead.  Consequently,  there  is  no  reason  to  expect  robust  growth  in 
manufacturing  employment  in  the  coming  years.  Furthermore,  in  the  current  economic  upswing,  it 
appears to be taking somewhat longer than usual for jobs to pick up. The number of hours worked, on 
the other hand, has risen more than normal for the current economic climate. Firms thus appear to 
have boosted production by making greater use of already employed staff instead of recruiting new 
employees. Although there is still considerable uncertainty about developments in the labour market, it 
is nevertheless likely that the number of employed will increase some time around the turn of the year. 
At roughly the same time unemployment should be able to begin to fall.  
The other side of the coin of robust growth and a subdued jobs market is continued high productivity 
growth and low cost pressures in the Swedish economy. The extent to which this is temporary and due 
to  economic  activity,  or  is  a  result  of  longer-term  factors,  is  hard  to  determine.  It  is  therefore  also 
difficult to judge how productivity will develop in the period ahead. Our assessment has been that the 
robust productivity partly reflects longer-term changes but that it is also due to the economic situation, 
and is thereby partly of a more transitory nature. We examine this assessment regularly, of course. 
In order to judge how demand in the economy will affect future inflation it is important to have a good 
picture  of  resource  utilisation.  There  is  no  exact  measure  of  this,  however.  In  the  latest  Inflation 
Report, the assessment was that total resource utilisation in the economy was still relatively low but 
that  it  would  rise  gradually  and  in  2006  reach  levels  at  which  it  no  longer  would  restrain  price  and 
wage  increases.  New  data  from  the  National  Institute  of  Economic  Research, for  example, suggest 
that resource utilisation is still relatively low, even though all indicators are not completely in accord. 
The  indicators  based on  labour  market  conditions point  consistently  to  low  resource  utilisation.  The 
somewhat stronger GDP growth that there is now reason to expect suggests, however, that the idle 
resources will be employed at a somewhat faster rate than forecast both in May and August. 
House prices and debt levels  
One issue that is of importance to the Riksbank for several reasons is household indebtedness and 
developments  in  residential  property  prices.  The  Riksbank  is  required  to  maintain  price  stability.  In 
addition  the Bank  is required  to promote  an  efficient,  stable  payment  system.  Furthermore,  if  these 
objectives  are  met,  the  Bank  should  also  attempt  to  take  account  of  the  other  targets  of  economic 
policy,  e.g.  economic  growth  and  high  employment.  Developments  in  household  indebtedness  and 
house prices can be significant in all these respects.  
When forecasting inflation, the Riksbank tries to take account of the connection between indebtedness 
and developments in house prices, on the one hand, and inflation on the other. For example, it may be 
a question of judging how large an impact rising house prices have on household wealth and, at the 
next stage, on demand in the economy. These relationships are in no way simple or straightforward, 
and  even  though  statistical  studies  show  a  clear  correlation  between  these  different  variables,  it  is 
entirely  possible  that  there  are  underlying  explanations,  e.g.  sentiment  in  the  economy,  that  could 
affect the relationships. In any case, when producing our forecasts, we do our best to estimate the 
effects of house prices and indebtedness. 
The Riksbank also illustrates regularly the effects on the payment system of developments in house 
prices and household debt, mainly in the Bank’s reports on financial stability. Our assessment so far is 
that there are no signs that property prices are markedly out of balance. High growth in households’ 
disposable incomes, low interest rates and a low level of housing construction, coupled with increased 
demand for housing, may to a large extent justify the price rises seen in the housing market at national 
level, as well as current debt levels. It is also possible that the increase in debt is partly an adjustment 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2004
to  an  economy  with  -  compared  with  before  -  better  functioning  financial  markets,  low  inflation  and 
expectations of relatively low interest rates in the future. Most indications also suggest that the majority 
of households would be able to service their debt even if interest rates were to rise sharply. Nor does it 
appear likely that banks and mortgage institutions would risk incurring losses that would appreciably 
affect their capital bases. This wasn’t the case either during the financial crisis at the beginning of the 
1990s. While the banks’ losses during the crisis were largely propertyrelated, they did not stem from 
lending against collateral in housing but from loans secured by commercial properties. And prices of 
commercial properties have this time not at all shown the same development as prices of residential 
property. On the contrary, they have fallen during the economic decline and have still not recovered. 
What  remains  then  are  the  effects  on  the  economy  in  general.  In  this  respect  it  is  perhaps  first  a 
question  of  whether  the  build-up  in  debt  and  developments  in  house  prices  should  prove 
unsustainable, that the prices therefore should fall and that this on the whole should result in a decline 
in  the  real  economy  in  general.  The  risk  of  this  happening  is  of  course  related  to  your  view  of 
residential property prices. If they seem to be highly elevated in relation to before, or are difficult to 
justify  through  established  economic  arguments,  the  risk  is  greater.  The  risk  of  problems  is  also 
connected  to  other  economic  developments.  If  these  are  stable,  there  is  a  smaller  probability  that 
those who have borrowed to buy a house will have made their decision on what later proves to be the 
wrong grounds.  
An example can illustrate the latter form of reasoning. Interest rates are currently at an all-time low. 
This indicates that they will rise, which is an assumption that most households ought to have taken 
into account. However, many of them may also have been counting on rising income, as this is the 
normal situation; interest rates usually rise at the point when economic growth and thereby income in 
society  increases.  There  is  of  course  a  risk  here.  A  couple  of  decades  ago  we  experienced  a  long 
period of both low growth and high inflation. If this should be repeated - although it does not at present 
appear likely - it is quite possible that many households would encounter difficulties. 
To sum up, one can say that the Riksbank in its normal work process does take into account, as far as 
is  possible,  the  effects  of  indebtedness  and  house  prices  on  inflation  via  effects  on,  for  instance, 
consumption  and  general  demand.  These  effects  are  taken  into  consideration  in  our  inflation 
forecasts.  In  addition,  we  might  choose  to  include  effects  on  the  payment  system  and  on  general 
economic  performance  if,  for  instance,  we  saw  a  significant  risk  of  a  future  financial  crisis.  The 
clarification of our monetary policy that we published in 1999 states that we would explain clearly the 
reasoning behind our decision if this situation were to arise. Naturally, this question - of whether the 
risks are sufficiently large to require special consideration in the monetary policy decision - is not a 
simple one. It concerns weighing up difficult issues about which opinions may differ from time to time. 
So  far,  however,  considerations  with  regard  to  the  effects  of  house  prices  and  household 
indebtedness on factors other than the inflation rate have only played a marginal role in interest rate 
policy.  
Inflation and monetary policy 
Let me conclude with a summary of my current views on inflation and monetary policy. Since the early 
summer, inflation in Sweden has developed roughly in line with the Riksbank’s assessment in May. 
Inflation is low both by Swedish and international standards, at around 1 per cent. At the same time, it 
is important to emphasise that the decisive factor for monetary policy is not the present inflation rate, 
but our views regarding future inflationary pressures.  
At  our  monetary  policy  meeting  in  May,  the  Riksbank  judged  that  inflation  would  remain  relatively 
stable  over  the  coming  year  and  then  increase  gradually  as  a  result  of  rising  international  and 
domestic resource utilisation. Given the risks we saw before us - primarily a slightly stronger economic 
upturn  -  inflation  was  expected  to  be  in  line  with  the  Riksbank's  inflation  target  a  couple  of  years 
ahead.  This  was  why  the  repo  rate  was  left  unchanged.  The  outlook  from  May  had  not  changed 
significantly  at  the  meetings  in  June  and  August.  However,  we  observed  in  August  that  economic 
growth appeared slightly stronger both in Sweden and abroad. This meant there was also reason to 
expect slightly higher resource utilisation. Moreover, the economic upturn had continued for a further 
couple of months.  
What  is  the  present  outlook  for  inflation  over  the  coming  years?  My  own  assessment  is  that  the 
conclusions drawn by the Riksbank at the previous meeting in August remain valid on the whole. It is 
likely, however, that some upward revision of the inflation forecast may be warranted compared with 
BIS Review 51/2004 
 5
the May assessment, and perhaps even compared with the August forecast. In the short term the high 
oil price points to such a scenario. It also appears reasonable to expect somewhat higher resource 
utilisation over the coming years compared with in May and August. Factors that support this are the 
strong  data  releases  during  the  summer  and  the  more  expansionary  fiscal  policy  that  now  appears 
likely. Another factor is international developments, which appear to be strong. Slightly higher resource 
utilisation should lead to a slight increase in inflationary pressures over the coming years, compared 
with previous assessments.  
There  are,  of  course,  uncertainty  factors.  I  have  already  mentioned  the  uncertainty  surrounding 
international developments. Another uncertainty factor concerns developments in the labour market, 
which in turn are related to productivity growth. 
On the whole it is likely that there will be reason to revise up somewhat the inflation forecast compared 
with the May Inflation Report. Inflation a couple of years ahead can nevertheless be expected to be 
roughly in line with the Riksbank’s target. But as economy activity continues to strengthen, which is 
likely to imply less idle resources in the economy, there is reason to expect gradually rising inflationary 
pressures. 
Thank you! 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2004
