Amando M Tetangco: The importance of risk profession and sound risk 
management practices 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of the Philippines, at the 
2004 Convention of the Professional Risk Managers’ International Association Philippine Chapter, at 
the Asian Institute of Management, Manila, 13 September 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am pleased to speak today at this important event - the 2004 Philippine Risk Convention. I wish to 
congratulate  AIM-JBF  (Asian  Institute  of  Management-Jose  B.  Fernandez)  Center  for  Banking  and 
Finance and the Professional Risk Managers’ International Association for organizing and sponsoring 
this gathering; the number of participants speaks well of the great interest in risk management and the 
risk profession. 
My  topic  is  the  importance  of  the  risk  profession  and  sound  risk  management  practices  in  the 
Philippines. The risk profession is an area that has become a growth industry; and it is the one that is 
particularly  relevant  to  banks given  their  fiduciary  functions,  the complexity  of  risks  inherent  in  their 
working environment, and the stability and efficiency of the payments and settlement system which 
greatly rest on them. 
Allow  me  to  tackle  this  presentation  from  the  perspective  of  the  BSP,  both  as  a  regulator  of  the 
Philippine financial institutions and an institution which in itself is an end-user and a staunch promoter 
of risk management. 
The BSP performs a dual role. First, as the county’s monetary authority, the BSP sees to it that the 
monetary policy is supportive of its mandate of maintaining price stability conducive to balanced and 
sustainable  economic  growth.  Second,  as  the  regulator  of  financial  institutions,  the  BSP  seeks  to 
promote the soundness of the financial system, which in turn, would support overall macroeconomic 
stability and growth. 
I would first focus on the current and future thrusts of the BSP in line with the second role as they 
relate to risk management and then proceed to the importance of risk management, risk profession 
and risk management practices. 
The need to change regulatory approach 
A  crucial  moment  in  the  development  of  risk  management  occurred  in  February  1995  when  it  was 
announced that the Barings PLC, the oldest bank in England had lost over GBP600 million and was 
insolvent as a result of the derivative trading activities of a single trader in Singapore. At the time of its 
collapse, Barings was known to be very conservative, well capitalized and historically profitable. 
The  Barings  case  brought  to  light  that  the  real  issue  was  not  derivatives  per  se,  but  the  quality  of 
management and control required in modern financial environment. The collapse called into question 
the strength of existing internal controls in the investment industry and the aptness and adequacy of 
external monitoring done by the exchanges and regulators. The event demonstrated very clearly that 
their  existing  regulatory  frameworks  were  no  longer  appropriate  for  the  continuously  changing  and 
complex  market  environment.  This  led  to  a  critical  reassessment  of  the  regulatory  approach  and 
brought changes in the banking supervision approaches by the Bank of England and other regulators 
around the world. 
Financial regulatory initiatives in Philippines on internal risk management 
The BSP, for its part, in its role as bank supervisor has taken a number of initiatives to improve internal 
risk management among banks by adopting the Basel framework. 
In March 2001, the BSP adopted the original Basel I through Circular No. 280. This Circular provided 
the guidelines for the computation of risk-based capital for credit risk. This was further enhanced by 
the  issuance  of  Circular  No.  360  in  December  2002  incorporating  market  risk  into  the  risk-based 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
capital  framework.  We  also  issued  Circular  No.  400  in  September  2003,  extending  the  risk-based 
capital adequacy requirement to Quasi-Banks. 
The BSP’s focus on supervision is ultimately intended to give banks greater flexibility to respond to 
challenges  and  changing  opportunities  under  a  more  deregulated  and  globalized  environment  and 
amidst rapid technological advances. Traditional bank supervision tended to instruct banks to avoid 
risks that seem too high. The new approach to supervision favors assessment of the quality of risk 
management  practices,  and  generally  allows  banks  to  take  risks  so  long  as  they  demonstrate  the 
ability to assess, measure and manage them. 
We believe that a good first step to good risk management is good corporate governance. We have 
thus issued a number of guidelines instituting good corporate governance. These include laying down 
the  guidelines  to  govern  the  responsibilities  and  duties  of  the  board  of  directors  (Circular  No.  130, 
June 1997); requiring banks to develop and implement a compliance system and appoint/designate a 
compliance officer to oversee implementation (Circular No. 145, October 1997); implementing the fit 
and proper standards for directors and officers of banks and non-banks including the requirement for a 
mandatory orientation program on corporate governance (Circular No. 296, September 2001). 
This  year,  the  BSP  issued  anew  a  number  of  guidelines  that  aimed  to  further  enhance  the  risk 
management  practices  in  banks.  In  January,  the  BSP  issued  the  guidelines  for  managing  large 
exposures and credit risk concentrations of banks (Circular No. 414). Also in the same month, the BSP 
issued the guidelines for the capital treatment of banks’ investment in credit-linked notes (CLNs) and 
similar credit derivative products (Circular No. 417). In April 2004, the BSP issued guidelines for the 
treatment of compliance risk and to further strengthen banks’ compliance function (Circular No. 429). 
And  more  recently,  in  June  2004,  the  BSP  issued  the  guidelines  for  the  development  and 
implementation of banks’ internal risk rating systems(Circular No. 439). 
Journey to Basel II 
The simplified approach of Basel I has been successful in boosting capital levels in the global banking 
system  from  what  were  considered  uncomfortably  low  levels  throughout  the  late  1970s  and  early 
1980s.  Its  major  shortcoming,  however,  is  that  the  “risk  weights”  poorly  represent  the  likelihood  of 
sustaining  losses  and  such  lack  of  risk  sensitivity  can  lead  to  misallocation  of  scarce  financial 
resources and hamper long-term economic growth. 
The New Capital Accord otherwise known as Basel II, formally unveiled last June 26, is seen to make 
capital requirements to be more risk sensitive than Basel I. It allows greater reliance on the banks’ 
internal systems for setting the capital requirements. More importantly, it provides incentives for banks 
to continuously improve their risk management practices. 
However, Basel II poses challenges to Philippine Banks and the BSP. Banks will have to develop a 
more  disciplined,  rigorous,  and  auditable  approach  to  risk  assessment.  This  challenge  has  many 
dimensions and technology will only address some of them. For the BSP, our challenge is to build up 
technical knowledge and supervisory resources to validate bank’s risk management systems. We will 
also need to examine our existing charter to see to it that we have the necessary powers to implement 
Basel II, particularly Pillar 2. 
The risk management standards and practices embodied in Basel II are real and are drawn from the 
best  practices  of  large  internationally  active  banks.  It  reflects  the  many  insights  gathered  through 
practical  experience,  including  both  successes  and  failures  in  risk  management.  It  contains  many 
useful lessons and can serve as a good roadmap on how to improve internal risk management. 
However, we acknowledge that not all aspects of Basel II will be of use to every bank. For example, 
some  of  the  quantification  tools  used  in  large  complex  institutions  may  not  be  necessary  for  the 
smaller and less sophisticated institutions. And some risks inherent in the activities of banks which are 
internationally active may be remote to those which are merely active domestically. 
This is the reason for modifying the Philippine framework by taking into account, the local banks’ state 
of readiness, local conditions and practices consistent with the nature, complexity and materiality of 
the local institution’s activities. This is also the reason for providing a breathing space for thrift and 
rural banks in implementing Basel II. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2004
The BSP has lined up certain projects which involve the study of the applicability of certain Basel II 
requirements to local conditions. These projects are expected to culminate in a set of comprehensive 
guidelines for banks which we plan to release not later than end-2006, for implementation in 2007. 
As you may be aware, Pillar 1 of Basel II proposes standard and advance approaches to credit and 
operational  risks.  Universal/commercial  banks  are  expected 
the  standardized 
approaches to Basel II by 2007. However, implementation of the more advanced approaches is not 
expected  to occur  until  perhaps  2010 to  allow  banks  time  to build-up  reliable historical  database  to 
estimate default probabilities and other variables as important inputs to the advanced models. Foreign 
banks whose head offices are using the advanced approaches, will be allowed to use them provided 
that they can show that their models are suited to domestic conditions. 
With regard to Pillar 2, we will continue to push banks to improve their risk management practices and 
risk  assessment  capabilities  and  corporate  governance.  With  respect  to  Pillar  3,  the  appropriate 
disclosure requirements under Basel 2 are targeted by 2007. 
implement 
to 
BSP’s view of the importance of risk management and sound risk management practices 
On the topic of the importance of the risk profession and risk management practices in the Philippines, 
I  believe  this  could  be  best  approached  by  presenting  our  views  on  the  significance  of  risk 
management and our expectations from risk managers. 
• 
Risk  management  is  more  than  a  regulatory  reporting  and  compliance  exercise;  it  is  a 
necessary  risk-reducing  tool  to  promote  long-term  profitability  and  stability  of  the  firm  and 
enhance the competitive advantage of firms. 
We  encourage  banks  to  have  the  flexibility  to  use  their  internalmodels  not  merely  for 
computing the level of capital needed to absorb possible losses inherent in their activities, 
but  to  encourage  them  to  make  rational  decisions  on  the  basis  of  risk  and  return 
considerations. Good internal models provide timely information on how much risk the bank 
is  taking  in  order  to  achieve  specific  business  objectives.  Internal  models  must  also  allow 
banks  to  compare  and  select,  on  a  timely  basis,  from  among  the  alternative  business 
opportunities or strategies not solely from the profit angle but also from a risk standpoint. 
The Philippine adoption of Basel II will certainly obligate banks to cover more types of risks 
and on the basis of our calculations, the banks’ capital requirements will surely increase with 
said adoption.  However,  if  a  bank  has right risk  management systems  that can  effectively 
capture the risk exposures, there is an opportunity for them to lower their capital charges. 
As financial markets progress towards the market transparency mechanism that is promoted 
under  Pillar  3,  risk  management  will  be  seen  as  a  potential  differentiator  and  a  source  of 
competitive  advantage.  Ultimately,  it  will  reward  banks  that  manage  their  risks  effectively, 
and penalize those that do not. Good risk management practice is thus even more essential 
for banks to maintain competitiveness over the long run. 
Corporate governance is not a mere risk compliance measure; It is vital to the institution’s 
health. 
As far as the banking industry is concerned, corporate governance relates to the manner in 
which businesses and affairs of the individual banks are directed and managed by the board 
of directors and senior management. It provides the structure though which the objectives of 
the  institutions  are  set,  the  strategy  of  attaining  those  objectives  is  determined  and  the 
performance of the institution is monitored. 
Corporate  governance  is  essential  to  the  institution’s  health.  It  seeks  to  meet  legal 
requirements  and  uphold  fiduciary  responsibilities  to  investors,  creditors  and  depositors.  It 
attracts  and  retains  good  senior  management,  officers  and  employees.  It  also  makes  the 
organization attractive to investors, clients and business partners. 
Equally  important,  corporate  governance  reduces  exposure  to  reputational  risks  or  the 
potential that a negative publicity regarding an institution’s business practices will cause a 
decline in the customer base or lead to costly litigation. 
Risk management matters are necessary parts and parcel of sound strategic planning. 
  BIS Review 50/2004 
 3
The need to include risk management in strategic planning cannot be overemphasized as we 
have  seen  a  number  of  banks  getting  into  trouble  where  the  root  cause  can  be  traced  to 
inconsistencies  between  the  bank’s  strategic  goals  and  risk  management  objectives  or 
simply the lack of risk management objectives. 
Sound  strategic  planning  should  involve  not  only  setting  targets  such  as  revenue,  assets 
under management, and the number of new accounts, but also include the establishment of 
control and risk management systems. 
Specifically strategic planning should lead to an objective assessment of the institution’s risk 
profile and highlight areas of strengths and weaknesses. It should help the firm determine 
the risks it wants exposure to, the risk it cannot avoid, risks that the firm is not prepared to 
face and the risks it can reduce. 
Strategic planning should involve the use of internal risk assessment as such could uncover 
natural hedges, or countercyclicalities, that exist across different businesses of a firm. Such 
knowledge helps the firm focus on its net exposures and more effectively allocate resources. 
Risk  assessment  often  results  in  a  better  understanding  of  the  internal  and  external 
environment, which can be a source of competitive advantage by the uncovering of business 
opportunities  or  the  early  assessment  of  threats  which  in  turn  allow  the  firm  to  have 
competitive lead over less informed competitors. 
Stress testing enhances management of risks. 
Many of us here today may wish that we have the ability to predict with certainty when the 
next crisis will strike. Regrettably there appears to be no existing technology that would allow 
us to predict it with accuracy. However, we can prepare for it well in advance it if we know 
how  it  would  impact  on  us,  if  and  when  it  comes,  and  plan  in  advance  the  right  level  of 
resources to withstand it. We can do this if we have the capability to perform on a regular 
basis, the suitable stress testing and scenario analyses. 
A proactive risk culture must exist in an institution to ensure effective risk management 
A  proactive  risk  culture  means  there  is  awareness  of  risk  within  an  institution  which 
permeates the actions and words of all the members of the firm. This can be done through 
regular risk awareness activities, education, open communication lines among units/groups 
concerned, and continuous interaction with senior management. 
When  considering  the  importance  of  risk  culture,  it  may  be  asked  why  some  firms  fared 
better than others at risk management. Nick Leeson’s actions at Barings would have been 
less likely if a meaningful “risk culture” had been in place which institutionalized management 
oversight,  upheld  segregation  of  duties,  and  permitted  closer  monitoring  of  the  trading  in 
books that appeared to be profitable. Risk culture is important today because the complexity 
of modern financial instruments makes it possible for even a single, unsupervised trader to 
gamble and lose, the entire capital of a firm. 
A  good  example  of  recent  failure  of  risk  culture  is  that  of  the  National  Australia  Bank.  In 
January  of  2004,  the  National  Australia  Bank(NAB),  Australia’s  largest  bank  and  second 
biggest company was reported to have lost $360 million in foreign currency trading. A report 
released by the Australian Prudential Regulation  Authority attributes the losses to the four 
currency options traders who, possessed of an abundance of self confidence, positioned the 
NAB’s foreign currency options portfolio in the expectation that the fall in the US dollar that 
occurred  mid  last  year  would  reverse  and  that  volatility  would  eventually  stabilize.  Rather 
than closing their positions as the market moved against them, the traders chose to conceal 
their true positions - allowing those positions to deteriorate unchecked over a period of three 
months before they were finally discovered. The traders were able to paint a rosy picture of 
P&L  and  masked  losses  by  amending  trades  and  using  fictitious  trades.  By  the  time  they 
were discovered, the positions held were totally out of control. 
The report highlighted that the risk control failures have more to do with poor implementation 
than  poor  design.  On  paper,  NAB’s  existing  control  framework  should  have  been  able  to 
identify  and  contain  risk  positions  of  the  traders.  There  are  many  layers  to  NAB’s  internal 
control  framework,  the  risk  management  group  and  the  board  included,  but  they  failed  at 
every level to detect and shut-down the irregular currency options trading activity. The NAB’s 
internal governance model, which should have enabled timely identification and effective and 
BIS Review 50/2004
  4 
 Expectations from risk managers 
• 
quick escalation of serious risk issues on the currency options desk, simply did not function. 
Had  the  risk  control  framework  been  implemented  effectively,  the  losses  would  certainly 
have been substantially less, or quite possibly, averted altogether. 
Risk management team requires diverse set of skills and knowledge. 
The many complex risks across an organization are too varied for any one discipline to claim 
mastery over. As the role of risk management is complex and comprehensive, the ideal risk 
management team must be made up of multiple individuals, with different sets of skills and 
knowledge to effectively address the risks confronting the institution. 
Integrating  staff  from  such  areas  as  trading,  research  or  financial  control  and  legal,  can 
enhance  the  group’s  understanding  of  the  business  implications  of  risks,  and  its  ability  to 
interact  with  other  areas  that  either  feed  the  risk  analysis  process  or  are  affected  by  its 
results. 
Risk  management  team  must  be  independent  of  business  units  but  needs  to  interact  and 
communicate with other parts of the firm. 
Risk  management  needs  to  be  performed  as  an  independent  function,  sponsored  and 
supported  by  senior  management.  The  group  in  particular  needs  to  be  separate  from  the 
business units such as front office, otherwise there would be conflicts of interest and firm’s 
risk  would  not  be  independently  measured.  However,  this  independence  is  a  delicate 
balancing act because the risk management group needs to communicate with the business 
and operations groups to have a clear understanding of their views on the markets, products, 
positions, strategies and operational procedures before it can accurately assess risks. 
In addition to business units, the risk management group would also have to interact with 
other  internal  and  external  entities,  typically,  the  senior  management,  financial  control, 
operations,  legal/compliance  units,  regulators,  auditors,  rating  agencies,  investors  and 
clients. 
To illustrate some of these interactions, risk management and financial control (accounting) 
must have a close relationship since performance evaluation is no longer confined to simply 
reporting  returns  and  total  profit  figures,  but  has  increasingly  incorporated  the  measure  of 
risks taken. And since financial control maintains the books and records with respect to P&L 
while  the  risk  control  group  has  responsibility  for  risk  data,  the  two  departments  must 
invariably work together. Further, public and supervisory reports used to require disclosure 
on the traditional financial accounting information only; however under Pillar 3, banks may be 
required  to  make  public  certain  material  risks  information  such  as  tier  capital.  In  order  to 
ensure consistency in providing regulatory and public reports, the financial control and risk 
group must necessarily share the same database. 
External  auditors  in  other  countries  now  frequently  include  an  assessment  of  risk 
management in the annual audit, in part because of the trend to include risk management 
information in the annual report and to comply with the regulatory approach of ensuring the 
soundness  of  the  financial  institution.  With  the  adoption  of  the  Basel  II  Framework,  we 
expect this trend to grow globally, including in the Philippines. The risk management group 
must  hence  work  closely  with  the  auditors  to  demonstrate  clearly  the  measurement 
methodology used, as well as the completeness of the supporting procedures. 
Risk managers must look beyond organization’s boundaries. 
The  corporate  demises  of  Enron  and  WorldCom  have  shown  the  need  to  achieve  the 
organization’s  vision,  mission  and  objectives  under  any  stress  or  extreme  events.  The 
proactive  risk  manager  must  therefore  look  beyond  the  organization’s  boundaries  and 
assess the impact of its action on the wider environment where the firm operates, including 
those  of  its  stakeholders,  i.e.,  customers,  employees,  retirees,  suppliers,  communities, 
borrowers, creditors and regulators. 
  BIS Review 50/2004 
 5
   Speaking of regulators, internationally active banks need to take into account regulations in 
the various jurisdictions in which they operate, and the fact that regulatory standards may 
shift over time. 
Risk managers must be effective communicators and leaders in the organization. 
The  risk  manager  must  be  well  versed  in  the  risk  management  process  and  be  able  to 
effectively communicate and lead the processes within the organization to mitigate exposure 
to business risks. In support of this he must have a good understanding of the environment 
and community served by the organization, the operations of different units and relationship 
between different levels of the organization. 
Risk  managers  must  address  corporate  governance  issues  and  contribute  to  improved 
corporate governance. 
The  increased  anxiety  among  shareholders  due  to  the  celebrated  cases  of  accounting 
scandals  and  corporate  bankruptcies  have  highlighted  the  need  for  good  corporate 
governance.  Corporate  governance  has  become  an  issue  for  a  growing  number  of  risk 
managers who are now given an active role in managing corporate governance standards. 
Risk  managers  are  therefore  expected  to  address  corporate  governance  issues  and 
contribute  to  improved  corporate  governance  to  prevent  losses  and  enhance  long-term 
sustainability of the organization. 
Risk profession must embrace good business ethics. 
Allow me to tackle this subject by way of Enron’s experience with risk management. Enron 
maintained  a  risk  management  function  with  capable  employees.  Lines  of  reporting  were 
reasonably  independent  in  theory,  but  less  so  in  practice.  The  group’s  mark-to-market 
valuations  were  subject 
the 
mark-to-market  accounting  became  a  mark-to-model  accounting.  The  traders  who  were 
performing 
the  deals  were 
marked-to-model. With their bonuses depending upon the profitability of the deals, there was 
an  unaddressed  conflict  of  interest.  Trading  businesses  were  generating  considerable 
profits, but much of these were dubious mark-to-model profits. 
Enron  maintained  a  fluid  workforce.  Employees  were  constantly  on  the  lookout  for  their 
internal transfer. Those who rotated through risk management were no different. A trader or 
structurer whose deal a manager scrutinized one day might be in a position to offer that risk 
manager  a  new  position  the  next.  Astute  risk  managers  were  careful  not  to  burn  bridges. 
Risk  managers  knew  that  they  would  suffer  if  they  blocked  deals  or  did  not  support  the 
favorable  management-approved  mark-to-model  valuations.  Even  worse,  risk  managers 
were subject to Enron’ “rank and yank” system of performance review. Under that system, 
anyone could contribute feedback on anyone, and the consequences of a bad review were 
high.  Risk  managers  who  blocked  deals  could  expect  to  suffer  in  “rank  and  yank”.  Risk 
management,  thus,  became  little  more  than  a  rubber  stamp  and  a  stepping  stone  for 
employees moving around the company. 
The Enron’s case clearly describes the importance of ethics in risk management profession 
and the consequences of the lack of it. A code of ethics which sets forth a discipline of moral 
duty  and  conduct  in  support  of  the  demanding  standards  of  risk  management  profession 
must necessarily be in place. At the minimum, the code of ethics should cover the standards 
for integrity and dignity, trust, confidentiality, competence and professional practice. 
to  adjustment  by  management  and 
too,  had  considerable 
influence  on  how 
this  context, 
trades, 
the 
in 
Conclusion 
To conclude, in the longer term, the power of computers to create and analyze huge databases will 
change the very nature of risk management. Real time, on-line risk analysis and reporting, scenario 
analysis and stress testing will become more and more standard tools for day- to- day operations. 
But more important than these sophisticated systems is the development andadherence of institutions 
to good corporate governance ? one that permeates a proactive risk culture. We believe that this is the 
first  step  to  good  risk  management  which  an  institution  can  implement  even  in  the  absence  of 
sophisticated  systems.  If  one  has  a  good  risk  management  process  that  it  follows  strictly,  then  the 
institution has a better chance of preventing the occurrence of losses even during extreme events. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2004
The requirements of Basel II are amazing even for the sophisticated risk professional. Not only does 
he need new set of improved risk techniques and technology, he also needs to unlearn old traditional 
techniques  that  have  now became  obsolete  or  unreliable. He  needs  to  be constantly  aware  of  new 
market developments, good or bad, and learn from the experiences and mistakes of others. Not only 
that, the Basel world would require vast amount of data inputs, analysis and reporting that would place 
pressure on the risk professional to do a better job. 
Our views on risk management and our high expectations from risk practitioners as presented, point to 
the  varied  and  difficult  roles  that  the  risk  professional  must  play.  It  is  incumbent  upon  him  to  be 
prepared for them and accept the challenge. The lessons learned from the financial disasters, some 
them I mentioned here, and the challenging tasks on the road to Basel II, the need to integrate risk 
management in strategic planning to maintain competitive advantage and ensure company long-term 
survival, - all these highlight the growing importance and broadening application of risk management 
and consequent increased challenges for risk management practitioners. 
In playing these increasingly challenging roles, risk practitioners, in whatever capacity he/she is in ? as 
an in-house risk manager or risk specialist or an external risk management adviser-- may be faced 
with  key  issues  as  lack  of  independence,  lack  of  competence  in  specific  areas,  unclear  scope  of 
responsibility, unclear legal or contractual liability, conflict of interest, inconsistency of treatment and 
approaches, inadequate or inappropriate risk management tools and processes, and uncertainty of the 
results of advise or recommendation. 
Therefore, in order to face these issues squarely, it would be ideal to have a professional approach to 
risk  management  by  instituting  a  system  of  guidance  as  to  the  appropriate  and  standard  behavior, 
work practices and ethics to observe in the provision of risk management services, and a framework or 
benchmark  for  a  professional  risk  management  service.  It  is  also  important  to  have  a  system  of 
qualification,  training  and  education  as  well  as  a  forum  to  share  experiences  and  ideas  to  improve 
competency among risks management practitioners. 
These are our views on the importance of risk profession and sound risk practices employed in the 
Philippines. May I clarify, nonetheless that most suggestions here also apply to non-bank entities. Let 
me re-emphasize that risk management is not merely for compliance, but is a vital aspect of protecting 
and enhancing an institution’s corporate image, gaining competitive advantage and ensuring its long-
term viability. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 50/2004 
 7
