Jean-Claude Trichet: Current challenges for the ECB - sustainable 
non-inflationary growth and financial stability 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  ECB,  at  a  conference  sponsored  by  Christa 
Randzio-Plath,  the  Bundesbank  Hamburg  office  and  the  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Hamburg, 
13 May 2004. 
 I am very honoured to have been invited here today. I would like to thank the Hamburg branch of the 
Bundesbank, the Chamber of Commerce and Madam Christa Randzio-Plath for their invitation. Today, 
I would like to talk about two main challenges inherent to the mandate, role and functions of the ECB. 
The first one concerns the ECB’s role of providing a sustainable non-inflationary growth environment. 
The second relates to the ECB’s contribution to financial stability in the euro area.  
Let me turn first to the challenge of a sustainable non-inflationary growth environment.  
Sustainable non-inflationary growth 
The monetary strategy of the ECB: how it can contribute to sustainable non-inflationary growth 
Let me start by elaborating on the contribution that the ECB’s monetary policy can make towards a 
high level of sustainable non-inflationary growth. Any deliberations in this field must necessarily start 
from  the  wide  consensus  which  has  been  reached  in  the  past  few  decades  on  two  fundamental 
principles that should guide monetary policy.  
The first principle lays down exactly what monetary policy can and cannot do. It relates to the well-
established fact that monetary policy impulses have only temporary real effects in the short term. In 
the long run, monetary policy can only influence the price level. 
The objective of price stability 
However, monetary policy can make a fundamental contribution to a high level of sustainable growth. 
It  relates  to  the  second  principle  I  was  referring  to  above.  This  second  principle  recognises  the 
fundamental  role  of  price  stability  as  a  prerequisite  for  sustainable  growth  and  the  creation  of 
employment. Why is that so? The reasons are manifold. 
• 
in 
First, price stability enhances the efficiency of the market system in allocating resources by 
making  it  easier  for  economic  agents  to  optimise  their  decisions.  Symmetrically,  price 
stability also prevents the considerable and arbitrary redistribution of wealth and income that 
arises 
inflationary  as  well  as  deflationary  environments,  where  prices  change 
unpredictably. 
Second, price stability preserves and bolsters consumers’ purchasing power and confidence, 
thus supporting consumption.  
Third,  price  stability  conducts  to  lower  uncertainty  and  minimised  risk  premia  in  financial 
markets,  thereby  implying  lower  medium  and  long  term  market  interest  rates,  which 
stimulates investment and growth.  
Fourth, ensuring the price stability objective provides markets with an indispensable nominal 
anchor for adjusting wages in line with productivity growth, thereby helping to preserve the 
competitiveness of the euro area economy and the stability of the currency. 
   The  above-mentioned  principles  are  enshrined  in  the  EU  Treaty,  which  has  assigned  to  the 
Eurosystem - i.e. the ECB and the national central banks of the euro area - the primary objective of 
maintaining price stability.  
In the context of its monetary policy strategy, the ECB has made the Treaty’s mandate operational by 
providing an explicit quantitative definition of price stability: a year-on-year increase in the HICP for the 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
euro area of below 2%. In reviewing its monetary strategy one year ago, the ECB has clarified that it 
will  aim  at  maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  This  public 
announcement is a fundamental element of our monetary policy concept. It is good for transparency 
and accountability: the public can judge whether and how we are achieving our own goals according 
to this yardstick. It is good for medium and long-term credibility: inflationary expectations can be more 
firmly anchored. 
The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy 
The ECB’s monetary policy strategy also makes clear that price stability is to be maintained over the 
medium term. This is a crucial element of our policy. First and foremost, it means that the central bank 
eschews  over-ambitious  attempts  to  steer  price  developments  over  short  horizons  and  with  a  high 
degree of precision.  
Second, the medium-term orientation gives the ECB the possibility to respond in the most appropriate 
manner to different economic shocks, according to their origin, size and nature. In particular, the time 
horizon over which price stability has to be re-established would depend on whether the shocks are 
temporary or permanent, whether they emerged on the supply or the demand side, on their domestic 
or external origin, their potential for becoming entrenched in pricing decisions and on their implications 
for the fragility of the financial system. In all events, the central bank has to preserve its credibility, 
ensuring that expectations remain consistent with its declared policy objective.  
A sound analytical framework 
Maintaining  price  stability  in  a  new,  ever-changing  and  complex  environment  like  the  euro  area 
economy is a continuous challenge. In such circumstances, we focus on the need for robustness and 
completeness of the analytical framework to assess the risks to price stability. Our approach is based 
on  two  pillars:  the  economic  analysis  and  the  monetary  analysis.  The  economic  analysis  takes  into 
account  a  broad  set  of  economic  and  financial  indicators  to  assess  the short  to  medium-term  price 
trends. The monetary analysis permits a cross checking of the economic analysis by drawing on the 
longer-term  close  link  between  the  money  stock  and  the  price  level  from  a  medium  to  long-term 
perspective.  In  this  way  we  trust  that  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  takes  into  account  in  real  time  all 
relevant information. 
Overall, I have no doubt that the ECB’s approach to monetary policy will ensure that price stability will 
be  maintained  on  a  lasting  basis  in  the  euro  area,  in  this  way  providing  a  crucial  contribution  to 
economic growth. Let me now explain to you how, by doing this, we have contributed and continue to 
contribute to a sustainable non-inflationary growth path. 
How we have contributed and continue to contribute to sustainable non-inflationary growth  
The “magnetic north” of our compass is the maintenance of price stability over the medium term. Since 
1999,  the  medium  to  long-term  inflation  expectations,  extracted  either  from  the  ECB  Survey  of 
Professional  Forecasters  or  from  surveys  conducted  by  private  institutions  such  as  Consensus 
Economics, have remained in line with our objective of price stability, fluctuating within a narrow band 
around 1.8%-1.9%.  
It  is  true  that  actual  inflation  has  several  times  risen  above  the  ceiling  of  2%  since  1999.  But  this 
occurred in a difficult environment with many adverse price shocks. However, this has not jeopardised 
our achievement in anchoring medium to long-term inflation expectations. 
Moreover,  anchoring  long  term  inflation  expectations  at  moderate  levels  has  allowed  to  maintain 
short-term,  medium-term  and  long-term  market  interest  rates  at  low  levels,  thereby  offering  very 
favourable  financing  conditions  to  consumers,  investors  and  companies.  This  low  level  of  market 
interest  rates  is  the  result  of  the  high  level  of  credibility  that  the  ECB  and  the  euro  immediately 
inherited  from  the  national  central  banks  and  from  the  most  stable  national  currencies  that  existed 
before 1999; contrary to what some observers were forecasting, the euro was not build as an average 
of the former national currencies, displaying a yield curve that would be the average of the yield curves 
prevailing in the countries deemed to join the euro area; the euro inherited immediately the yield curve 
of the most stable currencies, thus offering to 12 countries and 300 millions citizens the low levels of 
market interest rates that prevailed in a few countries only ;this is a major success of the euro that 
unfortunately is often underestimated.  
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
The past success in anchoring euro area inflation expectations over the medium term should guide 
and  inspire  our  current  and  future  actions.  In  this  respect,  let  me  describe  briefly  the  current  and 
short-term economic outlook for the euro area as we saw it in the last Governing Council meeting in 
Helsinki.  
As regards the current outlook for prices, some short-term fluctuations will push inflation rates up over 
the  coming  months,  on  account  of  less  favourable  base  effects  and  increases  in  indirect  taxes. 
However, beyond the short term, we expect price developments to remain in line with price stability. In 
particular, wage developments should remain moderate. The latest data on wage growth in the fourth 
quarter of 2003 lend support to this view.  
What about the outlook for economic activity? At the current juncture, we expect a continued, though 
modest,  further  recovery  in  real  GDP  growth  in  the  euro  area  over  the  short  term.  The  conditions 
remain in place for the recovery to continue into 2005 and strengthen over time. This outlook reflects a 
number of factors: 
• 
• 
First, global economic growth continues to be robust and world trade has strengthened.  
Second,  on  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  be  helped  by  favourable  financing 
conditions, an improvement in corporate earnings and spillover effects from global demand 
trends.  
Third,  as  regards  private  consumption,  growth  in  real  disposable  income  should  lead  to 
increased  spending,  in  particular  because  households  do  not  face  significant  financial 
constraints.  Over  time,  consumer  spending  should  also  be  progressively  supported  by  an 
improvement in labour market conditions. 
 However, although a sound monetary policy is a necessary condition for long term sustainable growth, 
it is not sufficient and it needs to be complemented by other factors. Actually, the main challenge is to 
raise the potential growth rate of the euro area economy.  
Looking back over the last ten years, it is clear that the euro area has suffered a growth deficit when 
compared,  for  example,  with  the  US.  Since  the  mid-1990s  euro  area  real  GDP  has  grown  at  an 
average  rate  of  around  2%  per  annum,  whereas  growth  in  the  US  has  been  almost  one  and  half 
percentage points higher. Why is this? In principle, such medium to longer-term differences can be 
due to different growth rates in population, labour utilisation and labour productivity. 
On the productivity side, we all know that we should view comparisons across countries with some 
caution. Despite this, the general finding is that average productivity growth in the euro area since the 
mid-1990s has been lower than before, while in the US it has clearly been higher. The main reason for 
this difference in productivity performance are developments in total factor productivity, a catch-all for 
improvements  in  technology,  organisation  and  factor  input  quality.  With  the  necessary  structural 
reforms, productivity developments in the euro area could eventually follow those in the US. This leads 
me to my third point: I would like to stress the crucial role that future structural reforms will have to play 
in achieving higher and sustainable non-inflationary growth.  
The need for structural reforms 
Progress in this field has been uneven across countries, but significant, and such an effort should be 
recognised  explicitly.  However,  there  is  still  a  long  way  to  go.  We  all  have  committed  to  make  the 
European Union “the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world, capable 
of sustainable economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion”. Furthermore, 
we have set specific deadlines for the targets to be met. And that is why further reforms have to be 
adopted and effectively implemented.  
Besides promoting higher sustainable growth, structural reforms are aiming at increasing the ability of 
the economic system to rapidly adjust to changing macroeconomic conditions. That has become even 
more important since the start of Economic and Monetary Union, given that euro area countries can no 
longer use monetary and exchange rate policies to mitigate the effects of adverse shocks.  
The  decision  on  the  specific  structural  reform  measures  to  be  taken,  their  design  and  actual 
implementation  is  left  to  the  individual  countries.  While  getting  closer  to  one  another,  EU  Member 
States  still  differ  in  many  respects:  in  terms  of  economic  structure,  economic  development  and 
institutional  setting.  Leaving  it  up  to  the  national  actors  to  decide  on  their  reforms  is  the  natural 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
consequence  of  such  differences.  However,  structural  reforms  should  take  the  EU  consensus  on 
policy priorities and objectives as their clear and common reference point.  
Let me mention some of the objectives at the top of the reform lists where I think progress is most 
needed.  
As  far  as  the  labour  market  is  concerned,  moderation  in  wage  agreements  is  essential,  not  only  in 
order  to  contain  risks  to  price  stability  but  also  to  foster  employment  growth  and  to  enhance 
competitiveness. Wage bargaining outcomes should allow for appropriate wage developments in the 
overall economy, as well as a sufficient degree of wage differentiation to reflect more strongly regional 
and  sectoral  productivity  differences.  But  inflationary  pressures  could  also  result  from  matching 
inefficiencies in the labour market leading to wage increases in excess of labour productivity growth. 
That  reminds  us  that  a  wide  range  of  policies  should  aim  at  increasing  the  efficiency  of  matching 
potential workers to job vacancies; namely, investment in education, in training and life-long learning. 
Particularly important in this respect are all the structural measures that could facilitate employment of 
the young unskilled workers in countries where youth unemployment is abnormally high. 
Let me also say a few words on product market reforms. There are important productivity gains to be 
reaped in the euro area countries by removing the barriers to competition that still remain at national 
and  at  EU  level.  That  requires  further  progress  with  regulatory  reforms  at  national  level  in  order  to 
intensify  domestic  competition  and  the  full  EU-wide  integration  of  markets  in  order  to  foster 
cross-border  competition  within  the  enlarged  EU.  Furthermore,  we  need  to  ensure  an  institutional 
environment  that  is  more  encouraging  to  business  start-ups,  innovation  and  the  diffusion  of 
technological progress. 
Again,  let  me  stress  that  adopting  effective  structural  reforms  is  not  an  easy  task,  it  needs  much 
determination and constant explanation on the part of governments, parliaments and social partners, 
in order to convince the citizens that structural reforms are good for growth and job creation. They are 
most definitely needed - along with monetary and fiscal policy - as an essential ingredient to ensure 
higher long-term growth, prosperity and job creation in the euro area. This is why the ECB is backing 
these  reforms,  why  it  is  part  of  the  European  consensus  on  their  necessity  and  why  we  try  to 
contribute to their good understanding by our fellow citizens. 
The importance of fiscal discipline 
As  I  just  said,  fiscal  discipline  is  another  crucial  element  in  enhancing  sustainable  non-inflationary 
growth.  Sound  public  finances  create  a  macroeconomic  environment  in  which  uncertainty  about 
long-term  macroeconomic  developments  is  reduced.  This  encourages  economic  agents  to  increase 
long term investment and therefore it is favourable to growth. 
Fiscal  discipline  will  also  enhance  confidence  in  general  amongst  entrepreneurs  and  households. 
Greater confidence in sound economic policies may have a positive effect on the economy via higher 
private  consumption  and  investment,  even  now.  One  particular  challenge  when  it  comes  to  fiscal 
discipline  is  the  effect  that  ageing  populations  will  have  on  government  spending  in  the  decades 
ahead.  Concerns  about  unsustainable  public  finances  due  to  high  deficits  and  debts,  and 
unsustainable social security systems, may lead consumers to save more, in anticipation of future tax 
increases. 
Sound public finance and sustainable non inflationary growth are mutually reinforcing and are creating 
a virtuous circle : growth in turn reinforces public finance.  
In  Europe,  the  relevant  fiscal rules  are those of  the Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact. They require the avoidance of excessive deficits, for which a reference value of 3% of GDP for 
the overall public finance applies. Beyond that, it has been agreed in the Stability and Growth Pact to 
maintain  fiscal  positions  close-to-balance  or  in  surplus  in  the  medium  term.  These  requirements 
provide  a  framework  to  preserve  budgetary  discipline  and  sustainable  public  finances,  while  also 
allowing for the smoothing effect of automatic stabilisers.  
In the view of the Governing Council, the current rules, as included in the Maastricht Treaty and in the 
European secondary legislation, are appropriate. No changes to the present wording are needed. But 
the implementation could and should be improved. Areas where solid improvements could be made 
include in particular a better analysis of structural imbalances and means to strengthen the incentives 
for sound fiscal policies during periods of strong economic growth. 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
Financial stability 
Let me turn now to the very important issue of financial stability. The development of both the role of 
central banks in financial stability and thinking about appropriate responses to financial imbalances, 
such as excessive movements in asset prices, is one of the key challenges that central banks face 
today.  
The activities of central banks striving to strengthen financial stability are related - on the one hand - to 
the monetary policy function, aimed at preserving price stability and thereby contributing to sustainable 
growth in the long term. On the other hand - central banks’ macro-oriented financial stability functions 
also  relate  to  micro-level  prudential  supervision  as  both  are  geared  towards  safeguarding  financial 
stability.  
In  broad  terms,  the  financial  system  matters  for  growth  as  it  can  produce  an  efficient  allocation  of 
resources from savers to productive investors. Stable financial markets and a stable financial system 
also dilute risk by spreading it across a large pool of economic agents thereby reducing the costs of 
economic failure. 
Another reason why financial stability matters for growth relates to the real economic costs of financial 
instability. In fact, both the direct resolution costs of financial crisis to governments and the broader 
costs to the welfare of the economy can represent large losses in output.  
the  analysis  of  risks 
to  price  stability.  This 
Financial sector information in monetary policy-making 
Let me start by considering the ways in which financial stability is very closely related to price stability 
and monetary policy-making.  
First  of  all,  financial  stability  is  a  precondition  for  ensuring  that  monetary  policy  is  efficiently  and 
effectively  carried  out.  The  success  of  monetary  policy  in  delivering  price  stability  relies  on  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  transmission.  Central  banks  have  direct  control  over  short-term 
interest rates only. Monetary policy decisions affect prices through various channels - acting directly 
on the expectations of economic agents as well as influencing, inter alia, banking credit conditions, the 
exchange  rate  and  other asset  prices.  It  is  quite  obvious  that  a  correct  and  orderly  transmission  of 
monetary policy to the economy requires a sound and stable financial system. Financial instability may 
distort  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  ultimately  reduce  its  effectiveness  in  maintaining 
monetary stability and contributing to long term sustainable growth.  
The  second  crucial  aspect  is  that  conditions  in  financial  markets  in  general,  and  financial  stability 
considerations in particular, always need to be part of the overall assessment of economic conditions 
and 
is  an  analytically  challenging  and  very 
information-demanding exercise, in which central bankers have to be involved.  
In  this  respect,  a  number  of  historical  episodes  have  shown  that  financial  instability  can  pose  very 
difficult  challenges  to  monetary  policy.  A  much-debated  specific  case  is  the  possible  emergence  of 
large misalignments in financial prices or asset price bubbles, a well-known symptom of imbalances in 
the  financial  system.  Episodes  of  large  “booms  and  busts”  in  asset  prices  are  dangerous  and  may 
result  in  self-reinforcing  spirals  that  are  a  significant  threat  not  only  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
sector  but,  more  generally,  to  macroeconomic  stability.  Monetary  policy  cannot  avoid  taking  into 
account these threats. 
In practice, it is extremely difficult to identify asset price bubbles in real-time. Even after the fact, there 
can be debate on whether a bubble really existed or whether expectations had been misguided. 
I  should  add  that  it  appears  very  useful  to  look  at  developments  in  credit  and  monetary  variables, 
which often in the past signalled the build-up of dangerous financial imbalances in the economy. As 
you know, the Eurosystem assigns a specific role to the monetary aggregates within the framework of 
its  two  pillars  approach  of  its  monetary  strategy.  Credit  being  one  of  the  counterpart  of  M3,  it  is 
therefore carefully followed, which is important from the perspective of monitoring the preconditions for 
the build-up of the financial imbalances.  
Having  said  that,  what  should  be  the  response  of  monetary  policy  to  the  possible  emergence  of 
financial instability? The above considerations lead me to the following remarks.  
First, the possibility of financial crises - and the potential high costs associated with them - strengthens 
the case for central banks to extend the horizon of their monetary policy beyond the short-term. All 
potential  consequences  of  asset  prices  booms  and  busts  need  to  be  analysed,  which  may  require 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 5
looking far ahead into the future. The ECB has taken these considerations into account by adopting a 
medium-term orientation in its monetary policy strategy. 
Secondly and crucially, in dealing with financial instability, a central bank should never lose sight of its 
ultimate objective of maintaining price stability over the medium-term. In this respect, there should be 
no doubts that the costs associated with financial instability reinforce the importance of price stability. 
Financial stability as an independent goal 
I just described how financial stability contributes to the maintenance of price stability. Symmetrically, 
price instability is also unambiguously harmful for financial stability. By blurring signals from relative 
price changes, inflation often leads to distortions in the allocation of resources. Equally, the likelihood 
of  misperceptions  about  future  profit  possibilities  can  be  increased  by  inflation.  This  results  in 
sub-optimal  investment  decisions  being  taken  and  possibly  over-optimistic  credit  risk  assessments. 
Hence,  price  stability  -  which  is  the  primary  objective  of  monetary  policy  -  can  be  regarded  as  the 
bedrock on which financial stability is built.  
However,  I  cannot  close  the  case  here.  Historical  evidence  does  not  support  the  idea  that  an 
environment of stable prices will inevitably ensure financial stability. Another way of stating this is that 
price  stability  would  seem  to  be  a  necessary,  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  ensuring  financial 
stability. This leads to the fact that central banks need to focus on financial instability also on its own 
right.  
Looking  at  the  historical  evidence,  financial  distress  has  occurred  both  in  industrial  countries  and 
emerging market economies where price instability was not an issue. This has been apparent in the 
period since the extensive liberalisation of the financial industry, which started in the early 1980s. The 
examples are many, but to name a few, the financial crises in the Nordic countries, in Japan, in East 
Asia  or  in  Mexico,  all  took  place  in  circumstances  where  inflation  was  not  a  threat.  Also,  the  stock 
market  bubble  of  the  late  1990s,  in  which  stock  prices  across  the  globe  rose  to  unrealistic  levels  - 
particularly in new technology sectors - shows that asset prices can deviate from their fundamental 
determinants even when prices of consumer goods and services are stable.  
There  are  also  other  examples  at  the  level  of  institutions.  Some  individual  failures  of  financial 
institutions or elements of financial system infrastructure with concerns of wider consequences have 
also  occurred  in  an  environment  of  stable  prices.  Financial  stability  problems  stemming  from  such 
individual events can be milder, but they can be obviously unrelated to macro-economic conditions.  
Finally, let me remind you that the interest of central banks in financial stability matters is not a new 
phenomenon.  Actually,  financial  stability  was  one  of  the  original  tasks  of  central  banks  due  to  the 
combination of the central bank monopoly on issuing “final” money and the participation of commercial 
banks  in  the  money-creation  process.  Between  the  1930s  and  1980s,  heavy  regulation  was  a 
characteristic of financial systems. In such an environment, the issue of financial instability was less 
pressing, so that the financial stability objective did not attract significant attention from central banks. 
Even though it commanded less attention in certain periods in the past, this aspect of central banking 
is now being strengthened around the globe not least because of financial liberalisation. 
Conflict between price stability and financial stability? 
A  potential  conflict  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability  is  often  claimed  to  exist,  simply 
because these are two goals for a single institution, with only one major instrument at its disposal - the 
monetary  policy.  Such  a  conflict  would  emerge  if  there  were  circumstances  in  which  the  monetary 
policy stance - as reflected in short-term interest rates - which is aimed at maintaining price stability, 
harmed the stability of the financial system. It would also emerge if there were circumstances in which 
the  price  stability  objective  prevented  the  central  bank  from  dealing  appropriately  with  financial 
instability.  
A very forceful argument supporting the view that such a conflict is unlikely to occur in the medium 
term  is  that  the  absence  of  stable  prices  is  a  major  threat  to  financial  stability,  as  I  already  noted. 
Nevertheless, there have been times when price and financial stability objectives have appeared to be 
in  conflict,  and  other  possible  situations  have  been  envisaged  in  the  academic  literature.  However, 
when the central bank focuses on long-term price stability, addressing financial stability issues would 
likely contribute to achieving both objectives and no conflict should really exist.  
6 
 BIS Review 28/2004
It  should  also  be  noted  -  when  talking  about  the  possible  conflict  -  that  besides  the  interest  rate 
“weapon” central banks have some other tools at their disposal to maintain financial stability. These 
include  payment  systems  tools,  such  as  standards  for  risk  limitation,  or  communication  tools. 
Ultimately,  the  crisis  management  measures  of  emergency  liquidity  support  together  with  the 
co-ordination  of  private  sector  solutions  can  be  used  by  a  central  bank  to  contribute  to  financial 
stability, even if it does not have supervisory responsibilities. 
EU framework for financial stability and the role of the Eurosystem 
I have hopefully made clear the close interest of central banks on financial stability and the case for 
addressing  it  explicitly  by  central  banks.  I  would  like  to  give  some  information  on  how  the  financial 
stability function is being developed in the ECB and the Eurosystem. 
The Eurosystem has the task of contributing “to the smooth conduct of policies pursued by competent 
authorities relating to the prudential supervision of credit institutions and the stability of the financial 
system”  (Article  105(5)  of  the  Treaty).  It  is  also  entrusted  with  an  advisory  role  in  the  financial 
rule-making process. The Eurosystem fulfils these tasks by way of decisions taken by the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB.  The  actual  tasks  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  in  the  financial  stability  field 
comprise both crisis prevention and crisis management. The Banking Supervision Committee (BSC) - 
which is constituted by central banks and banking supervisors of the now 25 EU members - assists the 
Eurosystem in performing its tasks in the financial stability area.  
Let me describe our activities in the two areas of prevention and crisis management in more detail.  
We are currently making many efforts to develop our financial stability monitoring. This work involves 
the assessment of sources of risk and vulnerabilities in the financial system and of the capacity of the 
financial system to absorb shocks from the euro-area or EU-wide perspectives.  
There is ample evidence that substantial integration was achieved in the euro area wholesale markets. 
For  instance,  since  the  launch  of  the  euro,  bid-ask  spreads  in  the  euro  money  market  have  not 
signalled any market segmentation by country. However, the effects of integration on the stability of 
the financial system are not straightforward. The common wholesale market in euro is better able to 
absorb small shocks than before, but at the same time, in a more integrated financial system, systemic 
shocks can be transmitted more quickly and disturbances can now spread more easily across borders. 
This  is  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  we  need  to  have  a  strong  area-wide  perspective  on  financial 
stability.  Common  shocks  can  be  much  more  significant  than  before  and  contagion  risks  may  be 
greater in the euro area than in the Single Market as a whole, due to common systemic components 
such as the wholesale money market and payment system.  
In  line  with  these  developments,  the  ECB  and  the  BSC  aim  at  delivering  a  broad  assessment  of 
relevant  developments  for  euro  area  and  EU  financial  stability.  This  work  draws  upon  supervisory 
information.  
The core of the work is the overall assessment of the current conditions of the main components of the 
euro area financial system. This assessment includes in the first instance the banking sector analysis, 
which continues to represent the main component for financial stability, given the financial structure of 
the euro area. The BSC in particular contributes to the monitoring and evaluation of banking stability 
on  the  basis  of  quantitative  (based  on  macro-prudential  indicators)  and  qualitative  assessment  by 
national authorities. The assessment also extends to the analysis of other financial institutions, as well 
as  the  money  market  and  the  payment  and  settlement  systems.  The  assessment  builds  on  an 
extensive analysis of developments in the international and European economic and financial market 
environment,  as  well  as  in  the  financial  condition  of  the  household  and  corporate  sectors.  The 
outcome of the evaluation is delivered to the Governing Council for its discussion and judgement and 
also contributes to the European debate on financial stability, mainly in the context of the Economic 
and Financial Committee. 
As  you  may  know,  one  of  the  main  task  of  the  Eurosystem  is  to  ensure  the  smooth  functioning  of 
payment systems, which is key to preserving financial stability. The most important way of reducing 
the risk of a disruption of the payment circuit has been the establishment of the single and safe RTGS 
system, TARGET, which links together the national RTGS systems of the EU countries. The launch of 
TARGET  II  -  now  in  pre-project  phase  -  will  further  improve  the  robustness  and  resilience  of  the 
system,  as  well  as  its  efficiency.  Moreover,  financial  stability  concerns  increasingly  also  relate  to 
securities  clearing  and  settlement,  especially  due  to  the  ongoing  domestic  and  also  cross-border 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 7
consolidation  in  this  area.  The  ESCB  and  the  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators  are 
currently designing safety standards for security settlement systems. 
Finally, in case a major crisis involving one or several credit institutions would occur, I would simply 
recall that the exceptional liquidity allocation function has to be exercised by the national central bank 
concerned, under the control of the Governing Council of the ECB in case where there is a large or a 
cross-border liquidity problem. Moreover, a memorandum of understanding was signed between EU 
central banks and supervisory authorities in March 2003 in order to ensure that effective co-operation 
across central banks and banking supervisory authorities would arise in a cross-border crisis. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me briefly conclude. I have just discussed two of the challenges that the 
ECB faces, but there are of course many other challenges. Maybe one of the most important ones, 
with the Europe-wide celebratory fireworks of 30 April still fresh in our minds, is the EU enlargement 
and the future entry of our new Member States into the euro area. This represents challenges, but it 
will  also  bring  major  opportunities  for  our  European  economy;  if  one  remembers  the  concerns 
expressed when Spain and Portugal joined the European Union in 1986, and if one considers all the 
benefits that this integration brought to Europe as a whole, there is certainly room for hope and high 
expectations with this new enlargement.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 28/2004
