Philipp M Hildebrand: Inside Europe, outside EMU - lessons and outlook 
Speech by Dr Philipp M Hildebrand, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at 
the British Swiss Chamber of Commerce, Geneva, 23 April 2004. 
 My long-standing personal attachments to the United Kingdom make it a special privilege to be here 
this  morning  to  speak  about  Europe  and  its  significance  to  our  two  countries.  Geneva  is  one  of 
Europe’s truly international cities and provides a fitting platform for a discussion on some of the salient 
characteristics about the relations of the United Kingdom and Switzerland toward Europe.  
The United Kingdom and Switzerland are both undeniably European nations. Nonetheless, they both 
firmly  remain  outside  of  the  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU).  Institutionally,  the  links  of  the  two 
countries with Europe differ, of course. The United Kingdom is in EU Europe while Switzerland is only 
in Europe, despite the fact that until the EU welcomes ten new Member States next week, we Swiss 
can  be  forgiven  to  think  of  ourselves  as  representing  the  “heart”  of  Europe.  Culturally,  our  two 
countries are rooted in different European traditions: Anglo-Saxon on the one hand and Continental 
European on the other hand, notwithstanding the fact the historical roots of the Saxons are, of course, 
on the continent.  
During the remainder of my time with you today, I will sketch more fully a number of salient common 
features  and  differences  between 
these 
commonalities  and  differences,  I  will  then  draw  some  tentative  economic,  financial  and  political 
conclusions about the respective experiences and relations of our two countries with Europe and more 
specifically with EMU.  
the  United  Kingdom  and  Switzerland.  Based  on 
UK and Switzerland: Common features and differences: 
It seems to me that even a perfunctory comparison of our two countries’ relations to Europe and EMU 
needs to touch upon law, politics and recent economic history.  
Law and politics 
There is a fundamental judicial divide between the common law tradition of Anglo-Saxon countries and 
the civil law tradition of Continental Europe. Over the centuries, this divide has undoubtedly spread 
into  culture  and  minds.  The  custom  and  case-based  common  law  was  institutionalized  in  1154  by 
Henry II through elevating local custom to a unified system of law “common” to the country. It may be 
unwritten, as it was at the outset, or captured in statutes and codes. This judicial history is reflected by 
the absence of a written constitution in the United Kingdom. Civil law in Continental Europe, on the 
other  hand,  has  its  roots  in  the  Corpus  Juris  Civilis  of  Emperor  Justinian.  It  constitutes  broad  legal 
principles  and  doctrinal  writings  and  is  explicitly  written  law.  This  explicit  and  written  tradition  is 
reflected in the “acquis communautaire” of the European Union with nearly 100’000 pages and some 
20’000  laws,  decisions  and  regulations.  In  light  of  our  two  countries’  legal  roots,  the  legal 
consequences of relations with the European Union are undoubtedly of greater concern to the people 
of the United Kingdom than to Continental Switzerland. 
More importantly, in my view, the political systems of the U.K. and Switzerland differ in fundamental 
ways. The United Kingdom is one of the oldest representative parliamentary democracies. Its electoral 
system tends to yield clear-cut political majorities. The ruling party - Tory or Labour - is elected for 
typically four years and can manage the country quite independently as it is assured quasi-autonomy 
to  alter  existing  legislative  acts  or  enact  new  ones.  Switzerland  has  an  equally  proud  democratic 
tradition. It is, however, deeply rooted in direct participation by the sovereign. A vote by the people is 
possible on nearly everything. Indeed, it is often compulsory. The Swiss parliament is elected every 
four years. Due to the proportional voting system, no political party can expect to achieve an absolute 
majority.  Thus,  the  parliament  elects  the  government  as  a  collegiate  body  which  traditionally 
encompasses  all  four  main  political  parties.  Consequently,  legislative  decisions  tend  to  be  deeply 
rooted in compromise, not least to overcome the potential referendum hurdle. 
The mechanics of a particular political system affects the ability of legislative bodies to pass politically 
contentious  reforms  to  a  country’s  underlying  economic  structure.    In  parliamentary  systems  with  a 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 1
clear  majority  the speed of  structural  adjustment  -  once  initiated -  tends  to  be  higher.  On  the  other 
hand, policies are possibly more short-term oriented and large policy errors more likely. Investors may 
therefore demand a higher risk premium. In direct democracies, the speed of reform is typically slower. 
Grid-locks are possible through referenda and therefore more common. On the other hand, political 
stability  in  direct  democracies  tends  to  be  higher  and  economic  policies  typically  have  a  more 
long-term orientation. As policy changes take more time to be introduced, the risk of large policy errors 
tends to be smaller. Over the long-term, investors appear to be willing to pay a premium for higher 
stability. 
Beyond  differing  parliamentary  systems,  our  two  countries’  political  structures  are  organized  along 
different principles.  Whereas the political process in the United Kingdom can be broadly characterized 
as top down, Switzerland’s federalist structure implies a bottom-up political process with a great deal 
of political autonomy for our nearly 3000 communes and 26 cantons. It is interesting to note that there 
are  at  least  some  tentative  signs  of  converging  trends:  In  the  United  Kingdom,  Tony  Blair’s 
government has initiated constitutional reforms by establishing the Scottish Parliament and the Welsh 
Assembly in 1998 and by advancing the Regional Assemblies in England. In Switzerland, a number of 
centralization proposals are debated such as directly enhancing the power of the federal government 
or alternatively, merging a number of cantons with the aim of ending up with larger and fewer regional 
authorities.  These  trends  illustrate  that  Switzerland  and  the  U.K.  both  face  a  trade-off  between 
increasing  economic  efficiency  on  the  one  hand  and  retaining  long-standing  political  and  historical 
traditions on the other hand.  Under pressure from rapidly evolving global economic forces and the 
need  to  adjust  to  them,  both  countries  will  need  to  continue  to  identify  respective  strategies  to 
maximize economic welfare and optimize political structures.  
Recent economic history 
Let me now turn to some recent economic history. History shapes memory and experience. The work 
of Nobel Laureate Daniel Kahnemann demonstrates that experience constitutes a reference point for 
human beings by which current and expected welfare are evaluated against.1
The United Kingdom has experienced profound economic crisis relatively recently. In 1976, the pound 
sterling collapsed. The Labour government under Prime Minister Callaghan faced a near bail-out by 
the International Monetary Fund.2 The crisis left deep scars in the real economy. As some of you will 
remember, power failures were a common phenomenon in those days in London. The experience of a 
severe economic crisis commonly shared by the British people undoubtedly played a role in paving the 
ground for the ultimate acceptance of the far-reaching and rapid economic reform agenda under the 
leadership of Margaret Thatcher which boosted economic growth in the United Kingdom. 
In  contrast,  Switzerland  has  no  recent  memory  of  a  comparable  economic  crisis.  On  the  whole, 
economic reforms progress only gradually and fail to cover the economy as a whole. Fortunately, in 
some  areas,  liberalization  has  advanced  rapidly.  A  positive  example  is  the  Swiss  labor  market. 
Unencumbered by a history of pervasive unionization, Swiss labor market flexibility has continuously 
been strengthened. Today, it is comparable to Anglo-Saxon standards. 
Against the backdrop of our two countries’ differing legal, political and economic traditions, let me now 
turn to what strike me as significant lessons with regard to our respective relations with Europe and, 
more specifically, with EMU. 
Structural reform and EMU 
The  United  Kingdom  is  currently  harvesting  the  fruits  of  its  growth-boosting  liberalization  policies 
implemented during  the past  20  years. A  dynamic  market  economy  yields strong  and stable  output 
                                                      
1   See e.g. Judgment Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases, D. Kahneman (editor), Cambridge University Press, 1982. 
2   Rising current account deficits, increasing unemployment and inflation led to the collapse of the Sterling. The UK requested 
for IMF assistance and the BoE secured a stand-by credit from other central banks, among them the SNB. Negotiations with 
the  IMF  were  protracted.  Fund  officials  were  determined  to  ensure  that  UK  officials  had  in  place  a  set  of  policies  that 
promised a drastic decrease in public sector borrowing in order to achieve a deceleration of inflation and an improvement of 
the balance of payments. An agreement was reached in December 1976. Immediately afterwards, confidence in the pound 
was restored. See e.g. The International Monetary Fund, 1972-1978: Cooperation on Trial, Margaret Garritsen De Vries, 
IMF, 1985. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2004
with low unemployment and monetary stability. This stands in contrast to the current situation in the 
European Monetary Union. Its large member states in particular suffer from endemic growth problems, 
structural weaknesses and high unemployment. In light of this comparison, it is not surprising that any 
proposal for the UK to join EMU at this stage is widely regarded as economically disadvantageous, 
quite  apart  from  deeper  cultural-historical  misgivings  in  the  UK  about  further  European  integration. 
Moreover, correlations suggest that the US business cycle is no less important for the British economy 
than the degree of activity in the EU (Chart 1).  
In many ways, the lessons for Switzerland are more complicated. Unlike the UK, Switzerland has had 
to endure a protracted period of very low economic growth. Indeed since 1980 and on an accumulated 
basis,  Switzerland  has  had  the  poorest  growth  performance  amongst  the  advanced  economies 
(Chart 3).3 As a result, a widespread and welcome political and media debate about how to boost our 
country’s growth performance has emerged. At the same time, the absence of a deep economic crisis 
experience,  the  mix  of  proportional  representation,  direct  democracy,  strong  federalism  and  the 
resulting consensus-oriented political process has so far prevented the implementation of a genuine 
wide-ranging liberalization program.  
As a result, there is a latent belief embedded in many economic debates in Switzerland that the only 
way successfully to complete the necessary structural reform program is to join the European Union. 
Given that an opt-out clause for Switzerland would be unlikely, joining the European Union would in 
fact  be  tantamount  to  joining  EMU.  In  other  words,  many  of  those  who  propose  EMU  membership 
accept the need aggressively to push on with economic reforms but reject the notion that it can be 
done independently. The responsibility for introducing reforms is in effect delegated to the European 
Union.  
This line of reasoning is flawed and must be dismissed. It is true that the obvious appeal of such a 
strategy  is  the  ability  to  blame  the  European  Union  for  having  to  introduce  unpopular  reforms  and 
ultimately transfer the political costs of reforms to Brussels.  Nonetheless, as the examples of several 
member states demonstrate, EMU membership does not guarantee successful reforms. First of all, the 
European Union, let alone the European Monetary Union were not primarily designed to be vessels to 
accommodate liberalization efforts. Moreover, in the cases where membership does require legislative 
adjustments  which  amount  to  economic  reform  steps,  EU  law  only  prescribes  the  formal  legislative 
change.  Implementation  responsibility  typically  remains  with  local  authorities  on  the  basis  of  the 
subsidiarity principle.  
This point is reinforced when considered from a macro-economic perspective. Far-reaching domestic 
reforms  often  constitute  painful  macro-economic  adjustment  processes.    With  EMU  membership,  a 
country  loses  its  monetary  policy  and  at  least  to  some  extent  its  fiscal  policy  lever.  With  these 
important  macroeconomic  compensating  mechanisms  no  longer  available,  the  cost  of  domestic 
economic reform is in fact likely to rise. Necessary real exchange rate adjustments will have to occur 
via  wage  and  price  changes  while  the  ability  for  fiscal  policy  to  reduce  the  cost  of  higher 
unemployment  is  curtailed.  At  the  same  time,  labor  mobility  that  could  absorb  some  of  the  costs 
remains limited in Europe. Arguably, therefore, far-reaching economic reforms become in fact more 
difficult to implement once a country loses its independent monetary and fiscal policy inside EMU. This 
is particularly true for countries with rigid labor markets. The recent electoral results in Germany and 
France illustrate this dilemma.   
It is of utmost importance for the Swiss political authorities not to fall into the trap of the kind of ‘help us 
from ourselves’ line of reasoning that I tried to outline. There may well be political reasons to have a 
long-term  EMU  accession  strategy  in  place.  But  it  is  a  mistake  to  link  the  question  of  domestic 
economic reform to EMU accession. As I pointed out earlier, in light of Switzerland’s legal, political and 
historical context, far-reaching reforms will be a formidable challenge, despite the extraordinary asset 
of  a  highly  flexible  labor  market.  Nonetheless,  there  is  no  alternative  to  tackling  independently  and 
directly the domestic economic restructuring process and its consequences if Switzerland is serious to 
boost its growth potential and thereby safeguard its tradition of broad social and welfare programs. 
                                                      
3   Because Swiss GDP statistics do not fully take into account the improvement of the terms of trade regularly realized by the 
tradable  sector,  the  growth  differential  between  Switzerland  and  other  advanced  economies  is  overstated  but  remains 
significant nevertheless. See e.g., Term-of-Trade Changes and Real GDP: Evidence from Switzerland, Ulrich Kohli, SNB 
Quarterly Bulletin, June 2002. 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 3
Monetary policy and EMU 
Accession to a monetary union transfers the power over monetary policy from the national to the union 
level. There are costs and benefits to such an abdication of monetary sovereignty. Nominal interest 
rates are equalized throughout a monetary union and the nominal exchange rate is no longer available 
as a tool for alleviating the impact of asymmetric shocks. Necessary economic adjustments between 
different  countries  of  a  monetary  union  must  therefore  occur  through  various  price  and  factor 
movements.  As  I  have  already  suggested,  imposing  real  wage  adjustments  in  particular  can  be 
politically  costly.  In  the  case  of  both  the  UK  and  Switzerland,  these  potential  costs  of  EMU 
membership are mitigated by virtue of flexible labor markets in both countries.  
In the case of Switzerland, EMU accession would also lead to the loss of an interest rate bonus our 
country  has  traditionally  enjoyed.  At  least  partly,  this  bonus  is  rooted  in  the  credibility  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, acquired over a long period of independent and successful monetary policy (Chart 2). 
One benefit of EMU membership for Switzerland as a trading nation would be lower transaction costs 
derived from the use of a single currency and the disappearance of a considerable part of exchange 
rate  risk  for  our  exporters.  Interestingly,  with  the  Swiss  Franc’s  recent  stability  vis-à-vis  the  Euro, 
Swiss  Euro  oriented  exporters  have  of  late  enjoyed  both  the  interest  rate  bonus  and  considerable 
currency stability. This, of course, does not apply to our dollar-oriented exporters who have to manage 
a  substantially  higher  exchange  rate  risk.  When  we  observe  Switzerland’s  business  cycle  and  its 
degree  of  relative  synchronization  with  that  of  the  Euro-zone,  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  two 
business  cycles  would  be  fundamentally  incompatible  in  the  context  of  a  monetary  union.  Not 
surprisingly  in  light  of  our  trade  links,  our  business  cycle  is  relatively  closely  correlated  with  that  of 
Germany.  Nonetheless,  it  is  worth  pointing  out  that  in  terms  of  annual  real  GDP,  Switzerland  has 
outperformed  Germany  in  ten  out  of  the  last  24  years  (Chart  4).  There  seems  to  be  an  increasing 
synchronization  of  national  business  cycles  inside  the  Euro-zone,  though  this  pattern  can  also  be 
observed for economies that were outside EMU such as the UK, Switzerland and Sweden (Chart 5). 
Higher business cycle synchronization may simply reflect the fact that with growing globalization, the 
overwhelming  economic  trends  are  global  rather  than  intra-regional.  In  the  context  of  benefits  for 
Switzerland,  I  have  already  discussed  why  the  argument  that  EMU  membership  would  induce  the 
Swiss  political  authorities  to  embark  upon  a  necessary  and  otherwise  impossible  economic  reform 
program should be dismissed. 
For  the  United  Kingdom,  the  economic  cost-benefit  assessment  of  EMU  membership  is  a  different 
one.  Analogous  to  the  Swiss  case,  the  UK  would  lose  monetary  policy  as  a  flexible  instrument  to 
respond  to  asymmetric  domestic  shocks  such  as  the  current  steep  rise  in  domestic  house  prices 
(Chart 6). However, unlike Switzerland, the UK would gain from lower interest rates. In this context, it 
must  be  remembered  that  the  Bank  of  England’s  post-monetary  independence  highly  successful 
monetary  policy  under  an  inflation  targeting  regime  follows  a  long  period  of  stop-and-go  monetary 
policy and relatively high inflation (Chart 7). The argument that EMU would somehow induce further 
structural  reforms  is  equally  irrelevant  for  the  UK  as  it  is  for  Switzerland  though  partly  for  different 
reasons. As I outlined earlier, initiated by the economic shock experience of the late 1970s, the United 
Kingdom  has  independently  and  autonomously  embarked  upon  a  long-standing  and  far-reaching 
economic liberalization course. The current nature of the relative business cycles between the UK and 
the  Euro-zone  points  to  higher  economic  costs  of  UK  membership  in  EMU  than  for  continental 
European countries. This is illustrated by the different interest rates settings of the ECB and the Bank 
of England in recent times. 
To join or not to join 
To  join  or  not  to  join  EMU  is  a  complex  and  multi-faceted  decision  for  any  sovereign  nation.  By 
definition,  it  amounts  to  a  long-term  commitment  to  an  uncertain  process  subject  to  unpredictable 
influences. The long-term costs and benefits of such a decision are therefore not easily evaluated. In 
addition, the cost-benefit analysis must take place at many different levels. Economics constitutes only 
one layer of analysis and by no means the only relevant one. Switzerland and the United Kingdom are 
both  nations  with  long-standing  traditions  of  global  integration  and  free  trade.  Both  nations  rely 
fundamentally  on  multilateral  contractual  frameworks  such  as  the  one  offered  by  the  World  Trade 
Organization (WTO). Our nations and our peoples live in and benefit from a global and open world. 
Europe is and must remain part of that world. Surely an open multilateral global economy must be our 
primary  long-term  commitment.  The  decision  to  join  a  regional  agreement  such  as  the  European 
Monetary Union must be evaluated against this global backdrop. I have tried to provide you with a brief 
sketch  of  some  of  the  salient  macro-economic  issues  related  to  such  an  evaluation.  Beyond 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2004
economics,  both  of  our  nations  have  a  proud  political  history.  Ultimately,  the  decision  to  surrender 
national sovereignty - be it monetary or otherwise - will always be a political one. Central bankers may 
have views as private citizens which they would presumably express at the ballot box. In the public 
domain, however, their responsibility should be to illustrate potential economic consequences of the 
ultimately political decision to join or not to join the European Monetary Union.  
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  decision  formally  to  join  EMU  does  not  appear  to  be  a  policy  issue  of 
imminent  concern  in  either  of  our  two  countries.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  the  issue  was  indefinitely 
pushed  back  in  time  in  June  of  last  year.  Here  in  Switzerland,  it  is  the  ratification  of  the  second 
package  of  bilateral  treaties  with  the  European  Union  that  dominates  our  current  external  political 
agenda. Since this contractual arrangement with our European partners was designed from the outset 
as  a  multi-issue  legal  document  with  costs  and  benefits  spread  over  multiple  issues,  the  Swiss 
government  is  to  be  commended  for  insisting  on  negotiating  the  agreement  as  a  comprehensive 
package and not break it down into multiple single issues.  
Meanwhile, globalization is set to proceed. With the rapid integration of China and India into the global 
economy  and  the  subsequent  reorganization  of  production  processes,  global  competition  is  rapidly 
increasing with changes in relative prices that become increasingly a function of global demand and 
supply.  Needless  to  say,  the  globalization  path  will  neither  be  linear  nor  smooth.  There  are  risks, 
perhaps none less so than the temptation of governments to resort to protectionism in a misguided 
effort to respond to the costs associated with global economic integration.  
In  Europe,  integration  is  also  proceeding.  In  less  than  a  week,  ten  countries  will  join  the  European 
Union. They will add twenty-five percent to Europe’s population, twenty-three percent to Europe’s land 
mass  and  nine  percent  to  European  GDP  on  a  purchasing  power  parity  basis.  Average  GDP  per 
capita in Europe will therefore decline by thirteen percent to a level slightly above sixty percent of that 
of the United States. Fifteen years after the fall of the Iron Curtain, the new member states are keen to 
compete  on  the  internal  market.  The  adjustment  process  will  entail  important  challenges  to  both 
newcomers  and  old-timers.  On  balance,  I  remain  confident  that  in  the  longer  term,  the  growth 
contribution to the European Union will be a positive one.  
In  a  world  of  rapid  change  and  integration,  countries  with  a  long  history  of  open  economies  and 
societies are well positioned to reap economic and social benefits. Both of our countries doubtlessly fit 
into  that  category.  Note  that  in  a  recent  global  survey,  Switzerland  was  voted  the  third  most  open 
country  in  the  world.  The  challenge  will  be  to  maintain  our  ability  to  adapt  to  changing  external 
conditions. On the important issue of domestic structural reform, Switzerland would be misguided to 
consider  EMU  membership  as  a  strategy  for  curing  domestic  problems.  Instead,  we  have  much  to 
learn from our friends across the English Channel on how to reform a domestic economy on the basis 
of domestic needs.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 5
Correlations of UK GDP Growth with US and EU 
Chart 1 
UK-US
UK-EU15
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2
1970
10 Years Rolling Correlation
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
Long Term Interest Rates in the UK, Germany and Switzerland in percent 
Chart 2 
 18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
Germany
U.K.
Switzerland
Jan 72
Jan 74
Jan 76
Jan 78
Jan 80
Jan 82
Jan 84
Jan 86
Jan 88
Jan 90
Jan 92
Jan 94
Jan 96
Jan 98
Jan 00
Jan 02
Jan 04
  6 
 BIS Review 24/2004
Chart 3 
Real GDP Level in 2003 (1980=100) 
Korea 
Singapore 
Taiwan Province of China 
Hong Kong SAR 
Ireland 
Cyprus 
Luxembourg 
Israel 
Australia 
United States 
Norway 
Canada 
Spain 
New Zealand 
Iceland 
Japan 
Portugal 
Belgium 
Finland 
United Kingdom 
Netherlands 
Greece 
Sweden 
Austria 
Denmark 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
Switzerland 
 BIS Review 24/2004 
 0
100
200
300
400
500
 7
Annual GDP Growth in the UK, Germany and Switzerland in percent 
Chart 4 
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
Germany
Switzerland
U.K.
1980
1985
1990
1995
2000
 Correlations with Germany’s GDP Growth 
Chart 5 
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
 8 
 AUT
BEL
CHE
DNK
E15
ESP
FIN
FRA
GBR
ITA
SWE
1990.1-1998.4
1999.1-2003.4
 BIS Review 24/2004
12 Months Growth of the Halifax House Price Index 
Chart 6 
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
-5%
-10%
-15%
Apr 90
Apr 92
Apr 94
Apr 96
Apr 98
Apr 00
Apr 02
Chart 7 
Annual CPI Inflation in the UK 
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1962
1964
1966
1968
1970
1972
1974
1976
1978
1980
1982
1984
1986
1988
1990
1992
1994
1996
1998
2000
2002
BIS Review 24/2004 
   9
