Irma Rosenberg: The inflation target and the CPI  
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the CPI committee’s 
50th anniversary, Norra Latin, 4 May 2004. 
 Allow  me  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  the  invitation  to  attend  this  anniversary  seminar.  I  have 
previously been a member of the CPI committee so I have some insight into the issues with which the 
committee has contended down through the years. As you know I have a different role today and it is 
in  this  capacity,  as  a  monetary  policymaker,  that  I  today  intend  to  provide  some  reflections  on  the 
CPI's role as a target variable for monetary policy. 
In January 1993, a few months after the Riksbank had been forced to abandon its defence of the fixed 
exchange rate, a monetary policy strategy was introduced that was pretty much untried, not only in 
Sweden but also internationally: Monetary policy was to be aimed at achieving a quantified target for 
inflation. The rate of price increases was to be stabilised at 2 per cent a year with a tolerance range of 
1 percentage point. 
Right  from  the  beginning  the  target  was  defined  in  terms  of  the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI,  even 
though other measures also featured in the discussion. There were several reasons for choosing the 
CPI as the target variable. Perhaps the most important of these was that the CPI, with its long history, 
is  the  best  known  measure  of  price  developments  in  Sweden.  This  was  judged  to  be  especially 
important at a time when we wanted to quickly generate public confidence in the new monetary policy 
regime.  It  was  also  considered  reasonable  to  attempt  to  stabilise  the  value  of  money  in  terms  of  a 
basket  of  goods  that  had  great  significance  for  the  average  person.  Additional  advantages  that  are 
usually  put  forward  are  that  the  CPI  is  published  regularly  and  comparatively  often,  and  that  CPI 
inflation is normally not revised. 
Looking back on the ten years or so that have passed since the introduction of inflation targeting, we 
can  conclude  that  the  CPI  has  worked  relatively  well  as  a  target  variable.  When  the  target  was 
adopted  it  was  probably  considered  by  many  to  be  unrealistic.  But  during  these  years  inflation  has 
averaged close to 2 per cent. The credibility of the target is also high today, judging by the inflation 
expectations of households and other economic agents. I don’t think it’s an exaggeration to say that 
we, through the new policy with a target for the rate of increase in the CPI as an anchor, coupled with 
a successful consolidation of the government finances, have essentially succeeded in achieving what 
we had hoped for. Sweden has gone from being a high-inflation economy, characterised by recurring 
cost crises and unstable economic developments, to being an economy with low, relatively stable rises 
in prices and wages, where the risk of periods of overheating and subsequent recessions has been 
reduced considerably. 
The journey has not been entirely problem-free, and the experiences we have gained on the way have 
prompted us to make some changes to practical aspects of policy, or perhaps rather as regards how 
policy  is  communicated  to  the  public.  We  have  also  had  to  change  and  improve  our  analysis  of 
inflation in different respects. I intend today to touch upon the problems we have encountered on our 
journey and how we have tried to deal with them. 
Important to have explicit communication 
So what difficulties have we encountered as regards defining the inflation target in terms of the change 
in  the  CPI?  To  illustrate  this  I  need  first  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  principles  that  underlie  the 
Riksbank's interest rate decisions. Like other central banks that have adopted inflation targeting, the 
Riksbank has worked from the premise that monetary policy affects inflation with a certain lag; it is 
generally assumed that it takes one to two years before a rate adjustment achieves its full impact on 
inflation. Against this background, and as a step towards clarifying how we try to attain our target, we 
have formulated a simple rule for monetary policy: if the forecast of inflation one to two years ahead 
exceeds 2 per cent the repo rate should normally be raised, and if the forecast is below 2 per cent the 
repo rate should normally be lowered. To put it somewhat differently, but with the essence more or 
less the same, the rule means that monetary policy should normally be aimed at meeting the inflation 
target of 2 per cent CPI inflation one to two years ahead. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
The fact that we use primarily the inflation forecast one to two years ahead as a kind of intermediate 
goal for the real target of 2 per cent actual inflation means that temporary shocks that only have an 
impact on inflation in the coming year do not generally affect our rate setting. It is conceivable that 
drastic changes in interest rates could bring inflation back to the target faster than over one to two 
years. But such a policy would probably result in  sharp, undesired fluctuations in both the real and 
financial  economy.  Against  this  backdrop  it  could  be  said  that  we  normally  deliberately  tolerate  the 
target deviations that result from temporary shocks to inflation and that arise and diminish over the 
next year. 
However, sometimes temporary effects on inflation arise that do not subside during the subsequent 
year. These effects then show up in the inflation forecast, measured in terms of the CPI, one to two 
years ahead. But if the effects are expected to disappear quite soon afterwards, there may be cause 
not  to  counter  them  through  repo  rate  adjustments.  In  other  words  there  may  be  reason  in  certain 
situations to depart from the rule that the repo rate should be changed if the forecast of CPI inflation 
differs from the 2 per cent target one to two years ahead. 
In  such  situations  it  is  very  important  that  we  communicate  our  intention  to  deviate  from  the 
established  policy  rule  and  that  we  explain  clearly  the  underlying  reasons.  One  way  in  which  the 
Riksbank has decided to deal with the issue is to highlight at various times "adjusted" measures of 
inflation,  as  indicators  of  the  longer-term  inflationary  trend.  I  shall  now  illustrate  this  with  a  few 
examples. 
The first example is from the period during the second half of the 1990s when monetary policy was 
eased and there was a steep decline in the general level of interest rates. Between autumn 1995 and 
spring  1999  the  repo  rate  was  cut  from  just  under  9  per  cent  to  less  than  3  per  cent.  This  was 
accompanied  by  a  sharp  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates.  The  aim  of  the  repo  rate  cuts  was  to 
stimulate the economy via the traditional demand channels so as to contribute to a rise in CPI inflation, 
but these effects came first after a certain lag. The immediate effects on the CPI of the rate cuts and 
the  fall  in  the  general  level  of  interest  rates  were  the  opposite,  through  declining  mortgage  interest 
costs. This meant that CPI inflation initially dropped very sharply. Due to the fact that the change in the 
general interest rate situation was both large and protracted, the CPI was affected for an appreciably 
longer time than one to two years. As the low CPI inflation was largely a result of the Riksbank's rate 
cuts and therefore was judged to be transitory, the Bank did not see reason to counter it through a 
further easing of monetary policy. During this period, however, the Riksbank was often asked why the 
repo rate was not lowered in spite of below-target inflation, which indicated the need for a more explicit 
explanation  of  policy.  To  this  end  we  highlighted  a  new  index  as  an  important  inflation  measure, 
namely  UND1X,  which,  among  other  things,  excludes  mortgage  interest  costs.  The  June  Inflation 
Report in 1999, for instance, illustrates how UND1X was used to clarify the formulation of monetary 
policy. When the repo rate was left unchanged on this occasion UND1X inflation was forecast to be 
close  to  2  per  cent  towards  the  end  of  the  forecast  period  while  CPI  inflation  was  expected  to  be 
considerably below target. 
The problems we encountered in communicating monetary policy, which arose in conjunction with the 
substantial  rate  cuts  during  the  second  half  of  the  1990s,  were  also  a  significant  reason  for  the 
Riksbank's decision in 1999 to publish a clarification of the formulation of policy and the application of 
the inflation target.1 Among other things the clarification specified the situations in which there may be 
reason to deviate from the simple rule of aiming policy at meeting the target of 2 per cent CPI inflation 
one to two years ahead. My discussion today is based on exactly the same line of reasoning as in that 
clarification. 
The second example is taken from spring 2001. Higher food and energy prices due to foot and mouth 
disease and mad cow disease, as well as supply shocks in energy production, caused a sharp rise in 
CPI inflation. The price increases were judged to be temporary, and the Riksbank decided therefore 
not to raise the repo rate. As the prices rises were estimated to disappear from CPI inflation relatively 
quickly,  there  was  no  need  in  this  case  to  depart  from  the  Bank's  simple  rule  of  monetary  policy. 
However there was a need in our external communication to illustrate clearly the assessment that it 
was  mainly  transitory  price  increases  that  had  caused  CPI  inflation  to  be  so  high  above  target. 
Consequently, to this end, the June Inflation Report in 2001 presented an inflation measure that was 
                                                      
1   See Heikensten, L, "The Riksbank's inflation target - clarifications and evaluation", Sveriges Riksbank Quarterly Review 1, 
1999. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
adjusted to exclude temporary rises in prices. On that occasion there was no forecast for this adjusted 
measure. 
The  third  and  most  recent  example  is  when  the  Riksbank  decided  last  year  to  highlight  UND1X 
excluding energy as an especially important index for assessing longer-lasting inflationary pressures. 
Energy  prices  had  risen  steeply  around  the  turn  of  the  year  2002/2003.  We  judged  this  rise  to  be 
temporary and expected energy prices to fall back again. This meant that the inflation rate would come 
to be affected for a reasonably long period by these temporary fluctuations in energy prices. At the 
monetary  policy  meeting  in  April  2003  the  Riksbank  judged  that  inflation  towards  the  end  of  the 
forecast  period  would  be  somewhat  below  target  if  the  repo  rate  were  left  unchanged.  A  strict 
application of our simple rule would have resulted in a repo rate cut, but since temporary fluctuations 
in energy prices were the chief reason for the inflation forecast being below 2 per cent, the Riksbank 
decided to leave the repo rate unchanged. In order to clarify that the Riksbank did not wish to bring 
inflation back to the target over the normal two-year horizon, the Riksbank decided on this occasion to 
place particular emphasis on an inflation measure that was not as strongly affected by the fluctuations 
in energy prices. 
How has the strategy worked? 
So how has this strategy worked, i.e. highlighting on different occasions other indices than the CPI as 
a  way  of  illustrating  that  there  sometimes  may  be  reason  to  depart  from  the  rule  that  CPI  inflation 
should  be  2  per  cent  one  to  two  years  ahead?  With  hindsight  we  can  conclude  that  despite  out 
attempts to be explicit in our communication, it appears that we haven't got our message across in all 
respects. The strategy does indeed seem to have been successful insofar as we have seldom been 
asked, especially in the last few years, why the repo rate has not been changed in spite of an inflation 
forecast  that  is  above  or  below  target.  Sometimes,  however,  and  particularly  during  a  couple  of 
months in autumn 2003, the interpretation has been that the Riksbank has "changed target variable". 
But this has not actually been the case; the inflation target is and has always been defined in terms of 
the  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI,  even  if  we've  often  made  it  clear  that  policy  in  the  time  horizon  in 
question has been based on a different index, mainly UND1X. 
Permit me to return to last year's discussion about energy prices in order to illustrate what I believe 
could be one of the problems. As I mentioned, the repo rate was not lowered in April 2003 despite the 
fact that our forecasts pointed to below-target CPI inflation two years ahead. The reason was that the 
forecast of CPI inflation was depressed by energy price effects that were judged to be transitory and 
that  were  expected  to  subside  just  beyond  the  forecast  horizon.  However,  the  measure  that  was 
considered a better reflection of longer-term cyclical inflation, UND1X excluding energy, was forecast 
to be in line with the inflation target at the end of the forecast period. One perhaps likely interpretation, 
and an interpretation that was obviously common, was that the Riksbank had not departed from its 
policy rule of adjusting the repo rate when inflation deviates from the target, but that the target variable 
itself  had  been  changed.  And  since  the  new  supposed  target  variable  was  in  line  with  the  inflation 
target there was no reason to change the repo rate. Our intention, however, was rather the reverse, 
i.e. to highlight UND1X excluding energy to point out that fluctuations in CPI inflation were driven to a 
great  extent  by  temporary  variations  in  energy  prices,  also  somewhat  beyond  the  normal  two-year 
horizon, and that this was an occasion on which there was reason to depart from the rule. 
It could possibly be helpful in such situations to also show expected CPI inflation in a time perspective 
that is long enough to allow all temporary effects to have dissipated fully. It would then be clearer that 
the analysis of inflationary developments in terms of different adjusted measures was being done for 
instructive reasons. In that way it should be possible to avoid the risk of interpretations that we had 
“changed target variable.” Such an approach would also be consistent with the clarification from 1999, 
which says that the Riksbank should explain in advance how large a deviation from the inflation target 
defined  in  terms  of  the  CPI  that  can  be  justified  one  to  two  years  ahead.  It  would  be  possible  to 
illustrate clearly both the size of the target deviation during the normal forecast horizon and the fact 
that inflation was expected to be back on target in the not too distant future. 
Allow me to elucidate my train of thought with an example. Suppose that as a result of some shock the 
inflation rate after 1.5 years is forecast to rise from 2 to 3 per cent. The shock is assumed to be such 
that it, after its occurrence, affects inflation for only one year. One example of a shock with such a time 
profile  is  an  expected  rise  in  VAT,  which  raises  the  price  level  permanently  but  only  affects  the 
12-month change in the CPI one year ahead. Another example is an increase in an excise duty, for 
example tobacco tax. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
With a forecast that only spans the first two years, it would not be clear that inflation would gradually 
be in line with the target again. Were the forecast horizon instead to be extended somewhat, in a way 
that shows the rise and fall in inflation, it would be clearer that the Riksbank did not judge the shock to 
have a lasting effect on inflation. 
So  against  this  background  there  could  be  reason  when  appropriate  to  present  forecasts  also  in  a 
slightly  longer  perspective  so  as  to  illustrate  our  assessment  of  these  temporary  effects.  One 
advantage  of  this  approach  would  be  that  it  would  enable  the  monetary  policy  discussion  to  focus 
more clearly on the target variable CPI. 
To sum up, I think we can conclude that the CPI has worked well in the new role that it was given 
some ten years ago - as a target variable for monetary policy. To the extent that problems have arisen, 
it  has  been  a  question  of  relatively  limited  pedagogical  complications  in  the  situations  when  the 
Riksbank  has  judged  it  appropriate  to  depart  from  the  simple  policy  rule  for  how  the  repo  rate  is 
usually  set.  In  my  opinion  these  problems  are  not  so  serious  that  they  cannot  be  dealt  with  by  the 
Riksbank adhering to its ambition of striving to make monetary policy as transparent as possible. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
