Jean-Claude Trichet: The integration of European financial markets 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Deutsche Börse’s 
New Year’s Reception 2004, Frankfurt am Main, 26 January 2004. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thanks very much for having invited me here today for the Deutsche Börse’s New Year Reception.  
I am probably at no better place and perhaps no better time to discuss with you our common objective 
of  achieving financial  market  integration  in  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  in  particular.  I am  at  the right 
place  because  Deutsche  Börse  is  undoubtedly  a  very  important  market  player  in  the  provision  of 
European-wide  financial  services  at  the  European  and  global  level,  as  illustrated  by  the  Chicago 
venture. Therefore, it should be well placed to exploit the opportunities flowing from the single financial 
market.  And  it  is  now  an  opportune  time  to  reflect  further  on  the  overall  process  that  will  deliver 
integrated markets in Europe given that the Financial Services Action Plan is being finalised over the 
coming few months. 
I believe that the key question for us - public authorities as well as market participants - is how we can 
contribute  to the  further  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe.  In  thinking  about  this  question,  I 
would like to focus my remarks on three particular aspects. 
First, it is important to take stock of what the current situation is and how far we have come along the 
road towards fully integrated capital markets. 
Second,  in  view  of  this  audience,  I  would  like  to  address  the  developments  in  securities  markets, 
highlighting some of the most pressing challenges to further integration. 
Finally, I would like to provide you with my thoughts about the possible elements of a forward-looking 
strategy  for  achieving  financial  market  integration,  involving  both  public  authorities  and  market 
participants. 
The integration of financial markets: state of play  
The  introduction  of  the  euro  now  five  years  ago  has  undoubtedly  led  to  larger,  deeper  and  more 
integrated  financial  markets.  This  has  been  especially  the  case  in  wholesale  markets,  such  as  the 
unsecured money market, the government bond market and the related derivatives markets. These 
are of most direct interest to the ECB because of their close link with monetary policy.  
Within the first weeks after the introduction of the euro, country differences in the overnight interbank 
rate fell to a level below the usual bid-ask spread, which is around 5 basis points, and there are good 
reasons to think that quickly thereafter it further declined to levels close to zero. Also the development 
in dispersions in the government bond yields reflect a growing integration of this market segment. As 
to the derivatives market, I do not have to recall here that Eurex has become the largest futures and 
options  market  for  euro  denominated  derivatives,  breaking  new  trading  records  last  year  by 
transacting over 1 billion contracts.  
Progress also occurred, although at less impressive rates, in the corporate bond and equity markets. 
The  elimination  of  the  currency  risk  has  diminished  the  importance  of  the  local  component  in  the 
securities business, with institutional investors increasingly taking a pan-European view in investment 
decisions.  The  corporate  bond  market  has  developed  strongly  and  witnessed  a  large  increase  in 
issues since the introduction of the euro, although part of this increase was due to temporary factors, 
such as corporate restructuring and the liberalisation of the telecom industry. Over time, stock price 
variations in the euro area have become more sensitive to pan-European evolutions and new data and 
less to local informations and news. 
However, not all wholesale markets are equally fully integrated, the repo market being a particularly 
special  case.  Participants  in  this  market  segment  continue  to  trade  preferentially  with  national 
counterparts and a significant share of the transactions are secured by national collateral. According to 
BIS Review 6/2004 
 1
our  data  at  the  ECB,  about  40%  of  all  cash  lending  and  borrowing  against  securities  is  conducted 
exclusively at the national level.  
At this point, I would also highlight that the markets where integration has advanced the least are in 
the retail sector. In this area, there may well be structural explanations. For example, the proximity to 
the  customer.  I  note  that  a  great  deal  of  market  localisation  is  present  in  the  U.S.  in  spite  of  the 
removal  of  barriers  to  intra-state  and  inter-state  banking.  According  to  a  survey  conducted  by  the 
Federal Reserve, more than 90% of banks’ clientele is located within a distance of less than 20 miles 
of  the  banks’  premises.  I  am  convinced  that  the  potential  developments  in  new  technologies  and 
financial innovation will continue to exert their influence both in Europe and in the Unites States and 
may well make geographical proximity to customers less relevant. Public authorities also have a role 
to play in promoting the appropriate regulatory and supervisory environment that enhances investors’ 
confidence in cross-border financial services.  
The integration of securities markets 
Given these general considerations I would like now to focus on the securities markets. I believe that 
perhaps more than in any other field, the trading and post-trading services in the securities industry 
are good examples to illustrate the scope for further integration and how we can contribute to it. 
Let me start my discussion by stressing the importance of securities markets and the particular interest 
of the ECB. Securities trading, clearing and settlement are indeed at the core of our financial system 
and any inefficiencies in these processes are bound to have important negative implications. When 
trading, clearing and settlement are too costly or complex, financial transactions are discouraged. This 
in  turn  would  have  negative  effects  on  the  allocation  of  capital,  risk  sharing  across  agents,  and 
economic  growth.  On  its  part,  the  ECB  has  a  particular  interest  in  integrated  securities  markets 
because  all  central  bank  credit  operations  need  to  be  fully  collateralised.  The  functioning  of  the 
payment system and the implementation of monetary policy therefore crucially depends on a smooth 
and efficient working of the securities clearing and settlement infrastructure.  
Unfortunately,  reality  is  quite  different  and  substantial  barriers  continue  to  exist  to  efficient  cross-
border  clearing  and  settlement,  as  identified  by  the  Group  headed  by  Alberto  Giovannini.  The 
European securities infrastructure today remains highly fragmented with over 30 national exchanges, 
about 20 national clearing and settlement institutions, and an additional 20 other systems in acceding 
countries. In this period of transition, we have to cope with a substantial degree of fragmentation of our 
securities  infrastructure,  which  adversely  affects  market  liquidity,  leads  to  redundant  investments  in 
different systems, and requires additional layers of intermediation. Compared to, say the US, where 
the infrastructure has been over time highly consolidated, the costs of securities settlement are greater 
in Europe. Although it is very hard to calculate the benefit that we could gain from consolidation and 
therefore  the  opportunity  cost  of  the  remaining  fragmentation,  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  it  is 
substantial.  
I am of the opinion that there are good reasons to believe that integration in the European securities 
markets will accelerate in the future. The European trading and post-trading infrastructure is now in a 
period of consolidation, with technological and regulatory changes supporting the removal of barriers 
to  the  cross-border  provision  of  services.  The  proposed  new  Investment  Services  Directive  should 
simplify the regulatory framework and increase the uniformity of securities regulation. It will also lead 
to  the  effective  adoption  the  single  passport  concept  and  contribute  to  safeguarding  issuers  and 
investors’  interests.  This  would  also  be  supported  by  the  provisions  of  the  Market  Abuse  and 
Prospectuses Directives. The adoption of an appropriate set of International Accounting Standards, as 
well  as  the  proposed  Transparency  Directive,  dealing  with  disclosure  requirements  of  listed 
companies, should equally enhance investors’ confidence and uphold the transparency of European 
equity markets. Overall, I also observe that there is an increasing sense of shared interests and aims 
among public authorities, market players and other stakeholders in securities markets. For example, 
market integrity issues are certainly seen more and more as a truly European concern. 
In  conclusion,  I  therefore  foresee  a  great  potential  for  further  integration  within  securities  markets, 
thereby fostering greater competition in this area.  
2 
 BIS Review 6/2004
Challenges for the further integration of securities markets 
The optimism  I  express here should  not  make us  forget  that  there  are still considerable challenges 
ahead in the integration of securities markets. Let me outline those that I consider the most pressing.  
First, the removal of remaining obstacles to competition. For example, the second Giovannini report 
identified  three  types  of  barriers  to  efficient  and  competitive  markets:  differences  in  technical 
requirements and market practice; differences in tax procedures; and issues relating to legal certainty. 
The ECB agrees with the general approach that promotes market-led solutions. But it also recognises 
that public authorities have a responsibility in this area and thus supports the work of the European 
Commission in seeking to remove some of these barriers. For its own part, the ECB contributes to 
removing  obstacles  to  integration  mainly  by  acting  as  a  catalyst  for  improvement,  encouraging 
discussions among the relevant players, and, last but not least, harmonising central bank procedures 
and  operations.  Ultimately,  the  final  outcome  will  not  only  be  the  result  of  competition  and  market 
forces, but also of co-operation between market participants and public authorities. 
The second challenge is developing a common market infrastructure. I use the term “infrastructure” 
here  in  its  very  broad  meaning,  covering  areas  such  as  trading  platforms,  clearing  and  settlement 
systems,  standardised  technical  rules  and  market  conventions.  In  effect,  if  we  look  closer  at  the 
reasons why some of the markets are more integrated than others, we are led to conclude that the 
presence of a common infrastructure is crucial.  
Let me illustrate my argument with two examples. Integration in payment systems as well as in euro 
money markets was achieved very quickly after the introduction of the euro because of the existence 
of TARGET, the EU-wide large-value payment system operated by the Eurosystem. The Eurosystem 
has  decided  to  introduce  refinements  to  TARGET  aimed  at  reinforcing  the  benefits  that  may  be 
derived from a common infrastructure. In particular, the new system, TARGET 2, will aim at providing 
a  harmonised  level  of  services,  with  a  single  TARGET-wide  price  structure,  while  seeking  cost 
effectiveness through a shared technical platform among the Eurosystem’s central banks. TARGET is 
thus a clear illustration of how public authorities can contribute to financial integration by developing a 
common  technical  infrastructure.  It  is  no  coincidence  that  in  the  areas  where  such  common 
infrastructure  is  missing,  then  integration  is  less  well  developed.  The  repo  market,  which  is  still 
hampered  by  a  multitude  of  securities  clearing  and  settlement  systems,  gives  a  still  unfortunate 
example of that phenomenon. 
Another example is the adoption of the EONIA rate, which underscores how market participants play 
an  important  role  in  fostering  financial  integration  through  the  adoption  of  market  conventions.  The 
EONIA rate, which stands for Euro Over-Night Index Average, is the effective interest rate in the euro 
unsecured overnight interbank market. The technical definition and the procedures for calculation of 
the rate have been defined by market participants through a series of market conventions, which were 
key for the integration of this market segment. In this respect, I should also mention that ECB has a 
role in the process because it fixes the EONIA rate as a service to the banking sector. This illustrates 
that public bodies can indirectly foster financial integration by acting as a facilitator in private sector 
initiatives. 
The third challenge is the design of public standards for risk management. Weaknesses in clearing 
and settlement arrangements can be a source of systemic risk. It is therefore paramount that effective 
risk  management  standards  are  applied  by  clearing  and  settlement  systems.  However,  competition 
entails  the  risk  that  the  service  providers  might  try  to  improve  competitiveness  by  applying  more 
lenient  risk  management  standards.  Given  the  potential  systemic  effects  of  the  failure  of  a  major 
clearing and settlement system, the operators might assume that central banks will eventually bail it 
out  and  they  might  therefore  not  have  sufficient  incentives  to  address  risks  effectively.  Against  this 
background, the ECB takes the view that the establishment of public standards for risk management is 
essential. In fact, the Eurosystem has set such standards that securities settlement systems need to 
comply with in order to be eligible for the use in our credit operations. 
All  interested  parties  should  be  actively  involved  in  the  development  and  implementation  of  such 
standards. At the G10 level, standards for securities settlement systems have been developed by a 
Joint Task Force in which both the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the 
International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  are  represented.  The 
fruitful 
experience gained in this co-operation has encouraged similar work at the EU level. For this purpose, 
the ESCB has established a framework for co-operation with the Committee of European Securities 
Regulators  (CESR),  primarily  aimed  at  assessing  how  the  G10  recommendations  should  be 
implemented in Europe.  
BIS Review 6/2004 
 3
The post-FSAP period offers a unique window of opportunity 
Finally,  I  will  devote  the  last  part  of  my  remarks  to  some  reflections  on  the  strategy  for  financial 
integration  going  forward,  now  that  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan  (FSAP)  is  approaching  its 
completion. I believe that there is now an excellent opportunity to devise and engage in a strategy that 
delivers the full potential of financial integration. But in order to reap this potential, it is essential that a 
consistent  post-FSAP  strategy  is  adopted.  I  see  several  components  in  such  strategy  for  public 
authorities and market participants. Let me begin with the role of public authorities. 
First, it is crucial that authorities implement the FSAP measures, which provide the legal infrastructure 
for a single financial market, in a coherent manner. In this respect, I would highlight the provisions of 
the new Investment Services Directive, which will provide the single market for financial services with 
a core legislative framework. Furthermore, the Lamfalussy process of regulation and supervision, now 
being  extended  from  the  securities  field  to  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors,  will  allow  for  more 
flexible and uniform technical regulations. This dynamic process should ultimately produce a genuine 
common  financial  legislation  and  regulation  for  market  players,  while  respecting  the  principle  of 
subsidiarity enshrined in the Treaty.  
Second,  there  may  be  scope  for  simplifying  the  current  regulatory  framework,  thereby  reducing  the 
corresponding regulatory burden on financial institutions. The implementation of FSAP measures and 
of  the  the  so-called  Lamfalussy  approach  should  not,  in  any  respect,  lead  to  an  additional  layer  of 
complex regulation - this would run counter to the spirit of the Single Market as it would not provide the 
right incentives for market participants to extend their activities throughout the EU. In this context, I 
want to recall that a main objective of the Lamfalussy process is to allow for more flexible and uniform 
technical regulations. If adopted ambitiously, such a process could lead to the development of a true 
EU rulebook to which institutions may refer directly for their cross-border business. 
Third, promoting a robust supervisory and financial stability framework for integrated financial markets. 
As  integration  proceeds,  financial  institutions  will  increasingly  engage  in  cross-border  business. 
Furthermore, this is likely to bring a change in the transmission channels for systemic risk, notably as 
a result of a possible increase in the risks of cross-border contagion. Consequently, it is important that 
authorities - supervisors and central banks - seek to enhance co-operation and information exchange 
in  order  to  monitor  such  developments  and  take  co-ordinated  action  if  required.  Many  steps  have 
already been made in this direction. For instance, a Memorandum of Understanding between central 
banks and banking supervisory authorities on co-operation in crisis situations has been agreed upon 
in 2003. 
Let me now turn to the role of market participants. 
To complement the public sector initiatives I have just outlined, collective action by market participants 
at  the  European  level  is  required.  Let  me  provide  two  examples  of  where  such  collective  action  is 
needed.  
First, it is crucial that market players participate and contribute actively to the European policy-making 
process.  Let  me  recall  that  under  the  Lamfalussy  process,  market  participants  are  being  consulted 
extensively and called to contribute to the design of regulatory proposals and policy strategy. I note in 
this respect the European Commission’s initiative of establishing expert groups to conduct a thorough 
assessment  of  the  state  of  integration  of  European  financial  markets.  As  indicated  by  the  Inter-
Institutional  Monitoring  Group,  there  are  considerable  costs  attached  to  consultation  processes,  for 
both  authorities  and  market  players.  However,  market  participants  could  benefit  from  economies  of 
scale in both costs and resources if collective action is co-ordinated more effectively at the European 
level. 
Second,  collective  action  of  market  players  is  also  warranted  in  the  area  of  market  conventions. 
Markets do not function only on the basis of public regulation, but they also need rules devised by the 
market  players  themselves.  Markets  should  not  however  remain  segmented  because  of  different 
national practices or the lack of product standardisation. The private sector should therefore establish 
such rules at the European level, possibly with the support of public authorities. The development of 
the EONIA overnight interest rate index I discussed earlier and the related role played by the ECB, is 
again a good illustration. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude.  
4 
 BIS Review 6/2004
The potential gains from monetary union will only be fully realised if remaining barriers to integration of 
European  financial  markets  are  effectively  removed.  There  is  considerable  evidence  that  wholesale 
markets  are  now  much  more  integrated  than  before.  But  integration  in  securities  markets  needs  to 
proceed further. Without an integrated European securities market the outcome of the entire process 
of financial market integration risks falling short of expectations.  
The FSAP is now nearing completion. It is therefore important that we devise a coherent post-FSAP 
strategy. I have outlined my thoughts in this area, but I would invite you, as market participants, to also 
formulate your own ideas for furthering the process of financial integration. The final outcome of the 
will  be  the  result  not  only  of  competitive  pressure  or  policy  decisions,  but  very  much  also  of  co-
operation between market participants and public authorities. 
I would however underline that given the speed of developments in financial markets, it is important 
that a post-FSAP strategy is implemented in a timely fashion, with clear milestones. Furthermore, such 
a post-FSAP strategy needs to be carefully and independently monitored and reviewed, in the same 
manner  as  the  FSAP  itself  was.  This  would  include  regular  reviews  of  the  progress  made  on  the 
various  fronts,  while  ensuring  the  full  accountability  and  transparency  of  the  process.  We  have  to 
make sure that the post-FSAP strategy proceeds in the right direction and at the right speed. 
Ladies and gentlemen, with this challenging message for the future I want to conclude. I thank you for 
your attention and let me wish you all the best for 2004.  
BIS Review 6/2004 
 5
