Klaus Liebscher: The importance of the Bretton Woods institutions for small 
countries  
Opening address by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Conference 
on “60 Years of Bretton Woods - governance of the international financial system - looking ahead”, 
Vienna, 21 June 2004.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is with great pleasure that I may welcome you to the conference on “60 Years of Bretton Woods - 
Governance of the International Financial System - Looking Ahead” hosted by the Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank. I am equally delighted that we managed to attract so many distinguished speakers from 
around the globe, who are here in Vienna today to discuss various aspects of the governance of the 
international  financial  system  with  us.  I  would  like  to  express  my  sincerest  gratitude  to  all  these 
speakers for their contributions in advance. I feel also honored that such a great number of you have 
accepted our invitation to participate in what promises to be an ideal opportunity to reflect upon the 
history and future of the Bretton Woods Institutions.  
During  our  conference  it  is  supposed  that  policymakers,  investment  bankers  and  academics  will 
discuss the governance of the international financial system, debate about exchange rate issues and 
explore ways to improve the current crisis prevention and resolution framework. We believe that these 
three broad themes are central to the debate on the international financial architecture.  
A brief review of 60 years of Bretton Woods  
1. 
The  1930s  demonstrated  that  the  pursuit  of  nationalistic  beggar-thy-neighbor  policies  can  have 
dramatic and devastating effects.  
In order to prevent a repetition of this destructive experience, the Bretton Woods system consisting of 
the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank was created in 1944 to govern the post 
World War II economic system. This regime was expected to perform three important functions:  
• 
• 
a regulatory function by administering the rules governing currency values and convertibility,  
a financial function via the supply of supplementary liquidity to members facing balance of 
payment pressures and  
a consultative function by providing a forum for cooperation among governments.  
• 
I  consider  the  Bretton  Woods  system  very  innovative  for  four  reasons:  First,  with  this  system 
international monetary cooperation was for the first time attempted on a permanent and institutional 
basis. Second, this system respects the principle of national sovereignty while committing members to 
collective  responsibility.  Third,  it  provides  a  mechanism  for  inter-governmental  consultation.  And 
fourth,  even  though  the  principle  of  national  sovereignty  is  respected,  voting  rights  are  allocated  in 
proportion to quotas rather than on a one-state, one-vote basis.  
The first major systemic crisis - the breakdown of both the gold exchange standard and the par value 
system  of  the  original  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  early  1970s  -  was  weathered  surprisingly  well. 
Unlike during the 1930s, monetary relations did not degenerate into total chaos. Instead, a significant 
degree of cooperation was preserved under the auspices of the IMF.  
Later  on  the  international  financial  system  has  been  exposed  to  a  string  of  crises  since  the  early 
1980s. But the IMF in particular was chastised for its role in the crises of the mid- and late 1990s. A 
common feature of these crises was that they grew out of weaknesses in domestic economic policy 
frameworks  accentuated  by  international  capital  flows  and  often  in  combination  with  unsustainable 
fixed  exchange  rate  pegs.  In  most  of  these  cases,  Fund  surveillance  had  not  ex  ante  and  publicly 
stressed the weakness of domestic or financial sector frameworks or questioned the inconsistence of 
economic policies with a fixed peg.  
The  social  impact  of  crises  on  countries  raised  questions  about  the  IMF’s  approach,  its  quality  of 
advice  and  accountability.  Academics,  policymakers  and  nongovernmental  organizations  alike 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
criticized the IMF for advocating rapid capital account liberalization and paying insufficient attention to 
the foundations for stability and growth; for applying a ‘one-size-fits-all’ model that was insensitive to 
countries’  individual  circumstances  and  needs;  for  advocating  policies  that  served  primarily  the 
interests of creditors and for being insufficiently open to outside views and advice.  
While some of this criticism seems justified, I do not wish to ponder the counterfactual: what if the IMF 
had not existed and thus would not have helped resolve these crises? In addition, the Independent 
Evaluation Office of the IMF, having reviewed some of the aforementioned criticism, refuted most of it.  
In other areas, the Fund reacted to the criticism and has changed some of its policies, for instance 
with  respect  to  capital  account  liberalization.  To  my  mind,  these  are  very  important  developments 
which show that the Bretton Woods Institutions are -without any doubt - learning institutions. What is 
more, these institutions are of significant importance when we look for an orderly solution to economic 
imbalances or financial crises.  
Multilateralism and governance of the international financial system  
2.  
The main function of international financial institutions today is to provide the best framework for the 
governance  of  globalization  so  that  this  process  becomes  a  win-win  proposition,  in  which  all 
economies ultimately benefit through productivity and growth effects.  
This means that a level playing field should exist that governs the integration of national economies via 
trade in goods and services in particular to minimize unfair cross-border competition. A world of global 
capital  markets  offers  faster  rewards  for  success  both  for  the  countries  concerned  and  for  the 
international system; on the other hand, weaknesses are also punished harder and faster than before. 
Globalization presents all economies with new opportunities.  
More substantial trade and investment flows lead to lower prices and greater choice, larger markets 
and economies of scale and faster adoption of new technologies. Stiffer competition among firms and 
exposure to the world’s best-practice standards as well as free movement of capital generate a more 
efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Thus,  globalization  can  play  a  major  role  in  enhancing  growth  and 
living standards.  
However,  there  are  risks  associated  with  globalization  and  liberalisation  that  need  to  be  properly 
managed  by  policymakers.  Globalization  entails  not  only  new  opportunities  but  possibly  also  new 
inequalities that need to be anticipated and addressed both in developed and developing countries. As 
a case in point, the recent financial instability demonstrates the risks associated with volatile global 
capital  markets.  Fully  opening  up  to  liberalisation  too  early  and  too  quickly,  without  the  necessary 
preparations,  is  dangerous.  Countries  must  first  put  in  place  appropriate  policies  and  institutional 
frameworks. The IMF’s surveillance mandate is just the instrument to achieve this aim.  
Surveillance and crisis prevention  
3.  
Self-surveillance is the most effective form of surveillance since self-interest should motivate countries 
to  pursue  stronger  policies.  The  ultimate  reward  for  countries  with  improved  policies  will  be  higher 
economic growth, and a higher standard of living for their citizens. 
The  effectiveness  of  external  surveillance  -  like  the  IMF’s  surveillance  mandate  -  is  very  much 
dependent on the credibility of the review process. International organizations can add weight to local 
voices:  national  think  tanks  or  academics  might  have  said  something  many  times  over  and,  yet,  it 
helps to have a credible body such as the IMF says it, too.  
Therefore, international organizations must ensure that the analysis and advice presented to countries 
is not perceived either to be tainted by special interests or weakened by the use of flawed analytical 
methods.  
As to its surveillance mandate, the IMF faces critical limitations. In seeking to provide good advice, the 
IMF is constrained for example by a country’s economic progress and authorities’ willingness to follow 
up on advice. However, based on experience across many countries, a consensus has emerged about 
the  broad  guidelines  for  policies  that  serve  the  goal  of  sustained  growth  and  thus  should  help  in 
preventing  crisis.  These  policies  include,  among  other  factors,  the  need  to  support  an  appropriate 
macroeconomic and microeconomic environment, the need for a market-oriented system with a high 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
level of competition, openness to international trade and investment, price stability and exchange rates 
that broadly reflect international competitiveness.  
All  of  this  has  led  to  a  shift  in  the  crisis  prevention  strategy  employed  by  the  IMF.  The  IMF  now 
concentrates  on  identifying  vulnerabilities,  such  as  excessive  sovereign  debt  or  balance  sheet 
mismatches. Also, its stance on capital account liberalization has changed. Today, the IMF advocates 
that  member  countries  should  first  have  the  institutional  capacity  and  a  relatively  strong  financial 
sector with a sound supervision regime before taking this major step. In fact, before fully liberalizing all 
capital movements in 1991, Austria had followed this policy. Back then, Austria was criticized for this 
policy which has now become conventional IMF wisdom.  
One important initiative in the sphere of crisis prevention is the Financial Sector Assessment Programs 
(FSAP), which are conducted together with the World Bank. An FSAP is designed to establish a profile 
of the strengths and weaknesses of the financial sector of a given country. This initiative is not only 
geared  towards  emerging  market  countries  (EMCs)  or  developing  countries,  but  also  towards 
industrial countries. Austria, for example, just conducted an FSAP with excellent results.  
Another important area constitutes economic and financial standards and codes, which are formulated 
in  collaboration  with  public  and  private  sector  institutions.  Their  aim  is  to  promote  meaningful 
comparable statistics, transparency rules for fiscal and monetary policies and supervisory standards 
for the banking, securities and insurance sectors. This is meant to facilitate the integration of countries 
into the global economy.  
Will all of these initiatives prevent financial crises altogether? Overshooting and correction will always 
be part of financial markets. This means that in an open and dynamic market economy there are limits 
to our capacity to anticipate and prevent crises.  
However, with skillful and prudent economic, monetary and financial policies, crises should occur less 
often and they should be less severe.  
Crisis management and resolution  
4.  
Over the last 20 years, the Bretton Woods Institutions had to deal with a continuous series of financial 
incidents. These crises encompassed economic misalignments and systemic vulnerabilities, such as 
evinced in the Mexican or East Asian financial crises and financial disruptions due to contagion across 
countries and markets, as for example during the Russian debt default of 1998.  
The success of the Bretton Woods Institutions should be reflected in a declining trend of the overall 
number of Fund-supported programs over time. There are legitimate cases which require access to 
Fund resources. However, the Fund’s financing role should and can only be catalytic, given its limited 
resources. While policies, such as the exceptional access framework, are in place to safeguard Fund 
resources, they are often not adhered to.  
I am also concerned about the prolonged use of Fund resources which is out of line with its mandate. 
Countries  that  run  IMF-supported  programs  over  many  years  or  decades  are  probably  not  a 
demonstration of success. Thus, the IMF should strive to prevent that countries become dependent on 
IMF financing.  
During the debt crises of the early 1980s, the IMF acted more as a crisis manager or the official agent 
in charge of concerted bank lending. This role has shifted over the years, with the Fund now practically 
resolving  countries’  financial  crises  on  its  own.  An  important  initiative  to  reposition  the  Fund  once 
again as a crisis manager came to be known as the private sector involvement (PSI) initiative. PSI 
encapsulates  the  official  sector’s  attempt  to  engage  the  private  sector  in  crisis  resolution  more 
effectively.  The  private  sector  has  to  assume  responsibility  for  its  investment  decisions.  This  is 
grounded  in  my  firm  conviction  that  a  collectivization  of  private  sector  losses  would  distort  the 
allocative efficiency of capital markets and would lead to moral hazard via increased risk-taking.  
Another important initiative, which the IMF started to discuss in late 2001, proposed to establish an 
international  bankruptcy  procedure  for  unsustainable  sovereign  debt  (SDRM).  I  believe  that  this 
mechanism  would  have  made  the  PSI  initiative  more  operational.  However,  the  time  may  not  have 
been  ripe  yet  for  such  a  comprehensive  framework  for  the  restructuring  of  sovereign  debt. 
Nevertheless, public and academic awareness has been raised.  
The debate has helped in that many EMCs have introduced collective action clauses (CACs) in their 
sovereign bond contracts and major EMCs and the private sector are discussing a Code of Conduct. 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
This notwithstanding, I am firmly convinced that we need an international arrangement which would 
facilitate the orderly resolution of sovereign debt crises.  
Such an arrangement would also help shift the function of the IMF from its current role as crisis solver 
to crisis manager.  
Economies in transition, developing countries and poverty reduction  
5.  
In  addition  to  finding  more  effective  mechanisms  for  crisis  prevention  and  management,  the 
international community faces another major challenge, the eradication of poverty.  
One of our prerogatives should be to integrate developing and transition economies in such a way that 
they can maximize the benefits of globalization, while minimizing the costs.  
This implies, specifically, helping these countries attract sufficient sustained private capital flows, while 
strengthening measures for crisis prevention and better crisis management, supporting policies and 
structural reforms that facilitate development, and helping secure sufficient external funding to sustain 
their growth and poverty reduction.  
While not being a “development” institution in spirit and by design, the Fund’s role in the developing 
countries  has  nevertheless  become  an  essential  and  integral  part  of  the  efforts  of  the  whole 
international community to advance development.  
Especially by launching the HIPC (Highly Indebted Poor Countries), the PRSP (Poverty Reduction and 
Strategy  Papers)  and  the  PRGF  (Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility)  initiatives,  the  Fund 
substantially reframed its role in low-income countries, making poverty reduction and growth the key 
objectives and modalities for programs supported by the Fund. While the PRGF relates strictly to the 
Fund’s role, the HIPC and the PRSP initiatives guide the cooperation with developing countries, the 
Fund, and also the World Bank.  
I see the Fund’s role in developing countries and especially its financing role as catalytic rather than 
substantial. The Fund should allocate only a limited amount of financial aid to developing countries in 
support of their progress towards macroeconomic stability and financial soundness.  
Turning to transition economies, I believe that we often overlook the strong track record both the IMF 
and the World Bank have established in these countries.  
While the Bretton Woods Institutions were caught as much by surprise by the collapse of Communism 
as everybody else, their involvement in these countries was instrumental to their integration into the 
world economy. At the beginning of the 1990s, the majority of transition economies had some form of 
IMF involvement via a fully-fledged IMF program or technical assistance. The IMF together with the 
World Bank worked hard to stabilize the economies of these countries, devise economic policies and 
build  modern  institutions,  thus  transforming  many  of  these  economies  into  today’s  very  successful 
market economies.  
Owing to a common history and its geographic location, Austria has a particular interest in the stability 
and economic progress of the transition economies.  
Austria had already started in the late 1980s to develop extensive economic ties with the transition 
economies, which have increased substantially over time.  
Strong trade linkages, very high levels of foreign direct investment and support for their integration into 
either the EU or other international institutions have been mainstays of Austria ‘s policies towards the 
transition economies. In addition, in 1992, Austria decided to participate in setting up the Joint Vienna 
Institute together with the IMF and other international organizations to respond to the strong demand 
from economies in transition to train officials in market economics and the free enterprise system.  
6.  
Conclusion  
Ladies and Gentlemen!  
Austria joined the IMF and World Bank/IBRD in 1948 and has been an active and supportive member 
of the Bretton Woods Institutions (BWI) ever since. Especially for a small open economy like Austria, 
the  BWI  were  and  still  are  important  windows  to  the  rest  of  the  world.  Therefore,  both  the 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
Oesterreichische Nationalbank as well as the Ministry of Finance have always kept close and good 
working relationships with the management and staff of the IFIs.  
I am a firm believer in the value of the Bretton Woods Institutions for the global economy as a whole 
as well as for small countries and the positive contribution they have made to the world economy. The 
60 th anniversary, this conference or the strategic review of International Financial Institutions which is 
presently  conducted  by  the  G  7  mark  an  opportunity  to  look  afresh  at  these  institutions,  assess 
whether they have fulfilled their respective mandates and reflect upon their future roles. However,  I 
expect that we will not attempt to overhaul the system which can be improved upon but ultimately has 
worked to the benefit of all.  
I sincerely hope and advocate that we go back to the roots of these institutions with the World Bank as 
the primary institution for structural policies and development and the IMF as the institution for short-
term  macroeconomic  surveillance,  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  management  rather  than  attempt  to 
redefine their respective roles. In addition, what sometimes is forgotten in many reform debates: these 
institutions fulfill functions for all their members and cannot or should not be narrowed.  
In concluding, I am looking forward to fruitful and challenging discussions during our conference and I 
wish all of you an interesting stay here in Vienna.  
BIS Review 40/2004 
 5
