Antonio Fazio: The banking industry and the prospects for the economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Italian 
Bankers’ Association, Rome, 8 July 2004. 
 The European banking market 
Over  the  past  three  years  the  European  banking  and  financial  system  has  managed  to  withstand, 
without repercussions for the cost of credit, the difficulties caused by the slowing of economic growth, 
fluctuations in share prices and the crises and collapse of major industrial groups. 
Monetary policy in the three main areas of the world has been markedly expansionary, while prices 
have remained largely stable. There has been a substantial increase in the monetary base; interest 
rates on loans have fallen to historical low levels. In the case of real-estate investment the abundance 
of  credit  has  fostered  price  rises  in  excess  of  the  increase  in  prices  of  current  output;  in  some 
countries, property values have been inflated by speculation. 
The Federal Reserve’s recent increase in interest rates by 25 basis points marks the start of a move to 
bring  the  cost  of  money  in  the  United  States  back  to  long-term  equilibrium  levels,  against  a 
background  of  robust  economic  growth.  Even  after  the  rate  increase  the  yield  curve  has  a  sharp 
upward  slope  everywhere,  in  the  United  States,  in  Europe  and  in  Japan,  pointing  to  market 
expectations that interest rates will rise substantially in coming years. 
The rise in interest rates will affect public finances, particularly in the most heavily indebted countries. 
It re-emphasizes the need for firms to ensure that costs and combinations of factors of production can 
guarantee the development of their activity and the growth of the economy, even with real and nominal 
interest rates closer to normal levels. The return on savings invested in financial assets will increase. 
 The resilience of the banking and financial systems in the face of destabilizing forces can partly be 
ascribed  in  Europe  to  the  close  collaboration  between  national  supervisory  authorities  and  the 
increasingly widespread adoption of harmonized rules. 
Substantial progress has been made in the past ten years in improving the regulatory framework and 
strengthening  the  operational  infrastructure  and  by  integrating  payment  systems  at  national  and 
international level. 
The integration of the share and bond markets can benefit firms in terms of the range, quality and cost 
of the services provided to them, as well as households. 
Wholesale  financial  activities,  interbank  transactions,  syndicated  loans  and  business  services  are 
concentrated and tend to develop on international markets. According to a survey conducted within 
the  ambit  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  the  41  largest  European  banking  groups, 
including three from Italy, have establishments in an average of five member states outside their own. 
Mergers and acquisitions have created banking groups whose home market encompasses the whole 
of  Europe.  In  Italy  as  well,  foreign  intermediaries  hold  substantial  market  shares  in  such  fields  as 
securities trading on electronic markets and business services, including the placement of corporate 
bonds. 
Success  in  the  retail  market,  on  the  other  hand,  requires  a  knowledge  of  the  social,  economic  and 
institutional  characteristics  of  the  place  of  business  and  experience  in  dealing  with  small  firms  and 
households.  Collaboration  arrangements  with  local  banks  and  aggressive  commercial  policies  can 
only substitute partially and temporarily for the informational advantages of local roots. In crossborder 
retail banking there have been few attempts to supply services without a permanent foothold in foreign 
markets;  in  practice  the  decision  to  do  business  in  other  countries  has  been  accompanied  by  the 
acquisition of existing operators. 
The Financial Services Action Plan launched at Community level in 1999 is due to be completed by 
the end of 2005; it covers legislative measures applying to both the wholesale and the retail segments. 
Last April a directive on investment services was approved, abolishing the obligation to concentrate 
trades on regulated markets and providing for the protection of investors, and the directive on take-
over bids, which lays the foundations for the development of a European market of corporate control. 
BIS Review 44/2004 
 1
These directives supplement those, also recent, on the supervision of conglomerates operating in the 
banking, financial and insurance sectors and on the prevention of market abuse. 
The supervision of banking systems is institutionally embodied in national legislation. In order for it to 
be efficient and, above all, effective, it must be performed close to the intermediaries concerned. 
In January this year the London-based Committee of European Banking Supervisors began operation, 
alongside  other  similar  committees  set  up  for  the  markets  in  financial  and  insurance  services.  It  is 
composed of representatives of the banking supervisory authorities and central banks of the European 
Union  and  its  task  is  to  provide  technical  advice  to  the  Commission  regarding  legislative  and 
regulatory  proposals  in  the  field  of  banking,  as  well  as  to  promote  the  uniform  application  of 
Community directives and the convergence of supervisory practices in the member states. 
The internationalization of the Italian banking system 
Spurred by competition and privatizations, the Italian banking system has made significant advances 
in  the  last  ten  years  with  regard  to  the  average  size  of  intermediaries  and  the  range  of  services 
offered.  Efficiency  has  improved;  efforts  must  continue,  above  all  within  recently  formed  groups,  to 
increase the integration of operating structures and the effectiveness of risk-management systems. 
In the Anglo-Saxon countries there is clear evidence of a structural shift in banks’ business stemming 
from the greater development of these countries’ financial markets; the relationships between banks 
and firms are changing. As international competition grows more intense, these trends will also affect 
the Italian financial system. The new aspects of credit business and the new operational instruments 
will  need  to  be  assimilated  by  Italian  bankers  and  adapted  to  the  specific  features  of  the  Italian 
economic and institutional context; the supervisory authority is following developments closely. 
Mergers  and  acquisitions  have  narrowed  the  gap  between  Italian  and  foreign  banks  in  terms  of 
volumes of business. The gap reflects the less developed state of the Italian banking market. The ratio 
of credit to GDP is 85 per cent, a value comparable to that of France, less than those of Spain and 
Germany and the euro-area average, all well above 100 per cent. 
Lending to households is less developed in Italy, among other things because of the higher propensity 
to  save.  Most  of  households’  borrowing  consists  of  home  mortgages;  credit  for  the  purchase  of 
consumer durables is nonetheless expanding, thanks in part to a more diversified and efficient supply. 
By contrast, lending to firms is comparable to the euro-area average in relation to GDP. Interest rates 
are in line with, and sometimes lower than, those in the other EU countries. 
Another  factor  tending  to  reduce  banking  intermediation  is  the  high  level  of  public  debt  and  the 
substantial investment of households’ savings in public-sector securities.  
Although growing, the presence of Italian banks in foreign markets is still limited. According to the BIS, 
at  the  end  of  last  year  the  Italian  banking  system’s  assets  abroad  vis-àvis  non-bank  counterparties 
equaled  13  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  levels  reached  by  the  French,  Spanish  and  German  banking 
systems are much higher, respectively 49, 36 and 72 per cent. 
The leading international banks are interested in the Italian market. German banks have $137 billion of 
claims on Italian residents, compared with Italian banks’ exposure of $33 billion to German residents; 
French banks have $114 billion of assets in respect of Italy, compared with Italian banks’ $28 billion in 
France. 
These figures are mainly a reflection of the important production and above all marketing presence of 
German and French firms in Italy. 
The expansion of credit must serve the needs and in fact follows that of production. 
We have called on the banking system to increase the support it provides for the internationalization of 
the Italian economy. 
The growth  in  Italian banks’  operations  in  foreign  markets  will be  assisted by  greater  industrial  and 
marketing penetration of Italian firms in those markets. 
In  recent  years  the  leading  Italian  banks  have  increased  their  presence  appreciably  in  Central  and 
Eastern Europe markets, among other things in order to grasp the opportunities for expansion in retail 
business in those countries and benefit from the prospects of economic growth following their entry 
into the European Union. They are countries where Italian firms are investing heavily, both to serve 
local  demand  and  to  take advantage  of  low  production costs.  In several of  these  economies  Italian 
banks have acquired a significant market share, more than 20 per cent in some cases. 
Foreign intermediaries hold a larger portion of the capital of major banks in Italy than is the case in the 
other  main  euro-area  countries  and  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries;  the  shareholdings  involved  are 
minority  interests.  The  shareholdings  attributable  to  institutional  investors,  and  to  pension  funds  in 
particular, are negligible. The banking systems of France and Germany are characterized by the large 
share of bank capital held by the State, the US system by the presence of large institutional investors. 
The capital and reserves of Italy’s major banks surpass the standards agreed at international level; 
however, they are still less than those of the largest intermediaries operating in the European market. 
Industrial companies are not substantial shareholders of the leading foreign intermediaries. 
The  holding  of  substantial  or  even  controlling  interests  by  industrial  companies  calls  for  careful 
evaluation in our system too, in the light of its possible consequences for the allocation of credit in the 
event  of  production  problems  or  falling  prices  in  some  sectors.  The  strengthening  of  the  banking 
system’s capital base must come principally from self-financing, recourse to the financial market and, 
looking further ahead, greater participation by institutional investors. 
The new Capital Accord 
On 26 June the central banks and supervisory authorities of the Group of Ten countries approved the 
text of the new Accord on banks’ capital, prepared by the Basel Committee. 
The document represents the point of arrival of a complex process initiated in the second half of the 
1990s in response to the recurrent financial crises in the global market, which hit Mexico, Thailand, 
Korea, Russia, Brazil and Argentina, and the parallel and partly related evolution of banking. 
The Accord identifies more efficient methods for determining the amount of capital required to cover 
the different forms of risk. 
Credit risk being equal, the amount of capital banks will be required to have should decrease by virtue 
of its more efficient allocation. However, the development of banks’ activity and the complexity of their 
transactions have considerably increased their exposure to operational and legal risks. 
The new Accord grants intermediaries complete freedom of initiative. The rules and risks have been 
defined, in analytical terms, borrowing from operational best practices. 
The  models  and  parameters  for  the  measurement  of  capital  requirements  and  their  application  are 
developed by each individual intermediary. The supervisory authorities assess them for approval and 
then oversee compliance. 
In  response  to  an  initiative  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  among  others,  the  Accord  provides  for  specific 
solutions designed to produce a better evaluation of credit risk for small loans. Intermediaries may use 
simplified  methods  for  the  calculation  of  requirements,  similar  to  those  now  in  force.  Like  the  more 
complex  methods,  the  simplified  ones  will  on  average  involve  a  reduction  in  the  amount  of  capital 
required,  as  a  consequence  of  the  more  favourable  treatment  for  small  loans.  It  should  also  be 
recalled that the capital of many smaller Italian banks is above the required minimum today. 
The new Accord will be incorporated in a Community directive; it will be phased in between the end of 
2006 and the end of the following year. 
Simulations performed on a large scale show that application of the Accord will not have restrictive 
effects on the supply of credit. Many large banks already set the terms and conditions of loans in line 
with those that will derive from the new Accord. 
Under  the  new  system  it  is  essential  that  firms  supply  complete  information  on  their  assets  and 
liabilities and profits and losses and on the structure and extent of their activities. This will result in 
firms  themselves  having  an  incentive  to  promote  transparency  and  complete  compliance  with  the 
rules. 
The economic situation 
Economic activity is expanding vigorously at global level. It is being driven by the cyclical upswing in 
the United States, the other major countries of the Americas, Japan and other Asian economies. 
In the twelve countries of the euro area, GDP grew by 0.6 per cent in the first quarter of this year. Its 
growth  over  the  whole  year  is  likely  to  be  1.7  per  cent.  Industrial  production  is  estimated  to  have 
increased by 2.5 per cent since the middle of 2003. 
In  Italy,  GDP  rose  by  0.4  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter.  Consumption  showed  a  recovery,  as  did 
business investment, which had the fallen in the two previous years. Exports declined in spite of an 
acceleration in world demand. 
Agriculture  and  services  drove  the  expansion  in  GDP.  In  the  second  quarter  industrial  production 
continued  to  decline.  According  to  preliminary  estimates,  it  fell  by  1.4  per  cent  between  the  end  of 
2003 and June of this year. 
The trend of industrial output in Italy continues to diverge from that in the other European countries, 
particularly  France  and  Germany.  There  has  been  a  further  loss  of  Italian  manufacturing’s 
competitiveness both abroad and at home. 
Between  2001  and  2003  unit  labour  costs  in  industry  rose  in  Italy  by  a  total  of  9.9  per  cent.  In 
Germany the increase over the same three years was 2 per cent, in France 1.6 per cent. The gap 
mainly reflects the performance of productivity. 
In contrast with the sharp drop in Italian exports, amounting to 3.4 per cent in 2002, 3.9 per cent in 
2003 and 2.1 per cent in the first quarter of this year, the volume of French exports contracted slightly 
over the same period and German exports showed vigorous growth. 
According  to  preliminary  estimates,  GDP  growth was  slower  in  the  second  quarter  than  in  the  first, 
both in Europe and in Italy. 
In Italy, the behaviour of the main macroeconomic variables and business investment intentions point 
to an acceleration in activity in the second half of the year. 
Credit continued to grow at a rapid pace in the first half of this year. The rate of increase in lending to 
the building industry remains high. Consumer credit is tending to expand for structural reasons. 
Loans to firms are growing faster than GDP. The increase in lending in the twelve months ending in 
May was 3.7 per cent nationally and 6.5 per cent in the South. 
The restoration of a climate of complete confidence among banks, firms and savers is necessary in 
order  to  ensure  firms  the  support  of  credit  in  the  face  of  important  due  dates  and  to  finance  the 
hoped-for expansion of activity in the second half of this year and in 2005. 
Economic policy 
Major problems and tasks lie ahead for economic policy and for the adjustment of the public finances 
in particular. 
In the first half of this year the state sector borrowing requirement exceeded that of the first half of 
2003 by more than €12 billion, or nearly one percentage point of GDP. 
The progressive deterioration in the accounts in the first six months of this year suggests that in the 
absence of corrective action general government net borrowing for the year as a whole will be 3.5 per 
cent of GDP, as I indicated at the Bank of Italy’s Annual General Meeting on 31 May. 
The adjustment package the Government is about to adopt, amounting to some €7.5 billion or 0.6 per 
cent of GDP, is intended to ensure compliance with the 3 per cent limit. 
In formulating the mid-year budget, the restrictive measures must not be allowed to have a negative 
impact on demand at a time when the economic recovery is still halting. It will be necessary to monitor 
the effectiveness of the measures, whose application is concentrated in the coming months. 
The  evolution  of  the  public  finances  must  be  carefully  verified,  among  other  things  owing  to  the 
uncertain outlook for some receipts that are an integral part of the budget for 2004 adopted at the end 
of last year. 
The positive outcome of the Ecofin meeting prevented a worsening of expectations. 
With a view to the publication of the Economic and Financial Planning Document, the size of Italy’s 
public debt requires the formulation, in accordance with the political calendar of a policy for the public 
finances that can reconcile their consolidation with faster growth in the medium term. 
After the second half of the 1990s the public finances began to deteriorate again. In the last two years 
cyclical developments have also been a factor. 
In  the  last  three  years  the  containment  of  the  budget  deficit  has  been  entrusted  mainly  to  one-off 
measures, which are useful in a period of transition and sluggish economic growth; it is now necessary 
to return to a lasting structural reduction of the gap between expenditure and revenue. 
The primary surplus has progressively contracted; this year it is likely to be around 2 per cent of GDP, 
notably less than the value of 5.5 per cent set in order to participate in the Monetary Union and to 
ensure a significant rate of debt reduction in relation to GDP. 
The outlook for the public finances needs to be verified both for this year and for 2005. The expected 
rise in interest rates worldwide will influence interest expenditure. The downgrading of Italy’s rating by 
an international rating agency is confirmation of the difficulties facing the country. 
The  structural  curbing  of  current  expenditure  must  reduce  government  borrowing  and  provide  the 
resources for increased public investment. Reducing the burden of taxation must not lead to a rise in 
the  deficit.  The  expansionary  effect  produced  by  the  growth  in  disposable  income  would  be 
outweighed by the negative effect deriving from the increase in the debt. 
Conditions in the trade unions, firms and banks appear to be conducive to a return to growth-oriented 
cooperation. 
To date the contribution from the implementation of public works has been limited; it must be boosted. 
The  curb  on  public  expenditure  must  not  penalize  firms  in  the  weakest  parts  of  the  country.  New 
prospects  must  be  created  for  research,  for  the  application  of  advanced  technologies  in  production 
and for the development of alternative energy sources. 
It  is  necessary  to  increase  confidence.  This  can  be  done  by  drawing  up  a  credible  and  broadly 
supported  economic  policy  to  reduce  the  absorption  of  savings by  the  State,  lower  (in  part  through 
faster growth) the ratio of public debt to GDP, and charts a course for progress in the years to come. 
As  I  also  noted  on  31  May,  the  Italian  economy’s  loss  of  competitiveness  is  the  consequence  of 
long-term trends; partly owing to an especially difficult international environment, the deterioration has 
not  been  halted  in  the  last  few  years.  It  is  necessary  to  act  on several  fronts  and  set  in  motion  an 
improvement of the factors underlying growth. 
It is necessary and possible to react, in Italy and at European level, so as to be able to participate in 
what promises to be a strong and prolonged recovery of the world economy. 
