Ishrat Husain: Harmonization of the banking sector in SAARC region 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  South  Asian 
Federation of Accountants Conference held in New Delhi, India on 28 August 2004. 
 Harmonization  of  the  banking  sector  should  not  be  seen  as  an  objective  in  itself  for  the  member 
countries of SAARC region but it should be considered as a tool for achieving a large objective. South 
Asia has the largest number of poor people in the world. Any objective must therefore aim to address 
this particular issue in a perceptible way. Thus there must be a broad agreement and consensus that 
the objective should be greater production and exchange of goods and services among the regional 
countries  so  that  the  larger  market  achieved  through  intra-regional  trading  is  able  to  generate 
economies of scale, lower cost of production, increase efficiency and lead to higher growth rate and 
reduce  the  incidence  of  poverty.  Unless  all  the  stakeholders  in  the  countries  of  the  region  strike  a 
consensus, forge a strategy and action plan in a sequenced and structured way the likelihood of an 
enlarged South Asian market becoming fully effective will remain low. 
• 
the  South  Asia  Free  Trade  Agreement  (SAFTA) 
Leaders  of  SAARC  Region  have,  after  a  long  hiatus  and  slow  start,  agreed  to  weave 
together 
in  2006.  The  practical 
implementation  of  SAFTA  is  therefore  a  priority  for  all  the  member  countries.  Careful 
planning  and  sequencing  will  be  required  along  with  strong  political  will  to  move  in  this 
direction. Some of the preparatory steps for making SAFTA take off in a meaningful way are: 
Trade facilitation through expeditious border crossings, quick custom clearance, efficient port 
facilities,  improved  transport  links  should  precede  or  take  place  simultaneously  with  the 
expansion of volume of cross border trade. 
Domestic tax, tariff and subsidy policies that affect production and trade incentives should be 
harmonized  to  avoid  recurrence  of  trade  disputes  and  frequent  use  of  anti  dumping  laws.  
As India provides a lot of subsidies to its producers in various forms and shapes the smaller 
countries are hesitant to allow MFN status to India. The recourse to a long negative list that 
restricts the volume of trade should be avoided at all costs. 
Macroeconomic  policies  such  as  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  should  be  harmonized  to 
achieve a stable, non-discriminating macroeconomic environment for all the countries in the 
region. 
Supporting institutions to manage and facilitate integration, for example, setting standards, 
establishing regional development funds and for dispute resolution should be created. 
Communication  and  transport  infrastructure  between  the  bordering  countries  should  be 
improved and upgraded to facilitate increased trade and factor mobility. 
Legal  regulations  for  investor  protection,  intellectual  property  rights  enforcement,  anti-trust 
law, commercial law, labor relations, financial institutions should be harmonized. 
Financial markets should be widened and regulatory changes introduced to promote cross-
border investment, listings, syndication, bond issues etc. 
       After  laying  out  the  entire  edifice  of  the  preparatory  measures  required  I  will  attempt  to  lay  out  an 
analytical  framework  for  financial  sector  and  banking  sector  harmonization  in  South  Asia  and  then 
apply this framework to the case of Pakistan. 
Empirical  evidence  and  theoretical  literature  have  now  conclusively  demonstrated  that  the  more 
efficiently  the  financial  sector  carries  out  its  intermediation  role,  the  greater  will  be  the  volume  of 
investment.  More  efficient  financial  intermediation  also  increases  the  average  productivity  of 
investment. Two major determinants of this functional efficiency of financial sector are market structure 
and the regulatory framework. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 1
  Market structure consists of the degree of competition, concentration and interlocking control between 
financial  institutions  and  business  enterprises  as  well  as  the  degree  of  specialization  within  the 
financial  sector.  It  is  influenced  by  the  internal  organization  and  management  of  the  financial 
intermediaries. These, in turn, are affected by the degree of government ownership and control. The 
regulatory  framework  includes  regulations  imposed  both  for  monetary  policy  as  well  as  prudential 
purposes. 
Steps taken to stimulate competition are lowering the barriers to entry, abolishing interest rate ceilings, 
removing  directed  credit  allocation,  and  privatizing  government  owned  banks.  The  privatization  of 
government owned banks is still controversial in most of the region but it must be obvious by now that 
these  banks  suffer  from  three  terminal  diseases  i.e.  high  volume  of  non-performing  loans,  high 
intermediation costs and loss of initiative and entrepreneurship. 
• 
Thus harmonization of the banking sector in the South Asian countries should be driven by 
these  two  considerations  i.e.  to  eliminate  the  distortions  in  the  market  structure  and  to 
strengthen  the  regulatory  framework  prevailing  in  each  country.  This  agenda  for  market 
structure improvement should therefore aim to achieve the following outcomes: 
Freeing interest rates so that they are determined by market forces Abolishing or lowering 
reserve and liquidity requirements. 
Removing directed credit regulations and reservation of certain sectors as preferred ones. 
Adopting indirect instruments of monetary control instead of credit ceilings. 
Liberal branch opening and closure policy. 
Opening  up  or  easing  entry  into  the  financial  sector  including  privatization  of  state  owned 
banks. 
Restructuring operations and elimination of excess or redundant manpower. 
• 
We should also be cognizant that a liberalized system described above would also be more vulnerable 
including possible systemic breakdown in which many financial firms and businesses may go out of 
business.  If  the  political  leadership  have  cold  feet  and  do  not  allow  terminally  sick  and  financially 
unviable firms to die their natural death then the financial sector would always remain saddled with 
unnecessary burden exacerbating the event risk of banking crisis at some unknown time in the future. 
Having discussed the pre-requisites of a market structure that will improve the efficiency of 
• 
financial  intermediation  let  us  now  turn  to  describe  the  essential  elements  of  a  desirable 
regulatory framework. Banking regulation should ensure that: 
Adverse selection in bank entry is avoided by making certain that individuals more likely to 
misuse  banks  do  not  get  bank  charters,  banks  have  adequate  capital  investment,  cross 
ownership is proscribed and character stipulations for bank ownership are enforced. 
The  incentives  of  bank  owners  remain  aligned  with  those  of  the  depositors  so  that  bank 
owners stand to make substantial losses in the event of insolvency. Loans loss provisions 
and capital adequacy regulations play a key role in bringing about such as alignment. 
Excessive risk taking by bank managers is prevented by close scrutiny and supervision of 
their asset management. This includes measures limiting bank holdings of excessively risky 
assets, preventing lending to related parties, requiring diversification and making that banks 
have appropriate loan appraisal, documentation, follow up and classification procedures. 
   Along with the issues of harmonization of market structure and regulatory environment in the SAARC 
Region  there  is  another  issue  that  impinges  upon  the  efficient  functioning  of  financial  sector  i.e. 
autonomy  and  independence  of  the  central  banks  among  various  countries.  Assuming  that  the 
countries in the region are able to implement the measures required to achieve harmony in the market 
structure and regulatory environment the capacity of the central banks to taking appropriate actions on 
right time without interference, approval or reversal by another layer of decision makers will be quite 
critical. Thus the imperative of attaining central bank independence at an even keel in each country 
assumes an important dimension. 
After laying out the analytical framework and specifying the characteristics essential for harmonization 
of banking sectors in the region it may be useful for me to narrate the progress Pakistan has been able 
to  make  in  respect  of  each  of  the  three  dimensions  discussed  above.  I  do  not  wish  to  imply  by 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2004
presenting  the  experience  of  Pakistan  that  this  should  be  the  reference  print  for  harmonization  of 
banking system in South Asia but only to suggest that other countries should review where they stand 
at present and what needs to be done in the future. 
Market structure 
(a) 
Four  out  of  five  large  nationalised  commercial  banks  have  been  privatized  while  fourteen 
private domestic and eighteen foreign banks were allowed to enter the banking sector. State 
ownership of banking assets has declined from 92 per cent in 1992 to 20 percent at present. 
Governance structure of banks has been strengthened, better disclosure and transparency 
standards have been introduced and credit ratings of banks have been made mandatory and 
disseminated widely to the public at large. Fit and proper criteria have been prescribed for 
the directors and senior managers. 
Artificially high rates of return on National Savings Schemes run by the Government were 
putting bank deposits at an intrinsic disadvantage and creating uneven playing field against 
the  banks.  These  returns  have  been  radically  rationalised  and  aligned  with  market-based 
benchmarks so that the choice of the savers between NSS and bank deposits is no longer 
tilted. 
Foreign exchange markets have been totally liberalized. All current account transactions and 
most  capital  account  transactions  have  been  made  convertible  while  exchange  rate  is 
market determined. Formation of exchange companies has encouraged further liberalization 
of capital movements. 
Government borrowing from the banking system is market based and the annual volume of 
borrowing is limited and pre-announced. Mandatory credit allocations or subsidised interest 
rates have been abolished and the Central Bank does not have any preferred sectors. 
Financial  instruments  of  varying  tenure  such  as  Pakistan  Investment  Bonds  have  been 
introduced by the Government to serve as the benchmark enabling a corporate debt market 
to function. 
An  online  Credit  Information  Bureau  is  maintained  by  the  Central  Bank  for  sharing 
information with the commercial banks on the credit history of the borrowers, and particularly 
those who are not servicing their debt on time. This information is extremely useful to the 
banks in making informed credit decisions. 
Diversification  of  risks  has  been  attempted  by  encouraging  bank  lending  for  agriculture, 
SMEs,  consumer  financing,  mortgages  etc.  and  widening  and  strengthening  the  customer 
base in place of a narrow concentration on public sector borrowers and corporates. 
Regulatory framework 
(a) 
Central bank’s capacity to supervise and regulate banks, effectively monitor non-performing 
loans,  enforce  actions  against  banks  found  violating  regulations  and  laws  has  been 
strengthened.  In  the  last  four  years,  licence  of  one  bank  was  revoked  while  appropriate 
intervention  resulted  in  change  of  ownership  and  management  of  three  banks.  Several 
institutions were forced to liquidate or merged with strong institutions. If these actions were 
not taken these banks would have collapsed with disastrous effects for the financial markets. 
Several  development  financial  institutions  have  either  been  closed,  wound  up,  privatized, 
converted  into  a  bank,  restructured  and  adequately  capitalized  for  eventual  sale  to  the 
private sector. 
An  independent  assessment  of  the  financial  sector  by  a  joint  World  Bank-IMF  team  has 
concluded  that  the  financial  soundness  indicators  of  Pakistani  banking  system  are  robust 
and can withstand exogenous shocks. Observance of internationally accepted standards and 
codes has found to be quite high. 
Minimum capital requirements of banks have been raised twice during the last four years to 
weed out weak banks and allow mergers and consolidation to take place so that fewer but 
stronger banks operate in the system. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 3
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
(h) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
Stringent measures have been laid and enforced on classification of non-performing loans, 
loan loss provisioning, tier 1 and tier 2 capital adequacies, write off of unrecoverable debt 
and allocation of capital against market risk. 
Three  different  sets  of  regulations  specifically  tailored  to  manage  the  risk  profiles  of 
corporate, consumer and SME lending have been issued by the State Bank in consultation 
with the banks and businesses. 
Central bank autonomy 
Central banks are required to promote the establishment and operation of a safer and sound financial 
system i.e. the framework of prudential regulations and supervision as well as payment and settlement 
systems. Central banks also play a critical role in crisis management through provision of emergency 
liquidity  assistance.  Finally,  price  stability  has  to  be  assured  to  lay  the  foundation  for  long-term 
sustainable growth. For these functions to be performed effectively the central banks require a degree 
of autonomy. 
State Bank of Pakistan has gradually won a substantial amount of autonomy and independence during 
the last several years. The laws governing the Bank have been modified from time to time to provide 
adequate decision making authority and powers in respect of the conduct of monetary policy, banking 
supervision  and  regulation,  exchange  rate  and  foreign  reserves  management  and  payment  and 
settlement system. A Monetary and Fiscal Coordination Board has been set up to coordinate monetary 
and fiscal policies. An independent Board of directors consisting of seven eminent individuals drawn 
from  various  walks  of  life  oversees  the  activities  of  the  Bank  and  formulates  policy  guidelines.  
The  Ministry  of  Finance  has  only  one  representative  on  the  Board  and  exercises  a  single  vote  in 
decision-making.  The  Governor  and  the  Board  cannot  be  removed  by  the  Government  until  they 
complete their tenure. The exercise of autonomy is, however, very much a function of the competence 
and  capabilities  of  the  Central  bank.  Therefore,  concerted  efforts  were  made  to  upgrade  the 
technology, human skill base, reengineer the business processes, and delegate powers, restructure 
the core and non-core functions, and introduce modern management practices. This improvement in 
capacity was essential for the Central bank to assert its independence while winning the respect of the 
stakeholders. 
Next steps 
As a practical measure we should begin the process of harmonization of banking sector in our region. 
The starting point could be that the definition of the soundness indicators, the uniformity of prudential 
regulations and the availability of financial infrastructure such as payments and settlement system are 
worked  through  developed  and  agreed  upon  for  adoption  by  all  the  countries.  For  example,  capital 
adequacy requirements on the basis of risk-weighted assets vary within the region, the classification 
rules  for  non-performing  assets  differ  widely,  provisioning  criteria  are  wide  apart.  Capital  reserves 
representing  surplus  from  the  sale  of  assets  are  treated  differently,  the  constituents  of  core  capital 
prescribed  by  each  central  bank  have  large  variation.  This  list  can  be  expanded  and  enlarged  to 
present a comprehensive picture but the practices in each country can be evaluated and brought in 
line  with  international  standards.  Consolidation  of  financial  information  of  the  banks  operating  in 
various  countries  of  the  region  should  be  made  mandatory  so  that  cross-border  risks  are  fully 
understood. The bank branch opening by the South Asian banks in each other’s countries should be 
facilitated  and  encouraged.  Payments  and  settlement  system  should  be  linked  in  order  to  expedite 
transfer of payments across the borders in the region. 
These four steps alone would take some time but pave the way for other steps in the sequence to be 
followed subsequently. 
Conclusion 
This paper has set out the analytical framework for harmonization of the banking sector in South Asia 
region. The three pillars of this framework are market structure, regulatory framework and institutional 
autonomy  of  the  Central  Bank.  The  paper  then  applies  this  framework  to  the  case  of  Pakistan  in 
respect  of  each  of  the  three  pillars.  Although  this  case  study  should  by  no  means  be  used  as  a 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2004
benchmark  but  it  provides  insights  to  each  country  as  to  how  much  distance  they  have  already 
traversed in respect of these three dimensions and how much they have to move further. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 5
