Zhou Xiaochuan: Opening ceremony of the Bank of Korea Beijing 
Representative Office 
Speech by Mr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the opening ceremony of 
the Bank of Korea Beijing Representative Office, Beijing, 4 December 2003. 
 First of all, on behalf of the People’s Bank of China, I would like to express my sincere congratulations 
on  the  opening  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  Beijing  Representative  Office  and  warm  welcome  to  the 
representatives  of  the  Bank  of  Korea  to  work  in  Beijing.  I  believe  the  establishment  of  the  Bank  of 
Korea  Beijing  Representative  Office  will  further  improve  the  cooperation  between  the  two  central 
banks and economic and trade relations between the two countries. 
There has been a rapid development in the Sino-Korean cooperation in the economic and financial 
sectors since the establishment of diplomatic relations between the two countries. China has become 
Korea’s  biggest  export  destination,  third  largest  trade  partner  and  biggest  overseas  investment 
destination,  while  Korea  is  China’s  fourth  largest  export  destination,  fifth  biggest  trade  partner  and 
sixth largest investment destination. China-Korea economic and financial cooperation is characterized 
by complementarity and has great potential. 
I am happy to see that, with the increasing needs of economic and financial exchanges between the 
two  countries,  cooperation  between  the  two  central  banks  has  become  increasingly  close.  Since 
former BOK Governor Cho Soon visited Beijing in the year when diplomatic relations were established 
between China and Korea, high-level exchange of visits between the two central banks has continued. 
For the moment, there are a number of formal and informal consultation mechanisms in place. Next 
week, Deputy Governor Li Ruogu will lead the delegation of the People’s Bank of China to attend the 
eleventh  Sino-Korean  Financial  Cooperation  Meeting  to  be  held  in  Seoul.  The  regular  business 
consultation at the Director-General level was successfully held three times. In addition, the informal 
meetings  between  central  bank  governors  of  China,  Japan  and  Korea  were  successfully  held  eight 
times. 
The Establishment of the Bank of Korea Beijing Representative Office is a welcome response to the 
demands for closer cooperation between our two institutions and a reflection of the foresight of the 
Bank of Korea. Governor Park Seung visited China in June of 2002 and expressed the desire to set up 
a representative office in Beijing. Under the joint efforts of the two sides, the Bank of Korea Beijing 
Representative Office was today officially established, becoming the first one by foreign central banks 
in Beijing. I believe the Office will serve as an important bridge to further strengthen cooperation and 
deepen  understanding  between  the  two  central  banks,  and  will  certainly  play  an  important  role  in 
enhancing bilateral economic and financial cooperation. 
The establishment of the Bank of Korean Beijing Representative Office will help to promote exchange 
of  information  and  experience  between  financial  sectors  of  our  two  countries.  In  the  wake  of  Asian 
financial crisis in 1997, Korea managed to stabilize its macro-economic situation, effectively adopted 
reforms  in  the  financial  and  corporate  sectors  and  labor  market,  and  recover  the  economy  in  a 
turbulent  external  environment.  Since  challenges  facing  China’s  financial  sector  are  similar  to  what 
Korea has experienced, we will continue to learn from Korea’s valuable experience in financial reform.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the opening China in the process of reform is dynamic and full of vitality. This 
will bring more opportunities for cooperation between our two countries in the economic and financial 
sectors. The effective cooperation between the two central banks will provide better service, better and 
stable  business  environment  and  financial  institutions.  I  am  sure  the  Bank  of  Korea  Beijing 
Representative Office will play a great role. 
Thank you.  
BIS Review 4/2004 
 1
