Bodil Nyboe Andersen: Recent economic developments in Denmark  
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Association of Danish Mortgage Banks, Copenhagen, 29 April 2004.  
 The  Danish  economy  has  shown  very  positive  trends  in  the  last  decades  even  though  economic 
growth  has  been  modest  recently.  Various  governments  have  implemented  a  number  of  structural 
reforms since the beginning of the 1980s. As a result, the Danish economy is today extremely robust 
with strong economic fundamentals. 
The  fixed-exchange-rate  policy,  which  was  introduced  in  1982,  has  been  a  cornerstone  of  this 
development. However, a sustainable and credible fixed-exchange-rate policy requires that the rest of 
the economic policy and the structural conditions are in order. 
In Denmark this called for a number of economic reforms that began in the 1980s. The cost-of-living 
adjustment was abolished and the central-government finances improved. The deductibility of interest 
payments  was  restricted  and  interest  taxation  reduced.  All  of  these  factors  contributed  to  breaking 
expectations of a devaluation-inflation spiral. 
However, breaking these expectations took its toll and, as many people in the financial sector may still 
recall, the years around 1990 were lean years for Denmark. 
On the other hand, these measures resolved some of the structural problems that had burdened the 
Danish economy for many years. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  Denmark  has  seen  stable  growth  with  declining  inflation,  lower 
interest  rates  and  the  accumulation  of  solid  surpluses  on  both  public  finances  and  the  balance  of 
payments, as well as gradual expansion of pension savings. 
In  recent  years  Denmark  has  seen  strong  growth  in  real  wages,  and  at  the  same  time  Danish 
companies  have  successfully  carried  out  rationalisation  measures.  Even  though  unemployment  has 
been  increasing  for  a  period  of  time,  unemployment  has  been  low  on  a  European  scale  in  the  last 
5-10 years. This indicates that the structural reforms already implemented in the labour market have 
contributed to enhancing the flexibility of the Danish economy.  
In  international  assessments  and  comparisons  it  is  noted  that  Denmark  has  successfully  applied  a 
long-term  and  medium-term  orientation  to  its  economic  policy  without  resorting  to  short-term 
fiscal-policy  measures.  Most  recently,  the  IMF  delegation  that  visited  Denmark  in  March  this  year 
described this as follows in their conclusions: 
“At  the  same  time,  Denmark  has  been  well-served  by  focusing  on  medium  term  fiscal  targets,  and 
relying  on 
to  support  demand  during  downturns.  Discretionary 
counter-cyclical policy should be kept as an exceptional response to avoid creating an expectation of 
fine  tuning  and  short-term  fixes  that  could  weaken  the  effectiveness  of  the  medium-term  fiscal 
framework.” 
Why focus on medium-term economic policy? Why is it recommended to refrain from fine-tuning via 
fiscal policy? 
Because experience shows that detailed management of economic development is hard to achieve by 
adapting fiscal policy on an ongoing basis. 
Not  only  is  it  difficult  to  make  short-term  predictions  of  economic  development,  it  is  also  difficult  to 
obtain an accurate picture of the current situation. We get a myriad of statistics, for example national 
accounts data, that are published rather quickly, with a dedicated effort. However, the short publication 
deadline means that the data will often have to undergo very extensive revision a few months later. 
This is especially problematic around a cyclical reversal when even minor revisions may give rise to a 
very different interpretation. 
Unemployment  represents  a  key  indicator,  which  is  timely  as  well  as  accurate.  Consequently, 
unemployment  plays  a  central  role  in  the  cyclical  analysis  and  in  the  debate  on  the  structure  of 
economic policy. 
large  automatic  stabilizers 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
However,  the  unemployment  rate  should  not  be  readily  interpreted  as  a  reflection  of  the  cyclical 
situation. 
Firstly, experience shows that changes in employment lag behind cyclical trends. A cyclical reversal is 
reflected  in  the  unemployment  rate  some  months  after  the  reversal  actually  takes  place.  Normally 
about six months on average, but the number of months varies considerably. 
Secondly, the unemployment measure comprises both the unemployed who will be able to quickly find 
employment when economic growth picks up, and those who will not be able to find employment so 
quickly. The latter group, called structural unemployment, is not easily affected by an upswing created 
by  a  fiscal  stimulus.  It  must  be  influenced  via  structural-policy  measures  targeted  at  mobility, 
education, unemployment benefit, activation, tax, etc.  
In  practice,  however,  it  is  impossible  to  draw  a  distinction  between  structural  and  cyclical 
unemployment. And such a distinction is by no means permanent over time. Most people believe that 
structural unemployment in Denmark has declined over the last decade. 
Since cyclical unemployment is not easily defined, it is obviously difficult to aim to abolish it. 
Finally, another uncertainty in connection with fiscal fine-tuning is how quickly a fiscal adjustment is 
reflected  in  the  demand  for  labour.  Studies  indicate  that  it  may  take  a  number  of  years  before  the 
economic effect of a fiscal-policy measure peaks. By then the cyclical situation may be quite different 
from when the measure was adopted. 
Therefore, it is very difficult to apply even an approximately correct dosage of fiscal activism. 
Still, it is hard for governments to refrain from fiscal activism, as they will often be under pressure to 
make adjustments, from political players as well as from professional organisations and the media. 
In  good  times  there  will  be  pressure  to  relax  fiscal  policy  by  lowering  taxes  rather  than  to  let  the 
automatic stabilisers work to improve the government surplus. At a weak point in the economic cycle 
there will also be pressure to relax fiscal policy in order to stimulate economic growth. 
Denmark has avoided this kind of fiscal activism for a number of years, and only minor adjustments 
have been made in connection with the annual Finance Acts.  
Danmarks  Nationalbank's  comments  on  the  government's  so-called  “spring  package”  should  be 
viewed  in  this  light.  I  take  this  opportunity  to  repeat  our  comments  issued  in  connection  with  the 
publication of Danmarks Nationalbank's Annual Report. 
“Danmarks  Nationalbank  finds  that  there  is  no  pressing  need  to  implement  measures  to  adjust 
economic  development.  Fiscal  policy  is  already  slightly  expansionary,  interest  rates  are  historically 
low, and most observers share the view that an upswing is in the making. 
Although  the  unemployment  rate  is  still  low,  both  by  international  comparison  and  in  a  historical 
Danish perspective, it is on the increase.  
The widespread political view is therefore that extensive relaxation of fiscal policy is needed. 
Denmark's  economic  situation 
is  very  robust  with  a  government  surplus,  a  considerable 
current-account surplus, a highly stable krone rate and low inflation. Against this background we have 
to acknowledge that today the economic scope for implementing reasonable measures exists. 
The government's plan may turn out to be too expansionary, which is too early to assess. However, 
especially in this light it is important that the plan applies a combination of temporary measures and 
moves  forward  already  adopted  relaxations.  This  limits  the  potential  adverse  consequences  in 
connection with maintenance of the medium-term objective of expanding the supply of labour, limiting 
the increase in public expenditure and reducing the government debt.” 
These  comments  on  the  government's  plan  were  made  in  a  current  context  about  six  weeks  ago. 
Nevertheless,  they  are  a  good  reflection  of  Danmarks  Nationalbank's  overall  position  that  the 
overriding priority is to maintain the medium-term economic policy. This also requires more reforms to 
be implemented to reduce structural unemployment and thus ensure that Denmark will continue to be 
among the countries with a low unemployment rate. 
The general course of the economy is of great significance to mortgage credit, as was seen around 
1990. In addition, mortgage-credit legislation was previously often used as an element of economic 
policy. A case in point is the introduction of so-called mixed loans in the mid-1980s. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
The  beginning  of  the  1990s  saw  new  adjustments  to  the  acts,  but  this  time  the  purpose  was  to 
stimulate economic development. This implied liberalisation of the rules.  
Furthermore, the last decade or so has been characterised by extensive waves of conversion which 
have  helped  to  reduce  the  homeowners'  interest  costs  in  step  with  the  general  global  decline  in 
interest rates in that period. 
The introduction and widespread use of adjustable-rate loans have also contributed to this, and at the 
same time short-term interest rates have been lower than long-term interest rates. 
Finally, the introduction of the so-called deferred-amortisation loans has meant that the homeowners' 
debt  service  can  be  limited  to  interest  payments  for  a  number  of  years.  In  other  words, 
deferred-amortisation  loans  represent  an  easier  way  of  achieving  the  same  results  as  with 
supplementary mortgage credit.  
The gradual liberalisation has made it easier for existing homeowners to weather situations of financial 
tightness.  When  social  events  altering  the  ability  to  meet  payments  occurred,  many  homeowners 
came  through  by  remortgaging  or  raising  supplementary  mortgage  credit,  and  society  was  spared 
many problems. 
In recent years new homeowners have made extensive use of the new mortgaging opportunities in 
such a way that they can be expected to be more vulnerable in the future. This applies both when the 
homeowners'  net  income  is  reduced  and  when  the  level  of  interest  rates  in  the  economy  rises 
significantly. 
What will happen in the coming years? The scope for relaxing the borrowing conditions seems to be 
exhausted - unless interest payments are frozen. Indeed, in view of the current level of interest rates 
further significant relaxations in this respect can hardly be envisaged. On the contrary, everybody is 
talking about the risk that interest rates will increase. 
The  coming  years  will  then  show  who  have  successfully  advised  their  customers  about  the 
consequences of interest-rate changes or changes in the customers' ability to meet payments - and 
who have merely been sales men. 
The basic principles of mortgage credit in Denmark have been retained in the many adjustments to 
mortgage-credit legislation over the years. 
The mortgage-credit institutes are intermediaries providing loans on the basis of bonds. The credit risk 
is  “pooled”  so  that  the  bondholders  are  not  dependent  on  one  single  borrower's  ability  to  meet 
payments. However, the interest-rate risk still rests on the borrowers and bondholders, respectively, 
not on the mortgage-credit institute. 
This is different from the home-financing system in the USA, which is otherwise similar to the Danish 
system in that the borrower may remortgage by redeeming the loan when interest rates decline. In the 
USA  the  conversion  risk  is  to  a  large  extent  assumed  by  two  privileged  institutes  with  a  large 
proportion of the housing loans on their balance sheets. These institutes have encountered significant 
risk-management  problems  as  a  consequence  of  interest-rate  fluctuations.  They  have  thus  had  to 
conduct  very  extensive  hedging  in  the  bond  market,  among  other  things,  and  this  again  has  led  to 
pronounced volatility in the bond market. 
Denmark did not experience a similar increase in volatility. 
At international meetings we are sometimes asked why this increase did not happen in Denmark. One 
explanation is our balance principle, which ensures that the conversion risk is spread out on a large 
number of investors rather than being concentrated on a few mortgage-credit institutes. 
The next question is then: why did Denmark introduce the balance principle? 
This is not quite as easy to answer. When the mortgage-credit system was founded there were no 
clearly expressed considerations about the balance principle. What happened was that the borrowers 
joined  forces  -  just  like  the  cooperative  movement  in  other  areas  of  the  economy  -  to  be  able  to 
provide joint collateral and issue standardised bonds. 
The  balance  principle  has  been  a  cornerstone  of  the  mortgage-credit  system  in  Denmark  for  more 
than  100  years.  Since  then  the  authorities  -  including  Danmarks  Nationalbank  -  have  come  to 
appreciate  it  to  such  a  degree  that  they  have  again  and  again  resisted  the  request  from  the 
mortgage-credit institutes to relax the balance principle.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
