T T Mboweni: The monetary policy framework of South Africa 
Address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  International 
Investors Conference, Sun City, 24 March 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
The main task of macro-economic policy is the promotion of sustainable high economic growth, the 
creation of employment opportunities, the containment of inflation, improvement of the living conditions 
of all the residents of a country, and the elimination of unjustifiable discrepancies in the distribution of 
income amongst our people. These economic objectives can best be obtained amongst other things in 
a  stable  financial  environment.  Financial  instability  is  a  major  obstacle  in  the  fulfilment  of  this  task. 
Stable financial conditions should be maintained throughout the various phases of the business cycle 
to attain maximum economic development. 
Primary objective of monetary policy 
2. 
The role of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) in this process is to achieve and maintain price 
stability and to develop and supervise a healthy banking sector. This objective is spelled out in both 
the Constitution of South Africa and in the SARB Act. In section 224 of the Constitution and section 3 
of  the  SARB  Act  it  is  stated  that  the  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  is  to  protect  the  value  of  the 
currency  of  the  Republic  in  the  interest  of  balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  This,  in  our 
view, means price stability. These laws therefore recognise that only by protecting the currency can 
balanced and sustainable economic growth be achieved. It is believed in the Bank, and indeed in most 
other  central  banks  in  the  rest  of  the  world,  that  the  potential  growth  rate  of  an  economy  and  the 
optimum creation of employment opportunities can only by attained under stable financial conditions. 
By  fulfilling  this  primary  objective,  the  SARB  will  be  making  its  contribution  to  sustainable  high 
economic growth in South Africa.  
Section 224(2) of the Constitution determines further that the SARB, in pursuit of its primary objective, 
must perform its functions independently and without fear, favour or prejudice. Regular consultation 
must, however, take place between the Minister of Finance and the Governor of the SARB. In addition 
to this legal requirement, section 10(2) of the SARB Act clearly states that “the rates at which the Bank 
will discount or rediscount the various classes of bills, promissory notes and other securities shall be 
determined and announced by the Bank from time to time”. This gives the Bank the right to determine 
the  official  rate,  or  as  it  is  now  called  the  repo  rate.  These  laws  therefore  provide  the  executive 
management  of  the  Bank  with  complete  instrumental  independence,  with  the  one  precondition  that 
regular consultation should take place with the Minister of Finance. The Bank can accordingly perform 
its work in an autonomous manner. 
Having established that the task of the Bank is the achievement and maintenance of price stability, 
what  does  the  term  price  stability  convey?  In  the  economic  literature  price  stability  is  normally 
regarded  as  a  situation  wherein  changes  in  the  general  price  level  do  not  materially  affect  the 
economic  decision-making  process.  Although  relative  price  movements  still  have  an  impact  on 
production,  consumption  and  investment,  the  rate  of  inflation  in  such  conditions  is  no  longer  an 
important factor in the decisions taken by producers, consumers and investors. 
Price stability is heavily dependent on stability in the financial sector. The Bank has accordingly also 
been  tasked  to  promote  the  soundness  and  management  of  domestic  banks  through  the  effective 
application  of  international  best  practise  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  area.  The  objective  of 
banking supervision is to ensure that banks manage their risks in such a way that systemic risk in the 
banking sector is minimised, thereby ensuring the safety of depositor’s money. It is aimed at promoting 
the financial soundness of banks and the banking system as a whole.  
In the fulfilment of its mission the Bank performs virtually the full range of functions and duties that are 
customarily carried out by central banks. The other main functions of the Bank are:  
1) 
2) 
the issuing of banknotes and coin; 
acting as banker to the government; 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 1
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
acting as bank to private banks; 
providing facilities for the clearing and settlement of claims between banks; 
providing liquidity to banks and acting on a case by case basis as “lender of last resort”; 
engaging in open-market operations; and 
collecting, processing and interpreting economic statistics and other information. 
The importance of price stability  
3. 
The objective of achieving and maintaining price stability is based on the proposition that inflation is 
bad for economic growth, employment creation and the distribution of income. Is this indeed the case, 
or can more growth be attained by allowing an acceleration in inflation? 
It  is  often  argued  that  there  is  a  trade-off  between  inflation  and  growth  based  on  the  Philips-curve 
analysis.  In  this  analysis  it  was  argued  that  at  a  low  level  of  inflation  real  economic  growth  can  be 
stimulated through an expansionary monetary policy even if this policy should lead to higher inflation. 
There  may  be  some  truth  in  this  analysis  over  the  short  term,  but  such  a  policy  will  not  achieve 
long-term  sustainable  high  economic  growth  and  employment  creation.  An  artificial  stimulation  of 
demand inevitably results in higher inflation rather than production over the long term. If demand is 
allowed to grow more rapidly than the production capacity of the economy, this leads to inflation. It 
also results in rising deficits on the current account of the balance of payment. If these deficits are not 
readily financed by means of financial inflows, the exchange rate of the currency could come under 
pressure. A depreciating currency can bring forth further pressures on domestic prices. A little bit of 
inflation  once  started  can  easily  gain  momentum,  which  could  require  very  restrictive  measures  to 
again attain balance between demand and supply. Substantial swings in interest rates to achieve such 
a balance make business planning difficult and could lead to lower average economic growth over the 
long term.  
The maintenance of price stability over the long term implies low and more stable interest rates. With 
low inflation, output increases become more dependent on increases in investment and the quantity 
and quality of labour, and on the way that these production factors are employed. Economic growth 
becomes propelled by healthy permanent factors and is not dependent on an artificial stimulation of 
demand. Low inflation is therefore an important factor for sustainable high growth. In such a stable 
environment demand and output will grow on a steady and sustainable basis. 
If price stability is not achieved, the well known disadvantages of inflation come into play. High inflation 
distorts the allocation of resources and favours investment in non-productive hedge assets rather than 
in capital formation. High inflation discourages saving and leads to more consumption. High inflation 
erodes  the  competitiveness  of  local  manufacturers  and  other  producers  vis-à-vis  foreign  producers. 
High inflation leads to an unfair redistribution of wealth by penalising the poor more than the rich. The 
general conclusion is accordingly that high inflation in the medium to long term leads to lower growth, 
fewer jobs, more unemployment and a more unequal distribution of income and wealth. 
Inflation targeting 
4. 
How do we achieve price stability? Inflation is a monetary phenomenon, i.e. inflation cannot take place 
without a  more rapid  increase  in  the  quantity  of  money  than  in  output,  provided  that  the  velocity  of 
circulation  of  money  remains  unchanged.  As  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  has 
coined  it:  “No  money,  no  inflation.”  An  increase  in  the  inflation  rate  can  originate  from  many 
developments  in  the  international  and  domestic  economy  and  it  is  impossible  for  any  individual 
institution to prevent these causes of inflation to take effect. The SARB can only use the powers at its 
disposal to reduce inflationary pressures. This consists basically of influencing liquidity in the banking 
sector  and/or  influencing  the  general  level  of  interest  rates.  In  pursuing  price  stability,  the  main 
operational variable that the Bank uses to influence prices is the repo rate, that is the interest rate at 
which the SARB meets the liquidity needs of banking institutions. By changing the repo rate, the Bank 
directly  affects  other  domestic  interest  rates,  the  demand  for  money  and  credit,  and  eventually 
changes in prices. 
From  February  2000  changes  in  the  repo  rate  are  based  on  the  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy 
framework.  With  the  adoption  of  this  framework,  the  Bank  moved  away  from  an  eclectic  monetary 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2004
policy framework or informal inflation targeting. In the eclectic monetary policy framework the growth in 
money supply and bank credit extension were used as intermediate guidelines for the determination of 
short-term  interest  rates.  In  addition,  in  deciding  on  the  most  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance, 
developments  in  a  number  of  other  variables  were  also  taken  into  consideration,  because  the 
monetary aggregates had lost some of their usefulness as indicators of future inflation due to structural 
changes in the economy.  
The  adoption  of  an  inflation  targeting  framework  reduced  the  role  of  these  intermediate  guidelines. 
Instead, the SARB adopted a strategy of determining directly what the likely path of inflation would be. 
This led to the detailed assessment of factors that could affect inflation based on past experience. The 
indicators that the SARB monitors include the growth in money supply and bank credit extension, the 
changes  in  nominal  and  real  salaries  and  wages,  the  nominal  unit  labour  costs,  the  gap  between 
potential and actual domestic output, exchange rate developments, producer prices and import prices. 
Developments in a number of exogenous factors are also regarded as important in this analysis, such 
as oil prices, food prices and administered prices. Unfortunately the Bank has little control over these 
exogenous price changes, but they may have an important bearing on inflationary pressures. 
In  analysing these  factors  the  SARB  is  acutely  aware  of  the  long  and  variable  lags  of  the  effect  of 
interest rate changes on inflation. This is generally believed to be about 18 to 24 months. These lags 
in monetary policy were an important consideration in the decision to determine directly what the likely 
path of inflation will be. In adopting an inflation targeting framework the Bank’s research has become 
increasingly  focussed  on  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  and  the 
development  of  inflation  forecasting  models.  In  co-operation  with  the  staff  of  other  central  banks  a 
suite  of  models  was  developed,  comprising  a  core  model,  a  small-scale  model,  vector  models, 
Philips-curve models and indicator models. 
The  prediction  of  inflation  is  of  the  utmost  importance  in  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy 
because changes in policy measures must always be based on likely future price developments. The 
fact that inflation targeting has to rely on forecasting has led to the criticism that this is a weakness of 
this framework as forecasts are inherently unreliable. This limitation, however, applies in the case of all 
other monetary policy frameworks. If the objective of a central bank is the attainment of price stability, 
it will always have to take a view on how its current policy stance will affect future price developments, 
whichever monetary policy framework it decides to pursue. The difference between inflation targeting 
and other monetary policy frameworks, is that inflation targeting should make forecasting explicit and 
transparent.  
Although the forecasting of inflation is an important tool in deciding on the appropriate monetary policy 
stance,  the  SARB  still  applies  discretion  in  reaching  a  decision.  Every  forecast  is  based  on 
assumptions and no model is perfect. A careful analysis of all economic data and the risks involved is 
made to ensure that the correct decision is taken. For this reason the central bank also applies a suite 
of models to minimise these risks and possible limitations of the individual models. 
This analysis of current and possible future developments is important because the achievement of 
the  target  is  the  overriding  objective  of  monetary  policy  in  an  inflation  targeting  monetary  policy 
framework. Such a framework can only be successful if the public is convinced that the central bank is 
serious about the achievement of the target. Missing the target by a wide margin and consistently will 
lead to lost prestige and credibility for the central bank. 
The SARB also realises that exclusive emphasis on inflation goals over the short term could lead to a 
highly unstable real economy over the longer term. If a severe exogenous shock affects the economy, 
extreme  measures  to  reach  the  inflation  target  could  be  very  costly  in  terms  of  lost  output  and 
employment. In such cases, some discretion is applied by the Bank. The monetary policy framework at 
first  made  allowance  for  such  occurrences  by  including  an  escape  clause  stipulating  the 
circumstances  under  which  the  Bank  did  not  need  to  meet  the  target.  Experience  showed  that  this 
escape  clause  created  problems  in  communicating  monetary  policy  decisions.  It  was  accordingly 
replaced  in  November  2003  by  the  introduction  of  an  “explanation  clause”.  In  the  case  of  a  supply 
shock the Bank must now fully inform the public of the nature of the shock, the anticipated impact on 
inflation and the monetary policy response to ensure that inflation returns to the target. 
The institutional arrangements 
5. 
The  decision  on  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  is  taken  by  a  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC).  This  committee  was  set  up  shortly  before  South  Africa  adopted  the  inflation  targeting 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 3
framework for monetary policy. It first met on 13 October 1999. The Committee at present consists of 
the Governor, three deputy governors and four senior officials of the Bank. Six meetings are held in a 
year  with  intervals  of  about  two  months  between  each  meeting.  These  meetings  are  normally  held 
over two days. On the first day members of the Bank’s staff inform the committee about international 
and domestic economic developments and present a forecast of likely future developments. On the 
second day a decision is taken about the monetary policy stance and the statement explaining this 
decision  is  finalised.  This  statement  is  then  released  at  a  press  conference  and  broadcast  live  on 
SABC TV. 
This  process  has  improved  the  transparency  of  monetary  policy  considerably.  In  order  to  further 
develop a better understanding of monetary policy, Monetary Policy Forums have been convened by 
the  Bank.  These  forums  provide  a  means  for  open  discussion  on  monetary  policy  and  recent 
international  and  domestic  economic  developments.  The  Monetary  Policy  Forums  are  held  twice  a 
year in the major centres of South Africa and representatives of labour organisations, the business, 
community and academic institutions are invited to attend them. The forums ensure that the views of 
interested parties are taken into account in the determination of monetary policy and that the monetary 
policy stance is explained in some detail to the public. 
In addition, the Bank publishes a Monetary Policy Review twice a year to increase the understanding 
of its conduct of monetary policy. The first review was published in March 2001. In these reviews a 
more  detailed  analysis  is  made  of  domestic  and  international  economic  developments  and  the  way 
that inflation is and could be affected. The SARB’s core forecast of inflation is also published in the 
review  in  the  form  of  a  fan  chart.  Confidence  bands  in  the  fan  chart  show  the  varying  degrees  of 
certainty for projected rates of increase in the general price level. 
Assessment of inflation targeting in South Africa 
6. 
The inflation target was originally specified as an average annual rate of increase of between 3 and 
6 per  cent  in  the  consumer  price  index  for  metropolitan  and  other  urban  areas  excluding  mortgage 
interest costs (the CPIX) for the years 2002 and 2003. In November 2003 it was decided to terminate 
the annual average specification because it complicates the implementation of the inflation targeting 
framework and could lead to inconsistencies in monetary policy arising from excessive interest rate 
volatility and ineffective management of inflation expectations. It was then replaced by a continuous 
target  of  3  to  6  per  cent  for  the  period  beyond  2006.  In  other  words,  the  target  is  specified  as  an 
inflation rate of between 3 and 6 per cent which must be obtained continuously over a twelve-month 
period in the coming years. 
In 2002 the rate of increase in the CPIX averaged 10 per cent, or 4 percentage points above the upper 
limit of the target range. Four exogenous factors were mainly responsible for this inflation outcome. 
Firstly, the nominal value of the rand on a trade-weighted basis declined by approximately 34 per cent 
from the end of June 2001 to the end of that year. Secondly, the prices of food increased by almost 
17 per  cent  in  2002.  Thirdly,  the  Brent  price  of  oil  rose  from  US$20  per  barrel  in  February 2002  to 
US$28  per  barrel  in  December  2002.  Fourthly,  administered  prices  increased  at  very  high  rates  of 
about 10 per cent or more in 2002. 
In view of the effect of these extraordinary events on inflation, the Monetary Policy Committee opted to 
bring the inflation rate down to target levels in a gradual manner. In January 2002 the first corrective 
step was taken. At this meeting the Committee increased the repo rate by 100 basis points, followed 
by  a  further  three  increases  of  100  basis  points  at  the  next  three  meetings.  This  brought  the 
repurchase rate to 13,5 per cent in September 2002, at which level the rate was kept until June 2003. 
These  corrective  measures  had  the  desired  result.  The  twelve-month  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPIX 
slowed down from 11,3 per cent in November 2002, and moved below the 6 per cent upper limit of the 
inflation target range to 5,4 per cent in September 2003. CPIX inflation then decelerated further to a 
year-on-year rate of 4,0 per cent in December 2003, before increasing marginally to 4,2 per cent in 
January 2004.  For  the  year  2003  as  a  whole  CPIX  inflation  averaged  6,8  per  cent.  These 
developments allowed the SARB to reduce the repo rate by 5,5 percentage points in the second half 
of 2003. 
In  bringing  CPIX  inflation  down  to  these  lower  levels,  the  restrictive  monetary  policy  stance  was 
assisted  by  a  number  of  other  factors.  Particularly  important  in  this  regard  was  the  discipline  in 
government finances that helped considerably to reduce inflation expectations. The monetary policy 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2004
stance was further assisted by a recovery in the exchange rate of the rand from the beginning of 2002 
and slower rates of increases in food and energy prices. 
It can nevertheless be stated that the consistent application of the inflation targeting monetary policy 
framework  was  successful  in  bringing  inflation  down  to  the  target  range  as  it  is  now  defined  by 
government.  Moreover,  the  inflation  outlook  remains  favourable.  Most  analyst  and  economic 
commentators, including the SARB, expect CPIX inflation to remain within the inflation target range 
over the next two years. Inflation is projected to accelerate moderately in the course of 2004 to levels 
close to the upper limit of the inflation target, followed by somewhat slower rates of increase during 
2005. This improved inflation performance should be accompanied by a pick-up in economic growth 
during 2004 and 2005.  
The inflation targeting monetary policy framework not only assisted the Bank in bringing about a better 
inflation  performance,  but  also  strengthened  the  SARB’s  mandate  to  focus  on  price  stability.  In 
previous policy regimes there was no explicit benchmark against which the performance of the Bank 
could  be  judged  objectively.  In  the  inflation  targeting  framework,  a  specific  target  range  is  set  for a 
price index to be achieved over a specific time frame, subject to the structural reform of the economy. 
As  already  indicated,  inflation  targeting  has  also  been  accompanied  by  major  improvements  in  the 
Bank’s communication with the public, making monetary policy more transparent. By the specification 
of a target range, the accountability of monetary policy has been improved. The fact that government 
decides on the level of the target range has improved the co-ordination between monetary policy and 
other economic policy measures. To some extent, inflation targeting is already leading to a weakening 
of the importance of backward-looking inflation in decision-making of business and labour. However, 
many wage demands are still based on historic inflation figures. It can nevertheless be stated that the 
introduction of inflation targeting in South Africa has been a big success. 
Improvement in international liquidity position 
7. 
Before concluding this address on the inflation-targeting monetary policy framework of South Africa, I 
would  also  like  to  mention  that  the  application  of  this  framework  has  been  accompanied  by  a 
consistent effort to improve the liquidity management of the South African SARB. 
At  the  end  of  September  1998  the  net  open  foreign-currency  position  of  the  SARB  (NOFP)  still 
amounted to US$23,2 billion, i.e. the difference between an oversold forward book of US$25,3 billion 
and net gold and foreign exchange reserves of US$2,1 billion. At that stage a decision was taken to 
reduce the NOFP gradually to zero. Underlying circumstances allowed the Bank to reduce this position 
relatively rapidly to US$9,5 billion at the end of December 2000. Then a more gradual approach had to 
be  adopted  due  to  the  weakness  in  the  external  value  of  the  rand.  Using  only  proceeds  from 
privatisation and of funds raised abroad by government, the NOFP was brought down to US$4,8 billion 
at the end of 2001. In May 2003 the oversold NOFP was finally converted to an overbought position of 
US$0,7 billion. 
With the expunction of the oversold NOFP, the SARB shifted its focus to reducing its oversold forward 
book  and  to  seeking  over  time  to  strengthen  the  official  foreign  exchange  reserve  position.  The 
oversold forward book of the Bank amounted to US$4,7 billion at that time. This oversold forward book 
was closed out during February 2004. At the end of February 2004, the international liquidity position 
of  the  Bank  was  a  positive  US$4,7  billion.  Although  this  is  probably  still  relatively  low  in  relation  to 
some  of  our  significant  peers,  the  achievement  of  this  positive  balance  has  been  a  major 
accomplishment. The SARB’s focus in the coming years will be to increase this position gradually to 
higher levels. 
Conclusion 
8. 
These improvements in the international liquidity position and the lower rate of inflation should provide 
a platform for the more rapid economic development of South Africa. Stability in interest rates and in 
the  value  of  the  rand  are  important  pre-conditions  for  the  attainment  of  high  economic  growth  and 
employment creation. The focus of the SARB will therefore continue to be on the objective of price 
stability. We can only develop an environment favouring price stability and in this way contribute to the 
attainment of the other important objectives of economic policy. 
Welcome to South Africa. Welcome to the North West Province of South Africa. Enjoy! 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 5
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2004
