Philipp M Hildebrand: Ten theories on the economic relationship Switzerland - 
Europe 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Dr  Philipp  M  Hildebrand,  Member  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, to the Arbeitgeberverband Basel, Basel, 8 September 2004. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  relationship  between  Switzerland  and  the  EU  is  close  in  so  many  ways  that  it  appears  almost 
stronger than that among many member states themselves. The debate on a possible integration into 
the EU as a logical consequence should be as broad-based as possible. Economically speaking, the 
issue has become more pressing since the introduction of the euro, as Switzerland is now surrounded 
by  a  single-currency  area.  Switzerland’s  weaker  economic  growth  is  also  frequently  quoted  as  an 
argument  in  favour  of  integration,  since  the  necessary  domestic  structural  reforms  would  then  be 
easier to realise. However, one tends to overlook the fact that the national authorities would continue 
to  be  responsible  for  implementing  reforms  and  that,  moreover,  the  absorption  potential  of 
autonomous monetary and fiscal policies would be forfeited.  
Even with an independent policy, Switzerland is in a position to outperform if it again focuses on its 
strengths of flexibility and openness. The independent monetary policy has helped to keep inflation in 
Switzerland at a low level for decades. This and the diversification properties of the Swiss franc make 
capital cheaper in Switzerland by approximately 1.5 percentage points (interest premium). Exchange 
rate  volatility  vis-à-vis  the  euro  area  has  declined,  while  it  would  continue  to  exist  vis-à-vis  the  US 
dollar even after integration. The as yet more flexible labour market ushered in by the transition period 
II of the Bilateral Agreements I is the flagship of Swiss economic policy. It keeps unemployment and 
the  resultant  national  costs  low  in  the  long  term  and  strengthens  the  incentives  for  individual 
performance. It is essential to translate openness and flexibility, also with respect to internal structural 
reforms  and  external  relations,  into  autonomously  implemented  reforms  and  a  practical  global 
orientation. 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
