Alan Bollard: What’s happening in the property sector? 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Property Council of 
New Zealand, Rotorua, 2 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
The  property  sector,  in  the  broadest  terms,  is  something  that  fascinates  most  people.  Most  New 
Zealanders own or aspire to own some kind of property, and property forms a significant part of the 
wealth of many of New Zealand’s households. As a country with a substantial reliance on agriculture, 
both currently and historically, the buying and selling of rural properties also has a particular potency in 
our  national  imagination.  The  Reserve  Bank,  by  contrast,  has  a  technical  interest  in  the  property 
sector, though of course we too know how perceptions can be everything.  
The Reserve Bank is charged with two key tasks, aside from issuing currency. They are implementing 
monetary policy to achieve price stability, and maintaining the stability of the financial system.  
Changes in asset prices, for the most part property prices, can have consequences for both of these 
tasks. Most asset prices do not directly enter the Consumer Price Index; the prices of new houses and 
cars  are  included,  but  that’s  about  all.  However,  even  changes  in  the  prices  of  assets  that  are  not 
included  in  the  CPI  can  have  an  indirect  effect  on  consumer  prices.  For  example,  a  sharp  lift  in 
commercial property prices or rentals ultimately impacts on the “cost of doing business”. In turn, that 
has an impact on the prices faced by consumers.  
Changes  in  asset  prices  can  also  have  consequences  for  financial  stability.  We  know  from  the 
experience of the late 1980s that a large fall in commercial property prices can result in some large 
firms running into serious financial difficulties, with major consequences for financiers and banks. It is 
important that our financial system is robust enough to withstand such shocks. 
So, in short, the property sector is definitely on our radar screens. What I want to do, therefore, in this 
speech is give you an idea of how we view the sector and its various parts.  
Of course, one can start with the core economic idea of supply and demand. However, we also know 
that  the  property  market  behaves  differently  from  the  market  for  consumer  goods.  In  the  property 
market, supply tends to be relatively inelastic. Or rather, it tends to respond quite slowly to changes in 
demand. 
In fact, the demand for buildings can increase dramatically as output rises. Consider a single firm. The 
value  of  the  building  stock  that  a  firm  uses  can  be  large  relative  to  the  annual  output  that  the  firm 
produces.  Hence  a  rise  in  output  can  result  in  a  change  in  demand  for  building  stock  that  is  even 
larger, in value terms, than the initial rise in output. 
We know that the amount of new building work that can be put in place in a short time period is limited. 
For one thing, new buildings, and even alterations, involve design time, and time to get through the 
planning process. Second, there is always a limit on the building industry’s ability to meet demand. 
Such bottlenecks have been in clear evidence over the past couple of years as the demand for new 
housing and apartments has accelerated. 
Because  supply  often  lags  demand  in  the  property  market,  there  is  the  potential  for  a  mismatch 
between  the  supply  and  demand,  and  this  can  work  in  both  directions.  When  demand  for  property 
cools, due to a slowing economy, it’s hard to switch off new supply in the pipeline. So a rapid rise in 
prices can be followed by quite significant declines later on. All property sectors tend to exhibit price 
cycles, with these cycles reflecting this mismatch between demand and supply.  
Demand  for  most  kinds  of  properties  over  recent  years  seems  to  have  outstripped  increases  in 
supply - prices and rentals across most property classes have generally been moving upwards and 
vacancy  rates  downwards.  We  can  attribute  much  of  that  strength  directly  to  developments  in  the 
broader economy. Whilst it hasn’t been all plain sailing, this year the New Zealand economy entered 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 1
its fifth year of unbroken growth. Just as that expansion has drawn heavily on the economy’s surplus 
labour  and  productive  capacity,  so  too  has  it  fuelled  the  demand  for  property.  When  you  consider 
some of the causes and consequences of that growth, it’s not hard to see why the property sector has 
fared pretty well over this period. Some of the following statistics may help to put some perspective 
around  the  demand  for  property.  Since  1998/1999,  when  the  business  cycle  caused  by  the  Asian 
crisis and drought bottomed out:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
the total output of the economy has expanded by about 20 per cent; 
the volume of retail sales has expanded by about 25per cent; 
export volumes have risen by nearly a third, driven heavily by the primary sector; 
the  annual  operating  surplus  in  the  agricultural  sector  has  risen,  in  real  terms,  by  around  
35 per cent; 
the  number  of  people  employed,  either  full  time  or  part  time,  has  increased  by  around 
220,000; 
net immigration has added 67,000 new people to the normally resident population, and when 
increases  in  foreign  students  and  those  here  on  work  permits  are  included,  the  figure  is 
considerably larger still; 
the annual number of tourists visiting New Zealand has risen by nearly 1 million; and 
there are about 40,000 more business units now operating throughout the country across a 
variety of industries.  
   Clearly all of that will have helped to fuel the demand for property in some way. But each segment of 
the  property  market  is  different  and  each  has  its  own  drivers.  So  let  me  move  on  and  make  some 
remarks about the major areas of property - rural, commercial and industrial and housing.  
Rural property 
Prices of various rural land types - dairy, fattening land, etc - have tended in the past to move in a 
similar fashion. This suggests that a similar set of factors is driving the demand in each sector. World 
growth, which in turn affects commodity prices, is probably one of these factors. Another reason why 
the prices of different land types tend to move together may be competition for land between different 
primary sub-sectors. For example, increased demand for dairy products will tend to increase the value 
of land used for dairying, but the effects are also likely to felt by other sub-sectors, lifting the price of 
land that is currently being used for other purposes. 
Figure 1 shows changes in rural property prices and changes in the CPI. The profiles of the two series 
are clearly different. Consumer inflation was very high in the mid 1980s, but then fell to 2 per cent in 
late 1991. It has generally stayed low since then. In contrast, rural property prices showed large rises 
in the late 1980s and early 1990s before levelling off. Rural property prices have shown further gains 
in recent years, and increased by 12.9 per cent in calendar year 2003. 
What caused the large rises in prices that began in the late 1980s and continued over the 1990s? The 
levelling off in prices in 1991 appears to have been the result of a sharp fall in world commodity prices 
in the second half of 1990 on the back of a weak world economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2004
Figure 1 
Rural property prices and the CPI 
Annual percent change 
 The first thing to note is that rural property prices fell through much of the 1985-89 period, following the 
abolition of subsidies. In real terms, this fall was severe. In figure 1, we can view the gap between the 
rural property prices and the CPI as being the change in real property prices. The fall in real prices in 
the 1980s was huge, since nominal property prices were falling at the same time as consumer inflation 
was  high.  Given  this,  a  lot  of  the  rise  in  property  prices  that  occurred  in  the  early  1990s  could  be 
viewed as “catch up” with real prices correcting back to a more normal level. 
However, other factors were also at work - the exchange rate eased in late 1988 which flowed through 
into export prices; interest rates fell sharply between 1990 and 1992; a new government was elected 
in late 1990 and began carrying out further reforms; confidence was returning to farmers after they 
realised that they could in fact operate profitably without subsidies; and growth in the economy overall 
began to rise in early 1993. 
Rural property prices, commodity prices and merchandise terms of trade 
Indexes with base 1989Q4 = 1000 
Figure 2 
BIS Review 48/2004 
  3
What  has  driven  the  rise  in  rural  property  prices  since  2000?  The  initial  boost  came  from  an 
extraordinary rise in export earnings which occurred in the 18 month period beginning in June 1999. 
During  this  period  world  prices  for  our  exports  rose  strongly,  while  the  exchange  rate  declined. 
Figure 2,  which  shows  property  prices  in  index  form  (i.e.  in  level  terms  rather  than  growth  rates), 
illustrates the strong climb in commodity prices as expressed in New Zealand dollars.  
On top of this climb in export prices, export volumes also rose. Export earnings peaked in December 
2000 and have declined a bit since then. Even so, they are still at a much higher level than they were 
in the early 1999. This is despite the current strength in our exchange rate (which, I might add, is due 
in part to the weakness of the US dollar). Fortunately our exchange rate appreciation has occurred at 
a time when world commodity prices have been high. Also, given the speed with which our currency 
has appreciated, some exporters still have significant foreign exchange cover in place. They had taken 
out much of this cover in the period when the exchange rate was low. This has partly offset the impact 
of the exchange rate rise on their earnings.  
Another factor that drove land prices in the early 2000s was the conversion of farms to dairying. Over 
the second half of the 1990s, dairy prices rose relative to those for alternative pastoral products like 
meat  and  wool,  with  the  positive  effects  of  the  Uruguay  GATT  round  becoming  apparent.  The 
formation of Fonterra may have also been a factor in the move to dairy. 
In  the  last  two  years,  other  forms  of  farming  have  come  to  the  fore.  The  continuing  fall  in  sheep 
numbers in the EU, and residual anxieties about BSE and CJD in Britain, have pushed lamb prices to 
new highs. At the same time, the BSE outbreak in the US, which was traced back to a Canadian herd, 
has resulted in North American beef being virtually shut out of the world market. With demand for beef 
from North Asia continuing to be strong, world beef prices have risen sharply.  
While the outlook for agriculture remains positive, it is too early to say that prices for the commodities 
that  we  produce  have  shifted  up  a  level  and  will  stay  there.  It  can  be  argued,  for  example,  that 
increasing demand for dairy products from China means that our dairy prices will move to a higher 
level.  Even  if  this  was  the  case,  it  would  be  unwise  to  think  that  commodity  price  cycles  would 
disappear altogether - prices will continue to cycle, even if they cycle around a higher level.  
The National Bank, in its Rural Report of March 2004, suggested that even now rural land might be too 
expensive. The National Bank notes that the value of an asset in economic terms is the present value 
of future expected income discounted at the required rate of return. The National Bank estimates that 
for the future income stream to equal the current price of rural land a discount rate of around 4 per 
cent is required, which is very low. Provided that the future income stream is being estimated correctly, 
this suggests that rural land is currently overvalued.  
Analysis that we have undertaken at the Reserve Bank indicates that the ratio of rural land prices to 
agricultural operating surplus is now above its long run average value. However, the ratio is not yet out 
of line with the values that it reached in the mid 1990s.  
Whether  there  will  be  a  downward  adjustment  in  prices  presumably  depends  on  whether  market 
participants also reach the conclusion that rural land is overvalued. Rural dwellers often remind us that 
non-economic factors - lifestyle considerations in particular - are also important reasons for wanting to 
hold rural land. 
Industrial and commercial property 
The  prices  of  industrial  and  commercial  buildings  rose  sharply  in  the  mid  1980s  during  the  growth 
surge that followed the first moves to deregulate the economy. By industrial buildings I mean factories, 
cool-stores, warehouses and the like. By commercial buildings, I mean offices, retail buildings, hotels, 
and other similar places of business. Looking back, we can see that we had a price bubble. (Bubbles 
are often difficult to identify when they are occurring, but are clearly obvious once they’ve burst.) 
In a bubble, asset prices become disconnected from reasonable expectations of the future earnings of 
those assets. Markets fail to get prices right. This mis-pricing gets reinforced and exaggerated by herd 
behaviour, or irrational exuberance. Investors convince themselves that someone else will pay even 
higher prices for the assets in future. 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2004
In the case of commercial buildings in the 1980s, the pace of construction was frantic, as supply rose 
to meet the high demand which was manifesting itself in high prices. Anyone who was around at that 
time can remember the cranes that cluttered the skylines of our major cities. While prices for industrial 
properties also rose sharply in the 1980s, construction of new industrial buildings was actually fairly 
steady during this period. 
The  bubble  that  occurred  in  the  mid  1980s  was  not  limited  to  business  property.  The  SE40  share 
market index doubled in one year and then halved in the following year, after the crash. Nor was the 
bubble limited to New Zealand; it occurred in other countries too, notably in the US. 
Figure 3 
Industrial property prices and the CPI 
Annual percent change 
 The bubble burst in late 1987 when the US share market crashed. It suddenly became obvious that 
asset prices had been out of line with economic fundamentals. We had witnessed a sustained period 
of  misplaced  investment,  with  the  returns  from  this  investment  proving  to  be  low.  Misdirecting 
resources in this manner can be very costly for the economy.  
The consequences for New Zealand were serious. Some companies went bankrupt and the economy 
went into a recession. It didn’t recover from this recession until 1992. In terms of the loss of output 
relative to potential output, this recession was probably New Zealand’s second worst of the twentieth 
century. 
When the recovery did arrive, it was strong. Manufacturing, much of which had been restructured and 
was running under new ownership and management, began to thrive. For a number of years we had 
double  digit  percentage  growth  in  manufactured  export  volumes.  Consequently,  the  demand  for 
industrial  property  rose  sharply.  In  the  newly  deregulated  environment  of  the  labour  market, 
employment  growth  was  strong,  and  unemployment  began  a  steady  decline.  The  growth  in  service 
sector employment increased the demand for commercial property.  
The  Asian  crisis  and  the  drought  of  1997  slowed  demand  for  both  industrial  and  commercial 
properties. But prices have lifted again in recent years, fuelled by the economic growth stemming from 
all the factors I mentioned earlier.  
In general, these recent rises do not appear to be cause for concern. As I see it, we have learnt from 
the lessons of the past, especially the lessons from the 1980s. An incremental approach to industrial 
and commercial building appears to have been adopted. Little speculative building is being done, and 
arrangements  regarding  the  tenancy  of  new  buildings  are  often  finalised  before  building  begins. 
Additions and alterations continue to be a major component of total building activity, with office space 
being refurbished in order to meet clients’ needs. The clients too have probably played their part, by 
moving to open plan arrangements and paring back their requirements for floor space. I hope these 
trends continue. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 5
I do see some future challenges for the commercial and industrial property sectors. Building consent 
data over the past 12 months have indicated an increase in new building intentions in the sector. High 
levels  of  activity  in  the  housing  and  apartment  sectors  have  deflected  some  resources  and  labour 
away from the commercial building sector. Those pressures are likely to remain in the near future. In 
addition, planned government investment in roading and other areas of infrastructure will continue to 
place heavy demand on civil engineering and related professions as well as the demand for labourers, 
many of whom might otherwise choose to work in the property construction field. 
In fact, there are currently pressures on factors of production across all sectors of the economy. For a 
number of years now, firms across all industries have been reporting that it is getting harder to recruit 
both skilled and unskilled labour. There appears to be an emerging view on the part of employers that, 
over the last 10 years or so, the country as a whole has not done enough training, particularly in the 
skilled trades area. Hence, delivering on commercial construction projects over the next few years will 
be a challenge requiring careful management. 
Figure 4 
Commercial property prices and the CP 
Annual percent change 
 Housing 
I’d  now  like  to  make  some  comments  about  New  Zealand’s  residential  property  market,  which  has 
experienced a  strong cyclical upswing over  the  past  three  years.  During  that period, we have  seen 
record numbers of house sales together with a significant lift in the construction of new dwellings, both 
houses and apartments. Unlike the residential upturn during the mid 1990s, which affected mainly the 
upper North Island, this one has been spread across the country, including many parts of the South 
Island. 
House  prices  have  increased  substantially  and  by  significantly  more  than  we’ve  seen  in  other  New 
Zealand property markets over the same period. Indeed, Quotable Value New Zealand data suggest 
that house prices measured across the country as a whole have increased by nearly 50 per cent over 
the past three years. In some regions, the increase has been much more dramatic than that.  
Most market observers, the Reserve Bank included, agree that the upswing has now peaked and that 
demand is gradually beginning to cool. House sales, which are a good barometer of demand and a 
good  leading  indicator  of  future  building  activity,  have  edged  down  over  2004.  The  number  of  new 
building consents issued, although fairly volatile, appears to be easing after rapid growth in both 2002 
and 2003. We’re also now seeing some cooling in the rate of growth in credit extended for housing 
purposes.  
6 
 BIS Review 48/2004
Figure 5 
House prices and the CPI 
Annual percent change 
Figure 6 
Indicators of housing activity 
Annual percent change 
  Nevertheless, both house sales and new consents remain at high levels by historical standards and 
current residential construction activity is very high as the sector continues to work off a considerable 
backlog of demand built-up over the past couple of years. 
To  some  degree,  the  residential  construction  sector  has  been  able  to  enhance  its  own  capacity  to 
supply. The Household Labour Force Survey shows that employment in the wider construction sector 
has risen by nearly 40,000 people since 2001. A number of building companies have gone to great 
lengths  to  overcome  shortages  of  labour  either  by  accelerated  training  or  by  tapping  into  labour 
markets abroad. Even so, the sector remains stretched, with clear shortages of particular skills. The 
frustration households seem to face in finding a builder, plumber or other tradesperson at reasonable 
notice these days has become part of the national folklore. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 7
In talking about the various property sectors, it’s fair to say that economic analysts in New Zealand, 
including analysts at the Reserve Bank, tend to focus more heavily on the housing market than other 
markets. One of the reasons for this is simply that this is where much of the action has been over 
recent years; activity and prices in the markets for most other types of property, other than perhaps 
rural  property,  have  been  relatively  more  subdued.  Another  reason  is  the  role  that  residential 
construction plays in economic growth. Residential construction accounts for around 6 per cent of total 
GDP,  which  is  about  twice  the  amount  accounted  for  by  non-residential  construction.  (However,  if 
“other construction”, which includes infrastructure spending, is added to non-residential construction, 
the amount gets closer to the residential construction total.) 
Another  reason  why  analysts  are  interested  in  the  housing  market  is  the  “wealth  effect”.  A  rise  in 
house prices increases the wealth of households. In fact, in recent times, house prices have tended to 
be the major driver of changes in household wealth. A rise in household wealth in turn results in a rise 
in household consumption; with households feeling richer, they tend to spend more on consumption 
items. Given that private consumption accounts for nearly 60 per cent of expenditure on GDP, it can 
be seen why we take such an interest in the “wealth effect”, and what house prices are doing.  
Over  the  past  three  years,  these  linkages  have  been  of  particular  interest  to  monetary  policy.  The 
upsurge  in  housing  activity  and  construction  has  added  directly  to  domestic  inflation  pressures. 
Residential construction costs, as measured by the Consumers Price Index, have increased by nearly 
20 per cent, contributing significantly to overall inflation. We’ve also witnessed very strong household 
spending  over  this  period  which  appears  to  have  been  reinforced  by  the  rapid  increase  in  house 
prices. Whilst I would not want to overplay the significance of housing and construction in our policy 
decisions  -  stronger  inflation  pressures  have  been  evident  in  many  other  parts  of  the  domestic 
economy  as  well  -  we  have  clearly  had  to  take  the  strong  housing  sector  into  account  when 
determining policy settings. 
The  recent  period  of  strength  in  the  residential  property  market  is  hardly  unprecedented  in  New 
Zealand. The early 1970s, the early and late 1980s, and the mid 1990s were also periods marked by 
intense activity in the housing market and strong house price inflation. 
There  were  some  unique  features  to  each  of  those  cycles,  but  also  some  common  drivers.  Each 
coincided with a substantial acceleration in population growth to levels well above normal, due mainly 
to a spurt of high net immigration - more arrivals and fewer departures. Each cycle was also reinforced 
by  some  other  stimulus,  such  as  a  lift  in  export  prices  received  from  abroad,  fuelling  household 
incomes.  
A sharp lift in net immigration and the sharp improvement in export returns from about 2000 through to 
2002 were also catalysts for the recent upturn, although there are now indications that the migration 
pressures on housing are easing. Figure 7 shows estimates of the annual demand for dwellings from 
migrants. These estimates, which are indicative only, were derived by assuming that the number of 
persons per household would be the same for migrants as for the rest of the population. As figure 7 
shows, the demand from short term visitors has been negative over the last year, as the number of 
visitors leaving the country has outnumbered those arriving. This has largely reflected a very sharp fall 
in the number of short-term overseas students in the country over the past 18 months (i.e. those here 
for periods of less than a year). 
There  have  also  been  other  factors  acting  to  reinforce  demand  for  new  dwellings  in  recent  years. 
These  include  the  drift  of  New  Zealanders  to  warmer  regions  and  into  the  cities,  as  well  as  social 
changes  that  have  seen  the  average  number  of  persons  per  dwelling  steadily  decline.  Life-style 
changes  and  preferences  have  increased  the  demand  for  inner-city  apartments  and  more  exotic 
alternatives to the traditional New Zealand family home - the one bathroom, three bedroom bungalow. 
Strong economic activity, which means more income and more jobs, gives households the capacity to 
accelerate  these changes.  But  when  the  supply  of  such housing is  inelastic  - as  it  always  is  in  the 
short-run - the result is upward pressure on house prices and construction costs.  
Another source of demand during the latest cycle, at least in its early stages, has been the significant 
demand for properties by non-residents particularly in coastal and lakeside regions. The relatively low 
New  Zealand  dollar  up  until  about  2002  helped  to  make  such  properties  particularly  attractive  to 
foreign buyers. Although we have no reliable way of telling how much of New Zealand’s housing stock 
is now owned by people living abroad, that proportion has almost certainly increased substantially over 
the past few years. Demand coming from people living abroad is likely to be less sensitive to monetary 
policy than demand coming from resident population. 
8 
 BIS Review 48/2004
Figure 7 
Estimated annual demand for dwellings from migrants 
Number of dwellings (calculated as net migrants/average persons per dwelling) 
 The housing markets in some parts of the country where such activity was prevalent a year or two 
ago,  such  as  Nelson,  appear  to  have  been  cooling  recently.  The  significant  rise  in  house  prices  in 
these  regions  following  a  surge  in  demand,  coupled  with  the  stronger  New  Zealand  dollar,  has 
presumably  dampened  overseas  investor  enthusiasm  to  buy  such  properties.  However,  by  all 
accounts, Australian investors are still active in purchasing New Zealand properties at the moment.  
All of the factors I have mentioned help to explain why housing demand has been strong, but they are 
not the full story. One of the more noteworthy aspects of the housing upturn has been that very similar 
cycles  have  been  seen  in  a  large  number  of  other  countries  around  the  world.  Along  with  New 
Zealand,  many  countries,  including  Australia,  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  Ireland,  France, 
Italy, Spain, and some other OECD countries, have all experienced very strong housing markets with 
significant increases in house prices in recent years. In many cases their upturns started a little earlier 
than New Zealand’s and the subsequent cooling seems a little more advanced. An associated feature 
is  that  debt  to  income  ratios  have  continued  to  lift  sharply  in  many  of  these  countries  over  recent 
years, including Australia, the United States and New Zealand, reflecting the enthusiasm for buying 
houses. However, the question to arise is what the common drivers, if any, might have been? 
The investment motive seems to be a common factor. Households in most of these countries appear 
to  have  viewed  investment  in  housing  as  a  preferred  alternative  to  other  forms  of  savings  and 
investment. In many countries, there also appears to have been something of an aversion on the part 
of the household sector to other forms of investment, such as shares or superannuation funds. That 
aversion is likely to reflect the losses that some investors incurred at the beginning of the decade as 
the world economy slowed and the “tech-wreck” unfolded. In our own case, one only has to look at the 
low  level  of  net  inflows  into  managed  funds  over  the  past  few  years,  to  see  how  investors  have 
behaved in the wake of poor returns received earlier in the decade.  
Relatively low interest rates in most countries in recent years have also undoubtedly made the debt 
financing of housing purchases relatively more attractive for many households. One might argue that 
interest  rates  in  some  countries  were  set  at  too  low  a  level  over  this  period,  but  it  should  be 
remembered  that  until  quite  recently  central  banks  have  had  to  contend  with  weakness  in  general 
activity in many of these countries, notwithstanding stronger housing markets. 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 9
Those buying a house primarily driven by an investment motive may or may not choose to live in the 
house themselves. An increasing number of purchases appear to have been by those wishing to let 
the house on the rental market and expecting to make a capital gain. We lack comprehensive statistics 
on such activity in New Zealand, but our contacts in the banking sector confirm that a substantial part 
of  the  recent  growth  in  housing  credit  has  been  for  that  purpose.  Investor  housing  activity  has,  of 
course, been a key driver of the recent property boom in places such as Sydney and Melbourne, as 
the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  has  noted.  Such  activity  often  relies  on  a  steady  stream  of  rental 
income in order to meet the financing obligations on the property.  
Growth in housing rentals in New Zealand has been lagging rising house prices for some time now, 
and thus rental yields in many parts of the country appear to be declining. Consequently, the success 
of “housing as an investment” may largely depend on the prospect for sustained capital gain over the 
coming years. Last year I commented on the potential vulnerabilities that some investors could face 
when the housing market or the economy inevitably cools. 
Those vulnerabilities arise either from being disappointed in respect to capital gain or being unable to 
meet outgoings should interest rates rise further or the rental market weaken in the future.  
Looking  at  the  balance  sheet  of  New  Zealand  households  one  might  well  ask  whether  these 
vulnerabilities are overstated. The recent sharp rise in house prices has to date made New Zealand 
households considerably more wealthy, at least on paper. 
To illustrate that proposition, the Reserve Bank’s own estimate of the household sector’s net wealth 
(including the current market value of housing) stood at $345 billion (about 3 times annual GDP) at the 
end  of  2003.  That  was  up  from  $260  billion  (or  about  2.5  times  annual  GDP)  in  2001.  This 
improvement in net wealth was despite households taking on an extra $23 billion worth of debt over 
the  same  period.  Surely,  we  would  need  a  very  large  and  unprecedented  fall  in  house  prices  to 
reverse that improvement?  
Figure 8 
Net wealth of households 
$billion as at December 
The answer, of course, is that the aggregate household balance sheet gives very limited perspective 
on the exposures of individual households or investors. For example, some households or investors 
are clearly considerably more highly geared than the average New Zealand household represented in 
the balance sheet figures I just quoted. Moreover, there is a composition issue here. New Zealanders 
hold  a  very  large,  and  increasing,  portion  of  their  wealth  in  housing.  That  itself  creates  a  potential 
vulnerability.  Past  experience  shows  that  individual  house  prices  can  and  do  fall  by  significant 
amounts even if the national average house price appears comparatively resilient.  
 10 
 BIS Review 48/2004
Consequently the Reserve Bank has been giving a consistent message to households and investors 
over the last year. Prudent buyers and investors need to satisfy themselves that they could withstand 
a reasonably significant fall in house prices and rentals and/or a reasonably significant rise in interest 
rates.  In  housing,  as  with  any  other  investment,  it’s  the  investor  who  takes  the  risk,  thus  it’s  the 
investor who needs to be careful.  
I should point out that the Reserve Bank is certainly not projecting a calamitous fall in house prices 
over  the  next  few  years.  However,  some  of  the  fundamental  drivers  of  the  housing  cycle  that  I 
mentioned before, such as rapid population growth, certainly appear to be easing, and the evidence 
does point to a cooling market. A reasonable view is that house prices are unlikely to rise much further 
over the next two years, and some falls are certainly possible, particularly in some regions. 
Financial system stability 
Although the possibility of falls in house prices at some point in the future is something investors in 
housing need to be wary about, the Reserve Bank is also interested in what the consequences of a 
widespread fall would be for the stability of the banking system. More generally, we are also interested 
in the potential stability implications of a significant change in values for other types of property such 
as commercial or rural properties, against which the banking system extends significant amounts of 
debt.  
Last  year,  New  Zealand  participated  in  the  International  Monetary  Fund’s  (IMF)  Financial  Stability 
Assessment Programme (FSAP). In preparation for the FSAP, the Reserve Bank, in conjunction with 
the  major  banks,  examined  the  potential  vulnerability  of  the  banking  system  to  a  significant  fall  in 
house prices combined with a marked rise in unemployment. 
One  aspect  of  this  exercise  was  to  look  hypothetically  at  what  might  occur  if  house  prices  did  fall 
substantially and if the unemployment rate increased sharply, given current lending exposures. The 
exercise  assumed  movements  that  were  extreme,  but  by  no  means  implausible,  by  international 
standards. 
I  am  pleased  to  say  that  the  results  of  this  stress  test  were  favourable  -  the  banking  system  itself 
appears well placed to withstand a marked fall in house prices and an associated deterioration in the 
labour  market  should  these  events  ever  occur.  In  part,  this  reflects  measures  banks  have  taken  to 
effectively  insure  themselves  against  the  risk  of  default  on  housing  lending.  Of  course,  on  matters 
related to financial stability there’s never room for complacency. Moreover, this positive finding does 
not  remove  the  onus  on  individual  households  and  investors  to  be  careful.  While  the  result  of  the 
stress test does give us a measure of confidence in the likely resilience of the banking system to a 
marked  fall  in  house  prices,  some  individuals  could  nevertheless  be  hurt  if  such  a  scenario  was  to 
eventuate. 
As  part  of  the  same  exercise,  we  also  examined  the  possible  effects  of  a  sizeable  fall  in  both 
commercial property prices and corporate earnings for the banking system. Once again, this exercise 
suggested the banking system is well placed to absorb such a shock. And again, this positive finding 
does not remove the onus on commercial property investors to exercise appropriate care as they go 
about their business. 
Conclusion 
Summing up, property market developments in New Zealand over the past few years can be explained 
largely in terms of the economic cycle. The relative strength of many segments of property - in terms 
of  prices,  rentals,  vacancies,  or new  building  activity  -  largely reflects growing  levels  of demand  for 
property as the scale of the economy and the number of people in it expands. To that extent, these 
developments provide little reason for concern. 
 However,  like  any  other  asset  markets,  property  markets  can  get  out  of  kilter  with  the  underlying 
requirements of the economy and investor preferences can change independently of the economy at 
large. As I have said before, at the margin this may have been the case in parts of the housing market 
over the past two years, with some investors becoming unrealistic about prospective returns. There 
are, no doubt, examples of overzealous investors in the commercial and rural property markets too. 
Since  property  markets,  and  the  economy  that  they  serve,  are  inherently  subject  to  cycles,  market 
participants need to remain wary of the risks and structure their affairs accordingly.  
BIS Review 48/2004 
 11
