Jean-Claude Trichet: Current issues on the European Central Bank 
and the euro 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Club International 
La Redoute, Bonn, 27 September 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour and pleasure to speak to the Club International La Redoute here in Bonn. Tonight, 
I plan to share with you some reflections about the ECB and the euro which has now been with us for 
quite a while. Contrary to what some critics had predicted before its launch almost six years ago, the 
euro  has  been  a  success  from  its  very  start.  From  day  one  of  its  existence,  we  have  managed  to 
deliver what we promised to deliver - that is a new single currency that would be at least as good and 
confidence-inspiring as the best performers among the previous national currencies were prior to the 
introduction of the euro. 
That  is  why  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  thoughts  on  the  main  factors,  principles  and 
mechanisms which helped the ECB to make the euro a success. I would also like to elaborate on the 
implications of the historic enlargement of Europe for the future integration of new Member States in 
the field of monetary policy. 
My first remark relates to the successful transition to the euro 
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro  almost  six  years  ago  we  engaged  in  a  grand  enterprise  that 
irreversibly tied together the economic and monetary destiny of eleven, then twelve, sovereign nation 
states. We were asked to deliver a new single currency that would be at least as good and as credible 
as the most credible ones among the previous national currencies - and we promised to deliver. It was 
a solemn promise made to the more than 300 million people in Europe. It was crucial for a smooth 
transition to the euro. Had we failed in meeting this promise, a number of people in Europe would have 
seen their medium and long term market interest rates rise at the moment of transition, reflecting the 
deterioration of the quality of the new currency. 
At  the  same time,  to  meet  this  promise  was extraordinarily  demanding  because  the  success  of  the 
transition  to  the  euro  was  very  much  depending  on  the  immediate  achievement  of  a  high  level  of 
credibility. And this credibility in the delivery of price stability had to be intact not only in a two-year or 
five-year perspective, but also on a ten-year and even thirty-year basis. 
I  well  remember  that,  before  we  started  our  work,  success  was  not  taken  for  granted.  Sceptics 
doubted that it was possible to establish the euro as a stable currency and to successfully formulate a 
monetary  policy  for  a  currency  area,  so  diverse  in  many  respects.  In  particular,  the  coexistence  of 
sovereign national fiscal policies and a supranational monetary policy was considered as a dangerous 
mixture.  The  single  approach  implied  by  the  single  monetary  policy  was  criticised  as  a  serious 
hindrance to further economic convergence. Some sceptics even took the view that a stability-oriented 
monetary policy was bound to fail in such a situation.  
Where do we stand today? The experiences over the past five and a half years make it clear that the 
euro has been firmly established as a stable and credible currency. The introduction of the euro both 
in book-entry form and in the form of banknotes and coins went extremely smoothly and was virtually 
free of technical problems. In January 1999 we established almost over night a unified money market 
which  worked  well  from  the  very  start.  New  payment  systems  for  large-value  transactions  were 
implemented successfully. Three years later the introduction of the euro notes and coins, which was a 
unique logistical undertaking, took place smoothly, without any major hitches. 
Equally  important,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  has  been  successful  in  keeping  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations under control, even in the face of exceptional uncertainty and a number of substantial, 
mainly upward, price shocks hitting the euro area economy. To a large extent, the ECB’s monetary 
policy has been operating in a context of exceptional economic, financial and geopolitical uncertainty, 
as was for instance the period following the traumatic terrorist attacks of 9/11 three years ago. It is my 
strong belief that the euro and our single monetary policy have considerably contributed to protecting 
our economies which otherwise could have been much more adversely affected. 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 1
With  a  view  to  anchoring  long  term  inflation  expectations  we  kept  a  steady  hand  and  never 
overreacted, which bears testimony to our capacity to weather difficulties. We succeeded in delivering 
the best yield curve available in the economies that were to form the euro area. This was in sharp 
contrast  to  the  view  of  some  observers  who  argued  that  the  quality  of  the  euro  as  a  new  currency 
would converge only towards a sort of arithmetic average of the legacy currencies, rather than to the 
benchmark set by the most credible national currencies that were merged into the euro. In fact, what 
happened is that the very low market interest rates that existed only in a small number of economies 
were immediately extended to the full body of the euro area. Long-term inflation expectations aligned 
with  the  low  levels  of  the  best  performing  economies  that  were  merged  into  the  euro.  As  a 
consequence, with nominal and real interest rates at historically low levels, Europe now enjoys much 
more favourable financial conditions than in the 1990s. 
This success is all the more remarkable given that the ECB started without a track record of its own. In 
this respect, we can say today that the ECB was borne credible. But why was that? In my view, there 
have  been  mainly  three,  closely  related,  factors  or  principles  at  work:  a  clear  and  unambiguous 
institutional setting, the ECB’s strong commitment to a high degree of transparency and its monetary 
policy strategy. 
Clear mandate to an independent central bank 
Let me start by making a few remarks on our mandate which is to deliver price stability. This mandate 
mirrors  the  mandates  of  a  very  large  majority  of  the  EU  national  central  banks  before  1999.  It  is 
enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, which was signed by all governments of the European Union and 
ratified by all national parliaments, thereby reflecting a clear preference of the citizens of Europe for a 
stable currency. Consequently, our mandate to maintain price stability is included in an eminent place, 
under  the  “Union’s  objectives”,  in  the  draft  Constitution  just  approved  by  the  European  Council  last 
June. This clear assignment of responsibility to monetary policy has been indispensable in ensuring a 
high degree of credibility for our policy from the very outset. 
But  why  is  price  stability  an  economically  desirable  objective?  Well,  price  stability  enhances  the 
efficiency  of  the  price  mechanism  in  allocating  resources.  It  is  associated,  in  particular,  with  lower 
uncertainty and risk premia in financial markets. This facilitates financial transactions and ultimately 
implies  lower  medium  and  long-term  interest  rates,  thereby  fostering  investment.  Stable  prices  also 
prevent an ad hoc redistribution of wealth and income as a result of unexpected price developments, 
which in turn contributes to social cohesion. As both historical experience and a full body of academic 
research illustrates, maintaining price stability is a necessary condition for monetary policy to foster 
sustainable growth and job creation. 
Independence 
To ensure that we can fulfil our mandate effectively, the Treaty assigns considerable independence to 
the Eurosystem which consists of the ECB and the 12 national central banks of the EU Member States 
which have adopted the euro. 
Today,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  among  central  bankers  and  economists  that  a  high  degree  of 
independence allows the central bank to conduct its monetary policy in a consistent manner, to fulfil its 
mandate  to  guarantee  price  stability  and  thereby  to  gain  and  maintain  a  high  degree  of  public 
confidence  in  its  policy.  Once  the  public  and  the  markets  are  convinced  of  the  central  bank’s 
commitment to preserve price stability, they will act - for example, in wage and price setting - in a way 
that facilitates the achievement of this goal. A virtuous cycle is created which is conducive to creating 
an environment of stable prices in which economic activity can flourish. At the same time central bank 
independence goes hand in hand with the need for transparency. 
Transparency 
In  fact,  today,  transparency  is  the  rule  of  the  game.  Striving  for  a  high  degree  of  transparency  in 
monetary  policy  is  widely  acknowledged  as  a  fundamental  principle  of  efficient  monetary  policy.  It 
includes the setting of clear benchmarks for accountability, which, in democratic societies, is the quid 
pro quo of independence. It also includes the announcement of unambiguous objectives to the public, 
a timely and comprehensive release of all pertinent information and the contents of monetary policy 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2004
deliberations.  In  this  sense,  transparency  does  not  only  serve  accountability,  but  also  helps  the 
markets to trace, to understand and broadly anticipate how monetary policy systematically reacts to 
observable  data  and  indicators,  thereby  enhancing  the  credibility,  predictability  and  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy. 
The ECB has played a leading role in this general trend towards greater transparency and openness. 
It  has  in  fact  set  standards  of  transparency  in  the  practice  of  monetary  policy.  Acknowledging  that 
transparency ultimately is about public understanding of what we do and why, we have from the very 
beginning practised an open and transparent communication with market participants and the public at 
large.  We  have  placed  strong  emphasis  on  transparency  of  the  decision-making  process,  on  the 
provision of timely and clear explanations of our economic diagnosis to the general public and market 
participants, and on accountability vis-à-vis the European Parliament. 
This was an extremely important element for a new institution such as the ECB which was lacking a 
track record. The first and most important step towards a high degree of transparency was the explicit 
announcement  of  our  monetary  policy  strategy  in  October  1998,  well  before  we  actually  started 
conducting the single monetary policy in the euro area. It clearly stated the basic concepts driving our 
monetary policy and thus helped to reduce the acute uncertainty faced by market participants at that 
time.  
As regards our communication policy, we have been from the very beginning very bold. In 1999 the 
state of the art of central banking communication was, with only very few exceptions, to display the 
diagnosis of the central bank with a delay of five or six weeks by publishing the minutes. As a rule, no 
timely and comprehensive explanation was given by issuing a detailed communiqué and by holding a 
press conference after the policy meeting. 
In fact, the ECB was among the first central banks to give a real time detailed analysis and diagnosis 
and to organize regular press conferences and, to date, it still remains the only one doing so shortly 
after  each  of  its  monetary  policy  meetings.  In  our  press  conferences,  we  give  a  full  and  detailed 
explanation  of  our  analysis  and  of  the  reasons  underlying  our  policy  decisions.  The  introductory 
statement opening our press conference consists of an extended summary of the deliberations of the 
Governing  Council  in  which  the  situation  is  assessed  and  our  diagnosis  expressed.  The  press 
conference furthermore allows a transparent interaction with participants and, through them, with the 
full body of observers, savers and investors. All this wealth of information is provided in “real time”. In 
addition, the ECB’s Monthly Bulletin provides the public with the full set of detailed assessments and 
data  underlying  our  policy  decisions  only  a  few  days  after  they  are  taken.  This  demonstrates  our 
strong will to be transparent. 
Our commitment for transparency has been actually more and more acknowledged. This is reflected in 
the evidence of the first five and a half years (supported by recent empirical work) which suggests that 
we have been highly predictable in our decisions - at least as much as other very influential central 
banks. This also demonstrates that our monetary policy is well understood by external observers. 
Monetary policy strategy 
Let me now come to the third factor behind the success of the euro and the ECB, which lies at the 
heart of our monetary policy concept: the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. To devise the best possible 
monetary policy for the new currency, we aimed to build on the wisdom and the wealth of experience 
with the conduct of monetary policy that had been accumulated in the preceding decades by central 
banks and academic institutions in industrialised countries, in particular those forming the euro area. 
The ECB’s definition of price stability  
As I have emphasised above, the basis for our strategy is our mandate from the Treaty to maintain 
price stability as the primary objective of monetary policy. In order to make this mandate operational, 
the Governing Council of the ECB in October 1998 sharpened the focus by defining price stability in 
quantitative terms as the year-on-year increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of below 
2%. This public announcement was absolutely instrumental in preserving continuity at the moment of 
transition  from  the  previous  national  currencies  to  the  euro:  the  euro  was  given  the  very  same 
definition of price stability as the one attributed to the most credible national currencies benefiting from 
the lowest market interest rates. We further clarified last year that, in the pursuit of price stability, the 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 3
ECB  aims  at  inflation  rates  below  but  close  to  2%,  thereby  preserving  a  sufficient  safety  margin 
against the risk of deflation. 
There  are  great  advantages  of  a  clear,  publicly  announced  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability: 
First, it is good for transparency, as everybody knows precisely what we are aiming at. Second, it is 
good for accountability, as the the public can judge whether and how we are achieving our own goals 
in  comparison  with  the  yardstick  we  made  public.  Finally,  it  is  good  for  medium  and  long-term 
credibility, as inflationary expectations can be more easily anchored. 
The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy  
Ever since the announcement of its strategy in 1998 the ECB has also made it clear that price stability 
is to be maintained over the medium term. The medium-term orientation of the ECB’s monetary policy 
strategy clarifies that the time horizon over which price stability has to be re-established needs to be 
tailored to the prevailing circumstances in the economy. By adapting the appropriate monetary policy 
horizon  to  the  prevailing  economic  circumstances,  the  ECB  makes  an  important  contribution  to 
avoiding unnecessary volatility in output and employment growth.  
Moreover,  our  focus  on  the  medium  term  embodies  a  commitment  to  avoid  overly  activist  and 
ambitious attempts to fine-tune inflation outcomes. This also contributes to ensuring that expectations 
remain  consistent  with  our  declared  policy  objective  over  the  medium  term  and  helps  the  ECB  to 
preserve its high degree of credibility,  
Comprehensiveness of the analytical framework  
We  are  all  constantly  bombarded  with  economic  news.  In  order  to  protect  itself  against  the  risk  of 
being  swamped  by  latest  indicators  and  to  be  able  to  deeply  understand  the  main  factors  driving 
economic, monetary and financial developments, the central bank, in its daily operations, has to filter 
an  enormous  amount  of  information.  It  routinely  seeks  to  define  the  state  of  the  economy  as  new 
circumstances  arise  and  evaluate  their  implications  for  the  risks  to  price  stability.  This  is  a  highly 
demanding  exercise,  because  economic  shocks  do  not  come  about  with  labels  and  are  difficult  to 
identify in real time. In addition, the economy is potentially always subject to several forms of structural 
change. As a consequence, it is clear for all central banks that no simple rules linking policy to one or 
two privileged indicators can substitute for an accurate examination of economic developments in all 
their complexities.  
From  the  beginning,  the  ECB  felt  the  need  to  adopt  a  conceptual  framework  that  could  help  it  sort 
through a wealth of potentially conflicting statistics, and organize the various pieces into a reliable road 
map  for  internal  analysis  and  communication  with  the  public.  This  required  the  adoption  of  a 
framework  that  concentrated  more  on  picturing  the  economy  as  a  large,  complex  and  permanently 
evolving system. 
As  a  consequence,  in  our  analysis  we  incorporate  all  possible  pertinent  information,  all  relevant 
forecasts  and  modelling  exercises,  including  private  sector  views.  We  are  not  dependent  for  our 
decisions on the mechanical result of an equation or a single set of equations or an algorithm. In a 
very  complex  world,  where  the  complexity  of  reality  cannot  be  adequately  captured  by  any  single 
model and where uncertainty is an important element to take into account in any decision, there is also 
need for judgement by the policymaking bodies in taking policy decisions, particularly in assessing the 
likelihood of certain hypothetical scenarios potentially materialising. 
Specifically,  we  opted  for  a  ‘binocular’  perspective  over  the  economy,  organised  in  an  “economic 
analysis”  and  a  “monetary  analysis”.  This  policy  framework,  which  is  well  known  as  the  ‘two  pillar 
approach’, conveys the notion of a diversified analysis. Our economic analysis focuses on real activity 
and financial conditions to study shorter-run deviations of inflation from its long-term trends. However, 
we also complement this economic analysis with a monetary analysis, which places great emphasis 
on the longer-term trends of inflation. 
Monetary analysis allows us to cross-check, from a medium to long-term perspective, the information 
stemming  from  the  economic  analysis.  It  constantly  reminds  the  central  bank  of  the  fundamental 
principle that, while responding to economic developments as they unfold, it must never lose sight of 
the fact that, over sufficiently extended horizons, the rate of money growth must be consistent with its 
price stability objective. This cross-check ensures that all relevant information is taken into account in 
our assessment of the risks to price stability and that monetary policy has a nominal anchor beyond - 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2004
and even well beyond - the conventional projection horizon. It also induces and reinforces a firm sense 
of direction, discouraging policy agitation.  
The need for structural reforms 
However, good monetary policy alone is not sufficient to make monetary union a success. We have to 
be  clear  and  realistic  about  what  monetary  policy  can  deliver  and,  even  more  importantly,  what  it 
cannot.  Monetary  policy,  even  though  well-designed  and  implemented,  cannot  solve  all  Europe’s 
economic problems. Appropriate structural reforms decisively implemented by national governments 
are vital for sustainable, non-inflationary growth of the euro area economy. 
To increase the growth potential in Europe, structural reforms are needed for the euro area. This fact 
has  long  been  recognised  by  EU  policymakers,  most  notably  by  the  European  Council  when  it 
adopted  the  Lisbon  Strategy  four  years  ago  to  foster  economic  growth  and  drive  job  creation. 
Ambitious, well-designed and decisively implemented structural reforms in labour, product and capital 
markets  will  enhance  the  shock  absorption  capacity  of  the  economy  and  the  effectiveness  of 
macroeconomic  policies.  In  this  respect,  a  convincing  commitment  to  decisively  implementing 
structural  reforms  and  a  credible  communication  of  their  economic  benefits  to  the  general  public  is 
crucial for raising consumer and investor confidence and, ultimately, growth and employment. 
The new and stimulating challenge of enlargement 
Let me now turn to the new and stimulating challenge of enlargement, which, in my view, offers a great 
opportunity for the European economy as a whole. 
The enlargement of the European Union by ten countries from Central and Eastern Europe and the 
Mediterranean  on  1st  May  this  year  was  without  any  doubt  a  major  milestone  in  the  history  of 
European integration. These countries together comprise a population of 75 million people which is 
about one fifth of that in the enlarged EU. While the economic weight of the new Member States is, at 
the current stage, less significant - their total GDP as a share of the existing members is about 5% (at 
market exchange rates, as compared with around 8% of the EU GDP when Spain and Portugal joined 
the EU in 1986), this will change in the future as their per-capita income levels are catching up with 
those in the rest of the EU. 
What are the economic implications of EU enlargement for the European economy? The debate about 
the effects of enlargement is often dominated by concerns, such as the risk of mass migration from the 
new Member States, involving increased pressure on labour markets and welfare systems of the other 
Member  States.  In  my  view,  the  benefits  that  enlargement  brings  are  often  neglected  in  such 
discussions.  I  am  convinced  that  EU  enlargement  is  a  win-win  game  for  both  the  old  and  the  new 
Member States, which will contribute positively to economic growth and welfare in the European Union 
as a whole. Let me explain why. 
First of all, let me recall that over the past decade, the preparations for enlargement have already had 
a significant impact on the European economy, especially in terms of trade and financial integration 
between  the  new  and  the  existing  EU  members.  Profound  structural  changes  in  the  new  Member 
States in the past 15 years alongside with sub stantial progress towards the opening of markets early 
in  the  transition  process  (mainly  through  the  implementation  of  the  so-called  Europe  Agreements) 
have led to a tremendous increase in trade with the new Member States. Since 1995, the share of the 
current  new  Member  States  in  the  EU-15  exports  and  imports  outside  the  EU  (so-called  extra-EU 
exports  and  imports)  has  increased  by  an  impressive  50%  to  more  than  13%  and  almost  12%, 
respectively.  Likewise,  impressive  progress  has  been  made  during  the  past  decade  in  terms  of 
financial  integration.  Substantial  inflows  of  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  constituting  by  far  the 
largest share of total cumulative net private capital inflows to the new Member States, stand out in this 
respect and, in fact, FDI has been a key driver of productivity growth and export dynamics. Especially 
after the Russian crisis at the end of the 1990s, FDI flows from the EU-15 to the new Member States 
increased spectacularly and, according to the most recent data, the share of the current new Member 
States in the EU-15’s total extra FDI outflows amounts to more than 12%. 
The  enlargement  of  the  Single  Market  is  beginning  to  strengthen  the  degree  of  competition  as  the 
accession of the new Member States increases the number of suppliers within the Single Market. In 
addition,  an  enlarged  Single  Market  is  enhancing  the  scope  for  economies  of  scale.  These  effects 
should  lower  prices  and  increase  productivity,  thereby  contributing  to  an  increase  in  the  potential 
BIS Review 53/2004 
 5
growth rate. Furthermore, the extension of the Single Market should increase the range and varieties 
of products available to producers and consumers. 
However, these clear benefits do not come automatically. To what extent and how quickly they can be 
reaped depends critically on whether macroeconomic conditions are stable and the extent to which 
structural reforms are implemented.  
From a central bank perspective, enlargement marks the beginning of a process which will lead to the 
integration of new Member States in the euro area, as these countries have no opt-out clause. This 
integration is taking place in a well-defined institutional framework and comprises several stages. The 
first  phase  for  the  new  Member  States  is  the  period  after  EU  accession  and  before  joining  the 
exchange  rate  mechanism  (ERM  II),  which  is  a  multilateral  arrangement  of  fixed  but  adjustable 
exchange rates with a central parity and a standard fluctuation band of ±15% against the euro. The 
second phase starts with entry into ERM II and stretches all the way to the introduction of the euro. As 
you may know, three new Member States already entered ERM II in late June, while this step is still 
ahead for the other new Member States.  
In this context, let me recall that there are no formal criteria to be met for entry into ERM II. However, 
successful and smooth participation requires that major policy adjustments - for example relating to 
fiscal  policy  and  price  liberalisation  -  are  undertaken  before  joining  the  mechanism.  Participation  in 
ERM II can be an important means to anchor exchange rate and inflation expectations and to promote 
discipline. It can help orient macroeconomic policies to stability, while at the same time allowing for a 
degree  of  flexibility,  if  needed,  through  the  wide  standard  fluctuation  band  and  the  possibility  of 
adjusting the central parity.  
Beyond membership in the ERM II lies the adoption of the euro. Joining the euro area is an irrevocable 
decision and thus a step of major importance requiring circumspection and careful preparation. All new 
Member States are expected to adopt the euro in due course once they are deemed to have fulfilled 
the conditions set by the Treaty. As in the past, each country will be assessed on its own merits and its 
particular situation, based on the principle of equal treatment. Therefore, no additional criteria for the 
adoption of the euro by the new Member States will be introduced, while at the same time there will be 
no relaxation of the criteria laid out in the Treaty, including the criteria concerning the sustainability of 
nominal convergence.  
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  conclude.  As  promised  six  years  ago,  our  new  currency  has  been  firmly  and  credibly 
established as a stable currency. We have ensured a successful transition to the euro by transferring 
to the new currency the same degree of credibility as the one of the most credible national currencies 
that  were  merged  into  the  euro.  Thanks  to  the  institutional  setting  of  the  Treaty  and  our  monetary 
policy  concept,  the  ECB  was  borne  credible  and  has  managed  to  maintain  its  high  degree  of 
credibility. Long-term interest rates have converged not to the average of pre-EMU levels but to those 
of  the  best  previous  benchmarks.  Yet,  there  is  no  reason  to  be  complacent.  Ahead  lie  further 
challenges, most stimulating among them, the enlargement of the euro area. 
I thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2004
