Birgir Isleifur Gunnarsson: Review of economic and financial development in 
Iceland in 2003 
Address by Mr Birgir Isleifur Gunnarsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, at the Bank's annual meeting, Reykjavík, 23 March 2004. 
 On behalf of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland I welcome you all to the Bank’s 
43rd annual meeting. The Bank’s financial statements for the year 2003 have been ratified today by the 
Prime Minister. The Bank’s annual report has also been published. It includes a survey of the Bank’s 
activities and performance, along with a detailed report on the Bank’s monetary policy and actions, the 
financial  system,  financial  stability  and  the  financial  markets,  and  the  main  features  of  economic 
developments in the course of last year. 
Price developments 
Three years have now passed since Iceland’s monetary policy framework was changed and a formal 
inflation target was adopted with a joint declaration by the Government and the Central Bank. Under 
this framework, the target of monetary policy is price stability. The Central Bank is obliged to aim at an 
average rate of inflation, measured as the annual 12-month increase in the CPI, of as close to 2½% as 
possible.  Since  monetary  policy  aims  at  maintaining  price  stability,  it  will  not  be  applied  to  achieve 
other  economic  targets  such  as  a  balanced  current  account  or  a  high  level  of  employment,  except 
insofar as these are compatible with the Bank’s inflation target. 
Prices  were  stable  in  2003.  Over  the  year,  i.e.  from  the  beginning  of  January  2003  to  the 
corresponding  period  in  2004,  inflation  measured  2.4%.  This  is  just  below  the  target.  Excluding 
changes  in  the  price  of  public  services,  the  rate  of  inflation  was  somewhat  lower.  Until  the  closing 
months of 2003, goods prices were somewhat lower than the previous year, and the increase in prices 
of  services  slowed  down  significantly.  Substantial  increases  were  seen  in  housing  prices,  however, 
and the housing component of the consumer price index rose by much more than the CPI as a whole. 
Housing  inflation  began  to  inch  downwards  in  the  course  of  the  year  and  this  development  has 
continued  so  far  this  year.  The  Central  Bank  can  thus  feel  satisfied  with  the  rate  of  inflation  in  the 
recent  term,  and  bearing  in  mind  the  long  lag  in  the  transmission  mechanism,  price  developments 
indicate that monetary policy over the preceding period has had the intended effect. 
The  Central  Bank  lowered  its  policy  interest  rate  to  5.3%  in  the  beginning  of  February  2003.  Its 
inflation forecasts did not warrant any further changes in the policy rate by the Bank. The policy rate 
was broadly neutral during the year, i.e. it neither stimulated nor dampened demand. In real terms the 
policy rate was therefore not far from the estimated equilibrium real interest rate during the year. 
Output growth 
Iceland  experienced  robust  output  growth  from  1996  until  2002,  when  it  was  marginally  negative. 
Output growth recovered last year. Latest estimates from Statistics Iceland put the figure at 4%, which 
is somewhat higher than the Central Bank assumed in its updated macroeconomic forecast published 
earlier this month. Statistical evaluation of output growth in 2003 could still change when estimates are 
revised,  which  illustrates  the  uncertainty  that  surrounds  recent  and  current  economic  developments 
and  compounds  the  uncertainty  about  the  future  that  monetary  policy  formulation  always  faces.  Be 
that  as  it  may,  output  growth  was  clearly  robust  and  is  explained  above  all  by  a  rapid  increase  in 
national expenditure after two years of contraction. Private consumption growth also picked up and 
investment  soared  after  a  sharp  recession,  primarily  due  to  the  impact  of  the  hydropower  and 
aluminium projects that were launched during the year, along with investment in housing. 
An  interesting  comparison  can  be  made  between  output  growth  in  Iceland  and  other  countries, 
especially the euro area which is often used as a frame of reference. Roughly speaking, from 1996 to 
2001 growth in Iceland was two to three times higher than in the euro area. In 2002 the euro area 
performed  better,  but  in  2003  growth  was  estimated  at  0.8%  in  the  euro  area  while  it  was  4%  in 
Iceland.  The  difference  is  even  more  pronounced  between  Iceland  and  the  largest  euro  countries, 
Germany,  France  and  Italy,  whose  economies  have  been  sluggish  for  several  years.  This  large 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 1
difference in growth explains much of the interest-rate differential that has prevailed between Iceland 
and that area. In part the policy stance of the European Central Bank has to the extent possible been 
guided by efforts to drive growth with low interest rates, while the Central Bank of Iceland’s objective 
has by and large been to contain economic overheating. 
The current account deficit and the labour market 
Iceland’s  external  balance  has  been  volatile  in  recent  years.  A  current  account  deficit  equivalent  to 
10%  of  GDP  in  2000  was  virtually  eliminated  within  two  years,  but  widened  sharply  again  in  2003. 
After reasonable balance in the first quarter and a sizeable merchandise account surplus, the deficit in 
the second and third quarters was the largest since the beginning of 2001. For the year as a whole, 
the  current  account  deficit  was  equivalent  to  5½%  of  GDP.  A  recession  in  exports  was  a  strong 
contributing factor, along with rising imports driven by private consumption, but much of the widening 
current account deficit may be ascribed to imports of investment goods for a hydropower project. In 
this respect the deficit is benign in origin, although the pace of increase so early on in the upswing is a 
cause of some concern. 
As is commonly the case at the onset of a growth episode, the increase in demand for labour was 
fairly  slow  during  the  year.  The  unemployment  rate  came  down  more  slowly  than  had  widely  been 
expected  given  the  surge  in  vacancies  registered  with  employment  agencies.  Seasonally  adjusted 
unemployment began to decline slowly from the autumn onwards. On the other hand, the number of 
vacancies  doubled  last  year  and  demand  for  foreign  labour  picked  up  as  the  year  wore  on.  In 
February 2004, seasonally adjusted unemployment was 2.9% and had gone down by 0.1% per month 
since September 2003. Productivity growth appears to have been exceptionally high last year. As in 
recent years, domestic wage rises outstripped those among Iceland’s main trading partner countries. 
Measured by the wage index, domestic wages rose by 5½% in 2003, which represents 3½% growth in 
real terms. 
Exchange rate developments and foreign reserves 
Under the new monetary framework, Iceland abandoned a fixed exchange rate regime and the króna 
was  floated  in  the  market.  Every  so  often  the  argument  is  put  forward  that  the  Central  Bank  can 
determine the exchange rate, and some people criticise it if the exchange rate develops along different 
lines from what they had expected. Such debate was far less prominent in 2003 than the year before, 
which definitely indicates a growing awareness that the Central Bank cannot exert a decisive impact 
on the exchange rate of the króna. For the first part of the year the króna strengthened, probably as 
the  result  of  expectations  of  currency  inflows  in  connection  with  investments  in  hydropower  and 
aluminium. Around the middle of the year the króna depreciated again. Uncertainty about revenues 
from the Keflavík NATO base and about the Norðurál aluminium smelter expansion, and perhaps to 
some  extent  stepped-up  Central  Bank  currency  purchases,  are  probable  explanations.  Around  the 
same  time,  currency  inflows  diminished  in  connection  with  credit  movements.  The  króna  began  to 
appreciate again in September, around the time of reports that the Norðurál expansion looked more 
likely  to  go  ahead  and  less  uncertainty  about  operation  of  the  NATO  base.  Currency  inflows  and 
outflows  were  in  fairly  good  balance  during  the  last  months  of  2003  and  the  exchange  rate  settled 
down. Towards the end of the year the króna began strengthening again, until mid-January. The main 
explanation for this appreciation is probably inflows of borrowed funds in connection with a series of 
business mergers and takeovers. 
Changes  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  need  to  be  examined  in  the  context  of  the  slide  of  the 
US dollar against the euro. One consequence has been that the exchange rate of the króna against 
the euro is roughly the same now as it was two years ago, while the dollar has weakened against the 
króna by one-third over the same period.  
By law, one of the tasks of the Central Bank of Iceland is to maintain foreign exchange reserves in 
accordance with its objectives and role. At the end of 2001 the foreign reserves were largely sustained 
with  foreign  borrowing  by  the  Central  Bank,  which  left  the  external  position  unacceptably  low  on  a 
long-term  view.  The  reason  was  that  under  the  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  the  Central  Bank 
frequently  intervened  in  the  FX  market  in  2000  and  2001  by  selling  foreign  currency  in  an  effort  to 
stem the slide of the króna. In 2002 the Central Bank began building up its foreign reserves again, 
purchasing  foreign  currency  for  the  equivalent  of  4.5  b.kr.  Last  year  the  Bank  stepped  up  these 
purchases to the equivalent of 43.2 b.kr. Nonetheless, the Bank’s purchases only amounted to 3.6% 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2004
of total turnover in the FX market during the year. By mid-2003 the Central Bank had repaid its foreign 
short-term borrowing in full and at the end of the year the foreign reserves amounted to more than 
58 b.kr. This year the Bank has continued to purchase currency in the market, but on a smaller scale 
than in 2003. It  thereby aims to strengthen its foreign reserves even more this year. Ample foreign 
reserves are an obvious prudential measure and one of the factors that international ratings agencies 
consider when evaluating the creditworthiness of Iceland’s sovereign and corporate debt. However, a 
high level of reserves does leave the Central Bank’s operations much more exposed to changes in the 
exchange  rate,  as  reflected  in  the  minor  operating  loss  reported  for  last  year, which was described 
earlier at this meeting. 
Financial stability 
The Central Bank is obliged by law to promote price stability and also an efficient and safe financial 
system, including payment systems domestically and with foreign countries. In most countries these 
are  he  main  objectives  of  central  banks.  This  role  is  important  because  shocks  to  the  banking  and 
financial system are closely linked to changes in the value of financial assets, interest rates and the 
exchange rate. The Central Bank’s monetary policy  measures and information systems enable it to 
evaluate the risk of financial shocks and warn against them.  
The Central Bank published two reports on financial stability in Monetary Bulletin last year, in May and 
November.  The  broad  finding  was  that  the  position  of  the  financial  system  strengthened  during  the 
year, and a new report published last week indicates that the position of major financial companies 
and  markets  is  relatively  firm.  Macroeconomic  conditions  are  favourable  on  the  whole.  The  main 
concerns are the expansion in largely foreign-financed lending, and high asset prices. There has been 
a  noteworthy  flurry  of  leveraged  buyouts  of  listed  and  unlisted  companies,  which  provide  one 
explanation  for  the  surge  in  lending  by  banks.  These  transactions  have  driven  up  equity  prices  of 
several listed companies, including financial companies, prompting the question of what the impact will 
be should share prices head back down. Housing prices in real terms have stopped climbing in the 
Greater Reykjavík Area, for the time being at least, but a substantial drop is unlikely in the near future. 
Asset  price  developments  are  an  important  factor  for  financial  stability  assessments  and  may  also 
influence monetary developments, especially in an economic climate such as the present. A decline in 
equity and housing prices could serve to counter potential overheating of the economy in the next few 
years. The main shock to financial stability and monetary policy would be if asset prices were to drop 
sharply  at  the  same  time  as  the  growth  of  real  disposable  income  slows  down  at  the  end  of  the 
aluminium-related investment boom. 
Lending developments 
As  I  mentioned  before,  lending  growth  is  a  cause  for  concern,  both  for  financial  stability  and  the 
Central Bank’s inflation target. Domestic lending grew at a brisk pace in 2003 and this development 
appears to be heading in the same direction this year. Total domestic lending by deposit money banks 
over  the  twelve  months  to  the  end  of  January  increased  by  about  23%,  which  is  above  a  rate 
consistent  with  longterm  price  stability  and  economic  stability.  The  period  1998  to  2001  provides  a 
recent example of the consequences of heavy credit growth. Both arrears and loan losses rose in the 
wake  of  the  credit  boom,  leading  to  a  temporary  tightening  of  the  commercial  banks’  and  savings 
banks’ foreign funding. While the recession and the ensuing strain on the financial system are now 
over, it can be partly ascribed to relatively favourable economic conditions and the consequently sharp 
turnaround in the exchange rate of the króna that financial companies only sustained minor setbacks. 
Proportionally, the highest growth in deposit money banks’ lending has been to foreign borrowers, but 
foreign currency-denominated lending to domestic entities has also surged, by more than 45% over 
the past 12 months. By no means all this foreign currencydenominated credit has been provided to 
domestic  businesses  and  households  that  have  foreign  currency  income  or  other  hedges  against 
exchange risk. This poses a particular risk for borrowers and lenders alike. 
Foreign debt of deposit money banks at the end of January 2004 had risen year-on-year by almost 
300 b.kr.,  or  two-thirds.  There  are  probably  a  number  of  explanations  for  this  strong  demand  for 
foreign borrowing. Firstly, it is connected with changes in Icelandic business structures and ownership. 
Following the privatisation of state banks, investors have been actively involved in dissolving the old 
links  in  business  ownership  and  forging  new  ones.  Foreign  funding,  mediated  by  the  banks,  has 
played  a  key  role  in  these  events.  Secondly,  conditions  in  international  finance  markets  have  been 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 3
favourable  for  such  reshuffling.  Foreign  short-term  interest  rates  are  close  to  a  historical  low  and 
foreign  long-term  interest  rates  are  still  very  low,  although  they  have  risen  above  the  nadir  they 
reached  around  the  middle  of  last  year.  Thirdly,  Iceland  enjoys  economic  stability  and  growth 
prospects are favourable for the next few years. 
In December last year the Central Bank sent a letter to chief executives of the commercial banks and 
largest savings bank expressing concern about the rapid increase in lending and high levels of foreign 
short-term financing. As is generally the case people responded in different ways, and some pointed 
the finger elsewhere. An encouraging aspect of subsequent developments, however, is that the banks 
have  begun  to  extend  the  maturities  of  their  foreign  borrowing,  so  that  the  gap  between  their 
short-term and long-term liabilities has narrowed in recent weeks. This is crucial, because it may be 
imprudent to place excessive faith in the availability of shortterm funding. In its letter, the Central Bank 
echoed cautionary remarks from the agencies that award credit ratings to the Republic of Iceland and 
other  Icelandic  borrowers  in  foreign  markets.  Ratings  agencies  have  stated  that  their  chief  concern 
and the main constraint on upgrading Icelandic ratings - or even a potential reason for downgrading 
them  -  is  the  high  external  debt  position  of  the  economy.  Since  the  Treasury  has  been  retiring  its 
foreign  debt  over  the  past  few  years,  the  ratings  agencies’  comments  are  addressed  elsewhere,  in 
particular to the banks. Cautionary remarks based on such arguments should of course be heeded by 
all  the  banks  in  Iceland  that  have  been  borrowing  abroad  recently.  It  is  in  everyone’s  interest  to 
safeguard Iceland’s credit ratings and, where possible, strengthen them. 
Payment and settlement systems 
At the Central Bank’s annual meetings in recent years I have outlined the work it has undertaken in 
development of payment and settlement systems. Two types of payment system are in operation in 
Iceland, both of them settlement systems, i.e. the Central Bank’s real-time gross settlement system 
and the netting system operated by Fjölgreiðslumiðlun hf. Settlements of securities transactions are 
processed  by  the  former  system.  Participants  are  the  commercial  banks,  savings  banks  and 
Central Bank. The Icelandic Banks’ Data Centre provides software services for both systems and the 
Central  Bank  acts  as  a  settlement  provider.  These  systems  are  described  in  detail  in  the  Central 
Bank’s annual report. 
Since  2001,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  working  in  close  collaboration  with  Fjölgreiðslumiðlun,  the 
Icelandic Banks’ Data Centre and credit institutions on development of payment systems with the aim 
of bringing them into compliance with the BIS Ten Core Principles for Systemically Important Payment 
Systems. This work has focused on clarifying the qualifications and responsibility of management and 
netting  system  participants.  Settlement  processes  have  been  reviewed  with  respect  to  finality  of 
payments  and  timing  of  settlements.  Risk  management  has  been  strengthened  by  defining  and 
monitoring  risks,  making  debt  positions  visible,  restricting  debt  positions  and  requiring  collateral  for 
settlements. Arrangements  for  oversight,  communication  of  information and  contingency plans  have 
also been reviewed. 
An important landmark in the development of these systems was reached last year when two sets of 
rules  were  adopted,  on  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland’s  real-time  gross  settlement  system  and  on 
activities of netting systems. At the end of the year the systems were designated and notified to the 
EFTA Surveillance Authority. The real-time gross settlement system and netting system have thereby 
been recognised as legitimate payment systems in Iceland and across the European Economic Area. 
Also  in  2003,  the  Central  Bank  and  FME  [Financial  Supervisory  Authority]  signed  a  cooperation 
agreement on oversight and prudential supervision of payment and settlement systems. I would like to 
express my special thanks for the good cooperation with all parties involved on these important issues. 
Even  though  important  milestones  have  been  attained,  sound  operation  of  payment  systems  will 
remain an important and extensive task. 
A multicurrency country? 
Every  so  often  the  question  has  cropped  up  of  whether  Iceland  is  destined  to  become  what  has 
sometimes  been  called  a  multicurrency  country.  This  apparently  refers  to  when  a  large  share  of 
business  transactions  are  conducted  in  more  than  one  currency  and  liabilities  of  various  kinds  are 
mostly  denominated 
include 
performance-related wages in the fisheries sector, which represent indirect indexation of wages to the 
exchange  rate;  an  increasing  trend  for  corporate  accounting  to  be  conducted  in  foreign  currencies; 
that  have  been  cited 
foreign  currencies. 
Indications 
in 
4 
 BIS Review 18/2004
the  króna 
and  the  fact  that  recently  even  households  have  been  offered  foreign  currency-denominated  loans. 
Other  factors  mentioned  have  been  greater  globalisation,  the  growing  importance  of  external  trade, 
and of foreign investment. 
There is a tendency to paint a rather exaggerated picture of Iceland’s dependence on global trade. 
Admittedly, foreign trade has been on the increase, but is still quite small relative to the size of the 
economy. Direct foreign investment is proportionally much lower than in most advanced economies, 
while  the  scope  of  foreign  indirect  investment  is  similar  to  that  in  neighbouring  countries.  Foreign 
currency deposits are an established feature of the banking system in Iceland. They are well within the 
reference limits that the IMF, for example, applies in classifying countries according to whether the use 
of  foreign  currencies  is  important  for  them  or  not.  Accounting  in  foreign  currencies  is  confined  to  a 
handful  of  companies  with  multinational  operations  and  generally  speaking 
is 
overwhelmingly  predominant.  However,  it  is  true  that  among  the  advanced  economies,  Iceland  has 
one of the highest levels of external debt and exchangerate sensitivity. 
Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  there  is  hardly  any  question  about  the  solid  position  of  the  króna  in  the 
Icelandic economy. Nothing gives us any reason to expect that to change. As in other countries that 
earn considerable revenues from tourism, foreign currencies are always used to some extent, but this 
is probably a much more common practice in countries with long borders with other currency areas, 
such as Canada or Switzerland. It seems highly unlikely that the króna’s position as a trading currency 
would be so severely undermined that other currencies would be preferred in domestic transactions. 
Continual  movements  in  the  exchange  rate  of  the  króna  would  create  a  broad  risk  in  using  other 
currencies, unless all liabilities - and that includes wage settlements - were to be converted into the 
same  foreign  currency  at  virtually  the  same  time.  Because  it  is  more  economical  for  business 
transactions and liabilities to be denominated as far as possible in the same currency, a fundamental 
change in the position of the króna is unlikely, except directly by an act of government, or indirectly in 
the highly improbable event that economic policies were to collapse and erode all confidence in the 
króna,  with  accompanying  hyperinflation,  as  has  happened  in  some  Latin  American  countries  that 
have adopted the dollar or others that have been forced to adopt another currency. 
It has sometimes been claimed that the heavy level of external debt means that interest rate decisions 
by  the  European Central Bank possibly  have  even more  impact in  Iceland  than  domestic monetary 
policy.  There  is  nothing  new  about  the  impact  of  foreign  interest  rate  developments  being  felt  in 
Iceland - and the same applies to other countries as well - although the scale of Iceland’s foreign debt 
leaves its economy more susceptible to foreign interest rate movements. It is worth remembering that 
while foreign interest rate developments mostly affect Iceland’s national income, economic cycle and 
current  account  balance,  they  can  never  have  a  crucial  impact  on  the  domestic  rate  of  inflation.  A 
heavy  weight  of  foreign  currency-denominated  borrowing  in  domestic  debt  may  complicate  the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy. In the long run, however, only domestic monetary policy 
measures can determine a deteriorating value of the domestic currency vis-à-vis goods and services - 
or to put it plainly, inflation. 
Prospects 
Finally,  I  shall  turn  to  economic  and  monetary  prospects.  Last week  the Central  Bank  published  its 
quarterly Monetary Bulletin, which included an updated macroeconomic and inflation forecast. This is 
not  a  comprehensive  new  forecast,  which  henceforth  is  scheduled  to  be  published  twice  a  year,  in 
June and December. Inflation is now forecast to remain below the target until the second half of 2005. 
Around that time it can be expected to rise above the target, on the assumption that the exchange rate 
and the Central Bank’s policy interest rate remain unchanged. In assessing price developments and 
the inflation outlook it is important to bear in mind that the recent strength of the króna has probably 
been  unsustainable  in  the  long  run.  Recent  price  developments  and  forecasts  based  on  the 
assumption  that  the  króna  will  remain  strong  may  therefore  underestimate  latent  inflationary 
pressures. Capital inflows over the next two years may bolster the króna, but this cannot be taken for 
granted given that conditions could change. 
A  sizeable  increase  in  productivity  last  year  appears  to  have  contributed  to  the  recent  low  rate  of 
inflation, despite higher output growth in 2003 than forecast in November. If productivity continues to 
grow  at  an  unusually  brisk  pace,  it  will  ease  inflationary  pressures  in  the  near  term.  The  recently 
concluded wage settlements, which broadly speaking seem copatible with the inflation target, include 
provisions that could induce greater efficiency in business operations and boost productivity. Another 
recent factor that has served to ease inflationary pressures is that rapid growth in national expenditure 
BIS Review 18/2004 
 5
has  primarily  been  channelled  into  increased  imports.  It  has  therefore  exerted  less  pressure  on 
domestic factors of production than otherwise, but is reflected in a widening current account deficit, as 
I have discussed. In the long run, an excessive current account deficit could undermine the exchange 
rate and fuel inflation, although this does not appear to be much of a threat within the horizon of the 
latest forecast. 
The Bank’s macroeconomic forecast now assumes that the Norðurál aluminium smelter expansion will 
go ahead, which raises projected output growth to 3½% in 2004 and 4½% in 2005. The appreciation 
of the króna, strong increase in productivity in 2003 and large share of foreign labour employed on 
hydropower and aluminium projects will result in less pressure on domestic factors of production and 
prices than would otherwise be the case. 
As I mentioned earlier, it is likely that some of the appreciation of the króna in the first half of last year 
was connected with planned investments in aluminium and hydropower projects. Had these plans not 
materialised, it is almost certain that the Central Bank’s policy rate would be lower today. Due to the 
strengthening  of  the  króna  in  2003  and  the  proposed  tightening  of  the  fiscal  stance  implied  by  the 
budget for this year, the Central Bank’s policy interest rate has remained unchanged since February 
last year. The Central Bank does not consider that there are grounds for raising the policy rate yet, but 
all things being equal the inflation forecast calls for a higher policy rate in the coming months, even 
though the inflation outlook is favourable until some time next year. Because monetary policy needs to 
be forward-looking, this could well mean that the Central Bank will raise its interest rate even though 
inflation is still below the target. Largescale investments over the next few years mean that monetary 
decisions need to take into account a longer horizon than usual. Considerations of financial stability 
call for the same approach.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
Inflation forecasts play a key role in the Central Bank’s monetary policy decisions. Looking into the 
future  is  always  difficult,  but  I  think  that  the  Central  Bank  can  feel  satisfied  with  how  accurate  its 
inflation forecasts have turned out to be. 
I would like to conclude by thanking the Office of the Prime Minister and other government authorities 
for their pleasant cooperation. I also thank the financial institutions for their good collaboration. Last 
but not least, I would like to thank the employees of the Central Bank for their fine work, without which 
the Bank could not have achieved such impressive results. 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2004
