Y V Reddy: Financial stability - Indian experience 
Speech  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  Zurich  University,  Zurich, 
Switzerland, 27June 2004. 
 I am thankful to the BIS for inviting me to share some thoughts on financial stability issues in the Panel 
of  four  Governors.  It  is  an  honour  to  address  the  galaxy  of  central  bankers  assembled  here  in 
connection with the annual meetings of the BIS. My observations are based on the Indian experience 
and would focus on rebalancing of efficiency and stability in the context of financial sector reforms in 
India. 
In India, we have been moving from a government-dominated financial system to a market oriented 
one.  In  the  past,  the  Government  domination  was,  in  a  sense,  imparting  too much stability  through 
rigidity and too little efficiency. In this context, enhancing efficiency while at the same time, avoiding 
instability in the system, has been the challenge for the regulators in India.  
The concept of financial stability needs to be understood contextually also. For us in India, it means: 
(a)  ensuring  uninterrupted  financial  transactions;  (b)  maintenance  of  a  level  of  confidence  in  the 
financial  system  amongst  all  the  participants  and  stakeholders;  and  (c)  absence  of  excess  volatility 
that unduly and adversely affects real economic activity. Such financial stability has to be particularly 
ensured  when  the  financial  system  is  undergoing  structural  changes  to  promote  efficiency.  The 
structural changes relate to ownership, regulation and competition, both, domestic as well as external 
competition.  Integration  of  financial  markets  is  another  dimension  of  the  process:  the  integration  of 
domestic financial markets is one aspect while global financial integration is another though a related 
aspect.  
While global financial integration does have beneficial impact, the volatility in capital flows can cause 
instability, specially if a country has not reached the “threshold”, as very ably explained by Professor 
Kenneth  Rogoff  of  Harvard  University.  Many  emerging  market  economies  do  not  seem  to  have 
adequate  self-correcting  market  mechanisms  in  respect  of  such  cross-border  capital  flows.  In  such 
cases, the capital flows at critical times reflect more of changes in the risk appetite of the international 
investors than a country’s fundamentals. Hence, special defences need to be put in place for ensuring 
financial stability in the case of countries like India that are faced with the prospect of volatile capital 
flows.  The  issues  relating  to  cross-border  supervision  of  financial  intermediaries  in  the  context  of 
greater capital flows are just emerging and these need to be addressed.  
In  the  context  of  ongoing  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  in  India,  the  regulatory  regime  has  also 
undergone  certain  fundamental  changes.  New  regulators  like  those  for  the  insurance  sector  and 
capital markets have been created. The focus of regulation has also changed. The issues of regulatory 
co-ordination  do  arise  often.  However,  the  changes  in  the  regulatory  regime,  meant  for  greater 
efficiency, may, on occasion, contain the risk of being a source of instability.  
This leads us to the role of regulators in developing market-oriented financial system while maintaining 
the  independence  and  credibility  of  the  regulator.  In  India,  this  process  involved  development  of 
technological and institutional infrastructure by the Reserve Bank of India, changing the interface with 
the  market  participants  through  consultations  and  communication  -  which  was  critical  for  mutual 
benefit. The relationship with the Government - as the majority owner of the financial entities, as the 
ultimate risk-bearer in the system and as the sovereign in law making - is also changing in the new 
environment.  
In a way, in the development of a market-oriented financial system, the Reserve Bank of India is, what 
I may call, a “nurturing” regulator as well as an “independent” regulator. In the relationship with the 
government, the Reserve Bank of India emphasises: (a) autonomy in operations; (b) harmony with the 
government policies, specially due to the continuing dense linkage between fiscal and financial sectors 
in India; and (c) co-ordination with the government in bringing about structural changes, particularly in 
respect of public ownership and legislative framework.  
In this background, would a single regulator, other than the central bank help? Will separating banking 
supervision from the central bank be of help? I would like to quote here Professor Charles Goodhart 
(2000): “I doubt whether the pressures to establish a unified supervisory agency are quite as strong in 
most developing countries.” He adds: “For such reasons, I do not believe that the case for separation, 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
which has become stronger in the developed countries, should be transposed also to the developing 
countries.” I hope the views of Professor Goodhart in this regard, since he made the above comments 
at  a  memorial  lecture  in  RBI,  have  not  changed  over  the  past  three-four  years.  As  a  pragmatic 
measure,  we  have  banking  supervision  under  an  independent  Board  for  Financial  Supervision  (but 
within the RBI) while some sort of co-ordination is sought to be achieved through a High Level Co-
ordination  Committee  on  Financial  and  Capital Markets,  consisting  of  financial  regulators  and  the 
Ministry of Finance, but presided over by the Governor, RBI.  
In conclusion, I would like to highlight three aspects of financial stability. First, we keep in mind our 
vulnerability  to  real  sector  shocks  which  would  affect  financial  stability.  The  major  sources  of  such 
shocks in India are very sharp rise in oil prices and extraordinary monsoon failures. Second, we have 
political system stability in India though there have been coalition governments at the federal level. We 
are  aware  that  most  of  the  currency  crises  in  developing  countries  occurred  around  the  times  of 
political elections, particularly in countries with the presidential form of government. Our experience in 
India is that political cycles have had a relatively muted impact on financial stability. In any case, socio-
political preference for greater financial stability needs to be appreciated and the weight accorded to 
financial  stability  in  India  appears  to  be  higher  than  in  some  other  countries.  Third,  developing 
countries differ so much in size, nature and structure of the economy, level of development and socio-
political conditions that my observations here are more of random thoughts to be mulled over rather 
than structured issues in respect of financial stability in developing countries.  
Thank you.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
