Seung Park: Swiftly changing economic environment in Korea 
Speech  by  Dr  Seung  Park,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Asia  Society,  New  York, 
3 June 2004. 
 Introduction 
Mr. President, 
Distinguished members of the Asia Society, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am delighted to stand before you here today as the guest of the Asia Society. It is a great privilege to 
have this opportunity to speak to so many leading members of New York’s business community, and a 
pleasure  to  see  your  great  interest  in  the  Korean  economy. Let  me  at  this  point  voice  my  deep 
gratitude to the President of the Asia Society, Nicholas Platt, and to all of those involved for inviting me 
to address you today. 
In the almost fifty years since it was founded in 1956, the Asia Society has played an invaluable role in 
building  up  the  cooperation  and  furthering  the  flow  of  ideas,  people  and  investment  between  the 
countries  of  Asia  and  the  United  States. Indeed,  it  has  contributed  to  no  small  degree  to  the 
astonishing economic development of Asia today. 
Members of the Asia Society, 
I salute your achievements and congratulate you wholeheartedly upon the success of the Fourteenth 
Asian Corporate Conference, held recently in Seoul. 
I would like to speak to you today about the swiftly changing economic environment that Korea is now 
confronting and about our responses to it. My focus will be on the hollowing-out of manufacturing. 
The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing 
The  hollowing-out  of  Korea’s  manufacturing  sector,  as  many  of  you  will  be  quite  aware,  is  now 
proceeding at a very fast pace. 
Korean companies are reluctant to make domestic investments in manufacturing. In contrast, they are 
undertaking  many  new  investment  projects  abroad  and  are  increasingly  relocating  domestic 
production lines overseas. Last year, facilities investment in Korea shrank by 1.5% while, in striking 
contrast, Korean direct investment in China rose by more than 40%. A recent survey found that more 
than 30% of Korean small and medium-sized enterprises, SMEs, were either actively planning direct 
investment projects abroad or had a preference for investing overseas. In the case of export-oriented 
firms,  this  figure rose  to more  than  50%.  More  than  one  million  jobs  have been created  by  the  ten 
thousand or so Korean enterprises that have set up businesses in China. At the same time, the rate of 
unemployment among people in their twenties in Korea has reached a high level of above 7%. 
Inward direct investment by foreign companies, meanwhile, has also fallen off. Flows of foreign direct 
investment into the Korean manufacturing sector stood at 2.9 billion dollars in 2001, but this figure has 
continued to shrink since then, reaching 2.3 billion dollars in 2002 and just 1.7 billion dollars last year. 
Owing to this reluctance to invest in the country on the part of both home and foreign businesses, we 
are witnessing the polarization of Korean industry and so-called jobless growth. Businesses involved 
in the high-tech sector, exporters and large companies are now generally showing fast rates of growth. 
On the other hand, companies in old technology sectors and SMEs dependent on domestic demand 
are becoming  less  and  less competitive.  What  this means  is  that,  with  the  contraction  of  the  labor-
intensive industries, in which SMEs predominate,  there are fewer new job opportunities opening up 
even though GDP may be growing. 
What  has  brought  about  this  state  of  affairs  is  the  tectonic  drift  taking  place  in  the  locus  of  global 
manufacturing  activity.  You  will  all,  I  think,  be  familiar  with  how  the  dynamic  core  of  global 
manufacturing moved in the 1960s from the United States to Japan, and in the 1980s from Japan to 
the  newly  industrializing  economies  including  Korea.  Since  the  early  1990s,  it  has  been  shifting  to 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 1
China and, as a part of this process, Korea is experiencing the hollowing-out of its own manufacturing 
sector. 
Earlier hollowing-out of U.S. and Japanese manufacturing 
Each of these shifts in the locus of world manufacturing production, that is to say these processes of 
the hollowing-out of previous manufacturing bases, has had its own distinct characteristics. Even so, 
there has been a common thread running through them all, which is that their root causes have lain in 
losses of competitiveness due to high costs and low efficiency. U.S. wage levels back in the 1960s 
were four times higher than Japan’s. In contrast, the rate of manufacturing productivity increase in the 
U.S.  was  less  than  one  fifth  that  in  Japan.  Later,  as  wages,  house  prices,  and  land  prices  were 
continually rising in Japan from the early 1980’s, while manufacturing productivity growth was only one 
half that of Korea’s, Japan also began to experience fade-out in its manufacturing. 
However,  I  should  point  out  that  when  the  process  of  hollowing-out  was  underway  in  the  U.S.  and 
Japan, the scales of the economies to which the torches were being passed were relatively small. To 
be exact, the Japanese economy was only one fifth the size of the U.S. economy in the 1960s, and the 
scale  of  the  Korean  economy  was  just  one  fifteenth  that  of  Japan  in  the  1980s.  The  new 
manufacturing centers in these cases, therefore, had relatively small capacities for absorption. What is 
more,  protectionism  was  a  part  of  the  predominant  economic  framework  in  those  days.  Various 
institutional devices could, therefore, be drawn upon to protect a country’s industries. 
This meant that the hollowing-out of manufacturing in the U.S. and Japan took place only gradually, 
leaving companies and government with sufficient time to respond appropriately. In the U.S., notably, 
industries  faced  with  declining  competitiveness  did  not  shift  their  production  facilities  offshore  but 
instead  underwent  rational  processes  of  adjustment  involving  mergers  and  acquisitions,  shifts  of 
specialization and closures. To my mind, deindustrialization or a shift to a focus on services, better 
describes this process in the U.S. than to refer to it as a “hollowing-out of manufacturing”. In the 1980s 
in Japan, similarly, efforts aimed at business rationalization went hand in hand with the simultaneous 
pursuit  of  product  quality  enhancement,  the  development  of  cutting-edge  technology  and  the 
upgrading of industrial structure. 
In  this  respect,  the  hollowing-out  of  manufacturing  at  first  posed  challenges  to  both  the  U.S.  and 
Japan, but eventually served as opportunities for these countries to strengthen their economic order 
and upgrade their industrial structures. 
Differences between the current hollowing-out of Korea and two previous cases 
The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing that we are facing today is a part of the phenomenon of 
tectonic  drift  of  world  manufacturing  to  China.  The  high  costs  and  low  efficiency  of  the  Korean 
economy, which has drained its competitiveness, has also played a large role. 
Korea’s curse of high costs and low efficiency dates back to the second half of the 1980s, when per 
capita national income reached the level of semi-developed countries. In the transition to a democratic 
society,  long  suppressed  popular  aspirations  for  higher  living  standards  erupted,  while  at  the  same 
time asset price inflation led to the formation of real estate and stock market bubbles. Above all, after 
1990,  wages  in  manufacturing  rose  at  an  annual  average  rate  of  11%,  the  fastest  pace  among  all 
OECD members. So in one bound, Korea has become a high wage economy. Korea’s wage levels are 
ten times those of China nowadays, and are also rather high compared to countries like Singapore, 
Hong Kong and Taiwan that are similar to Korea in terms of the stage of economic development. 
What is more, Korea finds itself in a situation where its other social costs are also high. This comes as 
a result of not just the high real estate prices and heavy private spending on education, but also an 
endemic climate of confrontation between labor and management and the influence of vested interest 
groups. Meanwhile, in stark contrast, manufacturing productivity growth in Korea has been no more 
than one half that of China since the late 1980s. 
The story does not end there. The environment in which this hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing is 
proceeding is very different from that which faced the U.S. and Japan. 
Firstly, in contrast to what happened in the U.S. and Japanese cases, the economy to which the base 
of manufacturing is moving from Korea is one that is already much larger in scale and so has a huge 
capacity for absorption. The Chinese economy is now more than twice the size of Korea’s. In addition, 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2004
it is showing the highest rate of growth worldwide, and so the gap between them in terms of economic 
scale is likely to widen. 
Secondly, I should point out as well that the gap between Korea and China in terms of costs is much 
greater than what we saw in the cases involving the U.S. and Japan in the past. Whereas U.S. wages 
were  four  times  those  in  Japan  in  the  1960s,  and  this  ratio  was  much  the  same  when  the 
manufacturing  base  shifted  from  Japan  to  Korea  in  the  1980s,  the  difference  between  Korean  and 
Chinese wage levels is now ten to one. Transportation costs in China are only one half those in Korea 
and the corporate tax rate in China is 15%, much lower than Korea’s 27%. 
Thirdly,  in  contrast  to  the  previously  prevailing  mood  of  protectionism,  the  predominant  current  that 
has spread around the whole world is that of openness. 
Under these circumstances, once the process of a hollowing-out of manufacturing is set in motion, the 
pace of its spread and development can only get faster. The effects that this has on society as a whole 
can then come to be almost destructive in their force. For textiles, footwear and white electric goods, 
the process of hollowing-out is already so far advanced that the major part of production by Korean 
firms  now  takes  place  in  China.  Even  in  sectors  where  hollowing-out  is  still  in  the  early  stages,  its 
speed  is  rapidly  gathering  pace.  I’m  thinking  here  of  sectors  like  computers,  telecommunications, 
steel, chemicals and machinery, which are midway on the technological development ladder. As an 
example, about two years ago when I went to China, you could hardly see a locally produced mobile 
phone.  Handsets  imported  from  Korea  were  a  big  hit  on  the  streets  at  that  time.  Today,  however, 
China has already emerged as the world’s largest producer and exporter of mobile phones. 
Korea’s policy options in dealing with the hollowing-out 
The hollowing-out of Korean manufacturing is taking place so fast and across such a wide spectrum 
that  our  firms  and  government  have  little  time  to  spare.  It  has  become  a  critical  challenge  to  the 
Korean economy. Will the hollowing-out of manufacturing derail the Korean economy, or can we take 
advantage of it like the U.S. and Japan by turning it into an opportunity for a further quantum leap? 
The answer will depend upon how the Korean people react. 
To embrace this challenge and exploit it as an opportunity to press forward the development of the 
Korean  economy,  the  Korean  people  and  its  government  should  commit  themselves  to  four  major 
endeavors. 
Firstly, we must set out to constantly strengthen economic cooperation between South and North on 
the Korean Peninsula. This will give us some short-term relief by softening the blow represented by 
the hollowing-out of manufacturing. South Korean firms should relocate their labor-intensive industrial 
facilities not just in the Kaesung Industrial Complex, which is now being constructed, but throughout 
the whole of North Korea. This will breathe new life into Korean enterprises whose competitiveness is 
now on the wane, and SMEs in particular. Within the Kaesung Industrial Complex, wage levels will be 
fifty-seven and a half dollars a month, which is lower than those in China. Land prices too are very 
reasonable, and the highest level of corporate tax rate will be only 14%. So there is a very good case 
for Korean firms to take full advantage of these points by relocating production to North Korea rather 
than to China or Vietnam. 
Brisk economic cooperation between North and South is also very important in terms of preparing for 
national  reunification.  Now  many  of  North  Korea’s  industrial  facilities  are  in  a  decrepit  state.  If  they 
were to be exposed to the blast of open competition, there would be no option other than to scrap 
them entirely. Research institutes tell us that if reunification were to take place abruptly under these 
circumstances, with the coming down of the walls dividing the peninsula, several million North Koreans 
might be forced to flood into the South seeking refuge. This could lead to a national disaster. In this 
respect, strengthening South-North economic cooperation is obviously a much more desirable option. 
Secondly, we need to rectify the high costs and low efficiency that now characterizes Korean society. 
It  is  vital  to  reach  a  social  consensus  on  improving  the  climate  of  labor-management  relations  and 
removing the rigidities of the labor market. On the basis of this consensus, we should then work for 
wage stability. We also have to start to reduce the burden of other social costs. This involves bringing 
down  housing  purchase  and  rental  costs  through  stabilizing  house  prices.  It  means  educational 
reforms to cut the exorbitant level of spending on private tutoring. It also implies lowering the costs of 
the political system by allowing a more productive style of politics to take hold. We should also seek 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 3
ways  to  reduce  the  loss  of  efficiency  caused  by  the  tendency  to  collective  egotism,  often  found  in 
large-scale national investment projects. 
Thirdly, we will push forward still more passionately in upgrading the industrial structure and improving 
corporate  competitiveness.  We  have  to  revitalize  the  manufacturing  sector  with  a  new  focus  on 
advanced technology areas generating high value-added, such as the IT industry. At the same time, 
we  must  also  promote  deindustrialization  or  service-oriented  industrialization,  while  giving  every 
encouragement  to  our  financial,  logistical,  cultural  and  knowledge-based  industries.  The  share  of 
manufacturing drops in any economy as it moves into a more mature stage of development, while that 
of the service sector rises. In terms of its weight in their economy, the manufacturing sector peaked in 
the U.S. in 1953, in Japan in 1970 and in Korea in 1988. It then showed a steady decline in each case. 
By upgrading its industrial structure in this way, Korea can avoid competing head-on with China, which 
has huge reserves of low-cost labor, and can instead build up a complementary relationship with it. 
Some  form  of  support  will  of  course  be  necessary  for  the  sunset  industries  that  are  no  longer 
competitive, in order to assist their friction-free market exit through mergers and acquisitions, change 
of business lines within the country, or relocation overseas. 
Last, but by no means least, we need to promote even more strongly the liberalization and openness 
of  the  Korean  economy.  Earlier  this  year,  Korea  concluded,  not  without  difficulty,  a  free  trade 
agreement with Chile. But it is absolutely essential for us to ensure a degree of openness that is on a 
par with that of Singapore, through expanding FTAs not just with Chile but with the U.S., the European 
Union, Japan, China, members of ASEAN, and other Latin American countries. In parallel with this, we 
need  to  give  a  dynamic  boost  to  foreign  investment  in  Korea,  by  creating  an  environment  in  which 
people  from  all  around  the  world  can  do  business  as  freely  in  Korea  as  in  Dubai  or  Singapore. 
Outward  investment  by  Korean-based  enterprises  and  their  relocation  of  their  production  facilities 
overseas  should  also  be  viewed  positively  and  made  as  simple  as  possible.  Furthermore,  by 
promoting deregulation in the areas of finance and transportation, the country will be able to achieve 
its great ambition of becoming a financial and logistical hub of North-East Asia. 
Concluding remarks 
Distinguished members of the Asia Society, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The hollowing-out of manufacturing that is now taking place in Korea can perhaps be thought of as an 
unavoidable stage on the road to economic maturity, a bit like the acute growing pains of adolescence. 
Having said this, I must admit that not all economic agents in Korea are finding it easy to adapt to this 
hollowing-out  of  manufacturing,  because  it  is  taking  place  so  fast  and  its  ripple  effects  have  such 
awesome destructive power. 
Seen  in  this  light,  the  hollowing-out  of  manufacturing  may  well  appear  threatening  to  the  Korean 
economy in certain respects and in the short term. Looked at calmly overall and taking a longer-term 
view,  however,  the  process  brings  fresh  opportunities  for  the  Korean  economy’s  upgrading  and 
development. In other words, it is challenges like these that spur on the Korean economy to still more 
energetic advances. 
You  will  all,  I  think,  be  familiar  with  how  Korea  achieved  the  ‘Miracle  of  the  Han  River’,  emerging 
phoenix-like as a member of the OECD from the ashes of the Korean War. Korea was again able to 
overcome within a short period of time the currency crisis with its threat of a debt moratorium in 1997. 
The Korean nation has repeatedly shown itself to have deep reserves of strength to draw on in times 
of crisis, when it unites as one. The stronger the challenge, the more dynamic vital energy the nation 
has been able to summon up, to respond even more resolutely. 
To  turn  the  challenge  facing  the  Korean  economy  into  a  great  opportunity,  the  Korean  people  and 
government  should  now  go  through  a  process  of  wide-ranging  social  reform  founded  upon  the 
transformation of the structure of popular consciousness. The difficult problem of society’s high costs 
and low efficiency can and will be solved through educational renewal, the reconfiguration of politics, 
cooperation  between  labor  and  management,  and  restraint  from  collective  egotism.  Along  with  this, 
globalization will be encouraged through moderation of the mood of anti-globalization and animosity to 
openness that still lingers on in some areas of Korean society. 
I am convinced that once Korea has traversed the hollowing-out of manufacturing, it will move on to 
become  a  much  more  mature  advanced  society.  Let  us  suppose  that  it  is  indeed  able  to  maintain 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2004
stable  growth  at  the  5%  level  annually,  by  turning  the  present  changes  in  its  environment  into 
opportunities for enlarging its growth potential. Then, about ten years later, the country could look to 
the ‘New Miracle of the Han River’, achieving per capita income of 30,000 dollars and joining the ranks 
of the ten largest economies worldwide. 
Mr. President, 
Distinguished members of the Asia Society, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Drawing my remarks to a close, I should like to give my deep thanks to all of you here today for your 
keen interest in the Korean economy. It is my great hope that as true friends of Korea you will not 
hesitate to give your suggestions and advice about the best way forward for the Korean economy. 
Thank you for listening so attentively. 
BIS Review 36/2004 
 5
