Wu Xiaolin: China’s monetary and interest rate policy in year 2004 
Speech by Miss Wu Xiaolin, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the Forum of Financial 
Opening and Commercial Bank Reform of China, Beijing, 17 April 2004. 
 The  3rd  Plenum  of  the  16th  CPC  National  Congress  calls  for  deepening  financial  reform  through 
pushing  forward  financial  institutions  reform  and  improving  financial  supervisory  and  regulatory 
regime. Commercial bank reform, one important component of financial reform, is inseparable from the 
improvement of financial regulatory regime, which will not only lay the foundation for commercial bank 
reform, but also intensify the requirements for the operation and management of commercial banks. 
Given current economic and financial situation, central bank’s monetary policy stance in year 2004 is 
to rein in excessive money and credit growth, avoid excessive volatility of interest rates and accelerate 
interest rate liberalization. Next, I would like to focus on China’s Monetary and Interest Rate Policy in 
Year 2004. 
Monetary policy targets in 2004 
I. 
We  expect  to  keep  the  M2  and  M1  growth  rates  at  around  17%,  new  RMB  lending  around 
RMB 2.6 trillion yuan, and CPI around 3%. The ultimate objective of our monetary policy is to maintain 
balanced economic growth. Large population and comparatively insufficient resources in China pose 
constraints  on  economic  growth.  Therefore,  the  economy  should  be  developed  in  a  pragmatic, 
coordinated and balanced way. According to the 7% growth rate target for 2004 set by the Central 
Committee, and considering that money supply growth and new lending in 2004 should be lower than 
those  in  previous  year  due  to  the  time  lag  of  excessive  credit  growth  in  2003,  we  decided  on  the 
aforementioned monetary policy targets. With appropriate macroeconomic adjustment and regulation, 
the CPI in year 2004 is expected to be kept at around 3%. To be more specific, hangover effect may 
contribute 2.2 pp to CPI, new inflation factors and price adjustment policies contribute 1 pp. Combined 
with other non-quantifiable upward price pressure, the CPI growth rate could maintain at around 3% if 
macroeconomic adjustment measures gradually take effect. 
Given that China’s economy, in recent years, has been in the process of transition and integration into 
the world economy, the correlations among economic variables kept changing; hence the selection of 
intermediate  monetary  policy  targets  provoked  debate  in  academia.  Before  any  clear  conclusion  is 
reached, we have to make the intermediate targets a synthetic target, focusing on M2 and credit scale 
while considering money market rates. 
II. 
Apply  various  monetary  policy  instruments  in  a  flexible  manner  to  reach  monetary 
policy targets 
China’s economy, currently right in the transition period, is not comparable to command or developed 
market  economy.  The  complexity  of  macroeconomic  development  poses  challenges  to  monetary 
policy. In this connection, only if we utilize various monetary policy instruments in a flexible manner, 
can we reach the monetary policy targets. At present, the major monetary policy instruments include: 
open market operation, reserve requirement, interest rate policy, re-lending and rediscount, and credit 
policy. 
i. 
Sterilize  excessive  forex  position  through  open  market  operation  while  maintaining 
sufficient liquidity in the market 
Over  the  past  two  years,  China’s  foreign  exchange  reserve  has  grown  fast,  leading  to  substantial 
increase in base money injection as a result of Forex purchase. In line with the overall money and 
credit  plan,  the  People’s  Bank  of  China  (PBC)  has  maintained  the  stable  growth  of  base  money 
through  open  market  operation.  Since  22nd  April  2004,  the  central  bank  has  intensified  currency 
withdraw from circulation through issuing central bank bills. By the end of 2003, the central bank has 
made 63 issues of central bank bills, with a total issuance amount of RMB 722.68 billion yuan, and 
outstanding amount of RMB 337.68 billion yuan. In 2003, base money injection as a result of Forex 
purchase  added  up 
to  RMB 1,145.9 billion yuan,  while  open  market  operation  withdrew 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 1
RMB 269.4 billion  yuan  base  money,  resulting  in  a  net  base  money  injection  of  RMB  876.5  billion 
yuan. 
At  the  same  time,  the  PBC  has  provided  sufficient  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  through  flexible 
market  operation.  At  the  end  of  last  August,  the  IPO of  Huaxia  Bank  led  to  relatively  large  liquidity 
shortage  in  the  commercial  banks.  Under  such  circumstance,  the  PBC,  on  August  26  and 
September 2nd,  2003,  twice  reduced  the  issuance  scale  of  3-month  central  bank  bills  and  injected 
liquidity to commercial banks through 7-day reverse repo transaction; At the time of Changjiang Power 
IPO on November 11 last year, the PBC again conducted 7-day reserve repo transaction. Under the 
guidance  of  open  market  operation,  the  7-day  repo  rates,  typical  inter-bank  interest  ratea,  have 
remained  stable  at  around  2.15%  despite  of  the  liquidity  fluctuations  resulted  from  IPOs,  which 
indicates that open market operation has reached expected target. 
Given sufficient liquidity of financial institutions and falling trend of money market rates during the first 
quarter of this year, the PBC intensified sterilization operation. In this period, the cumulative amount of 
central  bill 
reached  RMB 435.2 billion yuan  and  outstanding  amount  stood  at 
RMB 615.45 billion  yuan;  Base  money  injection  as  a  result  of  Forex  purchase  amounted  to 
RMB 291.6 billion yuan, and open market operation withdrew RMB 281 billion yuan, resulting in a net 
base  money  injection  of  RMB 10.6 billion yuan  and  basically  offsetting  the  Forex  position  of  base 
money. 
issuance 
ii. 
Use  reserve  requirement  policy  in  a  flexible  way  to  lower  the  cost  of  currency 
withdraw and improve the operation of commercial banks 
In order to rein in the obviously excessive credit growth, the PBC raised the required reserve ratio by 
one pp on September 21, 2003. Traditional Money and Banking theories regard required reserve ratio 
hike as a relatively drastic measure, nevertheless the central bank interpreted it as a mild move. The 
major reason is that the central bank has to withdraw a large amount of excess liquidity because of 
fast growth of foreign exchange reserves, To do so, if the central bank only issue CB bills without any 
other measure, it has to raise the interest rates on CB bills to a very high level given strong economic 
expansion momentum and commercial banks’ wide interest rate differentials which is larger than the 
returns on CB bills, however, high interest rate would have significant implications on the economy. In 
contrast, the 1 pp rise of required reserve ratio enabled the central bank to reduced at a lower cost the 
commercial banks’  excess  reserve by around RMB150  billion  yuan,  accounting  for  only  6%  of  their 
holdings  of  treasury  bills,  financial  bonds  and CB  bills.  Therefore,  the  required  reserve  ratio  hike  is 
actually  a  mild  policy  measure.  Moreover,  the  policy  was  announced one  month  in  advance,  giving 
sufficient time for financial institutions to manage their liquidity. The PBC also provided timely support 
to those financial institutions with short-term liquidity difficulties, so as to maintain the overall stable 
developments of financial operation and money market interest rates. 
With  the  approval  of  the  State  Council,  the  PBC  announced  on  March  25,  2004  that  the  required 
reserve  ratio  for  financial  institutions  with  capital  adequacy  ratio  below  a  specific  level  would  rise 
0.5 pp  to  7.5%,  while  the  ratio  for  other  financial  institutions  remained  unchanged.  State-owned 
commercial banks, urban and rural credit cooperatives were exempt from the differentiated required 
reserve ratio policy. On April 11, 2004, the PBC announced again that the required reserve ratio for all 
financial institutions except from urban and rural credit cooperatives would rise 0.5 pp since April 25, 
2004. 
The differentiated required reserve ratio scheme is both a transitional policy in line with China’s current 
financial system, and an innovation based on the original purpose of required reserve ratio policy, i.e. 
to ensure the payment and settlement of commercial banks, and to prevent over-lending by financial 
institutions  attracted  to  favorable  loan  terms  which  may  undermine  their  liquidity  and  payment 
capacity. The required reserve ratio policy then gradually evolved into a monetary policy instrument, 
and  the  deposit  insurance  regime  combined  with  supervision  on  capital  adequacy  ratio  started  to 
replace it as policy tools to impose prompt corrective actions on financial institutions based on different 
risk  profiles.  Given  the  fact  that  China  has  yet  to  establish  deposit  insurance  system,  and  quite  a 
number of financial institutions failed to reach the 8% capital adequacy ratio, the differentiated required 
reserve ratio scheme is conducive to curb excessive credit expansion of the financial institutions with 
low  capital  adequacy  ratio  and  poor  asset  quality,  and  to  prevent  the  one-size-fits-all  approach  in 
macro financial adjustment and regulation. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2004
Utilize other monetary policy instruments 
iii. 
At  the  same  time,  the  PBC  will  strengthen  credit  management  by  rigorously  curbing  loans  to  over-
invested industries, and keeping the proportion of medium and long term loans at reasonable level. 
The  PBC  will  also  endeavor  to  adjust  loan  structure,  urge  financial  institutions  to  implement  credit 
policy,  promote  financial  ecological  development,  enhance  re-lending  and  rediscount  management, 
continue  to  improve  financial  service  to  rural  economy,  and  further  promote  inter-bank  market 
development. 
III. 
The priority of China’s current interest rate policy is to enhance institutional reform so 
as to facilitate monetary policy transmission mechanism 
In  a  market  economy,  interest  rate  policy  is  conducted  through  adjusting  interest  rates  to  influence 
market financing costs and signal the central bank’s judgment on economic development and liquidity 
position. In the games between central bank and the public, the signal effect is bigger than financing 
cost. 
i. 
Adjust interest rates flexibly on the condition of maintaining both internal and external 
equilibrium 
Since September 2003, the Year-on-Year (YOY) consumption price level has grown fast to 3.2% at 
the end of December, implying increasing inflation pressure. From January to March 2004, the YOY 
CPI rose 3.2%, 2.1%, and 3.1% respectively and month-to-month (MOM) rose 1.1%, –0.2% and 0.3% 
respectively. The CPI in the first half of this year may continue to rise, but current one-year loan rate is 
only 5.31%. If real loan rates fall negative at some point of time, the behavior of economic agents will 
be distorted. The enterprises will accumulate raw materials because they can make profits simply by 
borrowing, thus aggravating raw material shortage, pushing price level further up and leading funds to 
circulate in retailing rather than be invested in manufacturing. Therefore, price level is one indicator the 
central bank must closely monitor when considering interest rate policy. 
In addition, the central bank must also take into account the issue of Forex arbitrage. Over the past 
two years, capital inflows have led to substantial rise in Forex position. The amount of capital inflow is 
directly linked to domestic and foreign interest rate differentials. Currently the one-year domestic RMB 
deposit  rate  is  1.98%,  1.4  pp  higher  than  the  0.5625%  one-year  domestic  USD  deposit  rate  and 
0.92 pp  higher  than  the  1.06%  one-year  US  CD  rate.  In  this  connection,  we  must  flexibly  adjust 
interest rates on the condition of maintaining both internal and external equilibrium. 
ii. 
Establish floating benchmark interest rate regime and signal to the public in a timely 
manner 
With  the  approval  of  the  State  Council,  the  PBC  decided  to  adopt  floating  relending  rate  regime. 
Relendings  refers  to  the  loans  central  bank  grants  to  financial  institutions.  Floating  relending  rate 
regime  means  that  the  PBC,  according  to  macroeconomic  and  financial  situation,  can  set  and 
announce the extent by which the relending rates move above benchmark rates within the fluctuation 
band  authorized  by  the  State  Council.  Effective  on  March  25,  2004,  the  rates  on  one-year-or-less 
liquidity  relendings  rose  by  0.63  pp  from  existing  benchmark  level.  In  order  to  support  agricultural 
development, floating relending rate regime for rural credit cooperatives will be implemented gradually 
in three years, and three years later, the rate increments for RCCs will be half those for other financial 
institutions. 
The  adoption  of  floating  relending  rate  regime  is  another  important  step  toward  interest  rate 
liberalization.  It  helps  not  only  improve  interest  rate  formation  mechanism  and  the  central  bank’s 
capability of guiding market rates, but also upgrade the effectiveness and transparency of relending 
management. 
iii. 
Change the ways of resetting loan rates to guide commercial banks to enhance risk 
management and make positive reaction to the interest rate changes by central bank 
With the approval of the State Council, the PBC changed the way of resetting loan rates. Effective on 
January 1st, 2004, the ways of resetting loan (excluding household mortgages) rates are determined 
by borrowers and lenders through negotiation. The frequency of resetting rates on medium and long 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 3
term  RMB  loans,  previously  once  a  year  and  now  determined  by  borrowers  and  lenders,  can  be 
monthly,  quarterly,  annual,  or  fixed.  This  policy  move  has  corrected  the  asymmetry  between  fixed 
deposit rates and annually changed loan rates. Consequently, commercial banks can determine the 
way  of  resetting  loan  rates  according  to  customer’s  credit  rating,  and  flexibly  design  loan  products. 
Also,  shortened  resetting  intervals  help  commercial  banks  spot  problems  the  customer’s  solvency 
problem. In addition, when central bank changes benchmark rates, commercial banks can promptly 
adjust  loan  rates  based  on  lending  agreement,  thus  mitigating  interest  rate  risk,  facilitating  the 
transmission of monetary policy to manufacturing and consumption. The change of loan rates resetting 
policy forced commercial banks to establish offer system, to factor in credit risk and interest risk when 
estimating profits, and to set up internal transfer pricing mechanism. 
iv. 
Speed  up  the  adoption  of  loan  rate  floor  and  deposit  rate  ceiling  policy  and  urge 
commercial banks to improve asset/liability management (ALM) 
With the control of lending scale and deposit/lending rates, the commercial banks’ ALM only focuses 
on the ratio of deposit to lendings. Interest rate liberalization, nevertheless, requires commercial banks 
to focus on interest rate risk and capital adequacy ratio. 
Loan rates floor management 
(i) 
Loan  rate  floor  management  calls  for  commercial  banks  to  adjust  asset  structure  with  risk  pricing. 
According to a survey on September 2002, less than half of the outstanding commercial bank lendings 
are fixed rate, while in stock-holding commercial banks, the percentage of fixed rate loans is only 36%. 
Since the 0.9-1.7 pp floating range has basically liberalized the lending rates, commercial banks must 
learn how to price risk. 
Loan pricing must take into account such factors as fund cost, direct and indirect costs, loan taxation 
cost, loan maturity, loan risk and target profit. 
Fund cost rate refers to the cost for commercial banks to obtain fund in the market with similar maturity 
and cash flows as the loan extended to clients, i.e. the internal transfer price of the loan. Direct costs, 
including  all  costs  related  to  loan  product  and  client  services,  can  be  derived  from  direct  cost  rate 
using  activity-based-cost  (ABC)  or  average-cost  method.  Indirect  costs,  generated  from  operations 
other than loan activities, can be calculated using average-cost method. Because the calculation of 
direct and indirect costs both use historical data, the data must be updated regularly so as to ensure 
its effectiveness and applicability. In China, taxation cost rate is the operating tax rate plus added cost 
per  loan.  Credit  risk  premium  is  used  to  cover  expected  loan  loss  and  the  expected  loan  loss  rate 
equals default rate multiplied by loan loss rate. To estimate loan loss, commercial banks must set up 
internal rating modes. The longer the loan’s maturity, the higher the lendings rate. The logic behind is 
that  longer  maturity  means  longer  financing  period,  consequently  higher  financing  cost  and  greater 
possibility  of  changing  cost,  therefore,  the  loan  rates  should  rise  accordingly.  Target  profit  can  be 
estimated using return on capital and the ratio of capital to lending. 
At  present,  loan  pricing  is  one  weakness  of  our  commercial  banks,  because  in  the  past  they  didn’t 
have much chance to do it due to interest rate control. In the process of interest rate liberalization in 
coming years, commercial banks need step up efforts in pricing product, accumulate experience and 
basic data, and strengthen international competitiveness. 
Deposit rate ceiling management 
(ii) 
Deposit rate ceiling management requires commercial banks to actively adjust their liability scale and 
structure, and adapt themselves to capital adequacy ratio management. 
Western commercial banking management theories have evolved from asset management, to liability 
management,  finally  to  asset/liability  management.  Liability  management  originated  at  the  end  of 
the1960’s, when high inflation and sharp and unexpected interest rate hike, combined with rigorous 
interest  rate  control  in  many  countries,  led  to  disintermediation  and  fund  shortage  in  commercial 
banks. Commercial banks then had to attach great importance to liability management and attract fund 
back into commercial banks through innovation. 
However,  China’s  liability  management  originated  in  a  very  different  backdrop.  In  China,  funds  and 
risks are over-concentrated in banks while capital adequacy ratio of most commercial banks are low. 
To meet capital adequacy ratio requirements, commercial banks must reduce either asset or liability. 
With  deposit  rate  ceiling  policy,  commercial  banks  can  tailor  deposit  price  to  specific  situation. 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2004
Commercial banks with low capital adequacy ratio can reduce deposit by lowering deposit rates so as 
to mitigate the pressure of excessively expanding loans to avoid loss due to large liability. Therefore, 
deposit rate ceiling policy not only helps rein in excessive credit growth and mitigate inflation pressure 
and  non-performing  loan  risks,  but  also  guide  funds  into  capital  market  to  promote  capital  market 
development. 
v. 
Actively  push  forward  financial  derivatives  transaction  with  a  purpose  of  providing 
commercial  banks  and  customers  with  hedging 
interest 
liberalization. 
instruments  during 
Both  financial  institutions  and  their  customers  need  instruments  to  hedge  interest  rate  risks  after 
interest  rates  are  liberalized.  In  fact,  according  to  option-pricing  theory,  financial  institutions,  even 
without  derivatives,  can  use  basic  instruments  to  create  transactions  with  the  same  nature  as 
derivatives to hedge risks. But the pitfall is its relatively high cost and risk. Derivative hedging is cost-
effective and convenient, but risky due to high leverage, which was reflected to some extent in the 
meltdown  of  Barrings  and  LTCM.  In  this  regard,  we  will  enhance  the  internal  control  of  financial 
institutions before pushing forward derivative transactions and finally provide commercial banks and 
customers with hedging instruments. 
With the approaching of fully opening up of China’s banking sector, commercial bank reform is urgent. 
I believe that, with clear policy and development direction set by Central Committee and State Council 
and  more  favorable  reform  environment,  commercial  bank  reform  will  proceed  successfully  through 
joint efforts by all staff in banking sector. 
BIS Review 32/2004 
 5
