Jaime Caruana: Making diligent preparations for Basel II 
Opening remarks by Mr Jaime Caruana, Governor of the Bank of Spain and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Thirteenth International Conference of Banking Supervisors 
(ICBS), Madrid, 22-23 September 2004. 
 Welcome and overview 
1. 
Distinguished guests and friends: as the Governor of the Bank of Spain, it is my pleasure to serve as 
your host at the Thirteenth International Conference of Banking Supervisors here in Madrid. I am also 
privileged to serve in a second capacity at this event as chairman of the Basel Committee on Banking 
Supervision. In that regard, it is my honour to launch our dialogue on the two main themes selected for 
this conference. 
As  you  know,  the  Committee  reached  agreement  on  an  historic  revision  of  the  international  capital 
framework just this past June. So naturally an important focus for this conference will be on preparing 
for  its  implementation.  In  addition,  because  Basel  II  relies  increasingly  on  the  quantification  of  risk 
exposures to understand a bank’s risk profile, it is more important than ever before to look behind the 
numbers  and  into  the  rules  that  define  how  exposures  are  measured.  The  second  day  of  our 
conference  will  be  devoted  to  the  emerging  issues  in  accounting  and  their  relevance  to  banking 
supervision. 
I  am  indebted  to  the  Secretariat  of  the  Basle  Committee,  the  staff  of  the  BIS,  as  well  as  to  my 
colleagues at the Bank of Spain, for choosing speakers who will encourage a lively conversation on 
these two themes. 
In my own remarks this morning, I would like to open with some thoughts first on the implications of 
“Basel  II”  for  banking  supervision  worldwide.  While  much  has  been  said  about  its  sophistication,  I 
believe that many have overlooked key principles in Basel II that are relevant to all supervisors and all 
banks in all markets. In that regard, it is important to remember that Basel II’s success depends on a 
broad  range  of  other  preparations  and  measures  that  we  undertake  to  strengthen  safety  and 
soundness; in the second part of my remarks, I will offer some views on the other mechanisms, that lie 
at the heart of a sound system of supervision more generally. 
As I will mention, many of our safety and soundness goals are more easily achieved when supervisors 
apply these mechanisms more consistently: this makes it critical for the Basel Committee to continue 
to  expand  its  ties  and  seek  greater  cooperation  with  the  broader  supervisory  community.  Finally,  I 
would like to close with some brief thoughts on the rules that govern transparency and disclosure in 
our jurisdictions and on our responsibilities as supervisors to encourage their continued advancement. 
With that overview, I would like to share some thoughts on the implications of Basel II for supervision, 
which is my first topic. 
Implications of Basel II for supervision 
2. 
When we last met as the community of bank supervisors in Cape Town under a brilliant South African 
sun, you may recall that the chairman of the Basel Committee at that time, Bill McDonough, described 
the revision of the capital framework as a “tremendous journey” for all of us. He was quite right. Our 
journey has lasted five years. Supervisors, central bankers, and representatives of the industry have 
spent countless hours researching and debating the paths to follow. The public and transparent nature 
of our consultations subjected our proposals to intense scrutiny. This made our journey a difficult one, 
but by testing our ideas, we found ways to improve the capital framework. 
Today, two years and an ocean away from our mid-point meeting in Cape Town, I am privileged to 
announce that our journey to “Basel II” concludes a key stage here in Spain. For that, I would like to 
express  my  deepest  appreciation  to  you,  the  members  of  the  supervisory  community,  for  your 
collaboration, your contributions, and your commitment to the new framework. Basel II emerged from 
the  remarkable  spirit  of  goodwill,  cooperation,  and  dedication  to  financial  stability  shared  by  bank 
supervisors and central banks worldwide. By providing your perspectives and experience, you helped 
to  ensure  the  relevance  of  the  “three  pillars”  to  many  kinds  of  banks  in  many  different  economies. 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 1
Because of your assistance, the question before us today is not whether Basel II is applicable to a 
particular market. Instead, the important question is when Basel II should be implemented. 
Only national authorities can answer that question. The text that we published this past June will now 
form the basis for national rule-making and approval processes. Yet adopting Basel II on the same 
timetable as the member countries of the Basel Committee may not be feasible for all countries. In 
fact, Basel II may be a lesser priority compared to other efforts to promote the fundamentals of safety 
and soundness in each country’s banking system. 
Regardless of when we intend to adopt Basel II in our countries, Cicero would have understood the 
task ahead for all of us: he wrote that, “In all matters, before beginning, a diligent preparation should 
be made.” Indeed, the success of Basel II in promoting the health of our banking systems tomorrow 
will depend critically on the diligent preparations that we undertake today. 
So now the journey begins anew for us. As we prepare for the next stage of our journey, all of us must 
encourage  our  banks  to  improve  their  management  of  risk.  We  must  enhance  our  own  skills  as 
supervisors.  And  we  must  strive  to  make  our  markets  more  transparent.  Cooperation  and 
transparency will be key in this new journey and Basel II can play a catalytic role. 
Basel II offers us an important way forward and provides us with tools for enhancing our supervisory 
systems. As we review the text of Basel II to consider our next steps, it is easy to be impressed by 
some of its advanced techniques for quantifying the risk of loss. But the formulas in Basel II are not 
revolutionary. The advanced approaches to credit and operational risk contained in Basel II reflect the 
tremendous advances in risk management achieved among some of the most sophisticated banking 
organisations.  Indeed,  rather  than  inventing  something  new,  the  Committee  adopted  many  of  the 
sound practices that the industry had already identified. 
What  is  new  in  Basel  II,  and  what  matters  most  for  supervision,  is  the  marriage  of  two  important 
trends.  By  building  on  these  trends,  Basel  II  will  incorporate  principles  that  are  relevant  for  all 
supervisors. 
First trend: qualitative assessments of internal controls 
2.1 
The  first  trend  that  is  captured  in  Basel  II  represents  a  shift  in  the  focus  of  safety  and  soundness 
evaluations. In the past, supervisors emphasised the use of backward-looking evaluations of a bank’s 
performance  to  determine  its  financial  condition.  This  drew  our  attention  toward  past  results  rather 
than future risks and a bank’s readiness to manage them. 
In contrast, today many supervisors focus more on qualitative reviews of the internal control structures 
that protect a bank against its specific risks. This represents a far more difficult way of evaluating a 
bank’s safety and soundness. It requires that we look beyond the numbers and into the bank’s internal 
processes.  By  deepening  our  insight  into  a  bank’s  risk  management,  we  gain  a  much  better 
understanding  of  its  strategies  and  controls.  We  learn  what  risks  the  bank  believes  are  ahead  and 
what measures it takes to mitigate them. We also develop a more refined sense of a bank’s sensitivity 
and ability to adapt to potential conditions in the future. 
This first trend of adopting a more “risk-focused” approach to banking supervision has a positive effect 
on  banks  as  well.  When  we  examine  the  quality  of  a  bank’s  risk  management,  we  demonstrate  to 
management the importance that we ascribe to developing and maintaining safe and sound control 
structures.  A  risk-focused  approach  thereby  creates  implicit  incentives  for  bank  management  to 
understand and to find better ways to control its risks. What results is not just a more proactive risk 
management  function,  but  also  a  greater  commitment  to  sound  corporate  governance  across  the 
bank. 
Second trend: incorporate incentives into supervision 
2.2 
Basel II recognises this result and goes one step further by creating not just implicit but also explicit 
economic  incentives  for  banks  to  improve  the  quality  of  their  risk  management.  The  inclusion  of 
incentives directly in the regulatory framework represents the second important trend in supervision. 
The proper use of incentives can help to align a bank’s objectives more closely with public policy goals 
of safety and soundness. In recent years, supervisors have begun to move more generally toward a 
system  of  supervision  that  encourages  prudent  risk-taking  through  the  offering  of  incentives  rather 
than simply enforcing compliance with rigid rules. Internationally, the 1996 Market Risk Amendment to 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2004
the  existing  Basel  Accord  represented  the  first  time  that  banks  received  explicit  capital  benefits  for 
developing more sophisticated measures of risk, in that case market risk. Basel II continues this trend 
by extending incentives to the treatment of credit risk and operational risk. 
Basel II embraces both trends 
2.3 
By stepping back a bit from Basel II’s formulas, we can see that the new capital framework builds on 
two  important  trends  to  incorporate  a  new  philosophy  for  banking  supervision.  It  combines  a  risk-
focused approach to supervision with incentives for prudent risk-taking into a coherent policy objective 
that seeks to promote adequate capitalisation. By incorporating in all three of its pillars clear incentives 
for  banks  to  improve  their  management  of  risk,  Basel  II  reinforces  management’s  focus  on  control 
structures. 
• 
For  example,  in  Basel  II’s  minimum  capital  requirements  -  or  Pillar  1  -  regulatory  capital 
charges are aligned more closely to a bank’s own measures of risk. This creates immediate 
incentives for banks to improve those measures. 
Likewise, Pillar 2 - supervisory review - emphasises that responsibility for evaluating capital 
adequacy  lies  with  a  bank’s  management.  Supervisors  will  review  and  respond  to  those 
internal  assessments,  thereby  creating  incentives  for  banks  to  evaluate  their  exposures 
thoroughly and to plan their capital strategies carefully. 
Finally, Pillar 3 - market discipline - seeks to make a bank’s risk profile more transparent to 
outside  investors  and  market  participants.  This  should  better  enable  the  market  to  reward 
banks that take a responsible approach to risk management and penalise those that do not. 
Market discipline can serve as a powerful incentive for prudent behaviour: indeed, markets 
are sometimes stricter than supervisors. 
  Basel  II’s  combination  of  a  process-oriented  focus  with  incentives  for  banks  to  improve  their  risk 
management offers benefits both for individual banks and for the banking system as a whole. 
For an individual bank, Basel II encourages management to adopt approaches that are relevant to the 
risks the bank faces and that are appropriate for its level of sophistication. That, in turn, ensures that 
the bank takes prudent steps to protect itself against losses, including making appropriate use of its 
capital resources. 
The consequences are even greater at a macro level. I believe that, when risks are properly assessed 
and managed across all banks, our banking system becomes more stable, less sensitive to the swings 
of the business cycle, and better able to promote sustainable growth. This benefits not just individual 
banks, but also businesses and consumers alike. 
Strengthening the foundation for Basel II 
3. 
To achieve these benefits, supervisors must ensure that the foundation for Basel II is ready. Basel II’s 
success in promoting improvements in risk management, and thereby in promoting financial stability, 
depends  on  the  support  of  a  broad  range  of  other  mechanisms  and  measures  in  the  banking  and 
supervisory structure. I’d like to turn now to the second part of my remarks and offer some views on 
the elements that comprise a strong foundation, not just for Basel II, but also for safety and soundness 
more broadly. 
Basel II draws heavily on the well-known and well-tested structure of the 1988 Accord. It retains its 
definition  of  capital  and  its  notion  that  capital  requirements  should  reflect  the  risk  of  an  asset.  The 
Standardised Approach to credit risk in Basel II represents a modest revision of the existing Accord. 
And in some jurisdictions and for some banking organisations - especially smaller banks that engage 
in more traditional, lower-risk businesses - the 1988 Accord may remain a relevant standard. 
So supervisors need not abandon the 1988 Accord in the near future. However, we have found that as 
banks  engage  in  more  advanced  activities,  the  simplicity  of  the  1988  Accord  quickly  becomes  a 
liability.  Because  it  is  a  static  rule,  it  is  falling  behind  the  pace  of  innovation  and  advances  in 
technology, telecommunications, and risk measurement and management practices. Basel II provides 
banks  and  supervisors  with  a  remedy,  one  that  represents  a  more  flexible  and  forward-looking 
approach to capital supervision. In that light, the question I hear from many supervisors is what else 
can  they  do  to  prepare  for  a  future  move  toward  Basel  II?  I  believe  that  we  must  strengthen  three 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 3
areas  of  supervision  in  particular  that  form  the  foundation  necessary  for  Basel  II  -  and  that  are,  in 
themselves, equally crucial to safety and soundness. 
First, a system of effective supervision must exist in a country. The Basel Committee has previously 
helped to identify 25 principles that contribute to a supervisor’s effectiveness. They are enumerated in 
the Core Principles for Effective Supervision and outline the authority and resources that a supervisor 
must have to promote financial stability. They include having adequate legal authority to set and apply 
licensing criteria, prudential regulations and capital requirements; having the ability to conduct ongoing 
evaluations of a bank’s operations and to respond when banks fail to meet regulatory requirements; 
and  having  the  ability  to  apply  this  authority  to  the  consolidated  global  operations  of  their  banking 
organisations  and  to  the  domestic  operations  of  foreign  banks.  When  applying  these  principles  to 
internationally active banks, supervisors must furthermore be able to share information with home and 
host supervisors as necessary. 
Second, we must ensure that the market in which Basel II is to be applied is moving toward greater 
transparency and is subject to a clear set of rules. Sound accounting and provisioning standards must 
be  enforced  so  that  capital  ratios  -  however  calculated  -  reflect  meaningfully  the  bank’s  ability  to 
absorb losses. The legal and judicial system must make the rights and responsibilities of both banks 
and  their  counterparties  clear  and  enforceable  so  that  banks  and  borrowers  can  make  the  most 
effective use of collateral, guarantees, and other measures to secure credit. 
Third,  we  must  confirm  that  the  banking  industry  is  developing  a  sense  of  a  “culture”  of  risk 
management. This is perhaps the hardest criterion to define. To a great degree, Basel II is intended to 
create  incentives  for  the  banks  to  renew  their  focus  on  a  risk  management  culture.  At  a  minimum, 
countries that seek to apply Basel II must ensure that their banks view risk management not as an 
exercise  in  complying  with  external  requirements,  but  rather  as  a  means  for  pursuing  opportunities 
responsibly. We must all understand as well that risk management is an art, not a science: it is a way 
to approach business decisions, but it does not provide automatic answers. Its successful application 
requires that we constantly improve our skills and our expertise. It demands the use of the best tools 
and  best  data  available  to  support  our  analyses.  And  ultimately,  it  requires  that  we  apply  our  best 
human judgement to all significant decisions. 
All  of  us  can  take  immediate  steps  to  strengthen  our  financial  and  supervisory  infrastructure  along 
these three areas. We must ensure the effectiveness of our supervisory systems. We must improve 
the transparency of our markets. And we must promote the development of sound risk management 
cultures. We do not need to implement Basel II formally to introduce or to strengthen the principles 
behind its three pillars. However, beginning to apply those principles can be an excellent way to lay 
the foundation for Basel II in the future. 
For example, supervisors could consider or continue to focus on internal processes and move toward 
a  system  of  risk-based  supervision,  to  complement  and  enhance  traditional  supervision.  We  can 
improve our capacity to look beyond the numbers and evaluate the quality and capabilities of a bank’s 
risk management and measurement. At the same time, supervisors can nurture a “risk management 
culture”  by  emphasising  that  banks  are  responsible  for  evaluating  their  capital  needs  and  for 
developing a strategy to maintain their capital levels, in line with the principles of Pillar 2. Finally, to 
improve market discipline along the lines of Pillar 3, some supervisors may wish to begin by ensuring 
a  basic  level  of  disclosure  across  all  banks.  They  could  discuss  with  banks,  investors,  and  other 
marketplace participants what information they need to understand a bank’s risk profile and then work 
to establish relevant reporting requirements. 
Clearly, we have many diligent preparations to make in the coming months and years as we prepare 
for Basel II. Later today, Nick LePan will share more detailed perspectives on the challenges ahead. 
Our workshops this afternoon will consider how to plan our transitions to Basel II, to prepare for the 
adoption  of  advanced  approaches  to  risk  management  and  the  implementation  of  Pillar  2,  and  to 
strengthen cooperation between home and host supervisors. 
With  regard  to  this  last  topic  of  cooperation,  I  believe  that  our  safety  and  soundness  goals  can  be 
achieved more easily when supervisors adopt more consistent approaches. In particular, Basel II will 
have the greatest impact if supervisors work in concert rather than in a vacuum. This makes it critical 
for the Basel Committee to build its ties and to encourage cooperation with other supervisors. 
Indeed,  as  I  suggested  earlier,  many  of  the  improvements  to  the  Basel  II  proposals  resulted  from 
discussions with other supervisors and central banks. The quality of our dialogue illustrates the very 
good state of relations between all banking supervisors today. This event, for example, represents one 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2004
of the most important opportunities for an exchange of views among Committee members and other 
supervisors.  But  what  begins  here  must  translate  into  other  avenues  for  communication  on  both 
multilateral and bilateral levels. 
In this regard, the Core Principles Liaison Group, or CPLG, serves as the main forum for exchanges 
between  Basel  Committee  members  and  other  supervisors.  This  working  group 
includes 
representatives  from  Committee  member  countries,  16  non-G10  supervisors,  the  International 
Monetary Fund, and the World Bank. Earlier this year, I chaired a very productive special session with 
this group. I learned first-hand the views of CPLG members on ways to build the Committee’s rapport 
with other supervisors. I also received valuable suggestions on the Committee’s projects. 
The  Committee  will  continue  to  rely  on  the  expertise  of  the  CPLG  to  provide  non-G10  reactions  to 
many of its main initiatives. For example, the Accord Implementation Group, which is chaired by Nick 
Le Pan, the Vice Chairman of the Committee and Superintendent of Financial Institutions in Canada, 
holds regular meetings with the CPLG to bring attention to non-G10 issues in implementing Basel II. 
Beyond this standing group, the Committee seeks other avenues for formal and informal discussions 
with  other  supervisors.  The  CPLG  itself  has  recently  suggested  that  regional  groups  of  banking 
supervisors  strengthen  their  activities  so  that  they  may  serve  as  another  channel  for  greater 
communication,  cooperation,  and commitment  to  shared  objectives.  The  Basel  Committee  has  long 
supported  the  development  and  mission  of  these  regional  groups.  These  groups  foster  regional 
cooperation as well as continued dialogue with the Basel Committee and other supervisors. More than 
a dozen of these regional groups exist, most of which met here yesterday. I encourage all of them to 
continue to develop programmes of their own. At a meeting between the Committee and the principals 
of the various regional groups, we discussed additional ways to strengthen future interactions between 
the Basel Committee and regional groups. 
One other formal effort that the Committee and its members support includes those events sponsored 
by the Financial Stability Institute of the Bank for International Settlements. The FSI provides technical 
assistance  to  supervisory  agencies  worldwide  in  enhancing  the  quality  of  their  supervisory  systems 
and the skills of their staff. The Basel Committee and its member agencies remain committed to the 
activities  of  the  FSI  and  to  working  together  with  fellow  supervisors  in  an  efficient  and  transparent 
manner. It is one of my highest priorities as chairman of the Committee to strengthen our outreach and 
communication with fellow supervisors. 
Accounting 
4. 
Our  overarching  goal  in  these  discussions  is  to  help  ensure  that  our  supervisory  framework  keeps 
pace with evolution in the industry and remains relevant to banking in the twenty-first century. This is, 
of course, a constant challenge for supervisors in an industry as innovative as the banking sector. Yet 
we must furthermore look beyond the immediate issues to consider more broadly the many changes in 
our markets and practices that are relevant to banks’ safety and soundness. In recent years, one of 
the most important reforms that affects not just banking, but in fact nearly all businesses, is the drive 
toward harmonised accounting standards globally. It is impossible for us to improve transparency and 
promote stability without examining the changes underway to the mechanics that define how financial 
data are recorded and reported. I’d like to conclude my remarks this morning with some preliminary 
thoughts on accounting and supervision and on our responsibilities in this field as supervisors. 
I  mentioned  earlier  that  the  application  of  sound  accounting  and  provisioning  standards  is  a  key 
element that we must build into the foundation for Basel II. When accounting rules are weak or poorly 
enforced, neither bankers, nor supervisors, nor marketplace participants can have much faith in their 
ability to evaluate the safety and soundness of a bank’s operations. 
No matter how sophisticated a bank’s risk management systems may be, they are ultimately worthless 
if  we  are  unable  to  determine  the  worth  of  the  bank’s  assets  and  liabilities  confidently.  Even  when 
standards  are  enforced  nationally,  substantial  differences 
in  accounting  standards  between 
jurisdictions  can  complicate  the  ability  of  global  markets  to  exercise  discipline  effectively  and  to 
allocate capital efficiently across borders. 
In our efforts to strengthen financial stability, central banks and supervisors have a legitimate interest 
in the quality of accounting standards and their effective implementation. We believe that, in order to 
contribute to strengthening the banking system, accounting standards should support - or at least be 
consistent  with  -  sound  risk  management  and  control  practices  in  banks.  In  addition,  they  should 
BIS Review 52/2004 
 5
facilitate  market  discipline  by  promoting  transparent  reporting  of  banks’  financial  position  and 
performance,  risk  exposures  and  risk  management  activities.  Finally,  accounting  standards  should 
facilitate the effective supervision of banks. 
Because  of  this  view,  the  Committee  has  sought  to  participate  actively  and  constructively  in  the 
international debates on accounting. Given our interest as well in promoting a more level playing field, 
ensuring the effectiveness of market discipline, and seeking the efficient allocation of capital across 
borders, we support the objective towards convergence in accounting guidelines. 
During tomorrow’s discussions, Dr. Arnold Schilder, Executive Director of the Bank of the Netherlands 
and Chairman of the Committee’s Accounting Task Force, will share some of the Committee’s thinking 
and most recent work on emerging issues related to accounting, Basel II and supervision. After his 
remarks, we will have an opportunity to meet in smaller groups to discuss issues and the work ahead 
for supervisors to help promote sound practices with regard to loan accounting, regulatory capital, and 
fair value accounting, as well as to incorporate the role of external auditors and accountants effectively 
in the supervisory process. 
But  these  discussions  mark  only  the  beginning.  Our  focus  on  accounting  from  the  supervisory 
perspective, and our dialogue with the accounting profession, must continue to grow in the years to 
come. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In my remarks today, I have tried to make clear that, in our new journey, challenging work remains 
ahead to ready our banks, to build our skills as supervisors, and to promote greater transparency in 
our markets. As we consider the preparations we must make, we might recall the words of the Spanish 
author, Miguel de Cervantes. In his world-renowned novel Don Quixote de la Mancha, he wrote nearly 
400 years ago that, “To be prepared is half the victory.” The other half, I think, will be cooperation. 
Likewise, the preparations and hard work that we undertake today to prepare for Basel II will, at the 
same  time,  strengthen  the  financial  and  supervisory  infrastructures  in  our countries  more generally, 
even  before  we  implement  Basel  II.  These  preparations  are  important  in  helping  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness of our supervisory systems, to enhance the transparency of our markets, and to develop 
the sense of a risk management culture in the industry. Together, they will contribute to the promise of 
greater financial stability in our markets. 
That is surely a goal worthy of the preparations we will demand of our banks, of our markets, and of 
our  own  agencies.  We  must  recognise  that,  just  as  banking  is  becoming  an  increasingly  complex 
business,  the  job  of  bank  supervisors  will  only  become  more  challenging  in  the  coming  years.  To 
promote sound banking and risk management practices on a national, regional, or global level, we will 
need  to work  together and  cooperate even  more  in  the  future.  Your  participation  in  this conference 
speaks to your interest in finding ways to deepen our cooperation as we move into this next journey for 
supervisors. “El trabajo compartido es mas llevadero,” as we say in Spanish: “Many hands make light 
work” - and, looking around this hall, you will see many hands ready to cooperate. 
And so, in closing, I encourage you to make the most of this unique opportunity to build contacts and 
working  relationships  and  to  share  views  on  how  we  can  work  together  toward  greater  financial 
stability in the future. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2004
