Svein Gjedrem: The economic outlook 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to invited foreign 
embassy representatives, Norges Bank, Oslo, 18 March 2004. 
The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 11 March and on previous speeches. Please note that the text below may 
differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
The Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 Your Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank you for taking the time to attend this event, which provides me with an 
opportunity to present Norges Bank’s view of the economic outlook. 
Growth in the Norwegian economy is rising. Unemployment has stabilised. An economic turnaround 
has  occurred,  with  a  soft  landing  after  a  long  period  of  high  cost  inflation.  Monetary  policy  has 
contributed to stabilising output and employment - but inflation is low. 
The interest rate level is in line with the level among our trading partners. Short-term interest rates in 
other countries have been unusually low over the past 2½ years, and there is little prospect of a sharp 
increase in the near term even if the world economy is expanding. 
Activity in the Norwegian economy is expected to pick up in the coming years. The past and ongoing 
rationalisation in the business sector may enable enterprises to increase production considerably in 
the  short  term  without  strong  employment  growth.  This  suggests  that  there  is  room  for  somewhat 
stronger growth in the economy without pressures on real resources emerging. 
The  low  inflation  environment  we  have  witnessed  in  Norway  lately  reflects  global  phenomena  and 
trends. Globalisation, new technology and increased trade among countries are key forces affecting 
the Norwegian economy, in addition to exchange rate developments. 
A global financial market 
Cross-border capital flows have increased considerably in recent decades. Bond markets have moved 
more in tandem, particularly since the mid-1990s. This also applies to equity markets. Investors are 
increasingly spreading their investments across countries. They are diversifying risk, and seeking high 
returns. In parallel, governments, banks and companies are issuing more debt externally. 
Currency trading has increased markedly since the 1980s. This trend was reversed when the number 
of currencies was reduced due to the introduction of the euro. Large trading volumes enhance market 
liquidity.  The  growth  in  currency  trading  reflects  an  increase  in  portfolio  investment,  higher  foreign 
direct investment and growth in world trade. 
The forward exchange and options market have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces 
transaction  costs,  and  it  is  easier  to  find  counterparties.  This  has  provided  companies  with  greater 
scope  for  hedging  against  foreign  exchange  risk.  The  use  of  instruments  that  reduce  the  risk 
associated with a floating krone is also increasing in Norway. 
A considerably larger portion of credit in other countries is now channelled via the bond market. Less 
risk is being accumulated in banking systems. The development of new markets and instruments, for 
example credit derivatives, has also led to a broader risk spread than earlier. 
The improved diversification of risk is probably one of the reasons that world financial markets have 
coped with  the stock  market  decline and  the  accounting scandals with  limited  damage  to  the wider 
economy. This is probably one reason why the downturn following the stock market decline in 2000 
was considerably less pronounced than during earlier downturns. 
The  new  instruments  spread  risk,  but  do  not  eliminate  it.  Financial  markets  have  become  highly 
complex.  This  alone  entails  an  operational  risk,  which  is  a  challenge  to  participants  and  the 
supervisory authorities. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 1
Increased trade promotes growth and lays a basis for prosperity. A number of Asian countries have 
experienced strong, export-led growth - Japan from the 1950s and several countries in Southeast Asia 
from the 1960s. 
In recent years, China has become an important player in international trade, and is now probably the 
world’s fourth largest trade nation. The Asian economies and the rest of the world have become more 
integrated. 
Technological  advances  and  a  sharp  fall  in  prices  in  the  IT  and  telecommunications  sectors  have 
exposed  a  number  of  services  that  were  previously  sheltered  from  competition  from  low-cost 
countries. 
EU enlargement this spring, with ten new members, is also influencing the division of labour in Europe. 
Implications for the Norwegian economy 
Intensified competition from Japanese and Korean shipyards had serious implications for Norwegian 
shipbuilding  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  However,  Japan  has  also  become  an  important  market  for 
Norwegian  products.  From  the  considerable  deficits  of  earlier  years,  trade  in  traditional  goods  with 
Japan has moved into near balance. 
Strong growth in Asia is probably one of the prominent factors contributing to high oil prices in spite of 
low growth in the OECD area in recent years. China accounted for close to 50 per cent of growth in 
world oil consumption in 2002 and 2003. Trade in Asia has stimulated Norwegian shipping. 
The Chinese economy could continue to expand at a brisk pace for a longer period, which would open 
a large market that can also be entered by Norwegian enterprises. Norwegian exports to China have 
increased,  but  are  still  limited.  Over  several  years,  enterprises  in  Central  European  countries  have 
been  a  source  of  competition  for  Norwegian  jobs.  Integration  is  also  opening  new  markets  and 
providing new sources of income for Norwegian enterprises. At the same time, tender requirements 
and  the  freedom  of  establishment  have  increased  the  competition  facing  Norwegian  industries  that 
were previously sheltered. 
A steadily larger share of Norway’s consumer goods imports come from China and Central European 
countries. Growth in imports from China was provided with an additional impetus after China became 
a member of the World Trade Organization in 2001. Imports from Eastern Europe have also continued 
to grow. 
There  are  many  economic  agents  in  Norway  that  are  benefiting  from  globalisation.  Consumers  are 
enjoying lower prices for goods and services. Input prices have fallen and companies can sell their 
products in new markets. But there are also costs. Norwegian businesses and jobs may lose in the 
competition. 
The challenge lies in moving idle resources to new business activities. This requires adaptability and a 
sound cost policy. 
The Norwegian economy is unique in being both a fully developed economy and a major oil exporter. 
Norway is the world’s third largest oil exporter. In the future, we will become an increasingly important 
exporter of natural gas. 
The petroleum sector accounts for 44 per cent of exports and 17 per cent of GDP. 
The present value of remaining petroleum reserves has been estimated at close to NOK 2 000 billion 
(present rate of net cash flow). The bulk of Norway’s petroleum wealth will be extracted over a period 
of 40 years, from 1990 to 2030. 
We are now in a phase where petroleum wealth is being converted from natural resources under the 
seabed to financial assets abroad. 
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  promoting  an  even 
distribution of wealth across generations. The intention behind the Petroleum Fund is that the cash 
flow from petroleum production should be channeled to the Fund and invested abroad. By doing so, 
changes in oil prices have little effect on the mainland economy. 
This chart illustrates how petroleum activity is separated from the mainland economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2004
Oil companies’ revenues are in foreign currency. The government net cash flow from taxes and direct 
ownership in oil companies is transferred directly to the Petroleum Fund. The return on the Petroleum 
Fund investments also adds to the capital. 
Of the total capital accumulated last year, NOK 59 billion was spent over the fiscal budget. 
The Petroleum Fund invests only in foreign markets. 
The  Fund  serves  as  a  buffer  against  shocks.  Changes  in  petroleum  revenues  are  absorbed  in  the 
Fund - not in the domestic economy. 
The  Petroleum  Fund  is  owned  by  the  government.  At  the  end  of  2003,  the  market  value  of  the 
Petroleum Fund’s assets was NOK 845 billion as indicated by the dark blue bars. 
The Ministry of Finance has defined a clear mandate for Norges Bank’s management of the Petroleum 
Fund. Norges Bank shall seek to achieve an excess return in relation to a benchmark portfolio. The 
return  on  the  Petroleum  Fund  was  0.59  percentage  point  higher  than  the  return  on  the  benchmark 
portfolio in 2003. This is the sixth consecutive year with an excess return. 
The return on the Government Petroleum Fund was 12.6 per cent in 2003. This is the Fund’s highest 
return ever. The solid result is due to a high rate of return on equity investments, at 22.8 per cent. The 
return on the fixed-income portfolio was 5.3 per cent. 
Since 1997, the average annual real return after management costs has been 3.7 per cent, measured 
in a common currency. 
The Ministry of Finance has set a benchmark index for the Petroleum Fund. It has two functions. First, 
it  expresses  in  a  precise  manner  the  strategy  chosen  by  the  Ministry.  Second,  it  is  a  basis  for 
comparison  for  the  active  management  of  the  Fund.  The  benchmark  index  is  a  global  securities 
portfolio, specified down to percentage holdings of individual securities. 
The  equity  allocation  is  probably  the  most  important  decision  in  the  composition  of  the  benchmark 
index. The Petroleum Fund bases its choice on the fact that equities yield a higher expected rate of 
return than fixed-income investments. 
Equities  account  for  40  per  cent  of  the  Petroleum  Fund’s  strategic  benchmark  portfolio,  and  fixed-
income instruments account for 60 per cent. In 2003, the equity portion of the benchmark consisting of 
securities listed in Europe was 50 per cent and the remaining 50 per cent in the Americas, Asia and 
Oceania. 
The  Petroleum  Fund’s  average  ownership  in  listed  companies  has  increased.  At  end-2003,  the 
average ownership interest in European companies, where the share is highest, was close to 0.5 per 
cent. 
Macroeconomic policy in Norway rests on two pillars; 
• 
The Storting issued formal guidelines to limit over time the annual use of petroleum revenues 
to the expected real return on the Fund - estimated at 4 per cent annually. That means that 
the government will not spend the capital itself - but only the return. In that way, the capital is 
saved for future generations. 
Monetary policy is aimed at ensuring low and stable inflation. 
 Monetary policy 
The operational target of monetary policy as defined by the Government is inflation of close to 2.5 per 
cent over time. It is just as important to avoid an inflation rate that is too low as it is to avoid an inflation 
rate that is too high. 
The inflation target provides economic agents with an anchor for their decisions concerning saving, 
investment, budgets and wages. The inflation target also provides a framework for monetary policy’s 
contribution to stabilising output and employment. 
The  economy  grows  thanks  to  increases  in  the  supply  of  labour  and  capital  and  technological 
progress. Average growth over time is referred to as trend growth. Owing to shocks to the economy, 
actual growth fluctuates around trend growth. The chart shows actual mainland GDP growth and trend 
GDP growth. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 3
Normally, Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to achieving inflation of 2½ per cent two years 
ahead.  A  two-year  horizon  is  applied  because  it  takes  approximately  two  years  for  an  interest  rate 
change to have a full impact. 
A flexible exchange rate 
Norway is a small open economy with a floating exchange rate. 
The  Norwegian  krone  does  not  stand  out  as  particularly  volatile.  On  the  contrary,  in  countries  like 
Sweden, the UK, Switzerland, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, the exchange rate fluctuates just 
as much - or more - than the Norwegian krone. 
There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is 
stable - but too strong - also entails costs in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - 
but weak - is a source of high inflation. 
Petroleum  revenues  generally  provide  substantial,  but  uneven  currency  inflows  into  Norway.  The 
currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and wide variations in the exchange rate. This 
tendency  is  countered  when  the  annual  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central  government 
budget  is  predictable  and  independent  of  annual  revenue  inflows,  and  the  remainder  is  invested 
abroad. The capital outflow through the Petroleum Fund contributes to both curbing the appreciation of 
the krone and maintaining its stability. 
Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of 
considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact 
on inflation and output. 
Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, it will generally stabilise over time. When inflation 
has  been  higher  in  Norway  than  among  our  trading  partners  for  a  longer  period,  the  krone  has 
generally  depreciated.  When  inflation in  Norway  is expected  to  be  broadly  in  line  with  that  of  other 
countries, the exchange rate will normally also return to its long-term average following periods when 
the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak. This provides a basis for stable exchange 
rate expectations. 
Economic developments and prospects 
As I mentioned in the introduction, the current picture is a broad-based economic recovery with low 
inflation. 
Expectations of a global recovery have boosted stock markets over the last year. The Norwegian stock 
market index, OBX, has increased more than US, German and Japanese stock market indexes. 
Oil prices and other commodity prices are also high. 
Normally, higher growth expectations are accompanied by higher interest rate expectations. This has 
not been the case lately. On the contrary, market expectations have fallen. The red line shows that in 
October last year, the market expected that the economic recovery would lead to higher interest rates. 
The green and yellow line shows the fall in expectations, and that the market now expects interest 
rates to remain low for a period ahead. 
The reason behind  the change  in expectations  is  the  absence of  inflationary  pressures.  In  Norway, 
inflation is low. In February, annual core inflation fell to minus 0.1 per cent. 
It is particularly prices for imported consumer goods - the yellow line in the chart - that have fallen 
sharply.  But  prices  for  goods  and  services  produced  in  Norway  have  also  declined.  Increased 
competition and productivity growth have probably contributed to low inflation. 
Higher productivity growth is a global trend and in particular in the US the phenomenon has been the 
subject  of  lively  debate.  The  current  economic  recovery  has  in  fact  been  labelled  the  “jobless 
recovery”, an indication that companies can increase production without new recruitment. 
A change in trade patterns and external economic conditions have resulted in an unexpectedly sharp 
fall  in  import  prices,  even  when  measured  in  terms  of  what  Norwegian  importers  pay  in  foreign 
currency. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2004
Consumer  price  inflation  in  Norway  declined  sharply  through  2003  due  to  cheaper  import  as  the 
exchange rate strengthened. In addition, prices for imported goods have fallen measured in foreign 
currency as shown in the next chart. Chart 18. Price indicator for imported consumer goods. Foreign 
currency. Index 
Again, this is a sign of the global trends I have mentioned earlier. 
The change in trade patterns has made a considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices for 
clothing and audiovisual equipment. Rapid technological advances have also pushed down prices for 
audiovisual equipment. 
In Norway, competition has probably increased in the retail industry and other service sectors in recent 
years. Initially, stronger competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises will respond by 
reducing their costs. This will occur in part in the individual enterprise, but subcontractors will also be 
required  to  reduce  their  prices  and  enhance  efficiency.  Therefore,  increased  competition  usually 
triggers higher productivity growth in the economy. Low inflation may therefore be matched by growth 
in productivity. 
The prospect of low inflation, (due to a cyclical downturn last winter, low pay increases last year, fiscal 
discipline and an unexpected decline in inflation), has resulted in a considerable easing of monetary 
policy. The key interest rate has been reduced by 5¼ percentage points and is now approximately the 
same as among our trading partners. The krone has depreciated over the past year, and is in line with 
the average for the 1990s. 
Monetary policy is expansionary. This is reflected in low after-tax real interest rates as shown in the 
chart. The low interest rate level has reduced household net interest expenses. This has increased 
household purchasing power considerably. 
Household demand will probably be the most important driving force in the Norwegian economy in the 
period  ahead.  Private  consumption  has  a  considerable  impact  on  overall  demand  and  activity  and 
accounts for 60 per cent of mainland GDP. 
Low inflation and reduced interest expenses will support strong growth in household real income. Even 
with  a  moderate  wage  settlement,  real  income  growth  may  reach  about  5%.  In  addition,  improved 
labour market conditions will strengthen job security and lead to expectations of higher income growth. 
Against  the  background  of  high  real  income  growth,  improved  job  security  and  expectations  of 
continued  low  interest  rates  ahead,  household  consumption  is  expected  to  exhibit  strong  growth. 
Growth  in  private  consumption  is  projected  at  5¼%  between  2003  and  2004.  Given  this  path, 
consumption will grow at a pace that is broadly in line with real income, with little change in the saving 
ratio. 
After falling last year, house prices edged up in autumn. At the end of 2003, house price inflation was 
high. There are prospects that house prices may show a fairly sharp rise between 2003 and 2004. 
Buoyant activity in the housing market and high house prices are contributing to strong growth in credit 
to households. The household debt burden has shown a considerable increase and is expected to rise 
further in the period ahead. A high debt burden means that an increase in interest rates to a more 
normal level may have a relatively pronounced impact on household income and hence consumption 
growth. 
The difference in growth in credit to households and non-financial enterprises is a good illustration of 
Norway’s dual economy. Over the past few years, credit growth has been far higher for households 
than for enterprises. The level of household credit growth has remained high recently. An important 
reason is the sharp rise in house prices in recent years. 
Low investment demand is reflected in credit to non-financial enterprises, which has declined to a very 
low level. Developments in prices for commercial property compared with house prices also indicate 
that the situation is better for households. 
Developments  in  mainland  enterprises  have  been  characterised  by  low  output  growth,  falling 
investment and declining profitability in many industries. In order to boost returns on invested capital, 
enterprises have taken steps to reduce costs, primarily by reducing their workforce or relocating parts 
of their production abroad. 
By way of conclusion, I would like to present a summary of the economic outlook for the Norwegian 
economy. 
BIS Review 16/2004 
 5
Growth in the Norwegian economy is projected to pick up this year, primarily fuelled by higher private 
consumption. 
There are signs of high productivity growth, which means that companies can produce more with the 
same  workforce.  The  high  cost  level  in  Norway  and  strong  competition  will  probably  induce  many 
industries to continue reducing costs and rationalising. Against this background, the output potential of 
the  Norwegian  economy  is  assumed  to  increase  more  than  normal  in  2004.  As  demand  edges  up, 
enterprises’  profitability  will  improve.  At  the  same  time,  they  may  meet  capacity  constraints. 
Investment  is  therefore  expected  to  pick  up  gradually  and  become  a  more  important  driving  force 
behind  the  upturn.  Mainland  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  pick  up  markedly  this  year  and  remain 
relatively high in 2005 and 2006. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2004
