Antonio Fazio: The international economy and Italy 
Address  by  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  AIAF  -  ASSIOM  -  ATIC  Forex, 
Genoa, 14 February 2004. 
 Recent economic developments 
1. 
At  last  year’s  General  Meeting  of  Shareholders  on  31  May  I  brought  my  Concluding  Remarks  to  a 
close  with  the  prospect  of  a  recovery  in  the  world  economy  during  the  course  of  2003,  and  more 
certainly in 2004. 
Expectations were that domestic demand and output in the United States would accelerate as early as 
the second half of 2003, driven by the monetary expansion, tax relief measures and weakening of the 
dollar. 
On  this  basis  we  suggested  that  Europe,  and  especially  Italy,  stood  in  need  of  an  economic  policy 
capable of putting the economy back onto a path of faster growth. 
The US economy grew at an annualized rate of 8 per cent in the third quarter of 2003 and 4 per cent 
in the last. 
The GDP of the European Union, calculated at the average exchange rates of 2003, is of the same 
magnitude as that of the United States; it grew by 1.1 per cent in 2002 and by 0.8 per cent in 2003. 
Output  increased  in  absolute  value  in  the  United  States  in  one  quarter  by  as  much  as  it  did  in  the 
European Union in two years. 
Labour productivity in the United States rose by 9 per cent in the third quarter of 2003 and by 3 per 
cent in the fourth. The decline in unit labour costs and strong competition kept the rate of inflation low; 
excluding  food  and  energy  products,  it  amounted  to  1.5  per  cent,  which  was  lower  than  in  the 
European countries. 
Fearing  the  possibility  of  deflation,  the  Federal  Reserve  accentuated  the  expansionary  stance  of 
monetary policy. Fiscal policy pushed the federal deficit up to 3.5 per cent of GDP in 2003, and it is 
expected to rise to 4.5 per cent this year. The growth in output averaged 3.1 per cent in 2003, well 
above the forecasts made last spring. 
In Japan exports expanded strongly in the last part of 2002 and recorded a further substantial increase 
in 2003; last year GDP grew by 2.2 per cent. 
The  reorganization  of  production  in  large  manufacturing  companies  has  improved  profitability  and 
reduced employment. Since the mid-nineties, some 2,700,000 jobs have been lost in manufacturing 
industry against a gain of 1,100,000 in the other sectors. 
The  improvement  in  profitability  in  industry  had  beneficial  effects  on  the  banking  system,  which  is 
currently engaged in securitizing large volumes of doubtful loans. 
Symptoms of deflation are still present. Monetary policy has been even more expansionary. 
With  the  lessening  of  global  political  tensions,  economic  activity  has  picked  up  and  progressively 
gained strength in the emerging economies as well. After two years of sharp deceleration, in 2003 the 
rate of growth rebounded to almost 6 per cent. 
In the emerging Asian countries GDP growth was 7.5 per cent. In Latin America, the modest results 
achieved by Brazil and Mexico contrasted with the sharp recovery in Argentina. 
The rate of growth in the euro area was no more than 0.5 per cent. 
In 2003 the world economy is estimated to have grown by 3.7 per cent. 
For 2004 the International Monetary Fund forecasts GDP growth of 4.6 per cent in the United States, 
2.2  per  cent  in  Japan,  6  per  cent  in  the  emerging  economies  and  3.6  per  cent  in  the  main  Latin 
American countries. 
In the twelve euro-area countries output is expected to grow by 2 per cent. 
The world economy is forecast to grow in 2004 by around 4.5 per cent. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 1
Liquidity and the international financial markets 
2. 
In  a  context  of  low  inflation  and  globally  insufficient  aggregate  demand,  markedly  expansionary 
monetary conditions in the three major areas have driven interest rates down to historically low levels, 
fostered a faster expansion of credit and supported the recovery of the financial markets. 
During the nineties the money stock in the seven leading industrial countries was somewhere between 
65 and 70 per cent of GDP. In the last five years it has risen steadily to reach nearly 80 per cent, an 
increase larger than that recorded in the previous twenty years. 
In the three major areas it was monetary base and the more liquid components of bank money that 
increased  most.  From  the  mid-nineties  onwards  the  deposits  of  non-residents  more  than  doubled, 
rising from around 3 per cent of GDP to nearly 8 per cent. 
Conversely, short-term interest rates in the United States, the euro area and Japan have fallen to their 
lowest levels since the end of the Second World War; net of inflation they are close to zero. 
Real long-term interest rates on government bonds, which had touched 5 per cent in 1995, gradually 
came down to fluctuate around 2 per cent at the end of last year. 
After  nearly  doubling  between  1996  and  1999,  the  capitalization  of  equity  markets  then  fell  and  in 
2002  was  close  to  the  value  recorded  six  years  earlier.  The  decline  in  share  prices  continued  until 
March  2003,  they  have  since  risen  by  40  per  cent  in  the  United  States  and  France,  by  more  than 
70 per cent in Germany and by 30 per cent in Italy. 
In Italy and France price-earnings ratios are broadly in line with their long-term values. 
In the United States stock prices are high in relation to profits and dividends, reflecting low interest 
rates and expectations of higher growth. 
After a pause in 2002, the notional value of derivative products recorded another very large increase 
in 2003. For the seven leading industrial countries the value of listed derivatives rose from 110 per 
cent of GDP to 180 per cent, almost three times as high as in the nineties. 
The restructuring and capital strengthening carried out in recent years by the banking systems of the 
leading industrial countries, prompted by the supervisory authorities, enabled them to take the fall in 
stock prices between 2000 and 2002 and the sharp slowdown of the world economy in their stride. 
Banks were able  to cope with  the  difficult  conditions  in some countries  and absorb  the consequent 
losses. They provided support for the restructuring of important sectors of industry and thus prevented 
production crises and job losses from spreading. 
After slowing sharply between 2000 and 2002, bank credit began to expand more rapidly again. Last 
year outstanding loans in the leading industrial countries grew by 4.3 per cent. 
There has been an increase in loan securitizations in domestic and international markets that have 
lessened the concentration of risk by spreading it across the financial system. 
In  the  last  ten  years  companies  active  in  the  main  markets  have  increasingly  raised  funds  through 
bond  issues,  to  finance  investments  and  expand  their  operations.  In  Europe  a  major  factor  in  the 
growth of this market was the introduction of the single currency. 
The  outstanding  value  of  medium  and  long-term  bonds  issued  by  non-financial  corporations  in  the 
seven leading industrial countries roughly doubled between 1995 and 2002, rising from $2,800 billion, 
or  14  per cent  of  GDP,  to  $5,000  billion,  or  24  per  cent  of  GDP.  At  the  end of  2002  the corporate 
bonds outstanding in the United States amounted to more than $3,000 billion, in the United Kingdom 
to  more  than  $500  billion  and  in  France  to  more  than  $300  billion;  in  Italy  they  amounted  to  about 
$100 billion. 
The  flow  of  net  issues  remained  high  in  the  first  half  of  2003  in  the  United  States,  France  and 
Germany. 
The  spreads  on  emerging  countries’  dollar-denominated  securities  over  US  securities  have  nearly 
halved, falling from 8 to 4.2 percentage points between the middle of 2002 and the end of 2003, in 
concomitance with the resumption of the flow of funds towards these countries. 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2004
Investment and demand 
3. 
The ample supply of credit and the low cost of capital have fostered an acceleration in investment in 
the United States and the emerging economies. Wage moderation in all the developed countries, as 
well as in the emerging economies, has permitted a constant increase in the flow of self-financing. 
The production of goods and services continues to be reallocated from the developed countries to the 
emerging countries in order to take advantage of lower labour costs. 
In  the  fifteen  countries  of  the  European  Union,  between  1980  and  2001  the manufacturing  sector’s 
contribution to total value added declined from 24 to 20 per cent. The contribution of private services 
to income formation rose from 41 to 48 per cent. 
In  the  United  States,  over  the  same  period  the  contribution  of  manufacturing fell  from  21  to  14  per 
cent; that of private services rose from 52 to 61 per cent. 
The large flows of direct investment by US firms in Mexico and other countries of Latin America and in 
China and other Asian countries relate in good part to relatively low-tech production; in the emerging 
economies mid-tech production is also gaining ground. 
Investment  in  services  and  high-tech  production  continues  to  be  concentrated  in  the  developed 
countries. 
In the United States the easy monetary conditions, coupled with rapid population growth resulting from 
natural  demographic  increase  and  substantial  immigration,  led  to  investment  in  housing  recovering 
strongly in 2002; the growth accelerated in 2003. 
By contrast, business investment in plant continued to shrink, but there was a pronounced increase in 
firms’ spending on machinery and equipment, especially information technology. 
The composition of business investment is reflected in the trend in payroll employment, which in the 
manufacturing sector was 3.6 per cent lower in January than a year earlier while in services it was 0.4 
per cent higher. On the other hand, hourly labour productivity has risen sharply. In two years, between 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2001  and  the  fourth  quarter  of  2003,  labour  productivity  in  the  US  non-farm 
business sector increased by a total of nearly 10 per cent. 
Population growth, the high proportion of young people, tax relief and low interest rates have pushed 
up consumption demand, particularly for durable goods, which grew by 6.5 per cent in 2002 and 7.4 
per cent in 2003. 
Business investment has been sustained by the substantial rise in firms’ profits and the improvement 
in their overall financial position. The financial situation of households has also turned better. 
In Japan, against the background of a recovery in global demand, continuing abundance of liquidity 
and, above all, productivity gains by firms, private investment began growing again in the second half 
of 2002; in the first three quarters of 2003 the average increase was 8 per cent on an annual basis. 
There was a strong upturn in exports. 
In France, Germany and Italy, notwithstanding plentiful liquidity and the historically low cost of money, 
business  investment  diminished.  In  Italy  total  investment,  including  private  and  public-sector 
construction, fell in the first half of last year by nearly 10 per cent on an annual basis. 
The  capacity  utilization  rate  is  low  in  all  the  euro-area  countries.  Consumer  confidence,  which  was 
also weak, showed a slight improvement in Europe in 2003. 
In the euro area, after declining by 2.9 per cent in 2002, investment fell further by 2.6 per cent on an 
annual basis in the first half of 2003. 
Exports, weighed down by the appreciation of the euro, fell by 3.9 per cent in the first half of the year. 
The decrease was 2.7 per cent in Germany, 5.8 per cent in France and more than 13 per cent in Italy. 
Euro-area resident households’ expenditure, which was stationary in 2002, showed signs of increasing 
in the early part of 2003 but then slowed down again in the course of the year. 
In the third quarter euro-area and Italian exports staged a recovery, in concomitance with the pick-up 
in activity in the United States, Japan and the major Asian economies. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 3
Merchandise exports of the leading industrial countries, which had stopped growing in the latter part of 
2002 and the early months of 2003, began expanding again in the second half of the year in both the 
industrial countries and the emerging economies. 
The  large  external  deficit  of  the  United  States  has  fueled  the  growth  in  the  supply  of  dollar-
denominated assets on the international markets. Private capital flows to Latin America have resumed, 
while those to the emerging countries of Asia and the countries of central and eastern Europe have 
remained strong; the flow of direct investment from the industrial countries continues; investment and 
growth in the developing areas are gaining pace. 
Sustainability of the recovery 
4. 
The  business  cycle  and  growth  in  the  United  States  are  decisive  for  the  prospects  of  the  world 
economy. 
In 2003 world GDP amounted to $35,600 billion, of which US economic output accounted for 30 per 
cent or just under $11,000 billion. 
Japan’s GDP was $4,200 billion; that of the euro area was $8,100 billion, or more than one fifth of 
world  economic  output.  Italy,  with  annual  output  of  $1,400  billion  at  last  year’s  average  exchange 
rates, accounted for 4.1 per cent of the world economy, mainland China for 3.9 per cent. The other 
developing countries together accounted for 13 per cent of world output. 
The latest forecasts for the United States are for GDP growth of around 4.5 per cent in 2004 and 4 per 
cent in 2005. Inflation will remain low. The consequence is a positive forecast for the world economy in 
the next two years. 
The  acceleration  in  economic  activity,  under  way  since  the  middle  of  2003,  and  the  continuation  of 
rapid  growth  in  2004  and  2005  are  based  on  the  recouping  off  of  an  initial  situation  of  production 
below  capacity.  The  estimates  of  potential  GDP  growth  in  the  United  States  for  the  next  five  years 
range between 3.2 and 3.5 per cent annually, depending on the source. 
All  in  all  these  are  prudent  forecasts,  taking  into  account  the  productivity  gains  that  have  been 
achieved  in  the  last  three  years,  the  growth  of  the  population,  the  country’s  endowment  of  human 
capital and the heavy investment in technology and information systems. 
Productivity  performance  is  in  a  sense  the  key  to  an  economy’s  strength.  However,  the 
macroeconomic context in which the efficiency of the US productive system is set contains factors of 
risk for the sustainability of growth. 
The financial balance of the public sector, the linchpin of the policy of support for domestic demand, 
went from a surplus of around 1.3 per cent of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 4.8 per cent in 2003. 
The improvement in the balance between saving and investment of households and firms, amounting 
to  around  5  percentage  points  in  the  three  years  from  2001  to  2003,  offset  only  part  of  the 
deterioration in public-sector saving. 
Over  the  same  period  the  balance-of-payments  deficit  increased  by  about  one  percentage  point  of 
GDP. 
The sustainability of the public debt appears to hinge crucially on economic growth. On 2 February the 
Administration  announced  it  was  committed  to  reducing  the  federal  deficit  from  the  $521  billion 
projection for 2004 to $364 billion in 2005 and $237 billion in 2009. The intention is to lower the ratio of 
the deficit to GDP to 2 per cent. 
At the end of 2003 the amount of federal government debt held by the public was equal to 36 per cent 
of GDP. It should be recalled that the household saving rate is extremely low and household debt high 
in the United States by comparison with Europe and with Italy especially. 
The external deficit is equal to approximately 5 per cent of GDP. The net external investment position 
is now negative by one quarter of GDP. 
At  the  global  level  a  significant  statistical  discrepancy  is  to  be  found  between  the  US  balance-of-
payments deficit on current account and the rest of the world’s surplus; it is equal to one third of the 
US deficit. The growth in US foreign debt greatly exceeds the increase in assets held by the rest of the 
world. 
4 
 BIS Review 11/2004
The sustainability of the foreign debt and, consequently, of the exchange rate depends on the demand 
for  financial  claims  denominated  in  dollars  and  on  the  share  of  12  American  real  assets  held  by 
non-residents. There is probably a substantial volume of dollar-denominated financial assets owned by 
firms and individuals that are formally not resident in the United States but which are within the orbit of 
that country’s economic and political system. 
In a globalized financial system, the productivity of the US economy, the country’s political and military 
strength, the stability and prestige of its institutions, the efficiency and liquidity of its markets offer real 
and financial investments a promise of safe long-term yields. 
Large  exports  of  capital  from  the  United  States  and  high  direct  investment  in  all  the  emerging 
economies led to a stock of foreign assets worth $6,474 billion at the end of 2002, 31 per cent of this 
consisted of direct investment and 21 per cent of shares. 
At  the  end  of  2002  America’s  gross  foreign  liabilities  stood  at  $9,079  billion,  of  which  22  per  cent 
consisted  of  direct  investment,  13  per  cent  of  shares  and  34  per  cent  of  private  and  public-sector 
bonds; interest payments averaged around 3 per cent. 
Given its share of world output and finance, the US economic and financial system extends beyond 
the  nation’s  borders.  A  pattern  seen  during  the  last  century  for  other  economically  and  financially 
hegemonic  systems  is  being  repeated.  A  similar  tendency  can  be  seen  for  Japan  in  relation  to  the 
emerging economies of Asia. 
In response to the concern lest a large external deficit influence the level of the exchange rate, on the 
occasion  of  the  recent  meeting  of  the  Group  of  Seven  in  Boca  Raton,  Florida,  the  US  Treasury 
Secretary reaffirmed the Administration’s commitment to policies conducive to a strong dollar whose 
value would nonetheless continue to be determined by market forces. 
The direct investment of the more advanced countries promotes economic activity and introduces new 
technologies in those where the cost of labour is very low. 
A  valid  economic  and  institutional  framework  and  the  provision  of  infrastructure  can  create  the 
conditions  in  newly  industrialized  and  emerging  economies  that  will  enable  them  to  attract  foreign 
investment and boost growth. 
The free movement of capital is a powerful force in the expansion of the world economy. 
Even though China, India and other newly industrialized countries in Asia still account for only a limited 
portion  of  world  output,  their  economies  are  growing  more  than  twice  as  fast  as  those  of  the  more 
advanced countries and contribute significantly to the expansion of the global economy. 
Economic activity in Latin America has begun to expand again after the major crises of recent years. 
In  Argentina  maintaining  the  present  favourable  macroeconomic  trend  will  depend  on  the  efforts  to 
honour  the  undertakings  entered  into  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  achieve  a  satisfactory 
restructuring of the country’s foreign debt and rehabilitate the banking system. 
Parts  of  Africa,  still  crushed  by  a  heavy  debt  burden  and  a  series  of  institutional  and  other  local 
problems, remain excluded from the advance of the world economy. It is necessary to revive the debt-
relief procedures of the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative. 
Europe is not contributing to the growth of the world economy. A stronger performance on its part is 
also necessary to adjust the payments imbalances between the principal regions of the world. 
The continent’s demographic structure and the aging of the population appear to offer little incentive 
for  investment.  The  potential  growth  rate  of  the  European  economies  is  estimated  at  around  2  per 
cent. In recent years the expansion of output has been less than 2 per cent. This year it is expected to 
come near it. 
Despite slow growth, the area still shows a small surplus on external current account of less than 0.5 
per cent of GDP. 
Europe’s share of the volume of world exports has declined in the last few years. Since the start of 
2002 it has suffered from the appreciation of the euro. Taking a longer-term view, it is the insufficient 
increase in productivity that is holding back competitiveness and growth. 
Price  stability  within  the  euro  area  is  assured  by  the  single  monetary  policy.  Financial  stability  is 
guaranteed by controls and supervision at national level. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 5
To increase Europe’s growth potential, reforms along the lines of the commitments undertaken at the 
Lisbon European Council in 2000 are essential. 
Action  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  current  public  expenditure  to  GDP  on  a  permanent  basis  is  especially 
urgent. Measures to alter labour market arrangements are necessary. 
Immigration will tend to increase in the years to come as the European population ages. It must be 
strictly  regulated,  at  European  Union  level  as  well.  Effective  policies  of  integration  are  needed  to 
attenuate  the  sometimes  severe  repercussions  on  the  existing  social  balance;  they  can  offer  an 
opportunity for human development to people whose homelands are beset by severe economic and 
social problems and contribute to the growth of our own economies. 
Italy 
5. 
From 1989 to 1999 the Italian economy grew at an average annual rate of 1.5 per cent, compared with 
an average of 2.1 per cent in the fifteen countries of the European Union. 
For  Italy,  these  were  the years  in  which  the  external  accounts were  adjusted  and  the  public  sector 
deficit was sharply reduced. 
The country’s net external debt had risen gradually during the eighties, touching 11 per cent of GDP in 
1992. After the devaluation of the lira in September of that year, accompanied by the containment of 
inflation  through  incomes  policy  and  the  tightening  of  credit,  exports  picked  up  strongly,  fostering 
economic activity and helping to reduce the foreign debt. In October the yield on three-month Treasury 
bills reached 18 per cent. Trading of government securities on the secondary market continued without 
a break; a generalized crisis of Italy’s financial system was avoided. 
The Mexican crisis, which erupted in December 1994, spread to the main world markets in the early 
months of 1995. The flight into strong currencies led to a strengthening of the Deutschemark and large 
appreciation of  the  yen;  the  dollar  depreciated  sharply.  The crisis  overtook  the  lira  along with  other 
weak currencies; in March, in a matter of days the lira’s effective exchange rate fell by 10 per cent. 
Despite  a  surge  in  yields,  the  primary  and  secondary  markets  for  government  securities  again 
continued to operate without interruption. 
Inflationary pressures built up again. 
The  monetary  restriction  made  it  possible,  within  a  year,  to  restore  the  lira’s  exchange  rate  to  its 
end-1994 level. Inflation was reduced to a level close to the rates in the other European countries. 
The abatement of inflation and the prospect of participation in the single currency led to lower interest 
rates on the public debt. 
Italy’s  re-entry  into  the  European  Monetary  System  at  the  end  of  1996  definitively  stabilized  the 
exchange rate and permitted a gradual relaxation of monetary conditions. 
The public finances benefited from the lower cost of debt. The ratio of tax and social security receipts 
to  GDP  was  raised  by  about  5  percentage  points  between  the  second  half  of  the  eighties  and  the 
second half of the nineties. Public sector net borrowing was reduced below the 3 per cent limit in 1997. 
The restored stability of the exchange rate was not associated with acompatible trend in production 
costs. 
Partly owing to the limited growth of the economy, labour productivity in both industry and services did 
not rise in line with that of the other industrial countries. The export competitiveness of Italian products, 
which had improved in 1993-1996 as a result of the lira’s depreciation, began to deteriorate again. 
Between  1995  and  2001  labour  productivity  in  Italy  rose  on  average  by  1  per  cent  a  year;  in 
manufacturing the average annual increase was 1.2 per cent. 
In  Europe  in  the  same  period  labour  productivity  rose  by  1.4  per  cent  a  year  in  the  economy  as  a 
whole and 3.1 per cent in manufacturing. 
In the United States labour productivity in manufacturing grew by 3.7 per cent a year between 1995 
and 2001. 
Italy’s  share  of  world  exports,  which  stood  at  4.5  per  cent  in  1995  and  4.2  per  cent  in  1996,  has 
contracted steadily over the past seven years, falling from 3.7 in 2000 to around 3.3 per cent in 2003. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2004
French  exports  represented  5.3  per  cent  of  world  trade  in  1996  and  were  still  at  the  same  level  in 
2003. Germany’s share of world exports has risen from 10.3 per cent in 1996 to 12 per cent. 
Italy’s  loss  of  market  shares  is  due  to  the  relative  increase  in  production  costs  and  the  scant 
importance of exports of high-tech goods. 
The loss of competitiveness has had repercussions on industrial activity and economic growth. 
Between 1996 and 2003 industrial production expanded by 5 per cent in Italy, by 17 per cent in the 
euro  area.  The  growth  the  Italian  economy  lost  because  of  the  decline  in  international  trade 
competitiveness is estimated to have amounted to more than half a percentage point each year. 
Italian industry consists of a few large corporations and a myriad of small and medium-sized firms. The 
1996 census found that three quarters of manufacturing employment was in firms with fewer than 250 
employees: some 550,000 firms, or 99.7 per cent of all manufacturing companies in Italy. 
A significant part of this vast network of small and medium-sized enterprises is located in industrial 
districts,  which  taken  together  account  for  41  per cent  of  industrial  employment  and  45  per  cent  of 
employment in manufacturing. For the most part, district firms are export-oriented. The organizational 
model of the districts, which combine cooperation with competition, overcomes some of the limits of 
small size and permits high levels of innovation and efficiency. 
This is the Italian economic engine that in decades past created wealth and jobs. 
However, the steady loss of competitiveness and the weakness of domestic demand are threatening 
the growth prospects of an increasing number of firms. Productivity and employment are slowing. 
Smallness  is  not  conducive  to  research  and  development,  which  is  indispensable  for  technological 
innovation and international opening, both crucial factors in competition between national economies. 
In the last decade Italian industry has also been impoverished by the loss of important branches of 
manufacturing. 
The  Italian  car  industry  has  encountered  serious  problems.  The  market  share  of  the  largest  group, 
after peaking at 60 per cent in the eighties, fell to 27 per cent in 2003; since the end of the 1980s its 
European  market  share  has  declined  from  15  to  8  per  cent.  The  main  source  of  difficulty  was  a 
strategy  of  diversification  that  ultimately  diverted  resources  away  from  R&D  in  the  auto  segment. 
Thanks to the support of the banking system the group is now on the road to recovery and disposing 
of assets not strategic to the core business. It has reduced its debt. The latest data indicate that its 
market share has risen to over 30 per cent. 
The recent performance of the Italian economy has also been affected by the problems at two major 
food-processing groups. 
The  difficulties  of  Italian  manufacturing  industry  go  well  beyond  those  of  the  automobile  and  food-
processing sectors. 
Industrial  activity  in  Europe,  after  reaching  a  low  point  in  the  second  quarter  of  2003,  expanded 
sharply in the third quarter and again in the fourth. In Italy the decline between the middle of 2002 and 
the middle of 2003 was followed by a significant upturn in the third quarter and a small contraction in 
the fourth, in which GDP stagnated. In the euro area GDP grew by 0.3 per cent with respect to the 
third quarter. 
In January the confidence of households plunged in Italy. Provisional data show that industrial activity 
remains slack. 
Economic policy 
6. 
Economic  policy  must  restore  expectations  of  growth,  halt  the  slide  in  competitiveness  and  prevent 
new problems from affecting production. 
Partly owing to the difficult economic situation, the adjustment of the public accounts has relied largely 
on  temporary  measures.  The  public  debt  remains  high  by  international  standards.  There  is  still  a 
considerable  discrepancy  between  the  general  government  borrowing  requirement  on  a  cash  basis 
and net borrowing on an accruals basis. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 7
For the years to come, the European Commission has signaled the risk that the deficit may go above 
3 per cent of GDP and the need, in the absence of structural measures to cut current spending, to 
raise taxes. 
The  possibility  of  reducing  taxes  depends  on  achieving  faster  economic  growth.  In  the  short  term, 
support for domestic demand through public works programmes is necessary. 
The  banking  system,  which  has  been  greatly  strengthened  in  the  last  decade  by  privatizations  and 
extensive restructuring, is committed to sustaining firms that are sound and profitable but too small to 
confront today’s increasingly fierce international competition. 
The banks must help firms to grow to a size that permits them to improve product quality and increase 
efficiency. 
This year a very substantial effort will be required to finance major groups that need the resources to 
continue and expand their activity. The banks’ commitment to providing support for troubled industries, 
notwithstanding serious difficulties, is commendable. 
It is essential that the system should earn and enjoy the confidence of the public, the authorities, and 
political and institutional bodies. 
For half a century the savings entrusted to banks and channeled by them to firms have benefited de 
facto  from  an  absolute  guarantee.  The  cost  to  the  public  finances  of  banking  instability  and  the 
inevitable  difficulties  of  intermediaries  has  been  far  smaller  in  Italy  than  in  the  other  industrial 
economies and in the developing countries. 
As in the other advanced financial systems, the direct financing of firms in the market has spread in 
recent years. 
The banks have performed the service of placing the securities issued by firms with other institutions 
and with private investors; the latter sometimes may not have been fully aware of the real risk of the 
investment. 
It is intermediaries’ duty to inform savers correctly and advise them wisely. We have called on them to 
examine the features of these instruments more carefully and to verify the full awareness on the part 
of households of the risks assumed, according to ethical and professional standards. 
Partly at our urging, banks are moving to satisfy those who have committed even modest savings to 
such investments without sufficient awareness. 
Cases of this kind must not recur. Trust must be restored in a component of the financial market that is 
crucial to the growth of firms. It must be reiterated that high yields are necessarily accompanied by 
high risks. 
At the end of 2002 the savings entrusted by households to the banks in the form of deposits and other 
funding  instruments  amounted  to  €760  billion.  At  the  end  of  2003  total  funds  raised  stood  at 
approximately €1,100 billion. 
The Bank of Italy protects savings and savers through the stability of intermediaries. It promotes the 
efficiency  and  competitiveness  of  the  credit  system  and  thereby  favours  the  allocation  of  the  funds 
raised for the growth of production and the formation of new savings. 
At  the  end  of  2002  households’  portfolios  contained  a  total  of  €290  billion  of  corporate  shares  and 
bonds. 
Corporate failures have direct repercussions on the savings of households, as well as on the banks. 
The Bank of Italy intervenes promptly with intermediaries so that loan losses are kept within the limits 
of banks’ capital and reserves and do not affect the savings entrusted to them. 
In  an  economy  in  which  firms  increasingly  finance  themselves  in  the  market,  the  value  of  this 
component  of  savings  depends  in  the  first  place  on  the  stability  of  the  firms  themselves.  The 
truthfulness and quality of firms’ financial reports and the other information they disclose to the public 
are fundamental. 
The system of internal and external corporate controls must be strengthened. 
We look upon the work of Parliament to improve and supplement the system of controls in the light of 
recent events  with  confidence  and respect.  The  unitary  oversight  of  the  credit  function  must  not  be 
impaired. The independence of the institutions responsible for controls is of fundamental importance. 
8 
 BIS Review 11/2004
Drawing  on  the  experience  of  the  most  advanced  financial  systems,  the  instruments of  intervention 
must  be  strengthened  and  more  resources  made  available  so  that  the  supervisory  authority  for 
companies  and  the  stock  exchange  can  take  timely  action  to  limit  the  frequency,  magnitude  and 
effects of corporate failures. 
A large share of national savings is entrusted by citizens to the State. 
The security of the savings entrusted to the public sector is fully guaranteed by the State’s power to 
levy taxes. 
However,  too  high  a  level  of  public  debt  adversely  affects  the  financing  available  for  firms  and  for 
investment. By limiting growth, it prevents the formation of new savings. 
In the current situation of the Italian economy, it is essential to reduce the public debt in relation to 
GDP. 
The prospect of closer economic policy coordination within the Government will increase the efficacy 
of measures; it can favour more effective action on the public finances. 
The recovery of the world economy also offers Italy an opportunity to overcome the present phase of 
uncertainty. 
Capitalizing on the resources of enterprise, labour and technology that it commands or can command, 
the  Italian  economy  must  make  a  concrete  start  on  structural  action,  the  reforms  needed  for  faster 
growth. 
An  organic  vision  of  the  objectives  and  instruments,  the  start  of  the  action  plans  can  restore 
confidence among all economic agents: the financial system, firms, consumers and savers. 
Looking at the experience of the most advanced economies, it is necessary for Europe to relaunch 
programmes  for  infrastructure,  innovation  and  research.  The  progress  made  in  economic  and 
institutional integration and the Union’s enlargement provide a solid foundation. 
In Italy as well we must move resolutely in the direction of faster growth, higher employment, security 
for the elderly and valid prospects for the young. 
It can be done. We must do it. 
BIS Review 11/2004 
 9
