Lucas Papademos: Interview with Il Sole 24 Ore 
English  translation  of  an  interview  with  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, conducted by Beda Romano (Il Sole 24 Ore), Frankfurt, 5 August 2004. 
The interview was published in Il Sole 24 Ore, in the edition dated 8 August 2004 and the publication 
of the translation was authorised by Il Sole 24 Ore. 
 The oil price has reached its peak for the last 20 years (in nominal terms at least). The price 
since the beginning of the year averages out at $37/barrel. Some governments are already very 
concerned, talking in terms of an oil crisis, and many are recalling the recession in the 1970s. 
What is your assessment? 
The  assessment  of  the  magnitude  of  the  problem  and  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  increase  in  oil 
prices is somewhat complex. It must be put in perspective. Oil prices have been rising since the end of 
1998. If we compare the recent increase in the price of oil with two similar episodes, we will note that, 
in percentage terms, the increase since 1998 is similar to the one recorded between December 1973 
and January 1974 and exceeds the rise between the end of 1978 and the end of 1979. The same 
conclusion is reached regardless of whether oil prices are measured in dollars or in euro.  
So there are good grounds for fears of a repetition of the crisis that struck in the early 1970s? 
There are major differences from that period. First of all, the increase in oil prices in the early 1970s 
occurred over a limited, two-month period, whereas the current upward trend in the price of oil has 
lasted 67 months: it has already exerted much of its impact on inflation and growth. I would also add 
that, in real terms, the oil price is at a relatively low level and far lower today than it was in the late 
1970s. Moreover the reliance of many economies on oil has declined.  
In other words, the oil price trend has to be viewed in perspective. All the same, the increase 
over the last few months cannot fail to make an impact on the European economy, in terms of 
both a rise in inflation and a decline in growth.  
It has been estimated that a 10% increase in the oil price pushes inflation up by about 0.1 percentage 
point  per  annum  in  the  first  year  and  by  roughly  the  same  amount  in  each  of  the  two  subsequent 
years.  The  impact  in  the  first  year  is  mainly  direct,  whereas  the  repercussions  are  indirect  in  the 
following two years, meaning that they reflect the effect on the prices of non-oil products and possibly 
“second-round” influences thorough wages. 
And what about the impact on growth? 
According  to  our  estimates,  a  10%  increase  in  the  price  of  oil  reduces  growth  by  about 
0.05 percentage point in the first year and in the second year and by approximately 0.1 percentage 
point in the third year. In other words, the size of the impact that an increase in the oil price has on 
growth and inflation is virtually the same over a three-year period. The direction of the impact is of 
course different and the time lags involved also vary.  
Be that as it may, the impact on growth seems to be more spread out over time.  
Quite.  However,  I  should  like  to  stress  that  these  estimates  embody  a  degree  of  uncertainty. 
Moreover,  it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  the  repercussions  of  a  rise  in  oil  prices  on  the  economic 
variables also depend on the economic situation at the time. For instance, if the oil price increase is 
mainly a consequence of robust global growth, the negative impact of that oil price increase on euro 
area growth could be offset. 
The ECBs Governing Council met on Thursday, leaving the cost of money unchanged at 2.0%. 
What was its assessment of the economic situation in the light of the latest figures? 
At the present time, we confirm the scenario of a gradual recovery in the euro area’s economy. At the 
same time, we believe that inflation prospects remain compatible with price stability over the medium 
term. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 1
In  its  last  communiqué  in  July,  the  ECB  cited  elements  of  uncertainty  in  the  economic 
situation.  In  its  last  report  on  the  European  economy,  published  on  Wednesday,  the 
International Monetary Fund explained that the risks are still on the downside. 
There are still uncertainties and risks. The oil price is a risk to be taken into account. If the price of oil 
were to remain high for some time, it might have an impact on growth, albeit to a limited extent in the 
first  year.  I  would  also  add  that  consumer  confidence  remains  low,  even  though  there  are  signs  of 
recovery in consumption in some countries, such as France and Italy. On the other hand, the relative 
strength of the economic expansion in the first quarter, robust growth worldwide, and the increase in 
industrial production in the euro area are positive developments all suggesting that growth in the euro 
area might exceed the rate previously forecast for this year. 
What uncertainties do you see on the inflation front Europe-wide? 
The oil price trend creates inflationary pressures over the short term. If the oil price were to remain in 
excess of but not far above $40/barrel for some time, inflation in the euro area would exceed 2.0% per 
annum (it stood at 2.4% in July - editorial note) until the end of 2004 and for a few months in 2005. 
That  being  said,  from  our  point  of  view,  and  taking  account  of  the  likely  influence  of  all  the 
determinants of price developments, we believe that annual inflation will average below 2.0% in both 
2005 and 2006. 
Despite the increase in the oil price, wage moderation has been striking. In Germany, what is 
more,  the  two  sides  of  industry  have  struck  agreements  in  some  sectors  in  favour  of  an 
increase in the working week without any wage increase. 
Indeed, until now, there have been no signs of inflation spilling over into wages. Wage moderation has 
helped  to  contain  inflationary  pressures,  partly  due  also  to  the  high  unemployment  rate  in  the  euro 
area  and  the  gradual  pace  of  the  recovery.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  annual  growth  rate  of 
compensation per employee declined to 1.9% in the euro area in the first quarter of 2004. Total hourly 
labour costs increased by 2.5% in the same quarter, somewhat faster than in the previous quarter, but 
still  moderately.  That  being  said,  we  are  keeping  a  close  watch:  we  want  to  prevent  the  recent 
increase in inflation and, in particular, the visible rise in oil prices from spilling over into wages. What 
we said in July still stands: we remain vigilant and we are monitoring the situation and all the risks to 
price stability very carefully. There is, however, no bias regarding the monetary policy stance in the 
future. 
In its latest report on the euro area, the IMF said it took a cautious line on the Monetary Union’s 
economic prospects. While it was about it, it lowered the euro area’s non-inflationary potential 
growth from 2.5 to 2.0%. 
First of all, I would point out that the IMF estimate is broadly similar to that of the ECB (2.0-2.5%), it is 
equal to the lower limit of the range of our estimated potential growth. However, these estimates are 
surrounded  by  many  uncertainties:  the  European  economy’s  modest  growth  performance  in  recent 
years and the progressive ageing of the population may have swayed the IMF’s calculations. 
Might the IMF be suggesting that, with growth at 2.0%, the euro area is creating inflation? 
Not necessarily. When appraising the potential emergence of new inflationary pressures, it is not only 
the actual growth rate that has to be compared with the potential rate, but also the level from which 
growth started out at the time of the recovery and the remaining gap between the actual and potential 
GDP levels. In other words, 2.0% growth does not automatically mean further inflation, regardless of 
the size of the so-called GDP gap and the rate of unemployment. 
The  ageing  of  the  population  might  lead  some  observers  to  think  that  Europe’s  potential 
growth is set to fall, or at any rate to remain inexorably low, at a time when the United States 
continues to present growth rates that are double those of Europe. 
It would be a mistake to reach such a conclusion in general. Other factors could counteract the effects 
of  the  ageing  of  the  population.  The  factors  explaining  the  difference  in  growth  rates  between  the 
United States and the euro area are population trends, differences in the growth rates of productivity 
and the degrees of labour force utilisation. The negative impact of population ageing can and must be 
offset by introducing measures to boost the contribution of the other two factors to euro area growth. 
2 
 BIS Review 45/2004
To sum up: the ECB remains cautiously optimistic as to the trend in the European economy. 
Would you say that interest rates stand at the appropriate level? 
You  will  have  noticed  that  we  have  preferred  since  last  April  to  cease  using  this  term  in  our 
communiqués. 
Is it no longer appropriate to use the adjective “appropriate”? 
In a way. We have preferred to cease using the word so as to dispel the impression that had prevailed 
in  financial  markets  that  by  using  it,  we  are  committing  ourselves  to  maintaining  interest  rates 
unchanged for a considerable period of time. 
It is a controversial decision. Some observers are wondering whether the ECB may perhaps be 
losing some of its transparency. 
This decision must not lead people to think that the ECB is less transparent about its policy stance or 
that  it  no  longer  wants  to  guide  the  markets.  We  believe  that  monetary  policy  must  be,  generally 
speaking, predictable in the light of our strategy and goals. However, this does not mean that we have 
to send out specific signals or express a “bias” regarding the future stance of monetary policy. Indeed, 
I take the view that, in general, although there can be necessary exceptions, it is not a good idea for 
central banks to give overly-clear, explicit indications about the future policy stance. Policy decisions 
are made in an uncertain environment. Should an unforeseen event arise, a central bank would be 
forced to surprise the markets unpleasantly. 
BIS Review 45/2004 
 3
