Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Ensuring stability in the Islamic financial system  
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the 3rd Annual Islamic 
Finance Summit, London, 13 January 2004. 
 Introduction 
I.  
“In  its  nascent  history  spanning  three  decades,  Islamic  banking  and  finance  has  undergone  rapid 
growth  and  transformation.  From  an  industry  striving  to  fulfil  the  religious  obligations  of  the  Muslim 
community, it is now a multi-billion dollar industry driven by well-defined business considerations and 
profit optimisation, whilst steadfastly upholding the Islamic principles. Indeed, this progress has been 
achieved against a challenging global financial and economic environment. The further development 
of  Islamic  finance  requires  for  it  to  be  endowed  with  the  right  pre-requisites  that  will  ensure  the 
evolution  of  an  intermediation  system  that  is  viable,  resilient  and  sustainable.  Of  essence,  is  the 
timeliness  to  develop  an  Islamic  financial  industry  that  is  comprehensive  and  sound,  that  promotes 
financial stability and growth through the robustness of its regulatory framework, the dynamism of its 
inter-connected  markets,  the  strength  of  its  financial  infrastructure  and  the  responsiveness  and 
sophistication of its products and services.” 
It is my honour to be invited to speak before this distinguished audience at this 3rd Annual Islamic 
Finance  Summit  organized  by  Euromoney.  In  the  development  of  the  Islamic  financial  system, 
significant attention has been given to ensuring financial stability. Several initiatives have been taken 
to promote financial stability in the Islamic financial system and thereby strengthen its foundations. My 
address this morning will focus on these initiatives. Allow me to also take this opportunity to share with 
you Malaysia’s experience in this endeavor.  
Current trends in the international financial landscape 
II. 
The international financial landscape is constantly being reshaped and transformed by the rapid pace 
of globalisation, financial liberalisation and the advances in technology. Globalisation has manifested 
itself  with  the  geographic  expansion  and  consolidation  of  financial  establishments  beyond  national 
boundaries and the massive flow of financial resources across borders. This has unleashed a greater 
volume of resources through the financial system, increasing the importance of the financial sector. 
These trends have been reinforced by the advances in technology, which has radically changed the 
way  we  do  business  and  the  structure  of  markets  and  their  dynamics  in  the  national  and  global 
economy.  This  has  resulted  in  an  environment  in  which  businesses,  markets  and  economies  are 
becoming internationally more integrated and inter-dependent.  
Financial  liberalisation  and  deregulation  of  the  financial  services  industry  has  also  resulted  in 
increased competition and the proliferation of new financial products and services. Also, the business 
operations  of  global  financial  conglomerates  now  span  over  multiple  jurisdictions.  Against  these 
developments, regulators have reassessed existing prudential rules and have adopted a consolidated 
supervision framework to prevent regulatory gaps that could become a source of systemic concern.  
While  deregulation  of  the  financial  sector  has  expanded  the  range  of  opportunities,  it  has  also 
increased  the  incidence  of  instability  in  the  financial  markets.  Heightened  uncertainties  and  greater 
volatility in financial markets have required greater attention on building more robust risk management 
capabilities. Greater investments have gone towards refining risk quantification techniques to enhance 
the overall risk management framework. There is also greater emphasis on risk management in the 
new international regulations such as in the Basel II capital framework. Maintaining relevant financial 
data  and  information  has  also  become  more  important,  and  has  resulted  in  large  investments  to 
enhance data mining and IT capability.  
While the global financial markets have become increasingly sophisticated, unstable market conditions 
and the failure of large financial institutions have prompted more stringent regulatory requirements and 
increased  transparency.  The  message  is  that  integrity  and  transparency  is  critical  for  financial 
institutions to gain public and investor confidence. In response to a number of high-profile corporate 
failures, there has also been a review of international accounting standards and practices to address 
inadequacies in the existing standards. In some countries, independent oversight committees/public 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 1
boards have been formed to establish auditing standards and to impose new rules on auditing quality 
control  and  auditor  independence.  The  trend  is,  therefore,  towards  improving  the  value  of  financial 
reporting and increasing the overall level of transparency. 
The  1997  Asian  financial  crisis  also  resulted  in  a  reexamination  of  policies  and  practices.  This  has 
prompted extensive financial restructuring and reform to strengthen domestic financial systems. Five 
years after the crisis, the financial systems in East Asia have emerged significantly strengthened and 
demonstrated greater resilience.  
Pre-requisites to a stable Islamic financial system 
III. 
Despite  a  more  challenging  environment,  the  development  of  Islamic  finance  as  a  viable  form  of 
financial  intermediation  has  moved  forward.  It  is  while  Islamic  finance  is  still  at  its  early  stage  of 
development that the opportunity has been taken to strengthen its foundations and put in place the 
pre-requisites that will pave the way for its development and safeguard the stability of the system. 
Not only has closer attention been given to the supervisory, regulatory and legal dimension but also to 
the development of the financial infrastructure and the markets as well to institutional development. In 
essence, the prudential regulatory design has been complemented by concurrent efforts to develop 
Islamic financial markets, the Islamic institutions and the financial instruments. Allow me to highlight 
the key areas that are important to this objective. 
First, effective regulatory and supervisory framework 
The  hallmark  of  a  well-developed  financial  infrastructure  is  an  effective  legal,  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework which would underpin the stability of the financial system. The regulatory and 
supervisory  function  is  an  indispensable  and  vital  component  of  the  financial  infrastructure.  For  the 
Islamic  financial  system,  this  framework  also  needs  to  be  consistent  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Shariah principles, including the establishment of a Shariah council, which provide assurance that the 
strategic  direction,  the  formulation  of  policies  and  the  conduct  of  financial  transactions  are  in 
compliance with the Shariah principles. This would need to be supported by an efficient court system 
that can effectively deal with all Islamic banking and finance cases, whose decisions are enforceable 
over  the  range  of  financial  issues  such  as contracts,  bankruptcy,  collateral  and  loan recovery  all  of 
which are essential for businesses to operate. The legal framework should also deal with supervisory 
issues,  including  the  relevant  regulatory  agencies  involved  in  the  supervision  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions  and  encompass  the  licensing  and  conduct  of  Islamic  banking  business.  The  relevant 
agencies should have clear responsibilities and objectives to ensure effective financial supervision.  
While  the  conventional  banking  system  is  guided  by  the  Basel  core  principles  which  outlines  the 
minimum  requirements  for  the  supervisory  regime,  these  principles  need  to  be  reviewed  from  the 
perspective  of  Islamic  banking,  taking  into  account  the  unique  characteristics  and  risks  involved  in 
Islamic banking and its products and services. 
A fundamental issue is the setting of prudent and appropriate minimum capital adequacy requirements 
for  Islamic  banks.  Such  requirements  need  to  reflect  the  risks  that  the  banks  undertake.  The 
framework  devised  would  need  to  incorporate  fundamental  Islamic  concepts.  The  principle  of 
Mudharabah, 
that  can  also  be  construed  as 
quasi-shareholders. Similarly, risk weights assigned to individual asset components need to reflect the 
nature  of  inherent  risks  involved.  It  is  not  as  straightforward  as  a  debtor-creditor  relationship  in 
conventional  banking  but  also  needs 
the 
investor-entrepreneur relationship that is inherent in Islamic banking.  
Islamic banking operations therefore need to be governed by its own standards and best practices in 
parallel with the international best practice. The establishment of the Islamic Financial Services Board 
(IFSB)  in  2002  as  an  international  prudential  standard-setting  body  to  promulgate  the  international 
regulatory and supervisory standards for Islamic financial institutions is aimed towards achieving this 
objective. In this regard, the IFSB has already made progress in developing the prudential standards 
on  the  capital  adequacy  and  risk  management  framework.  These  standards  are  expected  to  be 
completed in 2005. In addition, the IFSB will commence work on developing standards on corporate 
governance. 
At  present,  some  countries  have  adopted  the  Basle  Accord  standards  in  their  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework for their Islamic banking industry. However, these standards do not adequately 
for  example,  creates  a  class  of  depositors 
include  other 
risks  arising 
inherent 
from 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2004
address  the  requirements  of  Islamic  banking  operations  and  transactions,  resulting  in  gaps  in  the 
standards. Therefore, these gaps will be taken into account with respect to the capital treatment and 
risk associated for the different types of Islamic financial contracts to truly reflect their features and 
characteristics.  
While certain products in Islamic finance by their nature may not attract capital, the Islamic financial 
institutions  need  to  have  a  more  rigorous  risk  management  systems  in  managing  the  funds  placed 
under this arrangement. In this regard, the risk management standard needs to specifically address 
this  concern.  The  Islamic  financial  institutions  can  expect  to  be  better  regulated  and  supervised 
following the adoption of the standards to be issued by the IFSB. The IFSB will also have a prominent 
role  in  facilitating  the  streamlining  of  the  standards  covering  the  cross-border  supervision  issues 
including the home-host supervisor issue. 
Since  its  establishment  just  over  a  year  ago,  the  IFSB  has  attracted  a  wide  participation.  To-date, 
there  are  13  full  members,  3  associate  members  and  20  observers  in  the  IFSB.  This  encouraging 
development demonstrates the keen interest towards the orderly and sound development of Islamic 
banking  and  finance.  The  wider  participation  which  also  includes  several  international  and  regional 
multi-lateral  agencies  will  facilitate  the  consultation  process  and  the  adoption  of  these  standards. 
Another  important  role  to  be  played  by  IFSB  is  in  the  harmonization  of  the  different  Shariah 
interpretations  towards  a  more  universally  accepted  practice.  These  positive  developments  are 
expected to bring about a more robust regulatory and supervisory framework for the Islamic financial 
institutions to promote financial stability in the system. 
towards  maintaining  market  confidence,  and  strengthening 
Second, existence of strong corporate governance 
It is also recognised that good corporate governance reinforces sound regulation and supervision. It 
contributes 
transparency  and 
accountability. Its emphasis is to be value-oriented and promote fairness and justice with respect to all 
stakeholders of the banking institution. For corporate governance to work, good corporate practices 
need  to  be  instilled  and  embedded  in  all  aspects  of  the  operations  and  at  all  levels  within  the 
organisation.  
Indeed, Islam strongly advocates all forms of positive governance. These values and ethical conduct 
have already been in built and are inherent in the community. Islamic corporate governance serves 
through its underlying principles of economic well-being of the Ummah, universal brotherhood, justice, 
accountabilities and equitable distribution of income. Therefore, while the virtues of Islam have always 
advocated good corporate governance, the challenge to us lies in its application. For Islamic banking 
institutions, good corporate governance should have already been embedded in all aspects of their 
operations. 
Closely  linked  to  the  corporate  governance  issue  is  the  role  of  market  discipline.  Central  to  the 
effectiveness of the corporate governance arrangements is the empowerment of shareholders. This 
would  mean  providing  the  conditions  under  which  shareholders  have  both  the  incentive  and  the 
means to act to discipline Management. The market for corporate control is an important way in which 
shareholders  exercise,  in  effect,  an  ultimate  discipline  over  bank  Management  on  the  premise  of 
allocating capital where sound management is practised.  
Third, greater transparency and disclosure of information 
Transparency  and  disclosure  is  essential  particularly  in  a  rapidly  changing  environment.  While  the 
comprehensive  and  timely  availability  of  financial  information  will  increase  market  discipline,  the 
disclosure of information needs to be complemented with the ability of the market players to analyse, 
and appropriately interpret the information. 
Closely  related  to  this  issue  is  the  need  to  strengthen  the  framework  for  consumer  protection  to 
provide  an  avenue  for  redress  due  to  lack  of  transparency.  This  is  even  more  relevant  in  the 
multi-facet role played by the Islamic financial institutions in dealing with Islamic banking customers as 
the Islamic financial transaction is not merely based on the lender and borrower relationship as is the 
case  in  conventional  banking.  The  move  towards  the  adoption  of  the  supervised  market  approach 
requires continuous efforts to enhance product disclosures and to elevate the level of financial literacy 
of consumers.  
BIS Review 3/2004 
 3
To further enhance transparency in the conduct of banking institutions, proper accounting standards 
need to be in place to reflect the true and fair value of banking operations that would lead to greater 
accountability  and  responsibility  on  the  part  of  the  banking  institution.  Accurate  financial  reporting 
requires a body of financial accountants that are well-versed in Shariah principles to ensure that the 
accounts are not only drawn in accordance with the international accounting standards but are also in 
line with Islamic principles. This is to enable the investors and supervisors to obtain the true and fair 
assessment  of  the  Islamic  institution’s  financial  condition  and  the  profitability  of  the  business. 
Transparency  and  disclosure  is  even  more  crucial  in  Islamic  banking  where  the  concept  of 
mudharabah (profit-sharing) entails an investor-entrepreneur relationship and is a significant element 
in sourcing of funds. 
The  establishment  of  the  Accounting  and  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions 
(AAOIFI)  has  made  a  significant  contribution  in  formulating  and  issuing  accounting  and  auditing 
standards for Islamic financial institutions. The standards issued by AAOIFI have contributed towards 
improved  quality  of  financial  statements  and  reporting  methodology  of  Islamic  financial  institutions. 
AAOIFI has also issued standards on the role of the Shariah committee as well as the code of ethics 
that  should  govern  the  accountants  and  auditors  of  Islamic  financial  institutions.  Efforts  by  AAOIFI 
have  also  accelerated  the  pace  of  transparency  and  corporate  governance  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions.  
Fourth, risk management framework 
Emphasis on improved corporate governance goes hand in hand with the need for improvements in 
risk management standards. Sound risk management practices will minimise adverse consequences 
faced  by  financial  institutions  during  periods  of  uncertainty.  Robust  internal  controls  to  provide 
qualitative standards are also necessary to complement the quantitative analysis of risk to provide a 
check and balance in the overall risk management practices.  
Effective risk management systems is central to supervisory efforts. The risk management system in 
Islamic institutions need to be able to address the unique characteristics and attributes associated with 
Islamic financing operations involving financial contracts and instruments which may give rise to other 
risks  besides  credit  risk.  The  risk  management  infrastructure  needs  to  be  in  place  to  facilitate  the 
identification, measurement, monitoring and control of all inherent risks present in all the various types 
of financing so that the specific risks involved may be ‘unbundled’. The complexities of the respective 
risks in the Islamic financial instruments therefore need to be fully explored and quantified to provide 
for their effective assessment and management.  
In the area of Islamic banking, the requirement to manage the risks becomes more important because 
of the unique peculiarities in the contracts. Basel II has, to a certain extent, incorporated some aspects 
in  the  identification  of  risks,  in  particular  the  credit,  market  and  operational  risks  that  can  be 
assimilated by the Islamic banks in terms of its product offering. However, further refinement will have 
to be done by the Islamic financial specialists to assess the appropriateness of the capital definition in 
particular as outlined by the Basel committee. One of the considerations that need to be addressed in 
assessing  the  risks  associated  with  the  Islamic  bank  is  with  regard  to  the  capital  charge  on  its 
investment accounts. Basel II does not address this unique feature in its framework. Assets that are 
funded  by  monies  in  the  investment  account  may  not  require  the  capital  charge  for  the  purpose  of 
capital  adequacy  measurement  except  in  the  case  of  misconduct  and  negligence.  Similarly,  if  the 
Islamic  banking  institutions  were  to  be  more  engaged  in  the  profit-sharing  arrangement  in  its 
balance-sheets, it will require the Islamic bank to have a more rigorous risk management assessment 
and monitoring mechanism. This is an area that is being addressed by the Islamic Financial Services 
Board  in  the  drafting  of  the  standard  on  the  overall  risk  management  framework  for  the  Islamic 
financial community that takes into account this unique requirement of Islamic banking.  
While  risk  mitigation  is  desirable  in  Islamic  finance,  further  improvements  need  to  be  made  to  the 
existing risk management framework. New hedging products which are scarce in the market need to 
be  developed  in  the  quest  to  seek  for  compatible  risk  mitigating  products.  In  accordance  with  the 
principles  Islamic  the  Shariah  has  allowed  the  Ummah  to  undertake  juristic  reasoning  based  on 
contemporary  analysis  and  logical  inference.  Indeed,  the  development  of  new  hedging  products  is 
something  that  the  Islamic  financial  community  can  look  forward  to.  In  conventional  banking,  these 
instruments are used to mitigate risk. Indeed the Islamic financial community will soon develop such 
products for this purpose. 
4 
 BIS Review 3/2004
Fifth, effective and dynamic Shariah framework 
One of the central issues towards developing a dynamic Islamic financial industry is the Shariah. The 
Shariah should always be viewed as an enabler to innovation and creativity, rather than a constraint. 
Efforts, therefore, need to be enhanced to fully appreciate and maximise the true potential and wisdom 
of  the  Shariah.  The  collaboration  among  the  Shariah  scholars,  practitioners,  researchers  and 
regulators  to  undertake  in-depth  studies  and  research  to  create  new  products  will  provide  the 
fundamental foundation towards the development of a dynamic Islamic financial system.  
Sixth, development of comprehensive legal infrastructure  
Another important pre-condition to sustain the continued growth of Islamic banking and finance is a 
comprehensive  legal  infrastructure  for  legal  redress  arising  from  Islamic  financial  transactions.  The 
legal  infrastructure  needs  to  comprise  both  effective  regulatory  and  substantive  laws  as  weIl  as 
appropriate adjudicative fora for parties to resolve disputes relating to Islamic financial transactions. To 
address this, efforts are needed to develop a sufficient number of competent lawyers and judges that 
are  equipped  with  sound  knowledge  and  expertise  in  both  Shariah  and  civil  laws  to  deal  with  such 
matters.  
Seventh, development of vibrant Islamic financial markets 
In  the  more  developed  financial  centers,  the  development  of  inter-related  financial  markets  has 
contributed  towards  the  stability  in  the  financial  system.  This  is  an  area  of  priority  for  the  Islamic 
financial  industry.  In  this  regard,  the  development  of  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system 
including the various components of the financial markets would meet the requirements of the various 
differentiated  groups.  The  challenge  in  the  Islamic  banking  industry  is,  therefore,  to  steer  the 
development of an Islamic financial system towards one which is more dynamic and responsive. The 
development of an Islamic financial system should include the key components comprising the Islamic 
money  market  and  the  Islamic  equity  and  debt  capital  market,  given  the  strong  linkages, 
inter-dependence and synergies among these components in the system. Of importance is the Islamic 
money market to act as a platform to provide a ready source of short-term funding and investment. 
Financial instruments and interbank investment will allow surplus banks to channel funds to the deficit 
banks, thereby maintaining the funding mechanism necessary to promote stability in the system. The 
Islamic money market will also facilitate the conduct of monetary policy.  
The Islamic financial system also needs to include the capital market to provide an alternative source 
of financing, as well as to create broader and more diverse Islamic financial instruments for investors. 
The  equity  and  bond  markets  will  provide  a  more  balanced  allocation  of  financial  and  economic 
resources. This would result in a more efficient distribution of risks within the system, thus creating 
stability  in  the  system.  The  equity  and  bond  markets  would  also  provide  an  avenue  for  raising 
long-term capital. With a wider spectrum of instruments in the market, fund managers would be able to 
manage their portfolios better and spread their risk according to their desired risk tolerance, thereby 
contributing toward greater stability.  
Complementing these financial markets is the development of non-bank Islamic financial institutions. 
Takaful,  or  Islamic  insurance,  provides  the  risk  protection  to  its  policyholders  and  serves  as  an 
important  mobiliser  of  long-term  funds.  In  addition,  development  financial  institutions,  savings 
institutions  and  housing  credit  institutions  need  to  be  developed  to  meet  the  diversified  customer 
demands. These specialised institutions will meet the different requirements of the economy.  
Malaysia’s experience in the development and management of the Islamic finance 
IV. 
The  strategy  adopted  by  Malaysia  has  been  to  develop  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial  system. 
Malaysia started with the establishment of one Islamic bank to spearhead the introduction of Islamic 
banking products and services, and at the same time, identified the relevant financial segments that 
were required to support the expansion of Islamic banking activities. The Islamic financial system in 
Malaysia operates in parallel with the conventional system. 
Following the establishment of Islamic banking was the establishment of takaful or Islamic insurance 
to provide the coverage for Islamic housing mortgages. As these two segments progressed, Malaysia 
expanded  its  implementation  approach  by  allowing  the  conventional  banking  institutions  to  offer 
Islamic  banking  products  and  services  on  a  window  basis.  To  preserve  the  integrity  of  the  system, 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 5
firewalls between the conventional and Islamic funds were put in place. It was made mandatory for the 
Islamic  banking  operations  in  these  institutions  to  be  separated  from  the  conventional  banking 
operations, either electronically or through other designated means. This move created more players 
in  the  Islamic  financial  system  and  provided  the  platform  for  the  establishment  of  a  vibrant  Islamic 
money market. The Islamic money market served as a platform for the Islamic financial institutions to 
manage  their  short-term  portfolio  adjustments.  Recognising  the  importance  of  the  capital  market, 
Malaysia initiated the development of a private Islamic financial securities market in the early nineties. 
The Islamic financial system today has emerged as an important component of the overall Malaysian 
financial system that contributes to the growth and development of the Malaysian economy.  
Malaysia  has  also  adopted  legal  reform,  self-regulation  and  measures  to  encourage  market-based 
regulation.  New  measures  have  been  introduced  to further  improve  the  level  of  governance  among 
banking  institutions.  This  includes  reviewing  the  responsibility  and  accountability  of  the  Board  and 
Management  as  well  as  requiring  for  the  setting  up  of  various  Board  committees.  In  the  case  of 
Malaysia,  the  High Court of  Malaysia has  dedicated  high court  judges  to  preside  on  litigated cases 
over matters relating to Islamic banking and finance. To undertake a holistic legal review, the Central 
Bank  of  Malaysia  has  set up  a  Law  Review  Committee  to  review  the  common law-based  domestic 
legislations to assimilate the Shariah principles with the aim of removing any impediments to ensure 
the unhindered and efficient functioning of the Islamic banking and financial system. The Central Bank 
Act  has  also  been  amended  to  provide  for  the  establishment  of  a  Shariah  Advisory  Council  at  the 
Central Bank as the sole authority and reference on all Shariah matters pertaining to Islamic banking 
and finance.  
The  successful  integration  of  these  core  components  to  become  a  comprehensive  Islamic  financial 
system  has  contributed  towards  a  more  active  domestic  Islamic  financial  intermediation  process. 
To-date, Islamic banking has mobilised assets amounting to RM76 billion or 10 percent of the market 
size,  of  which  approximately  70  percent  of  the  Islamic  banking  assets  were  generated  by  the 
conventional banks with Islamic windows. In the takaful sector, the four takaful operators registered a 
total of RM4 billion in terms of assets. Significant progress was achieved in the area of Islamic money 
and capital market where the volume traded in the Islamic money market reached RM340 billion, while 
the outstanding amount of Islamic private securities was amounted to RM75 billion or 44 percent of the 
total outstanding private securities. In the stock market, more than 80 percent of the counters in the 
Kuala Lumpur Stock Exchange are Shariah-permissible counters. This year the Islamic banking sector 
will be liberalised to include up to three foreign Islamic banking institutions as the system becomes 
more integrated with the global financial system. 
Positioning the Central Bank to meet the challenges ahead 
V. 
My remarks on pre-requisites to a stable and comprehensive financial system would not be complete 
without a few words on the role of the central bank. To stay at the forefront in dealing with the new 
challenges and to effectively perform our responsibilities, the Central Bank’s efforts have also been 
focused on strengthening its capacities and capabilities.  
Central Banks in emerging market economies have a much broader mandate than our counterparts in 
the more advanced and mature economies. Of importance, is our developmental role in charting the 
development of the financial system, institutional development and the overall economic management. 
This is over and above the objectives of achieving monetary and financial stability and ensuring the 
sound and efficient functioning of the payments system. The Central Bank also has the important role 
of  developing  the  financial  infrastructure,  developing  the  financial  markets,  the  legal  framework and 
driving the institutional development. In Malaysia, our vision of the development of the financial sector 
over the next ten years is outlined in our Financial Sector Masterplan. The plan includes the strategic 
direction and strategies for the development of the Islamic financial sector.  
Finally,  greater  cooperation  among  the  regulators  is  necessary  in  order  to  ensure  that  the  Islamic 
financial  system  is  not  subject  to  vulnerabilities  and  abuses.  In  this  respect,  sharing  of  information 
among  the  regulators  including  across  borders  is  important  especially  in  a  more  globalised  and 
liberalised  environment  where  financial  transactions  and  activities  have  become  more  complex  and 
globalised. In this regard, there is a greater need for regulators to continuously exchange views and 
share information on key issues and developments faced in their own financial jurisdictions.  
Another important aspect is in regard to the development of the international Islamic financial market. 
Although  this  market  is  to  be  driven  by  the  market  players,  a  greater  role  is  expected  from  the 
6 
 BIS Review 3/2004
regulators and central banks to support its expansion. In this respect, the encouraging support shown 
by various regulators and central banks in making the launching and issuance of the sovereign sukuk 
papers a success represents an important progress that has been achieved. These initiatives will bring 
about a more coordinated effort in achieving market development and stability.  
Conclusion 
VI. 
Our quest to develop a dynamic Islamic financial system is to achieve the ultimate objective for Islamic 
finance  that  contributes  significantly  toward  the  overall  development  of  our  economies.  This  is 
achieved  through  the  intermediation  process  to  facilitate  trade,  business  and  investment.  This  will 
facilitate the integration of the Islamic financial system as a viable component of the global financial 
system.  
It is the ability of the Islamic financial industry to build institutional capacity, intensify the collaborative 
efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the Islamic financial infrastructure, and the acceleration of its 
global integration that will provide the synergies and opportunities for the Islamic financial industry to 
evolve into an important component of the international financial system that can contribute to greater 
global financial stability and enhance the prospects for a more balanced global growth. 
BIS Review 3/2004 
 7
