Joseph Yam: The case for an Asian Bond Market 
Opening address by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the 
Asia-Pacific Bond Market Congress: A New Maturity, Hong Kong, 8-9 July 2004. 
 I am honoured to be invited to give the opening address at this congress. The strong attendance at 
this event, and the quality of the sessions lined up, are, I think, an indication of the growing recognition 
of the importance of bond market development in this region. I am delighted that Hong Kong has been 
chosen  for  the  venue.  The  congress  is  well  timed,  since  only  yesterday  the  Hong  Kong  SAR 
Government launched its HK$20 billion bond issue. I extend a warm welcome to those of you who are 
visiting  Hong  Kong:  I  hope  you  will  be  able  to  stay  on  for  a  few  days  and  enjoy  the  city  over  the 
weekend.  
The  title  of  the  congress  “A  New  Maturity”,  apart  from  the  mild  and  allowable  pun,  makes  a  useful 
comment on the state of the bond market in Asia. Whether “maturity” is quite the right word is a matter 
of debate, and I note that the title of the panel discussion later this morning adds a question mark to 
the word. However we might describe it, there is no doubt about the progress that has been made in 
the growth of domestic bond markets in the region over the past few years. Market capitalisation of 
domestic  bond  markets  more  than  doubled  over  the  past  nine  years  -  from  an  average  of  20%  of 
combined GDP in 1995 to 47% in 2003. During the same period, the combined share of bond markets 
in total financing grew from 11% to 19%. Bond markets are, therefore, a growth industry. Quite apart 
from the considerable initiatives by the private sector, bond market development has been a particular 
target  of  initiatives  by  governments  and  multilateral  agencies.  There  are  good  reasons  for  this.  My 
intention in this short address is to set out briefly these reasons - to put the case for an Asian bond 
market - and then to examine some of the work that is in progress in this field, particularly from the 
point of view of the central banks.  
The need for an Asian bond market 
The  underdeveloped  state  of  the  Asian  bond  market  -  compared  with  the  bond  markets  in  the 
industrialised economies - has been well documented in recent years. Despite the impressive growth 
of  the  size  of  the  Asian  bond  market  that  I  have  just  mentioned,  it  still  lags  behind  the  developed 
economies in terms of breadth and depth. For example, the market capitalisation of the domestic bond 
market in the US, the UK and Japan is equivalent to over 150% of the GDP compared with just 47% in 
ex-Japan Asia. Activity in the secondary market is also relatively low.  
The disadvantages of not having a developed bond market were brought home to us during the Asian 
financial crisis of 1997-8. An efficient and mature bond market can play an important role during times 
when the other channels of financial intermediation - the banks and the equity markets - falter or fail. In 
particular,  through  developing  an  alternative  source  of  funding,  the  corporate  sector  can  reduce  its 
over-reliance on short-term foreign currency loans. A sound and healthy corporate sector contributes 
directly  to  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability.  Improved  financial  intermediation  also brings such 
microeconomic benefits as efficiency gains and diversification of tools for both borrowers and savers. 
The  absence  of  a  developed  bond  market  in  the  region  was  one  of  the  main  factors  behind  the 
extreme volatility that precipitated the Asian financial crisis. The crisis itself spurred governments in 
the  region  to  focus  on  bond  market  development.  This  has  been  one  of  the  positive,  constructive 
outcomes of the crisis, and this is the area in which most progress has been made. It is heartening 
that the lasting response to the crisis has been to develop rather than to restrict markets.  
Since the crisis, other important reasons for a stronger, deeper and broader debt market in the region 
have come to the fore. The strong current account performance of economies in the region has led to 
a very sizeable accumulation of reserves by the public sector. The total foreign exchange reserves of 
the  major  Asian  economies  outside  of  Japan  nearly  doubled  in  a  short  period  of  three  years,  from 
about US$700 bn in 2000 to over US$1,200 bn in 2003, generating quite strong investment demand 
for bonds. We are of course aware of the risk inherent in investing too much of the foreign reserves of 
Asia back in bond markets in Asia. Indeed, the withdrawal of foreign reserves invested in the region in 
times of stress in the region can exacerbate the stress. But there is a strong need from the investment 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 1
point of view for diversification and not be stuck with or overly exposed to bonds, for example, of a 
jurisdiction that is running a current account deficit that is so large as to be unsustainable.  
On  top  of  the  demand  from  the  public  sector,  private  sector  funds  are  increasingly  diversifying  into 
bond  investment.  There  are,  I  think,  two  main  reasons,  and  both  can  be  related  to  the  idea  of 
“maturity”.  Greater  investor  awareness  -  resulting  partly  from  investor  education  programmes  and 
retail bond schemes - has encouraged individual investors to think of bonds, instead of just sticking 
with deposits and equities. In addition, the population of the region - like all of us - is growing older. 
About  7.5%  of  the  population  of  the  region  was  over  the  age  of  60  in  2000.  That  percentage  is 
expected  to double  to 15%  by  2030:  in  Hong  Kong,  we have already  reached  11.5%. Not  only  are 
populations  growing  older.  People  are also  living  for  longer.  All  of  these considerations  have  led  to 
greater attention to retirement planning and to an increase in the size of the pension fund portfolio. 
Although Asia as a whole lags behind the rest of the world in the development of pension schemes, 
the  numerous  pension  reforms  undertaken  to  facilitate  pension  and  other  retirement  schemes  have 
stimulated  considerable  growth  in  the  size  of  funds.  In  some  economies,  such  as  Malaysia  and 
Singapore, the pension asset-to-GDP ratio is as high as 50 to 60%. For a number of good reasons, 
pension funds tend to involve large bond allocations. This has already added to the demand for bonds, 
and, as with public sector funds, this demand is likely to grow in the future.  
But, as we are all aware, there is lack of a deep bond market in the emerging Asian economies and 
therefore much of the increased demand, from both the public and private sectors, has been satisfied 
by investments in bonds denominated in the major foreign currencies. Indeed the net portfolio outflows 
from nine emerging markets in Asia (including both public and private sectors) have increased sharply 
over the past five years - from US$50 billion in 1998 to US$225 billion in 2003. Emerging Asia as a 
whole is now a large net exporter of portfolio capital.  
The growth in demand for bonds arises from what is surely a positive process - the increase in public 
and private wealth in our region. However, satisfaction of this demand brings us back to the problem of 
the  market  dynamics  of  globalisation,  which,  as  we  all  learnt  from  bitter  experience,  can  have  very 
negative effects. In a discussion about bond market development in the region, it would be useful for 
us to remind ourselves what this problem is. The pattern of the flow of international funds in Asia has, 
for some time now and encouraged by financial liberalisation, been characterised by a two-way traffic 
of  investment  flows.  In  the  one  direction,  there  is  the  very  substantial  outflow  to  the  industrialised 
economies, predominantly in the form of bond investments but equity investment also featured, and 
characterised by a large element of public funds. In the other direction, there is the inflow of private 
sector  foreign  funds,  of  more,  or  less,  substantial  magnitude,  depending  on  the  macroeconomic 
circumstances,  in  the  form,  relatively  speaking,  of  much  more  equity  related  investments.  This 
recycling  of  funds  brought  benefits  and  risks.  The  greater  presence  of  foreign  funds,  mostly  in 
institutional  form,  and  managed  and  serviced  by  highly  versatile  foreign  financial  intermediaries,  in 
domestic financial markets in the region, no doubt, promoted financial sector development. Indeed, the 
overall  efficiency,  including  the  level  of  sophistication,  of  financial  intermediation  in  the  region  has 
been  substantially  enhanced,  contributing  to  economic  growth  and  development.  But,  as  we  have 
observed,  it  also  presents  considerable  difficulty  to  monetary  authorities  in  the  region  in  the 
maintenance of monetary and financial stability.  
In  part,  this  is  due  to  the  differences  in  character  between  domestic  and  foreign  savings.  Those 
managing  foreign  savings  are,  understandably,  much  less  concerned  about  the  long-term  public 
interest  than  those  managing  domestic  savings.  Foreign  savings  are  also  much  more  sensitive  to 
changes in market sentiment and shifts in domestic policies, and are more prone to reversals. While 
this imposes greater discipline on local authorities in pursuing prudent macro-economic policies, it also 
brings  much  higher  volatility  in  the  financial  markets,  to  the  extent  of  possibly  creating  systemic 
problems that Asian monetary authorities are ill-equipped to handle. Furthermore, the foreign financial 
intermediaries are usually large international financial institutions with considerable market power and 
influence, in terms of the amount they are in a position to mobilise, relative to the size of the domestic 
financial markets of the emerging economies. This enables them to operate in the market not simply 
as price takers, but as a “price maker” with the power of pushing prices in a particular direction. The 
implications for the emerging markets are greater market volatility, greater tendency for overshooting, 
and  consequently,  greater  challenges  in  maintaining  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  problems 
are more intense for emerging economies with medium-sized financial markets that are large enough 
to attract foreign capital but not large enough to be immune from the manipulative or speculative plays 
that are, more often than not, associated with these fund flows.  
2 
 BIS Review 40/2004
The phenomenon I just described was, in fact, demonstrated in the recent mid-May episode of Asian 
stock market correction and the associated volatility in response to the reported withdrawal of foreign 
funds from the Asian market. This was a moderate episode that presented some threat to financial 
stability, and the markets were well able to take it. If the various measures introduced to strengthen 
financial systems after the Asian financial crisis had not been in place, and if Asian economies had not 
been  in  a  recovery  phase  at  this  time,  the  impact  of  this  volatility  in  fund  flows  could  well  have 
threatened  monetary  and  financial  stability  in  the  region.  Given  the  structural  trends  that  I  have 
described, and the market dynamics associated with them, even with benign conditions and stronger 
financial systems, there is a danger that, as this recycling pattern grows larger, the risks to stability will 
increase.  One  way  to  address  the  above  problems  is  to  develop  a  regional  bond  market  that  is 
capable  of  recycling  regional  wealth  in  a  more  efficient  and  healthier  manner,  thus  reducing  the 
probability and the destabilising impact of any reversal of fund flows on the domestic financial markets.  
Fostering regional bond market development 
That, briefly, is the case for a regional bond market. Indeed, it is more than a case for just having a 
regional  bond  market.  It  is  also  a  case  for  developing  such  a  market,  and  taking  quite  vigorous 
measures  to  stimulate  development.  Both  the  pattern  of  international  fund  flows  and  the 
underdeveloped  state  of  the  regional  bond  market  require  this.  Fostering  regional  bond  market 
development  involves  co-operation  on  a  number  of  fronts  among  economies  with  very  differing 
economic,  political  and  cultural  backgrounds.  It  is  often  said  that  the  diversity  of  this  region  -  in 
comparison  with,  say,  Europe  -  is  a  considerable  obstacle  to  the  kind  of  financial,  economic  and 
monetary co-operation that might be desirable. Nevertheless, it is heartening that, in this area at least, 
considerable progress has been made over the past few years, particularly among central banks. This 
co-operation has taken two forms: market development initiatives, which help promote the growth of a 
regional  bond  market,  and  infrastructural  initiatives,  which  facilitate  that  growth.  Let  me,  in  the 
remainder of this address, briefly outline some of these initiatives.  
A number of collaborative initiatives have been undertaken by central banks in the region to foster the 
development of both local and regional bond markets. These can be grouped into three main clusters, 
each falling under the auspices of a major regional multilateral organisation. The first of these is the 
APEC Initiative on the Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee Markets, which is being 
spearheaded by three APEC member economies (Hong Kong, Thailand and Korea) and sponsored by 
the World Bank. The aim of this initiative is to address structural impediments to the development of 
bond markets and to provide an effective and immediate solution to the credit gap problem. Under this 
initiative,  four  member  economies  of  APEC  -  China,  Thailand,  Mexico  and  the  Philippines  -  have 
volunteered to receive expert advice through visits from panels of experts. The objective of these visits 
is  to  assist  the  economies  in  question  in  identifying  potential  impediments  in  their  markets  and  in 
removing these impediments through specific, achievable and monitored action plans tailored to the 
individual economy. The programmes under this initiative are making good progress, and, in addition 
to 
to  promote  understanding  and 
the  panel  visits, 
experience-sharing.  
A second cluster of initiatives, under the ASEAN+3 forum, involves a variety of studies known as the 
Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI) on issues such as new securitised debt instruments, issuance of 
debt by international financial institutions, regional credit guarantees and enhancement facilities, and 
the establishment of local and regional credit rating and credit enhancement agencies.  
The third set of initiatives falls under EMEAP - the Executives’ Meeting of East Asia-Pacific Central 
Banks - and takes the form of bond funds aimed at channelling a small portion of the very large official 
reserves held by the Asian economies into the region. The first of these funds - Asian Bond Fund I 
(ABF1) - was launched in June 2003 and is now fully invested in US dollar-denominated bonds issued 
by sovereign and quasi-sovereign issuers in the EMEAP economies. The EMEAP Central Banks are 
currently  working  on  ABF2,  which  will  invest  in  local  currency-denominated  Asian  bonds.  Both 
initiatives are aimed at promoting the development of index bond funds in the regional markets and, at 
the  same  time,  enhancing  both  domestic  and  regional  bond  market  infrastructure.  This  is  a  very 
concrete initiative, involving the allocation of funds by a considerable number of central banks.  
These three sets of initiatives use differing approaches and a variety of tools. But they have common 
aims. One important aim is to identify - through individual studies, experience-sharing, and the practice 
of  fund  management  -  where  obstacles  exist  and  how  best  standards  and  practices  can  be 
harmonised to facilitate cross-border financial transactions within the region. A separate, but parallel 
two  policy  dialogues  have  been  held 
BIS Review 40/2004 
 3
consideration is the development of financial infrastructure. A number of studies have been carried out 
to explore the feasibility and desirability of establishing region-wide infrastructure, such as a regional 
rating  agency  and  regional  settlement  and  payment  systems.  Apart  from  the  many  technical 
complexities,  any  proposals  for  infrastructure  on  a  regional  dimension  would  require  thorough 
discussion among different jurisdictions and rigorous assessment of business viability and impact on 
the market. Long planning time would therefore be expected before any conceptual proposal could be 
put into practice.  
Effective financial infrastructure across the region is a precondition for debt market development within 
the region. Without it, all of the other initiatives I have described would be about as useful as buying 
aeroplanes  without  having  the  airports  in  which  to  land  them.  A  pragmatic  approach  is  therefore 
necessary,  leveraging  on  existing  infrastructure  within  each  jurisdiction  and  creating  a  network  of 
bilateral links between jurisdictions. Each jurisdiction will, of course, develop its own infrastructure and 
links according to needs, although the main lesson in this field is that it is better to be ahead of needs 
than behind.  
Let me take Hong Kong as an example. We have a reasonably advanced and sophisticated financial 
infrastructure, in keeping with our status as a regional and international financial centre. We have, over 
the past decade, extensively developed our payment and settlement systems to enable cross-border, 
multi-currency transactions to be conducted and settled in real time, without settlement risk. For debt 
settlement, we have established bilateral linkages between our Central Moneymarkets Unit and debt 
depositories  in  other  jurisdictions,  such  as  Euroclear  and  Clearstream,  Australia,  New  Zealand  and 
Korea. We have also recently set up a direct link with the GSBS in Mainland China.  
Hong Kong already has a real time settlement system for the Hong Kong dollar, the US dollar and the 
euro.  We  have  a  standing  offer  in  the  region  to  link  up  the  RTGS  payment  system  with  other 
currencies in other centres with RTGS capability - for example Tokyo. We hope that, in time, when 
circumstances permit, it will be possible to extend this to the renminbi. The aim is to provide a platform 
that prepares Hong Kong to maintain and develop its role in the changing regional and international 
financial intermediation process.  
Conclusion 
I have outlined in this address the case for an Asian bond market and the role being played by the 
public  sector  in  promoting  the  development  of  such  a  market.  Collectively  and  individually,  central 
banks  and  governments  are  making  good  progress  on  a  variety  of  initiatives  aimed  at  reducing 
barriers, building infrastructure and encouraging interest in the market. In the end, however, there is 
only  so  much  that  the  public  sector  can  -  or  should  -  do,  particularly  in  a  region  where  there  is 
traditionally not a lot of public debt. Central banks and governments have a responsibility to facilitate 
and  promote  development,  and  to  provide  an  environment  that  is  conducive  to  both  supply  (the 
issuers) and demand (investors). It is, I have argued, in the public interest that a healthy bond market 
should develop in our region. However, it is for the private sector to provide the great bulk of supply 
and demand. Happily, it appears that the private sector is playing its part with enthusiasm.  
4 
 BIS Review 40/2004
