Jürgen Stark: Economic perspectives in the euro area and Germany 
Lecture  by  Dr  Jürgen  Stark,  Vice  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  dinner  with  The 
Money Marketeers, New York, 25 February 2004. 
 I 
It is an honour and a pleasure to have the privilege of addressing you here today on the economic 
perspectives for Germany and the euro area as a whole.  
As a central banker, I prefer not to focus on the change in the latest monthly sentiment indicators and 
on quarterly growth figures, but rather on longer-term issues which are essential for a stability-oriented 
monetary  policy,  for  potential  growth  and  for  an  economy’s  resilience  to  shocks.  I  shall  also  be 
highlighting  some  differences  and  similarities  between  economic  fundamentals  in  Europe  and  the 
United States. 
European  economic  and  monetary  union  (EMU)  is  now  in  its  sixth  year  with  the  euro  as  its  single 
currency. These years have been fairly demanding but despite a number of sizeable adverse shocks, 
the  Eurosystem,  which  consists  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  euro  area  national  central 
banks, has managed to deliver a credible monetary policy stance.  
In the run-up to EMU and at its outset, many sceptics queried the feasibility of an “one-size-fits-all” 
monetary policy with a decentralised but closely coordinated economic and budgetary policy. The area 
was seen as too heterogeneous for such a demanding regime. 
Such  criticism  has  become  less  vociferous  recently  due  to  the  monetary  policy  track  record,  which 
proves that the credibility test has been passed so far. Average inflation has been close to 2% and 
long-term inflation expectations have been well contained, being close to and mostly below our ESCB 
definition of price stability of below 2%. 
The  growth  performance  of  Germany  and  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  been  less  encouraging. 
However,  after  three  years  of  sluggish  growth,  the  region  is  finally  showing  increasing  signs  of  a 
moderate cyclical economic recovery. 
The underlying conditions for strengthened economic growth remain favourable. Financing conditions 
are  generally  supportive,  with  low  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  The  restructuring  of  corporate 
balance sheets, particularly in Germany, has made considerable progress. Robust growth in our major 
trading partners is also aiding the economic recovery process. 
The favourable impact of world trade and world growth dynamics are more important for our exports 
than the recent decline in price competitiveness caused by the appreciation of the euro. The debate 
on  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  a  stronger  euro  should  not  distract  us  from  the  real  underlying 
obstacles to growth in Europe. 
I would not be sketching a full picture of the economic outlook if I failed to mention the risks to the 
broadening global recovery. Four factors, in particular, have to be watched carefully. 
Firstly,  global  imbalances,  especially  the  persistent  US  current  account  deficit.  According  to  the 
OECD, it is likely to surpass US$600 billion in 2005, which is equivalent to more than 5% of GDP. The 
deficit is growing both in dollar terms and relative to the size of the economy. What does that mean? 
Why was it not an issue years ago and why is it an issue now? 
Basically, the answer to those questions is that the source and the financing of the deficit have shifted 
from  the  private  to  the  public  sector.  From  an  US  perspective  that  is  not  a  problem  as  long  as 
foreigners are willing to continue supplying their savings. But the composition of external financing is 
becoming unbalanced and, to a growing extent, it is relying on foreign central bank purchases of US 
Treasuries. The willingness of overseas investors to hold an ever-growing dollar-denominated portfolio 
is obviously something which cannot go on for ever. 
Secondly, protectionist pressure. When Alan Greenspan spoke about globalisation last month at the 
Bundesbank Lecture 2004 in Berlin, he reminded us of  the virtue of open markets. He stated: “it is 
BIS Review 14/2004 
 1
imperative that creeping protectionism be thwarted and reversed”.1 This insight comes as no surprise 
to an economist, but it is a message which is easily forgotten. Unfortunately, that is something which 
holds  true  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  Withstanding  archaic  reflex  responses  of  emerging 
protectionism is sometimes a quixotic experience. But we should never forget that open markets and 
free trade in a multilateral world are key to prosperity - on both sides of the Atlantic. 
Thirdly, large fiscal deficits in all major economic regions and increasing debt-to-GDP ratios. It cannot 
be  ruled  out  that  this  worldwide  deterioration  of  fiscal  positions  will  sooner  or  later  lead  to  market 
reactions. An appreciable rise in interest rates has to be expected when investors begin to doubt the 
longer-term sustainability of public finances. 
Finally, ample liquidity. That is to say the gap on a global scale between real money growth and real 
GDP growth. This excess liquidity nurtures the risk appetite of investors. The search for yield has led 
to  a  considerable  narrowing  of  corporate  bond  and  emerging  market  sovereign  spreads.  If  excess 
liquidity  is  not  mopped  up  at  some  point  in  time,  it  will  find  its  way  through  in  terms  of  pushing  up 
inflation or in feeding new asset price bubbles which could be costly to unwind. 
II 
The global economic recovery is at present mainly driven by two centres of gravity: the US economy 
and emerging Asia. The euro area is lagging behind. Why has growth performance in the euro area 
and Germany been so sluggish during the past few years? 
Growth differentials between the United States and the euro area are for the most part a non-cyclical 
phenomenon. For instance, the estimates of overall production potential differ significantly.  
The US experience might hold important policy lessons in this regard and we have had quite a lively 
debate in Europe about the need to become more like the United States. In a nutshell: this is about the 
contest between the pros and cons of the Anglo-American free market model and the European model 
of social cohesion. I shall try to remedy certain misunderstandings or misperceptions that arise when 
country-specific factors are compared. 
The  latest  growth  figures  for  the  United  States  are  impressive.  However,  when  thinking  in  terms  of 
prosperity  developments,  it  is  necessary  to  apply  a  per  capita  assessment.  A  country  with  a 
fast-growing population needs to generate a greater increase in real income than a country with a less 
rapidly expanding population if it wishes to maintain or even increase the prosperity of its citizens. 
The euro area's annual population growth between 1996 and 2003 was about ¼% (in Germany about 
0.1%), whereas the US population grew by an average of about 1% owing to its higher birth rate and a 
sizeable influx of immigrants. Thus, the annual real GDP change of 2.0% in the euro area (1.2% in 
Germany) and 3.3% in the US in per capita terms was 1.7% in the euro area (1.1% in Germany) and 
2.2% in the US. The per capita growth differential is therefore “only” roughly one-third of the overall 
figure,  which  could  be  narrowed  down 
the 
measurement of deflation and depreciation were to be incorporated. 
The smaller per capita difference by no means justifies complacency. However, it is a better reflection 
of the improvement that has been achieved in the standard of living. It still shows that the per capita 
growth gap between the USA and Europe is growing and not converging. And one also has to take 
into consideration the fact that the United States is already at a considerably higher level. In 2002, 
GDP per capita on the basis of purchasing power parities was one-third larger in the United States 
than in the euro area. 
What  are  the  main  elements  behind  these  developments?  Lower  GDP  per  capita  means  lower 
national living standards. Economic well-being is largely determined by productivity. Looking at labour 
productivity, it is striking that the factor labour is not very efficiently incorporated into the production 
process in Europe. 
The labour force participation rate in the euro area - that is the members of the workforce in relation to 
the population of working age - is about 68% and more than 8 percentage points lower than in the 
United States. 
if  methodological  differences  regarding 
further 
                                                      
1  Alan Greenspan (2004), Remarks before the Bundesbank Lecture 2004, Berlin. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2004
2. 
Labour utilisation in Europe and Germany has declined significantly, mainly due to three factors. 
1. 
The  preference  for shorter  working weeks and  longer  holidays. Working  hours  per  person 
employed during the last 25 years have remained virtually unchanged at around 1,800 hours 
per  year  in  the  United  States,  whereas  in  Germany,  the  average  number  of  hours  that 
employees work is now around 1,450 hours, which is 15% lower than 25 years ago. 
Withdrawals from the labour force, including high participation in early retirement schemes 
since  the  early  1980s.  The  average  retirement  age  at  present  in  Germany  and  France  is 
about 59 years. 
The rise in unemployment, since the late 1970s up to 8.8% of the labour force. 
3. 
An interim conclusion may be drawn from this: the once popular European belief that the distribution of 
a  presumably  fixed  amount  of  labour  would  lead  to  greater  work  opportunities  has  not  become  a 
reality.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  led  to  higher  non-wage  labour  costs  and  higher  taxes,  which  have 
become an impediment to economic growth and job creation. 
Labour  productivity  per  hour  worked  is  at  present  about  the  same  in  the  United  States  and  in 
Germany. However, since the mid-1990s, increases in hourly productivity have been lower than in the 
United States. According to an OECD study,2 the main factors behind this have been a smaller-scale 
use  and  slower  diffusion  of  information  and  communication  technologies  (ICT)  and  less  intensive 
research and development. Other factors that play a role are institutional differences such as labour 
market rigidities and the relatively entangled web of regulations. 
Taken together, this has resulted in a hard core of structural unemployment. In particular, Europe has 
been less successful than the United States in integrating “marginal” or less productive members of 
the  labour  force  into  the economic  process.  A  better  inclusion  of  this part of  the  labour  force  might 
transitionally slow down changes in labour productivity, but would still increase overall welfare. 
Of course, the available data have to be interpreted with caution. Statistical sources vary and societies 
have  deep-seated  structural  and  cultural  differences  which  make  any  comparison  difficult. 
Nevertheless,  despite  all 
terminological,  conceptual  and  empirical  difficulties,  cross-country 
comparisons still remain important indicators for evaluating policy measures. 
Last but not least, lower productivity per employee than in the United States is, in part, a reflection of 
the democratic choice or the preference of European societies for shorter working time, which is, in 
economic terms, a substitution of consumption opportunities through leisure. However, this should not 
be interpreted as economic inefficiency. It could also be argued that US workers have had to work 
longer hours than their euro area colleagues to maintain similar per capita growth rates. 
Occasionally,  it  is  suggested  that  not  only  material  living  standards  should  be  considered  but  also 
other indicators of welfare, as Robert J. Gordon has done.3 According to his analysis, the GDP of the 
United States is bloated due, for instance, to the huge cost of keeping more then two million residents 
in prison and jail (700 inmates per 100,000 residents, whereas Germany has about 80 inmates per 
100,000  residents),  the  higher  primary  energy  consumption  per  capita  owing  to  the  more  extreme 
climate (energy consumption in Germany per capita is about half as high) and elevated transportation 
costs on account of the greater dispersion of the US population. 
These factors boost GDP without creating more welfare. I am not willing to make a value judgement 
on  these  issues.  Nevertheless,  those  factors  should  be  kept  at  the  back  of  one’s  mind  when 
comparing developments in GDP. 
In Germany, three years of an almost stagnating economy have led to the so called “Rhineland model 
of  capitalism”  being  subjected  to  more  intense  scrutiny.  This  development  has  not  only  raised 
questions about the economy, but also about German society and its political system. 
III 
                                                      
2  OECD (2003), ICT and Economic Growth: Evidence from OECD Countries, Industries and Firms, Paris. 
3  Robert J. Gordon (2002), Two Centuries of Economic Growth: Chasing the American Frontier, Northwestern University.  
BIS Review 14/2004 
 3
labour market 
pension system and  
health care 
The late Rudi Dornbusch once described Germany as an economy with two faces.4 On the one hand, 
an immensely successful country, prosperous and stable, with among the highest living standards in 
the world. On the other hand, a country that is plain stuck with mass unemployment, slow growth, with 
no idea of what to do about it and even less courage to try. I don’t believe that the last two criticisms 
still hold true.  
Less than a year ago, the situation had become so serious that the Bundesbank felt impelled to take 
an unusual step for a central bank in publishing a reform strategy based on a thorough analysis. To 
overcome the prevailing crisis of confidence, we called for a coherent overall approach to structural 
reform in the labour market, the social security system and fiscal policy. 
The  momentum  for  reform  is  almost  tangible.  The  government  has  already  started  to  implement  a 
number of important measures of its Agenda 2010. This is designed to increase, over time, the growth 
potential of the German economy and includes  
- 
- 
- 
reforms. The objective is a more flexible economy and to bring the social security system more in line 
with economic capacity. 
It  is  imperative  that  corrective  measures  be  implemented  in  a  timely  manner.  Unfortunately, 
experience shows that in the political sphere often more than 20 years pass by between awareness of 
social and economic challenges and their being addressed. Not to mention the difficulties in gaining 
popular support for or mere acceptance of structural changes. 
However,  policy  must  not  be  confined  to  the  “art  of  the  possible”.  Policy  is  also  the  art  of  making 
possible that which is necessary.  
The general public is beginning to realise that the deep-seated German proclivity for consensus does 
not work in an environment of low growth rates. Much remains to be done and it is crucial that this 
impetus does not falter. 
The  structure  of  Germany’s  constitution  with  its  different  layers  of  checks  and  balances  makes  it 
difficult to obtain the large parliamentary majorities needed for implementing daunting reforms. This 
pronounced decentralised system is firmly rooted in German history. It did not hamper the enormous 
economic upswing in the second half of the last century, but it has encountered difficulties in coping 
with  the  changes  that  have  become  necessary  owing  to  reunification,  European  integration, 
globalisation and demographic challenges. 
IV 
Structural change is possible in Europe. The most convincing recent example is European economic 
and  monetary  union.  The  creation  of  a  single  European  currency  was  the  most  far-reaching  and 
challenging  monetary  event  to  take  place  since  the  Bretton  Woods  conference  in  1944  and  the 
changeover to flexible exchange rates in the early 1970s. The true dimensions of this political project 
are often underestimated. The same is true of the economic benefits that will materialise over time. 
A  monetary  union  has  to  be  grounded  in  shared  values.  The  basis  of  those  shared  values  is  the 
definition of the member states’ economic policies enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty as the principle 
of an open market economy with free competition. 
However,  another  fundamental  policy  decision  was  also  necessary  for  the  introduction  of  a  single 
currency,  namely  the  willingness  to  transfer  national  monetary  sovereignty  to  a  supranational 
institution. The concomitant renunciation of sovereignty signified a profound break with the historical 
and political self-perception of the EU member states. 
European economic and monetary union was possible only against a backdrop of shared traditions, a 
decades-long  process  of  integration  and  successful  convergence  in  the  1990s.  The  opportunity  to 
                                                      
4  Rudi Dornbusch (2000), Keys to Prosperity, MIT. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2004
create a single European currency unleashed great energies in the EU member states. In that process 
of convergence, inflation rates, interest rates and government debts were reduced to the benefit of the 
participating economies. 
Given  reliable  underlying  economic  policy  conditions,  exchange  rate  relationships  on  the  foreign 
exchange  markets  within  Europe  were  able  to  stabilise.  Those  countries  which  used  to  have  weak 
currencies  gained  especially  from  this  since  their  risk  premium  on  capital  market  rates  decreased 
appreciably. 
Overall,  economic  and  financial  policy  has  become  more  geared  to  the  medium  term  and  more 
predictable  as  a  result.  Essentially,  this  means  that  the  member  states  have  said  goodbye  to  the 
stop-and-go policy that often used to be pursued. 
Despite  differing  economic  policy  standpoints  and  traditions,  it  was  possible  to  develop  and  put  in 
place a joint stability-oriented strategy for economic and monetary union. That would not have been 
possible without political courage and the will to shape events. 
At this juncture, let me introduce another institutional pillar of European monetary union: the Stability 
and  Growth  Pact,  which  aims  to  limit  the  risks  to  price  stability  which  might  otherwise  arise  from 
national “free rider” fiscal policies. 
From a macroeconomic stabilisation perspective, the central budget of the European Union, at roughly 
1%  of  EU  GDP,  is  insignificant  in  Europe.  The  crucial  stabilising  role  compared  with  the  US 
government expenditure of 34% is played by the national budgets of the member countries, whose 
general government expenditure accounts for 48% of euro area GDP. 
That  is  one  reason  why  EMU  needs  a  counterweight  to  the  politico-economic  incentives  to  borrow 
without being penalised adequately by financial markets in terms of a higher interest rate premium as 
compensation  for  the  national  inflation  and  depreciation  risk.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is 
therefore also an insurance policy for countries which adhere to sound fiscal policies. 
This  framework  for  fiscal  discipline  makes  long-run  sustainability  of  public  finance  and  short-term 
stabilisation  compatible.  The  objective  is  to  achieve  a  medium-term  budgetary  position  close  to 
balance or in surplus. An additional rationale for the Stability and Growth Pact is the urgent need to 
take  account  of  the  unfavourable  demographic  trends  in  Europe.  Such  a  trend  exists  in  the  United 
States  as  well,  but  is  less  pronounced.  By  2050  the  share  of  elderly  people  (≥65  years)  in  the 
population will have gone up from 12% to 21% in the United States and from 16% to 28% in the EU. 
Within the fiscal framework of the Stability and Growth Pact, the automatic stabilisers are allowed to 
operate freely as long as the upper ceiling of the 3% deficit is not endangered. The higher general 
government  ratio  in  Europe  and  the  structure  of  social  transfer  payments  make  the  automatic 
stabilisers twice as effective as in the United States. As a result, discretionary fiscal policy and all its 
well-known pro-cyclical drawbacks are less of an issue. 
However, some governments’ degree of commitment to the rules and procedures of the Stability and 
Growth Pact has not been encouraging recently. The credibility of the framework has been cast into 
doubt. This development is jeopardising confidence in the sustainability of public finance in the euro 
area.  European  and  especially  German  consumers  seem  to  be  more  Ricardian  in  nature  than 
American consumers are. That is to say, they have lost confidence in the soundness of public finance 
and  they  tend  to  regard  higher  deficits  today  as  higher  taxes  tomorrow,  therefore  increasing  their 
savings and holding back on consumption. 
Occasionally, the monetary policy of the Eurosystem is blamed for the slow growth performance of the 
euro  area.  By  the  same  token,  it  is  acknowledged  that  the  ECB  is  only  fulfilling  its  mandate. 
Consequently,  it  is  argued  that  the  mandate  should  be  changed  and  reflect  more  the  goals  of  the 
Federal Reserve System. I believe this line of reasoning is rooted in unfamiliarity with fundamentals 
within the euro area. But let me also raise two important questions. 
1. 
2. 
In answering these questions allow me to make the following points. 
Firstly,  the  primary  focus  of  European  monetary  policy  is  on  maintaining  price  stability  over  the 
medium term. The clear and straightforward mandate recognises that this is the best contribution that 
monetary policy can make to an environment conducive to growth and job creation. This mandate is 
What is the role and focus of monetary policy? 
What can be achieved through monetary policy? 
BIS Review 14/2004 
 5
not in the least outdated. It reflects the limitations of monetary policy and mirrors the latest insights into 
monetary theory and practical experience. 
Secondly,  the  mandate  also  reflects  historical  experience.  The  hyperinflation  that  occurred  in  some 
European  countries,  and  especially  in  Germany,  in  the  1920s  left  a  profound  impression  on 
subsequent generations. In the United States, the Great Depression left its mark and is an important 
factor in explaining why the mandate given by the US Congress to the Federal Reserve consists of the 
three non-prioritised goals of “maximum employment, stable prices and moderate long-term interest 
rates”. 
Thirdly,  the  structural  differences  between  continental  Europe  and  the  United  States,  such  as  the 
degree of structural flexibility, impact on the transmission mechanisms and the time lags of monetary 
policy. What I have particularly in mind in this context are differences in the transmission that arise 
between  a  more  market-based  financial  system  and  a  more  bank-based  one,  and  the  fact  that 
changes in short-term interest rates play a far less important role in investment decisions in continental 
Europe than they do in the United States. 
Finally, having said that, we have to bear in mind that monetary policy does not have the appropriate 
tools to fine-tune the business cycle or to balance deficiencies in other policy areas. At the same time, 
not too much emphasis should be placed on monetary policy responses to short-term macroeconomic 
developments or even indicators. Activist policies directed at exploiting short-term trade-offs between 
prices and economic growth bear the risk of contributing to instability in the medium to longer term.  
In the final analysis, all central banks are concerned about price stability. I would not place too much 
store on statements that inflation may have been eradicated, even if such assertions do come every 
now and then from well-known economists. Such statements put matters too strongly and are rather 
heroic  in  their  assumptions.  A  world  in  which  basic  economic  relations  have  ceased  to  exist  is  a 
dangerous promise to make - perhaps comparable to the irrational exuberance surrounding the hype 
of the “New Economy”. 
Low inflation is an experience of recent history. Its track record does not stretch over decades. And 
- as far as the euro area is concerned - the Eurosystem has responsibility for a region with a more 
inflation-prone history. 
V 
Let me summarise the most important lessons. 
1. 
Up  to  now,  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  has  been  successful.  Our  experience  of 
anchoring  inflation  expectations  reinforces  the  commitment  to  the  medium-term  approach. 
Greater activism would do more harm than good, especially considering the environment of 
little structural flexibility. 
We need to overcome the disappointing weak economic performance in Germany and the 
euro  area  as  a  whole.  Let  me  be  clear  about  this:  the  economic  problems  in  continental 
Europe cannot be reduced to monetary policy issues. What is needed is structural reform in 
member states, including pension reform, health insurance reform and labour market reform. 
Fortunately, there is a general recognition of the importance of structural flexibility in terms of 
raising long-term growth potential and increasing resilience to economic shocks. Addressing 
these  issues  will  rebuild  confidence.  Even  the  larger  economies  are  now  showing  a 
willingness to tackle structural impediments. 
Putting  fiscal  positions  back  on  a  sound  track  and  sticking  to  the  fiscal  rules  of  the  SGP 
would help to restore confidence. The credibility of consolidation measures is crucial. Fiscal 
adjustment  should  be  seen  to  lead  to  a  permanent  increase  in  future  disposable  income. 
Moreover, if appropriately designed, consolidation can raise output and employment in the 
medium term. Positive results will most likely be produced in the short run if consolidation is 
combined with structural reforms. 
The  integration  of  Europe  is  an  ongoing  process,  which  does  not  always  develop  as 
smoothly  as  might  be  hoped  for.  But,  eventually,  challenges  have  been  met  and  the 
groundwork for new challenges such as the enlargement of the EU with ten new member 
states  has  been  well  laid.  Nevertheless,  all  policymakers  have  to  live  up  to  their 
responsibilities. EMU offers the opportunity for a more dynamic Europe. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2004
