John Hurley: Economic developments in Ireland and other issues 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority 
of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2003, Dublin, 12 July 2004. 
 I would like to welcome you all to the publication of the Bank’s Annual Report for 2003. 
As you know, 2003 was a very significant year for us. We have been through a major restructuring 
process, which has seen the establishment of a new financial regulatory system. The Irish Financial 
Services Regulatory Authority is now responsible for consumer protection and prudential supervision 
while the Central Bank deals with all matters relating to Financial Stability. I am happy to report that 
these new arrangements, which are in place for over a year now, are working very well. 
This restructuring has allowed us to take stock. As a result, we are also today publishing a three-year 
Strategic  Plan  for  the  Central  Bank  and  Financial  Services  Authority  of  Ireland.  A  further  important 
development will be the publication of a stand-alone Financial Stability Report in mid-September. Up 
to now, this was included in the Bank’s Annual Report. 
I would also draw your attention to the reproduction in this Report of the first lecture in the Whitaker 
lecture series. This series has been established in honour of the former Governor, Dr. T. K. Whitaker, 
and is intended to contribute to general economic debate in Ireland. The inaugural lecture was given 
by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Jean  Claude  Trichet.  The  Report  also  includes  an 
article on Foreign Direct Investment in Ireland, a vital component of our recent economic success. The 
study  highlights  the  principal  reasons  for  our  success  in  this  area:  a  stable  macroeconomic 
background,  a  favourable  business  environment  in  its  many  aspects  and  a  strong  emphasis  on 
education and skills. Looking to the future, we need to ensure that we have the appropriate policies in 
place to continue to be an attractive location for Foreign Direct Investment. 
Economic developments 
Turning  now  to  the  economic  situation:  in  the  context  of  a  weak,  if  improving,  international 
environment, the Irish economy performed well, relative to other countries, in 2003. The latest official 
data put GNP growth at 2.8 per cent (GDP, 3.7 per cent). There was significant employment growth 
last year, which contributed to keeping unemployment at a low level - currently 4.4 per cent. 
For  2004,  Ireland’s  growth  prospects  appear  generally  good  -  particularly  as  the  US  and  East  Asia 
economies improve. However, considerable uncertainties remain. Global imbalances continue to pose 
a risk of a sharp adjustment of exchange rates with implications, in particular, for the US dollar/euro 
exchange rate. A second significant uncertainty surrounds oil prices, which continue to be subject to 
the influence of geo-political tensions in the Middle East. While recognising the implications of these 
risks for our economy, we have revised our forecasts for GNP up to 4¼ per cent (GDP growth, 4¾ per 
cent)  this  year.  The contribution  to  growth  by different  sectors  is  fairly  broadly  based with  services, 
manufacturing and construction all showing significant output increases. 
There were positive developments in inflation during 2003 and into 2004. By early 2004, inflation was 
running at a rate close to that of the euro area generally. The current inflation forecast for this year is 
2¼ per cent for both measures of inflation - the CPI and the HICP. 
Turning  to  the  outlook  for  2005,  the  acceleration  in  world  economic  activity  should  result  in  higher 
growth here. The forecast growth in Ireland’s GNP is put at 5 per cent (GDP, 5¼ per cent). Ireland’s 
inflation rate is forecast to increase slightly to 2¾ per cent (CPI) with HICP inflation of 2½ percent. 
Experience here and elsewhere shows that it is quite difficult to bring inflation under control once it 
takes hold. There is generally a high degree of persistence in inflation as inflationary expectations tend 
to become embedded. In our own case, inflation has been, on average, over 2 percentage points a 
year higher than in the euro area for the five years since the inception of the single currency. It has 
taken  some  time,  and  it  has  not  been  easy,  to  reduce  our  inflation  rate  to  that  of  the  euro  area 
generally.  With  the  economy  in  an  expansionary  phase,  it  is  important  to  secure  this  low  inflation 
environment. The maintenance of a competitive economy is particularly important in order to ensure 
that Ireland remains an attractive location for foreign direct investment. The success we have had in 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 1
attracting foreign direct investment could be undermined if inflation were to pick up significantly again. 
This  is  all  the  more  important  since  our  price  levels  are  already  higher  than  those  of  our  trading 
partners. 
Looking beyond the next few years to the medium-term, the economy’s growth potential is likely to be 
somewhat lower than in the recent past. There are two main reasons for this. Firstly, the scope for 
employment increases is less than in the past, given the earlier large increase in the participation rate 
and the current low rate of unemployment. Secondly, productivity increases over the past decade or 
so were boosted by structural changes in the economy which involved transferring labour from low to 
high productivity sectors, notably in the high-technology areas. The scale of this cannot be continued 
in the future. This would suggest that growth potential in the medium-term would be at the lower end of 
the 4 to 5 per cent range. It is important that expectations are adapted to this somewhat lower, but still 
very satisfactory, rate of potential growth over the medium-term. 
Credit growth continues to be a worry. In May, Ireland’s adjusted private sector credit growth rate of 
23 per cent was four times the euro-area rate of 5.8 per cent. If such divergent rates of increase were 
to  persist,  Ireland  would  become  one  of  the  most  indebted  countries  in  the  euro  area  within  a  few 
years. This increase in credit has mainly been accounted for by mortgage credit. The Bank remains 
concerned at the continuing large increases in house prices - currently running at 12 to 13 per cent - 
especially in the light of the substantial increase in housing supply. If the increase in prices were to 
continue, the risk of a significant correction would increase. 
Monetary policy and the euro area economy 
Current  prospects  for  the  euro  area  economy  are  reasonably  positive.  With  external  demand 
remaining  strong,  growth  is  expected  to  average  1.7  per  cent  this  year  and  2.1  per  cent  in  2005. 
Largely due to higher oil prices, inflation will be above 2 per cent this year and into the early part of 
2005. I feel however, that on balance, the current evidence points to inflation in the euro area being in 
line with price stability over the medium-term. 
Supervision 
This Annual Report contains a review of financial supervision issues covering the period from the 1st 
of January to the 30th April 2003, with a short summary of activities from May to December 2003. In 
accordance  with  the  new  legislation,  the  Financial  Services  Regulator  will  publish  its  own  Report 
covering the 20-month period from the 1st of May 2003 to the 31st of December 2004 in mid-2005. In 
the  meantime,  the  Financial  Services  Regulator  published  a  Progress  Report  in  June  of  this  year 
outlining  its  first  year  of  operation.  In  addition  to  supervising  financial  institutions  from  a  safety  and 
soundness  viewpoint,  a  comprehensive  regulatory  structure  for  consumer  issues  was  put  in  place 
during 2003 with the appointment of a Consumer Director as provided for in the legislation. 
Financial results 
The  Surplus  Income  paid  by  the  Bank  to  the  Exchequer  in  respect  of  2003  is  €321.7  million.  This 
amount  comprises  €69  million  in  profits  before  unrealised  gains  and  €258  million  transferred  from 
pre-EMU exchange rate gains, of which €108 million was in respect of unrealised foreign exchange 
losses in 2003 due to the appreciation of the euro. The only transfer to reserves from profits was a 
transfer of €5.4 million to the Superannuation Reserve. In addition, €78 million proceeds of the coin 
issue were paid to the Exchequer by the Bank in 2003. 
Strategic plan 
Today, in addition to the publication of our Annual Report, the Central Bank is issuing a three-year 
Strategic Plan. This is a comprehensive piece of work and provides us with the opportunity to outline: 
• 
the role and responsibilities of the Central Bank, both in the Eurosystem and domestically; 
the nature and purpose of our work; and 
• 
• 
the plans for new initiatives in the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2004
Since our entry into the Eurosystem, there has been a significant change of emphasis in our work, 
towards  a  greater  focus  on  Eurosystem  responsibilities.  We  have,  of  course,  undergone  a  major 
change  in  our  structure  and  the  Strategy  gives  us  the  opportunity  to  clarify  our  role  vis-à-vis  the 
Financial  Services  Regulator  and  to  reinforce  the  cooperation  between  us  in  areas  of  common 
interest. 
Articulating our Strategy now is very timely, as we can now draw on five years of experience in EMU 
and as the Eurosystem is facing up to challenges of expansion. Our Strategy was developed following 
a comprehensive consultation process throughout the organisation. We have defined specific strategic 
actions, which will be implemented over the next three years. 
For any of you who have a particular interest in this issue and would like more information, we would 
be glad to arrange a meeting with Ann Marie McKiernan who was heavily involved in preparing the 
Strategy. 
Before concluding, I would like to thank the members of the CBFSAI Board of Directors for their work 
and help throughout the year. I also greatly appreciate the dedication and commitment of the staff who 
have  ensured  that  the  reorganisation  has  been  such  a  success.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the 
Chairman,  Mr.  Brian  Patterson,  and  the  Board  of  the  Financial  Services  Regulator,  with  whom  we 
have worked closely to ensure a smooth transition to the new organisation. 
I  am  also  pleased  to say  that  the 2003  Annual  Report  is  available  simultaneously  in  both  Irish  and 
English. 
This concludes my opening remarks. My colleagues and I are now available to answer questions. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 3
