Timothy F Geithner: Perspectives on the US financial system  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  F  Geithner,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York, before the Economic Club of New York, New York, 27 May 2004. 
 It is a pleasure to join you today at the Economic Club of New York. And it’s a pleasure to share the 
program with John Thain. 
Today I want to talk about the U.S. financial system at this point of transition in the U.S. economy.  
The U.S. financial system is currently enjoying a period of considerable strength. Financial institutions 
are  strong.  Financial  innovation  has  spurred  advances  in  risk  management.  Market  practices 
surrounding  key  products  such  as  OTC  derivatives  have  been  strengthened.  And  the  industry’s 
payments infrastructure has been improved by additional safeguards and new clearing and settlement 
arrangements. The system has been remarkably resilient in the face of a range of recent challenges. 
The recent record is reassuring, but no financial system is without vulnerability. Periods of relatively 
favorable economic and financial conditions, such as we are experiencing today, are good times to 
reflect  on  the  capacity  of  the  system  to  withstand  future  stress.  I  want  to  focus  today  not  only  on 
developments  that  have  improved  the  overall  stability  of  the  system,  but  also  on  some  continuing 
challenges, and on the implications of these for risk management and supervision.  
The  history  of  shocks  to  the  U.S.  financial  system  is  highly  varied.  Even  over  just  the  past  two 
decades, we have seen a range of systemic events with a wide diversity in source and characteristics. 
We’ve seen credit booms and credit concentrations that resulted in substantial losses in the banking 
industry,  in  areas  as  varied  as  commercial  real  estate,  energy,  agriculture,  and  emerging  market 
sovereigns.  We  have  seen  shocks  reflected  in  sharp  and  substantial  movements  in  interest  rates, 
exchange rates, and asset prices. 
Some  of  these  events  were  associated  with  a  deterioration  in  macroeconomic  performance.  Some 
occurred  in  periods  of  relatively  strong  economic  growth.  Some  were  driven  by  abrupt  changes  in 
expectations  about  inflation  or  about  monetary  policy  and  the  associated  changes  in  the  level  of 
interest rates and the shape of the yield curve. Often these events followed periods of accommodative 
financial conditions, rapid credit growth, sustained rises in asset prices, and low volatility in the prices 
of financial assets. 
Many  of  these  events  had  a  self-reinforcing  element,  with  initial  changes  in  interest  rates  or  asset 
prices being amplified by the subsequent actions of market participants in the face of unanticipated 
losses. Financial leverage was also an amplifying factor in many of these events. In some instances, 
there  were  unexpected patterns  of correlation  in  the  movement  of  asset prices  and  in credit  losses 
across borrowers. 
These experiences led to changes in risk management practices, in supervision, and in our capacity 
as a central bank to contain systemic risk. These responses have reduced the overall vulnerability of 
the system to the types of shocks we’ve experienced. Moreover, because we’ve experienced such a 
variety of different types of stress, overall risk may be lower. But this recent history also suggests that 
we need to maintain a degree of humility and caution about our capacity to anticipate the nature and 
dynamics of future stresses to the financial system. 
How  strong  and  resilient  is  the  U.S.  financial  system  today?  Our  sense  is  that  the  system  is  quite 
strong and resilient relative to the recent past. 
The major financial institutions at the core of the system are profitable and well capitalized. The total 
risk-based  capital  ratio  for  the  ten  largest  U.S.-owned  bank  holding  companies  has  averaged  more 
than  12  percent  over  the  past  two  years,  a  slight  increase  relative  to  prevailing  levels  since  the 
mid-1990s.  At  year-end  2003,  nearly  every  bank  in  the  country  met  the  regulatory  standards  to  be 
considered  “well  capitalized”,  with  fewer  than  100  -  representing  less  than  1  percent  of  banking 
industry assets - failing to meet these standards. While risk-based capital ratios do not always provide 
an  accurate  picture  of  true  capital  strength,  especially  for  the  larger  and  more  complex  institutions, 
these statistics are nonetheless broadly indicative of a very strong underlying capital position of the 
industry. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 1
Robust  capitalization  is  important  because  capital,  along  with  earnings,  provides  the  first  line  of 
defense against losses. Counterparties and customers are less likely to lose confidence and pull back 
from a well-capitalized institution in the wake of a large loss or other negative event. Capital, in effect, 
helps protect firms against “runs,” both traditional “runs” where short-term funding and liquidity are at 
issue,  and  more  gradual,  but  just  as  damaging  “runs”  on  franchise  value,  where  customers  turn 
elsewhere for services because they question the long-term viability of a firm. 
Consolidation  has  resulted  in  larger  and  more  diverse  financial  institutions  at  the  core  of  the  U.S. 
financial system. Deregulation has enabled firms to better optimize the scale, geographic spread, and 
scope of operations. The result has been the creation of some extremely large and diverse financial 
institutions with high earnings capacity. In 2003, 18 U.S. bank holding companies and six securities 
firms  each  earned  more  than  $1  billion,  with  the  five  largest  bank  holding  companies  earning  a 
combined total of nearly $46 billion, over 40 percent of the banking industry total. Along with capital, 
these  earnings  provide  a  substantial  cushion  to  absorb  losses,  significantly  moderating  the 
consequences  of  an  adverse  event.  The  wider  scope  of  activities  and  greater  domestic  and 
international geographic diversification of these firms also provide a more stable revenue base. 
Advances  in  risk  management  have  also  enabled  firms  to  hedge  risks  more  effectively  and,  in  the 
aggregate,  to  disperse  risk  more  efficiently  across  firms  in  the  financial  system.  Given  advances  in 
data  collection  and  risk  modeling,  banks  and  other  financial  firms  are  able  to  do  better  risk-based 
pricing. Firms now have the capacity to view credit and other key risks from a portfolio perspective 
rather than in isolation, leading to more efficient risk sharing and better capital allocation. 
In concert with better risk modeling, securitization and credit derivatives have facilitated the dispersion 
of  credit  risk  across  firms  and  across  sectors  of  the  financial  system.  These  changes  have  led  to 
significant  risk  transfers  within  the  banking  system,  as  well  as  a  net  transfer  of  credit  risk  from 
commercial  banks  to  other  financial  intermediaries.  As  a  result,  we  believe  we  are  seeing  a  more 
efficient risk allocation within the financial system as a whole, since risks can be transferred to firms 
where they will diversify, rather than reinforce, risks arising from core businesses and to parts of the 
financial  system  that  are  significantly  less  leveraged  than  banks  and  securities  firms,  such  as 
institutional investors and mutual funds. 
These risk management advances have been accompanied by the growth of key derivatives markets 
that have lowered the costs of hedging market-price-sensitive positions and activities. One important 
example of this is the growth of the market for long-dated swaps, which are now used by banks to 
hedge mortgage securities and whole loans. The notional value of long-dated interest rate derivatives 
(those with maturities of more than 5 years) has more than tripled since the end of 1998, considerably 
faster growth than for comparable shorter-dated instruments. The growth of these markets reflects a 
very  substantial  increase  in  hedging  capacity,  and  this  “wider  pipeline”  seems  likely  to  facilitate  the 
ease with which the market adjusts in conditions of stress. 
Growth  in  these  OTC  derivatives  markets  has  been  accompanied  by  welcome  improvements  in 
market  practice.  Since  the  turmoil  of  1998,  financial  firms  have  made  significant  strides  in  the 
sophistication  with  which  they  assess  and  manage  counterparty  credit  exposures  arising  from  OTC 
derivative  transactions.  Rather  than  using  the  broad  “rule  of  thumb”  methods  that  were  once  the 
industry norm, OTC derivatives dealers now commonly assess counterparty exposures on a portfolio 
basis using more sophisticated approaches to capture both current mark-to-market exposures and the 
potential future exposure that could arise from changes in the contracts’ underlying rates and prices. 
These models make possible - but they cannot of course guarantee - an appropriately conservative 
assessment  of  the  potential  reduction  in  future  exposure  provided  by  netting  agreements  and 
collateral arrangements. Dealers have also made significant strides in developing and employing more 
sophisticated  and  exacting  ways  to  stress  test  their  exposures.  Taken  together,  these  approaches 
have  resulted  in  more  realistic  measures  of  counterparty  exposures  and  to  better  management  of 
counterparty risk. 
Beyond these improved exposure assessments, the use of collateral is much more prevalent than in 
the past. For instance, surveys by ISDA suggest that the share of fixed income derivatives exposures 
covered by collateral has increased from 40 percent to 55 percent just since 2002. Collateral is almost 
universally posted by all counterparties except those with the very highest credit ratings. There have 
also been significant improvements in the legal certainty surrounding these collateral arrangements. 
Among the legal advances are greater clarity on the enforceability of rights of netting and closeout in 
the  event  of  default  of  a  counterparty,  better  clarity  in  master  documentation  regarding  rights  and 
remedies,  and  better  harmonization  domestically  and  internationally  of  key  provisions  in  different 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2004
master netting agreements for different products that might hedge one another. These, combined with 
the wider prevalence of collateral arrangements overall, provide derivatives dealers greater protection 
in the event of counterparty default and expand their capacity to enter into transactions under normal 
market conditions. 
The  development  of  new  clearing  arrangements  has  also  strengthened  the  resiliency  of  the  crucial 
payment  and  settlement  systems  that  provide  the  backbone  of  the  U.S.  financial  system.  Existing 
payment  and  settlement  systems also have  implemented  improved safeguards  not  only  against  the 
impact of the default of a system participant, but also against the potential impact of external events, 
such as those experienced on September 11. 
Overall,  these  changes  suggest  that,  at  a  fundamental  level,  significant  strides  have  been  made  in 
enhancing  the  resiliency  of  the  U.S.  financial  system.  High  levels  of  overall  capital,  greater 
diversification of credit exposure, increased use of collateral, and the stronger payment and settlement 
system infrastructure make our financial system stronger today than it has been. With these favorable 
developments,  however,  come  a  range  of  challenges.  I  want  to  discuss  a  few  of  these  and  their 
implications. This is not meant to be, and is not, a comprehensive list. 
The first is the challenge of complexity. With financial growth and innovation, we have seen a dramatic 
increase  in  the  complexity  of  the  risk  management  challenge.  The  frontier  of  innovation  inevitably 
advances  somewhat  ahead  of  the  pace  of  improvements  in  the  risk  management  and  supervisory 
infrastructure. The models used to inform credit judgments, to measure exposure, and to price risk in 
the  newest  instruments  and  trading  strategies  are  by  definition  less  grounded  in  experience.  The 
process  of  assigning  fair  or  market  value  is  much  more  subjective  and  less  amenable  to  objective 
verification. Consensus on the appropriate accounting treatment is less well established. 
As the complexity of risks has grown, so have the demands on firms to understand how exposures 
might  evolve,  especially  in  times  of  market  stress.  As  an  example,  basis  risk  -  in  which  hedged 
positions  only  partially  offset  one  another  -  is  an  increasingly  important  concern  for  many  firms, 
especially those that deal in complex products such as options. Assessing and managing these more 
complex  risks  requires  risk  management  tools  with  a  commensurate  level  of  sophistication.  In 
particular,  the  further  development  of  techniques  for  stress  testing  and  scenario  analysis  and  of 
methods  for  translating  stress  test  results  into  concrete  risk  management  outcomes  are  important 
areas for additional progress. 
The  risk  management  challenge  is  complicated  by  the  nature  of  the  institutions  at  the  core  of  the 
system. Large, diversified financial institutions comprise many separate, highly specialized business 
units, each of which can have its own approach to tracking and managing risk exposures. Integrating 
across these businesses to develop a firm-wide, portfolio risk perspective is an important challenge, 
one that has many guises within a large, complex firm. For example, managing the complex pattern of 
risk  exposures  that  derive  from  membership  in  multiple  payment  and  security  settlement  systems, 
each  of  which  has  loss-sharing  arrangements  that  generate  contingent  exposures  among  and 
between their members, is just one small facet of the broader challenge facing such firms today. The 
difficulty of managing the conflicts in dealings with customers is also significantly enhanced for these 
large, diversified institutions, given the multiple roles that they play. 
More  generally,  it  is  increasingly  challenging  for  many  large,  diverse  financial  institutions  to  get  an 
accurate picture of their aggregate exposure to individual creditors when their business contacts can 
come through so many different sources within the firm. This difficulty is compounded when different 
types of exposures that are functionally equivalent are managed in different ways in different parts of 
the  firm.  Different  units  within  a  single  firm  frequently  trade  with  and  transfer  risk  to  one  another, 
adding  a  further  layer  of  difficulty  in  assessing  the  aggregate  exposure  to  a  given  creditor  or 
counterparty. 
The increased scale and scope of operations of the institutions that are the core of our system and the 
rapid  growth  in  complex  transactions  place  an  extraordinary  burden  on  the  internal  control, 
compliance, and risk management infrastructure. This is the “arms race” in finance. It is the challenge 
of  ensuring  that  the  strength  of  the  infrastructure  of  controls  within  financial  institutions  will  stay 
abreast of the pace of change in the complexity of risks and the tools we have to manage them - a 
process that we as supervisors will actively reinforce. 
A second issue relates to the degree of concentration in some core financial intermediation functions. 
The  two  largest  government-sponsored  enterprises  in  the  mortgage  market  now  hold  36  percent  of 
Agency mortgage-backed securities, as compared with less than 10 percent at the end of 1993. The 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 3
exposure  of  banks  to  these  GSE’s,  primarily  through  holdings  of  the  GSE  debt  funding  these  MBS 
positions,  is  as  a  consequence  very  large.  Two  institutions  now  account  for  essentially  all  of  the 
market for the clearing function for government securities and agencies, as well as for tri-party repo 
activity.  A  relatively  small  number  of  institutions  now  account  for  a  large  share  of  activity  in  the 
over-the-counter  derivatives  business  generally,  as  well  as  in  certain  categories  of  risk-transfer 
instruments. 
These developments have different sources. Some are the result of public policy choices. Some are 
the  consequence  of  the  economies  of  scale  inherent  in  these  businesses.  Overall,  we  have  a  very 
competitive  financial  system,  with  a  larger  diversity  of  institutions,  and  therefore  a  stronger  overall 
system  of  financial  intermediation.  As  a  general  matter,  however,  the  increase  in  the  size  of  some 
institutions  relative  to  some  parts  of  our  financial  system  necessarily  magnifies  the  potential 
consequences of a mistake or an infrastructure failure in these institutions. They are sufficiently large 
that  they  have  less  room  to  maneuver  in  adjusting  positions  in  response  to  changing  risks  without 
adversely affecting the markets as a whole. 
Increased  concentration  in  some  markets  should  reinforce  the  incentive  the  largest  institutions  and 
their  counterparties  have  to  manage  risk  with  a  greater  degree  of  caution.  Supervisors  have  a  role 
here, too, providing additional reinforcement in those cases where private incentives do not seem to 
be generating appropriately judicious responses. 
A third challenge is the increased opportunity that exists today for risk and leverage to migrate to, and 
build up in, parts of the financial system that are  not subject to direct supervision and regulation of 
their capital and leverage ratios. According to some estimates, assets under management at hedge 
funds  have  doubled,  to  $750  billion, since 1998,  as has  the number  of  funds,  which  now stands  at 
6,000. We have no reliable overall measures of the degree of leverage in these institutions, though it 
is  interesting  to  note  that  the  intermediaries  serving  as  prime  brokers  to  hedge  funds  believe  that 
overall  leverage  in  these  funds  is  lower  than  in  early  1998.  Given  the  growth  in  this  market,  credit 
exposure by banks and securities firms to the overall hedge fund sector may be higher than in 1998, 
but is likely spread more widely across funds. While there may well be more diversity in the types of 
strategies hedge funds follow, there is also considerable clustering, which raises the prospect of larger 
moves in some markets if conditions lead to a general withdrawal from these “crowded” trades. 
Overall, hedge funds can play a beneficial role in the U.S. financial system. They contribute to one of 
the  defining  strengths  of  our  financial  markets:  the  ease  with  which  we  match  capital  to  ideas  and 
innovation. They represent one aspect of a broader, quite favorable, trend toward a greater diversity of 
participants in U.S. financial markets and in that respect, they contribute to a broader spreading of risk. 
But they also present risks to the financial system. The extent of the risk they present to the system as 
a  whole  depends  significantly  on  the  prudence  of  the  institutions  that  enable  them  to  increase 
leverage.  The  improvement  in  market  practice  in  managing  counterparty  credit  risk  since  1998  is 
encouraging,  but  it  is  important  that  firms  continue  to  strengthen  those  disciplines.  At  the  most 
fundamental level, intermediaries providing credit to hedge funds need to ensure that the terms and 
conditions of their provision of credit - including the contingent credit that is an increasing feature of 
prime brokerage arrangements - appropriately reflects the risks involved. 
What are the implications of these challenges or qualifications to what is, overall, a favorable picture of 
the strength of the U.S. financial system? One of the more persistent features of financial history is 
that  discipline  tends  to  ebb  and  flow  to  some  degree  with  changes  in  financial  and  economic 
conditions.  Even  though  we  have  seen  a  broad-based,  secular  improvement  in  risk  management 
practices over the past decade, competitive pressure and the search for return in a low interest rate 
environment can lead to a relaxation of internal disciplines even as potential risk in the balance sheet 
increases. 
There  are  a  number  of  factors  that  suggest  these  forces  have  not  led  to  the  build  up  of  major 
imbalances  that  would  present  a  major  source  of  strain  as  these  incentives  diminish  in  a  changing 
financial environment. 
Net borrowing by the non-financial corporate sector has been quite moderate, especially as compared 
with  the  late  1990s.  The  financial  position  of  this  sector  is  very  strong,  with  declining  leverage, 
particularly for smaller firms, which tend to be more highly levered. Credit to the household sector has 
of course risen quite considerably, but debt service burdens still look relatively manageable. Net credit 
growth to emerging market sovereigns has been quite moderate relative to past periods. While growth 
in commercial bank assets has picked up in recent quarters, it also remains below the pace of the late 
1990s. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2004
As the financial markets have built in expectations of a gradual return to more normal monetary and 
financial conditions, we have seen some adjustment in a range of credit spreads. A range of surveys 
has  been  reporting  for  some  time  that  dealers  and  other  financial  intermediaries  have  generally 
reduced their exposure to rising interest rates. 
These adjustments are healthy. That their impact has been relatively contained so far may suggest 
that  borrowers  and  lenders  were  less  overextended  relative  to  past  periods,  despite  the  sustained 
period  of  accommodative  financial  conditions.  The  fact  that  this  process  of  adjustment  has  been 
relatively  modest  in  overall  impact  also  reflects  the  fact  that  it  has  occurred  in  an  environment  of 
growing confidence in the sustainability of the expansion and a consensus forecast for quite moderate 
inflation.  Even  so,  risk  managers  need  to  continue  to  be  attentive  to  the  implications  of  further 
evolution in monetary and financial conditions. 
This  overall  picture  suggests  the  supervisory  community  should  continue  to  focus  on  the  following 
priorities:  
• 
• 
Ensuring that overall capital levels provide a sufficiently strong cushion against risk.  
Encouraging  firms  to  continue  to  strengthen  the  internal  management  and  control 
infrastructure  as  it  relates  to  risk  management,  the compliance  function,  and systems  and 
technology.  
Improving the quality and integrity of public disclosure.  
Continuing to work toward a more integrated framework for supervision across the functional 
lines of financial activities within our markets, and globally as well.  
 For the Federal Reserve, this means that we will devote even greater attention to the institutions that 
now  constitute  the  center  of  our  financial  system,  as  well  as  to  the  clearance  and  settlement 
backbone. It means we need to make a greater investment in looking at risks in the financial system 
as a whole, not just those that have their origin in banks. And it means that we will have to continue to 
intensify our cooperation with other supervisory and regulatory authorities. 
The  U.S.  financial  system  is  of  course  only  as  strong  as  our  economy  as  a  whole.  Overall,  the 
fundamentals of the U.S. economy look quite strong. But the size of our fiscal deficit, and the risks 
posed by our large external imbalance, place a greater burden than would otherwise be the case on 
the credibility of U.S. monetary policy. In this context, it is particularly important that we preserve the 
high degree of confidence that now seems to exist that U.S. monetary policy will respond appropriately 
to the evolving balance of risks in the overall economic outlook, and particularly that we will maintain 
price  stability.  This  is  critically  important  to  sustaining  the  current  expansion,  and  to  sustaining 
confidence in U.S. financial markets over time. And getting monetary policy right is one of the most 
important things we can to do contribute to financial stability as well. 
BIS Review 33/2004 
 5
