Guy Quaden: Efficiency and stability in an evolving financial system 
Opening address by Mr Guy Quaden, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the National Bank 
of Belgium Conference on Efficiency and Stability in an Evolving Financial System, Brussels, 17 and 
18 May 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
I am pleased to welcome you at the third biannual international conference organised by the National 
Bank of Belgium. This year's subject is “Efficiency and Stability in an Evolving Financial System”. The 
topic is of the utmost importance not only to central banks but also to all economic agents. Indeed, the 
efficiency and stability of the financial system is a prerequisite for the optimal allocation of capital over 
different  sectors,  for  adequate  risk-sharing  across  agents  and  ultimately  for  economic  growth  and 
stability.  Central  banks  have  a  particular  interest  in  the  maintenance  of  an  efficient  and  resilient 
financial  system,  because  it  ensures  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy  and  thus 
contributes to meeting the final objective of price stability, and to promoting high sustainable growth.  
Over  the  past  decade  our  financial  systems  have  been  going  through  major  changes.  Those 
developments raise new questions and face central banks and other bodies having supervisory and 
regulatory powers with new challenges. In order to provide an appropriate response to these new and 
changing circumstances, policymakers should have a detailed knowledge of the ongoing processes 
and  apply  adequate  theoretical  models  and  insights  to  support  their  decisions.  This  conference 
combines  keynote  lectures  by  internationally  distinguished  researchers  with  the  research  effort  of  6 
Belgian teams, 4 academic teams and 2 teams from within the Bank. A selected group of international 
experts, with a broad research experience in financial issues, will act as discussants of these research 
papers. Their comments will be the start of a discussion I would like all of you to participate in. We 
hope  that  this conference,  offering  central  bankers, academic researchers  and  financial  experts  the 
opportunity to exchange ideas, will contribute to our understanding of the ongoing changes.  
Major changes  having  taken place  in our  financial environment over  the  last five  to  ten  years  have 
been the introduction of the euro and European financial integration, the global financial liberalisation 
and  the  rapid  development  of  new  financial  products,  the  consolidation  in  the  banking  industry  and 
new technologies for producing financial services. The introduction of the euro has removed one of the 
main  factors  of  financial  segmentation  across  eurozone  countries,  namely  the  multiplicity  of 
currencies. Thereby, it has reduced the vulnerability of the financial and real sectors to exchange rate 
shocks. The resulting financial integration has proved to be impressive in the securities markets. For 
example, the differential between interest rates in interbank markets and bond markets has narrowed 
drastically, cross-border bond and mutual funds holdings have been increasing very rapidly, a market 
for  private  bond  issuance  has  developed  within  Europe  and  equity  price  fluctuations  have  been 
converging. These factors have induced a rapid growth of the financial markets and have facilitated 
the  direct  access  of  borrowers  and  savers  to  the  markets.  Our  traditional  bank-oriented  financial 
systems  are gradually  turning  into  a mixed  organisation  with substitution  possibilities  between  bank 
and  market-based  financial  products.  The  co-existence  of  and  the  competition  between  the  two 
systems for allocating financial flows and risks in the economy should enhance economic efficiency, 
provided appropriate regulations, monitoring and supervision create the conditions for fair competition.  
Against  this  background,  the  banking  sector  has  experienced  major  changes.  Consolidation  in  the 
banking industry has been substantial. At the same time, banks have diversified their activities through 
mergers  or  by  creating  bank  insurance  groups.  They  have  also  been  trading  parts  of  their  balance 
sheet  assets  and  risks  through  financial  markets.  In  addition,  they  have  expanded  their  activities 
abroad,  although  further  developments  towards  cross-border  mergers  and  the  creation  of  larger 
Europe-wide  banks  can  be  expected.  So  the  banking  sector  is  now  characterised  by  higher 
concentration, stronger competition from foreign banks and direct competition with financial markets. 
But  what  precisely  will  be  the  future  role  for  banks  in  this  new  financial  environment?  Theory  and 
empirical evidence support the view that, as providers of finance, banks have the advantage of being 
in  a  position  to  acquire  information  on  the  borrowers  and  to  monitor  them  thanks  to  long-lasting 
bank-lending  relationships.  This  mitigates  the  effect  of  asymmetric  information  and  moral  hazard 
problems on the provision of funds. It is especially relevant to newly set up, small and medium-sized 
enterprises. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 1
This  debate  is  not  only  important  for  banks,  but  for  corporations  themselves.  Indeed,  it  is  regularly 
asserted  “,-in various countries, not the least in Belgium, that SME face increasing difficulties to get 
bank  financing  and  that  this  problem  could  be  compounded  by  the  revised  capital  requirements 
imposed by the new Basel II agreement. I would like to emphasise two points. First, the new Basel 
rules take expressly into account the specificities of SME. Second, recent figures for Belgium clearly 
indicate that, while large corporations have recently shifted to market financing, bank loans to SME 
keep  increasing,  and,  moreover,  are  priced  to  rates  which  compare  rather  favourably  to  the  ones 
applied in the rest of the eurozone. In this context, it seems quite difficult to speak of a credit crunch or 
of a comparative hardening of credit conditions in Belgium. 
Nevertheless, given the recent trend towards bank consolidation, a clear understanding of how banks 
succeed in combining the benefits of large-scale operations without losing the close relationships with 
their  clients  is  required.  These  questions  as  to  the  future  equilibrium  between  banks  and  financial 
markets will be tackled during our first session today. 
These  recent  financial  developments  will  have  an  impact  on  all  financial  tra  nsactions  and  on  the 
whole  spectrum  of  financial  firms.  But  the  benefits  gained  from  increased  financial  integration  and 
efficiency will extend well beyond the financial sector. Actually, the real economy may be expected to 
benefit  most,  because  a  more  efficient  financial  system  implies  higher  expected  returns  for  sectors 
with  a  financial  surplus  and  lower  borrowing  costs  for  investing  in  new  projects  that  need  external 
finance. This should facilitate the re-allocation of capital towards new developing sectors and firms that 
have a high growth potential. The real effects of financial market liberalisation will be envisaged during 
the second session of our conference.  
Increasing financial efficiency while maintaining financial stability is not only a major objective but also 
a  challenging  task.  In  order  to  meet  this  goal  we  should  carefully  design  and  monitor  market 
organisation and set up appropriate regulatory and supervisory arrangements. 
Recent research has shown the important role market organisation or market micro-structure plays as 
to  the  efficiency  and  the  stability  of  financial  markets,  and  more  in  particular  as  to  market  liquidity. 
Insufficient market liquidity during periods of tension may exaggerate price volatility and increase risks 
of  contagion  over  markets  and  institutions.  The  availability  of  broad  market  liquidity  under  all 
circumstances  is  therefore  crucial  to  reap  the  rewards  from  the  expansion  and  the  integration  of 
financial markets. The third session in the conference will deal with these issues. 
Financial  services  and  bank  management  in  general  have  become  increasingly  sophisticated  and 
complex. Information technology has fostered the use of quantitative management tools to evaluate 
credit and market risks as well as other risks, such as liquidity and operational risks. Current banking 
regulations should be adjusted to take into account the specificity of bank risks. They should provide 
the  proper  incentives  for  financial  firms  to  strengthen  their  internal  control  and  risk  management 
systems.  The  new  Basel  II  solvency  requirements  for  instance  develop  a  more  comprehensive  and 
risk-sensitive approach to banks’ capital requirements and a strengthened role of market discipline.  
As a member of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Bank has been deeply involved in 
the  design  of  these  requirements.  As  the  new  requirements  will  have  to  be  endorsed  by  the  G  10 
Governors and Heads of Supervision before their publication at the end of June, I will be involved as 
well.  Last  week  the  Basel  Committee  published  a  press  release  to  announce  that  it  had  achieved 
consensus  on  the  remaining  issues  so  that  I  don’t  expect  that  this  endorsement  could  still  prove 
problematic. 
The  introduction  of  this  new  set  of  rules  represents  a  milestone  in  the  design  of  a  more  dynamic 
prudential environment, combining rules and discretion, supervisory monitoring and market discipline. 
This  does  however  not  mean  that  the  work  is  now  finished.  The  implementation  of  the  new 
requirements  will  necessitate  considerable  efforts  by  the  financial  firms,  the  supervisory  authorities 
and  central  banks.  In  order  to  facilitate  that  process  the  Basel  Committee  created  an  Accord 
Implementation  Group  and  European  supervisors  decided  to  cooperate  more  closely  in  order  to 
achieve  a  greater  convergence  of  supervisory  practices.  The  legal  work  of  implementing  the  new 
requirements in EU and national legislation will also be a huge task.  
It is therefore important that the closer interaction between the academic and regulator’s worlds which 
is one of the new features in the design of Basel II be maintained during the implementation phase. I 
hope that this conference will also contribute to this.  
Other  developments  of  our  financial  system  I  have  mentioned  before,  such  as  the  concentration 
process in the banking sector, the creation of financial conglomerates or bank-insurance companies 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2004
and  the  development  of  cross-border  activities,  also  call  for  a  reassessment  of  our  regulation 
mechanisms.  However  difficult  it  has  proved  to  achieve  a  convergence  between  the  national 
supervisory authorities in the banking sector, the next daunting challenge will most probably be, in my 
opinion, to enlarge that convergence to other segments of the financial system.  
I would like to thank all speakers and discussants taking part in this conference. I am also grateful to 
the Belgian academic researchers and our own staff who have contributed to the research projects 
prior to this conference and, like all of you, I am looking forward to the presentations of their research 
results.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  thank  all  of  you  for  your  attendance  here  today  and  I  trust  your 
participation in the discussions and question time will be very active. I hope this conference will help all 
of us to better understand the mechanisms underlying the recent financial developments as well as the 
policy responses which should accompany them. 
BIS Review 29/2004 
 3
