Lucas Papademos: Five years of the euro - past achievements and future 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  conference 
“The  Euro  at  Five”  organised  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco,  the  European 
Commission and the University of California at Berkeley, San Francisco, 27 April 2004. 
 Introduction 
This  conference  to  mark  the  first  five  years  of  the  euro,  which  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San 
Francisco,  the  European  Commission  and  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley  have  kindly 
organised  together,  is  -  to  my  mind  -  akin  to  a  birthday  celebration.  And  as  it  is  always  nice  to  be 
invited to birthday parties, I am grateful to have the opportunity to address all of you who have shown 
by your presence here that you take an interest in the development and potential of our new currency - 
the euro. On such occasions, we often sit back and recall with fondness and pride the past; and for the 
younger ones, we tend to go back to the joyful day of birth, the delightful but sometimes stressful early 
years, and we remember the excitement, the achievements, as well as the difficulties associated with 
growing  up. And  we  do  not  only  talk  about  the past,  we also  look  forward and  talk  about what  lies 
ahead: the promising prospects as well as the challenges that may come. This is what I would like to 
do today for the euro.  
The euro: from the drawing board to reality 
One cannot understand the genesis and significance of the single currency without going back to the 
roots of the European construction, and the desire of European nations to create conditions for lasting 
peace and prosperity on their continent after the two devastating wars during the first half of the 20th 
century. In designing the post-war framework for cooperation in Europe, the “founding fathers” of what 
is today the European Union took a truly revolutionary step: they managed to “think outside the box” of 
autonomous nation states and indivisible sovereignty. They fashioned a novel political organisation, 
where decisions are made together and sovereignty is shared, and where supranational institutions 
assume responsibility for the common interest.  
Initially,  the  prime  focus  of  intra-European  politics  was  on  how  to  facilitate  the  free  flow  of  goods, 
services, capital and people across national frontiers. Creating a genuine common market in Europe, 
comparable to the unified market of the United States’ economy, was the stated objective. Monetary 
and exchange rate stability, though not explicitly stipulated in the founding treaties, also became an 
integral component of this endeavour. Achieving both macroeconomic stability and market integration 
was not an easy task, as exemplified by the sometimes turbulent history of the European Monetary 
System, which was established in 1979. Robert Mundell, the Nobel prize-winning economist, offered a 
theoretical  explanation  for  this  phenomenon,  suggesting  that  stable  exchange  rates,  free  capital 
movements  and  the  pursuit  of  an  autonomous  monetary  policy  are,  in  fact,  mutually  incompatible 
objectives for economically highly interdependent countries. It was the European Union which devised 
and sought to implement an innovative solution to the problem of the “inconsistent trinity”. The answer 
was not to try to just irrevocably fix exchange rates between European currencies, but to do away with 
their  exchange  rates  altogether,  and  create  “one  money”  for  “one  market”.  In  the  early  1980s  the 
thinking about a single European currency gained momentum. 
The  Delors  Report  of  1989,  which  laid  out  the  blueprint  for  the  establishment  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union,  and  the  Maastricht  Treaty  of  1992,  which  provided  the  legal  framework,  clearly 
defined the economic conditions and the institutional framework which had to be established to ensure 
that the birth of the single currency would take place in favourable circumstances and that the euro 
would be a stable currency, as strong as the national currencies it would replace. It was stipulated that 
there was to be a single monetary policy, geared towards the overriding objective of price stability, in 
the hands of a new, supranational central bank with a federal set-up, which was to be independent 
from political interference. In addition, countries willing to join the Monetary Union would have to attain 
a  high  degree  of  nominal  convergence  towards  price  stability,  which  would  be  measured  and 
assessed in terms of low and converging inflation rates, prudent public finances, low long-term interest 
rates and stable exchange rates. By explicitly specifying in the Treaty 1 January 1999 as the definite 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
towards  attaining  convergence 
target  date  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  by  laying  out  a  structured  three-stage  process  for 
achieving that goal, the member countries of the EU unequivocally committed themselves as early as 
1992 to actually making Economic and Monetary Union happen. 
Establishing the necessary conditions for the creation of a single currency represented a big challenge 
for European governments. It required a high degree of nominal convergence towards price stability. 
This, in turn, required breaking with entrenched habits of fiscal profligacy, reducing budget deficits and 
high  levels  of  public  debt,  giving  central  banks  independence  to  pursue  stability-oriented  monetary 
policies, and persuading markets and, more generally, all economic agents to adjust their expectations 
and  behaviour 
to  stability.  To  many  sceptical  economists, 
policy-makers and European citizens, this venture looked like a “mission impossible”. But if we look 
back  today  on  the  years  leading  up  to  1999,  one  cannot  but  be  amazed  and  impressed  by  the 
remarkable turnaround in economic policies in Europe during that period, spurred on by the political 
will  and  public  support  (in  most  countries)  to  undertake  the  necessary  adjustments  to  establish 
Economic and Monetary Union and qualify for participation in it.  
If  the  sceptics  were  confounded  by  the  governments’  determination  and  ability  to  meet  the 
convergence  criteria,  they  were  equally  wrong-footed  with  their  predictions  of  chaos  and  havoc  in 
financial  markets  upon  the  actual  birth  of  the  euro.  Thanks  to  the  diligent  technical  and  practical 
preparations  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  its  forerunner,  the  European  Monetary  Institute, 
together with the national central banks of the euro area, and of the financial institutions at large, the 
introduction  of  the  euro  in  book-entry  form  on  1  January  1999  went  remarkably  smoothly.  When 
trading in the new currency started after the “changeover weekend” on 4 January, very few hitches 
were recorded. Almost overnight, the national money markets in separate currencies integrated into a 
single one in euro, also thanks to the pan-European payment system put into place and operated by 
the Eurosystem.  
The first five years: goals, expectations and achievements 
As of 1 January 1999, the ECB assumed responsibility for the new currency and the conduct of the 
single monetary policy. The goal was to ensure that the euro would be a stable currency, and trusted 
by  the  European  public.  The  ECB’s  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  would  have  to  be  conducted 
effectively and to establish its credibility with the markets and with the public at large. Five years on, it 
is pertinent to ask a few probing questions: How did we do our job as responsible guardians of the 
new currency? What went well, and where could things have gone better?  
Let the facts speak for themselves. During the first five years following the introduction of the euro, the 
average rate of inflation in the euro area was precisely 2%, in line with the ECB’s definition of price 
stability. Inflation has occasionally risen above the ceiling of 2% owing to a number of adverse price 
shocks  and  the  ECB’s  measured  response  to  these  shocks,  consistent  with  the  medium-term 
orientation  of  its  strategy.  Nevertheless,  throughout  this  five-year  period  inflation  expectations 
remained  firmly  anchored  to  a  rate  close  to  or  less  than  2%,  as  can  be  inferred  from  the  yields  of 
index-linked long-term bonds. This fact demonstrates the credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy.  
The establishment over the past five years of the stability of the internal value of the euro and of the 
credibility of the single monetary policy was a major achievement. This was not a straightforward task 
for a new central bank without a track record which operates in a heterogeneous economic area where 
the responsibility for the conduct of economic policy lies with the national authorities. The environment 
of price stability and historically low levels of long-term interest rates have also established favourable 
conditions for economic growth. These conditions, however, have not proved sufficient to support a 
high rate of growth given the constraining influence of other non-monetary factors. 
A  second  important  achievement  was  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  physical  form.  Since  January 
2002, over 300 million European citizens hold the euro in their hands, in the form of some 15 billion 
banknotes and 50 billion coins. The logistics of this “cash changeover” represented an operation of 
unprecedented  magnitude  and  complexity,  involving,  from  day  one,  not  only  central  banks  and 
financial institutions but all firms - large and small - and the public at large. The smoothness with which 
the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  were  introduced  -  and  accepted  by  European  citizens  -  confounded, 
once more, the sceptics with their scenarios of chaos at the checkout counters, of numerous assaults 
on cash transports and the like. With the euro banknotes and coins, the citizens of Europe do not only 
possess a truly tangible symbol of European unity; they also have concrete proof of the irreversibility 
of the move towards Monetary Union. The euro is here - and it is here to stay! 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
Of course, giving up the habit of counting in francs, Deutsche Mark or lire and getting used to the new 
currency  was  a  challenge,  both  for  consumers  and  producers.  And  the  cash  changeover  did  have 
some  effect  on  prices  associated  with  their  conversion  from  national  denominations  into  euro.  Our 
statistics show that the introduction of euro banknotes and coins had a rather small one-off impact on 
inflation, of around 0.3 to 0.4% on average across the euro area. Nevertheless, the citizens of some 
euro area countries did - unfortunately - experience some disproportionate price increases following 
the changeover, especially in some sectors of the service industry, and this created the perception that 
inflation was higher than the rate actually recorded. These perceptions have persisted for a fairly long 
period  of  time.  The  gap,  however,  between  perceived  inflation  and  actual  inflation  has  gradually 
declined. 
As you can see, I do not wish to deny that we also experienced some difficulties, or “growing pains”, 
with  our  new  currency.  For  example,  communicating  our  monetary  policy  in  a  multilingual, 
multinational  environment  has  been  a  real  challenge  which  has  set  us  all  -  the  Eurosystem  at  the 
sending end, and the markets and the public at the receiving end - on a steep learning curve. It also 
took some time for the markets to fully understand our monetary policy strategy, that is, the conceptual 
framework on the basis of which the Governing Council assesses the economic outlook and the risks 
to  price  stability,  takes  decisions  about  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance,  and  explains  these 
decisions  to  the  markets  and  the  public.  By  now,  the  understanding  of  our  strategy  has  greatly 
improved, and the recent evaluation and clarification of the strategy has certainly helped to this end.  
Although the internal value of the euro, that is, its purchasing power for the European citizens, has 
remained strong, the evolution of its external value has, at times, been the subject of debate. After a 
protracted period of depreciation, especially against the US dollar, in 1999-2001, the exchange rate of 
the  euro  became  the  focus  of  attention  in  2003  and  early  2004,  this  time  because  of  its  rapid 
appreciation. All this attention somehow ignores the fact that the euro area economy, like that of the 
United States, is relatively closed, with the average of exports and imports corresponding to 18.7% of 
euro  area  GDP,  compared  with  11.3%  for  the  United  States.  Moreover,  the  macroeconomic 
implications of exchange rate developments vis-à-vis third currencies are more muted now than prior 
to the introduction of the euro, because they are no longer associated with fluctuations in intra-euro 
area financial relationships. 
Five years after the introduction of the euro is also a good time to review some other expectations that 
were  formed  before  the  euro  came  into  being,  notably  expectations  about  its  impact  on  financial 
markets and its international role, and to see to what extent these proved to be correct. For example, 
many  academics,  financial  market  analysts  and  policy-makers  had  predicted  a  rapid  integration  of 
European  financial  markets  once  the  single  currency  eliminated  exchange  rate  risk  and  reduced 
transactions costs. Indeed, borrowing costs in euro have been significantly reduced by the emergence 
of deeper, broader and more liquid continent-wide markets, which have reduced liquidity risk premia, 
improved access to external finance and lowered financing costs. Moreover, the establishment of the 
low  inflation  environment  in  the  euro  area  and  the  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  have 
reduced  inflation  risk  premia,  and  interest  rates  have  remained  lower  and  more  stable  across  the 
maturity spectrum than would otherwise have been the case. If, however, we take the deep, liquid and 
unified  US  market  as  a  benchmark,  we  clearly  still  have  some  way  to  go:  the  integration  of  equity 
markets is at a very early stage, common legal and regulatory frameworks are only gradually being 
elaborated,  and  the  consolidation  of  the  banking  sector  is  far  from  complete.  While  many  of  these 
processes  are  market-driven,  EU  policy-makers  should  make  efforts  to  spur  on  further  financial 
integration, to the benefit of all - individual savers, institutional investors or corporate borrowers, in the 
euro area and worldwide. 
Another  area  where  the  expectations,  at  least  of  some,  diverged  from  the  outcome  was  the 
international role of the euro. Before the birth of the euro, some policy-makers and economists had 
predicted that the euro would quickly develop into an international currency that would rival the US 
dollar.  And  indeed,  within  five  years,  the  euro  has  become  a  genuine,  fully-fledged  international 
currency; it is now the second-most widely used currency worldwide, and its international role exceeds 
that of its legacy currencies. For example, in 2003 some 39% of all international bond issues were in 
euro, compared with  45% in  US dollars.  In  more  than  50  countries  -  mostly  in  eastern  Europe,  the 
Middle  East,  the  Mediterranean  and  Africa  -  the  euro  plays  a  role  as  an  anchor  for  exchange  rate 
policies.  That  said,  the  internationalisation  of  a  currency  is,  of  course,  a  long  and  gradual  process, 
given  financial  market  inertia  and  network  externalities.  In  international  commodity  markets,  for 
example, the euro has made few inroads; and there has been a slow shift in the currency composition 
of official reserves. In our view, the internationalisation of the euro is a market-driven process; the euro 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
will  gain  its  place  in  global  markets on  its  own  merits,  by  being  a  stable and  trusted  currency.  The 
ECB’s policy therefore is to neither actively promote, nor hinder, the international use of the euro.  
The record of achievements during the first five years of the single currency is, I would say, more than 
respectable, and, in many regards, beyond expectations. In fact, the euro is already a prize-winner, 
having  been  awarded  the  renowned  International  Charlemagne  Prize  of  Aachen  in  2002  for  its 
contribution  to  European  unification.  More  fundamentally,  it  has  earned  the  trust  of  the  European 
public and the markets as a stable currency which maintains its purchasing power. But that does not 
mean  that  we  can  rest  on  our  laurels.  A  number  of  important  challenges  lie  ahead  for  European 
policy-makers which also relate to the euro. I would like to concentrate on two of them: first, we need 
to attain higher sustainable growth in Europe while maintaining price stability; and second, we have to 
make the enlargement of the EU and, later on, of the euro area a success. 
Attaining faster growth with stability in Europe 
The  euro  -  or  more  precisely,  the  single  monetary  policy  -  has  delivered  an  environment  of  price 
stability for Europe, and yet the growth performance of the euro area over the past five years has been 
far from stellar: since the mid-1990s, euro area growth has lagged behind that of the United States, on 
average by almost one and a half percentage points. How can we explain this gap? And what can be 
done to close it in the coming years? 
The answers to these questions essentially relate to problems and policies concerning the supply side 
of  the  European  economy.  Generally  speaking,  the  divergent  growth  performances  in  the  United 
States and Europe can be explained by different productivity performances and different demographic 
or  labour  market  developments.  Although  we  should  be  aware  of  the  statistical  or  methodological 
problems  related  to cross-country comparisons,  productivity  growth  in  the United  States has  clearly 
outstripped that of the euro area. The difference, however, in productivity growth rates between the 
United  States  and  the  euro  area  is  much  smaller  when  productivity  is  measured  per  hour  worked 
rather than per person employed. This is due to differences in hours worked per person, which have 
been broadly stable in the United States, while they have been declining in the euro area. The decline 
in average hours worked in the euro area over recent years reflects both a tendency towards a shorter 
working week and more part-time employment.  
Some economists have argued that these developments are largely due to different preferences for 
work  and  leisure,  which  are  reflected  in  a  higher  labour  force  participation  rate  and  longer  working 
hours  in  the  United  States.  In  other  words,  Europeans  tend  to  use  productivity  increases  to  buy 
themselves  more  leisure,  while  Americans  use  them  to  generate  more  income.  In  my  view,  this 
argument can only provide a partial explanation. In fact, lower participation rates and shorter working 
hours in Europe can be ascribed, to a considerable extent, to rigid labour market institutions and the 
disincentives  set  by  tax  and  social  security  systems,  which  influence  the  preferences  of  individuals 
regarding employment and leisure.  
With more flexible labour markets, fewer restrictions and lower taxes on labour, many people would 
decide to work more than at present.  A higher labour force participation rate is - in the absence of 
population growth comparable to that of the United States - the main lever with which we can also 
address the mounting problems related to the ageing of the European population. Although some EU 
countries  already  have  employment  rates  comparable  to  the  United  States,  and  some  others  can 
match the United States in terms of productivity, no single European country manages to do both. By 
stepping  up  the  pace  of  structural  reform  in  labour  markets,  European  countries  can  increase 
productivity and labour force participation, and thereby raise potential growth substantially.  
Structural  reforms  in  labour  and  product  markets  in  order  to  make  the  economy  more  flexible  and 
productive also yield other benefits, some of which are “closer to home” for me as a central banker. In 
an economic environment characterised by greater market flexibility, the single monetary policy can 
maintain price stability and help support economic growth much more effectively. By increasing the 
speed with which labour and product markets respond to shocks and policies and by raising the long-
term rate of sustainable growth, structural reforms to boost productivity and flexibility in the euro area 
economy enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy to preserve price stability under monetary and 
financial  conditions  fostering  faster  growth.  The  United  States  provides  a  “living  example”  in  this 
respect: strong productivity growth in the past few years has contributed to raising potential output and 
alleviating the risk of monetary accommodation during a period of economic recovery leading to the 
build-up of inflationary pressures. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2004
It should be clear from what I have said that, over the long term, the key to addressing the problem of 
Europe’s less-than-satisfactory growth performance lies with national governments, trade unions and 
employers, and not with the ECB. Monetary policy cannot be expected to increase economic growth 
sustainably by tolerating higher inflation. What it can do is to promote long-term growth by maintaining 
an environment of price stability - and this is precisely what the ECB is committed to doing. 
At the present juncture, with the euro area economy operating below capacity, the pace of economic 
recovery  hinges  critically  on  strengthening  the  confidence  of  both  consumers  and  producers.  The 
ECB’s current monetary policy stance - with interest rates at their lowest level in over 50 years - has 
been, and continues to be, conducive to the expected pick-up in economic activity. 
EU enlargement and the prospect of euro adoption 
Let me now turn to another important challenge for the European economy and policy-making, which 
is related to the forthcoming - indeed imminent - enlargement of the European Union. In just a few 
days - on 1 May - the largest ever expansion of the EU will take place, when ten countries with a total 
population  of  75  million  people  join  the  Union.  This  is  an  event  of  historic  significance  that  will 
influence  the  course  of  European  integration  in  many  ways.  The  performance  of  the  European 
economy in particular will be affected by the further economic, financial and monetary integration of 
the new Member States. 
Although  the  upcoming  EU  expansion  is  the  largest  ever  in  terms  of  the  number  of  countries, 
population  and  geographic  area,  the  associated  increase  in  the  level  of  economic  activity  and  the 
productive capacity of the EU initially will be relatively small. In fact, the combined GDP of the ten new 
member countries corresponds to about 5% of the total GDP of the current members of the EU. This 
will, of course, change over time since the new Member States have the capacity to grow faster, as 
defined by the major determinants of long-term growth and their “catching-up” process. We should not 
forget  that  not  so  long  ago,  most  of  the  new  entrants,  eight  out  of  ten,  were  centrally  planned 
economies. Over the past decade, they have made impressive progress in their transition to market 
economies  and,  on  average,  they  have  experienced  strong  economic  growth.  Nevertheless,  the 
average per capita income in the acceding countries in terms of purchasing power is still only about 
half of the EU average. It is therefore clear that achieving real convergence and a catching-up of living 
standards  will  continue  to  be  their  central  objective  and  policy  challenge.  This  objective  must  be 
achieved in parallel with further progress towards macroeconomic stability and the establishment of 
the necessary conditions for the adoption of the euro. 
The enlargement of the European Union will not coincide with an expansion of the euro area. All new 
Member States, however, are committed to eventually adopting the euro as their currency sometime in 
the  future.  They  do  not  have  a  right,  as  Denmark  and  the  United  Kingdom  have,  to  opt  out  of  the 
single currency. And, already, most of them have unilaterally announced target dates for joining the 
euro  area.  In  order  to  do  so,  they  must  fulfil  the  relevant  requirements  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht 
Treaty. This means that they must achieve a high degree of sustainable nominal convergence, which 
will be assessed on the basis of the same criteria that were met by the current members of the euro 
area. One of these criteria is exchange rate stability, which requires participation of the currency in the 
exchange  rate  mechanism  (ERM  II)  without  severe  tensions  for  at  least  two  years.  These 
requirements  for  euro  adoption  must  be  fulfilled  not  only  because  the  principle  of  equal  treatment 
should be respected. They must be fulfilled for substantive reasons too: that is, in order to ensure the 
smooth entry and successful participation of a country in the European Monetary Union. We should 
not forget that a Member State’s decision to adopt the euro is irreversible. 
It is not possible to identify a unique path towards euro adoption for the new Member States, or to 
recommend one particular, single strategy as the most appropriate one for achieving this goal. It is 
also difficult to predict the exact time when prospective participants will join the euro area - although 
the target dates announced by most of them range from 2007 to 2010. There are several reasons for 
these conclusions. At present, the economic situations of the new Member States differ considerably, 
notably  with  regard  to  the  degree  of  nominal  and  real  convergence  they  have  achieved.  Moreover, 
these  countries  are  characterised  by  different  economic  structures  and  they  employ  a  variety  of 
monetary policy strategies. Overall, and on average, the progress made towards convergence by the 
acceding  countries  is  considerable,  but  it  is  not  uniform  in  all  areas,  and  there  are  also  significant 
divergences across countries. Consequently, the economic situations and policy strategies of the new 
Member States will be assessed on a case-by-case basis as they proceed towards euro adoption. 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 5
Despite  the  progress  already  made  towards  macroeconomic  stability  by  the  acceding  countries 
overall, achieving the necessary degree of nominal convergence for joining the euro area will require 
the  effective  tackling  of  several  policy  challenges  in  a  number  of  countries.  Their  commitment  and 
determination  to  adopt  the  euro  sooner  rather  than  later  has  oriented  their  macroeconomic  policies 
towards  stability.  Greater  and  more  systematic  efforts  are,  however,  necessary  to  reduce  fiscal 
deficits, which on average were 5.3% of GDP in 2003, well above the reference value of 3%, and in 
some countries substantially higher. This is essential both for the fulfilment of the fiscal convergence 
criteria required for euro adoption and for the achievement of budgetary positions which will allow the 
automatic  stabilisers  to  work  and  provide  some  room  for  manoeuvre  for  fiscal  policy  after  joining 
Monetary Union. Moreover, it is also essential that prospective euro area participants achieve greater 
convergence of market structures and institutions in the coming years. Although such convergence is 
not,  in  general,  a  prerequisite  for  euro  adoption,  it  is,  in  my  view,  important  for  the  successful 
performance of their economies within the euro area. 
With regard to the conduct of the single monetary policy in an enlarged euro area, several questions 
have been raised and concerns expressed. Will the adoption of the euro by a number of countries that 
aim at achieving real convergence affect the orientation and formulation of the single monetary policy? 
And will the implementation of this policy become more complex in a larger and more heterogeneous 
Monetary Union? The answer to both of these questions is a simple no. The monetary policy stance of 
the ECB is determined by its mandate to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole over the 
medium term. The enlargement of the euro area cannot - and will not - change the ECB’s commitment 
to achieving its primary objective. And I am convinced that the national central banks that will join the 
Eurosystem  in  the  future  share  this  view  and  commitment.  Indeed,  the  experience  of  acceding 
countries  in  recent  years  confirms  the  validity  of  the  proposition  -  which  is  generally  supported  by 
evidence  -  that  there  is  no  permanent  and  exploitable  trade-off  between  long-term  growth  and 
inflation.  It  is  worth  noting  that  average  inflation  in  the  new  Member  States  has  declined  from 
double-digit rates at the end of the 1990s to 2.1% in 2003, a level comparable to that in the euro area 
and only marginally above the ECB’s definition of price stability. And, of course, all countries that will 
join the euro area in the future will have attained a high degree of sustainable convergence towards 
price stability. 
That said, it is foreseeable that a future enlargement of the euro area will increase the divergences in 
inflation and growth rates across the different regions of the single currency zone. However, regional 
differences  in  economic  performance  are  an  inescapable  feature  of  any  large  currency  area.  The 
existence  of  regional  differences  is  certainly  not  news  to  a  US  audience.  Inflation  here  in  San 
Francisco  is  different  to  that  in  Dallas  or  New  York.  Significant  differences  in  terms  of  inflation  and 
output levels also exist in the United States, and the Federal Reserve has nonetheless conducted its 
monetary  policy  smoothly  and  successfully.  In  a  sense,  the  Federal  Reserve  conducts  a 
“one-size-fits-all” monetary policy just as the ECB does. In the euro area, already today, with only five 
years’ experience of the single monetary policy, we can observe a process of increasing convergence 
of the economies, be it in terms of the synchronisation of business cycles, aided by converging interest 
rates at all maturities, or in terms of real GDP levels. Thus, the dynamics of convergence that should 
be inherent in a monetary union appear to be at work.  
Concluding remarks 
From  my  preceding  remarks,  you  rightly  get  the  impression  that  I  am  confident  about  our  ability  to 
master the challenges that lie ahead, for our young currency and for the enlarged European Union. Of 
course, to some of you, who are not so immersed in the internal dynamics of European integration, 
this may appear to be an expression of unwarranted optimism. After all, we have sometimes heard 
voices of scepticism about the viability of this unique construction of a “currency without a state”. A 
decade ago, Martin Feldstein claimed that Economic and Monetary Union would create great tensions 
which could even lead to another war in Europe. Even if the doubts about the effects of the euro no 
longer  lead  to  such  extreme  predictions,  a  certain  pessimism  nevertheless  still  exists.  Most  of  it  is 
unfounded. Current criticism often tends to blame the euro for problems which have very little to do 
with  it,  such  as  labour  market  rigidities,  overstretched  social  security  systems,  a  fiscal  system  not 
ready to cope with population ageing and many other things. It is unlikely that these problems would 
have been solved had the euro not been created. Indeed, the introduction of the euro may be forcing 
governments to confront structural problems which they had previously ignored. Moreover, the euro 
has shielded many euro area countries from significant exchange rate volatility and financial market 
6 
 BIS Review 25/2004
turmoil  in  the  face  of  the  many  adverse  shocks  that  have  occurred  over  recent  years,  including 
geopolitical tensions.  
Today we mark “The Euro at Five”. As I have explained, the accomplishments of those five years are 
already substantial, and we are ready to face the challenges ahead. Let me therefore conclude my 
speech at this birthday party by saying that we are looking forward to many, many happy returns. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 7
