R Basant Roi: Corporate governance guidelines and monetary policy stance in 
Mauritius 
Address  by  Mr  R  Basant  Roi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  at  the  opening  of  the  Goodlands 
Branch of the Indian Ocean International Bank Ltd, Goodlands, 20 August 2004.   
 Hon. Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance 
Chairman of the Board of Directors of the IOIB 
Chief Executive and staff of the IOIB 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Afternoon 
I am pleased to be here in your midst for the opening of the Goodlands branch of the Indian Ocean 
International Bank Ltd. 
I understand that the Indian Ocean International Bank has for quite sometime been implementing a 
plan  for  strengthening  its  financial  standing  and  is  also  in  the  process  of  enhancing  its  corporate 
image. The bank has so far made a good measure of progress in this endeavour. I would like to urge 
its board of directors to maintain the speed of progress with the same zeal and vigour to the finish. 
Poor corporate governance has been the major cause for the weakness of banks and bank failures in 
Mauritius.  To  the  board  of  directors  of  the  Indian  Ocean  International  Bank  and  to  the  boards  of 
directors of all other banks operating in Mauritius, I would like to say that adherence to good corporate 
governance  principles  is  indisputably  the  key  to  the  maintenance  of  the  sound  and  solid  financial 
standing  of  financial  institutions.  A  bank,  however  small,  with  good  corporate  culture  is  far  stronger 
than any big bank with poor corporate governance principles. 
In the past few years the Bank of Mauritius has issued to banks a comprehensive set of guidelines, 
including corporate governance principles that they are required to adhere to. While virtually no banker 
disputes the necessity to impose those principles and other guidelines, many in the industry view them 
as  cumbersome  and  too  demanding.  It  is  true  that  relative  to  way  banking  business  used  to  be 
conducted  until  very  recently  in  Mauritius,  the  regulatory  requirements  are  indeed  demanding.  We 
cannot, however, overlook the fundamentally important fact that regulatory requirements do serve the 
best interests of depositors. And the Bank of Mauritius, as regulator of the industry, is here to protect 
the interests of depositors. 
Regulations are not designed to shape good behaviour of bankers. They aim at establishing discipline 
in  the  conduct  of  banking  business  and  promoting  corporate  habits  that  are  not  only  fair  but  also 
transparent  to  market  participants.  In  this  process,  regulations  do  also  help  create  conditions 
conducive to the sound development of financial markets. Often we come across rogue shareholders 
and rogue board members. Companies commonly face a typical problem; it’s the agency problem that 
sits at the very heart of corporate governance. Certain board members in the banking industry, rather 
than  being  guided  by  such  principles  that  best  serve  the  interests  of  their  banks,  often  use  their 
authority  to  advance  their  own  agenda.  This  attitude  is  anathema  to  the  principles  of  good 
governance. 
In  the  banking  industry,  integrity  should  be  a  palpable  mark  of  distinction.  By  integrity  I  mean  that 
board members do not make decisions just for a quick buck. It means board members are not solely 
transaction-driven; they are in for the long-term benefits of their companies as well as of their clients. It 
also means that, if things do not go well, board members stand by their clients and if things do go well 
they  do  not  take  unfair  advantage  of  it.  While  profit  making  remains  the  principal  motive  for  any 
enterprise in a capitalist system, a usurious attitude in the banking business does quite often bring with 
it  the  seed of  self-destruction.  The  good  banker formulates  an educated  view  before  executing  any 
decision in his professional life. 
I  have  been  receiving  many  complaints  from  bank  customers  in  the  last  five  years.  Few  of  the 
complaints that I receive seem reasonable. Most of the complaints, after investigations, are found to 
be unreasonable. It is a common feature that borrowers do not pay sufficient attention to the contents 
of contracts they sign before borrowing. Often borrowers tend to swallow more than they can chew. It’s 
panic when the banker finally applies the sword. My appreciation of such a situation leads me believe 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
that  both  bankers  and  borrowers  share  the  blame.  To  borrowers  I  would  like  to  say:  refrain  from 
borrowing sums of money that is beyond their repayment capacity. To bankers, I would like to reiterate 
that they should, right from the outset, ensure that borrowers do have the repayment capacity before 
disbursing  funds  to  them.  Some  banks  do  it;  some  don’t.  We  are  contemplating  anti-collusive 
measures. 
Lately, various interpretations have been given to the monetary policy stance of the Bank of Mauritius. 
Five  years  ago,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  tightened  its  monetary  policy  stance  with  the  rate  of  interest 
having  gradually  risen  to  high  levels.  The  then  prevailing  conditions  did  warrant  the  tightening.  It  is 
commonplace  that  economies  do  undergo  cyclical  changes.  The  same  set  of  policies  that  is 
appropriate  for  a  particular  phase  of  the  economic  cycle  may  not  necessarily  be  appropriate  for  a 
different phase of the cycle if the objectives of the Bank’s policies are to be achieved. That is why the 
Bank  of  Mauritius  re-oriented  its  policy  stance  and  brought  about  reductions  in  the  rate  of  interest 
during  the  last  two  years.  The  successive  reductions  in  the  rate  of  interest  helped  alleviate  the 
financial burden of enterprises in the Export Processing Zone (EPZ). To what extent monetary policy 
can  go  on  accommodating  the  interests  of  the  various  economic  sectors  without  compromising  the 
very mandate of the Bank of Mauritius is clear to the enlightened observers. There are limits to what 
monetary policy of the Bank can deliver. 
The problems of the EPZ are mostly management and market-related. The emerging problem of our 
sugar industry is also market-related. The problems are definitively not rooted in the exchange rate of 
the rupee. It is inappropriate to speculate that a deliberate step to cause the rupee to depreciate is in 
the policy agenda of the Bank of Mauritius. This perception is incorrect. 
World  price  of  oil  has  attained  unprecedented  levels.  It  will  evidently  impact  on  the  domestic  price 
level. A depreciation of the rupee, triggered by oral stimulus, would exacerbate inflationary pressures 
in the economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, having said that let me reiterate my support to the Board of Directors and the 
management  of  the  IOIB  for  the  efforts  they  have  been  putting  in  so  far  to  steer  the  bank  out  of 
troubles. I wish them the very best of success. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
