Sunil Mendis: A brief look at financial information technology 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Sunil  Mendis,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  for  the  Financial 
Information Systems Seminar, Colombo, 8 September 2004. 
 His Excellency Akio Suda, the Ambassador for Japan in Sri Lanka, Mr Yoshihisa Onishi, Executive 
Director, FISC, other officers from the FISC in Japan, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Central Bank of Sri Lanka is happy to co-sponsor this programme together with the FISC of Japan 
(Center for Financial Industry Information Systems), in view of the importance of financial information 
technology in the financial services industry. Sri Lanka is no exception to continuous changes in the 
technology used by its financial services industry. In a market driven financial system, for information 
to be effective, there should be two vital ingredients, that is system integrity and timeliness - both of 
which  are  crucial.  The  more  dependable  your  information  systems  are,  the  more  efficient  and 
competitive  banks  can  be  as  a  player  in  the  financial  services  industry.  That  is  why  we  see  banks 
investing heavily in IT.  
Globally  too,  with  the  interdependence  of  markets  their  integration  is  facilitated  through  information 
systems which link these markets which make the world a very small place indeed on a PC monitor - 
where the whole world is virtually at your doorstep. 
The  FISC,  therefore,  has  contributed  significantly,  over  the  last  20  years,  to  making  information 
systems  more  efficient  and  dependable  through  their  research  activities  and  technical  co-operation 
programmes which have been extended to Asian countries such as Sri Lanka. Of particular interest to 
banks  would  be  the  security  guidelines  on  computer  systems  and  audit  guidelines  for  information 
systems of financial institutions, which they have issued. Some of these can be used as guidelines by 
our banking industry. 
Government and the people of Japan have contributed immensely to the development of this country 
for  many  decades  in  the  past  in  different  fields  and  their  support  in  sharing  their  knowledge  on 
financial  information  system  with  the  Sri  Lankan  financial  sector  is  greatly  appreciated.  In  this 
connection  I  wish  to  thank  the  FISC  who  has  devoted  so  much  of  its  time  and  effort  to  bring  in 
expertise in this area to market participants in Sri Lanka’s financial system. This would also provide a 
good forum for our banks to exchange ideas on specific security features adopted by the FISC. 
I have no doubt that this Seminar will provide an excellent opportunity for useful interaction amongst 
participants, and I would like to convey my best wishes. 
BIS Review 50/2004 
 1
