Ben S Bernanke: What policymakers can learn from asset prices  
Remarks  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, before The Investment Analysts Society of Chicago, Chicago, 15 April 2004. 
The references for the speech can be found on the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 Central bankers naturally pay close attention to interest rates and asset prices, in large part because 
these  variables  are  the  principal  conduits  through  which  monetary  policy  affects  real  activity  and 
inflation.  But  policymakers  watch  financial  markets  carefully  for  another  reason,  which  is  that  asset 
prices and yields are potentially valuable sources of timely information about economic and financial 
conditions.  Because  the  future  returns  on  most  financial  assets  depend  sensitively  on  economic 
conditions, asset prices - if determined in sufficiently liquid markets - should embody a great deal of 
investors’ collective information and beliefs about the future course of the economy. 
I thought you might find it interesting to hear a bit about how the staff of the Federal Reserve uses 
financial-market  information  to  try  to  improve  forecasts  and help guide policy  decisions.  As  you  will 
see, asset prices provide information, particularly about market expectations, that is difficult to obtain 
elsewhere. However, a recurring theme of my remarks will be that extracting accurate information from 
asset  prices  and  yields  is  more  difficult  and  requires  greater  sophistication  than  is  commonly 
supposed.  Ongoing  research  in  financial  economics  thus  has  great  potential  to  provide  practical 
assistance to monetary policy makers. 
As  usual,  the  views  I  will  express  today  are  not  necessarily  those  of  my  colleagues  in  the  Federal 
Reserve System.1
Market expectations of inflation: the information in inflation-indexed securities  
I will begin by discussing what financial markets can tell us about inflation expectations. The inflation 
expectations  of  financial-market  participants  are  of  particular  interest  to  central  bankers,  for  several 
reasons.  First,  as  price  stability  is  a  key  objective  of  monetary  policy,  the  Federal  Reserve  puts 
substantial resources into forecasting inflation. To the extent that financial markets serve to aggregate 
private-sector  information about  the  likely  future course  of  inflation,  data on asset  prices and  yields 
might be used to validate and perhaps improve the Fed’s forecasts. Second, inflation expectations are 
of  interest  to  policymakers  independent  of  inflation  itself.  A  considerable  literature  suggests  that 
successful monetary policies should stabilize, or “anchor,” inflation expectations so as to prevent them 
from  becoming  a  source  of  instability  in  their  own  right  (Goodfriend,  1993;  Evans  and  Honkapohja, 
2003). Finally, knowledge of the expectations of inflation in financial markets permits the calculation of 
real interest rates, which are important indicators of both the condition of the economy and the stance 
of monetary policy. 
Although  clues  about  inflation  expectations  abound  in  financial  markets,  inflation-indexed  securities 
would appear to be the most direct source of information about inflation expectations and real interest 
rates.2  Government  securities  whose  realized  yields  depend  on  inflation,  known  on  the  Street  as 
“linkers,” have become increasingly common in industrial countries, Japan being the latest nation to 
introduce an inflation-indexed government bond. The U.S. Treasury began issuing TIIS (for Treasury 
inflation-indexed  securities),  more  popularly  known  as  TIPS  (for  Treasury  inflation-protected 
securities),  in  January  1997.  TIPS  promise  a  yield-to-maturity  that  is  guaranteed  in  real  terms.  To 
provide  the  promised  real  yield,  TIPS  coupon  and  principal  payments  are  escalated  based  on 
increases in the consumer price index from the time at which the security was issued. 
The difference between the real yield guaranteed by an inflation-linked security and the nominal yield 
provided by a conventional security of the same maturity is known as the breakeven inflation rate or, 
alternatively, as inflation compensation. The top panel of Figure 1 shows the yield on nominal ten-year 
                                                      
1   Thanks are due to James Clouse and Brian Sack for superb assistance.  
2  
Indeed, their potential usefulness in this respect was an explicit motivation for their introduction in the United States. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 1
Treasury bonds (top line) and the real yield on ten-year TIPS since 1999 (bottom line). The vertical 
distance between the two lines is known as breakeven inflation at the ten-year horizon. The bottom 
panel uses overlapping issues of nominal securities and TIPS to disaggregate breakeven inflation into 
the rate that applies to bonds maturing five years from now and the implied forward breakeven rate 
from  five  to  ten  years  out.  The  breakeven  rate  of  inflation  is  often  treated  as  a  direct  reading  of 
investors’  expectations  of  inflation.  Under  this  interpretation,  the  lower  line  in  the  bottom  panel  of 
Figure 1 is an estimate of market inflation expectations over the next five years, and the upper line 
represents  five-year  forward  expectations  of  inflation,  that  is,  today’s  expectation  of  what  average 
inflation will be between 2009 and 2014. 
Unfortunately,  as  a  measure  of  market  participants’  expected  inflation,  breakeven  inflation  has  a 
number of problems (Sack, 2000; Shen and Corning, 2001). First, and probably the most important, 
breakeven inflation includes a return to investors for bearing inflation risk, implying that the breakeven 
rate likely overstates the market’s expected rate of inflation. Estimates of the inflation risk premium for 
bonds maturing during the next five to ten years are surprisingly large, generally in a range between 
35  and  100  basis  points,  depending  on  the  time  period  studied  (Ang  and  Bekaert,  2003;  Goto  and 
Torous, 2003; Buraschi and Jiltsov, 2004). If the inflation risk premium averages 50 basis points, for 
example,  then  breakeven  inflation  will  overstate  the  market’s  true  expectation  of  inflation  by  half  a 
percentage point, a substantial amount. A further complication is that inflation risk premiums are not 
constant but instead appear to vary over time as economic circumstances change. 
Second, although the issuance of inflation-protected securities has risen significantly, the outstanding 
quantities  of  these  securities  remain  much  smaller  than  those  of  conventional  Treasury  securities. 
Moreover,  TIPS  are  attractive  to  buy-and-hold  investors,  in  contrast  to  nominal  Treasury  securities, 
which are extensively used for trading and hedging (Sack and Elsasser, 2004). For both reasons, the 
market for TIPS remains significantly less liquid than those for most Treasury securities. All else equal, 
the  likely  presence  of  a  liquidity  premium  in  the  TIPS  return  tends  to  make  breakeven  inflation  an 
underestimate  of  expected  inflation,  thus  offsetting  to  some  degree  the  effect  of  the  inflation  risk 
premium.3 Like inflation risk premiums, liquidity premiums on TIPS appear to vary over time, further 
complicating the interpretation of breakeven inflation. 
A  third  issue  is  that  the  real  values  of  the  coupon  payments  on  an  indexed  security  are  fixed  by 
construction, while the real coupons of a nominal bond usually decline over its life. Hence, an indexed 
security typically has a longer duration with respect to real interest rate changes than does the nominal 
security, a difference that affects the relative riskiness of real and nominal securities.4 More generally, 
because  TIPS  returns  are  imperfectly  correlated  with  the  yields  on  both  nominal  Treasuries  and 
stocks, some investors demand TIPS for general diversification purposes - a demand that appears to 
have increased significantly as investors have become more familiar with this new type of asset. As 
the supply of TIPS has been fairly limited, the rise in demand by institutional investors and others may 
push down the equilibrium real return on TIPS and thus raise measures of breakeven inflation.5
A  separate  issue  that  bears  on  the  relevance  of  breakeven  inflation  for  policymaking  is  that  TIPS 
returns depend on the overall consumer price index (CPI), whereas for many purposes policymakers 
are more interested in the behavior of core inflation, a measure of inflation that strips out volatile food 
and energy prices. In fact, TIPS returns appear sensitive to fluctuations in oil prices.  
                                                      
3   As a partial fix of this problem, the breakeven inflation rates shown in Figure 1 are calculated by comparing the yields of 
TIPS and so-called off-the-run securities. Within a given class of securities, say Treasury bonds with ten years until maturity, 
off-the-run securities are securities other than those most recently issued. Because off-the-run securities are less liquid than 
newly issued (on-the-run) securities, they provide a more appropriate benchmark against which to compare the yields of 
relatively illiquid inflation-indexed bonds. 
4   As Sack (2000) has pointed out, this difference in duration implies that the breakeven inflation rate may be sensitive to the 
expected profile of future short real rates or be affected by differences in risk premiums arising from different exposure to 
interest-rate risk. Sack addressed the issue of differing durations of nominal securities and TIPS by comparing yields on 
TIPS to yields on artificial securities constructed to provide the same pattern of real payments as a TIPS security, thereby 
eliminating the differences in duration noted in the text. He found, however, that the duration mismatch is less important 
quantitatively than differences in liquidity between on-the-run nominal securities and TIPS. 
5   A number of technical issues, such as the lags in the inflation adjustment procedure, affect the relationship of breakeven 
inflation  and  expected  inflation.  One  such  potential  complication  arises  if  the  tax  rates  applicable  to  the  marginal  TIPS 
investor  and  to  the  marginal  holder  of  nominal  government  securities  are  not  the  same,  in  which  case  the  equilibrium 
breakeven inflation level will be affected. Roll (2004) discusses the effects of taxation on the breakeven inflation rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2004
As you can see in Figure 1, breakeven inflation rates have proven surprisingly volatile over their short 
history. For example, when nominal Treasury yields swung sharply during the spring and summer of 
2003, ten-year breakeven inflation moved sharply as well, declining about 40 basis points as the bond 
market rallied, then rising about 80 basis points when nominal yields came back up (top panel). This 
effect was seen also in inflation compensation at the five-to-ten-year horizon (bottom panel), a rather 
counterintuitive result. 
What should we make of the volatility of breakeven inflation over recent years? One interpretation is 
that inflation expectations are not as well anchored as policymakers would like (see Bernanke, 2004, 
for additional evidence on this point). The fact that inflation compensation tends to react strongly both 
to releases of macroeconomic data and to unexpected changes in monetary policy (Gurkaynak, Sack, 
and Swanson, 2003) supports this interpretation. 
Still, at this point I think we need to be cautious about drawing strong conclusions about the short-run 
behavior  of  expected  inflation  from  the  data  on  breakeven  inflation.  The  fact  that  the  volatility  of 
breakeven inflation is so much greater than that of standard survey measures of inflation expectations 
(such as those collected by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia for professional forecasters or 
by the University of Michigan for consumers) should give us pause. The responsiveness of breakeven 
inflation to what might be construed primarily as liquidity disturbances, such as the Russian debt crisis 
and  recent  bouts  of  mortgage  hedging  activity  that  roiled  Treasury  markets,  suggests  that  variable 
liquidity premiums, together with varying inflation risk premiums, contaminate breakeven inflation as a 
measure of expected inflation.6
I  have  emphasized  some  reasons  to  be  cautious  in  interpreting  breakeven  inflation  as  expected 
inflation.  Nevertheless,  I  expect  that  the  usefulness  of  inflation-indexed  securities  as  a  tool  for 
measuring expected inflation will increase over time. The liquidity of TIPS should continue to improve 
as  the  share  of  government  debt  issued  in  inflation-linked  form  continues  to  rise,  particularly  if  the 
Treasury decides to expand the range of maturities of indexed bonds that it offers. Moreover, as I will 
discuss briefly later in the talk, our ability to model risk and liquidity premiums is improving, which will 
help  us  control  for  an  important  source  of  volatility  in  breakeven  inflation.  Finally,  the  universe  of 
inflation-linked financial assets seems to be increasing, which will allow for fruitful comparisons and 
cross-checking. For example, futures on the CPI were recently introduced on the Chicago Mercantile 
Exchange. Although these contracts are not yet widely traded, they may at some point provide useful 
measures  of  breakeven  inflation  out  to  the  maturity  of  the  shortest-term  TIPS,  thereby  filling  in  an 
important portion of the term structure of breakeven inflation. 
Interest rates and spreads as leading indicators  
An alternative approach to extracting information from financial markets is to examine a range of asset 
prices  and  yields  to  determine  whether  they  are  useful  as  leading  indicators  of  economic 
developments.  Financial  prices  meet  several  key  criteria  for  being  useful  leading  indicators.  As  I 
already noted, asset prices and yields are inherently forward looking and thus may contain information 
about future economic conditions not evident in other series. Moreover, asset prices, unlike many data 
series, are available on a timely and continuous basis and are not revised. At least since the 1930s, 
when  Wesley  Mitchell  and  Arthur  Burns  (1938)  published  their  pioneering  work,  economists  have 
noted the usefulness of asset prices in forecasting economic activity - though perhaps we should keep 
in mind Paul Samuelson’s wry observation that “the stock market has predicted nine of the last five 
recessions.” 
Although many financial quantities have been used in forecasting (an index of stock prices is included 
in the official index of leading indicators), interest rates on various financial instruments have perhaps 
been most often cited for their value as leading indicators.7 For example, in a 1992 paper, Alan Blinder 
and  I  found  evidence  that  the  federal  funds  rate,  the  short-term  interest  rate  used  by  the  Federal 
                                                      
6 
Indeed, Shen and Corning (2001) note that breakeven inflation is correlated with other measures of liquidity premiums, such 
as the spread between on-the-run and off-the-run securities. Perli and Sack (2003) discuss the volatility in Treasury bond 
markets associated with mortgage hedging activity. 
7   Stock and Watson (2003b) provide an exhaustive survey of the literature on the predictive power of asset prices for output 
and inflation. Parts of my discussion in this section draw from their paper. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 3
Reserve  as  its  policy  instrument,  has  significant  predictive  power  for  a  variety  of  measures  of 
economic activity. 
Various yield spreads have also been found to be informative about the future course of the economy. 
In 1989, James Stock and Mark Watson proposed a new index of leading indicators based on seven 
variables  with  exceptionally  good  forecasting  track  records  up  to  that  date.  Among  these  variables 
were  the  spread  between  the  ten-year  and  one-year  Treasury  yields  (the  term  spread),  the  yield 
differential between commercial paper and Treasury bills (the public-private spread), the change in the 
ten-year Treasury yields, and the nominal exchange rate.8 Thus, Stock and Watson found that two of 
the best seven macroeconomic forecasting variables were interest rate spreads, and four of the best 
seven forecasters were financial in nature. 
Of these variables, the term spread (also known as the slope of the yield curve) had been recognized 
for some time as a useful indicator of cyclical conditions. Figure 2 shows the historical behavior of the 
term spread (top panel, here measured as the ten-year rate less the three-month rate), as well as that 
of the federal funds rate and the spread between commercial paper and three-month T-bill yields for 
comparison. The shaded areas indicate periods of recession as designated by the National Bureau of 
Economic Research. It is interesting that the slope of the Treasury yield curve has turned negative (top 
panel), at least briefly, at between two and six quarters before every U.S. recession since 1964 (Ang, 
Piazzesi, and Wei, 2003). It has given only one false signal, in 1966, when an economic slowdown  
- but not an official recession - followed the inversion of the yield curve. The slope of the yield curve is 
potentially informative for several reasons. To some extent, it captures the stance of monetary policy. 
For example, when the yield curve is sharply upward sloping, as is the case today, one can usually 
conclude  that  monetary  policy  is  in  an  expansionary  mode  (because  the  short-term  policy  rate  lies 
below the average of expected future short-term rates). Either an expected pickup in economic growth 
or  higher  expected  future  inflation  would  also  tend  to  raise  long-term  rates  relative  to  short  rates, 
steepening the yield curve. Evidence for the predictive power of the slope of the yield curve has been 
found for other industrialized countries as well as for the United States.9  
Although the evident information content of the term spread and other yields and spreads is intriguing, 
these variables - like breakeven inflation - hardly provide a foolproof forecasting tool. For example, the 
Stock-Watson indicator and other indicators based on interest rates and spreads signaled the 1990-91 
recession very weakly and rather late. The yield curve was inverted from June 2000 through March 
2001,  which  presaged  the  2001  recession,  but  other  financial  indicators  (such  as  the  public-private 
spread) missed the downturn entirely (Stock and Watson, 2003a), as you can see in Figure 2. More 
generally, Stock and Watson (2003b) have recently documented that simple forecasting relationships 
are typically quite unstable, presumably because both the nation’s economic structure, the conduct of 
policy, and the mix of shocks that buffet the economy change over time. 
Although the use of financial data as leading indicators is not without risks, I suspect that economists 
will  continue  to  try  to  find  better  ways  to  extract  the  information  in  these  data.  I  see  two  general 
approaches  as  being  especially  promising.  First,  forecasting  relationships  that  simultaneously  use 
information from a large number of data series may be more robust than prediction equations based 
on only a few variables (Stock and Watson, 2003b). One effective way to summarize the information in 
large  data  sets  is  through  the  estimation  of  statistical  models  that  extract  the  common  information 
conveyed by many variables.10 Currently, the U.S. Treasury uses a model of this type in preparing its 
forecasts of gross domestic product (GDP), and the Chicago Fed’s national activity index, which draws 
on earlier work by Stock and Watson, is also based on these methods. The Board staff is currently 
investigating the potential of this approach for forecasting the economy. 
                                                      
8   Friedman  and  Kuttner  (1993)  independently  recognized  the  rather  remarkable  forecasting  record  of  the  public-private 
spread. 
9   For  example,  Estrella  and  Mishkin  (1997)  studied  the  predictive  value  of  the  term  premium  using  data  from  France, 
Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Estrella and Mishkin found that the slope of the yield curve is 
useful for predicting growth at about a six-quarter horizon, with the link being somewhat stronger in the United States than in 
Europe. They also found that the slope of the yield curve helps to predict inflation (as measured by the GDP deflator), but at 
much longer horizons of about five years. Also using international data, Kozicki (1997) found that the term spread is a good 
short-run forecaster of output, but that the level of yields is a more useful predictor of inflation. 
In  other  work,  Stock  and  Watson  (1999)  have  shown  that  these  so-called  factor  models  can  provide  superior  and  more 
robust forecasts than methods based on only a few variables. Forni, Hallin, Lippi, and Reichlin (2000) and Bernanke and 
Boivin (2003) have obtained related results. 
10  
4 
 BIS Review 21/2004
The  other  promising  approach  is  to  combine  financial  and  macroeconomic  information  in  a  more 
structured  way.  For  example,  Ang,  Piazzesi,  and  Wei  (2003)  have  used  modern  financial  theory  to 
construct a model of the Treasury yield curve that closely links the behavior of real GDP and a few key 
interest rates. In particular, their framework incorporates the possibility of two-way causality, allowing 
for both interest-rate effects on the economy and the impact of economic developments on interest 
rates. These authors show that combining financial and macroeconomic elements in a single model 
permits better forecasts of both GDP and of interest rates than can be achieved through less formal 
methods.11  Other  work,  for  example  by  Ang  and  Bekaert  (2003),  shows  how  modeling  the  links 
between interest rates and the economy may help us obtain more efficient forecasts of inflation. These 
methods are also being studied at the Federal Reserve Board. 
One important advantage of this theory-based modeling approach is that it permits the estimation of 
risk premiums. For example, presumably the predictive power of the term spread would be enhanced 
if  we  could  separate changes  in  the spread  resulting  from changes  in rate expectations  from  those 
arising  from  changes  in  risk  premiums.  Similarly,  better  estimates  of  inflation  risk  premiums  would 
prove  useful  for  adjusting  breakeven  inflation  rates  from  TIPS  to  get  more  reliable  measures  of 
expected inflation. 
Market expectations of monetary policy  
What  do  markets  expect  about  the  future  course  of  monetary  policy?  The  question  is  important  to 
policymakers,  not  because  we  are  concerned  necessarily  that  we  should  meet  the  market’s 
expectations  -  such  a  strategy  quickly  degenerates  into  a  hall  of  mirrors  -  but  as  a  check  on  the 
efficacy  of  our  communication.  If  the  policy  expectations  of  the  market  differ  significantly  from  the 
policy  expectations  of  central  bankers,  then  the  two  leading  possibilities  are,  first,  that  the  policy 
committee  has  not  accurately  communicated  its  outlook  and  objectives  or,  second,  that  the  market 
hears the policy committee’s message but is skeptical of it. 
A number of financial instruments provide readings on the market’s policy expectations. Two of the 
most useful are federal funds futures contracts and eurodollar futures contracts. These contracts are 
traded  in  highly  liquid  markets.12  Moreover,  by  their  nature  they  are  closely  tied  to  expectations  of 
monetary policy changes, as both reflect rates paid in the interbank market, the market that is targeted 
by the Federal Reserve’s open-market operations.13
Implied forward values of short-term interest rates at various horizons can be extracted from federal 
funds and eurodollar futures contract prices in a straightforward way. Figure 3 provides an illustration. 
The lower, dashed line shows the path of the expected federal funds rate through 2008 as implied by 
federal funds and eurodollar futures at the close of the market on April 1, 2004, with an adjustment for 
the average level of term premiums. The upper, solid line shows the path of expected funds rates as of 
the market close on the next day, April 2. As you probably know, the payroll employment numbers 
announced on April 2 significantly exceeded market expectations. Figure 3 shows that the payroll data 
seems to have caused the market to price in an expectation of a higher federal funds rate target over 
the entire policy horizon. Of course, that change in policy expectations is consistent with the significant 
rise in Treasury yields that occurred after the employment report. 
Observing  market  expectations  of  policy  provides  useful  feedback  to  the  policymakers.  Yet  again, 
however,  caution  is  needed  in  interpreting  these  data.  As  with  inflation-indexed  securities,  forward 
interest rates implied by futures contracts do not necessarily correspond to market expectations of the 
short-term  rate,  because  of  the  presence  of  premiums  for  interest-rate  risk.14  Indeed,  research 
                                                      
11   Kozicki  and  Tinsley  (2001),  Hordahl,  Tristani,  and  Vestin  (2002),  Ang  and  Piazzesi  (2003),  Craig  and  Haubrich  (2003), 
Diebold, Rudebusch, and Aruoba (2003), and Rudebusch and Wu (2003) are  among the many interesting papers in the 
recent “macro-finance” literature on the term structure. 
12   The  volume  of  federal  fund  futures  contracts  traded  has  grown  about  sixfold  in  the  past  four  years,  to  about  8.3  million 
contracts 2003. 
13   Gurkaynak, Sack, and Swanson (2002) examined the predictive power of federal funds and eurodollar futures contracts for 
settings  of  the  federal  funds  rate  target  and  found  that  in  this  respect  they  outperform  other  financial  instruments. 
Specifically, they found that the federal funds futures contract dominates alternative instruments for forecasting the funds 
rate  out  to  a  horizon  of  several  months,  while  eurodollar  futures  do  slightly  better  than  alternative  instruments  at  longer 
horizons.  
14   Liquidity premiums are less of an issue for these markets. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 5
suggests that risk premiums in federal funds and eurodollar futures contracts are not trivial and may 
vary over time. For example, a study by Piazzesi and Swanson (2004) has found that risk premiums 
on  federal  funds  futures  are  both  strongly  countercyclical  and  predictable  at  longer  horizons.  The 
implication is that, although futures prices provide good estimates of market expectations of policy at 
short horizons of six months or so, at longer horizons they can be misleading. In particular, Piazzesi 
and Swanson (2004) find that if analysts ignore risk premiums in federal funds and eurodollar futures, 
they  will  estimate  longer-horizon  policy  expectations  that  “lag  behind”  actual  market  expectations, 
remaining too high when the Fed is easing and too low when the Fed is tightening.15 Fortunately, this 
research also shows how to correct the futures data to account for the time variation in risk premiums. 
Once again, we see that some subtlety is required to extract the information available in asset prices. 
A great advantage of market-based measures of policy expectations, relative to periodic surveys that 
ask  market  participants  about  their  expectations,  is  that  market  measures  are  available  essentially 
continuously.16 These measures thus lend themselves to “event studies” of two types, both of which 
are employed at the Board of Governors. The first type analyzes how various events, such as Federal 
Reserve statements; the release of minutes, testimony, or speeches by members of the Federal Open 
Market Committee (FOMC); and macroeconomic news affect market expectations of monetary policy. 
One simply compares the implied policy expectations before and after the event being studied. We 
have  already  considered  an  example,  the  effects  of  the  most  recent  payroll  report,  in  Figure  3. 
Analyses of this type provide insights for policymakers into the question of what economic factors the 
“market,” viewed collectively, is focusing on at a given time. 
The second type of event study uses market-based measures of policy expectations to analyze the 
effects of policy changes on the economy. In particular, when the FOMC chooses to set the target for 
the federal funds rate at a value different from that expected by the market, asset prices tend to react 
strongly. For example, in a recent paper, Kenneth Kuttner and I (2004) studied the effects on stock 
prices of unanticipated changes in monetary policy, as measured by settings of the federal funds rate 
target that differ from those implied by federal funds futures market. We found that a surprise increase 
of 25 basis points in the funds rate target typically results in a decline in broad equity indexes of about 
1 percent, whereas a change in the funds rate that is expected by the market has essentially no effect 
on stock prices.17 Our work is just one example of a number of event-study analyses that may well 
shed light on the effects of monetary policy and the channels of monetary policy transmission. 
Policymakers are concerned not only about market expectations of output, inflation, interest rates, and 
other key variables, but also about the extent of market uncertainty about those and other variables. 
Financial data provide insight about market uncertainty that is obtainable nowhere else. For example, 
the Board’s staff regularly analyzes the prices of options on eurodollar futures to estimate the degree 
of  uncertainty  that  market  participants  have  about  monetary  policy  at  different  horizons.  Indeed,  by 
examining options with different strike prices, and under some reasonable additional assumptions, one 
can produce a full probability distribution of market expectations for the level of the federal funds rate 
at various dates in the future. Likewise, analysis of various types of options can generate distributions 
of expectations for economic and financial variables ranging from oil prices to the exchange value of 
the dollar to future stock prices.18
Conclusion  
Financial markets aggregate enormous amounts of information and thus provide a rich hunting ground 
for central bankers trying to learn about the economy. Today I have tried to provide a small taste of the 
many types of financial data that are analyzed by the staff at the Federal Reserve as well as to give 
                                                      
15   Sack (2004) also allows for time-varying risk premiums, making the assumption that the risk premium is related to the slope 
of the eurodollars futures curve at longer horizons. Like Piazzesi and Swanson (2004), he finds that time variation in the risk 
premium  has  little  effect  on  estimated  policy  expectations  at  shorter  horizons  (six  to  twelve  months,  in  his  study)  but 
becomes increasingly important at longer horizons. 
16   Another advantage is that, unlike survey participants, traders back up their forecasts with their money - a powerful incentive 
to make forecasts that are as accurate as possible. 
17   Our  analysis  used  daily  data.  Using  intraday  data,  Gurkaynak,  Sack,  and  Swanson  (2004)  found  an  effect  of  similar 
magnitude. 
18   A caveat: These probability distributions are derived under an assumption of risk neutrality. Thus, unobserved risk premiums 
are potentially a problem here as well. 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2004
you some sense of the techniques that they bring to bear. A message that I also hope to leave with 
you  is  that  some  of  the  potentially  most  valuable  information  in  financial  markets  often  requires 
considerable theoretical and empirical sophistication to extract. For this reason, and as I mentioned at 
the beginning, financial research of the type being conducted at the Board, in academia, and in the 
investment community will prove invaluable to the Federal Reserve in our efforts to support a stronger 
and more stable economy. 
BIS Review 21/2004 
 7
 8 
  BIS Review 21/2004
BIS Review 21/2004 
  9
 10 
 BIS Review 21/2004
