Kishori J Udeshi: Bank supervision - challenges ahead 
NA  Palkhivala  Memorial  Oration  lecture  by  Ms  Kishori  J  Udeshi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve 
Bank of India, Jaipur, 28 August 2004. 
 I deem it an honour and a privilege to speak before this august gathering on the occasion of the Nani 
Palkhivala  Memorial  Oration.  While  conferring  on him  the  Honorary  degree  of  Doctor  of  Laws,  Shri 
Nani Palkhivala was described by Princeton University, USA, as a “defender of constitutional liberties, 
champion of human rights, teacher, author and economic developer”. This description, however, does 
not  capture  the  brilliance  of  the  man’s  mind,  the  eloquence  of  his  speech  and  the  goodness  of  his 
heart. While I do not have even an iota of his ability to speak without notes for hours and keep his 
audience in rapt attention there is one small thing that we two have in common and that is our alma 
mater;  St.  Xavier’s  College,  Mumbai.  Shri  Palkhivala  was  a  Director  of  the  Central  Board  of  the 
Reserve Bank of India from 1963 till 1970 and it is befitting that the subject of today’s talk is on the 
challenges ahead for banking.  
For a better appreciation of the future challenges let me begin by giving a brief glimpse of how we 
reached where we are today.  
The financial sector witnessed a radical shift with the introduction of the reform process in 1992. The 
focus of the reforms was on deregulation and liberalisation especially of the Banking sector which is 
the major component of the financial sector of the country. The banking sector reforms were guided 
primarily  by  the  recommendations  of  the  Committee  on  Financial  System  (Narasimham  Committee, 
1991)  which  related,  among  others,  to  (a)  reduction  in  the  levels  of  statutory  pre-emptions, 
(b) dismantling  the  complex  structure  of  administered  interest  rates,  (c)  laying  down  of  capital 
adequacy requirements; (d) introduction of prudential norms and (e) liberalisation of entry norms for 
domestic and foreign banks.  
At the macro level, firstly there has been a reduction in the level of preemption of banks’ resources. 
The statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) has been reduced from 38.5 percent in 1991-92 to 25 percent. The 
average cash reserve ratio (CRR) has been reduced from 15 percent in 1991-92 to 4.5 percent now. 
Secondly, interest rates have been deregulated. The number of administered interest rates on bank 
advances has been reduced from 20 in 1989-90 to just 2 by 1994-95. Interest rates on loans above 
Rs. 2 lakh are fully deregulated. Prime lending rates have declined from 19 percent in 1991-92 and the 
benchmark PLR now, in respect of five major banks, is in the range of 10.5 to 11.5 percent currently. 
Interest rates on domestic term deposits have also been deregulated. Thirdly, directed credit schemes 
have been streamlined to avoid inefficient use of credit. Fourthly, a Board for Financial Supervision 
has been set up with an Advisory Council to strengthen the supervisory system of banks and financial 
institutions  and  an  independent  Department  of  Banking  Supervision  has  been  set  up  in  the  RBI  to 
assist the Board.  
At  the  micro  level,  the  less  strong  banks,  which  suffered  capital  erosion  due  to  rising  levels  of 
non-performing assets were recapitalised. Secondly, capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of 8 percent 
was  introduced.  This  is  now  at  9  percent.  Thirdly,  prudential  norms  for  income  recognition, 
classification of assets and provisioning for bad debts were introduced. The management of NPAs has 
been  fortified  by  the  enactment  of  the  Securitisation  &  Reconstruction  of  Financial  Assets  and 
Enforcement  of  Securities  Interest  (SARFAESI)  Act,  2002  which  provides  statutory  support  for  the 
enforcement  of  creditors’  rights  and  inter  alia,  paved  the  way  for  the  establishment  of  Asset 
Reconstruction Companies. Fourthly, Debt Recovery Tribunals were set up to assist the banks in the 
recovery of loans. Fifthly, the Scheme of Ombudsman was introduced in 1995, to look into and resolve 
customer grievances. Sixthly, the State Bank of India Act, 1955 and the Bank Nationalisation Act of 
1970  were  amended  to  enable  the  banks  to  access  the  capital  market  for  debt  and  equity.  Lastly, 
reforms  were  also  introduced  in  respect  of  Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  and  non-bank  finance 
companies (NBFCs).  
The above measures together with the strengthening of prudential norms and market discipline and 
the adoption of international benchmarks to suit India specific needs have served to make the Indian 
financial sector competitive, viable and resilient.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 1
Financial crises the world over have revealed that weak financial systems and their supervision are the 
most  important  factors  contributing  to  macro  instability.  As  East  Asia  discovered  so  painfully,  the 
health  of  the  banking  system  underpins  that  of  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Financial  markets  are 
different from product markets and therefore, greater liberalisation goes along with deeper supervision 
and higher degree of regulation. Any destablisation in financial markets affects even those who are not 
in  financial  markets.  On  the  other  hand,  financial  markets  can  drive  the  real  economy.  Therefore, 
transparency, disclosures, prudential norms and capitalisation are a must. This is essential because 
bank depositors have no other security except that banks are well regulated.  
Increasing  deregulation  and  globalisation,  greater  competition 
the  country  and 
cross-border  dealings  have  exposed  banks  to  even  greater  risk.  Diversification  into  non-traditional 
products like insurance, derivatives etc., has added to the complexity of banking business. Further, 
internet  banking,  e-commerce,  e-money  and  other  information  technology  related  innovations  are 
adding  new  dimensions  to  risks  faced  by  the  banking  sector.  Mergers  and  acquisitions  as  well  as 
outsourcing of some non-core activities are undertaken by the banks with some strategic objectives - 
they also enhance the risks in banking. Considering the speed with which banking is changing, it is 
recognised that there is a need to enlarge the focus and thrust of Risk-Based Supervision (RBS) so as 
to be able to improve the risk sensitivity of the supervisory approach.  
In view of the relevance of improved risk management systems under the changing circumstances and 
the larger emphasis placed on risk management systems in banks under Basel II, it is essential that 
RBS stabilises at an early date and serves as an important feedback to not only the managements but 
also  the  supervisors.  However,  taking  into  account  the  diversity  in  the  Indian  banking  system, 
stabilising the RBS as an effective supervisory mechanism will be a daunting task.  
from  within 
Consolidation and move towards universal banking 
We are slowly but surely moving from a regime of “large number of small banks” to “small number of 
large banks”. The new era is going to be one of consolidation around identified core competencies. 
Mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector are going to be the order of the day. Successful merger 
of HDFC Bank and Times Bank earlier and Stanchart and ANZ Grindlays has demonstrated that the 
trend towards consolidation is almost an accepted fact. We are also looking for such signs in respect 
of a number of old private sector banks, many of which are not able to cushion their NPAs, expand 
their business and induct technology due to limited capital base. 
Coming times may usher in large banking institutions, if the development financial institutions opt for 
conversion  into  commercial  banking  in  line  with  the  recommendation  of  the  Second  Report  of  the 
Narsimhan Committee. In India, one of the largest financial institutions, ICICI, took the lead towards 
universal banking with its reverse merger with ICICI Bank. IDBI is also well on its way to transform 
itself into a universal bank. This may lead logically to promoting the concept of financial super market 
chain,  making  available  all  types  of  credit  and  non-funded  facilities  under  one  roof  or  specialised 
subsidiaries  under  one  umbrella  organisation.  The  setting  up  of  banks  by  financial  institutions  and 
non-banking  financial  companies  and  setting  up  of  insurance,  merchant  banking,  mutual  funds, 
housing finance and investment companies either as subsidiaries or as joint ventures has brought into 
focus  the  need  for  consolidated  supervision.  Consolidated  accounting  and  supervisory  techniques 
would have to evolve and appropriate firewalls need to be built to address the risks underlying such 
large organisations and banking conglomerates.  
Supervision/regulation of financial conglomerates 
The  financial  landscape  is  increasingly  witnessing  entry  of  some  of  the  bigger  banks  into  other 
financial  segments  like  merchant  banking,  insurance  etc.,  which  has  made  them  financial 
conglomerates. Emergence of several new players with diversified presence across major segments 
and possibility of some of the non-banking institutions in the financial sector acquiring large enough 
proportions to have systemic impact make it imperative for supervision to be spread across various 
segments of the financial sector. In this direction, an inter-regulatory Working Group was constituted 
with  members  from  RBI,  SEBI  and  IRDA.  The  framework  proposed  by  the  Group  will  be 
complementary to the existing regulatory structure wherein the individual entities are regulated by the 
respective  regulators  and  the  identified  financial  conglomerates  would  be  subjected  to  focused 
regulatory oversight through a mechanism of inter-regulatory exchange of information.  
2 
 BIS Review 49/2004
Risk management and capital adequacy 
Financial sector reforms in the current millennium are going to focus on setting the rules of the game 
for financial intermediaries in such a way that risks are taken with an adequate level of capital. In other 
words,  financial  intermediaries  should  be  free  to  engage  in  asset  liability  management  that  allows 
them to diversify their risk so long as they are supported by a level of capital sufficient to cushion them 
against their risk profile. 
The  first  Capital  Accord  of  1988  evolved  by  Basel  Committee  provided  a  framework  for  a  fair  and 
reasonable degree of consistency in the application of capital standards. However, the methods used 
to determine the capital charge for credit risk in the accord were not sufficiently sophisticated and not 
perceived  to  be  risk  sensitive.  Keeping  in  view  the  financial  innovation  and  growing  complexity  of 
financial  transactions,  a  need  was  felt  for  a  more  broad  based  and  flexible  framework  for  capital 
adequacy. Towards this end the Basel Committee has formulated a new framework, popularly called 
“Basel II” which attempts to formulate more precisely than before the levels of regulatory capital that 
banks must hold as a cushion against the credit and other risks that banks take. 
Cross-border supervision  
This would involve a greater focus on overseas operations of Indian banks and in having information 
sharing arrangements with overseas supervisors on a firmer and more formal footing. In the context of 
money laundering concerns raised by some of the supervisors, it needs to be ensured that some of 
the branches, especially those which are not compliant with the anti-money laundering principles of 
the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), are not causes of serious operational and reputational risks to 
their parent banks in India.  
Money laundering  
Although I touched upon this issue in brief earlier while discussing cross border supervision, I would 
like  to  dwell  a  little  bit  more  on  this  issue  as  it  has  been  engaging  the  attention  of  governments, 
regulators and international financial community for quite some time. And there will be no exaggeration 
if I call it the biggest challenge before the supervisors today.  
Post September 11, the issue that bank supervisors the world over are grappling with is “How to root 
out  the  menace  of  money  laundering?”  Until  recently,  the  governments  talked  tough  about  the 
problem,  but  did  little  about  it.  All  that  changed  three  years  ago.  The  FATF  was  conceived  by  G-7 
countries  as a  helpful  mechanism  to persuade  governments  to combat  money  laundering  and  offer 
them  technical  assistance  to  do  so.  The  laws  being  enacted  typically  require  a  bank  to  “know  the 
customer”  to  be  confident  that  his  money  is  obtained  by  legitimate  means,  and  to  report  any 
suspicious activity. This involves a Herculean effort, thanks in part, to the growth of “Correspondent 
banking relationships.” In effect, this means banks must know their customers’ customers as well. 
Banking  supervision  all  over  the  world  has  to  achieve  the  delicate  balance  between  respect  for 
customer privacy and making banks report suspicious transactions. This raised the toughest question: 
What exactly are efforts against money laundering trying to achieve? So far, countries have been free 
to define what they regard as illegal sources of money. Some include drugs, racketeering and other 
dark  crimes  in  their  definition  of  illegal  money.  Some,  such  as  France,  consider  tax  evasion  to  be 
money laundering. Others like Switzerland have more flexible laws. However, as recently as last week, 
Switzerland has agreed in principle to dismantle the veil of secrecy governing its banking activity in 
order to comply with anti-money laundering requirements. This is a landmark development.  
Corporate governance 
I would also like to touch upon an area, which is going to be the focus of the next generation financial 
sector reforms. One of the latest initiatives of RBI aims at enhancing the level of corporate governance 
in banks.  
In view of the special status enjoyed by banks whereby they freely accept deposits from the public and 
leverage  on  such  funds  through  credit  creation,  legal  prescription  for  ownership  and  governance  of 
banks have been laid down in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949. These have been supplemented by 
BIS Review 49/2004 
 3
Composition of the Board of Directors 
Approval of the Reserve bank for the appointment of CEO 
Powers for the removal of managerial personnel, CEO and Directors 
Guidelines on criteria for appointment, role and responsibilities of Directors 
Guidelines for acknowledgement of transfer/allotment of shares in private sector banks 
Foreign investment in the banking sector  
regulatory  prescriptions  issued  by  the  Reserve  Bank  from  time  to  time.  These  cover  the  following 
aspects:  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
We  have  recently  placed  in  public  domain  a  draft  paper  on  ‘A  comprehensive  policy  framework  for 
ownership and governance in private sector banks’. The objective of the draft guidelines issued by the 
Reserve Bank in July 2004 is to have a regulatory road map for ownership and governance in private 
sector banks in the interests of the depositors and financial stability. The underlying thread of the draft 
guidelines is to ensure that the ultimate ownership and control of banks is well diversified, banks are 
owned and managed by ‘fit and proper’ persons/entities and well capitalised and that the processes 
are  transparent  and  fair.  Several  countries,  both  developed  and  developing,  have  regulatory 
stipulations and clearance for significant shareholding and control. The threshold level may vary from 
country to country and can also involve more stringent conditions for higher thresholds. 
The draft guidelines allow for a level of shareholding of a single entity or a group of related entities 
beyond 10 per cent with the prior approval of the Reserve Bank. Such approval will be governed by 
the principles enunciated in the February 2004 guidelines. Apart from more intensive due diligence at 
higher  levels  of  shareholding,  the  February  2004  guidelines  require  public  interest  objectives  to  be 
served  for  shareholding  beyond  30  percent.  In  case  where  the  ownership  of  a  bank  is  that  by  a 
corporate entity, diversified ownership of that corporate entity will be considered among other factors. 
The  draft  guidelines  do  not  cover  foreign  bank  investment  in  Indian  banks,  which  will  be  released 
separately consistent with the policy in the Government press note of March 2004 to allow only one 
form of operational presence for foreign banks in India.  
In  order  to  minimise  vulnerability  due  to  small  size,  the  guidelines  provide  for  increase  in  the  net 
owned  funds  to Rs.300 crore  for  all private  sector  banks within  a  reasonable period. Cross  holding 
beyond five percent is sought to be discouraged and where such holding exceeds five percent, the 
objective is to reduce it to five percent. Promoters with existing shareholding beyond ten percent will 
be required to indicate the time table for reduction - the requests will be considered on the basis of the 
underlying  principles  of  ‘fit  and  proper’,  governance  and  public  interest.  As  a  matter  of  desirable 
practice, not more than one member of a family or close relative or associate should be on the board. 
Based on the feedback received, a second draft of the guidelines would be prepared and put in public 
domain. The broad principles underlying the proposed framework is intended to ensure the following: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
A consultative group headed by Dr. Ashok Ganguli was set up to review the supervisory role of board 
of banks. The recommendations included due diligence procedures for appointment of directors, the 
role  and  responsibilities  of  independent  non-executive  directors,  qualification  and  other  eligibility 
criteria for appointment of non-executive directors, providing training to the non-executive directors so 
that they are in touch with the latest developments, etc.  
In the midst of all these initiatives and challenges, a major challenge for the Reserve Bank has been to 
ensure  that  the  overarching  banking  regulatory  framework  facilitates  banking  services  reaching  the 
common  man.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  appointed  an  External  Committee  on  Procedures  and 
Performance Audit on Public Services headed by Dr. S.S. Tarapore and this committee has in one of 
its  reports  focused  on  depositor’s  accounts  and  other  banking  facilities  relating  to  individuals  -  the 
common  man.  Subsequently,  Governor,  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy  has  addressed  all  the  Chairmen  of  banks 
reminding  them  of  the  trust  reposed  by  the  common  person  in  the  nature  and  quality  of  customer 
Well-diversified ownership and control 
‘fit and proper’ status of important shareholders, Directors and CEO 
Minimum capital/net worth for optimal operations and systemic stability 
Transparency and fairness of policy and process. 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2004
service rendered by banks. Banks must recognise that if there is disenfranchisement of the depositor 
they may wake up to find slippages on the liability side of their balance sheet.  
In  the  ultimate  analysis,  however,  it  is  the  human  resource  which  will  have  to  respond  to  these 
challenges  and  in  the  words  of  our  previous  Governor,  Dr.  Bimal  Jalan,  “In  the  years  to  come  this 
‘human’ bias is likely to get stronger and the quality of human resources would become the cutting 
edge of competitiveness. A forward looking approach to our long term vision must focus on building 
human resources in a continuous cycle of competency and development”. To drive the change and 
meet the challenges we need bankers with not only requisite leadership and technical skills but also 
ethical  standards  of  the  highest  order  and  in  this  we  need  look  no  further  than  the  late  Shri  Nani 
Palkhivala for a role model - a man about whom it can be truly said that he walked with Kings yet lost 
not the common touch.  
BIS Review 49/2004 
 5
