Malcolm D Knight: The financial system and the global recovery - what lies 
ahead? 
Speech by Mr Malcolm D Knight, General Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 
Annual  Congress  of  the  Swiss  Society  for  Economics  and  Statistics  “International  Money  and 
Finance”, Basel, 18 March 2004. 
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  address  this  plenary  session  of  your  Society.  Since  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements is an international financial institution that is based in Switzerland, it is of key 
importance for us to maintain close ties with the community of professional economists in this country. 
Indeed,  the  fundamental  raison  d’etre  of  the  BIS  is  closely  aligned  with  the  subject  matter  of  this 
conference - international money and finance. The overarching goal of the BIS is to promote the twin 
objectives of sustainable non-inflationary economic growth and financial stability.  
As  a  result,  analysing  the  current  economic  picture and  prospects  for  the  period  ahead,  as  well  as 
assessing possible challenges for financial stability, are key elements of our work at the BIS. I want to 
cover  these  areas  in  my  talk  this  morning.  In  particular,  I  want  to  outline  what  I  see  as  the  current 
issues  for  international  financial  stability  and  to  touch  on  the  role  of  the  BIS  in  meeting  these 
challenges. 
 The economic picture has brightened significantly over the past six months. A strong and broad-based 
global recovery is under way. China has become the second engine of global growth alongside the 
United  States  -  and  this  buoyancy  is  evident  throughout  Asia.  At  present,  consumer  spending  in 
Europe  still  lags,  but  there  are  some  signs  that  confidence  has  strengthened.  There  are  few 
indications  of  any  generalised  inflationary  pressures,  even  if  the  recent  surge  in  commodity  prices 
does raise some questions.  
The international financial system has recovered from a series of shocks - the collapse of the IT sector 
equity bubble, the global recession, the financial crisis in Argentina, and the demise of corporations 
like  Enron,  WorldCom  and  Parmalat.  Global  equity  prices  are  well  above  the  low  point  that  was 
reached about a year ago. Interest rates are historically low across the whole maturity range. Credit 
spreads are tight, with many corporate and emerging market sovereign borrowers taking advantage of 
the unusually favourable funding conditions. Financial institutions are generally in much better shape 
than  a  year  ago.  Banks  in  many  jurisdictions  have  reduced  non-performing  loans,  and  insurance 
companies have benefited from rising equity prices.  
What  should  we  be  concerned  about  in  this  apparently  benign  environment?  The  thread  of  my 
argument is as follows: 
• 
Global growth is at present being driven by three powerful forces:  
(1) 
very expansionary fiscal policies in some countries, notably of course the United 
States;  
accommodative monetary policies almost around the globe; and 
an investment boom in China that is almost literally without precedent.  
(2) 
(3) 
Expansionary macroeconomic policies will, at some point, have to be reined in.  
Investment in China - and the credit expansion associated with it - needs to moderate to a 
pace that does not ignite an inflationary boom and bust. 
How these adjustments evolve in the next few years will have a major influence on global 
bond  markets,  on  asset  prices  in  other  financial  markets,  and  on  financial  institutions 
throughout the world. These financial market effects - which are my main focus today - will 
matter a great deal for the prospects for sustaining non-inflationary global growth. 
   BIS Review 17/2004 
 1
In the recent years of weak economic growth, fiscal policies in several large countries have provided a 
massive stimulus to aggregate demand. The cyclically adjusted fiscal balance in the United States has 
swung from a surplus of around 1% of GDP in 2000 to a deficit of 5% of GDP this year - a fiscal boost 
equivalent to 6% of GDP. Fiscal deficits in Europe have also widened, but by much less than in the 
United States. The deficit in Japan has been running at over 5% of GDP since 1998 and is still high. 
The current stance of these fiscal policies cannot be sustained indefinitely. The large structural deficits 
add to a stock of public sector debt which, in many cases, is already high. As for the United States, 
under current policies the prospects are for significant fiscal deficits for many years. All this is even 
more worrisome as governments in industrialised countries must confront the extraordinary challenge 
of rapidly ageing populations over the next 15 years. 
Central bank policy interest rates are also at historically low levels. The decline in short-term interest 
rates  has  been  particularly  dramatic  in  the  United  States,  where  the  federal  funds  rate  has  been 
lowered from 6.5% at the end of 2000 to only 1% at present. The ECB and other European central 
banks have also eased monetary policies, although less aggressively. The Bank of Japan has pursued 
a policy of zero nominal interest rates over the past couple of years, in an environment of falling output 
prices and a banking system encumbered with a large stock of non-performing loans. 
Historically low central bank policy interest rates suggest the need to return at some stage to a more 
“neutral”  setting  of  monetary  policy.  There  is  still  considerable  slack  in  the  major  economies, 
suggesting that there is no imminent need for monetary tightening. But rising oil and commodity prices 
could suggest some emerging inflationary pressures, albeit at the very early stage of the production 
chain. This is not a problem now, perhaps, but it is certainly a development that needs watching. A 
related issue is that in order to slow their domestic monetary expansions, Asian central banks at some 
point will need to scale back interventions in foreign exchange markets that are currently holding down 
the appreciation of their currencies against the US dollar. 
The investment boom in China also raises important issues. The present boom is in part simply one 
manifestation of what is little short of a new industrial revolution. Millions of new workers are being 
brought into the international economy. This promises to bring great benefits to all - and could provide 
a sustained boost to global growth. 
But the long-term benefits of this process should not blind us to certain important near-term economic 
risks. One is that the current breathtaking pace of investment in China and elsewhere in Asia could be 
inflationary, as output bumps into the constraints imposed by the limited local infrastructure, and the 
constraints  on  the  supply  of  raw  materials  and  other  non-labour  factors  of  production.  There  are 
currently some important signs of overheating in the Chinese economy. And there is also some risk of 
overinvestment. The production capacities built up in some sectors may never be profitable, and an 
overhang  of  capacity  could  blight  investment  prospects  in  the  future.  As  in  every  other  country, 
sustainable  growth  in  China  depends  on  the  implementation  of  effective  macroeconomic  and 
prudential policies. 
How these different policy challenges are met will have an important impact on growth, inflation, and 
the prospects for global financial markets. In particular, abrupt revisions of expectations by investors 
could translate into gyrations in financial markets. It is to these financial system issues that I now turn. 
 Global fixed income markets are likely to play a pivotal role in the way the global economy evolves. 
Current  macroeconomic  policies  have  significantly  affected  bond  market  conditions,  and  changing 
expectations  regarding  these  policies  could  have  a  strong  impact  on  the  level  and  volatility  of 
long-term interest rates.  
Take the example of fiscal policies. Bond markets serve, among other things, as a yardstick of fiscal 
prudence. As a result, concerns about the future prospects for achieving sustainable fiscal policies are 
at some point likely to be reflected in higher interest rates in bond markets. Not immediately of course 
- in fact, deteriorating fiscal positions have not, to date, led to higher long-term interest rates. But the 
risk  of  an  adverse  impact  on  financial  markets  could  increase,  especially  if  fiscal  deficits  were 
expected to persist during a period of strong growth. 
Monetary  policies  also  face  a  challenge.  As  the  global  recovery  proceeds,  policy  interest  rates  will 
need to return to more “normal” levels. There is of course no precise benchmark for the “normal” level 
of interest rates. Assuming a 2% inflation rate, some observers would put the “neutral” rate of interest 
in  the  United  States  at  around  5%  in  nominal  terms.  Whatever  is  the  true  number  for  this  natural 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2004
interest rate, it is certainly well above the 1% federal funds rate that prevails at present. It is unusual 
for  a  gap  of  this  size  -  and  the  associated  steeply  sloped  yield  curve  -  to  persist  for  so  long.  The 
challenge  is  how  to  “exit”  the  current  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  without  creating 
unnecessary uncertainty and generating excessive bond market volatility.  
Equally,  intervention  by  Asian  central  banks  in  foreign  exchange  markets  is  generating  a  heavy 
demand for US Treasuries and other dollar-denominated products, and is putting downward pressure 
on  pivotal  market  interest  rates.  As  intervention  subsides  from  current  exceptional  levels  -  as  it 
eventually must - market interest rates will probably rise. Nobody knows yet by how much of course - a 
lot  will  depend  on  how  markets  assess  future  inflation  risks  and  the  prospects  for  achieving 
sustainable fiscal policies in demanding medium-term conditions. 
 It  goes  almost  without  saying  that  a  long  period  of  very  low  interest  rates  like  the  one  we’ve  been 
experiencing  creates  new  types  of  risks  in  the  financial  system.  One  aspect  of  such  risks  is  high 
leverage. There is evidence that carry-trades are indeed rising as various players take on increased 
duration risk financed with very low interest rate short-term liabilities. And with long-term interest rates 
on  risk-free  government  bonds  so  low,  many  investors,  whether  leveraged  or  not,  have  been 
increasingly  tempted  to  “search  for  yield”.  This  has  resulted  in  a  large  net  flow  of  funds  into  risky 
credits.  Improved  fundamentals  appear  to  explain  only  part  of  the  narrowing  in  credit  spreads  for 
corporate  and  emerging  market  government  borrowers.  One  piece  of  evidence  that  suggests  that 
markets are to some extent driven by favourable liquidity conditions is the unusually high correlation of 
price movements across a very broad range of assets. 
An additional challenge arises from the wider international imbalances resulting from uneven global 
growth. The main issue here is, of course, when, and how, the historically large US current account 
deficit - which is running at well over $500 billion a year - will narrow. The downward trend in US bond 
yields over the past couple of months provides no indication of increasing concerns among investors 
at present. But the strong depreciation of the US dollar against the euro and several other currencies 
over the past 12 months could be an indication of increasing pressure to adjust. And the increased 
volatility  in  financial  markets  may  well  indicate  a  marked  degree  of  uncertainty  as  to  what  that 
adjustment process might entail. 
 Nevertheless,  indications  are  that  key  internationally  active  financial  institutions  are  generally  well 
placed  at  present  to  cope  with  higher  interest  rates.  They  are  also  better  prepared  to  withstand 
increased volatility in financial markets, and structural improvements have enhanced the stability of the 
financial system. Better allocation and management of financial risks should provide a buffer against 
shocks. 
Let  me  highlight  three  observations  that  support  this  assessment.  First,  the  global  financial  system 
absorbed  massive  losses  during  the  global  economic  downturn  of  recent  years.  Market-based 
intermediation  has  improved  the  dispersion  of  financial  risks.  For  example,  widely  dispersed  equity 
holdings have avoided a concentration of losses in the financial sector. Moreover, financial institutions 
appear to have used credit risk transfer markets quite effectively to manage their credit portfolios, and 
to diversify their risks regionally. This seems to have contributed to a better allocation of credit risk.  
Second, the international financial system has already weathered the sharp rebound in bond yields 
that took place during June and July 2003, without experiencing systemic problems. Admittedly, this 
setback  occurred  from  very  low  interest  rate  levels.  Nevertheless,  the  global  financial  system  did 
exhibit a noteworthy capacity to cope with a period of extreme volatility. This may reflect improvements 
in risk management. The dynamics of the increases in bond yields last summer were similar to those 
in the spring of 1994 - an episode so painful for the financial sector that it has become a standard 
scenario  in  the  stress  tests  that  major  financial  institutions  perform  to  check  their  risk  management 
systems. Hence banks and others have been able to learn from such past episodes. 
Third,  financial  institutions  have  shown  a  greater  capacity  to  absorb  shocks  than  in  the  past.  Of 
course, there have been significant differences in performance across major countries. Nevertheless, 
banking systems today are better capitalised overall than at any time in the 1990s.  
This reassuring picture does not mean that the present situation is without risks. It is not difficult to 
paint  a  much  less  encouraging  scenario.  For  instance,  any  sudden  unwinding  of  positions  by 
leveraged investors would itself accentuate volatility, and perhaps trigger further adjustments by the 
BIS Review 17/2004 
 3
wider investor community. Higher interest rates could well undermine present asset valuations. Debt 
service burdens of households and corporations could rise and lead to a deterioration in loan quality 
across the financial system.  
Whether this scenario is plausible or not depends on the answers to several questions. How far are 
borrowers and financial institutions prepared for higher interest rates? What would be the effect of a 
sharp, discontinuous adjustment? Could this phase of low interest rates and strong liquidity growth be 
creating  new  problems  that  may  be  difficult  to  discern  just  now?  These  questions  need  to  be  kept 
clearly in mind, even if one is broadly optimistic about near-term prospects. 
 These issues underline the truly global challenge of maintaining financial stability, and the relevance of 
international cooperation among central banks and financial supervisors. So let me close with just a 
few  remarks  on  the  role  of  the  BIS  in  addressing  these  -  and  of  course  other  -  issues  relating  to 
financial stability. Generally, the BIS contributes in two areas: 
One  is  the  exchange  of  information  and  the  discussions  that  take  place  among  central  banks  and 
other authorities who are responsible for financial stability. Central banks are not directly responsible 
for each and every aspect of financial stability, but they are the guardians of the overall soundness of 
their national financial systems. They are also seen as the lender of last resort - whatever that means 
in  practice.  Central  banks  therefore  attach  great  importance  to  careful  monitoring  of  the  various 
building blocks of the financial system. The standing committees of experts hosted by the BIS - the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  and  the 
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems - cover these building blocks. And last but not least, 
financial stability issues occupy a prominent place on the agenda of the central bank governors when 
they meet every other month at the BIS, right here in Basel.  
The  other  area  of  interest  to  the  BIS  comprises  efforts  to  improve  the  structural  resilience  of  the 
financial system. The challenge is to promote sound risk management practices in a way that ensures 
that financial institutions are adequately capitalised and prudently managed - while not hindering their 
ability  to  pursue  opportunities  and  profits  responsibly.  To  achieve  this  goal,  BIS  committees  are 
involved in the formulation of various internationally accepted codes and standards for both financial 
institutions and markets.  
The most important initiative in this regard is the New Basel Capital Accord, perhaps better known as 
“Basel II”. The Accord is intended to reflect the improvements in banks’ abilities to identify their risks. It 
is also intended to align regulatory capital requirements more closely with the actual degree of risk that 
banks face. But equally important, the New Accord will provide incentives for banks to improve their 
management of risks.  
 Let  me  conclude.  Very  accommodative  macroeconomic  policies  and  the  rise  of  China  have  been 
supporting global growth. These forces will at some point have to be brought onto a sustainable path 
in a way that avoids abrupt changes in expectations in financial markets. The main risk is high volatility 
in  global  bond  markets,  perhaps  with  an  “overshooting”  of  bond  yields.  The  chances  that  financial 
institutions  can  absorb  higher  interest  rates  are  at  present  good,  thanks  to  improvements  in  recent 
years  in  their  identification  and  management  of  financial  risks.  The  BIS  has  played  its  part  in  this 
process.  And  it  will  continue  to  do  so.  Ensuring  monetary  and  financial  stability  is  a  permanent 
challenge  which  demands  that  policymakers  keep  their  eyes  open  to  risks  and  are  prepared  to 
address them. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2004
