Caleb M Fundanga: Achievements and accomplishments at the Bank of Zambia 
during the past forty years 
Speech  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  40th  anniversary 
celebrations, Lusaka, 5-6 August 2004. 
 Chairperson, Baroness Lynda Chalker of Wallasey  
The  Guest  of  Honour,  His  Excellency,  the  President  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia,  Mr  Levy  Patrick 
Mwanawasa, State Counsel  
Honourable Ministers  
Honourable Deputy Ministers 
Your Excellencies Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Honourable Members of Parliament present 
Special Guest, Governor Tito Mboweni, Governor Reserve Bank of South Africa  
Distinguished Past Governors of the Bank of Zambia  
Senior Government Officials  
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
On  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  indeed  on  my  own  behalf,  it  is  my  singular  honour  and  rare 
privilege  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  you  all  as  we  commemorate  the  40th  Anniversary  of  the 
establishment of the Bank of Zambia. I would also like to thank, His Excellency, the President of the 
Republic of Zambia, for accepting our invitation to officiate at this special occasion. Further, special 
thanks go to Governor Mboweni for accepting to deliver a key note speech and all foreign participants 
for coming. Mr President may I mention that amidst this gathering are participants from sister central 
banks in the region that have come to celebrate this anniversary with us as well as Zambians based 
outside the Republic.  
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, this Anniversary marks 40 years of dynamic transformations and 
achievements  accomplished  by  the  Bank.  Some  of  the  challenging  issues  that  the  Bank  has 
confronted in the past and likely to do so in the future form part of the selected topics of Papers to be 
presented  and  discussed  at  this  Conference.  This  conference  is  therefore  expected  to  provide  a 
platform for sharing ideas required for practical solutions aimed at improving the Bank’s deliverables. 
In doing so, however, we must be cognisant of global trends in central banking.  
Madam Chairperson, since its establishment in 1964, the Bank of Zambia has played an important role 
in the economy by formulating and implementing monetary, regulatory and supervisory policies in its 
quest for price stability. Over this period, progress has been made towards the deepening of financial 
markets, specifically in the areas of monetary policy management, and the foreign exchange market. 
In  addition,  substantial  improvements  to  the  legislative  and  regulatory  frameworks  for  banks  and 
financial institutions have been attained.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, during the pre-liberalisation period from 1964 to 1991, monetary policy was 
largely characterised by administrative controls on interest rates and the exchange rate. Although the 
Banking  Act  of  1965  was  created  to  enable  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  in  the  pre-
liberalization  era  monetary  policy  involved  multiple  objectives,  such  as,  financing  agriculture  and 
parastatal companies, and providing guarantees for export marketing, which at times presented the 
Bank with conflicting roles as a monetary authority.  
To  the  contrary,  during  the  current  liberalization  period,  which  commenced  with  vigor  in  1992,  the 
Bank,  in  conformity  with  market  reforms,  has  steadily  moved  towards  the  use  of  market-based 
structures and systems as opposed to direct instruments in the conduct of its monetary policy. In this 
BIS Review 48/2004 
 1
regard, and beginning 1993, deregulation of interest rates, removal of capital controls and freeing of 
the foreign exchange market were implemented as part of the broader financial sector reforms.  
As  a  result,  through  the  use  of  mainly  market-based  instruments  of  monetary  policy,  the  Bank  has 
made  several  notable  achievements.  Amongst  these,  has  been  its  contribution  to  the  reduction  of 
annual  inflation  to  17.2%  in  December  2003  from  197.0%  at  the  end  of  December  1992.  Further, 
inflation has remained just under 20% in the first half of 2004 and it is the Bank’s desire to see single 
digit inflation within the foreseeable future. The benefits of lower inflation in single digits can not be 
over-emphasized, especially with regard to the fight against poverty.  
Madam Chairperson, last October the Bank took a bold stand of effecting a down-ward adjustment in 
the  statutory  reserve  ratio  to  14.0%  from  17.5  %  on  both  Kwacha  and  foreign  currency  deposit 
liabilities. This was intended to release funds to commercial banks. The outcome of this policy action 
has  been  increased  loanable  funds  being  available  to  commercial  banks.  This  in  turn  has  greatly 
contributed  to  the  downward  trend  in  lending  rates  in  the  economy.  For  instance,  the  weighted 
average lending base rate dropped to 29.8% in June 2004 from 39.6% in August 2003. This action 
was  consistent  with  Government’s  objective  to  ensure  increased  credit  to  priority  sectors  such  as 
agriculture. I am glad to inform the conference participants that a noticeable increase in credit to key 
growth sectors namely agriculture, tourism, manufacturing and mining has been recorded since this 
policy  action  by  the  Bank.  This  process  has  been  greatly  assisted  by  a  significant  reduction  in 
Government borrowing from the banking sector.  
In its continued effort to develop a fully functional foreign exchange market, in July last year the Bank 
established  a  broad-based  inter-bank  foreign  exchange  management  (IFEM)  system  as  the  new 
mechanism for determining the exchange rate in Zambia. Under this system market making has been 
transferred  to  commercial  banks  with  the  Bank  performing  mainly  an  oversight  role.  Coupled  with 
favourable developments in exports, the IFEM has to-date yielded encouraging results as evidenced in 
the relative stability of the Kwacha against currencies of most major trading partners.  
Mr  President,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  one  area  that  has  seen  remarkable  reforms  is  that  of  the 
payment systems in Zambia, for which the Bank has been actively involved. These reforms include the 
establishment in September 1999 of the Zambia Electronic Clearing House Limited which provides a 
speedier  mechanism  of  clearing  funds  to  customers.  It  also  reduces  the  risk  of  errors  during 
processing of payments. Another development arising out of electronic clearing was the establishment 
of an electronic funds transfer system called Direct Debits and Credits Clearing (DDACC) in October 
2001. The DDACC system provides unparalleled convenience to both payer and payee for processing 
bulk and small value regular payments such as salaries and utility bills. Owing to its fully electronic 
nature, funds are cleared within 24 hours.  
In a further development, in June 2004, the Bank of Zambia launched the Real Time Gross Settlement 
(RTGS) system. This system facilitates real time settlement of large value and time critical payments. 
This is a significant step towards easing the payments side of economic activities in our country.  
The above accomplishments not withstanding, challenges still remain and we in the Bank of Zambia 
are  set  to  drive  the  payment  system  towards  one  that  will  be  secure,  efficient,  cost  effective  and 
accessible to the majority of Zambians. The rural population and the unbanked majority will have a 
prominent focus in our reform process.  
The Bank has also been instrumental in other reforms in the financial sector which include preparation 
of  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan  (FSDP)  whose  overall  objective  is  to  increase  financial 
intermediation and promote efficiency of the financial system. 
Madam  Chairperson,  the  theme  “40  years  of  Central  Banking:  Facing  the  Challenges  of  the 
21st Century” during this anniversary is meant to make us reflect on the achievements that the Bank 
has made so far and then focus our attention to the challenges that lie ahead. This follows from the 
Mission of the Bank, which states “To formulate and implement monetary and supervisory policies that 
will ensure price and financial system stability”.  
The Bank of Zambia acknowledges the need for improved terms and conditions under which money 
and  credit  are  provided  to  the  economy.  The  increased  number  of  registered  domestic  and 
domestically incorporated international banks has led to augmented credit creation to local businesses 
compared  to  pre-liberalisation  levels.  Previously,  credit  facilities  were  scarcely  availed  to  local 
businesses. Efforts are currently being made to establish a Credit Reference Bureau, which should 
result in reduced information asymmetries and contribute to the further lowering of lending rates. It is 
also hoped that the bureau will provide an objective assessment of potential private sector borrowers 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2004
and  improve  credit  culture.  Timely,  adequate  and  affordable  credit  is  required  in  the  economy  to 
effectively facilitate economic growth, create employment and reduce poverty.  
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, financial stability which forms part of the Bank’s mandate is a 
critical  component  of  macroeconomic  stability.  Our  banking  sector  experienced  an  unprecedented 
structural  evolution  during  the  latter  part  of  the  1990s  when  new  bank  entrants  and  eventual  quick 
exits characterized it. The implications of a volatile banking sector speak for themselves. No doubt, the 
Bank of Zambia had met yet another daunting challenge in its role as a supervisory authority. Even in 
the aftermath, the Bank continues to deal with aspects of institutions in liquidation.  
However, one welcome outcome from this experience is the consolidation of the banking sector, which 
is  much  more  aware  of  the  constant  need  for  prudent  risk  management  and  good  corporate 
governance. From our end, the Bank has also undergone a significant re-orientation of its supervisory 
techniques and approaches. These are now largely in line with international best practices and also 
constitute a platform on which we shall meet the future challenges facing the financial sector in the 
21st Century.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, from time to time developments are associated with setbacks and the Bank of 
Zambia  is  no  exception.  Here  I  am  referring  to  the  issue  of  polymer  notes  which  were  introduced 
sometime last year. The introduction of these notes as we have explained at several fora was meant 
and is still meant to have cleaner notes in the economy and more importantly to have notes with a 
relatively longer life-span before replacement, than the traditional paper notes. With a relatively longer 
life-span, the nation would save resources because the frequency of replacing the notes would greatly 
be reduced. However, due to technical problems experienced by the printer, most of the notes have 
been fading faster than expected. May I re-assure the nation that we have continued to work with the 
printer  and  a  solution  is  being  worked  out  in  the  quickest  time  possible.  Needless  to  say  that  this 
problem has posed a big challenge for all of us at the Bank of Zambia.  
Madam Chairperson, with respect to its organisational and functional structure, the Bank has overtime 
undergone  modifications  to  suite  its  role  as  a  monetary  and  supervisory  authority.  In  addition, 
structural  changes  have  been  necessitated  by  the  continuously  changing  demands  along  with 
changes in the economy and especially in the dynamic financial markets. 
From  a  handful  of  departments  at  inception  currently,  the  Bank  comprises  the  following  core 
departments,  Economics,  Financial  Markets,  Bank  Supervision,  Non-bank  Financial  Institutions 
Supervision, Banking, Currency and Payment Systems, and the Regional Office in Ndola. The support 
departments include  Procurement  and  Maintenance,  Finance,  Bank  Secretariat,  Human Resources, 
Information Technology and Internal Audit as well as a Security Division. In order to streamline the 
operations of the Bank and improve its performance, a performance agreement system for employees 
was  introduced  in  1995.  This  was  meant  to  bring  about  a  new  work  culture  with  emphasis  on 
professionalism, based on the philosophy, “The BoZ Way means Action”.  
Mr President, Ladies and Gentlemen, since the 1996 Bank of Zambia Amendment Act, the Bank has 
continued  to  enjoy  operational  autonomy  with  regard  to  the  formulation  and  implementation  of 
monetary  policies  and  attainment  of  relative  financial  system  stability.  The  ability  of  the  Bank  to 
continually  meet  quantitative  benchmarks  set  by  Government  and  cooperating  partners,  can  be 
attributed to the focus of its monetary policy on creating a stable macroeconomic environment as a 
precondition for sustainable economic growth.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, as we move ahead and look to the next 40 years of central banking in Zambia, 
the Bank of Zambia will continue to play a catalytic role in facilitating the exchange of ideas among the 
banking community, the private sector, and all other key stakeholders through such gatherings as this 
conference.  We  will  continue  to  carry  out  our  mandate,  with  the  objective  of  facilitating  the  work  of 
Government and economic activities of the private sector for the betterment of all Zambians.  
Mr President, Madam Chairperson, Ladies and Gentlemen, I would be failing this occasion if I do not 
recognise that the achievements of the Bank of Zambia over the last 40 years are a result of the hard 
work  by  employees,  past  and  present,  including  the  former  Governors.  Allow  me  at  this  point  to 
present the names of the former Governors and also to recognize those that are in our midst.  
BIS Review 48/2004 
 3
Mr R C H Hallet, 1964-1967; 
Dr Justin Zulu, 1967-1970; 
Mr Valentine S Musakanya, 1970-1972; 
Mr Bitwell R Kuwani 1972-1976 & also 1981-1984; 
Mr Luke Mwananshiku, 1976-1981; 
Mr David A R Phiri, 1984-1986; 
Mr Leonard Chivuno, 1986-1987; 
Mr Francis X Nkhoma, 1987-1989; 
Mr Jacques A Bussieres, 1990-1992; 
Mr Dominic C Mulaisho, 1992-1995; and  
Dr Jacob Mwanza 1995-2002. 
These are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
May I, at this point, request that we stand and observe a moment of silence in honour of our past late 
Governors; R C H Hallet, Valentine S Musakanya, Bitwell R Kuwani, Luke Mwananshiku and Leonard 
Chivuno and many other former employees of the Bank who passed away during the last 40 years.  
Thank you. 
It is important to mention here that most of the former Governors have continued playing critical roles 
in the financial sector and I can proudly say that three of them today serve as chairmen of commercial 
banks. 
In conclusion, Ladies and Gentlemen, may I again welcome you all to this conference, and I urge you 
to be open and constructive during the deliberations. 
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2004
