Svein Gjedrem: The krone exchange rate and competitiveness in the business 
sector 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Federation 
of Norwegian Process Industries, Oslo, 29 April 2004.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s  press  conference  following  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  21  April,  Inflation  Report  1/04  and  on 
previous speeches. 
The charts can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 The primary objective of monetary policy is to ensure nominal stability.  
There  were  wide  fluctuations  in  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  Economic 
developments were marked by high and variable inflation. Inflation rose gradually and it took a long 
time before it fell.  
The absence of a nominal anchor was one of the main reasons behind these pronounced swings in 
the  Norwegian  economy.  With  a  policy  of  low  interest  rates  and  devaluations,  inflation  took  root. 
Nominal interest rates were kept at a low level even though inflation and the value of tax-deductible 
interest expenditure rose. Frequent devaluations from 1976 were not able to prevent a decline in the 
manufacturing  sector.  On  the  contrary,  they  proved  to  be  self-reinforcing.  The  wide  fluctuations 
culminated in a credit boom in the mid-1980s, and a rise in costs as a consequence of the spring 1986 
wage settlement. A pronounced downturn and high unemployment followed at the end of the 1980s.  
In  order  to  achieve  nominal  stability,  monetary  policy  must  provide  a  nominal  anchor.  Since  the 
Second  World  War,  there  have  been  several  monetary  policy  reforms  in  Norway.  In  the  period 
between  1972  and  1986,  monetary  policy  was  to  a  limited  extent  focused  on  stabilising  the  rise  in 
prices.  
During this period, inflation was high and variable. Consumer prices rose almost twice as much as in 
Germany. At the same time, the value of the Norwegian krone against the German mark was almost 
halved, contributing to high imported inflation.  
From the mid-1980s, during and after the credit bubble and the cost shock, it was recognised that a 
substantial revision of economic policy would be necessary and that the problems created by inflation 
had to be taken seriously. From 1986 to 1992, Norway operated a fixed exchange rate regime. The 
fixed exchange rate was the anchor for inflation in Norway. The difference between inflation in Norway 
and Germany narrowed substantially. Deteriorating competitiveness due to high wage growth would 
no longer be remedied by means of devaluations. Instead, imbalances in the labour market would be 
addressed by means of a counter-cyclical policy. Substantial emphasis was placed on the importance 
of  wage  formation  for  employment.  Only  when wage  growth  dropped below  the  level of  our  trading 
partners  did  unemployment  begin  to  fall  and  the  manufacturing  sector  began  to  pick  up.  Thus,  the 
fixed  exchange  rate  policy  was  not  introduced  in  order  to  strengthen  the  internationally  exposed 
business  sector.  On  the  contrary,  it  was  a  breach  in  the  approach  whereby  monetary  policy  and 
frequent  devaluations  had  been  used  to  shelter  these  sectors.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  was  an 
intermediate target for achieving low and stable inflation.  
The  exchange  rate  remained  stable  up  to  autumn  1996,  partly  because  wage  growth  was  low  and 
overall demand did not generate pressures in the economy. Gradually, the krone began to show wider 
fluctuations. The experience of the last half of the 1990s demonstrated that monetary policy cannot 
fine-tune the exchange rate. Developments in international financial markets led to more pronounced 
fluctuations. And more fundamentally, when labour market pressures rose and incomes policy failed, 
exchange rate developments were no longer providing signals for wage formation and fiscal policy. 
High  petroleum  revenues,  fiscal slippage  and  expectations  of  increased  use  of  petroleum  revenues 
contributed to this. The exchange rate was therefore no longer suitable as a nominal anchor. Towards 
the end of the 1990s, increasing emphasis was placed on the fundamental preconditions for exchange 
rate stability. Monetary policy instruments were oriented in such a way that price and cost inflation was 
brought down to the price stability objective of the European Central Bank (ECB).  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 1
Monetary policy 
In  most  countries,  price  stability,  or  low  and  stable  inflation,  is  the  objective  of  monetary  policy. 
Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that the absence of price stability 
has resulted in low and unstable output and employment.  
History  shows  that  there  is  no  long-term  trade-off  between  higher  growth  and  higher  inflation.  An 
economic  policy  that  fuels  inflation  does  not  generate  higher  economic  growth.  On  the  contrary,  it 
paves the way for subsequent recession and unemployment.  
After the Second World War, there was a long period of trying to achieve price stability by means of 
intermediate targets such as a fixed exchange rate and a target for growth in the money supply. The 
first explicit inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK 
in 1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. Pursuant to the Regulation on Monetary Policy laid down 
by the Government on 29 March 2001, the operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable 
inflation.  
Pursuant to the Regulation, Norges Bank’s mandate is as follows: 
“Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, 
contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate  developments.  At  the  same  time, 
monetary  policy  shall  underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable  developments  in  output  and 
employment.  
Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of monetary policy.  
Norges  Bank's  implementation  of  monetary  policy  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  first  paragraph,  be 
oriented towards low and stable inflation. The operational target of monetary policy shall be annual 
consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. […]”  
The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth its intentions. The last paragraph specifies what Norges 
Bank is required to do.  
The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the internal value of the 
krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation fosters economic growth 
and stability in financial and property markets.  
The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s 
external value, contributing to stable expectations concerning exchange rate developments.  
With open trade with other countries and free capital movements, we do not have the instruments to 
fine-tune the krone exchange rate. The krone has appreciated when economic activity has been high 
and there have been expectations of a wide interest rate differential. The krone has depreciated when 
activity has declined and the interest rate differential has narrowed. There is also a strong tendency for 
the krone to revert to a level that stabilises the price level in Norway relative to our trading partners, 
measured in a common currency.1  
The conduct of monetary policy 
Norges  Bank’s  operational  conduct  of  monetary  policy  shall  be  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation.  Norges  Bank  operates  a  flexible  inflation  targeting  regime,  so  that  variability  in output  and 
employment and in inflation is given weight. Inflation shall be 2½ per cent over time. Monetary policy 
influences the economy with long and variable lags, and the Bank must therefore be forward-looking in 
interest-rate setting. In the operational conduct of monetary policy in Norway, the path of inflation and 
the  real  economy  in  the  period  ahead  will  be  taken  into  account.  We  also  give  emphasis  to 
predictability and transparency. Normally, the interest rate is set with a view to achieving inflation of 
2½ per cent at the two-year horizon. This time horizon usually provides a reasonable balance between 
stabilising  inflation  on  the  one  hand  and  smoothing  fluctuations  in  output  and  employment  on  the 
other.  
                                                      
1   See Akram, Farooq Q. (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk 
Økonomisk Tidsskrift 118, pp. 89-112. 
2 
 BIS Review 25/2004
If  demand  for  goods  and  services  is  high  and  there  is  a  shortage  of  labour,  there  will  normally  be 
prospects of higher inflation. When the interest rate is raised, demand is dampened and inflation is 
kept in check. If demand is low and unemployment rises, there will be prospects of lower inflation. The 
interest rate will then be lowered. The inflation target thus represents a framework, not an obstacle, for 
monetary policy to contribute to stability in output and employment.  
Section 1 of the Regulation on Monetary Policy states that in addition to sustaining the level of inflation 
at approximately 2½ per cent over time, monetary policy shall also contribute to stable developments 
in output and employment. The mandate therefore establishes a flexible inflation target for monetary 
policy where variations in output and employment are also given emphasis.  
In the long run, output is determined by the supply of labour, capital and technology and by the ability 
to  adapt,  but  in  the  short  and  medium  term  monetary  policy  can  also  have  an  impact  on  the  real 
economy.  
The economy grows over time. Output will in some periods lie above trend growth and in others below 
trend.2 Stabilising output means seeking to maintain actual output near trend.  
There is one main monetary policy instrument: the interest rate. Interest rates are set with a view to 
achieving  low  and  stable  inflation,  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  to  avoid  substantial  variations  in 
output and employment.  
In recent years, household income has shown solid growth, and household confidence has been high. 
Corporate earnings, however, have been low, and until recently enterprises have primarily focused on 
enhancing efficiency. The level of household borrowing is high, while enterprises are reducing debt. 
Credit developments are thus giving ambiguous signals to our interest-rate setting.  
The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with low interest rates abroad and 
a close link between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy would restrain 
credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced.  
A flexible inflation targeting regime reduces the possibility of exposing households to a double shock 
in the form of higher unemployment and higher interest rates, as was the case at the beginning of the 
1990s. If the economy is exposed to disturbances that may lead to higher unemployment, inflation will 
normally decline and interest rates will be lowered.  
Flexible exchange rate 
In a small, open economy, the exchange rate is an important channel for monetary policy.  
The  krone  fluctuates.  This  is  not  surprising  because  other  countries’  currencies  also  fluctuate.  The 
krone  exchange  rate  is  the  price  of  our  currency  measured  in  a  foreign  currency.  Developments  in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment.  
The chart shows the effective exchange rate for Norway and a number of other small countries with 
inflation targeting. Exchanges rate fluctuations are approximately the same for Norway, Sweden and 
Canada, whereas the krone exchange rate fluctuates less than the exchange rate for Australia and 
New Zealand. Therefore, the krone does not stand out as particularly unstable compared with other 
countries’ currencies.  
The forward exchange and options markets have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces 
transaction  costs  and  it  is  easier  to  find  counterparties.  This  has  provided  companies  with  greater 
scope  for  hedging  against  foreign  exchange  risk.  The  use  of  instruments  that  reduce  the  risks 
associated with a floating krone is also increasing in Norway.  
There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is 
stable - but too strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone 
that is stable - but weak - is a source of high inflation.  
                                                      
2   Trend growth is used as a rough estimate of potential output. Potential output is the level of output that is consistent with 
stable inflation over time. 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 3
Petroleum  revenues  generally  provide  substantial,  but  uneven  currency  inflows  into  Norway.  The 
currency  flows  might  have  led  to  a  strong  and  volatile  krone.  This  tendency  is  countered  when  the 
annual use of petroleum revenues over the central government budget is predictable and independent 
of annual revenue flows, and the remainder is invested abroad.  
The  capital  outflow  through  the  Petroleum  Fund  contributes  to  both  curbing  the  appreciation  of  the 
krone and maintaining its stability.  
Norges Bank has not defined an exchange rate target. Nevertheless, developments in the krone are of 
considerable importance to interest-rate setting because exchange rate developments have an impact 
on inflation and output. When there are prospects of moderate economic activity, low wage growth and 
low inflation, Norges Bank will reduce the interest rate. This will normally result in a depreciation of the 
krone.  Prices  for  imported  goods  and  services  will  increase.  A  weaker  krone  strengthens  the 
competitiveness  of  Norwegian  enterprises  and  indirectly  leads  to  higher  output,  employment  and 
inflation.  
Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to 
exchange  rate  movements.  During  periods  of  political  and  economic  unrest,  investors  may  choose 
individual currencies as a safe haven - often the Swiss franc. In autumn 2002, the Norwegian krone 
was probably also perceived as a safe haven. In addition, oil prices rose as a result of the uncertainty 
associated with the war in Iraq.  
In  autumn  2003,  the  krone  showed  a  tendency  to  appreciate  against  the  euro.  This  partly reflected 
lowered  market  expectations  concerning  an  interest  rate  increase  abroad  and  expectations  that 
interest  rates  might  rise  earlier  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries.  At  the  same  time,  the  euro 
appreciated in relation to other currencies. Changes in the krone resulted in an unintended tightening 
of monetary policy. This trend was reversed in December owing to low inflation figures and a reduction 
in interest rates. The interest rate reduction was probably of considerable importance as it eliminated 
the excess return on NOK investments.  
The  krone  has  appreciated  again  in  the  last  couple  of  months.  The  appreciation  of  the  krone,  if  it 
persists, may curb inflation one to two years ahead. Past experience shows that the krone is at times 
heavily  influenced  by  developments  in  the  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other 
countries.  This  is  given  weight  in  interest-rate  setting.  However,  as  mentioned,  themes  in  foreign 
exchange markets shift, and Norges Bank does not have instruments to fine-tune the exchange rate.  
Normally,  Norges  Bank  will  not  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  order  to  influence  the 
exchange rate. Exchange market intervention, irrespective of whether foreign exchange is bought or 
sold, is not an appropriate instrument for influencing the krone over a longer period. We do not wish to 
act  in  a  way  that  may  trigger  a  game  situation  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  Foreign  exchange 
intervention rather than a change in the interest rate may give ambiguous signals to foreign exchange 
operators  and  a  game  situation  may  arise.  However,  interventions  may  be  appropriate  if  the  krone 
deviates substantially from the level that the Bank judges to be reasonable in relation to fundamentals, 
and if exchange rate developments weaken the prospect of achieving the inflation target. Interventions 
may also be appropriate in response to pronounced short-term fluctuations in the krone when liquidity 
in the foreign exchange market falls to a very low level.  
Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, when inflation is low and stable, it will generally 
stabilise over time. When inflation has been higher in Norway than among our trading partners for a 
longer period, the krone has generally depreciated. When inflation in Norway is expected to be broadly 
in  line  with  that  of  other  countries,  the  exchange  rate  will  normally  also  return  to  its  normal  range 
following periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak.  
Exchange rate expectations cannot be directly observed, but information from Consensus Forecast, a 
survey conducted among economists, may be an indicator.  
The chart shows the actual trade-weighted exchange rate (TWI) and expected TWI one year ahead as 
from  1998.3  When  the  krone  is  “weak”,  the  expected  exchange  rate  one  year  ahead  tends  to  be 
stronger  than  the  actual  rate.  Likewise,  the  expected  exchange  rate  one  year  ahead  tends  to  be 
weaker than the actual exchange rate when the krone is strong. In the period 2002-2003, the krone 
exchange  rate  varied  considerably.  Movements  in  exchange  rate  expectations,  however,  were  less 
                                                      
3   Consensus Forecast data were not available earlier. 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2004
volatile. When the krone was at its strongest in the second half of 2002, the expected exchange rate 
one year ahead was 4-5 per cent weaker. This illustrates that exchange rate expectations seem to be 
more stable than actual exchange rate movements and that after moving markedly beyond a long-term 
equilibrium level, the krone exchange rate is expected to revert to around this level. The equilibrium 
level for the nominal exchange rate is not, however, constant over time, but partly depends on price 
and cost developments in Norway relative to our trading partners.  
The advantage of a flexible exchange rate is perhaps most evident when the economy is sluggish. If 
the krone were to remain at a level that is too strong, nominal wages would have to remain unchanged 
over  a  longer  period  or  fall  in  order  to  bolster  companies  and  jobs.  This  only  occurs  when 
unemployment is very high. With a flexible exchange rate, a depreciation of the krone can also boost 
competitiveness. A flexible exchange rate can reduce fluctuations in employment and output.  
Empirical studies4 have also suggested that economic growth in industrialised countries with floating 
exchange rates has been as strong, and often stronger than in countries with a stable exchange rate. 
A  precondition  is  that  there  is  an  economic  policy  framework  so  that  inflation  does  not  spin  out  of 
control.  
The real exchange rate 
The chart shows developments in two measures of the real krone exchange rate, i.e. consumer prices 
and relative labour costs in Norway relative to trading partners, measured in a common currency. The 
real exchange rate measured by relative wage costs in a common currency is an expression of the 
cost competitiveness of Norwegian companies. The real krone exchange rate as measured in terms of 
developments in relative prices is an expression of the Norwegian krone’s purchasing power. When 
the  curves  in  the  chart  are  above  zero,  the  exchange  rate  is  stronger  and  competitiveness  weaker 
than the average level since 1970. The real exchange rate has fluctuated considerably over time and 
has deviated substantially from the average level over longer periods. Nevertheless, there has been a 
tendency for the real exchange rate to revert to this level. The points on the chart marked 2004 show 
the real exchange rate with wage and inflation projections for 2004 from Inflation Report 1/04. 1 2004. 
In relative prices, the real exchange rate is now about 3.5 per cent weaker than the average since 
1970, whereas it is approximately 2.5 per cent stronger than its historical average measured in terms 
of relative labour costs.  
The exchange rate in the long term 
There has been divergence between cyclical developments in Norway and other countries. This was 
most  pronounced  in  the  1980s  when  we  had  a  strong  upturn  while  Europe  was  in  a  recession. 
Although the economic cycles have been somewhat more similar over the years, there is still a time 
divergence. While the global turnaround took place in 2000, with a subsequent reduction in interest 
rates abroad, the Norwegian economy continued to show a high level of activity. Towards the end of 
the upturn, the economy was facing labour shortages, accelerating wage growth and a sharp increase 
in  household  consumption  and  debt.  Interest  rates  in  Norway  remained  high  and  the  interest  rate 
differential gradually widened.  
There have also been other differences between cyclical developments in Norway and other countries. 
The expansionary period in Norway led to strong wage growth from 1998 to 2002. The upturn in the 
global economy at the end of the 1990s was largely driven by business investment and wage growth 
was moderate.  
Wage growth in the Norwegian business sector from 1998 to 2002 was higher than the level that over 
time is consistent with the inflation target and with normal productivity growth.  
                                                      
4   See  Kenneth  Rogoff,  Aasim  M.  Husain,  Ashoka  Mody,  Robin  Brooks  and  Nienke  Oomes  (2003):  “Evolution  and 
Performance of Exchange Rate Regimes”, IMF Working Paper 03/243; Eduardo Levy-Yeyati and Frederico Sturzenegger 
(2003): “To Float or to Fix: Evidence of the Impact of Exchange Rate Regimes on Growth”, American Economic Review, 
September  2003,  pp.  1173-1193;  Jeannine  Bailliu,  Robert  Lafrance  and  Jean-Francois  Perrault  (2003):  “Does  Exchange 
Rate Policy Matter for Growth?”, International Finance 6:3, 2003, pp. 381-414. 
BIS Review 25/2004 
 5
In 2003, wage growth was considerably lower than in the previous five years. This provided a sounder 
basis for substantial reductions in Norwegian interest rates, resulting in a narrowing of the interest rate 
differential between Norway and other countries. The reduction has contributed to a weakening of the 
krone since December 2002. Thus, the real exchange rate has also weakened and business sector 
competitiveness has improved. However, the business sector is still feeling the effects of the loss in 
competitiveness that resulted from high wage increases. The internationally exposed sector has been 
scaled  back.  Those  companies  that  are  still  operating  may  be  in  a  better  position  to  bear  the  high 
wage level. Nevertheless, costs may hamper activity and employment growth.  
For  a  long  time,  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  the  level  of  cost  inflation  among  our  trading  partners 
provided an anchor for wage determination in Norway. To maintain competitive strength, wage growth 
in Norway had to be on a par with wage growth among our trading partners when productivity growth 
in Norway was on a par with our trading partners.  
With  the  current  monetary  policy  regime,  the  inflation  target  is  the  nominal  anchor.  According  to 
updated national accounts figures, an inflation target of 2½ per cent and trend productivity growth of 
around 2 per cent imply annual nominal wage growth of about 4½ per cent. Wage growth that is lower 
than 4.5 per cent contributes to increased employment.  
The  Swedish  Trade  Union  Confederation’s  recommendations  to  its  members  are  based  on  the 
inflation target: 
“It is therefore in the interests of all wage earners to control total wage increases to avoid exceeding 
the level that is consistent with the inflation target defined by Sveriges Riksdag (Swedish parliament).”  
Challenges facing the Norwegian business sector 
History has taught us that individual companies and individual industries in wealthy countries may be 
threatened by the emergence of producers from low-cost countries. Nevertheless, the emerging Asian 
economies have not posed a threat to industrialised countries' economies as a whole. On the contrary, 
growth in Asian economies has led to lower prices for a wider range of products. These countries have 
also  gradually  developed  into  important  markets.  We  know  from  experience  that  competition  from 
Japanese  and  then  Korean  shipyards  was  an  important  reason  behind  the  downsizing  of  our  own 
shipbuilding industry. Japan, however, has also become an important market for Norwegian fish, and 
Japanese tourists spend a considerable amount of money in Norway. The previous large trade deficit 
with Japan turned into a surplus in 2002, even excluding oil.  
The current strong growth rates in Asia are boosting demand for commodities. This also influences 
prices  for  commodities  that  we  produce.  Oil  prices  have  risen  sharply  since  2000.  Prices  for  other 
products such as paper and aluminium have shown a flatter trend, but have picked up. Salmon prices, 
which are more heavily influenced by developments in Europe, have risen sharply since spring 2003 
following a marked fall in 2002.  
The impact of increased competition from low-cost countries on the Norwegian economy 
Imports  from  China  to  Norway  increased  considerably  after  2001,  reflecting  in  part  China’s 
membership of the WTO from December 2001. Imports from China will probably increase in the future. 
This  in  itself  contributes  to  lower  imported  inflation.  Moreover,  inflation  in  Norway  is  restrained 
because the rise in prices for imports from trading partners other than China is also slowing.  
High  economic  growth  in  China  may  persist  for  a  longer  period,  providing  the  possibility  of  a  large 
market that will also be open to Norwegian firms. The enlargement of the EEA and the EU on 1 May 
this year will also open up new markets and sources of income for Norwegian firms, and increase the 
supply of labour.  
The transition to more open economies in Central and Eastern Europe has already had an impact on 
Norwegian firms. Trade with the Baltic countries, which used to be minimal, has increased sharply.  
Petroleum wealth and the krone exchange rate 
Let me conclude by referring to an analysis that can shed light on long-term developments in the real 
krone exchange rate.  
6 
 BIS Review 25/2004
In the long term, the exchange rate tends to adjust so that there will be a balance both in the domestic 
economy and balance in the current account.  
Petroleum  wealth,  defined  as  the  value  of  oil  and  gas  under  the  seabed  and  the  value  of  the 
Government  Petroleum  Fund,  provides  the  basis  for  substantial  foreign  exchange  revenues  in  the 
years ahead. These revenues will decline as the economy grows. The share of imports that can be 
financed by foreign exchange revenues from petroleum wealth will be reduced. Export earnings other 
than petroleum revenues will then be necessary. A substantial improvement in competitiveness will be 
required over time.  
Norway’s history as an oil nation goes back to the end of the 1960s. Rough estimates suggest that a 
real exchange rate that ensures balance in the balance of payments when petroleum wealth no longer 
has the same significant role in the economy is more in line with the real exchange rate prevailing in 
Norway prior to the discovery of oil. This is shown in the chart, where the real exchange rate in 60 
years’ time, after a sharp appreciation while we phase in petroleum wealth into the economy, will have 
reverted to the level prevailing before petroleum extraction began.  
On the basis of these analyses, a strong real krone exchange rate and weak competitiveness apply to 
a  period  in  which  the  petroleum  industry  is  expanding  and  we  are  reaping  the  biggest  economic 
benefits.  
BIS Review 25/2004 
 7
