Linah K Mohohlo: The role of the central bank in economic transformation -
sharing experiences  
Speech by Ms Linah K Mohohlo, Governor of the Bank of Botswana, to the Nigerian Economic Summit 
Group, Lagos, 22 March 2004.  
 I am most grateful to you, Mr Chairman, and through you, the Nigerian Economic Summit Group, for 
inviting  me  to  join  you  on  this  important  occasion.  This  event  and  other  similar  activities  hosted  by 
many  countries  in  our  continent,  provide  meaning  and  substance  to  the  objectives  of  the  African 
Union.  
This  gathering  is  consistent  with  the  many  contributions  that  the  people  of  this  country  have  made 
towards the realisation of the African Union and all that it entails. Of particular significance to me is 
that this event has been put together in collaboration with the Nigerian Women in Business. I have no 
doubt that this is as it should be, particularly during this month when the “United Nations Women’s 
Week”  has  been  celebrated.  In  Botswana,  we  have  followed  with  admiration  the  strides  made  by 
women in Nigeria.  
The initiatives and achievements of the women of Nigeria are examples of what is possible in, not only 
achieving  equality  and  fundamental  human  rights  for  more  than  half  a  country’s  citizens,  but  in 
advancing the economic well-being of the populace as well. Removing the many social, political and 
cultural  barriers  to  the  full  participation  of  women  in  any  economy,  at  all  levels,  will  go  a  long  way 
towards  ensuring  the  success  of  efforts  as  we  bring  about  the  much  needed  transformation,  be  it 
social, political or economic.  
What is an undeniable fact is that whatever barriers there are to women’s advancement, they will not 
remove themselves. Women must take the initiative and avoid being tentative in their approach and 
apologetic in their demands. A good number of women in Nigeria, as in other parts of the world, have 
the requisite credentials to unlock the doors to responsible positions in all areas and sectors of the 
economy.  You  have  a  shining  example,  right  here  in  Nigeria,  in  the  Minister  of  Finance,  the 
Honourable Okonjo Iweala, whose steadfast determination and exemplary efficiency in discharging the 
responsibilities of her Ministry are already evident. I want to believe that the authorities do not have to 
look too far for leadership at the apex of the banking field as well.  
This brings me to the main theme - “The Role of the Central Bank in Economic Transformation”. You 
will agree, Mr Chairman, that the degree to which a central bank can effectively assist in the economic 
transformation of any developing country depends not only on its degree of professional competence 
with which it carries out its mandate, but also on the environment in which it operates.  
It  is  this  latter  point  that marks  the  contours  of  my  remarks  on the  theme;  it  is  the  same  point  that 
anchors the success of Botswana’s socio-economic progress since Independence, which in large part 
enabled  the  Bank  of  Botswana  to  play  a  constructive  role  in  the  economic  transformation  of  the 
country over the years, and continues to do so to this day.  
The  rest  of  my  remarks  will  be  organised  to  provide  a  brief  background  on  Botswana’s  economic 
development,  especially  its  transformation  from  a  poor  rural  economy  to  a  fast  growing  mineral-led 
economy.  This  brief  survey  will  serve  as  a  backdrop  to  the  contribution  of  the  Bank  of  Botswana 
towards  realising  the  country’s  full  potential  in  achieving  sustainable  economic  growth  and 
development.  
As  many  of  you  know,  Botswana  is  a  landlocked  country  situated  in  the  centre  of  Southern  Africa, 
covering an area more or less the size of Kenya. Most of the country is not suitable for crop farming as 
it is semi-desert, with cattle rearing generally the only viable form of farming.  
Diamonds were discovered in 1967, soon after Independence (1966) and, currently, Botswana is the 
world’s largest producer of diamonds in value terms. The mining sector contributes approximately one 
third  to  GDP  and  accounts  for  about  80  percent  of  exports.  The  revenue  from  diamonds  and  the 
Government’s prudent fiscal policies have generally resulted in budget surpluses and a sizeable level 
of foreign exchange reserves, currently equivalent to 24 months’ import cover of goods, services and 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 1
factor  payments.  Despite  the  dominance  of  the  diamond  sector,  other  sectors  of  the  economy, 
including tourism and financial services, have grown in importance over the years.1  
Several  indicators  suggest  that  the  development  process  pursued  by  Botswana  has  been  very 
successful. For instance, per capita income grew at an average annual rate of 8.4 percent between 
1966 and 1990. Despite a slowdown in the 1990s, Botswana has registered annual GDP growth rates 
which  few  other  countries  have  matched,  particularly  in  the  past  20  years.  As  a  result  of  the  good 
economic performance, the country has graduated from being very poor at Independence to one of 
the  relatively  rich  in  the  region,  and  has  achieved  middle-income  status.  Diamond  revenues  have 
helped the Government to generate savings, hence there is no need for government borrowing. This 
has two implications for the business environment. First, the lack of government borrowing means that 
the  private  sector  is  not  “crowded  out”  for  investment  resources.  Second,  the  usually  buoyant 
revenues  have  enabled  the  Government  to  reduce  taxes  to  very  low  rates.  Notwithstanding  these 
achievements,  problems  remain.  The  level  of  poverty  is  at  an  unacceptable  level,  too  many  of  our 
people  remain  unemployed,  and  the  HIV/AIDS  pandemic  is  raising  many  new  social  and  economic 
problems.  
Fortunately, the outside world has recognised Botswana’s efforts in economic development, and this 
has  resulted in  the  country  acquiring  an  international  reputation  for  good  governance,  transparency 
and negligible corruption. Consequently, Botswana has attained and maintained the highest sovereign 
credit  rating  in  Africa,  awarded  by  both  Moody’s  Investors  Service  and  Standard  and  Poors.2  The 
rating compares favourably with several middle-income countries elsewhere in the world. The country 
has  also  scored  highly  in  the  Global  Competitiveness  Report  for  the  period  2003-20043,  and 
Transparency  International  has  recently  ranked  Botswana  30  out  of  133  countries  in  its  Corruption 
Perception  Index.4  All  of  these  scores  are  the  highest  among  surveyed  African  countries  and  are 
higher than those of several European countries. Those of you who are familiar with the credit rating 
procedures are aware that they are based on a wide cross section of the institutional, political, social 
and policy characteristics of the country being rated and, therefore, the process of assessment is very 
intrusive. I hasten to add that the central bank played a pivotal role in facilitating the rating exercise.  
Botswana’s  experience  provides  considerable  lessons  for  the  process  of  economic  transformation, 
given that the country has successfully completed one transformation and is in the process of another. 
The first transformation involved managing the impact of mineral exploitation on a poor subsistence 
agricultural economy. The second involves managing the transition from a rapidly growing, mineral-led 
economy  to  one  which  is  more  diversified  and  broadly  based.  Let  me  comment  on  these  two 
transformation experiences, and draw some lessons that may be useful for other countries and will no 
doubt be of interest to this gathering.  
When diamonds were discovered in Botswana, the country had little in the way of human or physical 
resources.  In  deciding  how  the  newly-discovered  mineral  resource  was  to  be  managed,  the 
Government focused on a few principles that, with hindsight, have proved to be extremely important. 
These principles included securing a fair deal for the nation in terms of the income generated from 
mineral exploitation; ensuring the efficient exploitation of minerals and not overstretching the nation’s 
limited  resources;  and  sharing  the  revenue  from  minerals  nationwide  and  not  concentrating  the 
benefits in particular areas. Interestingly, the diamond mines were never nationalised and were left to 
be run by a private sector company that was, and continues to be, in partnership with the Government 
in the project.  
The Government’s main concern was deciding how to best use the revenues generated by diamond 
exports. In doing so, it was guided by the desire to improve living standards as equitably as possible. 
Most  of  the  mineral  revenues  were  invested  in  physical  and  human  infrastructure,  such  as  roads, 
water  supplies,  telecommunications,  education  and  health  facilities.  By  and  large,  the  Government 
avoided  spending  mineral  revenues  on  what  could  be  considered  wasteful  grandiose  projects. 
Perhaps most importantly, the Government acknowledged the need to save some of the revenues and 
accumulate  financial  assets  in  the  form  of  foreign  exchange  reserves.  With  these  reserves,  and 
                                                      
1   National Development Plan 9, 2003-2009, Republic of Botswana, Gaborone. 
2   www.moodys.com and www.standardandpoors.com, respectively. 
3   World Economic Forum, Geneva, October 2003. 
4   See www.transparency.org/cpi/cpi2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2004
generally  prudent  budgeting,  Botswana  has  been  able  to  avoid  the  volatility  and  disruption  that 
typically  afflicts  mineral  producers  who  are  vulnerable  to  fluctuations  in  mineral  prices,  output  and 
revenues.  The  result  has  been  rapid  economic  growth,  generally  rising  per  capita  incomes  and,  at 
least until HIV/AIDS came along, there were major improvements in “quality of life” indicators such as 
life expectancy and literacy.  
Although  some  development  experts  attribute  Botswana’s  relative  success  to  the  exploitation  of 
diamond  deposits,  this  is  only  part  of  the  story.  Natural  resources,  no  matter  how  endowed  and 
lucrative, cannot, on their own, develop a country. What is important is the quality of economic policy 
making, and it is in this sphere that Botswana is distinguished from many other developing countries, 
certainly not the good fortune of having diamonds. There are several dimensions to what I have just 
referred to as the “quality of economic policy making”. The first key element is complementarity so far 
as fiscal, monetary and exchange rate policies are concerned. The second is policy consistency and 
achieving  stability  in  the  policy  environment,  given  their  particular  importance  to  both  domestic  and 
foreign investors. The third element is coherence and creation of synergies in policy implementation. It 
is  in  this  policy  environment  that  the  Bank  of  Botswana  has  contributed  to  the  development  of  the 
country.  
While  the  challenges  are  different,  I  believe  that  the  same  principles  of  stable,  consistent  and 
transparent macroeconomic policies, derived through a transparent process of consultation, analysis 
and discussion, with a leadership that is honest and unselfish, should help the second transformation 
to be completed as relatively successfully as the first.  
Mr Chairman, with this background, it is now time that I focus on the central point of my remarks - that 
is, the role of the central bank, in this case the Bank of Botswana, in the achievement of Botswana’s 
economic transformation.  
The  Bank’s  contribution  to  the  policy  environment,  and  the  role  it  plays  in  achieving  the  broader 
national  goals,  is  spelled  out  in  the  mandate  given  to  it  by  Parliament.5  In  general  terms,  it  is  a 
supportive  role,  as  it  is  for  almost  all  central  banks  in  the  world.  Specifically,  the  Bank  has,  as  its 
primary  responsibility,  to  promote,  and  when  achieved,  to  maintain  monetary  and  financial  stability. 
While  the  Bank  has  many  tasks  to  perform,  such  as,  to  issue  the  national  currency,  to  assist  the 
development  and  functioning  of  an  efficient  payments  mechanism,  to  implement  the  Government’s 
exchange rate policy, to manage the country’s foreign exchange reserves, and to provide advice and 
banking services to the Government, all of which are important in themselves, what is of paramount 
importance is the achievement of monetary and financial stability goals.  
This is a supportive role because none of these objectives are ends in themselves; the Bank pursues 
them as means towards the greater end of sustainable national economic growth and development. 
As  I  noted  earlier,  one  of  the  most  important  elements  of  a  successful  economy  is  a  stable 
macroeconomic environment, which can only be achieved by pursuing sound and consistent economic 
policies. It is not something the Bank can do alone; every organ of the economy has a role to play. The 
Bank’s part is to foster monetary and financial conditions that are conducive to an orderly, balanced 
and sustained development or - in the language of this event - to engage in the transformation of the 
economy  through  the  combined  efforts  of  government,  private  individuals  and  businesses,  both 
domestic and foreign.  
Little  of  what  I  have  alluded  to  should  be  new  to  this  well-informed  group.  Not  only  are  these 
underlying principles and objectives of a central bank embodied in the NEPAD initiative, it is also a 
message  I  believe  you  will  have  heard  many  times  from  your  own  central  bank,  under  the  able 
leadership  of  my  counterpart  and  friend,  Governor  Sanusi, and most  likely  from  every other central 
bank Governor who takes the time to discuss these issues in public - which these days seems to be a 
regular  and  frequent  occurrence.  You  will  agree  that  it  is  far  better  to  hear  from  central  bank 
Governors periodically, if not frequently, on these important issues rather than have the uncertainty 
that  comes  from  a  lack  of  information  on  what  central  banks  do  and  why  they  do  it.  It  is  with  this 
thought in mind that I want to share with you how we go about these specific central bank tasks at the 
Bank of Botswana.  
Monetary  stability  in  Botswana  is  pursued  through  a  monetary  policy  that  aims  to  achieve  a 
sustainable low and predictable level of inflation. Precisely how low it should be is a subject of ongoing 
                                                      
5   Bank of Botswana Act, 1996. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 3
debate, not only in Botswana but elsewhere where monetary or price stability has been recognised 
and accepted as the primary goal of monetary policy. Experience has taught us that high and volatile 
inflation  works  against  the  efficient  allocation  of  scarce  resources  by  creating  an  environment  that 
inhibits  businesses  and  consumers  from  making  sound  investment  and  saving  decisions,  and 
sustainable  growth  is  impossible  without  productive  investment  supported  by  adequate  long  term 
savings.  In  pursuing  its  inflation  objective,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  is  mindful  of  this  fact,  by  setting 
domestic interest rates high enough to provide a positive return to savers but not so high that they 
discourage private sector investment.  
The Bank’s monetary policy must also be mindful of the international dimension in which it operates. 
As I pointed out earlier, Botswana is a small open economy and, like all such economies, the country 
is dependent on trade and foreign investment to complement its own efforts to grow and prosper. This 
means  that  there  is  a  need  to  remain  and,  where  possible,  to  improve  Botswana’s  international 
competitiveness,  but  also,  in  Botswana’s  case,  to  diversify  the  economy  away  from  its  current 
dependence on relatively few products, especially diamonds, as the principal source of growth. Many 
different policies, focusing for the most part on trade and investment, contribute to these efforts. The 
Bank  for  its  part  contributes  by  pursuing  a  monetary  policy  that,  in  the  short  run,  seeks  a  rate  of 
inflation that is no higher than the average of its major trading partners which, if successful, implies a 
relatively stable real effective exchange rate, given that Botswana has pegged the nominal exchange 
rate  of  its  currency,  the  Pula,  to  a  basket  of  currencies  comprising  the  South  African  rand  and  the 
IMF’s  Special  Drawing  Right  (SDR).  In  the  longer  run,  however,  real  and  durable  international 
competitiveness  and  export  diversification  must  ultimately  come  from  improvements  in  productivity. 
The  Bank’s  focus  on  bringing  inflation  down  to  low  and  sustainable  levels  reflects  both  this 
fundamental  national  objective  as  well  as  its  own  statutory  objective  of  achieving  and  maintaining 
monetary stability.6  
The second main responsibility of the Bank is to promote and maintain financial stability through the 
regulation  and  supervision  of  domestic banks,  by  assisting  in  the  development  and  operation  of  an 
efficient  payments  mechanism,  and  by  maintaining  confidence  in  the  currency.  These  functions 
constitute  the  bulk  of  the  Bank’s  activities,  and  they  involve  the  licensing  of  commercial  banks  and 
other deposit-taking institutions, continuous monitoring of their solvency and liquidity, daily processing 
of cheques and other means of payment used in the hundreds of thousands of financial transactions 
that  occur  each  day,  and  designing,  printing  and  minting  as  well  as  distributing  good  quality  bank 
notes and coin to the public.7  
It  is  important  to  point  out  that  the  overall  credibility  of  the  Bank,  and  hence  its  effectiveness  in 
achieving its fundamental objectives, is critically dependent on how well it performs these operational 
tasks.  Competent  and  well-trained  staff,  high  standards  of  efficiency  and  accuracy,  up-to-date 
equipment and facilities, are required and must have the full attention of management to ensure that 
they are the best available for the job to be performed.  
Experience has shown that financial stability and monetary stability are inextricably linked. This means 
that  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  will  be  most  effective  in  an  environment  of 
macroeconomic  stability.  A  consistent  and  sound  macroeconomic  policy  environment,  with 
complementary  monetary,  fiscal  and  exchange  rate  policies,  is  essential.  Major  inconsistencies 
inevitably lead to an increase in economic and financial risks, to the point where the financial system 
itself becomes vulnerable. At the same time, the absence of a well-functioning financial system will 
make the achievement of monetary stability more difficult.  
There is one other element of a sound and efficient financial system that must be taken into account 
by the Bank. It is that corporate governance for financial institutions be of the highest standards, and 
that specialist service providers, such as accountants, auditors and lawyers, adhere to equally high 
professional  standards  and  code  of  business  ethics.  You  will  agree  that  if  accounting  and  auditing 
standards  are  weak  or  perverted,  effective  banking  regulation  and  supervision  will  be  seriously 
compromised.  
That  is  why  in  addition  to  on-site  and  off-site  supervision,  the  Bank  of  Botswana  regularly  meets 
commercial banks bilaterally and as a group, to ensure that good corporate governance is the order of 
                                                      
6   Monetary Policy Statements 2003 and 2004, Bank of Botswana, Gaborone (see www.bankofbotswana.bw). 
7   Annual Report 2002, Bank of Botswana, Gaborone (see www.bankofbotswana.bw). 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2004
the day, and that the quality of customer service is constantly improved in line with international best 
practice. This level of attention to high standards of corporate governance and professional conduct 
has meant that there has been no bank failure in Botswana. The closure of the Bank of Credit and 
Commerce  International  (BCCI)  in  1991,  was  due  to  its  global  problems  and  not  its  domestic 
operations.8  
Mr  Chairman,  earlier  in  my  remarks,  I  highlighted  that  the  success  of  a  central  bank  in  fulfilling  its 
mandate depends on two factors - the environment in which it operates, and its own competence in 
carrying  out  its  duties.  It  goes  without  saying  that  there  has  to  be  a  favourable  and  supportive 
environment which should facilitate the carrying out of the mandate. After all the central bank, related 
institutions  and  agencies  are  a  means  of  implementing  the  strategies  aimed  at  attaining  an  overall 
shared vision or goal for the country as a whole. These institutions serve a larger national goal; hence 
there is need to generate synergies in their activities if the overall national objective is to be achieved.  
One  of  the  synergies  that  crucially  influences  the  effectiveness  of  a  central  bank’s  role  in 
macroeconomic management is its relationship with government. Of necessity, this relationship must 
be close. The central bank is “the government’s bank”; the government is typically the largest or only 
shareholder  of  the  central  bank;  and  central  bank  functions  typically  involve  providing  a  range  of 
services  to  government.  What  is  important,  however,  is  that  the  relationship  is  clearly  defined;  the 
central  bank  should  be  independent  of  the  Government  particularly  with  respect  to  the  important 
central  banking  function  of  maintaining  monetary  and  financial  stability.  Central  bank  independence 
has  several  dimensions.  First,  there  must  be  a  clear  specification  of  objectives  and  allocation  of 
unambiguous policy responsibilities. Second, there should be a prohibition on government intervention 
or interference in the formulation or implementation of policy decisions relating to the responsibilities 
allocated  to  the  central  bank.  Third,  there  should  be  restrictions  on  government  actions,  such  as 
borrowing from the central bank, that might compromise the Bank’s ability to formulate and execute 
policy. Fourth, there should be a prohibition on government interference in the execution of duties by 
officers of the Bank.  
It should be noted, however, that central bank independence is not absolute. Many central banks that 
have  independence  in  the  formulation  and  implementation  of  monetary  policy  are  subject  to 
objectives, such as inflation targets, that are specified by their respective governments. Furthermore, 
governments have a legitimate role in determining the broad components of the macroeconomic policy 
framework,  such  as  the  nature  of  monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  regimes.  More  generally,  the 
need  for  central  banks  to  be  ultimately  accountable  to  an  elected  authority  such  as  Parliament, 
whether directly or indirectly, means that there has to be some element of constraint on independence. 
Operationally, however, it is important that central banks should have policy independence if they are 
to be effective in achieving their objectives.  
In the case of the Bank of Botswana, there is a reasonable degree of independence. The Government 
plays no direct role in the formulation and implementation of monetary policy, and the Bank is left to 
set  interest  rates  and  determine  other  parameters  of  monetary  policy  implementation  without 
interference. This allows the Bank to focus squarely on its objective of achieving low and sustainable 
inflation.  The  Bank  is  also  independent  with  regard  to  the  licensing  and  supervision  of  banks. 
Furthermore, while the Governor, Deputy Governors and Board Members are government appointees, 
they  cannot  be  removed  from  office  by  the  Government,  except  where  they  are  incapable  of 
performing their duties. Public officers have to be in a minority on the Bank’s Board. In addition, there 
is no provision in the Bank of Botswana Act for the Minister of Finance to issue instructions of any kind 
to  the  Bank.  The  only  direct  way  for  the  Government  to  intervene  in  the  Bank’s  policy  decisions  is 
through  instructions  issued  by  the  President,  and  it  is  clear  from  the  way  in  which  this  provision  is 
framed in legislation that it is intended to be used only in exceptional circumstances.  
There are, however, indirect channels where the Government can influence the Bank’s decisions. The 
most  senior  official  in  the  Ministry  of  Finance  is  an  ex-officio  member  of  the  Board,  and  as  the 
representative of the shareholder, he puts the Government’s views forward. And in certain areas, such 
as exchange rate policy, the Bank of Botswana Act specifies that the Government makes decisions 
and the Bank’s role is advisory.9  
                                                      
8   Banking Supervision Annual Reports, Bank of Botswana, Gaborone. 
9   Bank of Botswana Act, 1996. 
BIS Review 26/2004 
 5
As you can appreciate, the Bank of Botswana enjoys a relatively high degree of independence from 
the Government. While there are undoubtedly areas where that independence can be strengthened, 
key areas of policy formulation and implementation are left to the Bank to pursue in accordance with 
the best professional judgment of Bank staff, and this has led to high quality policy making that has 
contributed  to  Botswana’s  economic  success.  Partly  for  these  reasons,  major  policy  disagreements 
between the Bank and the Government are very rare.  
Besides its main policy responsibilities, the Bank also has a number of important statutory roles to play 
in providing financial services to the Government, as its financial advisor. As well as being banker to 
the Government, the Bank advises on any borrowing the Government may contemplate. It also carries 
out  various  ad  hoc  agency  functions.  For  instance,  when  the  Government  decided  to  obtain  a 
sovereign credit rating in 2001, the Bank managed the process, by selecting an advisor, hosting the 
rating  agencies,  and  acting  as  a  clearing  house  for  data  and  information.  More  recently,  the  Bank 
handled the Government’s first domestic bond issue, and this was very successful and is making an 
important contribution towards the development of the domestic capital markets. 
I have been associated with the Bank of Botswana since its inception, and it is with pride that I am 
able to say it is one of the most respected institutions in Botswana; it is also an exemplar for public 
institutions,  as  appropriate.  In  terms  of  corporate  governance,  transparency  and  accountability,  the 
Bank aspires to conduct its business in accordance with best international practice.  
The fact that the Bank has a high level of credibility, both domestically and internationally, is not just 
an achievement of which to be proud; it also makes the Bank’s policy implementation more effective, 
as its pronouncements are acted upon and are effective in shaping expectations.  
As  I  conclude,  Mr  Chairman,  I  wish  to  suggest  that  the  success  achieved  by  Botswana  in  its 
macroeconomic development has been shaped by a set of mutually supportive policies motivated by a 
common vision. The role of the Bank of Botswana in this context was to participate and contribute its 
part to the larger scheme of national goals. The Bank’s activities have been assisted by the mutually 
supportive synergies generated by the national effort at all levels. Needless to say, all the organs of 
any government, including the central bank, must pull together if development endeavours of bringing 
about appreciable socio-economic transformation are to be achieved.  
With these remarks, it only remains that I commend the organisers of this Economic Summit for the 
initiative undertaken, and to express my heartfelt appreciation for the excellent arrangements made to 
facilitate  my  presence  at  this  occasion  in  such  distinguished  company.  For  me,  it  will  remain  a 
memorable experience. I wish you, individually and collectively as a nation, success now and in all 
your future endeavours.  
I thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 26/2004
