David Dodge: Recent review of the Canadian economy 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Senate  Banking, 
Trade and Commerce Committee, Ottawa, 20 April 2004.  
 Good  morning,  Mr.  Chairman  and  members  of  the  Committee.  As  always,  we  appreciate  the 
opportunity to meet with you twice a year, following the release of our Monetary Policy Report. These 
meetings help us keep Senators and all Canadians informed about the Bank’s views on the economy 
and about the goal of monetary policy and the actions we take to achieve it. 
The Canadian economy continues to adjust to developments in the global economy such as stronger 
world  demand,  higher  commodity  prices,  and  the  realignment  of  world  currencies,  including  the 
Canadian  dollar.  Emerging-market  economies,  especially  China  and  India,  are  contributing  to 
intensified competition but are also creating new trading opportunities for Canada.  
These  developments  require  shifts  in  activity  among  sectors  and  create  a  need  for  adjustments  by 
many businesses. Monetary policy is facilitating these adjustments by supporting aggregate demand, 
with the goal of keeping the economy near its full production potential and inflation on target. 
When Paul and I appeared before this Committee last October, we told you that economic growth in 
Canada  was  weaker  than  expected  and  that  there  was  more  slack  in  the  economy  than  we  had 
projected  six  months  earlier.  As  you  know,  the  Canadian  economy  was  affected  by  a  number  of 
shocks in 2003. Thus, despite a broadening of the global economic recovery and higher commodity 
prices, it turned out that the economy at the end of the year was operating well below the level that we 
had projected in our October Report.  
Preliminary indications are that growth in the first quarter of this year was marginally below 3 per cent. 
Thus, the Bank’s view is that the economy is still operating significantly below its potential. 
Our  outlook  for  economic  growth  and  inflation  is  essentially  unchanged  from  that  of  the  January 
Monetary Policy Report Update. The economy is expected to grow by about 2 3/4 per cent in 2004, 
picking  up  to  about  3 3/4  per  cent  in  2005.  This  stronger  growth  is  expected  to  come  from  private 
domestic demand, reflecting the current monetary stimulus in the economy and high levels of business 
and consumer confidence. Such growth would return the economy to close to its production potential 
by  the  third  quarter  of  2005.  Core  inflation  -  which  removes  the  most  volatile  components  of  the 
consumer price index and the impact of indirect taxes on the remaining components - should average 
1 1/2 per  cent  over  the  remainder  of  this  year.  As  excess  supply  in  the  economy  diminishes,  core 
inflation is expected to move back to 2 per cent by the end of 2005. 
The  main  uncertainty  for  the  outlook  continues  to  relate  to  how  the  Canadian  economy  adjusts  to 
global developments. Overall, the risks to the outlook appear balanced. 
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I will now be glad to answer the Committee’s questions.  
BIS Review 22/2004 
 1
