Jean-Claude Trichet: Issues in monetary policy - views from the ECB 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  luncheon 
organised by the Economic Club of New York, New York, 26 April 2004. 
 Mrs President, Ladies and Gentlemen, dear Friends, 
It is a great honour and a pleasure to be invited to speak to the Economic Club of New York on the 
eve of a defining moment in Europe’s history.  
Only  five  years  ago  we  engaged  in  a  grand  enterprise  of  institutional  design  that  irreversibly  tied 
together the economic and monetary destiny of eleven, then twelve, nations. In five days from now, 
the European Union will complete its largest ever expansion. What was originally a Community of six 
countries in Western Europe will become a Union of 25, spanning a geographic area that used to be 
divided by an iron curtain. Today we can watch some 450 million Europeans dismantling the barbed 
wire of political hatred and economic seclusion that had split the continent for more than half a century. 
We  can  watch  Europe,  once  again,  engaging  in  a  concerted  effort  to  overcome  differences  and 
manage diversity.  
Taking issue with this historical transition, I intend to focus my remarks on the challenges of executing 
monetary  policy  in  such  a  rapidly  changing  world.  A  world  in  which  high-speed  structural  change 
- whether  spurred  by  spontaneous  economic  forces  or  institutional  evolution  -  may  put  time-tested 
economic models at risk, and defy policy-makers’ search for easy policy recipes. 
I will describe the mechanisms that the ECB has set in place to protect itself against the risk of serious 
misperceptions and policy mistakes. My conjecture is that these mechanisms can explain a great deal 
of the reasons why the institutional transition in Europe has so far been accomplished in the smooth 
manner  in  which  it  proceeded.  And  I  will  argue  that  the  same  mechanisms  are  also  appropriate  to 
prepare Europe for the new challenges that lie ahead.  
Central banks and uncertainty 
The ECB, like all central banks, is faced with several dimensions of acute uncertainty. The economy is 
continuously  hit  by  disturbances  that  are  often  difficult  to  identify  in  real  time.  Even  when 
policy-makers are able to correctly assess the source and the nature of a disturbance affecting the 
economy, tracking its propagation profile and assessing its final impact on the key variables of interest 
to policymakers is a daunting task.  
Econometric theory has spent decades devising sophisticated tools to isolate different types of shocks 
from the tangle that appears in the data. But inference is often non-robust across various identification 
schemes.  And  real-time  identification  remains  central  banks’  Holy  Grail.  As  a  consequence,  central 
bankers are given little guidance by theory in their daily endeavour to filter out noisy data.  
The task of policy-makers is further complicated if they suspect that customary cyclical movements are 
compounded by an ongoing change in the deep structure of the economy. For one thing, structural 
change amplifies the identification problem. It is difficult to ascertain whether the dynamic force that we 
see appearing on the screen is going to be reversed and eventually vanish, or will become ingrained 
in  the  underlying  economic  mechanism  for  many  years  to  come.  But  more  importantly,  in  case  a 
structural change is truly under way, macroeconomic relationships derived from empirical regularities 
and historical averages are bound to lose significance. A new set of relationships would need to be 
estimated and tested. But serious diagnostics for structural stability rarely give definitive answers. And 
re-estimation requires sufficiently extended spans of data that simply do not yet exist.  
Structural change on a global scale 
The  past  decade,  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  has  not  been  kind  to  policymakers’  aspiration  to  a 
comfortably stable set of structural relations usable for policy analysis. At a minimum, the second half 
of  the  1990s  and  the  early  years  of  this  century  have  sent  us  stark  reminders  that  the  economic 
structure  does  not  hold  still  for  long.  Our  recent  experience  in  coping  with  economic  change  has 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 1
provided more than one stress test of the macroeconomic models that are in use in our institutions. I 
shall mention three examples. 
On this side of the Atlantic, the policy debate has primarily focused on technological innovation, the 
spread of information technology, and globalisation. Many distinguished analysts have identified in the 
combination of these three dynamic factors the main structural force behind the reduction in economic 
frictions  and  the  narrowing  of  the  ability  of  any  single  market  player  to  influence  prices  and  dictate 
market  conditions  domestically.  This  course  of  events  has  increased  competition.  Through  a  better 
allocation of resources, heightened competition has advanced the standards of living in more than one 
country, notably the US. However, the same phenomenon has also reduced policymakers’ confidence 
in what seemed to be well-tested economic relations. For example, it has loosened the association 
between output growth and inflation, and between these two variables and employment. And many US 
observers were left wondering whether the intense capital deepening of the last few years - and the 
associated measured growth in productivity - may have shifted substantially the relationship between 
output and inflation. Of course, lasting shifts in productivity trends and their economic consequences, if 
real, will be clearly visible only in retrospect.  
Financial markets have also been a very important source of structural discontinuity with the past, in 
Europe  and  the  US  alike.  We  all  have  witnessed  the  frantic  rise  and  the  subsequent  shake-up  of 
equity  valuations.  In  addition,  we  have  seen  an  unprecedented  wave  of  mergers  and  acquisitions, 
facilitated  by  deeper  and  more  liquid  financial  markets.  This  wave  not  only  has  affected  domestic 
markets, but also very much has brought about tighter global linkages in the corporate sector. These 
tighter  linkages,  in  turn,  may  have  affected  the  extent  and  pace  of  the  transmission  of  economic 
developments across the globe.  
Structural change in Europe 
Thirdly, let me mention some sources of structural change that are specific to Europe. I would like to 
emphasise three dimensions. One is related to the institutional switch that the creation of the 
single currency has represented for the nations that have adopted the Euro. It was not clear at the 
outset to what extent the introduction of the single currency would affect financial markets and price 
and wage-setting behaviour. Indeed, times of institutional change are arguably times in which private 
expectations may fail to co-ordinate on a focal point. The widely-held presumption then was that the 
statistical  patterns  emerging  from  past  data  might  not  be  informative  of  the  structure  of  the  new 
economic  entity,  and  inference  drawn  on  its  basis  might  even  be  misleading.  Those  were  times  in 
which the measure of uncertainty was closer to a ‘Knightian concept’ wherein probability distributions 
for model coefficients could not even be known or existant. 
The money market, for one, underwent a historical transformation on the eve of the launch of the Euro 
in January 1999. Eleven national markets, so diverse in terms of participants, operating conventions, 
settlement structures, credit facilities, had to merge into a unified trading area almost overnight. New 
payments  systems  for  large-value  transactions  were  implemented.  Capital  markets  traditionally 
protected by currency fragmentation and national regulations were opened up to arbitrage and straight 
competition. It could not be taken for granted that private agents could immediately form expectations 
consistent with the new regime, and thus instability in behaviour could not be ruled out. 
Let me also mention, en passant, that, although the process of preparing for the adoption of the single 
currency had been carefully crafted, much remained to be accomplished on the side of constructing 
homogenous statistics across the countries participating to the Euro area and the elaboration of tools 
and models for the analysis of economic data.  
The  second  dimension  relates  to  ongoing  efforts  of  the  Euro  area  to  implement  structural 
reforms in the labour and good markets. These reforms aim to make these markets more flexible, 
strengthening the Euro area’s competitiveness and its resilience to shocks. Several such reforms have 
been already implemented and many more are to come. This is a factor that adds uncertainty to the 
stability  of  economic  relationships  in  the  Euro  area,  a  factor  that  the  central  bank  has  to  take  into 
account when taking policy decisions. 
The third dimension of structural change in Europe is that associated with enlargement. The 
integration  of  these  new  countries  will  affect  the  European  economy  through  a  change  in  trade 
patterns, capital and labour flows and a higher level of competition. 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2004
The enlargement will no doubt provide new opportunities for trade and investment flows. Some effects 
are already visible in a high degree of economic integration between the current Member States and 
the  acceding  countries.  Lower  trade  costs  and  an  increase  in  competition  associated  with  the 
enlargement of the Single Market can have a significantly positive impact on growth in the European 
economy as a whole. But the side effect might be, again, a somewhat diminished ability to extrapolate 
statistical patterns seen in the past to forecast the future, at least for some time. 
One notable source of dynamics in structural relationships, looking forward, will be the convergence 
across income and productivity levels. For acceding countries as a whole, per capita income today is 
less than half of the average of the Euro area, so the potential for trade creation and redirection of 
existing  trade  and  production  specialisation  patterns  is  enormous.  In  the  end,  increasing  prosperity 
and  living  standards  will  be  forthcoming  for  the  whole  Union.  And  along  the  way  the  drive  towards 
reallocation of production and re-specialisation will call for changes.  
The ECB’s monetary policy concept 
Europe’s  transition  to  the  single  currency,  no  doubt,  marked  a  time  in  which  the  signal  extraction 
problem  in  understanding  economic  developments  was  most  acute.  Yet,  the  transition  was  smooth 
and the abrupt switch in the process by which agents form their expectations, that many observers 
had predicted, did not materialise after all. So, amidst the challenges that loom in our future, we are 
reassured that we did make it and that it bears testimony to our capacity to weather difficulty. 
On the eve of the Euro changeover, markets immediately recognised the new rules of the game. They 
adjusted swiftly to the new monetary policy environment. Money market developments indicated that 
monetary policy was reasonably predictable from the start. Euro area medium and long-term inflation 
expectations, as measured by survey data, have remained around 1.8%-1.9%, consistently pointing to 
a high degree of credibility of the ECB’s official announcement that it would aim to maintain inflation 
below 2% over the medium term. In this respect, long-term inflation expectations aligned themselves 
with the low levels of the best performing economies that were merged into the Euro. This is all the 
more remarkable given that the ECB started without a track record of its own and was faced with a 
number of sizeable, mainly upward, price shocks hitting the Euro area economy.  
Faced by an environment characterized by an exceptional measure of uncertainty, the ECB identified 
three  principles 
three  principles,  stability, 
comprehensiveness,  and  transparency  have  been  incorporated  in  the  monetary  policy  concept  that 
has guided our course since 1999.  
for  an  efficient  monetary  governance.  These 
Stability 
There  is,  today,  a  general  recognition  that  price  stability  is  highly  desirable  from  an  economic 
standpoint.  It  preserves  an  environment  conducive  to  the  optimization  of  resource  allocation  and 
therefore permits to foster sustainable growth and job creation. There are several other reasons why 
price  stability  is  a  public  good  of  great  value:  In  particular,  preserving  the  purchasing  power  of  the 
citizens,  including  the  most  vulnerable,  and  preserving  the  correct  functioning  of  the  democratic 
institutions.  
In a world of accelerated changes, the concept of stability is even more of the essence. The central 
bank has responsibility to be an anchor of stability, price stability being the ultimate goal and one of 
the preconditions for financial stability.  
This stability principle has two major corollaries: First, being as clear as possible as regards not only 
the goal, but also the arithmetic definition of price stability. The Treaty establishing the Economic and 
Monetary Union wrote in stone that the objective assigned to the European Central Bank was price 
stability.  In  1998,  upon  taking  up  its  monetary  policy  tasks,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB 
sharpened the focus by defining price stability in quantitative terms as the year-on-year increase in the 
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of below 2%. We further facilitated the coordination of private 
expectations by clarifying that in the pursuit of price stability the ECB aims at inflation rates below but 
close to 2%, thereby preserving a sufficient safety margin against the risk of deflation. This precise 
definition  had  not  only  the  advantage  of  permitting  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  and  to  enhance 
transparency and accountability of the European Central Bank. It was also absolutely instrumental in 
preserving continuity in the moment of transition from the previous national currencies to the Euro: the 
Euro was given the very same definition of price stability as the one attributed to the most credible 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 3
national currencies benefiting from the lowest market interest rates. That has contributed to one of the 
most remarkable - and unduly discrete - process of the setting up of the Euro: From day one the Euro 
was given the best yield curve available in the economies of the Euro area.  
Second, immunizing monetary policy against short-termism by solidly anchoring it on a medium-term 
perspective. Constantly bombarded by economic news, a central bank risks being swamped by the 
latest indicator and by its conjectures concerning markets’ likely reaction to the latest indicator. This 
mechanism  can  lead  monetary  policy  gradually  astray  from  its  foremost  role  of  providing  a  firm 
medium-term  anchor  for  the  economy.  The  ECB  has  built  into  its  strategy  a  mechanism  against 
short-termism by adopting a “keeping its composure” approach to countering shocks.  
Instrumental  in  this  steady-hand  framework  is  our  notion  that  the  appropriate  horizon  for  monetary 
policy  is  the  “medium  term”.  In  this  respect,  the  time  horizon  over  which  price  stability  has  to  be 
re-established  needs  to  be  tailored  to  the  circumstances  prevailing  in  the  economy.  Sometimes, 
notably if there is suspicion that asset prices are moving substantially up or down, it pays to look even 
very far ahead, beyond the average lag of monetary transmission. In other cases, the economy can be 
expected to return to price stability within a shorter horizon. Such horizon would depend on whether 
the shocks are temporary or permanent, whether they emerged on the supply or the demand side, on 
their domestic or external origin, their potential for becoming entrenched in pricing decisions and on 
their implications for the fragility of the financial system. In all events, the central bank has to preserve 
its credibility, ensuring that expectations remain consistent with its declared policy objective.  
Comprehensiveness of the analytical framework 
A  central  bank,  in  its  daily  operations,  has  to  filter  an  enormous  amount  of  information.  It  routinely 
seeks to define the state of the economy as new circumstances arise and evaluate their implications 
for the risks to price stability. As I tried to argue above, this is a highly demanding exercise, because 
shocks do not come about with labels and the economy is potentially always subjected to structural 
changes. As a consequence, it is clear for all central banks that no simple rules linking policy to one or 
two privileged indicators can substitute for an accurate examination of economic developments in all 
their decisions and forecasts.  
From the beginning, the ECB felt the need to endow itself with a conceptual framework that could help 
it sort through a wealth of conflicting statistics, and organize the various pieces into a reliable road 
map  for  internal  analysis  and  communication  with  the  public.  This  called  for  the  adoption  of  a 
framework  that  concentrated  more  on  picturing  the  economy  as  a  large,  complex  and  permanently 
evolving system, rather than trying to condense this complexity into too simple summary statistics and 
models.  
In  the  event,  we  opted  for  a  ‘binocular’  perspective  over  the  economy,  organised  in  an  “economic 
analysis” and a “monetary analysis”. This policy framework, which came to be known as the ‘two pillar 
approach’,  permits  to  convey  the  notion  of  a  diversified  analysis  and,  in  our  view,  ensures  that  no 
information is lost in the assessment of risks to price stability.  
An  important  rationale  for  the  two-pillar  approach  relates  to  the  difference  in  the  time  perspectives 
relevant  for  analysis  of  price  developments  and  for  the  formation  of  private  inflation  expectations. 
Empirical  analysis  has  shown  that  the  inflation  process  can  be  broadly  decomposed  into  two 
components.  One  is  associated  with  the  interplay  between  demand  and  cost  factors  at  a  high 
frequency.  The  other  is  connected  to  more  drawn-out  and  persistent  trends.  The  latter  component 
demonstrates an empirical association with the trend growth of money on a long-term basis.  
The short to medium-term “economic analysis” - with its focus on real activity and financial conditions - 
is well equipped to study shorter-run deviations of inflation from its long-term trend. However, it often 
fails to track the mechanisms by which monetary factors act over extended horizons to nail down such 
trends. As a consequence, a monetary policy framework exclusively centred on such analysis would 
leave a ‘loose end’ in the expectations formation process, to the extent that it would offer no anchor to 
anticipations of price developments as the horizon - over which these are formed - lengthens.  
There are, therefore, merits in cross-checking the indications for the monetary stance that emanate 
from the shorter-term “economic analysis” with those stemming from the monetary analysis. Monetary 
analysis  constantly  reminds  the  central  bank  of  the  fundamental  principle  that,  while  responding  to 
economic  developments  as  they  unfold,  it  must  never  lose  sight  of  the  fact  that,  over  sufficiently 
extended horizons, the rate of money growth must be consistent with its price stability objective. This 
4 
 BIS Review 24/2004
cross-check ensures that monetary policy has a nominal anchor beyond - and even well beyond - the 
conventional projection horizon. It also induces and reinforces a firm sense of direction, discouraging 
policy agitation.  
Let me also observe that the success of the transition to the Euro was also very much depending on 
the lasting anchoring of long-term and even very long-term inflation expectations. As a matter of fact, 
to benefit at the very start of the Euro from the best yield curve available in the Euro area, to be able to 
extend  immediately  the  very  low  market  interest  rates  that  existed  only  in  a  small  number  of 
economies to the full body of the Euro area, one needed to be very credible. And this credibility in the 
delivery of price stability had to be intact not only in a two-year or five-year perspective, but also on a 
ten-year and thirty-year basis. 
Despite  the  fact  that  the  ECB  had  a  precise  definition  of  price  stability  which  the  Federal  Reserve 
System had not, like the Fed the ECB deliberately chose not to mould its own monetary policy strategy 
as one of “inflation targeting.” To be sure, the concept of “inflation targeting” is not always a clearly 
defined concept. However, if it is understood as a framework that makes macroeconomic forecasts the 
principal, if not the sole, statistical input feeding the policy-making process, then we would consider it 
too narrow a description of what monetary policy should look at.  
Indeed,  attempts  to  characterise  the  state  of  an  economy  in  terms  only  of  inflation  forecasts  would 
neither  do  justice  to  the  intrinsic  complexity  of  the  decision-making  process,  nor  would  it  provide  a 
robust and safe approach to policy. This is particularly true in a world of accelerated structural change 
in which central banks face a high degree of uncertainty about the future. 
A  central  bank  needs  to  maintain  appropriate  flexibility  in  the  way  it  responds  to  shocks,  taking 
decisions which are robust across a set of different plausible scenarios for the future. In this respect, it 
has  been  increasingly  recognised  that  a  central  bank  that  focuses  on  inflation  forecasts  at  one  or 
two-year  horizon  would  not  be  able  to  appropriately  take  into  account  the  formation  of  financial 
imbalances, as they generally exert effects on price developments at longer horizons. Especially in the 
face of substantial uncertainty about the sustainability of asset-price developments, it may instead be 
advisable to set interest rates with a view to a time frame extending well beyond conventional forecast 
horizons.  
More  generally,  the  existence  of  uncertainty  requires  central  banks  to  put  strong  emphasis  on  the 
robustness of their decisions, which implies that a good monetary policy strategy needs to perform as 
well as possible across a variety of empirically plausible models and scenarios. And it is in particular 
our view that the complexity with which monetary policy-makers are faced with should be presented to 
the public in a transparent manner. 
Transparency 
Indeed, the third principle that we have adhered to since the inception the ECB is the importance of 
open  and  transparent  communication  with  investors,  savers,  market  participants  and  the  public  at 
large. This is a prerequisite for appropriate accountability and enhances the understanding among the 
markets of how the central bank conducts its monetary policy, thereby enhancing substantially policy 
effectiveness.  
This was especially important for a new institution such as the ECB which was lacking a track record. 
The announcement of our monetary policy strategy in October 1998, before the ECB actually started 
to be in charge of conducting the single monetary policy in the Euro area, was a key element in our 
striving for transparency. It clearly stated the rules of the game and helped to reduce the uncertainty 
faced by market participants.  
Communication  with  the  public  and  the  markets  has  also  being  facilitated  by  the  fact  that  our 
assessment of  the  economic situation and  the risks  to  price stability  is  regularly  published and  that 
monetary  policy  decisions  are  explained  in  the  press  conference  that  we  give  after  each  monthly 
meeting in which monetary policy is discussed. The ECB produces on a monthly basis a bulletin that 
provides a detailed economic assessment to the public.  
We  have  been  told  from  time  to  time  that  we  were  not  sufficiently  transparent.  I  think  this  is  not 
justified. As a matter of fact, we have been very imaginative and creative in this respect at the very 
beginning of the Euro. In 1999 the state of the art of central banking was to display the diagnosis of 
the Central Bank 5 or 6 weeks after the decision was taken in publishing the minutes. No explanation 
at all was given in real time. We have been the first Central Bank to publish a full, detailed, real time 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 5
public display of our analysis and of the reasons why we had taken our decision. And we have also 
been the first to embark on a press conference organised by the President and the Vice President to 
explain the decision of the Governing Council.  
In that sense, we are one of the most transparent Central Banks in the world. And we have contributed 
substantially to modify the state of the  art of Central Banking: Today it would not be possible for a 
Central Bank to take a decision without displaying a real time explanation of the decision.  
the 
Monetary policy and asset prices 
I  have  already  alluded  to  some  of  the  challenges  that  monetary  policy  must  face  in  relation  to 
asset-price movements. Let me, therefore, at this stage pose on this issue that has recently attracted a 
great deal of attention in the debate among policy-makers, academics and the public at large. 
There are many challenges that central bankers face in relation to the links between monetary policy 
and  asset  prices.  To  name  a  few:  Should  central  banks  react  to  asset-price  movements?  How  to 
identify the insurgence of dis-equilibrium in asset prices when the equilibrium level is unknown? How 
to avoid a moral hazard problem? How to communicate with the public in case of asset-price bubbles? 
Unfortunately,  there  is  no  clear-cut  answer  to  any  of  these  questions.  Instead,  faced  by  starkly 
competing models and conflicting explanations of virtually all financial phenomena, central banks are 
constantly  reminded  of  the  great  value  of  robustness  and  pragmatism  in  monetary  policy.  In  this 
respect, I shall contend that the strategy adopted by the ECB involves some features which help to 
see through and tackle these challenges. 
First of all, the overriding objective of price stability, which monetary policy should be geared to, makes 
clear that asset prices cannot be a target for a central bank. This follows from the notion that in the 
long  run,  asset  prices  -  such  as  stock  or  real  estate  prices  -  are  fundamentally  determined  by  real 
factors  such  as  productivity, 
inter-temporal  preferences  of  society,  and  demographic 
developments.  A  central  bank  cannot  control  these  factors  and  therefore  it  cannot  aim  at  bringing 
about any asset price configuration that is not rooted in such fundamental forces.  
In  addition,  it  is  widely  recognised  that  the  central  bank’s  focus  on  the  overriding  objective  of  price 
stability helps to reduce investors’ misperceptions about future return possibilities and alleviates the 
problem  of  asymmetric  information  between  borrowers  and  lenders.  At  the  very  least,  even  though 
price stability cannot guarantee financial stability in all circumstances, it is clear that the absence of 
price  stability  would  only  exacerbate  the  problems  associated  with  asset-price  misalignments. 
Incidentally, as I have already mentioned, adopting a flexible medium-term orientation in the pursuit of 
price stability has the effect of lengthening the monetary policy horizon beyond the two years within 
which  meaningful  inflation  forecasts  are  usually  constructed,  depending  on  the  prevailing  economic 
circumstances.  This  lengthening  of  the  policy  horizon  helps  to  trace  out  the  likely  macroeconomic 
impact of a putative financial misalignment. 
Although  asset  prices  cannot  be  a  target  for  monetary  policy,  they  no  doubt  reveal  very  useful 
information about future risks to price stability that a central bank should take in due consideration. It is 
important  to  recognise,  however,  that  a  rise  in  asset  prices  does  not  always  signal  increased 
inflationary pressure. Whether or not this is the case very much depends on the underlying shock to 
the economy. There is thus no easy way to shortcut the signal extraction problem faced by a central 
bank  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  design  of  an  appropriate  monetary  policy  reaction  to  a  given 
movement in asset prices. Instead, a careful identification of the shocks driving the markets to best 
evaluate their implications for the risks to future price stability is needed.  
Movements  in  asset  prices  that  astray  from  their  fundamental  value,  so-called  asset-price  bubbles, 
pose specific and additional challenges for monetary policy. The first - and already very big - challenge 
is to detect in real time whether a bubble is developing. Asset prices are inherently forward looking 
and  it  is  very  difficult  to  assess  ex  ante  whether  the  expectations  underlying  an  ascending  or 
descending  trend  are  realistic  or  are  just  validating  themselves.  In  this  respect,  the  central  bank 
typically has no better knowledge about future fundamentals than the market itself.  
This does not mean that a central bank is left all by itself in the face of major asset price movements. 
For example, some simple measures for identifying overly optimistic expectations in the valuation of 
stocks seem to have been reliable indicators on quite a few occasions in the past.  
6 
 BIS Review 24/2004
Moreover,  apart  from  significant  deviations  of  asset  prices  from  past  trends  or  from  model-based 
predictions, it appears that it is also useful to look at developments in credit and monetary variables in 
order to identify bubble phenomena in real time. In this respect, we have gathered some evidence that 
growth  rates  of  money  and  credit  which  are  persistently  in  excess  of  those  needed  to  sustain 
economic growth at non-inflationary levels may, under certain circumstances, provide early information 
on  emerging  financial  imbalances.  Incidentally,  this  is  another  important  argument  for  devoting 
systematic  attention  in  our  analysis  to  the  monitoring  of  money  and  credit  developments  in  our 
monetary policy strategy. Finally, careful analysis of the balance sheets of the different sectors of the 
economy may also be able to provide early signals regarding the formation of bubble phenomena and 
financial imbalances in real time.  
But despite all this, it is clear that the difficulties involved in identifying asset-price misalignments in 
real  time  are  enormous.  Central  banks  need  to  be  very  cautious  in  forming  their  assessments  and 
keep the caveats underlying their analyses always in mind.  
And  the  challenges  faced  by  central  banks  in  the  face  of  sustained  market  movements  are  not 
exhausted  by  the  identification  problem  that  I  just  described.  Even  in  the  rare  cases  in  which  the 
central  bank  can  confidently  claim  to  be  facing  an  unusual  and  possibly  destabilising  asset  price 
movement, the design of its reaction is all but automatic.  
It is often argued that a central bank in such circumstances should carefully tighten its monetary policy 
at  an  early  stage  in  order  to  suppress  the  bubble  process  before  it  escalates  to  disproportionate 
dimensions. If a bubble exists, a somewhat tighter policy along the build-up phase - so the argument 
goes - may help to avoid that even larger imbalances may develop down the road.  
However, a bold opposite view has also found some supporters among economists. This alternative 
policy option would tend to suggest that, due to the rather long lags in the operation of monetary policy 
impulses, the central bank should consider loosening - rather than tightening - its policy in anticipation 
of the bubble collapse. This would cushion the negative effects of the expected economic downturn in 
a forward-looking manner. There is a very strong argument against this policy option because, when a 
bubble process emerges, it is then almost impossible for the central bank to predict the timing of the 
turnaround in asset prices. And if the central bank cannot be sure that the bubble will burst of its own 
accord, a loosening of policy will further strengthen the bubble process.  
But the dilemma - where not only the measure of misalignments, but also the sign of the monetary 
policy response to it is somewhat controversial - exemplifies the amplitude of the policy dilemma.  
If and when the bubble bursts, there is a dimension of strategic interaction that a prudent policymaker 
cannot  ignore.  This  offers  a  rather  strong  argument  in  favour  of  symmetry  in  the  central  bank’s 
behaviour in boom and bust periods. If a central bank were to react in an asymmetric manner, namely 
only with looser policy at times of asset price busts but not with tighter policy when asset price bubbles 
emerge,  the  central  bank  may  create  through  its  own  behaviour  a  moral  hazard  problem  among 
market  participants.  It  is  crucial  for  a  central  bank  to  avoid  this,  since  a  perception  that  it  insures 
investors against the risk of large losses could easily contribute to the formation of new bubbles in the 
future. 
All these considerations underscore how delicate is the issue of how to best communicate with the 
public  during  episodes  of  sustained  asset-price  movements.  The  principle  of  transparency  in  the 
conduct of monetary policy would demand that if the central bank’s view about the bubble enters into 
its monetary policy considerations it should make its views known to the market.  
Two central banks in comparison 
In  conclusion,  let  me  wrap  up  my  remarks  in  a  comparative  mode.  Let  me  explain  how  I  see  our 
European  monetary  policy  concept  in  comparison  with  the  US  Federal  Reserve  monetary  policy 
concept. I will not dwell on what is from time to time presented as the major difference, namely the 
legal objective assigned to the central bank. I already said that in my analysis this difference is one of 
presentation more than of substance, and should not be overdone. Instead, I would stress that I see 
two  major  similarities  and  two  significant  differences  between  the  ECB  and  the  Federal  Reserve 
concept. 
Two similarities: 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 7
First, both the ECB and the Fed are putting a strong emphasis on transparency of the decision making 
process,  on  transparency  of  the  analysis  that  is  worked  out  by  the  responsible  decision-making 
college, on explanations of the economic diagnosis to the public opinion and market participants, and 
on accountability vis-à-vis the Parliament of the Union. We both explain in real time why we took our 
decision  (I  recall,  en  passant,  that  the  ECB  organises  a  press  conference  immediately  after  the 
meeting  of  the  Governing  Council,  which  demonstrates  clearly  a  strong  will  to  be  transparent).  We 
both  go  frequently  before  the  Parliament  of  the  Union  to  explain  our  policy  and  to  respond  to  all 
questions of members of Parliament. 
Second, both the ECB and the Fed are clear on being as comprehensive as possible in their analysis. 
The  ECB  and  the  Fed  incorporate  in  their  analysis  all  possible  pertinent  information,  all  relevant 
forecasts  and  modelling  exercises,  including  private  sector  views,  whether  economic  or  monetary. 
Neither  the  Fed  nor  the  ECB  are  dependent  for  their  decisions  on  the  mechanical  result  of  an 
equation,  or  of  a  system  of  equations,  or  on  an  algorithm.  In  a  very  complex  world,  where  the 
complexity  of  reality  cannot  be  adequately  captured  by  any  single  modelling and  where  uncertainty 
- including what I referred to as ‘Knightian uncertainty’, that is a type of uncertainty without having the 
possibility  to  refer  to  a  probability  distribution  -  is  an  important  element  to  take  into  account  in  any 
decision,  we  both  trust  we  need  all  pertinent  information,  modelling  and  forecasts  and  judgement 
enlightened by the collegial wisdom and experience of a Council. 
We have also two significant differences that should also be stressed and explain why, despite our 
strong  similarities,  observers  are  very  often  underlining  that  we  are  illustrating  different  concepts  of 
monetary policy. 
First, we made public our precise quantitative definition of price stability whereas the Fed does not. 
The Fed probably has good reasons not to do it. Perhaps it implicitly refers to what the public opinion 
at large would regard as price stability in the US. I do not judge. Let me only point out the advantages 
of the ECB position. It is good for transparency: everybody knows precisely what we are aiming at. It is 
good for accountability: the public opinion can judge whether or how we are achieving our own goals 
in  comparison  with  the  yardstick  we  made  public.  It  is  good  for  medium  and  long-term  credibility: 
inflationary expectations can be more easily anchored. 
Let me also recall that the success of the transition to the Euro five years ago demanded as much 
clarity  as  possible  as  regards  our  definition  of  price  stability  in  comparison  with  previous  national 
definitions of price stability. We had promised that the new currency would be at least as good as the 
previous national currencies. This promise meant that the new currency would be at least as credible 
as the most credible of the previous national currencies. It also meant that the market interest rates 
associated  with  the  new  currency  would  be  as  low  as  the  interest  rates  associated  with  the  most 
credible currencies and the definition of price stability would not be looser. Had this not been the case, 
then markets would have demanded a risk premium to take into account the looser definition of price 
stability. And the transition could not have been organised in such a way as for the Euro to reap the 
full legacy of the lowest yield curve available. 
So it is not only for strong theoretical reasons but also due to practical considerations of an extremely 
important nature that the ECB has chosen to give a quantitative definition of price stability. 
Second difference with the US. As I tried to explain previously, we have assessed that it was useful to 
incorporate visibly in our monetary policy concept a monetary analysis complementing the economic 
analysis and permitting a cross-check of the latter from a medium to long-term perspective. 
We have seen three advantages in setting up our twofold approach. Firstly, to reflect that inflation, as 
a last resort, and in a medium to long-term basis, is a monetary phenomenon; this notion is, by the 
way,  very  widely  recognised  by  central  bankers  and  academics.  Secondly,  to  help  taking  some 
account in our monetary policy of the issue of avoiding abnormal boom-bust episodes in asset prices, 
which  could be  fed  by  abnormal  abundance  or  drying  up  of  liquidity.  And  thirdly,  perhaps  the  most 
important  reason  by  far,  to  contribute  to  better  anchoring  medium  to  long-term  inflationary 
expectations, which is important for all central banks of the world and all the more important for the 
ECB which cannot rely, for that purpose, on long-term past records. 
Also  for  this  second  difference  with  the  Fed  concept,  there  are,  in  my  eyes,  both  solid  theoretical 
reasons and practical considerations associated with the transition to the Euro. 
All taken into account, it seems to me that what is uniting us, our similarities, are more important than 
our differences. And we have solid explanations for our differences. I understand, in particular, that 
trends in money demand have not been as stable in the US as they have been in the Euro area. This 
8 
 BIS Review 24/2004
may partly explains the differences in our approach. Overall, there is no simple escape for a central 
bank from a rigorous analysis of the shocks hitting the economy and the underlying changes affecting 
the  economic  structure.  A  central  bank  can  never  simply  steer  monetary  policy  as  the  result  of  a 
calculation, the final stage of an algorithm or the functioning of a mechanism. Similarly to the Federal 
Reserve System, we believe that in the assessment of a financial and economic environment that is 
on an accelerated rapid course, the central bank needs realism and pragmatism.  
Policy decisions must be based, ultimately, on a judgement and must be clearly explained to the public 
in  a  transparent  manner.  From  its  inception  the  ECB  has  striven  to  score  highly  on  each  of  these 
dimensions and will continue to do so in face of the challenges that are waiting us ahead. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 24/2004 
 9
