Nicholas Le Pan: Implementation of Basel II - the next steps 
Remarks  by  Mr  Nicholas  Le  Pan,  Superintendent,  Office  of  the  Superintendent  of  Financial 
Institutions, Canada; Chairman of the Basel Accord Implementation Group; and Vice-Chairman of the 
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, at the Institute of International Finance, Inc: Basel Sessions 
2004, Madrid, 6 July 2004. 
 Thank you ladies and gentlemen. Let me thank the IIF for inviting me here today to give the closing 
remarks to talk about next steps in the implementation process. I know that I am the only thing that 
stands  between  you  and  a  beautiful  Spanish  evening.  When  I  thought  about  the  title  of 
“implementation and next steps”, several points came to mind. I thought first about that great story by 
the English author John Buchan, “The 39 Steps”. But of course Basel II is not really about intrigue. I 
next thought about many of those books one can buy in airports or shows on television, “10 Steps To 
A  Better  You”.  Well  of  course,  Basel  II  is  a  bit  about  that,  both  for  banks  and  supervisors.  Then  I 
thought about the steps in a recipe. However, unfortunately we all know that there is not one recipe for 
implementing Basel II - there is not one formula. Banks and supervisors have to do what is right for 
them within the framework set out in the Basel documents. I then thought about that great aphorism 
“The longest journey begins with a single step”. Are we at the beginning of the end or at the end of the 
beginning? I don’t know - but what matters is that we all have to get on with it. Lastly, I thought about 
dance  steps.  Of  course,  some  of  this  is  about  dancing,  working  together  in  a  coordinated  way  to 
produce good results. 
A year ago, the questions I got asked the most frequently were, “When will the Accord be finished?, 
Will it be finished on time?” Well, the Committee delivered the mid-year framework on the timeframe it 
promised. Now the questions I get the most are, “How is implementation going?, What are you going 
to do with implementation challenges?” I believe that Basel II can be implemented well. Not perfectly, 
but well. What I want to talk about is what it takes for high quality implementation to occur. And then, I 
want to use cross border issues as an example of those factors. 
So what does it take for Basel II to be implemented well? Within banks, it is highly important that Basel 
II not be treated as a compliance exercise. It has to become part of the management and governance 
of the bank with a greater focus on risks and how those relate to the capital the bank is holding. We 
also have to remember that Basel II is about judgement. Judgements made by banks and judgements 
made by supervisors. Despite the additional room for analytics inherent in the Basel II framework, we 
all  have  to  remember  that  banking  is  not  just  arithmetic  or  higher  mathematics,  neither  is  bank 
supervision. 
It  is  essential  that  banks  adopt  a  disciplined  approach  to  implementation  with  strong  project 
management skills and high quality efforts to identify gaps between where they now are and where 
they would like to be under Basel II, together with a realistic plan for moving to eliminate those gaps. 
Next,  communication  is  necessary  between  supervisors,  between  supervisors  and  banks,  within 
banks, and within the supervisory community. We talked about the fact that one of the things that is 
going on with supervisors is movement of the Basel II responsibility from policy development types to 
front line supervision staff. Within banks, it is also necessary to spread knowledge of techniques and 
the approach of the bank beyond the core group responsible for implementation. 
A  practical  attitude  is  essential  for  effective  implementation  of  Basel  II,  both  within  banks  and  by 
supervisors. At lunch time today, Charles Dallara referred in his remarks to the fact that one particular 
aspect of the framework was in the views of the IIF more of a pigs ear than a silk purse. Practical 
implementing people don’t worry so much about whether something is a pigs ear or a silk purse, they 
ask questions like “Can it fly? And if not, how do we make it fly?” 
I  want  to  emphasize  the  need  for  an  attitude  towards  ongoing  improvement  and  learning.  That’s 
because there is not one way to implement Basel II and because Basel II calls for improvements in 
risk management practices and in focus of supervisors. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 1
Feedback is key from banks to supervisors and supervisors to banks. Lastly, so is realism about what 
can  be  achieved  and  the  need  for  trust  and  respect  for  the  judgements  of  others.  I  am  concerned 
sometimes  about  the  degree  of  realism  I  see  within  industry  about  what  can  be  achieved.  For 
example,  I  saw  earlier  today,  presentations  that  suggested  there  ought  to  be  harmonious  and 
relatively uniform implementation of Pillar 2 across different countries and that the results for a given 
situation would be the same across different jurisdictions. That is not realistic. We all know that the 
Basel Capital requirements today are minimum requirements and that it is up to each jurisdiction to 
choose to require capital levels higher than what is mandated by those minimums, with hopefully full 
knowledge  as  to  the  possible  impact  of  those  choices.  As  well,  in  those  circumstances,  I  would 
anticipate that banks in that jurisdiction would take the responsibility to make sure that the supervisory 
and regulatory authorities were aware of the implications of those choices. All that is well and good, 
but to require and suggest that effective implementation of Basel II requires that degree of uniformity 
across jurisdictions is unrealistic. 
Again, I have seen circumstances recently when industry groups or certain individual institutions have 
called  for  a  resolution  to  the  home/host  issue  by  suggesting  that  banks  ought  to  deal  almost 
exclusively  with  their  home  jurisdiction.  At  the  same  time,  within  those  organizations,  local 
management and important local markets had virtually no knowledge of the implementation approach 
to  be  adopted  by  the  bank.  Imagine  the  situation  of  a  host  supervisor  who  communicates  with  the 
bank’s local management and is unable to get even the most rudimentary sense of what the bank’s 
approach  to  Basel  II  implementation  will  likely  be.  It  would  be  natural  in  human  nature  for  that 
supervisor to then start approaching the bank’s head office to try to understand what the bank’s plans 
were. Multiple requests of that nature would clearly be an implementation problem and would not lead 
to cost effective implementation. But, banks that neglect to deal with host jurisdictions adequately, are 
part of the problem. 
Let me say that I also believe that cost effective implementation is in the interest of not only banks but 
of supervisors. Supervisors don’t have unlimited resources either. And so, in many ways supervisors 
and banks have similar incentives to try to find ways to economize on the use of resources in order to 
do an effective job. 
Now  let’s  talk  about  the  home/host  issue  and  how  some  of  these  principles  annunicated  apply.  I 
believe  the  home/host  issue  is  one  of  the  most  important  to  effective  implementation  of  the  new 
Accord, and it is amongst the highest priority of issues the AIG is considering. You have heard this 
morning from my colleague of the FSA about the concept of real case studies. In a way, that is an 
oxymoron - how can you have a real case study? But, what I think is important to realize is that these 
real  case  studies  are  the  precursors,  and  can  transition  easily,  into  the  kind  of  practical  enhanced 
arrangements  and  supervisory  plans  between  home  and  host  jurisdictions  that  are  crucial  to  the 
effective implementation of the Accord. We have some 15 of these started and we need to broaden 
and deepen the number. They cover both credit risk and operational risk, though, I believe the number 
of operation risk case studies needs to increase. Many involve non-G10 countries in Asia, Europe and 
Latin America. 
And what drives the need for enhanced cooperation and coordination? We have to realize that it’s not 
only  the  case  that  banks  risk  management  operations  are  increasingly  being  managed  centrally. 
Banks operate in a variety of different modes. For some portfolios there is an increasing degree to 
which the analytics and judgements are made centrally. For other portfolios local information and local 
inputs into modelling and analytics are hugely important. So it’s not just the case that host countries 
need to think about how they can better rely on home jurisdictions. In many cases, home countries 
have  the  need  to  be  able  to  get  more  information  from  host  countries  about  the  relevance  of  the 
banks’ models and analytics associated with that host country’s market. 
We started these case studies because I believe that trust is not built solely by talking about it, but by 
doing. My job and the job of the AIG is to push these kinds of studies to happen, to draw out and 
share  some  of  the  lessons  learned,  to  draw  out  some  of  the  countries  outside  of  the  AIG  that  are 
conducting these kinds of exercises, and to provide feedback to banks and from banks to supervisors. 
Let me give you an example of some of the earlier lessons learned. These case studies are built on 
the concept that a relatively small group of supervisors, the home and significant hosts, should first 
start to try to work out and react to a bank’s plans, about how they can better coordinate their efforts. 
Well, the moment the other 30 supervisors involved with the bank heard about this, they wanted to 
know what was going on, when would they be part of this? And in some cases they hadn’t been told - 
a very simple lesson in communication. Similarly we learned quite early on in some of these cases that 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2004
bank’s  plans  were  not  well  developed  enough  for  supervisors  to  determine  how  best  to  coordinate 
their actions. 
My own conclusions of the progress to date draw out two essential points. Host jurisdictions need to 
think more than they have to date of what information that they would need in order to be able to rely 
more on calculations, analytics and so forth developed outside of their jurisdiction. Home jurisdictions 
on the other hand, need to think more about effective ways to communicate the work that they will 
have done and the results of that work in assessing the use of these centrally driven risk management 
techniques so that hosts have a basis on which to rely. In no case should these enhanced home/host 
relationships follow a specific formula. I am aware of all kinds of forms of cooperation ranging from 
simple  sharing  of  information  to  joint  participations  in  examinations.  And  in  no  cases  should  these 
enhanced  communications  and  co-operations  lead  to  changes  in  the  jurisdiction  or  the  mandate  of 
home or host supervisors. 
I think these real case studies by themselves will enhance communication between supervisors and 
the banks they regulate, will promote realism and practicality in implementation of the Accord and will 
build trust that is essential to effective implementation. I want to emphasize that banks have a key role 
in  making  this  home  host  cooperation  and  coordination  work.  It  is  impossible  for  supervisors  to 
develop approaches to enhance communication and cooperation if they do not have reasonably well 
worked out bank implementation plans to react to. 
Let me close by talking for a few moments about some of the other areas that the AIG will be focusing 
on.  We  have  created  a  group  to  look at  Validation  issues,  to  go through  validation  issues piece  by 
piece, to take account of industry views and to produce a kind of cookbook of approaches to validation 
that can be used by supervisors. 
We have also recently created together with the Capital Task Force, which has been the main body 
that  has  produced  the  Accord  itself,  a  joint  group  to  consider  the  issue  of  downturn  LGDs  and  the 
related issues of stress testing under Pillar 2 of the Accord. I anticipate that this group will produce 
some  guidance  on  implementation  of  the  Accord  and  will  also  interact  extensively  with  industry  on 
current practices and how those practices might evolve. 
The  AIG  will  be  delving  more  into  the  Op  Risk  area  focussing  on  the  AMA  approaches  and 
implementation challenges there. We will be involving and have involved non-G10 countries in both 
the validation and the AMA work. 
The AIG already completed earlier this year, a survey of preliminary intentions of national discretion 
items amongst Basel Committee countries. A number of non-G10 countries also chose to indicate their 
intentions and as a result, were provided information on G-10 countries intentions at that stage. The 
Committee has agreed in principle to publish this information later this year once it has been updated. 
We spent a fair amount of time on Pillar 2 in the AIG and will likely get back to that both during the 
course of this year and early next year. Our focus during the course of this year is likely to be on the 
more specific elements of Pillar 2, such as how to assess concentration risk. 
Overall I believe that these efforts can be highly successful through the sharing of information to both 
help in the development of thinking in the supervisory community, to help promote better cooperation 
and  coordination  and  to  spread  learning  both  between  supervisors  and  between  banks  and 
supervisors. We have to remember that there is no one step recipe book for implementation of the 
Accord  -  no  magic  39  steps.  On  the  other  hand,  with  goodwill,  good  feedback  and  ongoing 
communication, Basel II can be implemented well. I look forward to that result. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 42/2004 
 3
