Guy Quaden: Challenges for the European economy  
Speech  by  Mr  Guy  Quaden,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Belgium,  at  the  Foreign  Bankers’ 
Association in the Netherlands, Amsterdam, 27 May 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, Members of the Foreign Bankers’ Association in the Netherlands,  
I am very pleased and indeed I think it is a great honour for me to have been asked to be the keynote 
speaker at the 2004 Annual General Meeting of your Association. 
As  you  have  noticed  I  have  decided  to  talk  about  “Challenges  for  the  European  Economy”  but  of 
course I fully realize that I myself am facing a great challenge this evening, as I am aware that I am 
following  in  the  footsteps  of  a  large  number  of  distinguished  speakers  you  have  invited  for  your 
previous  lectures.  I  would  only  like  to  refer  to  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  Otmar  Issing,  Eddy  George  or 
David Dodge, colleagues or former colleagues within the Eurosystem or the G10 Governors’ Group. I 
hope my presentation will be as interesting as that of my colleagues I have the greatest admiration for. 
The  European  economy  is  facing  many  challenges:  consolidating  the  current  recovery,  redressing 
public finances which have deteriorated in many countries, reducing unemployment which is still too 
high and preserving the social cohesion, preparing for the ageing process and in particular its financial 
consequences, but I think one of them is now the most important: improving Europe’s growth potential. 
Its realisation is a prerequisite for meeting the other challenges mentioned. 
From the outset I want to make it absolutely clear that I am neither a eurosceptic nor a europessimist. 
So, I fully acknowledge and admire the resounding success European integration has achieved in two 
fields over the past few years. 
As a central banker I would of course first like to refer to the introduction of the euro which, as you all 
know, was brought about in two stages. On 1 January 1999 financial markets started using the euro 
while  the  single  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  was  implemented.  Three  years  later  the 
introduction  of  euro  notes  and  coins  led  to  the  general  use  of  the  single  currency  by  all  economic 
agents, thereby doing away with national currencies. 
This changeover to the single currency was the final touch of European monetary integration and had 
a profound effect on the deepening of the single market through the elimination of the exchange risk, 
the  reduction  in  transaction  costs  and  the  increase  in  price  transparency.  This  improvement  of  the 
single  market  will  enhance  the  overall  efficiency  of  the  European  economy  and,  other  things  being 
equal, also its growth performance. 
However,  it  is  doubtful  whether  the  population  of  our  countries  correctly  perceived  the  latter 
advantage.  Indeed,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  unfortunately  coincided  with  a  severe  slump  in 
economic activity: while in 2000 real GDP growth in the euro area reached 3.5 p.c. it declined during 
the following years to reach a mere 0.4 p.c. in 2003. 
Earlier this month European integration achieved another major success. 
Ten new member states joined the European Union, which now makes European reunification almost 
complete.  However,  this  historic  event  occurred  immediately  after  a  period  of  sluggish  economic 
growth which left the European economy somewhat weakened. Therefore, the enlargement, instead of 
generating  enthusiasm,  has  in  many  instances  given  rise  to  misgivings  among  the  population  and 
even  among  the  enterprises.  The  concern  regards  the  possible  delocalisation  of  enterprises  and 
significant job losses. 
At microeconomic and sectoral level, the integration of the ten new Member States will undoubtedly 
entail some adjustments and shifts but overall it should result in a win-win situation. The past decade 
has already brought a strong expansion of trading links between the old and new EU Member States. 
As  purchasing  power  in  those  countries  catches  up  and  their  markets  become  more  accessible, 
European  firms  are  set  to  expand  their  potential  outlets  while  the  continuing  dismantling  of  trade 
barriers and harmonisation of the regulatory framework will gradually create a level playing field. The 
expansion  of  trade  leading  to  increasing  specialisation,  and  hence  greater  productivity,  as  well  as 
consumers  having  a  wider  choice  will  produce  benefits  that  are  much  larger  than  the  costs  of 
integration. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 1
These  two  recent  major  events  show  that  insufficient  growth  is  a  real  cause  for  concern  for  the 
population  in  our  countries  which  feels  insecure  about  their  employment.  This  factor  obscures  the 
achievements  European  integration  has  reached  and  so  prevents  people  from  believing  in  the 
dynamism  of  European  unification.  Therefore  weak  growth  could  be  a  factor  entailing  growing 
euroscepticism, especially in Western Europe. 
For the coming months a reasonable optimism is justified. While the latest positive signals need to be 
confirmed by future developments, they underpin the expectation that the gradual recovery in the euro 
area will continue and will strengthen over time. The conditions are in place. 
First, the global economic upturn continues to be robust and broadly based, both geographically and 
across  sectors,  and  world  trade  has  also  strengthened.  In  this  context  of  a  favourable  external 
environment, euro area exports are expected to grow significantly this year and the next. 
Second, favourable financing conditions, improvements in corporate efficiency and earnings and the 
strength of global demand help investment. Over time, consumer spending should also be supported 
by growth in real disposable income and better labour market conditions. 
The latest data point to a stronger than expected recovery of real economic activity in the euro area at 
the  beginning  of  2004.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  real  GDP  increased  by 
0.6 p.c. quarter on quarter in the first quarter of 2004, after rising by 0.4 p.c. in the fourth quarter of 
2003 (revised upwards from 0.3 p.c.). 
Concerning the prospects, the slight decline in May in the two business confidence indexes which are 
the most closely watched in the euro area - the German IFO and the National Bank of Belgium index - 
does not question the strong improvement recorded since the end of last year. 
Obviously  the  consolidation  of  the  recovery  is,  as  often,  subject  to  some  risks  and  uncertainties. 
Consumer confidence is still relatively weak in many countries and the strong rise of oil prices is of 
course not good news for the European economy. There is no free lunch. The strong growth in the 
United States and Asia has sustained economic activity in the rest of the world, but has also caused a 
rise in commodity prices. As regards oil, it is clear geopolitical uncertainties also contribute to rising 
prices.  However  one  should  not  overdramatise  either.The  solidity  of  the  euro  exchange  rate  has 
limited rising oilbills for us. Moreover, owing to energy saving measures and the use of other types of 
fuel the relative weight of oil in the production of goods and services has declined markedly over the 
past thirty years. 
On an annual basis, the latest public and private sector forecasts point to growth in the euro area of 
1.6 p.c. to 1.7 p.c. in 2004 and more than 2 p.c. next year. This is however not a reason to be satisfied 
and complacent. In the EU or in the eurozone we speak of a recovery when growth is approaching 
2 p.c. while in the US they speak of a recession when growth is falling to 2 p.c. ! And, on the other 
hand, while most of the rest of the world is already enjoying robust growth, the recovery in Europe 
remains gradual and overly dependent on booming international trade. 
What is also needed are efforts to make the European economy more resistant to external shocks as 
those which have reduced its growth in the latest years and to increase its long term growth potential. 
Europe has to cope with a structural problem of low economic growth. The growth performance of the 
euro area is weak from an international point of view, in particular vis-à-vis the United States: over the 
past 10 years the American economy has shown an average GDP growth of 3.3 p.c., while the euro 
area  could  only  reach  an  economic  growth  of  2  p.c.  The  euro  area  only  succeeded  in  achieving  a 
higher  growth  rate  in  2001  when  the  United  States  were  hit  by  a  severe  but  short  slowdown.  The 
following years the American economy however showed a much stronger recovery than the euro area 
and now again acts as the main growth engine for the world economy. 
Yet  it  is  important  to  note  that  data  for  the  eurozone  are  averages  for  twelve  countries  and  that  a 
country like Finland in the euro area (and more generally the Nordic countries) has booked in the most 
recent  decade  performances  in  the  field  of  growth  and  employment  rates  which  are  comparable  to 
those of the US and are much better than those of countries like Germany and Italy. 
Given an unequal population growth - it is higher in the US - a further analysis shows that the gap in 
real GDP growth between the US and the euro area that opened up in the mid-1990s is half the size if 
measured in per capita terms. The remainder is due to differences in productivity growth (the increase 
in  overall  labour  productivity  in  the  US,  measured  by  real  GDP  per  person  employed,  reached  on 
average 1.9 p.c. in the last 10 years, almost twice as much as the 1 p.c. recorded in the euro area) 
and to a much lower level of labour utilisation in the euro area. In the euro area unemployment rates 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2004
are  currently  around  3  percentage  points  higher,  labour  force  participation  rates  more  than 
10 percentage  points  lower  and  annual  hours  worked  per  employed  person  lower  by  more  than 
300 hours. 
Europe is of course not the US. It has its own specificities which should be taken into account. So at 
least part of the gap in average hours worked between the US and the euro area should be attributed 
to structural preferences rather than to structural rigidites. 
However, when discussing this issue it has to be borne in mind that households also take into account 
the institutional environment, including tax, social security and pension systems when deciding on their 
labour supply. 
Moreover, the problem to what extent the present European system is sustainable cannot be ignored. 
The  so-called  European  model  has  come  under  increasing  pressure  from  demographic  factors. 
Further policy changes towards stimulating labour supply are inevitable if living standards and social 
cohesion are to be preserved. 
Unlike social preferences and rigidities, macroeconomic policies m ust not be seen as an explanation 
of the weaker growth in the euro area. 
First of all this holds true for monetary policy. As you know, the Treaty of Maastricht unambiguously 
provides  that  maintaining  price  stability  constitutes  the  primary  objective  of  the  European  Central 
Bank. 
According to the definition of the ECB which was clarified about a year ago and which aims to create a 
stable anchor for price expectations, price stability implies an annual rise in the harmonised index of 
consumer price for the euro area below but close to 2 p.c. This objective must be maintained in the 
medium term. Central bankers can not prevent external shocks, such as a rise of commodity prices on 
the  international  markets,  from  resulting  in  a  temporary  rise  of  inflation.  But,  they  have  to  preclude 
second-round effects. 
In its conduct of monetary policy, the ECB has already gained a high degree of credibility with market 
participants as is shown by moderate inflation expectations. These expectations remaining in line with 
its target the ECB was able to cut its key interest rate to historically very low levels (2 p.c. in nominal 
terms  and  actually  zero  in  real  terms).  Monetary  policy  thus  made  its  own  contribution  towards 
stabilising economic activity in the euro area. 
Ensuring  price  stability,  as  well  as  confidence  in  the  euro,  is  the  best  contribution  to  higher  and 
sustainable growth the ECB can make because it also allows for the advantage of low medium and 
long term market rates which in many European countries are still more important for the financing of 
investments by enterprises, households and government. 
In the fiscal sphere, almost all the governments in the euro zone allowed the automatic stabilisers to 
take  full  effect  during  the  recent  slowdown,  and  that  effect  was  often  reinforced  by  discretionary 
measures. Between 2000 and 2003, the budgetary deficit of general government in the euro area has 
grown  from  0.9 p.c.  of  GDP  to  2.7 p.c.  The  deficits  of  some  countries  have  even  exceeded  the 
threshold of 3 p.c. 
Fiscal policy has thus not been an impediment to recovery. One might however wonder whether the 
stimulation  of  the  economy  intended  by  the  fiscal  easing  in  many  countries  was  not  eroded  by  the 
adverse impact which such a relaxation of discipline can have on the climate of confidence. 
It seems that people in Europe more and more have a “Ricardian perception” of fiscal deficits. They 
are  more  aware  of  the  enormous  challenges  and  costs  our  ageing  society  entails.  People  in  the 
different  European  countries are  really worried  about  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public  finances. 
High  fiscal  deficits  will  only  worsen  their  anxiety  and  so  incite  them  to  increase  their  precautionary 
savings. 
In this context, the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact are appropriate. It is not correct to describe it 
as  a  fiscal  straitjacket.  Starting  from  a  budget  in  balance  or  in  surplus  at  the  peak  of  the  cycle,  a 
country  can  let  the  automatic  stabilisers  fully  operate  when  the  activity  is  slowing  down.  The  main 
problem with the Pact is, I think, that better incentives are needed to respect fiscal discipline during 
good economic times. 
So I hope that the forthcoming recovery will be the right moment for the European governments now 
facing budgetary difficulties, to put their finances again on the right track, so that in that field it will be 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 3
possible to reconcile short time flexibility with long term sustainability. In that case fiscal policy may 
again become an element of the required lasting macroeconomic stability. 
It is by paying more attention to the quality of public finances and by rendering the structure of taxes 
and that of expenses more growth oriented that Governments can contribute to stimulating Europe’s 
growth potential. I refer to expenditures such as education and improvement of human capital, public 
investment  in  infrastructure  and  research  and  development.  R  &  D  could  become  a  comparative 
advantage of Europe. At the moment Europe invests 1.9 p.c. of GDP in R & D and is thus lagging 
behind the US figures and the Lisbon target (3 p.c.). 
Over the past years, European policymakers have become more aware of this growth problem Europe 
is facing. So, in March 2000, during the Lisbon summit, an ambitious strategy was adopted aiming to 
increase  the  rate  of  sustainable  economic  growth  and  even  to  enable  Europe  to  become  the  most 
competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world in 2010. 
In order to achieve such a strategic goal the Lisbon agenda has brought together the different strands 
of  reform  policies  on  product,  labour  and  capital  markets  aiming  at  promoting  a  more  efficient 
allocation  of  resources  and  at  higher  growth  potential.  Moreover,  in  order  to  facilitate  monitoring  of 
progress with reforms, quantitative targets have been fixed to measure progress in particular on the 
labour market in achieving for instance higher participation and employment rates. 
The Lisbon agenda was excellent in terms of diagnosis. Until now it has however not been given a 
sufficiently powerful implementation. 
One cannot say that there was no progress in the last years in the field of structural reforms, but much 
remains to be done. The pace of reform needs to be significantly stepped up if the Lisbon targets are 
to be achieved. The review carried out by the high level group chaired by former Prime Minister Wim 
Kok provides an excellent opportunity to accelerate the process. 
Progress has been most tangible in deregulating and integrating product and financial markets. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  pace  of  financial  markets’  reform  has  been  impressive.  This 
includes policy-induced reform, such as the Financial Services Action Plan initiated by the European 
Commission  in  the  spring  of  1999.  Reform  also  covers  market-led  initiatives,  as  for  instance  the 
development of electronic trading platforms. As you know, the different financial markets have reached 
different levels of integration. So integration in euro money markets was achieved very quickly after 
the introduction of the new currency while for instance the euro area equity market, despite advances 
such as the setting up of Euronext, remains among the least integrated. Thus there is still need for 
continuation and completion. New progress should result from the cohesive and effective interplay of 
free  competition,  coordinated  action  by  all  market  participants  and  policy  enforcement  by  public 
authorities. 
Much  progress  has  also  been  made  regarding  the  integration  and  level  of  competition  in 
productmarkets.  However  substantial  barriers  to  free  competition  continue  to  exist,  particularly 
preventing  the  integration  of  services’  markets  and  effective  competition  in  network  industries. 
Fostering competition in these fields should also contribute to a downward effect on prices. Further 
regulatory  reforms  should  be  accompanied  by  a  sustained  reduction  in  state  aid  -  particularly  if  it 
constitutes economically questionable and sector-specific measures. In the end, this will promote the 
entry of new players, enhance innovation and reduce the tax burden. 
High  unemployment  and  insufficient  employment  rates  are  still  preoccupying.  The  labour  market 
participation  rates  of  women  and  the  youngest  and  oldest  age  groups  remain  too  weak  in  many 
countries. Thus far, progress with the implementation of labour market reforms has been uneven in the 
euro area. In some countries, significant achievements in terms of lower unemployment are already 
visible. Others are lagging behind. It is important to enhance the flexibility of labour markets to make 
the whole European economy better able to absorb economic shocks. Reforms are also needed not 
only to reduce non-wage labour costs and increase incentives for job creation but also to ensure the 
sustainability of the social security systems. 
The  challenges  are  known  and  the  analyses  are  completed.  Now  the  implementation  should  be 
focused  on.  As  I  have  said  at  the  beginning  of  my  speech,  I  am  neither  a  eurosceptic  nor  a 
europessimist. So I believe Europe can implement the Lisbon agenda. The introduction of the euro 
was  a  splendid  example  of  a  not  easy  but  successful  structural  reform.  It  can  be  and  it  should  be 
followed by others. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2004
The  framework  through  which  the  Lisbon  agenda  is  implemented  relies  largely  on  a  peer  pressure 
mechanism, mainly depending on goodwill of governments in individual EU countries. The pressure 
must  be  reinforced,  including  by  clearly  identifying  and  publicising  successful  and  lagging  country 
cases accross the EU and possibly industrialised countries more generally. 
Communication  must  also  be  improved.  The  transition  from  the  pre-reform  to  the  post-reform 
equilibrium  conditions  normally  takes  time  and  we  must  recognise  that  within  this  period  some 
uncertainty  may  occur.  For  this  reason  the  implementation  of  social  reforms  requires  a  strong 
leadership  and  a  continuous  explanation  effort.  We  have  to  convince  our  public  opinion  that  our 
countries would be better off - with more growth and more jobs - if we could deliver the reforms of the 
Lisbon agenda. 
I shall conclude with a last remark: the current recovery of economic activity, as welcome as it is, must 
surely not constitute a pretext for postponing a program of reforms, as its implementation is essential 
to achieve stronger and more sustainable growth in the long term. 
BIS Review 34/2004 
 5
