Toshihiko Fukui: Achieving sustainable economic growth and overcoming 
deflation 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Yomiuri 
International Economic Society, Tokyo, 13 May 2004. 
 Japan’s economy has now entered its third recovery phase since the bursting of the bubble, and this 
time it is of utmost importance to make the recovery lead to sustainable economic growth and put an 
end to deflation. With this in mind, I will talk about the current situation and the outlook for Japan’s 
economy as well as the conduct of monetary policy.  
New features of the world economy  
The interrelationships among various economies worldwide have become ever more pronounced as 
globalization and the IT revolution have progressed. Recently, the Chinese economy has been playing 
a  larger  role,  contributing  to  higher  world  economic  growth.  Against  this  background,  new  features 
have been emerging in the world economy.  
One feature is that, compared with the past, recovery in employment and household income tends to 
lag  significantly  behind  the  recovery  in  economic  growth.  Intensified  global  competition  has  been 
forcing firms to continue reducing the size of their labor forces even when the economy is recovering. 
Higher productivity due to the widespread IT revolution has been dampening firms’ demand for labor. 
The abundant supply of less expensive workers in China and India has been encouraging outsourcing 
by firms in industrialized countries.  
Another  feature  is  related  to  the  mechanism  of  price  formation.  There  has  been  an  increasing 
tendency for retail and consumer prices to remain basically unaffected by the surge in crude oil prices, 
international  commodity  prices,  and  shipping  charges  that  has  taken  place  in  line  with  the  steady 
recovery  of  the  world  economy.  This  is  because  the  increases  in  raw  material  prices  and  shipping 
charges have been able to be absorbed mainly by reductions in wages, which seem at last to have 
almost run their course, and higher productivity. Hence, these increases have not been passed on into 
prices of finished goods.  
These new world economic features have a direct bearing on the Japanese economy, and should thus 
be borne in mind when seeking to achieve the sustainable recovery and overcome deflation in Japan.  
World economic recovery and Japan’s economy  
Let  me  briefly  comment  on  the  recent  recovery  in  the  world  economy  before  turning  to  the  current 
situation and the outlook for Japan’s economy. The world economy has been recovering at a steadier 
pace than expected. The growth rate increased to around 3.9 percent in 2003, and is most likely to 
increase further to around 4.5 percent in 2004.  
In particular, the rapid growth of the Chinese economy has been conspicuous. It was over 9 percent in 
2003, despite the adverse effect of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS). In fact, the Chinese 
economy  has  been  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  8  to  9  percent  as  if  it  were  hardly  susceptible  to 
economic fluctuations. Recently, whether the economy will smoothly adjust to a more moderate and 
sustainable growth path is becoming a focus of attention.  
The current recovery, driven by expansion in the world economy, particularly the Chinese economy, 
seems to differ from the past in that Japan’s economy is not just exporting its way out. As I remarked 
at  the  beginning,  the  interrelationships  among  various  economies  have  become  pronounced.  It  is 
worth  noting  that  substantial  progress  has  been  made  in  the  international  division  of  production 
processes,  particularly  for  IT-related  goods  in  which  the  division  of  labor  and  concentration  of 
production tend to work most effectively.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 1
IT-related investment has been pursued actively all over the world, led by the United States. Against 
this  background,  the  process  of  manufacturing  finished  goods  has  been  increasingly  carried  out 
across a number of countries to take advantage of differences in the degree of technological progress, 
the make-up of the labor force, the condition of infrastructure, and the efficiency of public services.  
Interrelationships  among  economies  have  also  been  strengthened  through  integrating  production 
processes  across  borders.  For  example,  the  production  of  semiconductor  fabrication  machines  and 
equipment  as  well  as  high-value-added  parts  for  digital  home  appliances  has  been rising  in  Japan. 
These parts as well as machines and equipment have been shipped to the East Asian countries for 
processing  and  assembly,  which  have  also  been  on  the  rise  recently.  Finally,  finished  goods  have 
been exported, for example, back to Japan.  
Thus, in the trade between Japan and other East Asian economies, both exports and imports have 
been increasing substantially. The recovery in the Japanese economy should be understood as taking 
place in tandem with the strengthening of its interdependence with the world economy, and particularly 
with other East Asian economies.  
Current situation and outlook for the economy  
Japan’s economy has entered a recovery phase since around the summer of 2003. During 2004, the 
recovery has gradually been spreading from manufacturing to nonmanufacturing firms, from large to 
small firms, and from urban to regional economies. The decline in employment and household income 
is finally coming to an end, and Japan’s economy is expected to continue recovering.  
At the end of April, the Bank released the economic outlook for fiscal 2004 in its Outlook for Economic 
Activity and Prices. In the Outlook, the majority of Policy Board members forecast real GDP growth for 
fiscal  2004  in  the  range  of  3  to  3.2  percent.  If  this  forecast  is  achieved,  the  economy  will  have 
maintained year-on-year growth of about 3 percent in both fiscal 2003 and 2004. Although this does 
not measure up to the growth rate of the United States, it is well above that of the European Union 
(EU).  
Japan’s  economy  is  likely  to  continue  recovering,  gradually  gaining  momentum.  Exports  and 
production  are  expected  to  increase  as  overseas  economies  continue  to  record  high  growth. 
Corporate  profits  are  likely  to  continue  increasing  reflecting  firms’  success  in  reducing  costs  and 
strengthening  their  financial  conditions.  Higher  profits  are  likely  to  continue  raising  business  fixed 
investment,  particularly  among  manufacturers.  A  recovery  in  household  consumption  will  become 
probable,  as  the  positive  effects  of  the  rise  in  production  and  profitability  are  expected  to  spread 
gradually to the household sector via improvements in the employment and income situation as well 
as in asset prices.  
Regarding the year-on-year change in the consumer price index (CPI), the forecasts of the majority of 
Policy  Board  members  are  projected  to  remain  negative,  in  the  range  of  minus  0.1  to  minus 
0.2 percent in fiscal 2004.  
The output gap in the economy as a whole, which affects the underlying price trend, is expected to 
narrow, reflecting the economic recovery. The extent of the narrowing, however, is hard to estimate 
because  firms  tend  to  start  new  investment  related  to  technological  innovation  before  capacity 
utilization becomes too high.  
Although the rise in commodity prices at home and abroad has started to influence the prices of raw 
materials  and  intermediate  goods,  its  impact  on  the  prices  of  finished  goods  is  likely  to  be  rather 
limited.  Upward  pressures  on  the  prices  of  finished  goods  are  expected  to  be  offset  mostly  by  the 
increased productivity in the corporate sector, which is one of the new features of the world economy.  
Furthermore,  temporary  factors  that  have  been  pushing  up  prices,  such  as  the  increases  in  both 
medical costs and rice prices, and have contributed to a slowdown in the rate of decline in consumer 
prices, will start to fade.  
Structural problems in the private sector  
As described earlier, the current Japanese economy reflects the new features of the world economy. 
In  addition,  structural  problems,  such  as  firms’  excessive  capital  stock,  debt,  and  labor,  as  well  as 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2004
financial  system  problems  have  hindered  Japan’s  economic  recovery  over  the  past  decade  or  so. 
These problems still continue to weigh on the economy to some extent.  
A feature common to all of the recovery phases since the bursting of the bubble is that the recovery 
was  seen  mostly  among  large  manufacturers,  and  did  not  spread  much  to  other  firms  or  to 
households.  This  was  because,  when  compared  with  large  manufacturers,  nonmanufacturing  firms 
and small firms suffered more severely from excessive capital stock, debt, and labor, and they could 
not  adopt  aggressive  strategies.  Furthermore,  adjustment  in  employment  and  wages  undoubtedly 
delayed the recovery in household consumption.  
The  excessive  debt  problem  of  firms  is  none  other  than  the  nonperforming  loan  (NPL)  problem  of 
banks. The NPL problem triggered a vicious cycle, causing a decline in the risk-taking ability of banks, 
and in turn hampering the recovery of firms whose funding is highly dependent on bank loans.  
It  seems  that  the  intertwined  structural  problems  that  have  been  such  a  burden  on  the  Japanese 
economy are at last gradually being resolved, as the past efforts of firms and banks bear fruit. This has 
been  evidenced  by  the  recent  recovery  in  corporate  profits  and  the  abatement  of  concerns  over 
financial system stability.  
Many  point  to  sustainable  growth  of  the  world  economy  as  the  prerequisite  for  Japan’s  continued 
recovery.  However,  in  my  view,  the  more  important  prerequisite  is  that  firms  and  banks  accelerate 
their efforts to resolve structural problems.  
Let me elaborate on this issue.  
Efforts by the corporate sector  
In contrast with the period of rapid economic growth, an increasing number of firms are placing more 
emphasis  on  future  cash  flow  than  sales  in  assessing  their  business  performance,  and  they  have 
started taking on new business opportunities geared toward raising value added.  
Firms have become extremely conscious of their financial soundness after experiencing the bursting of 
the bubble and concerns over financial system stability. They have been accelerating their adjustment 
of  excessive  capital  stock  and  labor,  as  well  as  raising  their  capital  adequacy  ratios  by  reducing 
interest-bearing  debts.  These  developments  are  particularly  evident  among  manufacturers  who 
continue to reduce debts even though their interest-bearing debts have already declined to the levels 
seen  before  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  Such  developments  seem  likely  to  spread  gradually  to 
nonmanufacturing firms and small firms.  
In  the  Bank’s  most  recent  March  Tankan  (Short-Term  Economic  Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan), 
profits improved in a wide range of industries, not only among large manufacturers but also among 
nonmanufacturing firms and small firms. In fact, corporate profits have been increasing significantly in 
spite  of  relatively  small  increases  in  sales.  This  indicates  not  only  the  cyclical  strengthening  of  the 
economy but also the strengthening of the corporate structure accompanying progress in dealing with 
structural problems.  
Problems in the financial system  
Although  there  are  still  more  than  a  few  problems  left  for  banks  to  deal  with,  they  have  made 
substantial progress in dealing with NPL problems over the past year or so. Major banks have made 
considerable  progress  in  disposing  of  NPLs,  although  the  pace  of  disposal  has  varied  across 
individual institutions. Combined with the rise in stock prices, their capital adequacy ratios recovered, 
on  average,  to  around  11  percent  at  the  end  of  September  2003.  Regional  banks  have  also  made 
progress in reducing NPLs, but the pace of disposal has been slower than at major banks.  
Under  such  circumstances,  banks’  lending  attitude  seems  to  be  gradually  becoming  more 
accommodative. The lending attitude as perceived by firms in the Tankan has improved moderately. In 
the most recent March survey, the number of firms that responded that banks’ lending attitude was 
“accommodative” exceeded those that responded “severe.”  
The Bank intends to encourage these favorable developments. Japanese banks need to realize that 
they will no longer be able to satisfy the diverse needs of their customers simply by increasing the 
supply of conventional bank loans. As a matter of fact, it is encouraging that a considerable number of 
BIS Review 28/2004 
 3
banks  have  already  launched  initiatives  toward  introducing  new  methods  of  credit  extension, 
expanding  existing  channels  for  credit  extension,  managing  their  credit  portfolios  proactively,  and 
developing more sophisticated risk management systems. The Bank will back their efforts to establish 
new business models, as stated in its “On-Site Examination Policy for Fiscal 2004.”  
The full removal of blanket deposit insurance in April 2005 will be an important challenge for banks, as 
it will put their true financial strength to the test. The Bank hopes that efforts such as those I have 
described will enable many banks to regain market confidence and allow them to meet this challenge 
on their own.  
The situation in the household sector  
Finally, let me turn to the household sector. Consumers have been rather restrained in their spending 
as they have experienced prolonged economic stagnation and the frequent emergence of concerns 
over financial system stability.  
Recently,  however,  there  have  been  signs  that  consumers’  attitude  has  become  somewhat  less 
restrained.  For  example,  the  growth  rate  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  banknotes  in  circulation  has 
been slowing recently. In the past, the growth in banknotes surged when major financial institutions 
failed in 1997 and 1998 or when blanket deposit insurance was partially removed in April 2002. This 
was mainly because people who felt concern over the soundness of banks increased their cash on 
hand.  The  recent  decline  in  the  growth  rate  of  banknotes  suggests  that  these  concerns  have  been 
abating.  
Household consumption has been rather firm recently despite the sluggishness in household income. 
This may indicate that the economic recovery has improved consumer sentiment.  
There  seem  to  have  been  changes  in  consumers’  attitude  and  in  household  consumption.  In  this 
regard,  we  need  to  watch  carefully  whether  the  emerging  pattern  of  household  consumption  differs 
somewhat  from  that  previously  observed  in  Japan.  Thus  far,  the  basic  view  of  the  Bank  is  that 
household  consumption  recovers  on  a sustainable  basis  when  backed  by  rising  household  income, 
and  it  is  this  virtuous  cycle  of  income  and  spending  that  we  would  like  to  see  firmly  established. 
However, in the United States, household consumption frequently increased ahead of improvement in 
the economy as a whole. Something similar seems to be occurring in Japan, with the introduction of 
state-of-the-art  technology  products,  such  as  flat-panel  TVs,  DVD  recorders,  and  digital  cameras; 
consumption has been stimulated in spite of the lack of a marked increase in household income.  
Let me also mention the types of savings by the household sector. Since “safety first” has been the 
traditional savings habit of Japanese households, an excessive proportion of their savings is held in 
the form of safe assets, such as bank deposits.  
For  the  truly  dynamic  development  of  the  economy,  however,  it  is  crucial  that  diverse  channels  of 
credit  provision,  particularly  financial  intermediation  through  markets,  should  be  fostered.  Financial 
institutions  have  already been striving  to  develop  new  business models  geared  toward  this  end,  as 
well as to improve the functioning of financial markets. If households, which are the ultimate source of 
savings, remain extremely risk-averse, a significant mismatch in the supply of and demand for savings 
will emerge.  
In the future, particularly after the full removal of blanket deposit insurance in April 2005, and also in 
the context of the reform of the Japanese postal savings system, efforts should be made across the 
board to encourage households to diversify risks in their savings.  
Conduct of monetary policy  
Japan’s economy is expected to continue recovering in fiscal 2004, with the momentum for recovery 
spreading to a wider range of industries. Persistent efforts across the board are necessary to achieve 
sustainable growth and overcome deflation. The Bank, for its part, will continue the extremely easy 
monetary  policy,  thereby  backing  private-sector  initiatives  to  deal  with  structural  problems  and 
enhance market mechanisms.  
The current easy monetary policy consists of three elements.  
4 
 BIS Review 28/2004
The first element is the provision of ample liquidity to the money market. As a result, concerns over 
liquidity have almost disappeared in the money market, and financial institutions can concentrate on 
their businesses without worrying about raising funds in the market.  
The  second  element  is  the  policy  commitment.  The  Bank  has  made  a  commitment  to  continue  the 
current  policy  until  the  year-on-year  change  in  the  CPI  registers  zero  percent  or  higher  on  a 
sustainable  basis.  This  commitment  has  facilitated  market  participants’  projection  of  future  interest 
rates,  and  market  interest  rates  have  been  stable.  Firms  have  been  able  to  enjoy  a  stable  market 
environment in which they can raise funds at low interest rates.  
The current easy monetary policy is expected to have a stronger positive impact on economic activity 
in the private sector as the economy recovers further. Given that the Bank’s policy commitment allows 
firms to continue enjoying low funding costs and that the economic recovery raises the expected rate 
of return on new investment, firms’ profitability on investment will increase. Firms will become more 
proactive in seeking investment opportunities. Banks will also benefit from increased opportunities for 
profit from lending and other financial services. With this impact in mind and with a view to overcoming 
deflation, the Bank is determined to pursue the extremely easy monetary policy even as the economy 
continues to recover.  
The third element is the Bank’s efforts to improve the transmission mechanism of monetary easing. It 
is important to promote new financing channels other than bank lending in order to ensure that the 
effects  of  monetary  easing  permeate  throughout  the  economy.  These  efforts  will  also  improve 
Japanese capital markets over the long term.  
As part of these efforts, the Bank started to purchase asset-backed securities (ABSs) from July 2003, 
and to date, the total accumulated amount of ABS purchases has amounted to around 580 billion yen. 
The Bank’s purchases of ABSs have stimulated the capital market, and ABSs, which had been little 
used in Japan, are now becoming increasingly familiar.  
Furthermore,  the  Bank  hosted  a  Workshop  on  Securitization  to  back  the  development  of  the 
securitization  market,  and  exchanged  views  with  market  participants  about  practical  problems  and 
possible solutions to developing the market further. The Bank released a report on the Workshop in 
April, and proposed specific measures to evaluate the prices of securitized products more accurately 
and efficiently and to reduce costs related to the structuring and trading of these products.  
The  Bank  has  already  begun  taking  concrete  measures  to  nurture  the  development  of  the 
securitization  market.  It  is  planning  to  conduct  a  “Survey  on  Securitization  Market”  and  to  partly 
remove  the  prohibition-of-transfer  clause  attached  to  some  of  the  receivables  whose  debtor  is  the 
Bank.  
“Exit policy”  
There  are  views  that  the  Bank  is  avoiding  discussion  on  the  termination  of  the  quantitative  easing 
policy, or the so-called “exit policy,” for fear of overreaction by market participants.  
It is true that the zero percent year-on-year change in the CPI specified in the current commitment is 
merely  a  milestone,  and  therefore  the  Bank  intends  to  study  how  to  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a 
transparent way beyond that point.  However, under the current circumstances, it is still too soon to 
specify  a  concrete  policy  framework.  For  the  time  being,  therefore,  it  is  important  that  the  Bank 
concentrate all its efforts on achieving the goal contained in the existing commitment.  
When extricating itself from an unusual financial environment as at present, the Bank should be fully 
aware of the risk that expectations regarding financial market developments, such as the outlook for 
long-term interest rates, may become unstable. As the economy passes the zero percent milestone, 
the Bank should be extremely careful to avoid sharp fluctuations in financial markets and to prevent 
any sudden discontinuities in market conditions.  
Financial  markets  sometimes  overreact  to  a  shock,  but  they  are  also  capable  of  absorbing  it. 
Fundamentally, market conditions reflect the outlook for economic activity and prices. Therefore, the 
Bank will strive to accurately assess the economic and financial situation, communicate its thinking to 
market participants, and enhance the functioning of the market.  
Let  me  add  that,  to  achieve  stability  in  long-term  interest  rates,  it  is  particularly  important  that  the 
government  maintains  sound  fiscal  discipline  and  takes  investors’  needs  into  consideration  when 
issuing government securities.  
BIS Review 28/2004 
 5
Conclusion  
In concluding, let me point out a few things that I feel are important for the long-term development of 
the Japanese economy.  
First, Japan should be at the forefront of the race to create new technologies and ideas. High-quality 
human capital is the key to achieving this goal.  
Second,  Japan  should  take  the  initiative  in  promoting  the  formation  of  a  community  of  Asian 
economies whose mutual economic ties are even stronger than the fledgling ties enjoyed at present. 
This would help rectify global economic imbalances.  
Third,  Japan  should  play  a  prominent  role  in  developing  sustainable  energy  sources  and  creating 
innovations that contribute to solving environmental problems.  
Lastly, Japan should prepare itself to deal with the various problems attending its declining population. 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2004
