Ian Plenderleith: Always something normal from South Africa 
Speech  by  Mr  Ian  Plenderleith,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  to  the 
Association of Collective Investments Conference, Cape Town, 17 August 2004. 
 It  is  not  very  often  that  a  central  banker  gets  to  comment  on  his  country’s  economy  in  Latin.  As 
someone  whose  undergraduate  studies  were  ancient  Greek  and  Latin,  I  am  delighted  to  seize  the 
chance.  
The  Latin  I  have  in  mind  is  Pliny’s  often-quoted  phrase,  “ex  Africa  semper  aliquid  novi”  -  always 
something  new  out  of  Africa,  by  which  I  think  Pliny  meant  that  Africa  could  always  be  relied  on  to 
spring surprises, by astonishing the world with some bizarre new novelty. 
I want today to suggest some reasons why, if Pliny were with us now looking back on the remarkable 
progress South Africa has made over the past ten years, he would say the opposite. Much of the effort 
that  has  been  applied  to  leading  South  Africa  forward  over  the  past  decade  has  been  directed  to 
achieving what might be called “normalisation” - the steady process of building the stable political and 
social  and  economic  structures  that  are  normal  for  a  modern,  well-governed  country  in  the 
21st century. This is true of our political system, as was evident to all the world earlier this year as, 
with  pride  and  style,  we  celebrated  10  years  of  democracy  and  held  standard  normal  democratic 
elections, which were conducted with exemplary calm and good order. It is true, too, of the immense 
progress that has been in building a genuinely open multi-racial society and progressively alleviating 
the legacy of social neglect in areas such as education, health and basic living standards. It is true 
also, very visibly, in the economic sphere, in the huge strides that have been made in bringing South 
Africa into the frame as a normal, modern, open, competitive, market-based economy.  
It is this commitment to normalisation that has won the admiration of the world. I think it would win 
Pliny’s admiration, too, and that he would see that it is not frivolous novelty, but stable and sensible 
normality that is South Africa’s great achievement. So I think he would re-write his quotable phrase, to 
suggest  that  the  key  ingredient  in  the  immense  progress  we  have  made  in  the  past  ten  years  has 
been, not “semper aliquid novi”, but “semper aliquid normalis” - always something normal out of South 
Africa. 
In  the  economic  sphere,  the  extent  to  which  the  country  has  been  put  on  the  track  of  normalcy, 
running as a standard, normal, modern economy, is something of which everyone can be immensely 
proud. It is a priceless gain, achieved by hard work, dedication and intelligent policy-making. But it is 
not  just  something  to  look  back  on  with  satisfaction.  It  is  even  more  important  to  look  forward,  to 
recognise that the stable framework for a normal, well-run economy that has been achieved to date 
provides  the  foundation  for  improved  economic  performance  in  the  years  ahead.  That  means  the 
prospect,  if  we  stick  to  the  task,  of  faster  sustainable  growth,  better  public  services,  higher  living 
standards for all our citizens and growing and competitive businesses that will generate lasting jobs for 
the future.  
But we need to recognise, too, that it is only now, after some years of laying the foundations, that we 
are  beginning  to  see  these  benefits  come  through  in  substantive,  concrete  form.  Sensible  policies, 
aimed at generating benefits that are sustainable over the long term, take time to deliver dividends. 
But  commitment  to  good  government,  in  the  economics  sphere  as  elsewhere,  really  does  produce 
results,  and  I  want  to  highlight  three  areas  where  I  believe  we  are  now  seeing  the  benefits  come 
through strongly. 
First, South Africa has for ten years steadily pursued a stable, disciplined macroeconomic framework. 
The  rewards  for  macroeconomic  discipline,  however,  build  up  over  time  and  it  is  important  to 
recognise where we are now beginning to see the real benefits come through. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  the  National  Treasury’s  commitment  to  maintaining  budgetary  control  and 
strengthening the public finances is now providing the base for significantly increased expenditure on 
key  public  services  without  in  anyway  jeopardising  fiscal  discipline.  On  the  monetary  side,  the 
inflation-targeting framework and the independent responsibility given the South African Reserve Bank 
for managing monetary policy has enabled us to bring down inflation to within the target range of 3 - 6 
percent and, in the process, reduce interest rates very substantially during the past year or so. With 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 1
the  exchange  rate  recovering  from  its  temporary  and  irrational  plunge  in  2001,  increased  public 
confidence in the inflation targeting framework has delivered a steady decline in inflation expectations. 
The  benefits  of  this  steady  commitment  to  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  have  now  begun  to 
come  through  in  a  quickening  in  economic  growth  over  the  past  year,  with  every  prospect  that  the 
economy can continue to pick up speed in the year ahead and beyond helped by the recovery in the 
global economy. The economy has in fact achieved the remarkable record of registering continuous 
positive growth every quarter for the past 22 quarters. With inflation remaining under control, we are 
set to extend that record, as can be seen just last week by the further step we were able to take in 
reducing interest rates. 
A second feature of particular relevance has been the strengthening of the micro structure of financial 
markets  in  South  Africa,  again  designed  to  ensure  that  our  markets  meet  normal  established 
international standards. The well-constructed framework the National Treasury has pursued in its debt 
management activities, the quality of the markets administered by the JSE Securities Exchange, the 
Bond Exchange of South Africa and the clearing and settlement agencies, and the oversight exercised 
by  the  regulatory  authorities  have  all  greatly  improved  the  quality  and  liquidity  of  our  markets  and 
generated  substantial  international  interest  and  participation  in  South  African  financial  instruments. 
Well-functioning  markets  encourage  savings  and,  by  matching  savings  with  productive  investment 
opportunities,  help  to  bring  down  the  cost  of  capital.  We  have  seen  the  evidence  of  this  in  the 
diversification  of  issuers  in  the  bond  markets:  alongside  the  Government’s  bond  issues,  corporate 
issues  are  growing  rapidly,  securitization  is  increasing  and  recently  the  municipal  bond  market  has 
returned to life. 
This process undoubtedly has further to go and will help to provide the efficient structure of financial 
markets  that  are  an  essential  support  as  our  economy  continues  to  grow.  A  notable  further  step  in 
strengthening  our  financial  infrastructure  was  implemented  only  last  week,  when  our  real-time 
wholesale  payment  system  -  SAMOS  -  moved  to  same-day  final  settlement.  This  is  an  excellent 
example of how the steady and persistent commitment to normalising the structure and functioning of 
our  economy  can  produce  real  gains  that  are  often  overlooked  or  under-recognised.  SAMOS,  our 
real-time  payments  system,  lies  deep  in  the  plumbing  of  our  financial  system.  Its  functioning  is  a 
fascinating  piece  of  advanced  IT  engineering  -  at  least  for  central  bankers  like  myself  and  my 
colleagues at the National Payment System Department at the South African Reserve Bank, though I 
have  to  confess  we  have  noticed  that  other  people’s  eyes  tend  to  glaze  over  when  we  wax  lyrical 
about the elegance of the system! What this seemingly technical step does is to remove a significant 
element of overnight risk for the financial system as a whole: we can go to bed, however late, knowing 
that  all  the  day’s  millions  of  individual  payments  have  definitively  been  delivered  and  that  all  the 
resultant inter-bank olbigations have been settled finally and irrevocably. As importantly, that step in 
turn paves the way for South Africa later this year to join the international CLS system providing for 
real-time  settlement  of  foreign  exchange  transactions  between  the  rand  and other  currencies.  In  all 
these  ways,  the  structure  of  our  markets  has  steadily  been  strengthened  so  that  they  meet 
international standards. 
A third area I want to highlight where normalisation is now bringing real benefits is in the South African 
Reserve Bank’s own financial operations. There are two aspects here - external and domestic. 
In our external operations, in foreign exchange, a particular feature of the South African economy that 
has  often attracted  attention  as an  area  of  weakness has been  our  relatively  low  foreign exchange 
reserves position. Here too, normalisation has been pursued - to build up the official foreign exchange 
reserves towards a level normal for countries at our stage of development. 
At worst, in September 1998, we had a negative foreign exchange reserves position of $23 billion - the 
legacy  of  accumulated  losses  on  foreign  exchange  operations  in  earlier  years.  The  progressive 
closing-out  of  this  negative  net  open  foreign  currency  position  has  been  a  major  challenge  in  the 
recent years. The negative position was finally closed out only last year, in May 2003. We then set to 
the  task  of  squaring-off  the  negative  forward  book  which  had  been  financing  part  of  our  gross 
reserves. This in turn was achieved in February this year. Since then our reserves have continued to 
rise, to a level currently of gross reserves of $11.8 billion and net reserves (net of the Reserve Bank’s 
use of committed medium-term facilities) of $8.4 billion. This means that the structure of our foreign 
exchange reserves now looks, and is, normal by international standards. We shall continue to build the 
reserves gradually over time, as opportunity presents, but the positive reserves levels we now enjoy 
should make a material contribution to lessening rand volatility and strengthening our credit standing. 
Indeed, that is already evident, in the ratings upgrades South Africa has received in recent years and 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2004
in the substantial narrowing in the spreads on South African international bonds. This in turn helps to 
reduce the cost of international borrowing by South African companies across the spectrum. 
This  increase  in  official  foreign  exchange  reserves  is  a  very  positive  development,  and  has  been 
widely welcomed as such. But as we have moved steadily forward, the markets, rather like spectators 
at the Olympics now underway, have begun to enter into the spirit of the occasion and cheer us on to 
yet more heroic efforts. Some urge us to run faster and faster and, if not exactly go for gold, at least 
aim for seriously higher levels of foreign exchange reserves. Others argue that we should run in more 
than one event, pursuing not only higher reserves but also more active management of the exchange 
rate. So it is worth being clear exactly what we can hope to achieve in this area of our operations, and 
equally what we cannot. 
We can, and will, continue gradually to build up our official foreign exchange reserves to a respectable 
level in an orderly fashion in accordance with our balance sheet whenever circumstances allow us to 
do  this.  This  will  bring  benefits,  as  I  have  indicated,  in  terms  of  lessening  rand  volatility  and 
strengthening  our  international  credit  standing.  The  scale  of  our  operations  is,  in  fact,  cumulatively 
more substantial than is sometimes recognised: over the six years I have described above, we have 
acquired,  directly  by  purchases  in  the  market,  or  indirectly,  of  the  order  of  $30  billion.  Around 
$10 billion  of  this  has  been  acquired  in  the  past  eighteen  months.  These  are  not  negligible  sums, 
particularly in relation to the size of foreign exchange activity in the rand. 
In the process, our operations have undoubtedly provided some moderation to the rise of the rand we 
have experienced over the period. This has in degree helped to alleviate some of the strains exporters 
and  our  manufacturers  have  faced  from  the  rise  of  the  rand.  We  fully  recognise  the  difficulty 
businesses face in adjusting to those strains, and it is useful that our operations can help in this way.  
But our operations have to remain focused on rebuilding our reserves. It would not be sensible for us 
to switch to a different focus, of seeking more actively to manage the exchange rate, principally for two 
reasons.  First,  neither  we  nor  anyone  can  claim  with  any  confidence  to  know  what  would  be  an 
appropriate equilibrium exchange rate. It is much more sensible for us to pursue a stable monetary 
framework aimed at delivering low inflation and thereby help the market find a stable trading range for 
the  rand  -  as  indeed  it  has  managed  to  do  for  extended  periods  over  the  past  year.  Secondly, 
endeavouring to manage the exchange rate would jeopardise our success in delivering low inflation: 
countless episodes in the past around the world demonstrate that attempting to switch focus to the 
exchange rate means that the central bank loses control of inflation, with seriously damaging results to 
the prospects for sustaining growth in the economy on a continuing basis. 
So we can, through our continuing operations designed to rebuild the reserves, help in the process to 
moderate the pace of adjustments in the exchange rate. That we are doing and it is entirely consistent 
with our inflation targeting framework. But a more activist approach to try to manage the exchange rate 
would risk undermining the inflation target. 
In our domestic market operations, in the rand money markets, we have also achieved over the past 
two years a major streamlining of our activities aimed, here too, essentially at normalisation - to bring 
our operations back within the frame of normal central bank management of money market liquidity. 
We were out of this frame because the accumulated foreign exchange losses, described earlier, had 
two major distorting effects in our domestic markets. First, the losses accumulated on an account - the 
Gold and Foreign Exchange Contingency Reserve Account (GFECRA) - which falls to be settled by 
the National Treasury, but in the meantime stands as a claim on the assets side of the SARB balance 
sheet.  We  needed  to  find  a  way  to  fund  that  asset.  Secondly,  the  losses  generated  as  their 
counterpart a large structural surplus of rand liquidity in the market. These two distortions - the asset 
on our balance sheet that needed funding and the excess liquidity held by the market - are essentially 
two  sides  of  the  same  coin.  We  had  to  bring  the  two  sides  together,  so  to  speak,  by  draining  the 
surplus, in order to ensure that short-term money market rates remained in line with the policy repo 
rate set by the Monetary Policy Committee; and in doing so, we obtained temporary funding for the 
GFECRA asset. 
At peak, in August 2002, the structural surplus we had to drain amounted to the huge sum of close to 
R70 billion. We drained this by the use of variety of instruments - some normal in character, e.g. bond 
repos, but some innovative or unusual, such as the sale of SARB debentures and, on a very large 
scale, so-called special money market swaps with deposits, which were foreign exchange swaps with 
the  foreign  exchange  we  gave  on  the  swap  redeposited  with  us.  Rolling  over  this  diverse  funding 
BIS Review 46/2004 
 3
operation was a technically demanding task and I would like to pay tribute to my colleagues at the 
SARB who, long before my arrival, handled this task with skill, expertise and high professionalism. 
This was clearly not a sustainable situation. Not only did it impair the central bank’s balance sheet, but 
it also had seriously distorting effects on the domestic money markets, hampering their development; 
and at times it risked undermining the implementation of monetary policy. We have therefore over the 
past two years set ourselves to find ways of draining this liquidity on a permanent basis. 
The key to doing so was the steps taken by the National Treasury, starting in September 2002, to pay 
off the balance on the GFECRA, principally by issuing the SARB with bonds. We were then able to sell 
these bonds, either directly or by switching into forthcoming maturing issues, and so drain the excess 
liquidity on a permanent basis. At the same time, other factors helped us along the way - notably, the 
steady increase in notes and coins in circulation, and the recovery in the rand, which enabled us to 
start generating profits on our oversold forward book. The result is that, by the end of last year, we 
were able to pension off the use of special money market swaps with deposits - which had amounted 
to over R50 billion at peak - and had effectively completed the task of draining the liquidity surplus on 
a permanent basis. This episode is a fascinating story of bringing liquidity management back from a 
distorted position to normalcy. 
Thus  here,  too,  there  has  been  a  steady  process  of  bringing  our  structures  and  process  back  to 
normalcy. The process of normalisation is a feature of many areas of our efforts over recent years. I 
hope I have been able to show that it has been worth the effort, for the benefits it brings in terms of 
better  and  more  sustainable  economic  performance  for  the  country  as  a  whole.  I  hope  I  have  also 
been able to show that these benefits are now beginning to come through in substantive form, but that 
there is much more yet to be gained from the heavy lifting that has been done in recent years. That is 
why we will stick to the task. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2004
