Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Brief remarks on managing financial instability and shocks in 
a globalising world  
Introductory  remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at  the  Tun 
Ismail ali Chair Public Lecture, Kuala Lumpur, 6 February 2004. 
 We are indeed honoured and privileged to have Dr. Yilmaz Akyüz, holder of the Tun Ismail Ali Chair in 
Monetary and Financial Economics at the University of Malaya, to speak to us today on “Managing 
Financial  Instability  and  Shocks  in  a  Globalizing  World”.  The  Chair  on  Monetary  and  Financial 
Economics at the University of Malaya was established by Bank Negara Malaysia in recognition of the 
contributions  of  the  late  Tun  Ismail  bin  Mohamed  Ali,  the  first  Malaysian  Governor  of  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia. It is our hope that this Chair would contribute to enhancing expertise and knowledge in the 
area of monetary and financial economics.  
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me make a few brief remarks on the topic of today’s lecture, based on our experience in managing 
the  Malaysian  economy.  Uncertainty  and  instability  are  the  defining  feature  of  the  international 
financial system today, as borders have become more porous, financial markets more integrated and 
as  financial  flows  have  surpassed  trade  flows  as  the  dominant  determinant  of  the  international 
financial  environment.  Emerging  market  economies  have  become  more  vulnerable  to  international 
shocks which can have a significant adverse impact on the economy. Malaysia has approached this 
more challenging environment by increasing our own resilience and tolerance level to these shocks. 
There are three factors that are key to enhancing our resilience to external shocks. 
Capacity building: strengthening the economic and financial base  
The first is strengthening the economic and financial base. A deliberate policy to diversify the economy 
to achieve a greater balance between domestic and external sources of growth, to avoid excessive 
concentration in any activity and to reduce over-dependence on any particular market has increased 
the resilience of the economy. This has required shifting into new areas of comparative advantage and 
seeking new market opportunities and new areas of growth, while shifting out of those areas where 
comparative  advantage  has  been  eroded.  Having  flexible  labour  and  capital  markets  has  facilitated 
this process of adjustment.  
Of  equal  importance  is  the  development  of  a  resilient  institutional  framework  and  institutions.  This 
includes the promotion of strong private and public institutions. In the public sector, strong institutions 
can be measured in terms of building efficient and strong delivery systems that promote coordination 
in the government machinery to provide an enabling environment for operations in the economy. At 
the same time, sound private sector institutions are crucial. In addition to healthy financial positions, 
good systems of risk management and corporate governance would ensure better management and a 
healthy  corporate  sector.  Another  important  aspect  is  the  availability  of  timely  and  reliable  financial 
information and the strengthening of the legal and regulatory framework for enforcement of the laws 
and  regulations.  Strong  professional  organisations  can  also  play  an  important  role  to  improve  and 
enforce the standards and best practices.  
Developing  and  diversifying  the  financial  infrastructure  is  another  important  component  of  capacity 
building. In this respect, our Financial Sector Master Plan which was released in 2001 represents a 
ten-year strategy that charts the development of the financial sector. The focus of the initial phase of 
the plan is on the development of the financial infrastructure and financial markets as well as capacity 
enhancement and institutional development, in particular, of the domestic financial institutions, thereby 
putting  in  place  the  pre-conditions  for  moving  forward  to  a  more  liberalised  and  competitive 
environment. Gradualism has been adopted to avoid disruptive and unstable conditions. The aim is to 
evolve a more diversified financial system with financial institutions that are efficient, innovative and 
resilient.  The  Masterplan  places  priority  on  good  corporate  governance  and  transparency  within  an 
effective regulatory and supervisory framework and a strong structure for consumer protection.  
BIS Review 8/2004 
 1
Liberalization of capital account 
The second factor in enhancing national resilience is the approach to liberalising the capital account. 
While liberalisation of the capital account has potential benefits, it also carries substantial risks. For 
emerging economies, where the financial infrastructure is still relatively less developed, the premature 
liberalization of capital flows could lead to an accumulation of risk factors that could lead to instability 
and  culminate  into  a  financial  crisis.  The  approach  for  the  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  in 
Malaysia has been to adopt appropriate sequencing so that the increase financial integration will not 
have  destabilising  implications.  It  is  important  to  have  sufficiently  developed  domestic  financial 
markets,  sound  macroeconomic  conditions  and  sound  institutions  in  place.  Also  important  is  a 
surveillance  mechanism  to  monitor  capital  inflows  and  outflows.  Of  particular  importance  is  the 
monitoring  of  the  accumulation  of  external  liabilities  by  the  financial  system  and  the  private  sector. 
Advance  knowledge  of  imbalances  and  risks  would  facilitate  early  actions  to  manage  emerging 
vulnerabilities. 
An appropriate exchange rate regime 
Finally, I would like to mention the significant value to national resilience of having an exchange rate 
regime that is aligned to the economic fundamentals. It is important to understand that the exchange 
rate is a means to an end and not an end in itself. Its purpose is to provide a fair rate of exchange 
between goods and services that are produced in the domestic economy with those that are produced 
abroad.  Trade  and  investment  is  facilitated  by  an  exchange  rate  that  is  stable  and  reflective  of 
economic  fundamentals,  not  by  one  that  is  volatile  and  unstable  and  subject  to  speculative  capital 
flows.  The  exchange  rate  should  also  not  be  manipulated  to  cater  to  narrow  sectoral  interests.  For 
every  change  in  the  exchange  rate  that  benefits  one  sector,  there  would  be  another  sector  that  is 
disadvantaged. Therefore, the exchange rate policy has to rise above sectoral interests and consider 
the overall economic implications in deciding on the appropriate exchange rate. It is also not prudent 
to  respond  to  short-term  trends  or  to  focus  solely  on  developments  in  bilateral  exchange  rates. 
Malaysia  has  trading  and  investment  relations  with  many  nations.  We  therefore,  cannot  look  at 
movements of any particular currency pair as a basis for determining the appropriate valuation of the 
ringgit. A longer-term perspective to exchange rate policy is taken, looking at the relationship between 
the exchange rate and economic fundamentals. Of greater importance is to focus on enhancing our 
overall productivity and competitiveness against all our major trading partners. 
The  pegged  exchange  rate  has  served  Malaysia  well.  It  continues  to  serve  Malaysia  well.  This  is 
manifested in terms of the significant growth in the volume of trade and the steady inflow of foreign 
direct investment. In trade-weighted terms, the exchange rate is not misaligned. Since the ringgit peg 
to the US Dollar, the ringgit real effective exchange rate (REER), which is the trade weighted value of 
the  ringgit  against  our  major  trading  partners’  currencies  after  taking  into  account  changes  in  our 
inflation relative to those of our trading partners, has fluctuated within a range of plus or minus 7%. 
This  is  well  within  an  acceptable  range.  More  importantly,  the  ringgit  REER  has  not  experienced  a 
sustained trend towards increasing appreciation or depreciation. The ringgit has essentially gravitated 
around its fair value and has not experienced misalignment. Finally, the Malaysian economy has both 
external balance in the form of a sustainable current account and internal balance in the form of price 
stability. This again supports the ringgit being fairly valued. In addition, foreign direct investors have 
placed more importance on factors other than just the exchange rate alone. In managing exchange 
rate policy, no amount of exchange rate manipulation would satisfy the interests of all parties at all 
times. Indeed, it is a stable and fundamentally sound exchange rate system that will best serve the 
overall economic interests of the country. This will continue to be the objective of our exchange rate 
policy. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dr.  Yilmaz  Akyüz’s  lecture  today  would  provide  an  international  perspective  on  managing  financial 
instability and shocks in a more globalised world and touches on some of the issues I have mentioned. 
Although the regional financial crisis occurred more than six years ago, the issues it raises are not 
history.  They  are still  very  relevant  and  important.  Emerging  economies  need  to  continue  to  evolve 
approaches  and  solutions  on  how  best  to  manage  the  vulnerabilities  and  to  promote  and  preserve 
stability. In this endeavour, there is potential to not only consider what individual economies can do but 
also  the  opportunities  for  regional  arrangements  or  regional  solutions.  As  the  region  becomes 
increasingly  more  integrated  in  terms  of  trade  and  investment  flows,  the  potential  for  this  will  be 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2004
greater. The desired outcome is to achieve stability, which in turn, will contribute to the overall stability 
of the international monetary system and thus, enhance the prospects for shared global prosperity.  
BIS Review 8/2004 
 3
