Svein Gjedrem: Monetary policy and the krone exchange rate 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of ACI Norge - The Financial Markets Association, Oslo, 26 August 2004. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 11 August, Inflation Report 2/04 and on 
previous speeches. 
The
Charts in pdf-format can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 In most countries, price stability, or low and stable inflation, is the objective of monetary policy. The 
historical experience of Norway and other countries shows that high and variable inflation results in 
considerable fluctuations in output and employment. In addition, a fall in the level of prices could easily 
accompany a period of decline.  
The first explicit inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the 
UK in 1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. Norway introduced inflation targeting in the spring of 
2001. Approximately 20 countries currently use inflation targeting in their monetary policy.  
In this context, I would like to mention that the central bank of Sweden was able to draw on its own 
experience from the 1930s when it sought to motivate and firmly establish inflation targeting during the 
1990s. Admittedly, Sweden did not have an inflation target but a price target for monetary policy in the 
period 1931-1937. At that time, the concept was inspired by the work of Knut Wicksell 30 years earlier. 
As early as in 1898, Wicksell argued that price stability should be the central bank’s objective.1  
The conduct of monetary policy 
In Norway, the inflation target is set at 2½ per cent.  
Norges Bank operates a flexible inflation targeting regime, so that weight is given to both variability in 
inflation and variability in output and employment. In the long term, there is no conflict between low 
and  stable  inflation  and  stability  in  the  real  economy.  On  the  contrary,  price  stability  will  be  a 
precondition for high and stable output and employment over time. However, in some periods, there 
may be disturbances that create conflicts in the short term.  
The  point  of  departure  for  the  monetary  policy  strategy  ahead  is  the  very  low  level  of  inflation  at 
present. It has been lower than the inflation target since the autumn of 2002. The aim of monetary 
policy is higher inflation. Therefore, the interest rate is low.  
Monetary policy influences the economy with long and  variable lags. Norges Bank sets the interest 
rate  with  a  view  to  stabilising  inflation  at  the  target  within  a  reasonable  time  horizon,  normally 
1-3 years. The more precise horizon will depend on disturbances to which the economy is exposed 
and how they will affect the path for inflation and the real economy ahead.  
The economy grows over time. Output will in some periods lie above and in others below the long-term 
trend.2 Stabilising output means seeking to maintain actual output near trend.  
There is one main monetary policy instrument: the interest rate. The interest rate is set with a view to 
achieving  low  and  stable  inflation,  while  at  the  same  time  seeking  to  avoid  substantial  variations  in 
output and employment.  
In recent years, household income has shown solid growth, and household confidence has been high. 
High growth in labour costs over a number of years, the cyclical downturn in the world economy and a 
strong  krone  in  periods  resulted  in  deteriorating  profitability  in  many  companies.  Employment  and 
                                                      
1   Berg, Clas and Lars Jonung (1998): “Pioneering Price Level Targeting: the Swedish Experience 1931-37”, Conference on 
Monetary Policy Rules, Stockholm, 12-13 June 1998. 
2   Trend growth has been used as a rough estimate of potential output. Potential output is the level of output that is consistent 
with stable inflation over time. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 1
investment fell. The level of household borrowing is high, while enterprises have reduced debt. High 
debt growth increases the vulnerability of households to economic disturbances.  
Wage  growth  has  slowed  now  and  the  krone  has  depreciated.  A  turnaround  is  taking  place  in 
corporate earnings and there are also signs of this in investment and credit demand.  
The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with low interest rates abroad and 
a close relationship between domestic interest rates and the krone - a tighter monetary policy would 
curb credit demand primarily because a stronger krone would reduce job security.  
A flexible inflation targeting regime reduces the possibility of exposing households to a dual shock in 
the form of higher unemployment and higher interest rates, as was the case at the beginning of the 
1990s. If the economy is exposed to disturbances that can lead to higher unemployment, inflation will 
normally decline and interest rates will be lowered.  
A flexible exchange rate 
An important channel for monetary policy in a small, open economy is the foreign exchange market 
and the exchange rate.  
The  krone  fluctuates.  This  is  not  surprising  because  other  countries’  currencies  also  fluctuate.  The 
krone  exchange  rate  is  the  price  of  our  currency  measured  in  a  foreign  currency.  Developments  in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment.  
The chart shows the effective exchange rate for Norway and a number of other small countries with 
inflation targeting. Exchange rate fluctuations are approximately the same for Norway, Sweden and 
Canada, whereas the krone exchange rate fluctuates less than the exchange rate for Australia and 
New Zealand. Therefore, the krone does not stand out as particularly unstable compared with other 
countries’ currencies.  
The forward exchange and options markets have expanded in recent years. A deeper market reduces 
transaction  costs  and  it  is  easier  to  find  counterparties.  This  has  provided  companies  with  greater 
scope  for  hedging  against  exchange  rate  risk.  Instruments  that  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  a 
floating krone are increasingly being used, also in Norway.  
Hedging against fluctuations in the krone involves costs for businesses. A krone that is stable - but too 
strong - also entails costs to the economy in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is stable - 
but weak - is a source of high inflation.  
Petroleum  revenues  generally  provide  substantial,  but  uneven  currency  inflows  into  Norway.  The 
currency flows might have resulted in a strong krone and large variations in the exchange rate. This 
tendency  is  countered,  however,  when  the  annual  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central 
government  budget  is  predictable  and  independent  of  annual  revenue  flows,  and  the  remaining 
revenues are saved and invested abroad.  
The  capital  outflows  through  the  Government  Petroleum  Fund  contribute  to  both  curbing  the 
appreciation of the krone and maintaining its stability.  
Higher  oil  prices  have  resulted  in  higher  current  account  surpluses.  In  isolation,  this  contributes  to 
strengthening  the  krone.  However,  higher  surpluses  are  being  offset  by  higher  long-term  capital 
outflows through the Government Petroleum Fund. In addition, the oil companies primarily invest their 
cash surplus abroad. Foreign trade figures indicate that mainland imports have increased sharply in 
recent months. This increases demand for foreign currency.  
As  mentioned,  the  Petroleum  Fund  acts  as  a  buffer  against  the  wide  fluctuations  in  the  krone 
exchange rate that petroleum revenues could have generated. An increase in petroleum revenues will 
result in higher capital outflows from the Petroleum Fund. Operators in the foreign exchange market 
may at times have a tendency to underestimate this stabilisation mechanism. The increase in oil prices 
has increased the need for allocations to the Government Petroleum Fund, and in July Norges Bank 
resumed its daily purchases of foreign exchange for the Petroleum Fund. This comes in addition to the 
regular transfers of profit from the State’s Direct Financial Interest in petroleum activities (SDFI) to the 
Petroleum Fund, which are to be invested abroad.  
2 
 BIS Review 47/2004
Higher  oil  prices  mean  higher  revenues  for  the  oil  companies.  International  and  Norwegian  oil 
companies with activities in Norway increase their capital outflows when profits increase. Thus, in the 
short and medium term, cumulative profits in the petroleum sector do not generate substantial krone 
holdings in the domestic economy. It is possible to define a “basic balance”3 in the external account 
that  is  found  by  subtracting  the  capital  outflows  from  the  Petroleum  Fund  from  the  current  account 
balance. The basic balance is not affected by fluctuations in oil prices and the currently high price level 
when  the  central  government’s  use  of  petroleum  revenues  follows  a  long-term  guideline,  but  it  is 
weakened by the increase in imports.  
When the monthly allocations to the Petroleum Fund are larger than the foreign exchange transfers 
from Petoro (SDFI), Norges Bank will purchase foreign exchange in the market to cover the difference. 
The Ministry of Finance determines the amount of the monthly transfers to the Petroleum Fund on the 
basis of its estimates in the National Budgets and the Revised National Budgets. The Ministry may 
also adjust the amount on the basis of new information concerning, for example, developments in oil 
prices. Given the current high level of oil prices, purchases in the next few months will probably be 
considerably larger than they have been during the summer.  
Norges Bank has not defined a target for the exchange rate. Nevertheless, developments in the krone 
are of considerable importance to interest-rate setting because the exchange rate influences inflation 
and output.  
Portfolio investments may easily dominate movements in the krone exchange rate in the short term. 
Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to 
exchange  rate  movements.  During  periods  of  political  and  economic  unrest,  investors  may  choose 
individual currencies as a safe haven - often the Swiss franc. The Norwegian krone was probably also 
perceived as a safe haven when oil prices rose in the autumn of 2002 as a result of the uncertainty 
concerning a possible war in Iraq.  
In the period from March to May 2003 and throughout the autumn, the krone showed a tendency to 
appreciate.  This  partly  reflected  lowered  market  expectations  concerning  an  interest  rate  increase 
abroad  and  expectations  that  interest  rates  might  rise  earlier  in  Norway  than  in  other  countries. 
Changes in the krone resulted in unintended tightening of monetary policy. This trend was reversed, 
however, by low inflation figures and reductions in the interest rate. The interest rate reduction was 
probably of considerable importance as it eliminated the excess return on NOK investments.  
The krone, measured by a broad index (I-44), appreciated again markedly from mid-February 2004 to 
the  first  half  of  May.  After  that,  the  krone  depreciated  through  June.  The  publication  of 
lower-than-expected consumer price figures for May contributed to weakening market expectations of 
an increase in interest rates in the near future, and the krone depreciated. After the monetary policy 
meeting on 1 July, the krone was stable for a long period, but since then it has fluctuated in line with 
changes in oil prices.  
Past experience shows that the krone is at times heavily influenced by developments in the interest 
rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries.  This  is  given  weight  in  interest-rate  setting. 
However, as mentioned, themes in foreign exchange markets shift, and Norges Bank does not have 
instruments to fine-tune the exchange rate.  
Normally,  Norges  Bank  will  not  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  in  order  to  influence  the 
exchange  rate.  Exchange  market  interventions,  either  buying  or  selling  foreign  currency,  are  not 
suitable as an instrument for influencing the krone exchange rate over a somewhat longer period. If 
Norges Bank intervenes in the foreign exchange market instead of changing the interest rate, foreign 
exchange market participants may receive ambiguous signals, and complicated game situations may 
arise  between  the  market  participants  and  the  central  bank.  However,  interventions  may  be 
appropriate  if  the krone  exchange rate  differs substantially  from what  is  reasonable  on  the  basis  of 
fundamentals,  and  exchange  rate  movements  also  reduce  the  prospect  of  achieving  the  inflation 
target.  
Although the krone may fluctuate in the short term, it will tend to stabilise over time when inflation is 
low  and  stable.  When  inflation  has  been  higher  in  Norway  than  among  our  trading  partners  for  a 
longer period, the krone has tended to depreciate. When inflation in Norway is expected to be broadly 
                                                      
3   The basic balance is normally defined as the current account surplus minus net long-term capital outflows. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 3
in  line  with  that  of  other  countries,  the  exchange  rate  will  usually  also  return  to  its  normal  range 
following periods when the krone has been particularly strong or particularly weak.  
The real exchange rate 
The real exchange rate may be measured in a number of ways, for example, by relative consumer 
prices  and  relative  labour  costs  between  Norway  and  its  trading  partners,  measured  in  a  common 
currency.  The  real  exchange  rate  measured  by  relative  labour  costs  in  a  common  currency  is  an 
expression of the cost competitiveness of Norwegian companies. The real exchange rate measured in 
terms of developments in relative prices is an expression of the Norwegian krone’s purchasing power. 
The real exchange rate has fluctuated considerably over time and has deviated substantially from the 
average level since 1970 over longer periods. Nevertheless, there has been a tendency for the real 
exchange  rate  to  revert  to  this  level.  Relative  prices  in  a  common  currency  are  now  approximately 
2 per  cent  lower  than  the  average  since  1970.4  Relative  labour  costs  in  a  common  currency  are 
approximately 3.5 per cent higher than the historical average.  
As  mentioned,  high  wage  growth  over  a  period  of  several  years  starting  in  1998  eroded  the 
competitiveness  of  the  Norwegian  business  sector.  Even  though  the  krone  has  depreciated  since 
2002, the competitiveness of Norwegian companies is still fairly weak due to the high cost level. The 
nominal krone exchange rate has now reverted to around the level prevailing in the mid-1990s, while 
labour costs in manufacturing have risen considerably more than among our trading partners in the 
same period.  
Asymmetric cyclical developments 
Cyclical developments in Norway and other countries have been divergent. This was most pronounced 
in the 1980s when we had a strong upturn while Europe was in a recession. Even though business 
cycles have gradually become somewhat more synchronised, there is still a time lag. While the global 
turnaround took place in 2000, with a subsequent reduction in interest rates abroad, the Norwegian 
economy continued to show a high level of activity. Towards the end of the upturn, the economy was 
facing  labour  shortages,  accelerating  wage  growth  as  well  as  a  sharp  increase  in  household 
consumption  and  debt.  Interest  rates  in  Norway  were  kept  high  and  the  interest  rate  differential 
gradually widened.  
Cyclical  developments  in  Norway  have  also  differed  in  other  ways  from  developments  in  other 
countries.  The  expansionary  period  in  Norway  led  to  strong  wage  growth  from  1998  to  2002.  The 
upturn in the global economy at the end of the 1990s was largely driven by business investment, and 
wage growth was moderate.  
On the other hand, wage growth in the Norwegian business sector from 1998 to 2002 was higher than 
the level that over time is consistent with the inflation target and with normal productivity growth.  
Consumer  price  inflation  in  Norway  declined  sharply  through  2003.  In  2003,  wage  growth  was 
considerably  lower  than  in  the  previous  five  years.  This  provided  a  sounder  basis  for  substantial 
reductions in Norwegian interest rates, resulting in a narrowing of the interest rate differential between 
Norway  and  other  countries.  The  reduction  has  contributed  to  a  weakening  of  the  krone  since 
December  2002.  Thus,  the  real  krone  exchange  rate  has  also  depreciated  and  business  sector 
competitiveness  has  improved.  However,  the  business  sector  is  still  burdened  with  the  loss  in 
competitiveness that is due to high wage increases. The exposed sector has been scaled back. Those 
companies  that  are  still  operating  may  be  in  a  better  position  to  sustain  the  high  wage  level. 
Nevertheless, costs may hamper activity and employment growth.  
Petroleum wealth and the krone exchange rate 
In the long term, the exchange rate tends to adjust so that there is a balance both within the domestic 
economy and in the current account.  
                                                      
4   The point for 2004 shows the real exchange rate with wage and inflation projections for 2004 from Inflation Report 2/04. 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2004
Petroleum  wealth,  defined  as  the  value  of  oil  and  gas  under  the  seabed  and  the  value  of  the 
Government  Petroleum  Fund,  provides  the  basis  for  substantial  foreign  exchange  revenues  in  the 
years  ahead.  The  relative  significance  of  these  revenues  will  nevertheless  decline  gradually.  The 
share of Norwegian imports that can be financed by foreign exchange revenues from petroleum wealth 
will become increasingly smaller. Other export earnings must then be increased substantially. This will 
require a considerable improvement in competitiveness over time.  
Norway’s history as an oil nation goes back to the end of the 1960s. Rough estimates5 suggest that 
the real exchange rate that ensures balance in the external account when petroleum wealth no longer 
has the same significant role in the economy is more in line with the real exchange rate that we started 
with. This is shown in the chart, where the real exchange rate in the very long term will revert to the 
level prevailing before petroleum extraction began.  
On  the  basis  of  these  analyses,  a  strong  real  krone  exchange  rate  and  weak  competitiveness  will 
apply to a period from the beginning of the 1970s in which the petroleum industry is expanding and we 
are reaping the largest economic benefits.  
Main features of the economic situation 
Inflation is low. The rise in prices is being curbed by the appreciation of the krone in 2002, the fall in 
prices for imported consumer goods in foreign currency and strong competition in many industries in 
Norway. Monetary policy in Norway is oriented towards returning inflation to target. The sight deposit 
rate has been lowered to 1.75 per cent.  
Low interest rates and the global upturn are stimulating activity in the Norwegian economy. The output 
level  will  be  somewhat  lower  than  implied  by  the  trend  level.  This  means  that  the  output  gap  is 
projected to approach zero, but will continue to be marginally negative in 2004.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy is projected to pick up markedly this year and remain relatively high 
next year. The most important contribution comes from private consumption, fuelled by low interest 
rates  and  high  real  wage  growth.  The  global  upturn  will  probably  have  a  positive  effect  on  the 
internationally  exposed  sector.  Petroleum  investment  will  continue  to  expand  in  the  next  couple  of 
years. Mainland business investment is also expected to pick up gradually.  
In  recent  years,  many  enterprises  have  rationalised  operations.  As  a  result,  they  have  been,  and 
probably still are, able to increase production to a fairly large extent without any substantial increase in 
real capital and employment. There are prospects of solid growth in productivity in 2004. Nevertheless, 
our  regional  network  reports  that  companies  in  a  number  of  industries  are  now  considering  an 
increase in employment.  
After rising sharply for several quarters, economic growth in the US slowed in the second quarter and 
employment growth appears to have stalled this summer. Economic growth has picked up from a low 
level in the euro area. Economic growth has also gained momentum in Sweden and the UK. Strong 
growth in the US and China exerted upward pressure on commodity prices in 2003 and the beginning 
of 2004. Since then, price inflation has been dampened. Oil prices have risen considerably during the 
summer. Interest rate expectations indicate interest rate increases in a number of countries.  
The  effects  of  oil  price  developments  on  the Norwegian  economy  are  mixed.  Persistently  higher  oil 
prices  may  eventually  contribute  to  higher  petroleum  investment  and  increased  activity  in  sectors 
affected by petroleum activities. A sharp rise in oil prices, however, restrains global economic growth 
and affects demand for our other export products.  
The  analyses  in  Norges  Bank’s  last  Inflation  Report  in  July  2004  are  based  on  the  technical 
assumption  that  interest  rates  will  move  in  line  with  forward  interest  rates.  The  analyses  are  also 
based on the assumption that the krone exchange rate will shadow the path for the forward exchange 
rate  as  observed  on  24  June.  At  that  time,  market  pricing  reflected  expectations  of  a  fairly  stable 
exchange rate ahead.  
                                                      
5   See Akram, Farooq Q. (2003): “Reell likevektsvalutakurs for Norge” (Real equilibrium exchange rate for Norway), in Norsk 
Økonomisk Tidsskrift 118, pp 89-112. 
BIS Review 47/2004 
 5
Given  the  assumptions  underlying  the  projections  in  the  last  Inflation  Report,  inflation  will  be 
considerably lower than the inflation target in the period to the summer of 2006.  
Monetary  policy  also  places  emphasis  on  avoiding  imbalances  in  the  real  economy.  Capacity 
utilisation in the economy is rising, but the output gap, as it is measured by Norges Bank, will only be 
marginally positive during the period.  
Our assessment is that monetary policy should be aimed at increasing inflation at a somewhat faster 
pace  than  projected  in  the  last  Inflation  Report.  In  connection  with  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on 
11 August, the Executive Board stated that the inflation outlook may imply an unchanged interest rate 
for a longer period than implied by the interest rate assumptions in the last Inflation Report. On the 
other hand, the prospect of continued low inflation in Norway implies that Norway should not be the 
frontrunner when interest rates are increased in other countries.  
Following  the  monetary  policy  meeting  on  11  August,  the  Executive  Board  stated  that  with  the 
prospect  of  continued  low  inflation  for  a  period  ahead,  wide  deviations  from  projected  economic 
developments would be required before the interest rate should be increased. The Executive Board 
also  stated  that  uncertainty  concerning  the  effects  of  previous  monetary  policy  easing  and  the 
unusually low interest rate imply, on the other hand, that we should exercise caution with regard to 
further interest rate reductions. 
6 
 BIS Review 47/2004
