Rachel Lomax: Staying ahead of the curve - remarks on recent UK monetary 
policy 
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Annual Luncheon of 
the British Hospitality Association, London, 1 July 2004. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today. Judging by the capacity crowd, the businesses you represent 
are in pretty good spirits. 
What better way to start than by thanking you for your excellent hospitality. And what better place to 
celebrate an important double anniversary. Because that’s what today is, for me. 
It is exactly a year since I joined the Bank of England as Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy. And it 
is forty years, almost to the day, since I started my first job. I was a waitress: in a famous seaside town 
- the one that’s noted for fresh air and fun. 
It wasn’t much of a job. But then I wasn’t much of an employee, having no marketable skills, but plenty 
of attitude. I learnt how to carry several plates at the same time and a lot of interesting new words; and 
the  job  paid  for  a  memorable  holiday  in  Greece.  Looking  back  on  it,  I’m  sorry  I  left  without  giving 
notice: though I’m not sure my boss was. 
My  work  habits  have  improved  immeasurably  since  those  far  off  days.  And  so  I  think  has  British 
hospitality. 
The ‘eating out experience’ has certainly been transformed. At the very top end of the market, there 
are now over a hundred Michelin starred restaurants compared with less than thirty in my youth. The 
past decade has seen a huge investment in both hotels and visitor attractions. Three of the top five fee 
paying visitor attractions in the UK are less than five years old, with the wonderful London Eye now 
comfortably outstripping that doughty old trouper, the Tower of London. London doesn’t have it all its 
own way of course - the ground breaking Eden Project now comes in at a well deserved number three. 
Tourism has become more than good business. From the Welsh Valleys to the East end of London, it 
is  increasingly  seen  as  a  catalyst  for  economic  regeneration.  With  the  success  of  the  Manchester 
Commonwealth games, and Liverpool’s ambitious plans for 2008 as European City of Culture, not to 
mention  London’s  Olympic  bid,  there’s  no  shortage  of  high  profile  events  and  projects  to  provide 
inspiration for the future. 
Your industry is still a major employer, of course. You must provide more jobs than the NHS and the 
Armed  Forces  put  together.  I’d  be  the  last  person  to  underrate  the  importance  of  entry  level  and 
seasonal jobs; but you need highly skilled people too. So it’s good news that thousands of people are 
already on tourism and hospitality related FE and work based courses. Your new Sector Skills Council 
will provide an even sharper focus on defining and meeting your industry’s training needs. 
Nowadays, your industry makes a major contribution to our national income, and to our exports. And 
it’s  not  surprising  that  your  fortunes  are  heavily  influenced  by  the  economic  climate  at  home  and 
abroad. 
The decade of strong growth which you have enjoyed has been underpinned, at the national level, by 
an  unprecedented  period  of  low  and  stable  inflation,  and  steadily  growing  output  and  employment. 
Unemployment  has  been  falling  for  over  a  decade  and  has  now  reached  a  thirty  year  low.  And 
household spending has been growing strongly year in year out since the mid 1990s. 
What this means is that for many years your customers have been enjoying a very healthy growth in 
their spending power, in a labour market where jobs have by and large been plentiful. 
Of course, averages never tell the whole story. And hindsight is a wonderful thing. At the time, it didn’t 
always seem like plain sailing. 
The Stock Market crash, the slump in transatlantic traffic after September 11 and, last year, Iraq war 
related fears have represented setbacks, especially for London based businesses. Over the past few 
years, overseas tourism has been affected by the economic slowdown in North America and much of 
Europe and, maybe also, by the strength of the exchange rate. On the other hand, though foot and 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 1
mouth hit the industry very hard in some parts of the country in 2001, domestic tourism seems to have 
held up well. 
And that’s probably because the UK economy has weathered the squalls of the past few years rather 
better than both the US and the euro area. Since 2000, we have grown more strongly than the euro 
area,  and  more  steadily  than  the  US;  indeed  we  are  alone  among  major  industrial  countries  in  not 
having experienced a single quarter of falling output for more than a decade. 
As  a  result  the  UK  emerged  from  the  slowdown  in  the  world  economy  with  less  slack  than  other 
economies. That is the key reason why we were the first to start raising interest rates last November, 
when world activity started to pick up and demand at home accelerated. Since then, a number of other 
countries, including the US, have begun to raise their rates to more normal levels. 
When I joined the Monetary Policy Committee a year ago, both the Fed and the ECB had just cut their 
interest  rates  to  exceptionally  low  levels,  reflecting  real  concerns  about  the  strength  of  the  world 
recovery. Activity picked up sharply in the US last autumn, but the mood only changed decisively early 
this year, when a million new jobs were created in just three months. It is now clear that a broad based 
world recovery is well under way, led by the US and Asia, especially China, but spreading to other 
regions. 
The  news  from  Japan  is  more  encouraging  than  it  has  been  for  over  a  decade.  The  UK’s  major 
markets in Europe are benefiting from strong demand for their exports; and the latest news suggests 
that domestic demand in most of these countries is finally picking up, though consumers probably still 
remain a little wary. 
As  the  news  from  abroad  has  steadily  improved,  we  have  also  seen  a  marked  strengthening  in 
demand at home. After a fairly weak first half, retail sales bounced back, the housing market took on a 
new  lease  of  life  and  investment  began  to  recover.  It  now  looks  as  if  the  UK  economy  has  been 
growing around or above trend since the middle of last year. 
It  was  against  that  background  that  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  raised  interest  rates  in  three 
further stages to 4.5%. Meanwhile inflation remains low, well below the Chancellor’s target of 2%. 
This might seem to bear out the old taunt, that central bankers are the sort of people who want to 
close the bar as soon as the party starts to go with a swing. It would be fairer to say that we want to be 
sure that the party remains under control. We don’t want to encourage binge behaviour any more than 
you do, and for much the same reason; it makes life unpleasant for other people, and it leaves a nasty 
mess behind. 
That points to taking action at the first sign of trouble, and preferably before. In current circumstances, 
strengthening demand is beginning to put upward pressure on costs. Evidence from our Agents round 
the country, as well as official statistics, suggests that the labour market is tightening, and firms are 
having difficulty in filling some vacancies, despite the inflow of workers from the rest of the EU. 
These are straws in the wind, but if we delay taking action until inflation has taken off, it will be more 
difficult to bring it down again without causing the economy to slow sharply. That’s why our interest 
rate decisions need to reflect a view of likely inflationary pressures that looks a couple of years ahead. 
Our  central  forecast  is  that  the  economy  will  continue  to  grow  strongly  over  the  next  year  before 
easing back towards its longer term average, as both household and public spending slow down a bit. 
But  any  central  forecast  is  subject  to  a  wide  margin  of  uncertainty,  and  there  are  a  number  of  key 
risks. 
The housing market is one. Obviously, there are many aspects of housing which have nothing to do 
with  monetary  policy.  It  is  striking  that  fewer  houses  were  built  in  2001  than  in  any  year  since  the 
Second  World  War;  and  over  12%  fewer  houses  were  built  in  the  ten  years  to  2002  than  in  the 
previous decade. 
It is not the MPC’s job to control house prices, any more than it is our job to control share prices or the 
exchange rate; but just as we would not ignore the wider economic effects of a high exchange rate or 
a boom in the stock market, so we cannot, and do not, ignore the influence of soaring house prices on 
consumer spending and hence on the overall pressure of demand. 
Much attention has been paid to the historically high level of house prices relative to earnings, and 
what this might mean for the future path of house prices. A less discussed question - of more interest 
to  you  -  is  how  much  influence  the  current  strength  of  the  housing  market  is  having  on  household 
spending; and what impact a weakening in the housing market might have on consumers. 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2004
Healthy as household spending has been in the last few years, there has not a consumer boom on 
anything like the scale of the late 80s, when house prices last took off. Since early 1998, house prices 
have risen sharply relative to incomes; but household spending has only grown broadly in line with 
incomes.  A buoyant  housing  market  may  still  have had some  influence  on spending;  and spending 
and house prices may have been influenced by some of the same factors. But spending and house 
prices do not seem to have moved together as closely as they have done in the past. 
Does that imply that consumers would shrug off a downturn in the housing market? Not necessarily. 
The rise in house prices has meant that households have taken on a lot of debt, and higher interest 
rates will mean they have less money to spend on other things. While there are few signs of obvious 
financial stress at current interest rates, given the strength of the current jobs market and the current 
housing market, this could change, especially if several of these factors weakened at the same time 
and the economic climate deteriorated sharply. 
That’s  a  long  way  from  our  central  forecast,  but  uncertainty  about  how  consumers  might  react  to 
higher interest rates has been an important reason for tightening policy gradually since last November. 
We have also avoided springing surprises. I think that’s important: people are more likely to believe 
what we say, if our behaviour is reasonably predictable. But we wouldn’t be doing our job if we didn’t 
constantly revise our views in the light of new information and new research. That is why every month 
has to be a fresh decision. And why I can honestly say that I don’t know, any more than anyone else, 
where rates will be in a year’s time. 
Compared with a year ago, interest rates have risen from 3.5% to 4.5%. But the international outlook 
is clearly stronger now, the domestic economy is buoyant, and inflation remains low. That’s how we 
like it: and the lesson you should draw from our readiness to tighten policy over the past seven months 
is that we are on the case. 
I hope that will give you the confidence to focus on your main business; creating wealth and ‘making 
people happy’. 
BIS Review 41/2004 
 3
