Jarle Bergo: Monetary policy and cyclical developments  
Speech  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at 
Sparebanken Sogn og Fjordane, Førde, 18 October 2004. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 22 September, Inflation Report 2/04 and 
on previous speeches. 
The references and the 
charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 Price stability, in the sense of low and stable inflation, is the objective of monetary policy in a number 
of countries. Historical experience from Norway and other countries has shown that high inflation has 
resulted in unstable output and employment. In addition, a fall in the price level will often accompany a 
period of decline.  
The first inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK in 
1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. In Norway, the government issued a regulation introducing 
an inflation target in 2001. Monetary policy in euro area countries and Switzerland is also aimed at 
price stability, even though this is not referred to as inflation targeting in these countries.  
Inflation  targeting  has  proved  to  be  particularly  appropriate  in  very  open  small  and  medium-sized 
economies. Commodity exports play a particularly important role in several of the countries that were 
the first to introduce inflation targeting.  
Current inflation is low, but our recent history shows that without a nominal anchor inflation was high 
and variable and that we did not achieve higher growth in exchange for inflation. An economic policy 
that fuels inflation does not generate higher economic growth. On the contrary, it paves the way for 
subsequent recession and unemployment. High and variable inflation usually accompanies instability 
in output and employment. But inflation should not be too low over time either. This is partly because 
the  structure  of  the  economy  evolves  over  time.  Demand  for  labour  with  different  qualifications 
changes.  Restructuring  requires  changes  in  real  wages  and  relative  wages.  Nominal  wages  do  not 
readily fall. With some measure of inflation, real wages and relative wages can be changed without 
reducing nominal wages. Some degree of inflation oils the economic machinery.  
In  periods,  it  will  be  appropriate  to  stimulate  the  economy  with  low,  or  even  negative,  real  interest 
rates. If inflation becomes entrenched at a very low level, the interest rate will be less effective as an 
instrument  because  it  cannot  be  set  below  zero.  If  the  economy  is  again  exposed  to  unexpected 
negative disturbances, we will have little scope for manoeuvre.  
The most important contribution monetary policy can make to sound economic developments in the 
long  term  is  low  and  stable  inflation.  The  inflation  target  provides  an  anchor  for  economic  agents’ 
expectations concerning future inflation. We have a very open economy with free capital movements. 
Stable inflation expectations also contribute to more stable krone exchange rate expectations.  
Inflation  targeting  means  setting  the  interest  rate  so  as  to  achieve  a  numerical  target  for  inflation. 
Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to stabilising inflation at 2.5 per cent within a reasonable 
time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The more precise horizon will depend on disturbances to which the 
economy is exposed, and how they affect the path for inflation and output.  
The inflation target represents a framework for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to 
stabilising  output  and  employment.  We  have  chosen  flexible  inflation  targeting.  Variability  in  output 
and employment as well as inflation is given weight.  
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  to  safeguard  the  value  of  money  in  the  long  term,  and  seek  to 
contribute to stabilising economic developments in the short and medium term.  
The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation. The instrument is the interest rate. The 
interest rate influences inflation with a lag and with varying intensity.  
As interest rates fall, household and local government consumption and investment tend to accelerate. 
Higher  demand  leads  to  higher  output  and  employment.  Wage  growth  may  pick  up.  Higher  wage 
growth combined with higher profit margins will result in higher inflation.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
Lower interest rates normally lead to a depreciation of the krone. Imported goods then become more 
expensive and inflation accelerates.  
Expectations play a key role in price and wage formation, and they are influenced by the interest rate. 
Expectations concerning future inflation and economic stability have considerable impact, not least in 
the foreign exchange market.  
In  the  long  term,  output  and  employment  are  determined  by  the  supply  of  labour,  capital  and 
technology  and  restructuring  capacity.  Monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  smoothing  fluctuations  in 
output and employment. Norges Bank weighs stable inflation against stable output and employment.  
The economy grows over time. Output will in some periods lie below long-term trend growth and in 
others above trend. Stabilising output growth means seeking to maintain actual output near trend.  
The output gap is a measure of the difference between the actual level of output and potential output. 
Developments  in  the  output  gap  provide  a  basis  for  assessing  cyclical  developments  and  can  thus 
also shed light on domestic price and cost pressures in the economy.  
It is difficult to know how high capacity utilisation is at any given time. Output and employment figures 
are  often  revised  and  do  not  therefore  always  present  an  accurate  picture  of  the  current  economic 
situation. Norges Bank therefore also uses a number of other indicators to gauge the temperature of 
the Norwegian economy.  
The  period  of  high  capacity  utilisation  that  began  in  1997  came  to  an  end  in  winter  2003.  The 
Norwegian  economy  was  hit  by  a  pronounced  downturn  in  the  global  economy.  An  economic 
turnaround has now occurred in Norway, with a soft landing after the long period of high domestic cost 
inflation and sluggish external activity. Output is showing a marked increase, but inflation is low.  
Norges Bank has no set target for the level of the exchange rate. Nevertheless, developments in the 
krone are of considerable importance to interest-rate setting because the exchange rate has an impact 
on inflation and output. An important channel for monetary policy is the foreign exchange market and 
the krone exchange rate.  
Although  the  krone  fluctuates,  the  krone  exchange  rate  is  not  particularly  unstable  compared  with 
other countries’ currencies.  
The krone exchange rate is the price of our currency measured in a foreign currency. Developments in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment.  
There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is 
stable - but too strong - also entails social costs in the form of low activity. Similarly, a krone that is 
stable - but too weak - is a source of high inflation.  
From spring 1999 to December 2002, the interest rate in Norway was fairly stable at between 5.5 per 
cent and 7 per cent. In other countries, the interest rate fell in 2000 and 2001 when the ICT and equity 
bubbles  burst.  The  interest  rate  differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries  widened  due  to 
cyclical  divergence.  The  period  of  high  capacity  utilisation  continued  for  a  longer  period  in  Norway, 
with strong wage and cost inflation. The 2002 wage settlement resulted in very high wage growth for 
the fifth consecutive year.  
The Norwegian economy was exposed to considerable unexpected disturbances from the end of 2002 
and in 2003.  
Economic  developments  in  other  countries  were  an  important  factor  behind  the  appreciation  of  the 
krone.  
In the autumn of 2002 and into 2003, growth in the global economy moved on a different path and was 
substantially weaker than Norges Bank and other observers had expected. Weak developments in the 
global economy resulted in lower interest rates abroad and a wider interest rate differential between 
Norway and other countries. Developments in international equity markets and the risk of higher oil 
prices also contributed to strengthening the krone.  
A persistent downturn abroad, the likelihood of lower wage growth in Norway and a strong krone have 
led to reductions in the interest rate of more than 5 percentage points since December 2002. The sight 
deposit rate has been 1.75 per cent since March this year. Monetary policy easing has been aimed at 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
bringing  inflation  up  towards  the  target  of  2.5  per  cent  and  stabilising  developments  in  output  and 
employment.  
The decline in interest rates since December 2002 has contributed to weakening the krone. Measured 
by an index of 44 trading partners (I-44), the krone depreciated through 2003 by almost 11 per cent 
from its strongest level in January of the same year. The krone has fluctuated moderately in 2004. 
High  oil  prices  and  low  interest  rates  abroad  have  curbed  the  effect  on  the  krone  of  the  fall  in 
Norwegian interest rates. The krone has stabilised - though at a high level considering the inflation 
outlook.  
Consumer  price  inflation  in  Norway  declined  sharply  through  2003.  A  number  of  factors  appear  to 
have contributed to the decline.  
• 
The appreciation of the krone through 2002 contributed to a low rise in prices for imported 
goods.  
At the same time, a change in trade patterns and external economic conditions have resulted 
in  an  unexpectedly  sharp  fall  in  import  prices,  even  when  measured  in  terms  of  what 
Norwegian  importers  pay  in  foreign  currency.  The  change  in  trade  patterns  has  made  a 
considerable contribution to the sharp decline in prices for clothing, footwear and audiovisual 
equipment.  Rapid  technological  advances  have  also  pushed  down  prices  for  audiovisual 
equipment.  
Intensified  competition  in  retail  trade  and  other  service  sectors.  Lower  prices  for  imported 
consumer goods were an important reason for the low rate of inflation recorded in 2003. So 
far  in  2004,  services  where  wages  are  not  the  dominant  factor  have  made  the  most 
substantial contribution to low prices. House rents have also exerted downward pressure on 
inflation. 
  Norway is not the only country where inflation has been low. In Sweden, underlying inflation has fallen 
sharply. Excluding energy prices, underlying inflation stands at 0.7 per cent. Inflation has also slowed 
in  Finland  and  Denmark.  One  explanation  for  this,  common  to  all  these  countries,  appears  to  be 
keener competition, which has led to high productivity growth.  
In the first round, heightened competition affects companies’ profit margins. But enterprises respond 
by reducing their costs. This occurs in part in the individual business, but subcontractors also come 
under pressure to reduce their prices and enhance efficiency. Increased competition therefore triggers 
higher productivity growth in the economy. Low inflation may thus be matched by higher productivity.  
Economic developments 
External  cyclical  developments  and  events  are  of  considerable  importance  to  developments  in  the 
Norwegian economy.  
In autumn 2003, activity in the global economy picked up from a very low level. After rising sharply for 
several quarters, economic growth in the US slowed in the second quarter of 2004. Economic growth 
has picked up from a low level in the euro area. Growth has also gained momentum in Sweden and 
the UK. Strong growth in the US and China exerted upward pressure on commodity prices in 2003 and 
into  2004.  A  number  of  central  banks  have  increased  interest  rates.  Interest  rate  increases  are 
expected in a number of countries.  
Oil prices have also risen considerably during the summer. High oil prices constitute a risk factor with 
regard to developments in the global economy.  
In Norway, output growth has picked up after a growth pause in 2003. The interest rate reductions 
since  2002  have  contributed  to  a  turnaround  and  the  economy  has  experienced  a  soft  landing 
following  the  years  of  high  cost  inflation  in  Norway  and  the  period  of  weak  activity  in  the  world 
economy. Lower interest rates in particular have contributed to sustaining growth in disposable income 
and private consumption.  
Household  demand  is  one  of  the  most  important  driving  forces  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Low 
interest rates, high growth in real income and improved job security are now creating a basis for strong 
growth in household consumption.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
High wage  growth  over  several  years from  1998 has  eroded  the  competitiveness  of  the Norwegian 
business  sector.  The  nominal  krone  exchange  rate  measured  by  the  trade-weighted  index  is  now 
approximately at the level prevailing in the mid-1990s, while labour costs in manufacturing have risen 
considerably more than among our trading partners in the same period.  
The  business  sector  is  still  burdened  with  the  loss  in  competitiveness  that  is  due  to  high  wage 
increases. The exposed sector has been scaled back. Companies that are still in operation may be in 
a  better  position  to  cope  with  the  high  wage  level.  A  more  efficient  service  sector  may  also  have 
strengthened the export industry. Nevertheless, costs may hamper activity and employment growth.  
The  cost  level  with  the  current  krone  exchange  rate  is  close  to  15  per  cent  higher  than  in  the 
mid-1990s  and  about  4  per  cent  higher  than  the  average  for  the  past  30-35  years.  Norwegian 
businesses are losing market shares partly because of the strong krone.  
The international division of labour is shifting, and in the face of major restructuring it is a disadvantage 
for Norwegian business and industry that costs are high.  
In 2003, both employment and investment fell, although investment picked up somewhat towards the 
end of the year. Efficiency-enhancing measures will probably continue to mark developments in the 
business sector this year. This will curb demand for labour and investment growth. Strong competition 
has resulted in substantial restructuring. In Norway and other countries, manufacturing production is 
being moved to countries with lower costs.  
Petroleum  investment  is  also  rising  this  year  and  investment  growth  may  continue  to  be  strong  in 
2005. Petroleum investment has traditionally had a considerable influence on cyclical developments in 
Norway. If investment in 2005 is as high as estimated in the most recent investment intentions survey 
for  oil  and  gas  operations,  petroleum  investment  will  make  a  strong  positive  contribution  to  the 
Norwegian economy.  
Oil price developments have mixed effects on the Norwegian economy. Persistently higher oil prices 
contribute  to  higher  petroleum  investment  and  increased  activity  in  sectors  affected  by  petroleum 
activities.  A  sharp  rise  in  oil  prices,  however,  has  restrained  global  economic  growth  and  affected 
demand for our other export products.  
Increased  petroleum  investment  and  exploration  activity  offshore  are  providing  an  impetus  to  the 
business sector in the North-West. This is reflected in an increase in incoming orders to the shipyards, 
following a long period of sluggish activity. The willingness to invest is rising.  
The  region  is  very  export-oriented.  The  county  of  Sogn  og  Fjordane  is  Norway’s  second  largest  in 
terms of exports per inhabitant, while Møre og Romsdal ranks third. After declining in recent years, 
exports have now picked up in both counties.  
Møreforskning in Molde relays information regularly from our contact enterprises in Sogn og Fjordane 
and Møre og Romsdal. In September, these enterprises reported a rise in demand and output in all 
industries, with the exception of the fishing and fish processing industries. Output in the construction 
industry, retail trade and manufacturing output focused on the construction industry have also picked 
up. The public sector reports considerable investment needs, for example in connection with health 
sector projects.  
This snapshot report on the current situation in this part of the country and similar reports from the 
other regions provide information that is important to interest-rate setting.  
Employment has shown only a moderate increase since last summer, even though output growth has 
been  high.  The  labour  market  has  thus  improved  somewhat.  The  number  of  persons  employed  in 
Norway  began  to  increase  in  summer  2003  and  unemployment  stabilised.  Adjusted  for  seasonal 
variations, LFS unemployment stood at 4.5 per cent of the labour force in July.  
The most recent figures from the Directorate of Labour show that in September unemployment rose in 
the  health  care  sector  but  declined  in  manufacturing,  construction  and  science  professions. 
Unemployment has fallen in most regions.  
The North-West and Sogn og Fjordane: 
In  the  North-West,  there  are  still  only  a  few  contacts  that  report  an  increase  in  employment.  Most 
companies can increase activity by 10-15 per cent without altering their workforce. Retail trade and 
construction  are  the  only  sectors  that  report  an  increase  in  employment.  Construction  companies 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2004
report some signs of labour market tightness, due in part to the start-up of work on the Ormen Lange 
project.  The  use  of  foreign  contract  labour  in  connection  with  seasonal  work  in  the  fish  processing 
industry, the hotel sector, tourism and the engineering industry is increasing.  
Growth in household demand, petroleum investment and increased activity in the business sector are 
paving  the  way  for  a  rise  in  employment  in  the  period  ahead.  On  the  other  hand,  intensified 
competition  and  continued  rationalisation  in  the  business  sector  may  have  a  dampening  impact  on 
labour demand.  
Developments in real economic variables are mirrored in credit markets. In recent years, household 
income  has  shown  solid  growth,  and  household  confidence  has  been  high.  Corporate  earnings, 
however, have been low, and until recently companies have primarily focused on enhancing efficiency.  
Total credit growth is rising approximately on a par with GDP growth. The composition of credit growth 
in  the  past  year,  however,  has  given  ambiguous  signals  to  our  interest-rate  setting.  Growth  in 
household borrowing is high, while growth in corporate borrowing is low.  
Developments in corporate borrowing shadow developments in corporate investment.  
Household debt has increased sharply since 1994. The sharp increase in the value of dwellings is one 
of the main factors behind growth in household debt. House prices have risen by an annual average of 
around 9 per cent over the past 10 years. High and persistent house price inflation might contribute to 
holding up credit growth even after prices have levelled off. Since only a portion of the housing stock is 
sold each year, there will for a long period be some dwellings that are sold at a higher price than when 
they were last sold. This contributes to sustaining high credit growth.  
As a result of low interest rates, the household interest burden will remain fairly low in spite of high 
debt growth. It may prove to be particularly challenging for borrowers to assess their debt-servicing 
capacity over time in a period when the interest rate is abnormally low. Such a low interest rate also 
places greater demands on banks in assessing the creditworthiness of borrowers.  
According to money market expectations, the interest rate will eventually stabilise around 5½ per cent. 
This is consistent with an inflation target of 2½ per cent and a long-term real interest rate on a par with 
the  level  abroad.  This  interest  rate,  with  an  addition  for  banks’  margins,  provides  a  more  realistic 
indication  of  the  interest  rate  level  that  will  apply  over  the  loan’s  life  than  the  floating  interest  rates 
prevailing today.  
The interest rate can be used to reduce credit demand. At present - with continued low interest rates 
abroad  and  a  close  link  between  domestic  interest  rates  and  the  krone  -  a  tighter  monetary  policy 
would restrain credit demand primarily because job security would be reduced as a result of a stronger 
krone.  
House prices and developments in household credit influence consumption and housing investment. 
We seek to take account of these indirect effects in interest-rate setting.  
A turnaround has occurred in the Norwegian economy. The economy has experienced a soft landing 
after the long period of high cost inflation in Norway and sluggish external activity.  
• 
• 
• 
• 
Output has returned to trend and is now showing a marked rise.  
Employment has returned to trend and is rising.  
Unemployment is at the 1996-level and is equal to the average for the 1990s.  
Wage growth is broadly in line with a level that is consistent with the inflation target given 
normal productivity growth.  
Overall credit growth is balanced. Credit is expanding approximately in line with trend growth 
in nominal GDP.  
Labour  costs  in  Norway  relative  to  our  trading  partners  are  now  broadly  in  line  with  a 
long-term average.  
The nominal krone exchange rate is on a par with the average for the 1990s.  
The interest rate level is close to the level prevailing among our trading partners.  
Inflation expectations are approximately the same as the target. 
   BIS Review 61/2004 
 5
In this respect, there is equilibrium in the Norwegian economy.  
But the current inflation rate is low, and external and domestic interest rates are low. Lagged effects of 
the strong krone in 2002 are exerting downward pressure on inflation. At the same time, a change in 
trade  patterns  and  external  economic  conditions  are  pushing  down  import  prices,  even  when 
measured  in  terms  of  what  Norwegian  importers  pay  in  foreign  currency.  In  Norway,  intensified 
competition appears to be resulting in high productivity growth, which is probably contributing to low 
inflation.  
The  inflation  rate  was  lower  than  expected  this  summer,  but  picked  up  in  September  and  is  now 
approximately in line with projections in the July Inflation Report.  
Growth is high in the Norwegian economy. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag, and there 
is always substantial uncertainty surrounding inflation developments.  
The fall in the value of the krone through 2003, low interest rates and solid growth in the real economy 
are expected to gradually push up inflation.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 61/2004
