Jean-Claude Trichet: The integration of the single market for financial 
services - the Eurosystem perspective 
Keynote speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the CESR 
Conference “Europe’s single market in financial services: under construction or fully integrated”, Paris, 
6 December 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  at  the  first  Committee  of  European  Securities  Regulators’  (CESR) 
conference  with  such  a  distinguished  audience.  This  is  certainly  the  right  place  to  address  our 
common objective of fully developing a “European single market”.  
The process of financial integration is a very challenging and complex endeavour which results from 
the  effective  interplay  between  public  and  private  action.  Public  authorities,  both  national  and 
European,  do  play  an  important  role  in  ensuring  that  basic  conditions  are  in  place  for  market 
participants to expand their cross-border activities. These conditions include an adequate framework 
of  regulation,  supervision  and  financial  stability.  Whereas  public  action  is  necessary,  the  concrete 
realisation of financial integration rests eventually on the initiatives of market participants to exploit the 
opportunities offered by the institutional framework. 
In this context, we can assert that significant progress has been achieved in the pursuit of financial 
integration in Europe so far but the final goal of a single financial market has not been fully achieved 
yet:  On  the  side  of  market  participants  a  fully  fledged  pan-European  dimension  of  market  activities 
remains  to  be  achieved.  On  the  side  of  public  authorities  the  basic  components  of  the  institutional 
framework are already in place, but they need time before fully producing the desirable results.  
I  would  like  to  focus  my  contribution  on  the  integration  of  the  European  securities  markets, 
emphasising the priorities for further public action from a Eurosystem perspective. 
The interest of the Eurosystem in the integration of securities markets 
The Eurosystem has a clear interest in the integration of securities markets. First of all, an efficient and 
well-integrated financial system is crucial for the smooth transmission of monetary policy in the euro 
area.  Securities  market  is  a  particularly  relevant  area,  since  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy 
operations need to be fully collateralised. The harmonisation of national laws and practices in the field 
of  securities  -  which  is  one  important  element  to  further  integration  in  the  securities  markets  - 
enhances the effectiveness of the Eurosystem’s collateral policy.  
Second,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  operations  also  rely  heavily  on  the  smooth  delivery  of 
securities. Securities settlement systems should ensure that such a smooth delivery both at a national 
level and on a cross-border basis. At the same time, safety and soundness of securities clearing and 
settlement systems is equally important from a central banking perspective. In this regard, I want to 
mention the recently published standards on securities clearing and settlement systems, which have 
been  jointly  developed  by  the  ESCB  and  the  CESR.  These  standards  provide  a  benchmark  for 
regulators, supervisors and overseers to adapt their practices to a commonly accepted approach in 
the field of securities settlement. I would recall that such standards are based on the current market 
situation and legal framework, which is not harmonised at the EU level. Should a Directive on clearing 
and  settlement  be  finally  adopted  at  the  EU  level,  it  is  clear  that  the  standards  would  have  to  be 
assessed  for  their  conformity  with  the  provisions  of  the  Directive  and,  if  necessary,  amended 
accordingly. 
Third,  the  Eurosystem’s  interest  also  stems  from  the  relationship  between  integration  of  securities 
markets with financial stability. Central banks have a natural role in this area, confirmed by the Treaty, 
which states that the Eurosystem should contribute to the smooth conduct of policies relating to the 
stability of the financial system. An important task of the Eurosystem in this respect is the systematic 
monitoring of sources of vulnerabilities for the euro area financial system and the assessment of its 
degree of resilience to potential shocks. In this context, I would like to announce that the ECB will start 
publishing the output of this activity in the form of a financial stability review, with the first issue already 
scheduled to be published on 15 December. Another task of the ECB in this area is the provision of 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
advice on draft Community and national legislation in the financial field either through formal opinions 
or through its participation in the relevant regulatory (level 2) and supervisory (level 3) committees. In 
particular,  the  ECB  follows  closely  the  work  of  the  European  Securities  Committee  (ESC)  and  the 
CESR which play an important role in assisting the Commission in shaping the regulatory framework 
in the securities field.  
Priorities in the areas of financial regulation and supervision  
The level of integration of securities markets, including market infrastructures in both the trading and 
post-trading  areas,  has  increased  significantly  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro.  Given  this 
substantive  progress,  it  is  important  that  integrated  markets  develop  on  the  basis  of  a  sound 
framework for financial regulation and supervision. The CESR has a crucial role to play in this regard.  
First, the completion of the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP) will provide the “Single European 
Securities  Market”  with  a  strong  impetus.  It  is  however  important  to  note  that  most  of  the  FSAP 
directives in the securities field are designed in line with the Lamfalussy framework. Let me mention in 
that context the Market Abuse Directive, the Prospectuses Directive, the Transparency Directive and 
the Directive on Markets for Financial Instruments. These directives warrant the adoption of a number 
of Level 2 implementing measures by the Commission for their full implementation. The preparation of 
technical  advice  of  good  quality  on  the  content  of  Level  2  rules  is  one  of  the  CESR’s  main 
achievements to date, also under tight deadlines.  
In  this  respect,  the  message  I  would  like  to  convey  to  the  CESR  is  to  strive  to  continue  the  good 
practice  of  providing  timely  and  good  quality  technical  advice  with  extensive  consultation  practices. 
The recommendations of the Inter-Institutional Monitoring Group in this context are to be supported. 
For instance, as recently requested by the Commission, instead of a more general contribution, CESR 
could  formulate  its  advice  as  close  as  possible  to  the  content  of  a  Level  2  measure.  This  will  both 
facilitate and increase the transparency of the Lamfalussy regulatory process. 
As regards the Level 2, I would consider further efforts for optimising the content of this component of 
the Lamfalussy framework as of critical importance. In particular, the distinction between Level 1 and 
Level  2  legislation,  with  due  consideration  of  the  applicable  legislative  procedures,  could  be  better 
refined.  The  aim  would  be  to  achieve  a  flexible  and  consistent  set  of  securities  regulations  among 
Member States, which can further enhance cross-border transactions. The good experience gained so 
far with the implementation of the Lamfalussy approach should allow a wider scope for Level 2 than it 
has been the case.  
Second, the fact that integration has progressed more in the securities field than in other segments of 
the financial sector, makes the issue of effectiveness of supervisory convergence particularly relevant. 
This implies that Level 3 needs to be further developed with regard to the supervision of securities 
markets.  
The  CESR  is  providing  a  contribution  in  this  field  by  promoting  strategic  reflections  on  the  key 
challenges  surrounding  supervisory  convergence.  I  am  referring  to  the  recently  published  report  by 
CESR, commonly called the “Himalaya Report”. I understand that these reflections mirror the fact that, 
in comparison with other level 3 committees, the CESR has already gained some experience and is a 
position to start developing strategic considerations about its future role.  
On  this  issue,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  my  conviction  of  the  soundness  and  potential  of  the 
Lamfalussy framework. This framework provides an appropriate institutional set-up to achieve both a 
more  flexible  regulatory  process  and  consistent  supervision  for  integrated  financial  markets.  This 
conviction  has  been  substantially  reinforced  by  the  good  experience  gained  so  far  in  the  securities 
field. Therefore, I have confidence that the extension of the Lamfalussy framework to the banking and 
insurance sectors will reveal the same positive experience.  
Looking ahead, I believe that one of the main objectives in the context of what is commonly referred to 
as “the post-FSAP strategy” is to attempt to exploit to the maximum possible extent the potential which 
is inherent in the Lamfalussy framework to improve the regulatory and supervisory process. This is 
one of the main challenges for the Level 3 committees but it is also one of the main factors on which 
the success of these committees will be measured. I am aware that all the Level 3 committees are 
already working hard to meet the challenges posed by the Lamfalussy process.  
Therefore,  I  am  in  full  agreement  with  the  conclusion  of  CESR  in  the  Himalaya  report  that  the 
experience so far is a success and is in the right path. The priority is indeed to implement the existing 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
and potential supervisory tools within the FSAP and Lamfalussy frameworks. And the objective is and 
should be to achieve a good co-ordination among authorities in the implementation and enforcement 
of securities regulation across the EU.  
In this respect, while acknowledging the limitations of the voluntary nature of Level 3, I would tend to 
think that certain “soft” tools, some of those already used by the CESR, may enhance the prospects 
for  such  co-ordination  among  authorities.  First  of  all,  increased  transparency  of  CESR’s  activities, 
including consultation and reporting practices, may also enhance in my view CESR’s accountability. 
Second, tools such as peer pressure and supervisory disclosure may provide appropriate incentives to 
co-ordinated efforts among authorities without changing the nature of the Level 3 Committees. In this 
respect,  I  would  be  happy  to  hear  more  concrete  details  of  the  CESR’s  proposal  for  a  mediation 
mechanism of an advisory nature among national regulators. This has the potential to enhance the 
dialogue  among  CESR  members  on  specific  supervisory  issues,  therefore  also  enhancing  their 
co-ordination  and  mutual  understanding.  This  is  a  good  example  of  instruments  to  exploit  to  the 
maximum extent the opportunities offered by the Lamfalussy framework. 
Priorities in the area of financial stability 
After addressing regulation and supervision, let me now turn to the third component of the public policy 
framework for financial markets: financial stability.  
Indeed,  the  process  of  pursuing  further  financial  integration  also  needs  to  be  accompanied  by  the 
strengthening  of  the  framework  for  maintaining  financial  stability.  The  emergence  of  pan-European 
banking groups and the growing integration of financial markets and market infrastructures increase 
the potential scope for systemic risk in the EU. Systemic disturbances are likely not to be confined to 
one Member State, thus cross-border contagion may spread more easily.  
Many initiatives have been or are being taken at the EU and national level to reinforce the set-up for 
maintaining financial stability and managing financial crisis. First, the monitoring of the stability of the 
financial  system  is  being  further  developed.  More  and  more  central  banks  are  developing  a  more 
systematic monitoring of the stability of their domestic financial systems. This is reflected also in the 
tasks of the Eurosystem which, as I already mentioned, has established a systematic monitoring of the 
stability of the euro area financial system. This analysis includes all the relevant components of the 
financial  system,  notably  banks,  non-bank  financial  institutions,  financial  markets  and  financial 
infrastructure  and  reviews  all  possible  sources  of  vulnerability  for  the  system.  This  activity  of  the 
Eurosystem benefits from the monitoring of banking stability in the EU conducted since long by the 
Banking Supervision Committee, one of the ESCB committees where central banks and supervisory 
agencies  are  represented.  In  this  connection,  I  acknowledge  that  the  Level  3  committee  in  the 
insurance  field,  the  CEIOPS,  has  recently  activated  a  systematic  monitoring  of  the  stability  of  the 
insurance sector in the EU very much along the lines of the BSC work. I would thus see merit in the 
involvement of CESR in this area by developing a systematic monitoring of developments in financial 
markets from a financial stability angle.  
Second,  additional  measures  are  being  considered  to  strengthen  the  effectiveness  of  supervisory 
action in a more integrated financial market. For the banking sector let me mention the revised EU 
capital requirements framework for banks and investment firms where enhanced responsibilities are 
attributed  to  the  consolidating  supervisor.  Indeed,  along  with  the  responsibility  of  being  held 
accountable  for  the  approval  of  sophisticated  approaches  to  calculate  capital  requirements  for  the 
group  as  a  whole,  the  consolidated  supervisor  is  also  responsible  for  coordinating  activities  and 
exchanging relevant information in crisis situations. Hence, in my view, the role of the consolidating 
supervisor  does  not  undermine  but  rather  underpins  the  crucial  need  to  reinforce  supervisory 
cooperation  and  strengthen  the  interplay  between  the  home  and  the  host  supervisor  for  the 
supervision of groups operating on a cross-border basis. Strengthening of co-operation is critical for 
effective prudential supervision of all financial institutions. As to securities supervision - which is the 
main domain of CESR - I recognise that the main challenges are related to the fact that the principle of 
home country control finds a narrower application and that securities commissions have very different 
powers across countries.  
Third,  in  the  area  of  financial  crisis  management,  the  main  initiatives  are  in  the  form  of  promoting 
multilateral or bilateral agreements among the relevant authorities so that they are prepared in case of 
a  financial  crisis  with  cross-border  dimension.  The  main  idea  behind  these  agreements  rely  on  the 
assumption that the management of a financial crisis having a cross-border dimension is a complex 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
endeavour  which  requires  a  clear  ex-ante  understanding  of  the  role  and  procedural  steps  for  all 
authorities involved. Such agreements are expected to be a useful tool helping to a certain extent the 
management of a crisis, if it were to happen, though it should be recognised that each crisis has its 
own unique features and therefore it is impossible to foresee its dynamics. In this context, I should 
mention  the  MoU  agreed  in  2003  by  the  EU  central  banks  and  banking  supervisors  for  the 
co-operation and exchange of information between them in crisis situations. The MoU - prepared by 
the BSC - defines general principles for co-operation and can be used as a basis for more specific 
agreements amongst the authorities. More recently, the ECOFIN has agreed that another agreement 
should be reached at the EU level between central banks, banking supervisors and Finance Ministries 
for the interplay among the three authorities in crisis situations. At a certain stage, I think, the issue 
that will have to be addressed would be to also involve other categories of supervisors, in particular 
securities and insurance supervisors, given that a crisis of a cross-border dimension may well cover 
also financial institutions falling within their competence.  
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Let  me  finish  by  reiterating  that  the  “European  single  market”  is  still  under  construction. 
Notwithstanding  the  significant  progress  achieved  so  far,  the  attainment  of  an  optimal  level  of 
integration  requires  an  effective  interplay  between  market  forces,  and  both  collective  actions  and 
public action. Nevertheless, an exclusive and essential responsibility of public authorities remains the 
establishment  of  an  appropriate  legislative  and  regulatory  framework.  Regulatory  and  supervisory 
convergence represent the main elements in this process. Indeed, convergence will only be effective 
and produce its intended benefits if both CESR members and market participants can fully rely on a 
consistent  set  of  practices  across  the  EU.  This  constitutes  the  pre-condition  –  which  has  not  been 
present  so  far  -  for  workable  mutual  recognition  among  authorities  and  expansion  of  cross-border 
activities by market players. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS Review 74/2004
