Miguel Urrutia Montoya: Extracts of a speech on the Colombian economy 
Extracts of a speech by Dr Miguel Urrutia Montoya, Governor of Banco de la República (Bank of the 
Republic), at the III Commission of the Senate of the Republic of Colombia, Bogotá, 24 August 2004. 
         Colombian peso appraised 10,8% against the dollar in February of 2003 and on August 17 of 
2004.  Real  exchange  rate  index  has  been  revaluated  5,7%  and  it  is  calculated  that  at 
present it has a level similar to the one observed in October of 2002. 
Appraisal (nominal and real) of the peso is explained by external and internal factors and by 
a partial revision of an “excessive” devaluation between May of 2002 and February of 2003. 
The devaluation of the peso during the second semester of 2002 and the first two months of 
2003  was  excessive  in  relation  to  the  performance  of  fundamental  determinants  of  the 
exchange rate due to two facts: 
1. 
As with other currencies in Latin America, the peso started its devaluation starting on 
May  of  2002  following  the  strong  devaluation  of  Brazilian  real  currency  and  the 
increment in the “spreads” of public external debt of the countries of the region. As the 
doubts of the markets regarding Brazil’s economic politic resulted baseless, including 
the fear of the “infection” effect, the real as well as a good part of the currencies of 
Latin American economies began to appreciate in front of the dollar. In Colombia and 
Chile the appraisal was at first moderate and in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico it was 
strong. 
The devaluation in Colombia during the second semester of 2002 came along, with a 
residue, of acceleration in the inflation. This increase in the inflation contributed to the 
non-compliance of inflation target set for the year 2002 and made it mandatory that 
during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year  2003  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Banco  de  la 
República  (JDBR)  had  to  intervene  the  exchange  market  and  elevate  intervention 
interest rates in 100 basic points on two occasions. The target of this measure was to 
stabilize exchange rate and control inflation expectative, objectives that were achieved 
in a gradual manner but that did not avoid that in the year 2003, inflation target could 
not be met for a second consecutive year. 
2. 
Due to the fact that the devaluation described was originated partially in a baseless fear and 
was  translated  into  an  inflation  rate  and  expectative  incompatible  with  target  compliance, 
devaluation during the second semester of the year 2002 and two first months of the year 
2003 was unsustainable. Even more, though the appraisal of the peso in front of the dollar 
was not much until November of 2003, in part the appraisal of the peso at the end of that 
year and beginning of 2004 corresponds to the adjustment described in exchange rate. 
The external factors that have influenced in great manner the appraisal of the peso has its 
origins  in  the  unbalanced  and  economic  politics  of  the  United  States  of  America,  in  the 
higher  dynamism  of  worldwide  economy  and  the  recovery  of  Colombian  exportations  to 
Venezuela.  Also,  for  the  fifth  consecutive  year,  in  2003  the  remittance  of  Colombians 
increased and during 2004 a significant increment in dollars in cash entrance has been had. 
Low  interests  rates  and  a  strong  unbalance  in  payment  balance  drawing  account  of  the 
United States of America are an incentive for international investors to invest their capitals in 
countries with higher interests rates and diversify the currencies of their portfolio. 
The higher growth in worldwide economy increases the demand of the goods exported by 
emerging  countries,  including  Colombia,  and  raises  international  prices  of  their  basic 
products. This has occurred with a great force in 2004. 
Between December of 2003 and May of 2004, Colombian exportations to Venezuela have 
increased  in relation  to  the  same  period  of  the  year  before,  US$  220  millions  (m).  This  is 
equivalent  to  an  increment  of  114%.  Also,  in  the  lapse  of  the  year  2004  an  increment  in 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
dollars  in  cash  entrance  has  occurred.  These  two  factors  contribute  to  explain  the 
intensification of the peso revaluation process in the time elapsed during this year. 
The internal factors that have contributed a great deal to peso appraisal are the betterment 
of  national  and  international  investors  confidence  level  and  the  central  government  deficit 
and its financing. 
Confidence  incentives  the  inversion  and  consumption  facilitates  economy  growth  and 
attracts capitals from foreign countries of Colombians as well as foreigners. 
There are two channels by which the government deficit tends to appraise exchange rate. 
The  first  an  obvious  one  is  financing.  Part  of  government  deficit  financing  comes  from 
external credit that appraises local currency. On the other hand high deficits elevate internal 
indebtedness  costs  of  the  government  and  open  external  and  internal  differential  rates  in 
favor of inversions of national public debt titles. 
Up to July of 2004, Colombian exchange market has presented a dollar offer excess for an 
amount of US$ 1.400 m, in which the net demand of dollars by the Banco de la República 
has been of US$ 900 m, that of the government of US$ 407 m and of the financial system of 
US$ 141 m. Additionally during this month of August, the Banco de la República has bought 
currency for an amount of US$ 200 m. 
The appraisal of the peso that started on the second semester of 2003 and specially and 
with great force during the period of 2004 that has elapsed, is the result of three types of 
factors: i) a natural consequence of an economy that is strengthening and has an important 
betterment in terms of exchange, ii) the counterpart of the tendency of dollar devaluation in 
front  of  other  currencies  due  to  very  low  interests  rates  and  the  strong  macroeconomic 
unbalances in the United States of America and iii) the limited action margin that economic 
politics (monetary and fiscal) has for offsetting in a sustained manner the forces towards the 
appraisal. 
The JDBR has moved its politics movements in order to avoid an excessive appraisal of the 
peso that may compromise the future of commercial goods productions sector (exportations 
and importations). Also he has taken advantage of the tendency of the exchange market for 
consolidating  the  position  of  international  liquidity  of  the  country  and  thus  reducing  the 
vulnerability of the economy if there are future external impacts and thus diminishing external 
public debt cost. In this manner a reversion of the factors that today explain peso revaluation 
and that generate a macroeconomic instability that would result costly in terms of production, 
employment and inflation, are avoided. Measures taken by the JDBR are the following: 
• 
First, the Banco de la República has purchased US$ 1.400 m between December of 
2003 and the time elapsed during this year 2004, taking care that the resulting effect 
of monetary expansion will not compromise the compliance of inflation targets. 
Second,  it  has  maintained  low  intervention  interests  rates,  reducing  them  in  two 
opportunities during this year for a total amount of 50 basic points and leaving them 
stable while Federal Reserve incremented them. 
Third,  it  has  taken  measures  that  although  did  not  have  as  a  target,  an  exchange 
target,  it  incremented  dollar  demand  or  reduced  it  in  some  manner.  In  the  first 
direction  is  the  prohibition  to  financing  intermediaries  to  maintain  a  negative  cash 
position and the second the prohibition to travel to foreign countries with more than 
US$ 10.000  in  cash.  Also,  the  Banco  de  la  República  decided  not  to  render  the 
service  of  cash  currency  of  foreign  exchange  consignments  to  intermediaries  in 
exchange market. 
  Marginal diminishments on interests’ rates of the Banco de la República in order to revert 
revaluation pressures would be ineffective. Higher reductions would have a significant effect 
over inflation. 
Massive  reserves  purchase  may  conduct  to  inflation  acceleration  or  to  that  Banco  de  la 
República may suffer losses, if these are sterilized, this will worsen the fiscal situation. 
BIS Review 58/2004
        2 
 