Jean-Claude Trichet: Presentation of the ECB’s Annual Report 2003 to the 
European Parliament 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  to  the 
European Parliament, Strasbourg, 25 October 2004. 
 Permettez-moi  de  souligner  tout  d’abord  que  je  partage  entièrement  votre  désir  de  maintenir  les 
relations étroites et fructueuses que nos institutions ont développées au cours des dernières années, 
et que je me réjouis à la perspective de poursuivre notre dialogue dans cet esprit franc et coopératif. 
J’ai l’honneur de vous présenter aujourd’hui le rapport annuel de la BCE pour l’année 2003, lequel 
constitue,  en  conformité  avec  les  dispositions  du  Traité,  un  des  outils  principaux  de  la  BCE  pour 
rendre  compte  aux  citoyens  de  l’Europe  et  à  ses  représentants  de  la  politique  monétaire  et  des 
activités de la BCE dans les autres domaines de sa compétence. 
Die  EZB  ist  sich  der  grundlegenden  Bedeutung  ihrer  Rechenschaftspflicht  bewusst  und  hat  stets 
betont, dass das sehr hohe Maß an Unabhängigkeit der EZB mit strengen Berichtspflichten, wie sie im 
EG-Vertrag  festgelegt  sind,  einhergehen  muss.  Die  EZB  misst  daher  dem  regelmäßigen  Dialog  mit 
den Bürgern Europas und ihren gewählten Vertretern höchste Bedeutung bei. 
Economic and monetary issues 
The ECB’s monetary policy operated in a rather uncertain and challenging environment in 2003. In the 
first half of the year, real GDP growth stagnated amid considerable uncertainty related to geopolitical 
tensions and the turbulences in oil prices and financial markets. Following the easing of economic and 
geopolitical  uncertainties,  prospects  for  economic  activity  gradually  brightened  after  the  summer  of 
2003. Nevertheless, overall, real GDP in the euro area increased by only 0.5% in 2003. 
Annual HICP inflation slowed down slightly in 2003 to 2.1% on average, from 2.3% on average in both 
2001 and 2002. The persistence of inflation above 2% was mainly caused by increases in a number of 
volatile components of the HICP, in particular oil prices, and, in the second half of 2003, food prices. 
Rises in indirect taxes and administrative prices also added to inflation in 2003. From a medium-term 
perspective, however, we expected price developments to remain in line with price stability after the 
progressive elimination of the influences of those volatile components of the HICP. 
This expectation resulting from our economic analysis was in line with our monetary analysis. Much of 
the  strength  of  monetary  growth  in  early  2003  was  due  to  the  high  level  of  economic  and  financial 
market uncertainty prevailing at that time, which prompted portfolio shifts into safer, short-term liquid 
assets included in M3. In the Governing Council’s assessment, the accumulation of excess liquidity 
was less of a concern for price stability as long as the economic recovery in the euro area remained 
gradual. 
In view of the moderation of medium-term inflationary pressures in the first half of 2003, the ECB’s key 
interest rates were reduced by 25 basis points in March 2003 and by 50 basis points in June of the 
same year. Thus, in June 2003, the interest rate on the main refinancing operations reached the level 
of 2.0%. Since then, this interest rate has remained unchanged at this historically very low level, whilst 
the preservation of inflationary expectations in line with our definition of price stability has contributed 
significantly  to  the  very  low  level  of  medium  and  long  term  nominal  and  real  interest  rates.  The 
resulting yield curve has delivered a financial environment which is lending very significant support to 
the economic recovery. 
Turning  now  to  more  recent  economic  developments,  the  economic  recovery  which  started  in  the 
second half of 2003 has continued in 2004. In terms of year-on-year growth rates, we reached 2% in 
the second quarter of this year. Quarterly growth rates since mid-2003 have been in the order of 0.4% 
to  0.7%.  By  and  large,  output  growth  in  the  last  12  months  was  close  to  present  estimates  of  the 
potential growth rate in the euro area. 
We expect a continuation of this growth trend in the coming quarters. On the external side, the world 
economy  is,  according  to  the  IMF,  currently  recording  its  strongest  growth  in  30  years.  Some 
moderation is expected next year, but euro area exports should nevertheless continue to benefit from 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
favourable  global  demand  conditions  in  2005.  On  the  domestic  side,  investment  should  normally 
benefit from the positive global environment, the very favourable financing conditions in the euro area 
and the improvements in corporate efficiency, and there is scope in the euro area as a whole for a 
strengthening of private consumption. 
Naturally,  some  uncertainties  to  this  outlook  exist.  One  of  the  risks  stems from  developments  in  oil 
markets. If oil prices were to remain high, or even to increase further, they could dampen the strength 
of the recovery, both inside and outside the euro area, despite the fact that the oil intensity of the euro 
area is significantly lower than it was in the 1970s. We also need to keep in mind that part of the oil 
price  increases  is  due  to strong  global  demand,  which was  not  the  case  in  the  first  and second  oil 
shocks. But it remains true that the oil price increase constitutes an adverse supply shock for the euro 
area economy as a whole. For the oil price shock to be absorbed smoothly, the policy mistakes of the 
past must not be repeated. In particular, “second-round” effects must be avoided. 
With regard to consumer prices, oil market developments have had a direct impact on the euro area 
HICP.  Following  an  annual  rate  of  1.7%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2004,  inflation  reached  2.3%  in  the 
second quarter and 2.2% in the third quarter. Inflation rates over the past year have also been driven 
up  by  exceptionally  strong  rises  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices.  Nevertheless,  looking 
ahead, the available information does not indicate that stronger underlying inflationary pressures are 
building up domestically as yet. Wage developments have remained moderate since the last quarter of 
2003, and this trend should continue. Provided that there are no further significant shocks to prices, 
annual inflation rates should drop below 2% in the course of 2005. 
However, I should also stress that, over recent quarters, several upward risks to the outlook for price 
stability have emerged which call for ongoing vigilance. These again relate to oil price developments, 
in  particular  if  second-round  effects  stemming  from  wage  and  price-setting  behaviour  materialise. 
Other concerns relate to long-term inflation expectations and monetary trends. 
Indeed,  the  downward  trend  in  annual  M3  growth  since  mid-2003  appears  to  have  halted  over  the 
summer of 2004, and the shorter-term dynamics of M3 have strengthened. This reflects the fact that 
the historically low level of interest rates in the euro area continues to support monetary expansion. 
The low level of interest rates is also fuelling the growth of credit to the private sector and we have 
witnessed continued strong growth in loans for house purchase. Given the strength of M3 growth over 
the  past  few  years,  there  is  substantially  more  liquidity  in  the  euro  area  than  is  needed  to  finance 
non-inflationary  growth.  This  could  pose  inflationary  risks  in  the  future  if  this  excess  liquidity  is  not 
progressively  reduced  as  a  result  of  reverse  portfolio  shifts  accompanying  the  recovery.  Moreover, 
persistently  high  excess  liquidity  and  strong  credit  growth  could  become  a  source  of  unsustainable 
asset price increases. 
A sound and credible monetary policy is a necessary condition for sustainable growth and job creation 
but  is  not  in  itself  a  sufficient  condition.  Other  conditions  must  be  met,  in  particular,  sound  fiscal 
policies and appropriate structural reforms. In this respect, in the area of fiscal policy the year 2003 
proved  disappointing.  The  average  fiscal  deficit  in  the  euro  area  increased  from  2.4%  to  2.7%. 
Moreover,  the  fiscal  situation  remained  of  great  concern  in  countries  that  had  already  recorded 
significant imbalances in 2002. The aggregate euro area fiscal deficit-to-GDP ratio is not expected to 
improve in 2004 and the average debt-to-GDP ratio is expected to further deteriorate. This is a source 
of concern - all the more so in view of the important challenges for the consolidation of public finances 
which will have to be faced in the coming years, such as the fiscal burden of an ageing population. 
Last year fiscal policy in the EMU faced a number of serious challenges. On 25 November 2003 the 
EU Council decided not to act on the basis of the Commission’s recommendation and agreed to hold 
the excessive deficit procedure for the countries concerned in abeyance. The Governing Council of the 
ECB has, the very same day, supported the view of the Commission. The Stability and Growth Pact is 
a cornerstone of EMU. It is key to providing an economic rationale to a single currency area which has 
no  federal  government  and  to  ensuring  macroeconomic  stability  on  a  sustainable  basis.  The 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  of  the  opinion  that  substantial  improvements  in  the  Pact’s 
implementation are needed, particularly as regards the preventive arm of the Pact. At the same time, it 
is not in favour of making changes to the text of the Treaty or of the Regulations which form the basis 
of the Pact and we insist on the importance of preserving the full integrity of the nominal anchor of 3% 
in  the  corrective  arm  of  the  Pact.  I  would  also  stress  the  vital  importance  of  a  reliable  and  timely 
reporting  of  government  finance  statistics  which  would  not  be  subject,  in  any  respect,  to  political 
interference and electoral cycles. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
On a more positive note, both 2003 and 2004 have seen some progress towards structural reforms in 
several  euro  area  countries.  While  implementing  these  reforms  has  not  always  been  easy,  I  am 
confident that we will be able to see their positive effects in the next years. I have said clearly that the 
ECB  was  backing  governments,  parliaments  and  social  partners  that  had  embarked  on  those 
necessary  reforms  in  the  euro  area.  However,  we  should  not  become  complacent.  In  many  areas 
further  reforms  are  needed.  The  continuing  reform  process  is  key  to  enhancing  the  euro  area’s 
production  potential  and  ensuring  future  growth  and  employment  opportunities.  Let  me  also  stress 
here that I am particularly concerned about the very abnormally high level of youth unemployment in 
many of our member countries. 
The year 2003 was also marked by the final preparations for the enlargement of the European Union 
by  ten  new Member  States with  effect  from  1  May 2004.  For  the  ECB’s part,  the  integration  of  the 
central banks of the ten new Member States into the European System of Central Banks proceeded 
very smoothly. The governors of the central banks of these countries are now members of the ESCB’s 
General Council. In addition, the currencies of three of the ten countries have joined the exchange rate 
mechanism II (ERM II). 
Important challenges remain for these countries on the road to adopting the euro. Last week the ECB, 
like  the  Commission,  published  the  first  Convergence  Report  dealing  with  these  countries  together 
with Sweden. The report, which uses the same framework as was used in the previous Convergence 
Reports, identified several priority areas in which individual countries will be required to make further 
efforts before they can adopt the euro. The picture which emerged varies significantly from country to 
country, but many share similar challenges with regard to price stability, fiscal sustainability, exchange 
rate  stability  and  interest  rate  convergence,  albeit  to  differing  degrees.  In  addition,  institutional 
convergence  has  not  yet  been  achieved  in  all  countries,  in  particular  in  the  area  of  central  bank 
independence. I cannot overemphasise the latter’s importance for the successful pursuit of monetary 
policy. Overall, there is no uniform or preset timetable for the adoption of the euro by those member 
countries. 
 The  ECB  appreciates  the  favourable  comments  contained  in  the  European  Parliament’s  draft 
resolution on the ECB’s monetary policy strategy in 2003. Since its inception, the ECB has strived to 
demonstrate  a  strong  commitment  to  achieving  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  Inflation  has 
remained subdued, despite a sequence of adverse disturbances. The draft resolution is in line with our 
thinking  that  it  is  by  aiming  at  the  credible  pursuit  of  price  stability  as  its  primary  objective,  and  by 
solidly anchoring medium and long-term inflation expectations, that the central bank will make the best 
possible contribution to creating an economic environment most conducive to sustainable growth. 
Other issues raised in the European Parliament’s draft resolution on the ECB’s Annual Report 
2003 
Mr President, honourable Members of the European  Parliament, let me re-emphasise that the ECB 
attaches  the  highest  importance  to  its  regular  exchanges  of  views  with  the  European  Parliament, 
which  is  underscored  in  the  2003  Annual  Report.  I  am  therefore  gratified  to  note  that  the  draft 
resolution deems our dialogue a success. Indeed, the ECB is grateful for the suggestions made by 
Parliament. In this context, I can report to you that the ECB has decided to henceforth publish staff 
economic forecasts on a quarterly basis, in line with a proposal made by the European Parliament last 
year. 
I have noted - and welcome - the fact that on most important issues the views expressed in the draft 
resolution  are  very similar  to  those  held  by  the ECB,  such  as  your statements  on  the  ECB’s  policy 
conduct  in  2003  and  your  diagnosis  that  a  lack  of  structural  reform  is  a  major  factor  behind  the 
weakness of euro area economic growth. I also welcome the fact that your draft resolution reflects the 
fact  that  there  is  a  firm  link  between  the  credible  pursuit  of  price  stability  on  the  one  hand  and  the 
creation of an economic environment which is most conducive to growth on the other. I also fully share 
the view that more than five years on, EMU can be regarded as a great success. 
On  some  issues,  however,  slight  differences  of  view  remain.  The  draft  resolution  asks  for  the 
publication of the minutes of the Governing Council meetings whilst accepting implicitly that individual 
votes  of  members  would  not  be  made  public.  We  would  very  much  appreciate  that  the  Parliament 
could accept the argument that the publication of the votes of individual members of the Governing 
Council could trigger national public debates on whether national central bank governors have taken 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
due account of national interests, when the Treaty calls for us to focus on the euro area as a whole. 
Such public discussions would have very adverse consequences for the credibility and effectiveness 
of the ECB’s monetary policy. 
As  regards  the  minutes  I  have  to  stress  that  the  ECB  presents  and  explains  its  monetary  policy 
decisions  by  means  of  comprehensive  public  statements  at  its  press  conferences  which  take  place 
immediately  after  Governing  Council  meetings.  By  adopting  this  procedure  in  1999,  the  ECB 
contributed to improving the global ‘state of the art’ in central bank transparency and became the first 
central bank to release a fully fledged diagnosis to explain monetary policy decisions immediately after 
they are taken. The information conveyed by the ECB in this way is, in essence, similar to what other 
central  banks  publish  in  “summary  minutes”,  as  it  properly  reflects  the  overall  discussion  in  the 
Governing  Council.  The  ECB  is  the  only  major  central  bank  which  makes  possible  an  immediate 
interaction with the media. These features make the ECB one of the most transparent central banks in 
the world. 
Let me also briefly touch upon the joint work of the ESCB and the Committee of European Securities 
Regulators with regard to the development of standards in the field of clearing and settlement, which is 
also addressed in the draft resolution. These standards are an important contribution to a safe and 
integrated securities infrastructure. The ECB attaches great importance to this objective, given that the 
current fragmentation of the infrastructure results in additional securities transaction costs and could 
become a source of financial instability. 
However, while the ESCB-CESR standards on securities clearing and settlement have been designed 
in full compliance with the present regulatory framework, they are clearly not intended to pre-empt any 
future legislative acts in this area. Thus, should a Directive on clearing and settlement be adopted at a 
later stage, these standards would have to be assessed from the point of view their conformity with the 
provisions of such a Directive and, if necessary, amended accordingly. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2004
