David Dodge: Financial system efficiency - a Canadian imperative 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Empire Club of Canada and the 
Canadian Club of Toronto, Toronto, 9 December 2004.  
 Good  afternoon.  It  is  a  privilege  for  me  to  address  this  joint  meeting  of  the  Empire  and  Canadian 
clubs, and I thank you for the opportunity to do so. 
I am particularly pleased to speak to you today because this is a bit of a red-letter day on the Bank of 
Canada’s calendar. Today, we released the latest edition of our semi-annual Financial System Review 
(FSR). This publication, which is only a couple of years old, examines issues that relate to Canada’s 
financial  system.  Each  edition  of  the  FSR  takes  a  look  at  recent  developments  and  trends  in  the 
financial system, as well as issues that have an impact on its efficiency, safety, and soundness. This is 
because the overall role of the Bank in the financial system area is to promote its safety, soundness, 
and efficiency. Today’s edition contains a number of articles that focus on the promotion of financial 
system efficiency and stability. And it is the issue of financial system efficiency that I will talk about 
today.  
I  will  begin  with  a  brief  discussion  of  how  the  Bank  of  Canada  contributes  to  the  efficiency  of  the 
financial system at the macroeconomic level. Then, I will spend most of my time discussing how we 
can  improve  efficiency  in  Canadian  financial  institutions  and  markets;  that  is,  the  microeconomic 
aspects of efficiency. 
But before I do that, I should start by defining what I mean by “financial system” and “efficiency.” Then, 
I will explain why it is so critically important for Canada to improve in this area. 
When  I  talk  about  the  “financial  system,”  I  am  referring  to  financial  institutions  and  markets,  the 
infrastructure, laws, and regulations that govern and support their operations, and the macroeconomic 
framework within which they operate. My message for you is that improving the efficiency of Canada’s 
financial system is imperative. 
But what is an efficient financial system? In economic terms, an efficient financial system is one that 
helps to allocate scarce economic resources to the most productive uses, in a cost-effective way. The 
ultimate goal is to have Canada’s financial institutions and markets match investors and their savings 
with appropriate, productive investments. Put more directly, if Canadians want sustainable economic 
growth and prosperity, our financial system must function as efficiently as possible. 
Let me explain why efficiency is so important. With an efficient system, investors can get the highest 
risk-adjusted  returns  on  their  investments  and  borrowers  can  minimize  the  costs  of  raising  capital. 
Inefficiencies can drive a wedge between what borrowers pay and what investors receive. I’ll give you 
some examples of how inefficiencies can interfere with the saving and investment process that is so 
crucial to economic growth. If adequate information isn’t available, potential investors can’t tell whether 
a  particular  investment  fits  with  their  tolerance  for  risk.  If  financing  costs  are  too  high  because  of 
inefficiencies, borrowers won’t be able to secure the funds they need to expand. If competition isn’t 
encouraged, the  various  players  in  the financial  system  won’t  have  the  right  incentives  to  innovate. 
This is why it’s so critical for the financial system to work efficiently.  
Efficiency and the Bank of Canada  
I  would  now  like  to  spend  a  few  minutes  on  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  role  in  promoting  an  efficient 
financial  system.  In  order  to  have  such  a  system,  we  need  above  all  a  supportive  framework  of 
macroeconomic policies that minimize uncertainty and enhance confidence about the future value of 
money. This includes prudent fiscal policies, which are the responsibility of ministers of finance. It also 
includes effective monetary policy, which is the Bank of Canada’s responsibility.  
We achieve effective monetary policy through our system of inflation targeting. One of the key benefits 
of this regime is that inflation expectations have become well anchored on the 2 per cent target, not 
just  in  the  short  term,  but  also  in  the  long  term.  As  a  result,  borrowers  now  pay  a  much  smaller 
   1/4 
premium to compensate investors for inflation risk. This is particularly important at the long end of the 
yield curve. Reduced uncertainty has led to lower costs for borrowers and to a more efficient allocation 
of resources. 
The promotion of a safe and sound financial system that reduces uncertainties and systemic risk can 
also contribute to efficiency. We work in partnership with federal and provincial agencies, regulators, 
and  market  participants  in  this  area,  in  order  to  actively  foster  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the 
financial  system.  We  also  have  a  number  of  unique  responsibilities.  It  is  our  role,  for  example,  to 
oversee  those  payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  systems  that  could  pose  systemic  risk.  These 
systems have been designed to provide certainty that large-value payments or securities transactions 
will settle in real time. In addition, they have been designed to operate using a relatively small amount 
of liquidity compared with systems in other countries. This frees up resources that can be put to more 
productive use elsewhere. The Bank of Canada is also the “lender of last resort” - the ultimate provider 
of liquidity to the financial system. Indeed, we’ve just concluded a review of that role, and the details 
can be found in the FSR that we released today. 
There is also an international element to our efforts. The Bank of Canada works with partners in other 
countries on initiatives to strengthen the international financial system. The goal is to minimize the risk 
of a financial crisis in one part of the world spreading across borders. But that’s a topic for a whole 
other speech. 
So  to  summarize,  Canada’s  macroeconomic  and  prudential  policies  generally  do  the  job  they  are 
supposed to do in supporting efficiency. But let me be clear - we are not complacent; we are always 
looking for ways to improve. Continuous improvement is essential.  
Efficiency in financial institutions and markets  
Now,  I  want  to  talk  more  specifically  about  the  microeconomic  aspects  of  efficiency  in  financial 
institutions and markets, including the promotion of competition and the provision of an appropriate 
legal  and  regulatory  framework.  Competition  drives  innovation  and  efficiency  gains.  And  an 
appropriate  legal and regulatory  framework gives  all  investors  fair  access  to  necessary  information, 
while minimizing the costs of raising capital. 
The  evidence  shows  that  Canada’s  financial  institutions  and  markets  have  generally  been  efficient 
when  compared  with  those  in  other  countries.  But  over  the  past  decade,  markets  and  financial 
institutions elsewhere have become - and are becoming - more efficient. To stay competitive in this 
environment, Canada’s financial system must also constantly increase its efficiency. If we don’t make 
this effort, the Canadian economy will suffer. The status quo won’t cut it. 
So  what  should  our  priorities  be?  I’ll  talk  about  financial  institutions  first  and  then  about  financial 
markets. 
Efficiency and financial institutions  
In terms of financial institutions, a quick look backward may show us the way forward. I want to go 
back 40 years, to 1964, and recall the Royal Commission on Banking and Finance, otherwise known 
as the Porter Commission. The Porter Commission was well ahead of its time, with groundbreaking 
analysis  and  policy  recommendations.  In  the  post-World  War  II  environment,  where  extensive 
government controls on the economy were still thought desirable, Porter came out strongly in favour of 
greater competition, freer markets, and effective regulation that served to enhance efficiency.  
In the wake of the Porter Commission, Canada revised its financial legislation in some crucial ways. 
Canadian  banks  responded  to  the  new  competitive  environment  by  innovating  and  enhancing 
efficiency. Canadian institutions became world leaders, as financial institutions in many other countries 
were still operating under more restrictive and less-efficient regulatory regimes. Over the next three 
decades, Canada  continued  to  lead  the  world.  Successive  revisions  of  legislation  covering  financial 
institutions  encouraged  greater  cross-pillar  competition  in  some  areas,  leading  to  lower  costs  and 
improved efficiency. But over the past decade, other countries have caught up and are forging ahead.  
During this time, two trends changed the global environment for financial institutions. First, with the 
expansion of world trade, national markets became truly global. Financial institutions had to find ways 
to  provide  enhanced  services  to  customers  worldwide.  Second,  other  countries  -  particularly  the 
United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom  -  began  to  align  their  regulatory  frameworks  with  the 
   2/4 
competitive  philosophy  of  the  Porter  Commission.  The  regulatory  barriers  that  had  held  back 
competition, both geographically and among different types of institutions, began to fall rapidly.  
Out of this more open and competitive environment came consolidation - not just among institutions 
but across pillars and jurisdictions. As a result, foreign institutions were better placed to exploit new 
technologies in order to enhance efficiency, and to offer new instruments and combinations of services 
to their clients. These two trends have led to great benefits for consumers worldwide, and they are 
continuing.  
In  these  circumstances,  Canada  faces  a  difficult  policy  challenge.  How  can  we  enhance  our  policy 
framework to provide greater incentives for innovation by encouraging competition while, at the same 
time,  giving  our  institutions  the  scope  to  improve efficiency?  This  is  the  challenge  for Canadians  in 
considering mergers, both within and across pillars, and the removal of barriers to foreign competition.  
The questions about the best ways to enhance competition - to balance incentives for efficiency with 
other legitimate public policy concerns - are complex. And I don’t have simple answers. But efficiency 
must be at the heart of the debate. Because, in the end, an efficient financial system is key for the 
future - not just of the institutions, but of the Canadian economy as a whole. 
Financial market efficiency  
Let  me  now  turn  to  financial  markets.  When  it  comes  to  the  competitiveness  of  global  financial 
markets,  size,  depth,  and  liquidity  do  matter.  So  Canadian  financial  markets  -  whether  equity, 
fixed-income, derivatives, or foreign-exchange - have an inherent disadvantage compared with those 
in New York or London. To compensate, Canadian financial markets have to be relatively even more 
efficient. 
So what can Canada do to improve the efficiency of its markets? One area that has received a lot of 
attention, not just in Canada but in many other countries, is securities regulation. The key issue is to 
reduce what economists call “information asymmetries” by as much as is practical. What that means is 
that  our  regulatory  framework  should  aim  -  in  general  -  at  having  market  prices  reflect  all  relevant 
information, and that all parties to a transaction should have fair access to that information. We can 
enhance efficiency by reducing information asymmetries up to the point where the cost of additional 
compliance would outweigh the benefits. 
Following events such as Enron, Parmalat, and Livent, it became clear that investors were not always 
receiving sufficient and accurate information. Corporate scandals prompted many an investor to say: 
“There oughta be a law!” - a law to make publicly traded companies disclose all information. But in the 
rush to write laws and regulations, too much attention has been paid to detailed rules that govern how 
companies disclose  information,  rather than  focusing  on what  they  disclose. We have seen  a  large 
increase  in  the  costs  of  providing  information  -  particularly  in  the  United  States  -  without 
commensurate progress towards improving the relevance of the information being disclosed. 
The  concept  of  relevant  disclosure  is  particularly  important  for  a  country  like  Canada,  where  public 
companies range in size from the very small to the large and multinational. The precise nature of what 
constitutes relevant  information  differs depending on the  size  and  complexity  of  the  firm.  Corporate 
disclosure  regulations  should  recognize  this.  For  large,  complex  firms,  more  complex  rules  are 
required in order for investors to receive appropriate information. But for smaller firms, less-complex 
disclosure regulations - and lower costs of compliance - may result in the best cost-benefit balance. 
The  Canadian  Securities  Administrators  recognized  this  point  in  putting  forward  new  proposals  for 
guidelines for corporate governance that are based on a firm’s size. 
There  is  another  consideration,  and  that  is  the  need  for  some companies  to have  access  to  global 
capital markets. Firms that want to list on international exchanges will have to follow the disclosure 
rules  that  apply  in  those markets.  And  large  Canadian  firms  that  want  to raise  capital  abroad  need 
regulations  here  that  are  recognized  as  meeting  international  standards.  But  smaller,  less-complex 
firms - which make up the vast majority of publicly listed companies in Canada - may not want to raise 
capital  abroad.  So  it  may  not  make  sense  for  Canadian  regulators  to  force  these  smaller  firms  to 
comply with the kinds of detailed rules that would be appropriate for large firms. 
Let me be clear. The principles at the heart of Canada’s regulatory framework must be as good as, or 
better than, those of any other country. But keep in mind that companies considered to be mid-sized in 
terms of capitalization in Canada would be regarded as micro-capitalized by international standards. 
Historically,  Canada’s  public  markets  have  done  very  well  in  funding  these  smaller  companies 
   3/4 
efficiently. This should continue in the future. So it is clear to me that our regulatory framework should 
take into account differing levels of size and complexity when establishing rules for disclosure.  
The  rule  requiring  CEOs  to  sign-off  on  their  financial  statements  is  a  case  in  point.  The  principle 
behind the rule is to try to make sure that investors have sufficient and accurate information. Holding 
the CEO accountable is a good way to go about this. The principle can work equally well for large and 
small firms. But we need to be careful. For very large and complex organizations, setting out some 
detailed  rules  in  terms  of  procedures  may  be  helpful.  However,  we  do  not  need  a  whole  raft  of 
complex rules that tell the CEOs of smaller firms what procedures they must follow before they can put 
their signatures on their financial statements. We need to be careful not to write rules that govern only 
the inputs that come before the CEO sign-off. Rather, we need to focus on getting the output right, so 
that the document that the CEO signs actually gives investors sufficient and accurate information. 
Efficiency  dictates  that  Canada  should  have  uniform  securities  laws  and  regulations,  based  on 
principles  that  apply  to  everyone.  Some  have  taken  this  idea  further  and  advocated  for  a  single, 
pan-Canadian  securities  regulator.  I’m  not  here  today  to  weigh  in  on  that  debate.  But  I  do  want  to 
stress that, whatever the structure of the regulator, we must strive for efficiency in regulation - the best 
regulation, at the lowest cost.  
Now  let  me  talk  briefly  about  another  important  information  issue,  and  that  is  the  issue  of  price 
transparency in markets. Here, I am referring to timely, public disclosure of transaction details, such as 
price and volume. It is not difficult to see how this information leads to better resource allocation.  
The appropriate level of transparency may vary from market to market. Generally, the more liquid the 
market, the higher the level of transparency it can support. However, the world is moving to greater 
transparency  in  all  markets  through  the  spread  of  technology.  The  Bank  of  Canada  is  conducting 
research  and  working  with  market  participants  and  regulators  on  ways  to  increase  transparency  in 
Canadian markets, with due regard for liquidity, equitable access, and fair play. Together with price 
transparency, these are the ingredients that help to create efficient, well-functioning markets. 
It  is  important  that  we  get  transparency  and  regulation  right.  But  we  also  need  to  devote  the 
appropriate  time  and  effort  to  making  the  most  of  whatever  rules  we  write,  including  existing  ones. 
This  means  focusing  on  a  range  of  smaller  initiatives  that  can  enhance  efficiency.  For  example, 
provincial and territorial legislatures need to make the Uniform Securities Transfer Act a priority. Such 
an act would provide a sounder legal basis for the holding and transfer of rights in securities that are 
held in book-entry form, and would replace the current patchwork of legal rules in this area. Another 
initiative is the Canadian Capital Markets Association’s focus on trade-matching to support progress 
towards straight-through processing.  
There’s one more area where it is absolutely critical for Canada to continue to improve, and that is 
enforcement.  There  is  a  widely  held  perception  that  Canadian  authorities  aren’t  tough  enough  in 
punishing fraud and enforcing insider-trading and other rules. That’s why it is encouraging to see that 
steps  to  toughen  enforcement  are  being  taken,  by  provincial  securities  commissions,  by  the 
Investment Dealers Association, by law-enforcement agencies, and by the federal government. These 
kinds of steps to improve enforcement must continue.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. To improve the economic and financial welfare of Canadians, we need an efficient 
financial  system.  The  Bank  of  Canada  has  been  contributing  to  this  goal  by  enhancing  Canadians’ 
confidence  about  the  value  of  their  money  and  by  reducing  risks  to  the  safety  and  stability  of  the 
financial system. Our Financial System Review is part of this effort.  
But the effort must extend far beyond the central bank. I’ve raised some issues today that I think are 
critical to enhancing the efficiency of our financial system. None of these issues are new. They have 
been studied and analyzed thoroughly. But while Canada has been studying and analyzing, the rest of 
the world has been acting. It’s time for us to act, too. We have to get on with the job of improving 
efficiency. The future health of our economy and the prosperity of Canadians depend on it.  
   4/4 
