Jean-Pierre Roth: The role of the International Monetary Fund in promoting 
financial stability - a Swiss perspective 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at a 
meeting  with  directors  of  the  most  important  Swiss  firms  in  Argentina,  Buenos  Aires,  16  November 
2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  in  Buenos  Aires  to  address  such  a  distinguished  audience,  and  I  thank 
Ambassador von Muralt for organizing this event. For the next 20 minutes or so I would like to speak 
about the International Monetary Fund’s role in promoting international financial stability, and this from 
a Swiss perspective. 
I know that talking about IMF policy can be difficult here in Argentina. However, the Argentine case 
should not hamper our discussions. It should invite us to reflect on what the Fund has achieved so far 
in promoting international financial stability and what its present challenges are. 
Promoting  and  safeguarding  international  financial  stability  was  part  of  the  mandate  of  the  IMF  in 
1944, when the institution was established. It is still, in my mind, the core mandate of the IMF today. 
There should be no doubt that a strong and resilient international financial system is crucial for global 
growth and prosperity. This is even more so the case after the structural changes of the last decade, in 
particular the worldwide information technology revolution that led to a strong increase in the size and 
sophistication of international capital markets. In a globalized world, it is even more imperative for the 
Fund  to  focus  on  promoting  stability  as  a  global  public  commodity.  We  have  enough  experience  to 
know how costly it can be if things go wrong. 
Saying  that  Switzerland  treasures  a  stable  international  environment  is  in  many  respects  an 
understatement. Given the openness of our economy and the fact that we host an important financial 
centre, international financial stability for us has all the connotations of a vital national interest. To put 
things into the right perspective, allow me to mention a few figures that show how interconnected our 
economic  well-being  is  with  global  developments.  In  2003,  Swiss  exports  of  goods  and  services 
amounted to 44 percent of GDP. The GDP contribution of our heavily internationally oriented financial 
sector  reached  10  percent.  This  figure  rises  to  14  percent  if  we  also  include  the  insurance  sector. 
Swiss banks occupy a leading international position, particularly in the area of wealth management. 
The  value  of  total  assets  managed  in  domestic  banks  as  at  the  end  of  2003  amounted  to 
US$ 2.7 trillion. According to various estimates, this corresponds to about one-third of the world’s total 
private wealth managed abroad. Last, but not least, the banking and the insurance sectors combined 
employ  approximately  185,000  people,  the  equivalent  of  6  percent  of  total  Swiss  employment, 
whereas the fiscal contribution of the banking sector alone amounts to about 13 percent of total tax 
revenues. 
Under  the  circumstances,  it  should  come  as  no  surprise  that  Switzerland  fully  supports  the  IMF  in 
attaching the highest priority to stability and crisis prevention. The main tool in this endeavour is clearly 
surveillance. Surveillance remains the most important activity of the Fund as its first line of defense 
against turmoil. However, this activity is hardly known to the wider public. Unlike an agreement on a 
multi-billion rescue package, efforts to prevent a financial crisis never hit the headlines. Surveillance is 
relatively  unknown,  probably  also  because  it  is  a  very  complex  animal,  hard  to  explain,  and  with 
dozens of connotations. 
I  have  neither  the  time  nor  the  desire  to  elaborate  on  all  the  elements  of  present-day  Fund 
surveillance.  However  I  believe  that  some  points  are  worth  emphasizing.  In  the  first  part  of  my 
presentation I shall begin with some remarks on transparency, both in the context of the Fund and with 
regard to its role in promoting market discipline. I shall then elaborate a bit on surveillance in financial 
markets.  In  the  second  part  of  my  presentation,  I  shall  take  up  issues  linked  to  crisis  resolution. 
However, much effort goes into crisis prevention, crises cannot be completely ruled out in an open and 
dynamic  global  economy;  the  IMF,  therefore,  needs  to  be  and  to  remain  an  efficient  “fire-fighter”.  I 
shall  elaborate  on  this  “fire  fighter”  role  of  the  Fund,  on  the  limits  of  its  action,  and  on  what  is 
necessary to preserve efficiency and credibility in this context. 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 1
Surveillance and crisis prevention 
2. 
Let first me turn to crisis prevention. I shall start with a general remark. Surveillance is the backbone of 
crisis prevention. However, for surveillance to be effective, it must not only be correct, it must also be 
implemented. Implementing stability-oriented policies and efficiently monitoring domestic markets and 
institutions is the primary responsibility of the member country. The Fund can only help countries that 
are willing to help themselves. As any Argentinean would say, it takes two to tango. The Fund’s role is 
limited to providing the best possible objective advice built upon the best possible analytical expertise. 
This is not to say, of course, that Fund advice is always correct or appropriate. Though Fund staff is 
highly qualified, it can make mistakes. Indeed, mistakes have been made most often due to a poor 
understanding of the country-specific circumstances. 
It is therefore crucial to maintain a high-quality dialogue between authorities and staff at all times. The 
more the interaction between a country and the Fund is frank, constructive and based on mutual trust, 
the bigger the chances are of a valuable and usable outcome. Though Switzerland joined the IMF in 
1992 only, we can already record some very good experiences in this regard. Most appreciated, for 
instance, were the discussions that took place between our experts at the Swiss National Bank and 
Fund staff in the period of the formulation of the new monetary concept that was introduced in 2000. 
The second point I want to raise is that if mistakes cannot be avoided, at least we should learn from 
them. It is the sovereign prerogative of any state to deal with that issue within its own borders, and I 
shall not elaborate on that. The Fund, on the other hand, is an international public institution and is 
constantly  confronted  with  the  need  to  justify  its  actions.  Though  strictly  speaking  it  remains 
accountable only to its members’ authorities, in reality, the legitimacy bar has been raised in recent 
years. A wider section of society is more and more eager to engage the Fund in the various aspects of 
its activity. I think this is a most welcome development: the Fund has become an institution much more 
ready to listen than before. A milestone in this respect has been the institutionalization of the process 
of evaluating Fund activity with the creation of an Independent Evaluation Office in 2001. This office is 
now  fully  operational.  It  has  already  produced  very  valuable  analyses,  and  I  am  sure  that  its 
evaluations will greatly contribute to improving the future way of doing business of the Fund. 
The prerequisite for a constructive enlarged debate is of course transparency. And transparency has 
taken a “quantum leap” in the last decade, to use the words of the Managing Director Rodrigo de Rato. 
Switzerland  has  always  pushed  to  help  the  IMF  in  opening  up  and  overcoming  its  questionable 
reputation of being a secretive institution. We are happy with the results. The transformation from an 
institution that used to publish virtually nothing to an institution that publishes virtually everything took 
place in a very short period of time. We like to believe that our influence in this policy change was not 
negligible, not least with our unilateral decision in 1994 to publish the Fund report of the first Swiss 
Article IV consultation against all the then-existing rules. This was a precursory move that, although it 
earned our executive director a few moments of severe and formal reproof from the Board, had the 
merit to de-dramatize the publication debate by showing that the world would not come to an end if 
more information was disseminated about national policies. Subsequent developments have proved 
that  much  more  could  be  done  without  jeopardizing  the  fine  trade-off  between  openness  and 
maintaining the Fund’s role as a confidential advisor to its members. 
Transparency is important not only for legitimacy reasons. In the new information-technology world, it 
has  become  a  crucial  element  of  stability.  Transparency,  together  with  more  reliable  information, 
facilitates  a  smoother  functioning  of  markets  and  helps  them  in  assessing  risks  more  accurately, 
thereby strengthening market discipline. Stronger market discipline through transparency must be the 
new rule. Globalisation forces us to change. This means, for instance, that the range of action has 
considerably shrunk for those countries - rich or poor - that are active on financial markets. Structural 
and  balance  sheet  weaknesses,  inappropriate  exchange  rate  regimes  as  well  as  inconsistent 
macroeconomic policies must be addressed openly, and without hesitation or delay, to avoid market 
reaction. In some cases, a loss of confidence may fuel a snowballing effect that can easily lead to full-
blown capital account crises with high economic and social costs and serious risks of a contagion. 
By changing the rules, globalization forced the international community to change the framework of 
surveillance itself. This came under the general heading of reforming the architecture of the financial 
system. It is an ongoing, very ambitious project with many ramifications. Switzerland strongly supports 
it as well as all the related initiatives. I think we can safely say that a lot has already been achieved. 
The  structure  of  the  international  financial  system  is  today  more  robust  and  in  a  better  position  to 
withstand future challenges. Part of this project was to provide more information about countries and 
their  policies  to  help  investors  make  the  right  judgments.  A  number  of  standards  and  codes  were 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2004
defined  to  include  data  dissemination,  fiscal  transparency,  and  monetary  and  financial  policy 
transparency. Another aspect of the reform was strengthening Fund surveillance through its renewed 
focus  on  financial  markets.  Much  more  attention  is  today  paid  to  the  structure  of  national  financial 
systems and the institutional preconditions that have to be in place for countries to fully benefit from 
capital  account  liberalization.  A  key  initiative  in  this  regard  is  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
Program (FSAP), a health check-up of national financial sectors made in collaboration with the World 
Bank. Switzerland volunteered to undergo such a check-up in 2002. Once more, it was a useful and 
gratifying experience to interact with outside experts. And the reason I am saying this has nothing to 
do with the fact that the Swiss financial center came out of this surveillance exercise with very high 
marks. 
Financial crisis resolution 
3. 
Let me now turn to the second part of my presentation, the Fund’s role in crisis resolution. Here I have 
no direct Swiss experience to report on since my country, fortunately, never had to resort to financial 
support from the Fund. I will therefore speak from the perspective of a medium-size shareholder that 
believes that financial crises are market failures with potential systemic risks and that the Fund can 
and should play an important role in resolving them. 
The nature, scale and spread of financial crises have changed dramatically since the Tequila turmoil in 
Mexico in 1994. Financial integration and capital account liberalization brought about a huge increase 
in financial flows. Emerging economies did benefit from this new reallocation of international savings 
and some staggering economic results were obtained (annual GDP growth between 1986 and 1996 
for countries in South-East Asia averaged close to 8 percent). However, the new financial setting also 
made emerging countries particularly vulnerable to sudden changes in market sentiment. Losses in 
investors’ confidence could erupt much more quickly and spread across markets in a matter of days. 
Unfortunately, the economic and social costs of the new crises also increased substantially. 
I think we can safely say that the Fund, like anybody else, was caught by surprise by the virulence of 
the  turmoil  that  hit  Asia  in  the  90s.  When  Thailand  and  even  more  so  Korea  were  on  the  verge  of 
financial collapse the Fund looked very much like those generals always ready to fight the previous 
war.  Not  even  its  financial  means  were  adequate,  and  governors  were  rushed  to  decide  a  speedy 
45 percent increase in quotas in January 1998 to supplement the rapidly depleting Fund resources. It 
didn’t take the Fund long, however, to react, to pick up the challenge and, all things considered, to 
come  out  of  that  difficult  situation  relatively  unscathed.  No-one  should  claim  that  everything  went 
smoothly, though, or that no mistake has ever been made. From the side of the Fund, too, it was a 
particularly bumpy trial and error process. 
Quickly  restoring  market  confidence  became  the  name  of  the  game.  How?  This  is  the  difficult 
question.  I  shall  not  elaborate  on  the  design  of  the  various  programs  over  that  period.  A  very 
extensive,  at  times  quite  critical,  economic  literature  on  this  matter,  with  pieces  signed  by  the  best 
pens  in  the  profession,  is  readily  available  for  those  of  you  interested  in  more  details.  What  I  shall 
retain from that experience is that the key to the Fund’s results were its willingness and ability to react 
flexibly to the various circumstances, its readiness to recognize mistakes and change the course of 
action when necessary, and all this while sitting on a ticking time bomb. 
This flexibility bids well also for the future. The importance of adaptability in tackling future financial 
turmoil can never be sufficiently stressed. In a rapidly changing world, any silver bullet can soon lose 
its shine. No piece of advice is sure to preserve its value over time. What we must ensure, more than 
defining  a  set  of  measures  written  in  stone,  is  preserving  the  capacity  of  the  institution  to  quickly 
generate appropriate new responses to handle new situations. 
Financial support is the second aspect of the Fund’s role in crisis resolution. With the emergence of 
the new capital account crises, the need for Fund resources has sharply increased. The access limits 
to Fund resources that were conceived to tackle the more traditional “current account crises” became 
obsolete  overnight.  The  decision-making  process  tilted  completely  from  rules  toward  discretion. 
Multi-billion packages not only became common place; over the years, the burden of financing was 
increasingly put on the IMF. In many respects the situation became unsatisfactory. 
One can easily understand that setting strict limits to Fund financing may not be appropriate in capital 
account crises, as it may restrict the institution’s room for maneuver too severely. The Fund’s business 
is to take calculated risks, and in the new environment of integrated markets, there are cases where 
heavy financing of a country’s balance of payments difficulties is justified. In Korea, for instance, it was 
BIS Review 69/2004 
 3
a  success.  The  50billion  dollar  rescue  package  supported  a  rapid  turnaround  in  confidence  and 
economic performance. This being said, however, one point should be very clear. The IMF is not, and 
should  not  be,  in  a  position  to  always  fully  offset  the  volume  of  private  flows.  For  one  thing,  Fund 
resources  are  limited.  For  another,  the  systematic  relief  of  debtors’  and  private  creditors’ 
responsibilities through Fund financing would create problems of moral hazard. An excessive bail-out 
of negligent investors would also be perceived as unfair by those who are left behind to bear the cost 
of the crisis. 
The most important aspect in decisions on exceptional access to Fund resources does not concern 
amounts. It is rather an issue of whether lending is justified altogether. To help to take this decision 
- and also to increase the predictability of Fund action - a framework was developed. According to this 
framework, the Fund should grant exceptional access if three basic conditions are fulfilled. First, there 
must be a high probability that the debt will remain sustainable; second, the country must have good 
prospects of regaining access to private capital markets; and third, the policy program of the member 
country  must  provide  a  reasonably  strong  probability  of  success.  This  must  include  not  only  the 
member’s adjustment plans, but also its institutional and political capacity to deliver this adjustment. 
This also means that the cooperation between authorities and the Fund must be good and capable of 
generating constructive team-work. 
It has been easier to define this framework than to implement it. To some extent, this is not surprising, 
as  one  cannot  avoid  that  a  strong  element  of  judgment  will  influence  the  assessment  of  the  three 
above-mentioned conditions. And when there is room for judgment, there is always room for political 
interference.  Moreover,  if  we  add  the  fact  that  the  alternative  to  large  financing  very  often  is  the 
prospect of a full-blown crisis, with unpredictable but certainly high - and possibly systemic costs - it is 
not difficult to understand why the international community has often condoned sub-optimal decisions. 
One way to improve the situation and to eliminate this decision bias towards excessive Fund financing 
would be to find ways to involve more consistently the private sector in the resolution of crises and 
thereby  in  burden  sharing.  Once  again,  this  is  easier  said  than  done.  Progress  in  this  respect  has 
been disappointingly slow to emerge. 
Should we conclude that it is too difficult for the IMF to say no? I would definitely not go that far. While 
recognizing  that  capital  crisis  decisions  may  be  too  important  to  leave  only  to  experts,  bending  the 
rules too often can also have serious consequences. One consequence is that the credibility of the 
institution  will  eventually  suffer,  and  this  will  negatively  affect  its  efficiency  to  the  detriment  of  the 
membership  as  a  whole.  The  second  is  that  by  granting  too  many  resources  under  too  uncertain 
conditions the financial soundness of the IMF will be jeopardized. The financial soundness of the Fund 
may well constitute in itself the topic of another speech. Let me just tell you that, although the IMF 
financial  situation  remains  strong,  recent  developments  in  markets  and  in  Fund  lending  have 
increased the risks for the institution. 
Shareholders of the Fund, through the Executive Board, have the responsibility that the Fund takes 
sensible  decisions.  They  have  an  equally  important  responsibility  to  safeguard  the  credibility  and 
soundness of the institution. This can best be done by ensuring that, to the extent possible, the game 
is played according to the rules. To best pursue its mandates, the Fund must not only be competent 
and financially sound, it must also be able to preserve its own independent judgment. With this caveat, 
I would have no problem sharing the very widespread belief that if the Fund did not exist, we would 
have to invent it. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2004
