Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Sustaining Islamic banking and finance growth through 
effective dissemination of information 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the official launching of 
the  Islamic  Banking  and  Takaful  Expo:  “Sustaining  Islamic  banking  and  finance  growth  through 
effective dissemination of information”, Kuala Lumpur, 8 October 2004. 
 “The  domestic  Islamic  financial  system  has  reached  an  unprecedented  expansion,  successfully 
operating in parallel with the conventional financial system. The further development of Islamic finance 
requires for it to be endowed with the right pre-requisites to perform as an effective, efficient, resilient 
form of financial intermediation that supports wealth creation and sustainable economic growth. At the 
heart of this effort is the necessity to meet the financial requirements of consumers and businesses. 
While  significant  progress  has  been  achieved  in  the  development  of  the  overall  Islamic  financial 
infrastructure, financial institutions and products that has been reinforced by the strengthening of the 
regulatory,  Shariah  and  legal  dimensions,  there  has  also  to  be  the  effective  dissemination  of 
information  to  promote  greater  nationwide  awareness  on  Islamic  finance,  to  create  a  more 
well-informed  society  on  the  virtues  and  benefits of  the  financial services  being  provided.  Providing 
information  and knowledge  is  thus  integral  in our  endeavor  to  steer  the development  of  the  Islamic 
financial system in Malaysia.” 
Tuan-tuan dan puan-puan, 
Saya bersyukur dapat bersama para hadirin semua di Majlis Pelancaran Ekspo Perbankan Islam dan 
Takaful 2004, anjuran Persatuan Institusi Perbankan Islam Malaysia (AIBIM). 
Industri  kewangan  Islam  di  Malaysia  telah  muncul  sebagai  satu  komponen  sistem  kewangan  yang 
berdaya maju dan berdaya saing, seiring dengan sistem kewangan konvensional dalam menyumbang 
kepada pembangunan dan pertumbuhan ekonomi negara. Kini kita telah memiliki lanskap kewangan 
Islam yang komprehensif, dan kejayaan kita dalam mengintegrasikannya telah menyumbang kepada 
proses pengantaraan kewangan domestik yang lebih progresif. Sehingga kini, perbankan Islam telah 
berjaya  menjana  aset  sekitar  RM90  bilion  atau  10  peratus  daripada  juzuk  pasaran.  Industri  takaful 
pula telah mencatat aset sejumlah hampir RM5.0 bilion. 
To  further  strengthen  the  Islamic  financial  system  and  sustain  its  growth,  it  is  vital  to  enhance  the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the Islamic financial institutions in meeting the changing requirements 
of  our  economy.  The  Islamic  financial  infrastructure  needs  to  be  continually  enhanced  to  meet  the 
new, more complex and differentiated demands of the various economic activities of the  respective 
sectors of our economy. Of importance is the need to provide a mechanism to ensure accessibility to 
information  by  the  public  on  Islamic  financial  services  and  products.  An  extensive  and  structured 
education programme is thus key to enhance consumer and business awareness and knowledge on 
the products and services. It also represents part of the efforts to promote market integrity over the 
activities in the market. Of equal importance is also the need to strengthen the consumer protection 
infrastructure in Islamic finance.  
Effective  dissemination  of  information  will  provide  consumers  and  businesses  with  the  necessary 
information to undertake the financial transactions with awareness of their rights and accountabilities. 
In making financial decisions, consumers require various information and details about the processes 
and documentation involved, the relevant fees and charges to be incurred and the risks and benefits 
of each type of financial product or service. This will allow consumers to be aware of the opportunities 
available,  actively  manage  their  financial  position  while  at  the  same  time,  safeguard  their  financial 
future. The avenues to seek redress must also be easily accessible and available. Of importance is 
the need for all parties involved in the Islamic financial transactions to understand and appreciate the 
unique  characteristics  and  features  of  Islamic  banking  and  finance.  Clear  understanding  on  the 
conduct  of  the  Islamic  financial  transactions  would  lead  to  the  appropriate  execution  of  Islamic 
financial contracts that truly reflect the Shariah tenet.  
Active  consumerism  will  also  prompt  the  desired  efficiency  in  the  Islamic  financial  industry.  For  the 
Islamic financial institutions, understanding the dynamics of customer segmentation, building customer 
relationships and addressing the requirements and preferences of specific segments are vital not only 
for strengthening the existing customer relationships but also to secure new businesses. This would 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
contribute  towards  the  expansion  and  sustainability  of  the  market  share  of  the  Islamic  financial 
activities. Fundamental to achieving greater customer-centricity is to ensure that the processes, and 
workforce orientations, are aligned towards meeting customers’ expectations and delivering superior 
services.  This  needs  to  be  effectively  communicated,  shared  and  understood  by  all  levels  of  the 
workforce,  in  particular,  those  at  the  front  office.  It  is  therefore  important  for  the  Islamic  financial 
institutions personnel to enhance their own knowledge on the products and services offered, as well 
as customer service orientation.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
While the level of public awareness on Islamic banking and finance has significantly improved, more 
efforts can be done to reach out to the wider population, in particular the sub-urban and rural areas. 
Existing infrastructure must be utilized in an efficient manner to effectively disseminate information on 
Islamic financial products and services including by leveraging on the information and communication 
technology. Information can be in various forms, with the objective of enhancing financial literacy in 
Islamic finance in our community.  
The  advancement  in  ICT  has  also  had  significant  impact  on  the  operations  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions with respect to information management systems, product development, risk management 
and distribution capabilities. Significant application of IT would enhance efficiency by bringing down 
costs for consumers and businesses.  
As part of our initiative for the extensive dissemination of information effectively and efficiently, Bank 
Negara  Malaysia  has  developed  a  website  on  the  Islamic  money  market.  More  specifically,  the 
website aims to serve as a source of information on domestic Islamic financial instruments. It would 
provide greater transparency of the Central Bank’s Islamic money market operations, thus facilitating 
investment decisions and enhancing public confidence in their investments. The website also provides 
an analysis facility to chart historical data, in addition to reference to the rules and regulations in the 
conduct  of  the  Islamic  money  market  transactions.  It  thus  aims  to  effectively  meet  the  information 
requirements of bankers, financiers, statisticians, economists, researchers and prospective investors 
as well as increasing awareness of both domestic and foreign users. Moving forward, the website will 
be linked with other markets to serve as a platform for exchanging information and knowledge beyond 
our own borders. 
Ekspo Perbankan Islam dan Takaful adalah satu lagi saluran informasi yang menghubungkan institusi 
kewangan  Islam  secara  langsung  dengan  pelanggan.  Sehubungan  ini,  saya  menggesa  institusi 
kewangan Islam mengambil kesempatan untuk memasar dan menawarkan produk dan perkhidmatan 
mengikut  keperluan  mereka.  Saya  difahamkan,  ekspo  pada  tahun  ini  turut  disertai  beberapa  buah 
negara asing. Sesungguhnya penyertaan mereka ini akan memberi kesan positif kepada usaha-usaha 
kita untuk menjadikan Malaysia sebagai pusat kewangan Islam serantau.  
Tuan-tuan dan puan-puan, 
Usaha  kita  ialah  untuk  membangunkan  sebuah  sistem  kewangan  Islam  sebagai  satu  proses 
perantaraan yang dapat menyumbang kearah memperkayakan sumber ekonomi secara menyeluruh 
bagi  menjana  pertumbuhan  dan  pembangunan  yang  lebih  besar.  Selaras  dengan  perkembangan 
semasa,  institusi  kewangan  Islam  perlu  bersedia  untuk  menghadapi  cabaran  dan  peluang  dalam 
memenuhi  kehendak  ekonomi  yang  sentiasa  berubah.  Prospek  masa  depan  dan  kejayaan  industri 
perkhidmatan  kewangan 
iaitu 
pengawalselia,  industri,  peserta  pasaran  dan  masyarakat  umum.  Sehubungan  ini,  saya  ingin 
mengucapkan syabas dan tahniah kepada AIBIM di atas usaha berterusan untuk menganjur Ekspo 
Perbankan Islam dan Takaful ini sebagai acara tahunan. 
Dengan  lafaz  Bismillahirrahmanirrahim,  saya  dengan  sukacitanya  merasmikan  pelancaran  “Ekspo 
Perbankan Islam dan Takaful 2004”.  
Terima kasih. 
Islam  bergantung  kepada  gandingan  usaha  semua  pihak 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
