Leonard Wilson Kamit: Papua New Guinea - current economic conditions 
Speech  by  Mr  Leonard  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of 
Papua New Guinea, to the West New Britain Provincial Community on the occasion of the Bank Board 
meeting, Kimbe, 24 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Officials  and  business  leaders  of  the  West  New  Britain  community,  Police  Commissioner  Mr.  Sam 
Inguba and your senior officers, Secretary for the Department of Petroleum and Energy, Mr. Joseph 
Gabut, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
I speak on behalf of the Board of the Central Bank when I say that it is a pleasure for us to be here this 
evening to meet with you, the representatives of the private, public and civic sectors of the province. 
Let me introduce to you members of the Board of our Central Bank. Besides myself and the Deputy 
Governor Mr Benny Popoitai, the members of the Board (ex-officio) who are appointed in accordance 
with Section 27 of the CBA (2000), which specifies representation by various industry and community 
organisations are: 
Mr. Michael Mayberry, MBE, President of the PNG Chamber of Commerce  
Mr. John Mahuk, President of the PNG Trade Union Congress 
Mr. Patrick Kolta, President of the PNG Institute of Accountants  
Reverend Samson Lowa, President of the PNG Council of Churches 
Vacant - Deputy Governor, Policy and Regulations 
Vacant - Chairman of the Securities Commission 
Vacant - Minister’s appointee 
Two other Board members appointed by the Minister for Finance and Treasury are; 
Mr. Kostas Constantinou 
Mr. Robert Igara 
As most of you know, the Bank of Papua New Guinea has only one office in Port Moresby. We do not 
have branches in the other centers. As such, the only time we have the opportunity to visit provincial 
centres  is  through  our  business  liaison  visits,  visits  to  provincial-based  savings  and  loan  societies, 
special  project  visits  (e.g.  commodity  surveys),  through  special  invitations  to  talk  or  make 
presentations at conferences, and through Board meetings such as today. In the last six years, we 
have had the opportunity to address conferences/meetings in Mount Hagen, Kavieng, Kokopo, Goroka 
and  Lae  without  the  Board,  and  with  the  full  Board  in  Lae,  Alotau,  Kavieng,  Wewak  and  Goroka. 
Today is our sixth such meeting outside of Port Moresby. 
We have covered all the regions of Papua New Guinea - Highlands, Islands, Southern and Momase in 
our visitation. The Central Bank is a national institution that belongs to the people of PNG. And so we 
will continue to go out to them in this fashion. These visits provide an opportunity for Board members 
and senior Bank officials to meet with community leaders and our business liaison contacts and also to 
undertake some educational presentations such as the one we had for Kimbe Secondary School year 
11 and 12 yesterday. The visits also enable the Central Bank to do business (spend some funds) in 
the localities. Please do not over charge us - we are a business just like you and we are also expected 
to make profits and pay dividends to our only shareholder, the Government. 
Over these years in which the Board has met in Port Moresby and around the country, we have seen 
the economy turned around from a depressed state. From two years ago, the economy has recovered 
and there is confidence in the market, though much of the fundamentals still have to be continuously 
nurtured,  including  transportation  and  other  physical  infrastructure.  We  therefore  have  to  remain 
vigilant. There is no room at all for complacency. 
Current economic conditions 
2. 
The Central Bank has just released the June 2004 Quarterly Economic Bulletin, which was reported in 
the  media  on  Wednesday  22nd  September  2004,  so  I  shall  not  dwell  too  much  into  these 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 1
developments. Data available to the Central Bank indicates that the economy continues to improve in 
2004. In brief: 
• 
Domestic economic conditions: Economic activity continued to improve in the first half of 
2004,  led  by  the  export  sector  with  higher  production  and  prices  of  most  mineral  and 
non-mineral commodities. 
Inflation: The annual inflation rate continues to trend downwards in 2004, to 1.9 percent to 
June 2004 from 19.0 percent in June 2003. This reflected the positive impact of the stability 
in the exchange rate and fiscal restraint by the Government. For the remainder of 2004, we 
expect  this  declining  trend  to  continue,  if  current  stability  in  macroeconomic  conditions, 
particularly exchange rate continues. 
Exchange  rate:  The  positive  developments  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  since  the 
second half of 2003 with stable inflows from both the mineral and agricultural sectors has 
resulted in the appreciation of the kina. The exchange rate appreciated from US$ 0.3080 at 
the end of March 2004 to US$ 0.3120 in September. The Australian dollar appreciated from 
A$ 0.4057 at end March 2004 to A$ 0.4462 on 20 September 2004. 
Balance of payments (BOP): The improved inflows of export receipts reflect higher prices 
and  volumes  by  the  non-mineral  sector,  which  is  an  encouraging  sign  that  growers  and 
exporters are responding positively to the improvements in commodity prices. The Central 
Bank  has  also  increased  its  gross  foreign  exchange  reserves  to  a  historical  level  of 
K1,992 (US$  623)  million  on  31  August  2004,  sufficient  for  total  and  nonmineral  import 
covers of 5.6 and 7.5 months, respectively. 
Fiscal  operations:  The  National  Government’s  commitment  to  the  2004  budgetary 
framework resulted in it achieving a budget surplus of K219.6 million in the seven months to 
July 2004. This improvement was due to higher tax and dividend receipts, and lower interest 
cost  on  domestic  debt.  The  prudent  fiscal  management  resulted  in  a  net  retirement  of 
K72.6 million  in  Treasury  bills,  the  front  loading  of  counter  part  funding  for  development 
projects, and allowed the restructuring of domestic debt from short to long term. 
Domestic  interest  rates:  Consistent  with  the  easing  stance  of  monetary  policy  since  the 
second half of 2003, interest rates continued to trend downwards. The 28 days Treasury bill 
rate declined from 7.00 percent at the end of June 2004 to 4.50 percent this week, while the 
commercial banks indicator lending rates (ILR s) have also trended downwards to reach a 
range  of  between  11.75  and  12.75  percent  by  the  1st  of  October  2004.  With  the  annual 
inflation  rate  at  1.9  percent,  the  returns  on  Treasury  bills  are  still  positive  and  portfolio 
investors  are  encouraged to  retain  funds  onshore rather  than  take  unnecessary  exchange 
rate risks by investing offshore. 
Lending: Lending by the commercial banks continued to decline, in spite of the high liquidity 
levels in the banking system and the low interest rate environment. The Central Bank has 
encouraged the commercial banks to pass on the benefits of the low interest rates to their 
customers.  In  addition,  the  Bank  removed  the  restrictions  on  kina  lending  by  licensed 
financial institutions to Non-Resident companies as part of the review on Foreign Exchange 
Control  Regulations  and  to  encourage  lending  by  the  banks.  I  am  encouraged  by  recent 
comments that there are very viable projects commercial banks are now viewing. 
      Given the high level of liquidity in the banking system and to smoothen the sharp decline in interest 
rates, the Tap facility was closed in May 2004 and the maturing volumes were shifted to the weekly 
auction. In addition, the minimum amount at the auction was increased from K100,000 to K500,000. 
Recent media commentaries have suggested that the Central Bank’s actions are adversely affecting 
small investors. However, these actions are consistent with the Bank’s objective of price stability and 
aim  to  encourage  the  development  of  the  secondary  market  for  Government  securities,  thereby 
promoting a vibrant financial market and system. Small investors can purchase treasury bills from fund 
managers, stock brokers (Capital Stock brokers and Kina Securities) and other finance houses with 
amounts of K10,000. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2004
The Central Bank 
3. 
The financial reforms since 2000 have involved changes to the various Acts, which the Bank of PNG 
operates under. Besides the commercial banks, finance companies, and savings and loan societies, 
we now oversee the life insurance companies, superannuation funds, and the micro credit schemes. 
The  Central  Bank  also  encourages  the  establishment  of  savings  and  loan  societies  to  provide 
complementary financial services to those provided by the banks, finance companies and the existing 
Savings and Loan societies. This is one important mechanism of ensuring financial services reach our 
people  in  the  outside  centers  and  rural  communities.  As  at  the  end  of  June  2004,  there  were 
twenty-one  (21)  active  savings  and  loan  societies.  There  are  now  three  types  of  saving  and  loan 
societies: employer-based societies such as Teachers and Elcom; provincial-based societies like the 
East New Britain Savings and Loan society; and superannuation-based societies for their members. 
Provincial-based societies are flavoured in a fashion that membership is open to those living in the 
province  and  those  who  are  from  the  province  but  are  living  or  working  outside  the  province.  The 
workers outside the province who contribute to such societies find it beneficial when they go home for 
holidays and need to obtain financial resources. 
The  Central  Bank  stands  ready  to  assist  those  willing  and  able  to  establish  their  savings  and  loan 
society, providing advice and ensuring sound management practices, and systems support. 
May I publicly warn against the fast-money schemes or pyramid schemes. We have clamped down on 
the operators of these schemes. The Central Bank continues to work with the law enforcing agencies 
to stamp up these illegal schemes, which have created financial problems for many of our people. I 
acknowledge and am most thankful for the assistance from the Police in this aspect. We have also 
taken out advertisements listing the licensed financial institutions and warning the public on the illegal 
schemes. The Central Bank can only do so much - we need the public’s support - your support and 
the  support  from  the  media  -  to  help  us  stop  and  prosecute  the  operators  of  these  schemes.  The 
recent  snide  remarks  from  the  media  and  the  public  do  not  augur  for  the  efforts  of  all  concerned 
persons to stamp out this form of robbery from the public. 
Acknowledgements 
4. 
May I take this opportunity to thank the business houses and community in Kimbe and the West New 
Britain province for your support in participating in the business and employment s urveys conducted 
by the Bank. 
Your  continued  support  in  providing  us  with  up-to-date  information  will  enhance  the  accuracy  and 
quality of our reports and forecasting for the formulation of monetary policy. The input together with 
that from other sources is compiled into the Quarterly Economic Bulletin and other Bank publications 
that are sought from within PNG and abroad. 
The  surveys  are  useful  in  enabling  the  Central  Bank  to  keep  abreast  of  developments  in  the  real 
economy. The result of the surveys enables us at the Central Bank to design monetary policy, and 
importantly,  provides  another  source  of  information  for  the  Government  to  compile  its  estimate  of 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). 
Whilst we can obtain information from headquarters, there is spec ial input from actually going out into 
the regional centres and obtaining ‘on the spot’ information. At present, a total of 496 companies are 
included in the survey sample covering six regions and eight industries. Of these, 14 companies that 
are  headquartered  in  Kimbe  and  Bialla  participate  in  our  survey,  while  others  are  covered  by  their 
head offices in Port Moresby, Lae or Kokopo. I look forward to your continued cooperation in providing 
the required information in the surveys. 
Let  me  at  this  point  indicate  some  of  the  West  New  Britain  province’s  contribution  to  the  country’s 
balance  of  payments  performance.  Based  on  various  commodity  reports,  over  the  three  years 
between 2000 and 2003, West New Britain province exported on average 61 percent of PNG’s palm 
oil  volumes  or  earned  59  percent  of  palm  oil  export  revenue,  an  average  of  23  percent  of  PNG’s 
volumes of logs or 22 percent of export revenue from logs, and on average 1.5 percent of total cocoa 
volumes or 1.5 percent of cocoa export revenue. 
It is important that producers and exporters continue to make use of this ‘window of opportunity’, with 
better commodity prices and stable economic conditions. This will ensure sustainability of the current 
improved macroeconomic environment. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 3
The Board and staff are looking forward to the visit to the palm oil factory tomorrow to obtain first hand 
information on its operations. 
The  Central  Bank  would  like  to  see  the  West  New  Britain  Savings  and  Loan  Society  operating, 
enabling  the  people  of  this  province  to  benefit  from  other  financial  services.  This  will  involve  the 
support and commitment of the provincial authorities. 
As part of the Central Bank’s educational efforts, besides giving talks to high school students, we also 
distribute  books  to  high  schools  in  those  centres  the  Board  visits.  On  behalf  of  the  Board,  I  am 
presenting to the provincial education authorities some textbooks to the value of K1,000 for each high 
school in the West New Britain province. 
On behalf of the Board, the Deputy Governor, the management and staff of the Central Bank, I would 
like to once again thank the Provincial authorities, the Chamber of Commerce, and the management 
and staff of the Kimbe Bay Hotel, Liamo Reef Resort and Walindi Resort for making our stay here in 
Kimbe a pleasant one. 
Thank you and God bless. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2004
