Klaus Liebscher: Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI)  
Opening remarks by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Conference 
on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 29 November 2004.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  to Vienna  and  to  our  Conference  on  European 
Economic Integration (CEEI). I am very happy to welcome, in particular, the President of the European 
Central Bank, Monsieur Jean-Claude Trichet, who is going to take the floor in a few minutes to deliver 
the keynote speech, and the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof. Weber, who will hold this 
evening’s dinner speech. Jean-Claude, Axel - a very warm welcome to both of you! 
I also would like to welcome all fellow governors who followed our invitation - let me thank you for your 
highly valuable contributions to this conference. 
It is also a privilege for me that the Special Coordinator of the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe, 
Mr. Erhard Busek, will give an introductory statement later this morning.  
We  are  also  very  glad  that  we  have  again  attracted  many  distinguished  speakers  and  renowned 
experts from academia, from national as well as international institutions, and from the banking sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
About  one  year ago,  I  was welcoming  you  here  to  our  last  “East-West  Conference”.  We  had come 
together to debate “The economic potential of a larger Europe - Keys to success” and thus revisited 
the  most  important  topics  of  previous  East-West  conferences,  such  as  human  capital  formation, 
financial stability, and the specification of a suitable policy mix or structural reforms. I am very proud to 
be able to say that the Oesterreichische Nationalbank has been following the transition process very 
closely from the very beginnings.  
Already in 1989, the Oesterreichische Nationalbank started to build up an international platform - 
comprising  seminars,  workshops  and  conferences  -  to  discuss  questions  that  are  related  to  the 
transition  process  and  to  the  European  integration.  By  1995,  the  East-West  Conference  was 
established as an annual event of the OeNB in Vienna that highlighted numerous aspects of mutual 
interest year after year. In the setting of the 2003 East-West Conference, finally, we pre-celebrated the 
historic  event  of  the  EU’s  enlargement  towards  the  East  -  truly  a  major  milestone  in  the  European 
integration process.  
And just one month ago the process of European integration was taken one step further yet again: On 
28 October 2004, the Heads of State of the 25 member states and the three accession countries -
Bulgaria, Croatia and Romania - signed the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, which now 
needs to be ratified by each EU country. As a result of this process of integration in the second half of 
the  20th  century  and  up  to  today,  the  European  Union  has  reached  a  high  degree  of  stability  and 
prosperity.  One  may  safely  assume  that  in  the  first  half  of  the  last  century  people  would  not  have 
dared to dream of this period of peaceful convergence across Europe.  
Despite the successes, one has to acknowledge that much remains to be done for strengthening and 
advancing European integration. To single out just some of these major challenges, in March 2000, 
the  EU  Council  of  Heads  of  State  and  Government  agreed  on  a  new  strategic  goal,  the  so-called 
Lisbon strategy, for the European Union with regard to the next decade - let me quote - “to become 
the  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-based  economy  in  the  world  capable  of  sustainable 
economic growth with more and better jobs and greater social cohesion.”  
However,  there  is  a  lack  of  clear  and  decisive  progress  in  achieving  these  objectives,  as  recently 
pointed out by a report written on behalf of the European Commission. The subdued pace of economic 
recovery  in  the  euro  area  puts  the  spotlight  on  its  structural  inefficiencies  with  frictions  both  in  the 
labour  and  in  the  product  market.  The  EU  single  market  has  to  be  fully  implemented  in  order  to 
enhance  productivity  and  employment,  and  overall,  economic  growth  and  prosperity.  The  future 
European Commission, the European Council and the governments of the individual member states 
should  now  clearly  embrace  the Lisbon  strategy  and  speed  up  their  structural  reforms  in  order  to 
strengthen their international competitiveness, foster economic growth and support employment. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
in  some  Member  States 
The EU, the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and the euro are Europe’s strategic responses to 
global competition and associated challenges it poses. EMU represents a key step in completing the 
Single  European  Market.  Today,  the  euro  area  has  already  established  itself  as  a  stable  monetary 
anchor in the global economy. However, it is essential not to rest on our laurels.  
It has to be acknowledged that we have to work hard to keep and assure the success of EMU in the 
future. Several governments of euro area member states have repeatedly had difficulties to fulfil their 
responsibilities  and  obligations  with  regard  to  fiscal  rules.  For  the  stability  of  the  euro  and  the 
credibility of the monetary union, it is essential to comply with the fiscal rules set by the Stability and 
Growth Pact (SGP), which provides a clear, transparent and simple framework. 
Today’s  discussion  about  making  the  SGP  rules  more  flexible  as  a  short-term  remedy  to  the  fiscal 
problems  occurring 
is  counterproductive  and  at  odds  with 
the Maastrichtconsensus.  In  my  mind,  the  SGP  works  as  it  is.  The  problem  has  been  in  its 
implementation. It is not the Pact itself which has disadvantages or which has failed. It is the missing 
will of several governments to fulfil their responsibilities and obligations - they failed. Thus, should the 
rules be made exceedingly complex and contingent on too many exceptional economic circumstances, 
this will clearly weak the SGP in its implementation and credibility. 
Therefore, I would like to stress that a return onto a path of long-term sustainable public finances is 
necessary in order to foster the public trust in this pillar of the EMU stability architecture and to cushion 
possible  effects  of  the  Lisbon  structural  reform  agenda  as  well  as  to  moderate  the  challenges  of 
ageing societies in Europe. 
Where  and  how  does  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  enter  this  picture?  The deepening  of  the 
European  Union  came  along  with  the  widening  of  the  European  Union.  Since  the  fall  of  the  Iron 
Curtain  15  years  ago,  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  have  made  impressive  and 
successful, and often painful, experiences of transition to market economies; efforts there have been 
crowned by their accession to the EU. Membership includes the commitment to the eventual adoption 
of the euro.  
The creation of the euro area was based on the sustainable fulfilment of the Maastrichtconvergence 
criteria, and they will be applied to future euro area entrants in the same way. These criteria form a 
coherent  package  based  on  a  set  of  economic  indicators  that  is  neither  negotiable  nor  subject  to 
change.  From  a  legal  perspective,  this  ensures  continuity  and  equal  treatment,  from  an  economic 
perspective,  the  logic  of  lasting  convergence  has  not  changed  and  is  all  the  more  important  when 
countries are at different stages of economic development. 
As was pointed out in the last Convergence Report of the ECB, new Member States still have some 
way to go and nominal and real convergence with the Euro area differs considerably in some of the 
new Member States. Therefore, reform efforts and implementation of sound policies, especially in the 
fiscal field, are still required on the way to monetary union. 
In this light, a weakening of the Stability and Growth Pact would certainly send a wrong signal to any 
new EU country.  
I have no doubts that the success of European integration in the past will continue into the future. As 
mentioned  before,  the Oesterreichische  Nationalbank  (OeNB)  very  closely  tracks  and  analyzes  the 
process of European integration of Central and Eastern European countries. To keep the interested 
public  informed  about  economic  topics  pertaining  to  this  region,  we  hosted  the  “East-West 
Conference” year after year and published a “Focus on Transition” twice a year. Since the process of 
European integration has permanently closed the divide that used to run across Europeand since the 
new Central and Eastern European EU Member States have successfully completed most transition 
steps - and therefore can no longer be labelled transition economies - we had good reasons to update 
the  names  of  two  of  our  most  important  products.  Our  conference  and  our  publication  are 
complimentary products. Therefore we decided to choose a common name.  
This  year’s  conference  is  the  first  to  take  place  under  the  new  name: “Conference  on  European 
Economic Integration (CEEI)”, a name which reflects the growing-together of Europe. In parallel, we 
relaunched the “Focus on Transition” as ”Focus on European Economic Integration”. The first issue 
was  published  recently.  Hand  in  hand  with  the  renaming  we  also  have  renewed  the  structure  and 
content of our products, an effort that was greatly aided by the results of a reader survey conducted 
this  year.  We  will  continue  to  investigate  economic  topics  relevant  to  the  new  Central  and  Eastern 
European EU countries, such as the adoption of the euro. Furthermore, we used the opportunity to 
extend our geographical focus to the region of South East Europe.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
This  year’s  “Conference  on  European  Economic  Integration”  entitled  “South  Eastern  EUROPEAN 
Challenges  and  Prospects”  is  dedicated  especially  to  this  part  of  Europe;  which  comprises,  as  we 
understand  it,  the  countries  Albania,  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  Bulgaria,  Croatia,  Macedonia, 
Romania, Serbia and Montenegro. Since the eight Central and Eastern European countries joined the 
EU,  the  EU  integration  process  has  clearly  shifted  South  East.  Apart  from  Romania,  Bulgaria  and 
Croatia,  which  are  next  candidates  for  accession,  all  other  South  Eastern  European  countries  now 
have an accession perspective, as recently stated by the European Commission. The Stability Pact for 
South Eastern Europe has been assisting the difficult catching-up process of this region. We will hear 
more  on  this  pact  later  today.  For  completeness,  let  me  shortly  mention  the  case  of  Turkey.  Last 
month, the European Commission recommended to start accession negotiations with Turkey. Based 
on the report and recommendation from the European Commission, the European Council is expected 
to make a decision on December 17. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me perhaps shortly illustrate why the OeNB has such a pronounced interest in the countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe, and more and more in the region of South East Europe. 
With  the  enlargement, Austria  moved  closer  to  the  geographic  centre  of  the  European  Union.  EU 
integration comes along with economic integration. Economic and financial relations between Austria 
and  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  have  substantially  deepened  since  the  end  of  the 
Cold War.  
Central  and  Eastern  European  countries  have  developed  into  one  of  the  prime  destinations 
of Austria’s  foreign  direct  investments. Austria  is  the  main  foreign  investor  in Slovenia  and  the  third 
largest in the Czech Republic and in Slovakia. Austrian companies situated in the EU’s new Central 
European member states employ more than 220,000 persons. At the same time, Austrian companies 
are doing more and more business in South Eastern Europe.  
Austrian banks, in particular, play a major role in the banking sector in this part of Europe. In Albania, 
the  Austrian share  of  total  banking  assets  reaches an  impressive  51%;  in  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina 
almost  50%;  in  Croatia  the  share  amounts  to  around  40%. Due  to  strong  involvement  of  Austrian 
commercial  banks  in South  Eastern  Europe  and  its  impact  on  the  financial  stability  of  the  Austrian 
banking sector, it is essential for the Oesterreichische Nationalbank to monitor and analyze this region 
more closely. At the same time, we aim at providing a better understanding of this region, which for 
some people, even for some experts from Central and Eastern Europe, is still “terra incognita”. So far, 
not  much  research  has  been  devoted  to  this  region.  However,  South  Eastern  Europe  promises  not 
only  to  be  the  major  focus  of  European  integration  dynamics  in  the  coming  years  but  it  is  already 
among the fastest growing regions on the continent.  
We  very  much  hope  that  the  programme  we  have  put  together  for  our  Conference  on  European 
Economic  Integration  will  offer  new  insights  into,  and  a  better  understanding  of  this  region  whose 
political and economic perspectives are most heterogeneous. 
This  morning  will  start  with  a  presentation  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank, 
Jean-Claude  Trichet.  We  are  looking  forward  to  your  profound  and  inspiring  keynote  speech, 
Jean-Claude, and greatly appreciate your participation in our conference. 
After that, our idea for the first session was to give an overview of both the political and the economic 
situation in South Eastern Europe. With the introductory statement of Erhard Busek we can expect to 
get some first-hand knowledge about the Stability Pact for South Eastern Europe.  
The afternoon of our first conference day is dedicated to issues of monetary and exchange rate policy.  
Today’s  conference  will  be  concluded  by  President  Weber,  who  will  give  a  dinner  speech  on  the 
changes in the focus of European economic integration. 
Between the two sessions, the winners of the OeNB’s Olga Radzyner Award will be announced. This 
award was established to commemorate Olga Radzyner, the former Head of the Foreign Research 
Division of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, who died in a tragic flight accident in August 1999. The 
Olga  Radzyner  Award  is  bestowed  on  young  economists  from  Central  and Eastern  Europe  for 
excellent research focused on monetary and finance issues in economics. 
The second  day  starts  with  a  session  on  FDI  and  trade  as  pivotal  elements  for  catching  up  and 
improving  competitiveness  in  South  East  Europe,  followed  by  a  session  on  serious  regional 
challenges: high joblessness, poverty and brain drain. To highlight the foothold of Austrian banks in 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
this region, the last session will be dedicated to banking in South Eastern Europe and the leading role 
of Austrian commercial banks.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
We hope that this conference will make an important contribution to setting the stage for future interest 
in, research into and public awareness of this focus of emerging Europe.  
Let me now pass on to our distinguished key-note speaker, President Trichet.  
Jean-Claude, the floor is yours! 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2004
