Jean-Claude Trichet: EMU and the euro - successes and challenges 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, delivered at the conference “The Euro Five 
Years After”, Amsterdam, 12 October 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, it is a great pleasure to share some thoughts on the European Monetary Union 
with the distinguished attendance gathered in this conference by the European Commission and the 
EU Presidency.  
The establishment of the new currency - first in book-entry form and successively in its full physical 
embodiment - has made western Europeans fully part of a more integrated area and is substantially 
contributing to reinforce their European identity. More recently, the enlargement of the Union, and in 
particular the inclusion of the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe, has represented yet 
another grand contribution of Europe to the diffusion of free institutions, the safeguard of geopolitical 
stability and peace, and the promotion of economic progress on a global scale. We have decided to 
build a larger and peaceful Union of people to which the rest of the world can look for encouragement 
and example.  
It is around these themes that I will organise my few remarks today. My purpose will not be that of 
communicating a sense of complacency over past achievements. I will try to convey in my words the 
visionary drive towards action that still inspires the process of institutional transition in our Continent. 
We have not stopped to catch our breath after the euro change-overs, and we will not pause for a 
moment after the enlargement. In fact, the historical process of European integration that was initiated 
in Rome in 1957 is keeping momentum and will keep us occupied - I am sure - for long.  
The birth of the euro 
Sceptics were unconvinced as to whether it was possible to make the euro a stable currency and to 
successfully formulate a monetary policy for a supposedly diverse currency area. Where do we stand 
almost six years later? The euro has been firmly and credibly established as a stable currency. The 
euro area has brought with itself a period of currency stability, low rates of inflation and low levels of 
medium  and  long  term  market  interest  rates  that  generations  in  many  countries  had  never  seen 
before. The introduction of the euro, first, in book-entry form, and, second, in the form of banknotes 
and coins went extremely well under the presidency of my predecessor Wim Duisenberg to whom I 
would like to pay homage. The euro has become part of people’s daily lives. 
In  January  1999,  the  transition  to  the  euro  in  book-entry  form  was  virtually  free  of  implementation 
problems, although many people had predicted that such a big project would inevitably be delayed or 
affected  by  technical  glitches  or  organisational  failures.  This  complex  task,  involving  more  or  less 
simultaneous changes in countless computer programs at central banks, stock exchanges, authorities 
and thousands of private institutions, was carried out smoothly and in a perfectly coordinated fashion. 
Carefully crafted contingency measures - which would be activated in the event of a breakdown of the 
“core infrastructure” - assisted the migration of all electronic systems and procedures. Eventually, no 
incidents occurred after the irrevocable fixing of the conversion rates for the euro. On 4 January 1999 
the Eurosystem announced the successful completion of its first main refinancing operation.  
There remained looming concerns about how rapidly and smoothly the national money markets would 
integrate  as  we  were  aware  that  creating  an  efficient  single  money  market  also  depends  upon  the 
creation of a tight network of contractual agreements between market players across the euro area. Of 
course,  an  integrated  euro  area  money  market  is  a  precondition  for  the  very  execution  of  a  single 
monetary policy and for an efficient allocation of central bank money across market participants.  
In  fact,  the  national  money  markets  formed  an  efficient  integrated  euro  area-wide  circuit  within  a 
couple of weeks - faster than we had dared to hope. Overnight rates across the euro area converged 
rapidly, with only negligeable differences remaining.  
In this respect, TARGET - the real time gross settlement system of the euro area - has been a decisive 
supporting factor and has, in particular, contributed to the rapid integration of the money market. The 
TARGET  system,  developed  by  the  Eurosystem,  links  all  the  real-time  gross  settlement  payment 
systems  in  the  European Union.  The payment  volumes processed  daily  in  the  TARGET  system  far 
BIS Review 59/2004 
 1
exceed our initial expectations and the system had a market share of almost 70% of the total volume 
of  large-value  payment  transactions  in  the  euro  area  already  in  the  first  months  of  1999.  This 
percentage has been increasing in the following years to reach almost 90% in July 2004.1
The euro cash changeover 
Three years after the birth of the euro, the exchange of the legacy national banknotes and coins of the 
12 countries of the euro area for the new euro notes and coins was a huge organisational, logistical 
and  technical  undertaking.  A  number  of  observers  rightly  called  it  the  most  important  logistical 
endeavour in time of peace. This euro cash changeover progressed well to the benefit of more than 
300 million European citizens. 
If banknotes and coins are to be put into circulation, they first have to be produced, which in itself was 
an unprecedented challenge. For banknotes alone, we assembled and co-ordinated a total production 
capacity of some one billion banknotes per month. The banknotes incorporate state-of-the-art security 
features, had to be available within a fixed timeframe and be identical both in the eyes of the public 
and  when  read  by  machine  sensors,  given  that  they  are  legal  tender  throughout  the  euro  area 
irrespective of where they were originally issued. In total, more than 51 billion coins had been minted 
and around 16 billion banknotes printed at the end of 2001.  
The second phase of the operation involved putting the new currency into circulation and withdrawing 
national banknotes and coins, an operation that impacted the 300 million inhabitants of the euro area 
and many more outside it. Things worked out well because of good preparation: advance planning, 
communication,  co-ordination  and  thorough  follow-up  and  control  have  all  been  vital.  It  is  worth 
mentioning  the  success  of  the  slogan  “the  euro.  Our  money”,  which reached a  worldwide audience 
through television and newspaper advertisements, web pages, starter kits, and the 200 million leaflets 
written  in  a  total  of  38  official  European  languages,  regional  languages  of  European  countries  and 
other world languages. On 1st January 2002, the reception of the new currency was surrounded with 
confidence and, even, an element of enthusiasm across the euro area. 
The mandate of the ECB 
The citizens of the euro area received the new currency with a sense of confidence. But since the euro 
was not created in an institutional vacuum, it is important to recall which factors have enabled us to 
make  the  euro  a  credible  currency  which  was  immediately  adopted.  I  would  name  here,  most 
importantly, the institutional framework of Economic and Monetary Union. The Maastricht Treaty has 
written in stone that monetary policy is to be conducted with the aim of maintaining price stability and 
that the ECB is fully independent. These provisions were designed to ensure long-lasting credibility to 
the euro from its outset, by, in particular, sheltering monetary-policy from external pressure. 
The credibility of the ECB is reflected in low, medium and long-term inflation expectations. And this 
credibility was already high at the start of Economic and Monetary Union. I well remember that at that 
time  some  observers  argued  that  the  quality  of  the  euro  as  a  new  currency  would  converge  only 
towards a sort of an average of the legacy currencies, rather than to the benchmark set by the most 
credible ones. What happened is that, all along the yield curve, the euro area’s market interest rates 
became aligned with the lowest market rates prior to the euro. The euro area’s 300 million inhabitants 
benefited immediately from the best possible financial environment, from the credibility that had been 
built gradually in certain parts of the euro area over the previous decades, without losing a single basis 
point.  
Nominal  and  real  interest  rates  have  remained  at  those  low  levels  ever  since.  They  have  also 
consistently reflected a high degree of consonance between the ECB’s policy intentions on the one 
hand and the market understanding as regards the course of policy on the other. In other words, the 
level of predictability of policy - a highly regarded sign of transparency for a modern central bank - has 
been elevated by any international standards.  
Indeed,  predictability  and  transparency  go  hand-in-hand.  In  order  to  successfully  maintain  price 
stability, we constantly have to make all the reasons underlying our decisions transparent to the public. 
                                                      
1   Source: http://www.ecb.int/stats/payments/payments/html/04_table2.en.html 
2 
 BIS Review 59/2004
The  announcement  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  in  October  1998,  before  the  introduction  of  the 
euro, was a milestone in this regard. It clearly stated the ECB's understanding of its objective and the 
framework  used  to  guide  policy  decisions.  In  addition,  the  Governing  Council's  assessment  of  the 
economic  situation  and  the  risks  to  price  stability  are  regularly  published  and  monetary  policy 
decisions  are  explained  in  a  press  conference  that  I  and  the  Vice  President  give  immediately  after 
each monthly meeting in which monetary policy is discussed ; in this respect, the ECB has been very 
bold in its communication policy, as the usual practice of central banks in 1999 was to release their 
diagnosis  about  6  to  8  weeks  after  the  meeting  of  their  decision  making  body;  by  providing  a 
comprehensive  explanation  of  its  decisions  almost  in  real  time,  the  ECB  has  certainly  set  new 
standards of transparency in the world of central banking. We are convinced that transparency is a 
prerequisite for accountability and enhances the understanding among the markets of how the central 
bank conducts its monetary policy, thereby promoting predictability and supporting substantially policy 
effectiveness. 
The need for structural reforms 
While  EMU  has  been  highly  successful  in  restoring  and  furthering  macroeconomic  stability  in  its 
founding members, a number of economies in the euro area still have to undertake important actions 
to  fully  realise  the  advantages  of  a  stable  single  currency.  Structural  economic  impediments  in  a 
number of participating countries reduce employment opportunities and hold back the creation of real 
income  compared  to  the  pace  that  would  be  attainable,  were  available  resources  put  to  their  most 
efficient uses. Insufficient productivity growth - coupled with unfavourable demographic trends - in turn 
undermine the sustainability of social security systems. In many countries these systems incorporate 
relatively generous provisions for insiders to the disadvantage of younger and more deprived cohorts 
of  citizens.  It  is  therefore  widely  recognised  that  a  much  better  functioning  of  the  labour  markets, 
together with reforms of social security and protection, and the timely completion of the single market 
of  goods  and  services,  including  financial  services,  would  be  significantly  needed  to  improve  the 
prospects of the euro area.  
In  this  respect,  the  ECB  has  very  much  welcomed  and  supported  the  impetus  given  by  the  Lisbon 
European Council to the economic reform process. The diagnosis of the situation that emerges from 
the Lisbon discussions is pertinent and unambiguous. As pointed out by a recent report written under 
the auspices of European Commission2, it is time for the European Union and its members to translate 
words into actions, especially in areas such as job creation, investment in research, and liberalisation 
of  services.  The  European  Union  needs  an  economic  and  social  model  aiming  at  facilitating 
adjustments  into  new  employment  rather  than  the  excessive  protection  of  unproductive  jobs. 
Investments are needed to build more efficient infrastructures. We need better support for research 
and  development  activities,  and  also  improvements  in  our  policies  regarding  human  resources  and 
education. All these measures are key for productivity in the European Union to pick up and are of 
utmost importance to make the single market work better to the benefit of all Europeans.  
Structural  reforms  that  are  designed  to  increase  the  flexibility  of  markets  permit  a  higher  level  of 
sustainable  long-run  growth  and  employment.  They  furthermore  enhance  the  capacity  of  the 
participating countries to cushion macroeconomic shocks. The more rigid labour, product and financial 
markets are, the higher will be employment and income losses experienced in response to changing 
domestic  and  external  economic  conditions.  This  is  due,  in  particular,  to  the  fact  that  with  nominal 
rigidities prices and wages cannot adjust suitably and in a timely manner. Conversely, the speedier 
adjustments of wages and prices can take place in response to changes in macroeconomic conditions, 
the lower will be the burden of adjustment put on volumes and thus the lower the costs in terms of 
employment and output losses. 
We  recognise  that  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  requires  courage  and  leadership. 
Especially, they may temporarily be perceived negatively by some economic agents. However, after 
some time, employment is expected to increase, as new products and services are being introduced 
and  fresh  energies  are  being  unleashed  and  made  productive.  The  liberation  of  large  segments  of 
activity  that  were  previously  suppressed  will  soon  create  a  potent  constituency  for  reform  and 
                                                      
2  European  Commission  (2003):  “Jobs,  Jobs,  Jobs.  Creating  More  Employment  in  Europe”,  report  of  the  Employment 
Taskforce chaired by Wim Kok, November. 
BIS Review 59/2004 
 3
structural advancement. Importantly, all consumers and firms which in a regulated environment had to 
bear the cost of financing the subsidies will immediately enjoy the benefits from the reform.  
These prospective gains and the tilting of the balance of social preferences that these gains will bring 
about are often overlooked in the public debate. In fact, for the time being, the challenge to gain the 
support of parliaments and the public for implementing structural reforms is formidable. It is therefore 
imperative to make it clear to the public that, if governments and social partners deliver those reforms, 
the net benefits will be significant for the public at large. 
Fiscal policy 
Implementing  structural  reforms  to  raise  potential  growth  is  a  major  challenge  for  the  European 
economies. But it is not the only one. In any economy, achieving sustainable, non-inflationary growth 
also requires fiscal soundness. In the absence of such fiscal soundness, price stability can only be 
maintained at a higher cost in terms of interest rates, and thereby lower growth and employment.  
What is appropriate for all economies is all the more necessary at the euro area-wide level, where, in 
the absence of a federal budget, a credible framework ensuring fiscal discipline is a key component for 
the consistency and the cohesion of our monetary union. Sound fiscal policies implying safe budgetary 
positions in good times are necessary to ensure that fiscal policy has room to cope with asymmetric 
shocks,  which  can  no  longer  be  addressed  by  monetary  policy.  Not  least  for  these  reasons,  it  is  a 
matter of concern to the ECB that in a number of Member States abnormally large fiscal deficits have 
persisted over years.  
The Commission has tabled some proposals and a discussion has been launched to consider how to 
strengthen  and  clarify  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  We  can  find  common 
ground between some of the Commission’s proposals and our own thinking, namely, as regards the 
preventive arm of the Pact. We agree that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact should 
be improved. We agree that ownership and incentives for compliance need to be enhanced. And we 
agree  that  implementing  the  Pact  in  a  way  that  best  reflects  its  economic  rationale  should  help  to 
achieve this end.  
At the same time, making the rules exceedingly complex and contingent on too many circumstances 
would  complicate  the  implementation  of  the  framework  to  the  point  where  rules  would  be  de  facto 
relaxed. Therefore we are of the opinion that the so-called “corrective arm” of the Pact must preserve 
the  nominal  anchor  of  3%.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  requires  simple  and  transparent  rules  in 
order to facilitate effective monitoring; to provide an effective deterrence against unsound policies; and 
at the end of the day, to provide an anchor for long-term expectations, which only the clarity, simplicity 
and  credibility  of  the  framework  can  offer.  In  this  respect,  the  wording  of  the  Treaty  and  of  the 
regulations of the Stability and Growth Pact is appropriate in its current form and in our view should 
not be changed.  
The historic EU enlargement 
The introduction of the euro as a stable single European currency was not the last challenge to be 
faced by the ECB and the European Union in general. The recent enlargement of the EU has been an 
expansion of the European Union of exceptional historical dimension.  
The ten new countries represent 75 million people and their GDP is up to 4.8 % of the former EU 15. 
This  enlargement  and  its  anticipation  has  provided  significant  new  opportunities  for  trade  and 
investment.  These  effects  are  visible  in  the  enhanced  degree  of  economic  integration  between  the 
new and the old Member States. Trade integration is very substantial. For example, the share in the 
previous 15 Members’ total exports and imports that is accounted for by the 10 new Members States 
now stands at around 12-13 % - an increase of some 50% since 1995. Capital integration has also 
increased  dramatically  over  recent  years,  as  the  share  of  the  new  Member  States  in  the  previous 
Members’ total FDI outflows amounts to around 12 %. But both economic theory and empirical records 
lead us to believe that more is to come. Lower trade costs and an increase in competition associated 
with the enlargement of the European Single Market can have a significantly positive impact on growth 
in the European economy as a whole. Some economic studies point to an increase, ceteris paribus, of 
0.8 % of the EU GDP over the next ten years.  
4 
 BIS Review 59/2004
But  accession  has  also  been  a  powerful  catalyst  of  domestic  change  for  the  countries  that  have 
entered  the  Union.  Many  of  these  new  Members  have  made  remarkable  progress  in  recent  years, 
especially in terms of macroeconomic stabilisation and structural reforms. There still remain, however, 
important  challenges.  The  task  at  hand  is  to  advance  real  convergence.  Safeguarding  and,  where 
necessary,  enhancing  domestic  conditions  of  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  is  an  important 
institutional precondition. In particular, locking in inflation at low levels, preserving the soundness of 
the financial sector and making determined efforts towards fiscal consolidation are all of the utmost 
importance. 
Enlargement of the EU will lead to an expansion of the euro area at some time in the future. The main 
aim of the Eurosystem in this process is to ensure that the monetary integration of the new Member 
States proceeds in a smooth manner and in line with the Treaty provisions. We should certainly not 
forget that as the new Member States differ greatly in terms of economic structure, exchange rate and 
monetary  regimes,  and  in  the  degree  of  nominal  and  real  convergence  already  achieved,  they  will 
need to be assessed on a case-by-case basis throughout the process leading to the eventual adoption 
of  the  euro.  In  this  respect,  no  single  path  towards  ERM II  and  the  adoption  of  the  euro  can  be 
identified.  In  other  words,  many  strategies  may  be  feasible,  provided  they  are  based  on  sound 
economic reasoning, conform to the existing institutional framework and contribute to the high level of 
sustainable convergence which is essential in maintaining the status that the euro has gained in the 
few years of its existence as a respected and credible currency. 
We should also consider that the eventual adoption of the euro by a new Member of the EU is the 
end-point of a structured convergence process in which peer surveillance is called upon to preserve 
the common interest of all participants. The multilateral nature of the framework means that, at least at 
the  ultimate  stage  in  which  full  integration  into  the  euro  area  is  debated,  decisions  concerning  one 
country  or  one  currency  are  collective  decisions.  And  this  simple  fact  argues  for  the  fundamental 
principle  of  equal  treatment.  So,  while  each  country  would  be  considered  according  to  its  specific 
merits,  comparable  situations  and  cases  will  be  assessed  on  the  levelled  playing  field  provided  by 
objective criteria. There will be no additional criteria but neither will there be a relaxation of the criteria 
that proved effective in steering the process of convergence across the founding members of the euro 
area. 
Conclusion 
Let me underline four points which, I trust, are of the essence in the present situation : 
First, I would like to stress the remarkable credibility of the euro and of the Central Bank that issues 
this currency, the European Central Bank. Neither the ECB nor the Euro existed six and a half years 
ago! Today we have a currency which is as stable as were the best national currencies in Europe, and 
a Central Bank which is as credible as were the most credible Central Banks in Europe and in the 
world.  Our  duty  is  to  fully  preserve  and  enhance  this  exceptional  level  of  credibility  and  I  am,  as 
President, fully committed to this task. Let me in this respect pay homage today to Finn Kydland and to 
Edward Prescott, who were awarded yesterday the Nobel Prize in Economics. Their seminal work - as 
regards  central  banking  -  on  the  importance  of  time  consistency,  commitment  in  advance,  and  full 
independence  and  credibility  in  the  delivery  of  price  stability  over  time  has  been  very  important  for 
institutional developments around the world, including the ECB and the Eurosystem, and instrumental 
in our success. We owe them a particular debt of gratitude. 
Second, price stability is a necessary condition to obtain sustainable growth and job creation. It is not, 
alone, a sufficient condition. We also need in the Euro area sound public finances and bold reforms. 
These two goals are closely correlated to the extent that a number of structural reforms in the domains 
of public administration and social protection would diminish overall public spending. We encourage 
the Eurogroup of Ministers of Finance to proceed resolutely in this direction under the presidency of 
Gerrit Zalm today and of Jean-Claude Juncker tomorrow. 
Third,  let  me  say  simply  that  I  find  the  present  enlargement  a  formidable  success  for  all  our 
democracies that have voluntarily created together a new concept of a union of sovereign states which 
has no precedent in history. Of course we have many challenges associated with the fact that we are 
25 today and more tomorrow. But we should not lose sight that we will all “10” and “15” greatly benefit 
from the success of our ideas. 
Fourth, we are living in demanding times. The world is changing. Europe is changing. Future changes 
look  rather  unpredictable.  I  would  consider  this  unpredictability  as  the  very  mark  of  history  in  the 
BIS Review 59/2004 
 5
making. And I will never forget what Jean MONNET noted in his memoirs: “Those who decide not to 
start any enterprise because they are not assured that things will move in strict conformity with their 
plans  are  condemning  themselves  to  absolute  immobility.  Nobody  can  say  today  what  will  be  the 
shape  of  tomorrow’s  Europe  because  future  changes  that  will  be  born  from  present  changes  are 
unpredictable.” 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2004
