Rafael Buenaventura: Exports performance in the Philippines 
Welcome remarks by Mr Rafael Buenaventura, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank 
of the Philippines), at the Exporters’ Forum, Manila, 25 October 2004.  
 Ladies and gentlemen, good morning:  
Once  again,  I  welcome  you  to  this  gathering  of  exporters  and  policymakers,  which  we  have  been 
doing since 2002 to discuss issues and concerns of common interest. I am glad to see familiar faces 
around. I also extend a special welcome to the new attendees for finding the time to join us today.  
Let me also congratulate you for working hard to keep exports performance one of the few bright spots 
in our macroeconomy. I hope that we can go beyond the 13.7 percent growth we had in August for the 
rest  of  the  year.  I  am  sure  that  this  is  possible  given  that  the  outsourcing  of  manufacturing  of 
electronics and motor vehicle parts from other regions continues to benefit the Asia Pacific Region, 
including the Philippines. Garments, which posted a double-digit growth in August, the first time since 
March  of  2003,  hopefully,  will  continue  to  pick  up  ahead  of  the  holiday  season.  Meanwhile,  the 
improving  world  price  of  agro-based  products  bodes  well  particularly  for  the  coconut  oil  industry. 
These are signs of good times ahead.  
Overall, we expect a full year growth of 10 percent in 2004 and 2005. Mr. Guinigundo will discuss the 
details later and we will take this opportunity to validate with you our forecasts. Being with the industry, 
your expertise in reading where the market is leading to is a major input to our projections.  
While export growth for next year looks promising, we all believe that there is more to be done to catch 
up  with  our  Asian  neighbors  who  are  making  major  inroads  into  the  world  market.  We  have  been 
discussing  the  problems  besetting  the  export  sector  -  high  power  cost,  poor  infrastructure,  security 
concerns,  labor  unrest -  and  I know  the  growing  impatience  in some  of  you on  the  seemingly  slow 
progress in addressing them. However, you must also recognize that the government has been doing 
its best given its limited resources. This is the reason why we invited officials from other departments 
- Department  of  Energy,  Department  of  Labor,  Department  of  Finance,  Department  of  Trade  and 
Industry,  the  Board  of  Investments,  the  Philippine  Economic  Zone  Authority  and  the  Philippine 
National Police, among others - to hear your concerns as well as share with you the various reforms 
currently being undertaken to promote a more favorable business and investment climate.  
Let me end by saying that overcoming the challenges we face can be made easier if we maintain an 
open  line  between  private  enterprises  and  the  government  sector  and  recognize  the  important  role 
each one has to play. This is the reason why the BSP is taking the initiative of bringing us together 
regularly  in  this  Exporters’  Forum.  Previous  discussions  had  been  quite  fruitful  and  in  fact  yielded 
positive results for some. I hope this forum will be productive and will serve to open more avenues for 
mutual linkages within the export industry.  
Thank you very much and I look forward to hearing your views.  
BIS Review 68/2004 
 1
