Tom Alweendo: Prospects for a monetary union in the Southern African 
Development Community (SADC)  
Address  by Mr  Tom  Alweendo,  Governor  of  the  Bank of  Namibia,  at  the  Bank of  Namibia’s annual 
governor’s address, Windhoek, 18 November 2004.  
 Invited Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  happy  to  welcome  you  once  again  at  our  annual  event,  where over  the  last  five  years  I  have 
shared my views on a number of issues of economic nature. This evening, I am going to share with 
you my views on the prospects for a monetary union in the Southern African Development Community 
(SADC). This topic is by no means new and it has been discussed by various speakers on various 
occasions. However, because of its importance it is worth repeating and hopefully we will start building 
a consensus around the issue. 
The issue of monetary integration that is meant to ultimately lead to a monetary union on the African 
continent is being addressed at two levels. The first level of discussion is the continent-wide, where 
under  the  African  Union  the  continent  shall  establish  a  common  monetary  policy  and  therefore  a 
common central bank. The Association of African Central Banks (AACB) has been requested by the 
African Union to prepare the establishment of the African Central Bank and the time framework. The 
AACB  has  suggested  a  tentative  work  program  that  will  see  the  African  Central  Bank  being 
established by the year 2021. 
The second level of discussion with regard to monetary integration is taking place at regional level, 
where all five African regions are expected to work on regional monetary integration. In the Southern 
African  region,  SADC  is  working  on  a  program  where  we  are  going  to  establish  a  common  central 
bank in the region by 2016 and a common currency by 2018. The year 2016 sounds far enough, but 
this is a mere twelve years from now. 
Namibia’s position with regard to a SADC monetary union is further complicated by our membership to 
the CMA. At the CMA level, we have also started with preliminary discussions that more and more 
points  at  the  establishment  of  a  CMA  central  bank  ahead  of  the  SADC  central  bank.  An  argument 
could  be  made  that  since  all  CMA  member  countries  are  members  of  SADC,  it  will  be  better  for 
Namibia to concentrate on the SADC monetary union discussions. However, this will only be true if 
one was certain that the SADC discussions will go ahead as per the agreed timeframe. The concern 
here  is  that  the  CMA  is  a  de  facto  monetary  union,  except  that  the  function  of  making  monetary 
decisions is exercised by one member country only. This is not an acceptable arrangement and we 
need  to  find  a  more  equitable  solution  where  decision  making  power  is  exercised  by  all  member 
countries. 
The decision to discuss the continental monetary integration issue at two levels was seen to be the 
only realistic strategy if we were to succeed. This is so because the continent is faced with diverse 
economic  and  social  challenges  and  to  try  to  discuss  integration  at  continental  level  only  will  be 
foolhardy, at best. 
Joining a monetary union will mean giving up your national currency and adopting a new currency or a 
currency of a larger country. To some people giving up your currency is a provocative notion that could 
be  equated  to  treason.  This  is  especially  true  for  small,  developing  countries  that  might  have  just 
gained their political independence. The idea of being subsumed by a larger country is not appealing 
at all. Why, then, should a country want to enter into a monetary union? 
The  increased  interest  in  monetary  integration  is  closely  linked  to  the  process  of  globalization, 
especially financial globalization, which has been a dominant feature of discussions at various forums. 
In today’s globalized financial markets, capital has become too mobile and cross-border investment 
too vast. Today world financial markets are too large, economies are closely integrated and financial 
technology too innovative. 
In this context, the initiatives for free trade areas, customs unions and common markets are clearly 
designed as strategies of promoting a region within the global economy. Increasingly, the globalization 
process in terms of integrated markets is seen as a mechanism to enhance and promote the region’s 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
competitiveness vis-à-vis other trading blocks and enlarged internal markets. The key elements of this 
process  are  the  removal  of  the  internal  trade  barriers  and  free  flow  of  the  factors  of  production 
especially labour and capital. 
In a globalised financial market, the effectiveness of an independent monetary policy is questionable, 
especially for small open economies with one form or the other of fixed exchange rates arrangements. 
It is argued that it is very hard for a country to simultaneously maintain a fixed exchange rate and an 
open  capital  market  while  pursuing  an  independent  monetary  policy  geared  towards  domestic 
economic  policy.  A  country  can  opt  not  to  be  part  of  the  financial  globalization,  except  that  the 
outcome will not be desirable. What is likely to happen is that such a country will be isolated and might 
become further marginalized in terms of its participation in the world economy. I must also hasten to 
add  that  while  globalization  is  being  portrayed  as  good  for  the  world,  it  is  also  true  that  in  itself 
globalization  will  not  benefit  those  countries  that  are  not  prepared  to  take  advantage  of  the  new 
system. 
In  order  to  benefit  from  a  globalised  economy,  I  do  recognize  three  issues  that  are  of  critical 
importance.  First,  a  country  needs  to  ensure  that  it  has  the  necessary  human  skills  capable  of 
competing effectively within the world economy. Second, a country would need to have an institutional 
arrangement that conforms to international standards. Examples here are that your institutions must 
practice good governance; you must have an effective accounting regime; and you must have clear 
demarcation  of  functions  and  responsibilities  among  your  institutions.  The  third  issue  I  believe  is 
important is an effective legal framework, where businesses and individuals alike are certain that their 
legal contracts are enforceable in a timely manner. 
In our region, the increasing interest and momentum for the creation of a monetary union seems to 
revolve  around  two  main  considerations.  The  first  is  that  the  establishment  of  a  monetary  union  in 
combination  with  free  trade  agreements  is  increasingly  being  seen  as  part  of  a  strategic  push  to 
integrate the region. In this regard, a monetary union is seen as a way of reinforcing regional cohesion 
and demonstrating a commitment to regional solidarity. Indeed, the harmonization and unification of 
monetary policy represents the deepest form of economic and financial integration. 
The second consideration for the formation of a monetary union is the desire to counteract perceived 
economic and political weakness which dates back to the period of colonial rules by putting in place 
regional  institutions,  of  which  a  monetary  union  and  common  currency  would  be  strong  symbols.  It 
would also appear that the launching of the European monetary union has influenced this process. 
A strong argument and motivation for a monetary union is that it brings a number of benefits. The most 
often cited benefits are the increased intra trade, price stability, increased aggregate investment, and 
the  elimination  of  the  exchange  rate  risk.  It  is argued  that  the  elimination of  the  exchange  rate  risk 
would  allow  for  increased  capital  inflow  and  regional  investment  opportunities  resulting  in  welfare 
gains  and  growth.  It  also  reduces  transaction  cost  within  the  region  incurred  when  changing  one 
currency to another. 
Besides  increased  intra-trade,  economic  theory  and  experience  also  suggest  that  a  single  regional 
currency is expected to have a more stable internal and external value. Therefore, the benefits of price 
stability  and  monetary  policy  credibility  are  more  likely  to  be  realized  in  a  monetary  union.  This  is 
especially true if the regional monetary authority is autonomous in carrying out its functions and where 
its primary objective is price stability. 
It is also suggested that a monetary union would improve macroeconomic stability by ensuring fiscal 
and  monetary  policy  credibility.  This  is  necessary  for  attraction  of  investments,  which  eventually 
translates into economic growth as potential investors would only invest if they have full confidence 
that they would get sufficient returns on their investments. 
There are also costs involved in participating in a monetary union. By far the most often talked about 
cost, is the loss of autonomy to manage monetary policy. Arguably, national autonomy over monetary 
policy is supposed to give a country the maximum freedom and flexibility, through the use of various 
monetary  instruments  such  as  interest  rates  and  reserve  requirements,  to  steer  the  economy  in  a 
particular direction. Given that monetary policy is a key instrument of macroeconomic management, 
the  constraints  imposed  by  a  monetary  union  on  the  pursuit  of  country  specific  objectives  may 
therefore be viewed as constituting a hindrance to achieve country specific economic goals. This point 
is  important  especially  for  SADC  countries  that  are  at  different  stages  of  development  and  with 
different degree of financial and economic structures. Such diversity would make it difficult to sustain a 
monetary union. Therefore, having a unitary monetary policy for the region would be a daunting task 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
especially  given  the  fact  that  our  countries  have  different  shocks  that  may  require  different  policy 
responses. 
Yet, financial globalization has taught us that the use of an independent monetary policy is severely 
limited.  With  globalization,  cross-border  capital  flow  is  inevitable  and  this  makes  independent 
monetary  policy  ineffective  especially  for  small  developing  countries.  The  logical  conclusion  is  that 
such  countries  will  be  better-off  with  a  monetary  union  since  they  cannot,  in  any  case,  effectively 
implement independent monetary policy. 
Another  cost  associated  with  monetary  union  is  that  the  ability  of  the  government  to  conduct  fiscal 
policy  is  constrained  by  the  limits  collectively  agreed  and  imposed  in  respect  of  budget  deficit 
financing. The imposition of limits on deficit financing is necessitated by the desire to prevent member 
states  to  run  large  unsustainable  deficits  that  could  put  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  and 
exchange rates in the entire monetary union area. I would, however, want to believe that the restriction 
on deficit financing is a benefit and not a cost, because it encourages prudence in fiscal management. 
A monetary union will be more feasible among countries with open economies and strong trade links 
with each other. Furthermore, a monetary union is likely to be successful if there is a significant degree 
of  economic  convergence  among  the  member  countries  in  respect  of  some  of  the  macroeconomic 
variables. In the SADC region, empirical data indicates that the region does not meet all the criteria 
suggested by the optimum currency area theory, neither is there convergence in most of the economic 
variables.  The  process  to  establish  a  SADC  monetary  union  will  therefore  be  long  because  of  the 
macroeconomic convergence that must be established first. 
The lack of convergence in key macroeconomic variables may suggest that the region is not yet ready 
for a common currency. However, I must add that it may not be crucial to meet all the criteria prior to 
the formation of a union. It is possible for member countries to agree to meet some of the criteria only 
after  the  formation  of  the  monetary  union.  Experience  has  also  taught  us  that  in  the  case  of  the 
European Union, it was not only the economic argument that was the defining factor in the formation of 
the monetary union, but also the political drive for unification. It is therefore important to have political 
champions to promote the cause for a SADC monetary union. In the European example, Germany and 
France were the political champions for their monetary integration. 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that,  in  general  a  monetary  union  is  desirable  as  it  is  likely  to  promote 
macro-economic  stability  and  economic  growth  among  member  states.  However,  a  monetary  union 
should not be seen as an end in itself but as part of a process for wider economic integration in the 
region.  To  ensure  a  successful  implementation  of  a  SADC  monetary  union  within  the  agreed 
timeframe,  it  is  important  that  member  countries  intensify  and  redouble  their  efforts  towards  the 
realization of this noble objective. In particular, member countries would need to pursue appropriate 
policy measures in order to satisfy the convergence criteria. Given the importance of the issue and the 
sensitivities around it, it is crucial that the citizens of the member countries are properly informed of the 
desirability of a monetary union. 
A  SADC  monetary  union  will  also  have  its  unique  challenges.  Member  countries  should  therefore 
prepare themselves if they were to optimally benefit from the new arrangement. For example, member 
countries would need to strategically position themselves such that they increase their share of intra 
trade and investment within SADC and beyond. In the case of Namibia, we need to continue with the 
diversification of the economy towards manufacturing and services. We also need to do more in terms 
of concrete action plans to develop our human capital. This is a vital area where a lot has been said so 
far, but there is little evidence that suggests that we are succeeding in building human capital that is 
ready to compete effectively in the global economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
