Jean-Claude Trichet: Press briefing on the “ECB Financial Stability Review” 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Frankfurt 
am Main, 15 December 2004. 
 Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  welcome  to  this  special  press  briefing  on  the  publication  of  the  ECB’s 
Financial Stability Review 2004. 
Let  me  start by  saying  that  in publishing  this  Financial  Stability  Review  the European  Central  Bank 
(ECB) is joining a growing number of central banks around the world that are addressing their financial 
stability  mandates  in  part  through  the  periodic  issuing  of  a  public  report.  Under  Article  105  (5),  the 
Treaty establishing the European Union assigned to the Eurosystem the task of contributing “to the 
smooth conduct of policies pursued by the competent authorities relating to the prudential supervision 
of credit institutions and the stability of the financial system”. In this vein, the purpose of publishing this 
review,  which  represents  the  common  view  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  is  to  promote 
awareness  in  the  financial  industry  and  among  the  public  at  large  of  issues  that  are  relevant  for 
preserving and enhancing the stability of the euro area financial system. By providing an overview of 
sources of risk and vulnerability to financial stability, the review also seeks to help preventing financial 
tensions.  
Central banks have a strong and natural interest in the safeguarding of financial stability. This is in 
particular because financial institutions, notably banks, are issuers of by far the largest component of 
the  money  stock.  It  is  equally  because  a  stable  financial  system  is  needed  for  an  effective 
transmission of monetary policy and for the smooth operation of payment systems. A robust financial 
system  is  therefore  needed  to  ensure  that  the  single  monetary  policy  can  deliver  on  the  primary 
objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area. Finally, but not least, the health of the financial 
system is inextricably intertwined with the performance of the economy and its resilience to shocks. 
These are the reasons why the ECB and the Eurosystem have an important stake in financial stability 
in the euro area.  
Complex to define, financial stability is not only of the essence in avoiding financial crises but also in 
paving the way for the best financial environment in normal times. It is a condition where the financial 
system is capable of performing well in normal times all of its normal tasks and where it is expected to 
do  so  for  the  foreseeable  future.  From  this  viewpoint,  financial  system  stability  requires  that  the 
principal components of the system - ie financial institutions, markets and infrastructures - are jointly 
capable  of  absorbing  smoothly  a  full  array  of  adverse  disturbances.  It  requires  that  the  financial 
system  is  facilitating  an  efficient  reallocation  of  financial  resources  from  savers  to  investors,  that 
financial  risk  is  being  assessed  and  priced  accurately  and  that  risks  are  being  efficiently  managed. 
Financial stability also has an important forward-looking dimension. For instance, inefficiencies in the 
allocation  of  capital  or  shortcomings  in  the  pricing  of  risk  can,  by  laying  the  foundations  for  future 
vulnerabilities, compromise future financial system stability and therefore economic stability.  
Three steps are needed to produce a comprehensive picture of the stability of the financial system. 
The first entails forming an assessment of the individual and collective robustness of the institutions, 
markets and infrastructures that make up the financial system. The second involves an identification of 
the main sources of risk and vulnerability that could pose challenges for financial system stability in 
the future. The third and final step is an appraisal of the ability of the financial system to cope with 
crisis, should these risks materialise. The overall assessment will determine whether remedial action is 
needed.  
It is important to bear in mind that calling attention to the potential sources of risk and vulnerability to 
financial stability does not aim at identifying the main - or most likely - future scenario for the euro area 
economy. It neither aims at identifying the full balance of risks surrounding this main scenario as is the 
principal focus in the monetary policy assessment and decision-making process. Rather it entails the 
highlighting of potential and plausible sources of negative events, even if these are remote and very 
unlikely.  
   1/2 
The analysis contained in the review was prepared with the close involvement of, and contribution by, 
the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC). The BSC is a forum for cooperation among the national 
central banks and supervisory authorities of the EU and the ECB. The collaboration with the BSC has 
meant that the review draws upon a very broad knowledge-base and the analysis contained within it 
blends together the macro perspectives of central bankers with the micro perspectives of supervisors. 
Let  me  now  give  the  floor  to  Mr  Padoa-Schioppa,  who  will  present  to  you  the  main  findings  of  our 
analysis. 
   2/2 
