Otmar Issing: A framework for stability in Europe  
Speech by Professor Otmar Issing, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the University of London, European Economics and Financial Centre, London, 19 November 2004. 
 Introduction  
1.  
The  formation  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  has  created  a  framework  for  economic 
policy-making  in  Europe  which  is  unique  in  history.  While  the  single  monetary  policy  is  oriented 
towards  a  union-wide  objective,  namely  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  the  other  policy  areas  - 
involving fiscal and wage policies - largely remain the competence of national governments and other 
national actors, such as the social partners.  
The  combination  of  a  centralised  monetary  policy  and  decentralised  other  policies  has  led  to  the 
evolution  of  a  new  set  of  rules  and  objectives  for  national  and  supranational  policy-makers.  The 
Maastricht Treaty and the secondary legislation, including the Stability and Growth Pact, established 
the basic set of rules and objectives to lay out a framework for stability in Europe.  
Responsibilities under the “Maastricht assignment”  
2.  
With  regard  to  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  the  assignment  of  responsibilities  is  defined  by  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  respectively.  The  Treaty  has  assigned  the 
maintenance of price stability as the primary objective to the single monetary policy conducted by the 
ECB for the euro area as a whole. Without prejudice to its primary objective, the ECB shall support the 
general economic policies in the European Community. For fiscal policies, which continue to be largely 
a national responsibility, the Treaty sets out a framework of surveillance and disciplining mechanisms 
in  order  to  maintain  sound  public  finances.  These  indispensable  cornerstones  of  the  institutional 
framework agreed in Maastricht have been confirmed by the Constitution recently signed by the Heads 
of State and Government in Rome.  
The Stability and Growth Pact, which was agreed by all governments in 1997 after the signing of the 
Maastricht Treaty but before the launch of the single currency, sought to provide additional incentives 
for maintaining fiscal discipline at the national level by operationalising the excessive deficit procedure 
of the Treaty. It also specifies a commitment to achieving medium-term budgetary positions “close to 
balance  or  in  surplus”  and  incorporates  multilateral  surveillance  procedures  and  the  exchange  of 
information in conjunction with medium-term stability programmes submitted by national governments.  
Assigning the overriding objective of price stability to the single monetary policy is an example of the 
benefits  of  a  clear  division  of  responsibilities  between  different  policy  actors.  The  delegation  of  the 
single  monetary  policy  to  an  independent  central  bank enhances  credibility,  increases  transparency 
and also facilitates accountability. Similarly, the Stability and Growth Pact provides a basic set of rules 
for  the  conduct  of  sound  and  disciplined  fiscal  policies  by  national  governments,  while  in  principle 
preserving sufficient room for manoeuvre for the operation of automatic stabilisers without infringing 
the 3% ceiling for the deficit-to-GDP ratio.  
Of  course,  safeguarding  the  soundness  and  discipline  of  fiscal  policies  that  largely  remain  the 
competence of national governments presents a particular challenge. Ultimately, it must be ensured 
that twelve national budgets taken together are consistent with sustained stability for the euro area as 
a whole. In this regard the Stability and Growth Pact provides for a clear allocation of responsibilities 
between the Commission and the ECOFIN Council. The Commission is responsible for compiling the 
necessary 
formulating 
recommendations for decisions by the Council, and for overseeing the correct application of the Pact. 
The Council is responsible for taking the final decisions and it thus has the ultimate responsibility for 
enforcing the Pact. These two principles of surveillance and enforcement form the basic idea of the 
Stability and Growth Pact and must not be put into question.  
Having said that and in the light of the ongoing discussions on the future of the EU fiscal framework, 
let me re-affirm the ECB’s view that the Stability and Growth Pact is appropriate in its present form, but 
that there is scope for improving its implementation. Specifically, given that the experience with the 
Pact since 1999 has been mixed at best, there is a need to provide enhanced incentives to comply 
for  effective  multilateral  surveillance, 
information  and  analysis 
for 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
with the commitments under the Pact and to increase peer pressure towards enforcing the rules. At 
the  same  time,  there  is  a  need  for  increasing  the  awareness  of  the  basic  principles  underlying  the 
surveillance and enforcement process. Ultimately, this requires striking a delicate balance between the 
sovereignty of national governments, the responsibility of the ECOFIN Council for enforcing the Pact 
and  the  independence  of  the  Commission,  the  latter  being  essential  for  an  effective  assessment  of 
national budgetary positions.  
The ECB has always considered the fiscal rules enshrined in the Treaty and the Stability and Growth 
Pact  as  an  essential  element  of  Monetary  Union.  These  rules  already  contain  significant  scope  for 
flexibility. While the implementation of the preventive arm of the Pact could no doubt be strengthened, 
in  particular  to  enhance  incentives  for  compliance  in  good  times,  we  reject  proposals  that  would 
undermine the Pact’s corrective arm and the excessive deficit procedure contained in the Treaty.  
If all policy areas concerned respect the aforementioned allocation of objectives and responsibilities 
and  act  accordingly,  they  will  already  be  making  the  best  possible  contribution  to  the  Community 
objectives. 
A sound institutional arrangement 
3.  
A  clear  allocation  of  responsibilities  is  essential  for  well-designed  policy-making,  especially  in  a 
complex  institutional  set-up  as  the  one  governing  monetary  union  in  Europe.  At  the  same  time,  a 
continuous  dialogue  between  different  policy  actors  on  the  basis  of  the  allocation  of  tasks  is  also 
important  for  effective  governance.  An  open  exchange  of  views  and  information  between  individual 
policy  actors  -  without  any  commitment  or  mandate  to  take  and  implement  joint  decisions  -  will 
strengthen  economic  governance  if  it  manages  to  improve  the  common  understanding  of  the 
objectives and responsibilities of the respective policy areas and does not dilute accountability. 
The  central  legal  basis  for  economic  policy  co-ordination  among  Member  States  within  monetary 
Union is specified in Article 99 (ex 103) of the Maastricht Treaty, which states that “Member States 
shall regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern and shall co-ordinate them within 
the Council.” On the basis of this principle, the framework for the definition of economic policy priorities 
is  provided  by  the  “Broad  Economic  Policy  Guidelines”  adopted  by  the  Council  each  year.  These 
channels  for  policy  co-ordination  among  Member  States  do  not  involve  the  independent  monetary 
policy of the ECB.  
Any  form  of  exchange  of  views  and  information,  however,  should  clearly  be  distinguished  from  an 
attempt to co-ordinate macro-economic policies ex ante, which would give rise to serious information, 
incentive and enforcement problems. Ex ante co-ordination among different policy actors would blur 
the fundamental responsibilities of the respective policy areas under the Treaty. This, in turn would 
reduce  accountability  of  individual  policy  actors and ultimately  increase uncertainty  about  the  policy 
framework.  
Given  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  there  should  be  no  ambiguity  how  the  single 
monetary policy will respond to developments in fiscal policies and wage settlements to the extent that 
they will affect the maintenance of price stability. As a result, national governments and wage setters 
alike should be able to design and implement the policies under their responsibility in a manner that 
allows for the interdependencies of these policies with the single monetary policy. Obviously, if they 
take the single monetary policy’s credible commitment to maintain price stability as given, this will help 
to  align  expectations  and  condition  their  behaviour  in  a  favourable  way.  National  governments  and 
wage setters, in turn, are reassured that monetary policy will respond favourably to appropriate fiscal 
polices and wage settlements which allow to maintain price stability over the medium term. 
Sustained stability - be it maintenance of price stability or stability in a wider sense - needs a sound 
institutional framework. As regards monetary policy the independence and clear mandate of the ECB 
provides the best possible arrangement. At the same time it is obvious that a monetary union which is 
not a mature political union also requires a framework for fiscal policy. This framework must respect 
the  sovereignty  of  national  governments  and  parliaments  on  the  one  hand  and  the  need  to  ensure 
sound fiscal policy across the euro area on the other hand.  
Both,  sound  monetary  and  fiscal  institutional  arrangements  are  indispensable  for  a  consistent  and 
sustainable  stability  framework.  The  success  of  EMU  rests  not  only  on  the  ECB  and  its  monetary 
policy but also on a robust framework for national fiscal policies.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2004
On 1 May 2004 ten more countries joined the EU - all of them committed to join monetary union one 
day. The framework for stability already plays the role of an anchor for guiding convergence as shown 
e.g. in the Convergence Reports of the ECB and the European Commission. The new member states 
see the euro as the centre of gravity. This makes it all the more important that the basic rules of the 
game underpinning the existing framework for lasting stability in Europe are not put at risk.  
No doubt the institutional framework for EMU is at a critical juncture. At the same time one must not 
forget  the  fact  that  the  first  (almost)  six  years  of  the  euro  have  been  a  resounding  success. 
Notwithstanding severe exogenous shocks the stability of the currency has been preserved, inflation 
expectations have remained under control and the ECB has earned a degree of credibility which is 
outstanding for a new institution.  
Also  the  role  played  by  the  fiscal  framework  should  not  be  underrated.  The  consolidation  of  public 
finances  achieved  during  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  in  many  European  countries  had  been 
unthinkable only a few years previously. These achievements must not be thrown away but need to be 
re-enforced to build a strong and stable future for Europe. 
BIS Review 71/2004 
 3
