Antonio Fazio: Regulation and supervision in financial markets 
Presentation  by  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  Frankfurt  European  Banking 
Congress  2004,  panel  discussion  on  “Regulation  and  Supervision  in  Financial  Markets”,  Frankfurt, 
19 November 2004. 
 Development and integration of financial markets in the euro area 
1. 
The introduction of the single currency has given a decisive impetus to financial integration in Europe. 
The  integration  of  the  money  market  has  been  rendered  possible  by  the  creation  of  TARGET,  the 
European payment system. The launch of the new-generation system based on a single platform is 
scheduled for 2007. 
The euro has had a particularly significant impact on the European market for private-sector bonds; 
there  has  been  a  considerable  increase  in  the  number  of  even  medium-sized  firms  placing  issues 
outside their home country. The home-bias of equity portfolios has diminished. 
In the main industrialized countries the medium-term growth in the quantity of money, and hence in the 
volume of bank deposits, is in line with that in nominal GDP.  
The  faster  rate  of  expansion  in  the  aggregate  volume  of  financial  assets,  that  is  the  process  of 
financial  deepening,  is  the  outcome  of  the  direct  relationship  established  on  the  financial  markets 
between  the  firms  and  the  public  sector  issuing  securities,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  investors 
purchasing them, on the other. 
In Italy, between 1995 and 2003 the volume of funds raised directly on the financial markets by firms 
issuing shares, bonds and other instruments grew from 20 billion euros to 65 billion. 
The  amount  of  households’  financial  wealth  consisting  of  corporate  securities  increased  from 
180 billion euros to 470 billion, that is from 19 to 36 per cent of GDP. 
Similar developments have taken place on other markets. 
The stability of  the banking  system,  the  protection of  the savings  it intermediates and  their  efficient 
allocation are entrusted to the banking supervisory authority, as well as to market discipline. 
In  order  to  strengthen,  in  this  new  context,  the  safeguards  for  savings  invested  in  securities,  steps 
must be taken to ensure more effective controls on financial markets and firms issuing securities, if 
necessary by forging Europe-wide links. 
Banks and financial markets 
2.  
During the 1990s the large-scale process of consolidation and consequent growth in the size of banks 
encouraged  the  spread  of  the  universal  bank,  which  combines  retail  and  wholesale  business  and 
simultaneously performs both commercial and investment banking services. 
The  banks  themselves  have  greatly  stepped  up  their  role  in  the  distribution  of  third-party  financial 
products,  insurance  policies,  investment  funds  and  corporate  bonds.  Credit  risks  and  market  risks 
have diminished with their progressive transfer away from banks’ balance sheets, but other types of 
risks have emerged. 
The  reputation  of  a  bank  is  inevitably  and  increasingly  affected  by  the  quality  of  the  products  it 
supplies to its customers. There has also been an increase in both legal and operational risks. 
The banks’ increasing role in the distribution of third parties’ products makes it crucial to monitor for 
conflicts  of  interest.  It  is  extremely  important  that  conduct  should  be  ethical.  The  integrity  and 
completeness of the information provided to the public must be guaranteed and internal controls must 
be reinforced. Staff incentives must be designed to prevent the risk of improper conduct. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
Supervision 
3.  
International cooperation between banking, insurance and financial market supervisory authorities is 
strengthening. In view of the close links between the systems of the major areas - in the first place 
those of central and western Europe and the United States, but also to an increasing extent those of 
eastern Europe and Asia - supervisory cooperation has spread to the global level. 
In Europe, the nationally based organization of banking supervision is in conformity with the cardinal 
principle of the single European market, founded on minimum harmonization and mutual recognition. 
Supervision on a national basis permits the authorities to operate near the entities subject to control. It 
favours a constant exchange of information and direct contact with intermediaries. This is particularly 
effective if it is also realized by means of a widespread presence in the territory and through on-site 
inspections. 
Banking supervision is rooted in the legal and administrative systems of each country, not least owing 
to the possible involvement of public money in crises.  
Europe  has  equipped  itself  with  a  well-structured  system  of  multilateral  cooperation  and  bilateral 
agreements  between  the  national  authorities  responsible  for  supervising  the  banking  and  financial 
markets. 
Spurred by the guidelines set by the Ecofin Council meeting of Oviedo in 2002, in 2004 the application 
of the Lamfalussy reform was completed, extending to the banking and insurance sectors bodies and 
legislative  procedures  that  had  already  been  introduced  in  the  securities  field.  The  reform  process 
sees  national  authorities  and  European  institutions  engaged  in  speeding  up  the  approval  of 
harmonized  European  regulation,  ensuring  its  uniform  application  in  national  law  and  further 
strengthening cooperation among the supervisory authorities. 
Derivatives 
4.  
In the last four years the cyclical slowdown of the global economy, stock market turbulence, the failure 
of large companies operating at international level and the default of sovereign states have subjected 
financial systems to strong pressures in both advanced and emerging economies. 
Banks have demonstrated a great capacity to absorb the destabilizing impulses. Both in Europe and in 
the  United  States,  the  ratio  of  losses  on  loans  has  been  lower  than  that  registered  during  the 
recession of the early 1990s. There have been no significant episodes of instability. 
The  greater  soundness  and  flexibility  of  the  system  derive  above  all  from  the  reorganization  and 
capital strengthening of intermediaries prompted in many countries by the public authorities since the 
second  half  of  the  1990s.  The  strong  expansion  of  the  bond  market,  which  has  allowed  firms  to 
supplement bank loans with funds raised directly from savers, has contributed to the stability of the 
system. 
The  shocks  that  have  hit  the  international  financial  system  have  been  absorbed  thanks  also  to  the 
development  of  the  derivatives  market.  At  the  end  of  2003  the  notional  value  of  over-the-counter 
derivatives was approximately 200 trillion dollars, nearly twice as much as at the end of 2001. 
Interest rate derivatives account for about three quarters of the entire derivatives market. In the last 
few years credit derivatives have grown especially fast; in the middle of this year the notional value of 
credit default swaps was of the order of 5.4 trillion dollars. 
The greater scope for managing risks has made it possible to avoid compounding the difficulties of the 
real  economy  and  the  international  political  tensions  with  financial  instability.  For  these  reasons  as 
well, the recent phase of cyclical weakness has been shallower than in similar periods in the past. 
The use of derivatives is not without its own risks. 
In  an  environment  characterized  by  abundant  liquidity  and  low  interest  rates  the  sharp  decline  in 
volatility recorded in recent months on the financial markets of the leading countries is connected to 
some extent with the search for higher profitability by major international financial institutions through 
the  purchase  of  high-yield  instruments.  Intermediaries  appear  to  have  increased  the  supply  of 
derivative instruments that provide protection against possible changes in the value of financial assets, 
thereby lowering option prices and volatility, and to have taken on the related risks. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
To  forestall  the  potential  adverse  effects  of  the  growth  of  derivatives  markets,  a  high  level  of 
professionalism on the part of market participants is indispensable. 
The  role  of  regulatory  authorities  and  central  banks  is  of  fundamental  importance.  Supervisory 
regulations  and  practices,  accounting  standards,  and  the  information  that  intermediaries  have  to 
provide are continuously updated, both at national level and in the sphere of international cooperation, 
to keep up with the development of the markets and contain the systemic risks that are associated 
with the potential benefits offered by the growing use of derivatives. 
Conclusions 
5.  
Efficient intermediaries, developed financial markets, capable of channeling funds towards firms with 
favourable growth prospects, improve the allocation of resources and stimulate investment and saving. 
But the very efficiency of the financial system, its stability depend ultimately on the strength of the real 
economy, on its ability to grow and compete. 
The  economy  of  the  euro  area  is  afflicted  by  a  loss  of  competitiveness  that  reflects  structural 
weaknesses in several fields. Productivity growth is unsatisfactory. 
It is necessary to remove the factors of an institutional, legal and fiscal nature that hamper flexibility in 
the use of labour and capital. 
In Europe the efforts to consolidate the public finances must be continued, not least so as to loosen 
the  constraints  that  are  holding  back  economic  activity.  The  action  of  the  Eurosystem  aimed  at 
guaranteeing price stability provides an essential condition for a firmly-based economic recovery. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
