Jean-Claude Trichet: South Eastern European challenges and prospects 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conference on European Economic Integration (CEEI), Vienna, 29 November 2004. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  talk  here  in  Vienna  to  this  distinguished  audience  at  the  conference  on  South 
Eastern  Europe,  the  first  of  its  kind  organised  by  the  Österreichische  Nationalbank.  Let  me  also 
warmly congratulate the OeNB and Governor Liebscher for the initiative. 
When  I  think  of  the  recent  enlargement  of  the  EU  in  central  banking  terms  I  cannot  do  so  without 
thinking of the contribution of the OeNB, which has been involved in enlargement issues from the very 
beginning.  This  was  thanks  to  its  long-standing  expertise  on  central  and  eastern  Europe.  With  this 
event, the OeNB clearly demonstrates once more that it is, inside the Eurosystem, at the forefront of 
the analysis of European integration. 
The topic that we have for today - South Eastern European challenges and prospects - is indeed a 
broad one.1 
Challenges refer mainly to those that arise in the process of transition from a centrally planned to a 
market  economy.  In  this  respect,  they  are  similar  to  the  ones  that  those  eight  countries  faced  that 
joined  the  EU  earlier  in  the  year.  But,  as  our  friend  and  coparticipant  in  this  conference  Governor 
Nicholl of the Central Bank of Bosnia and Herzegovina puts it, for countries in the former Yugoslavia 
there are also two other transitions with their own particular challenges: the transition from being part 
of a larger state to being independent democratic countries and the transition from war to peace. I do 
not intend to dwell on these issues but they are indeed important when thinking about South Eastern 
Europe. 
In setting the stage for the discussions today and tomorrow, I will focus my remarks on three aspects. I 
will  first  make  some  remarks  on  the  economic  and  monetary  performance  of  the  region;  I  will  then 
touch  upon  the  process  of  economic  and  financial  integration  into  the  EU  and,  lastly,  I  will  briefly 
discuss  the  use  of  the  euro  in  the  region.  As  I  will  explain  in  more  detail,  economic  and  monetary 
performance has improved over the last years,  although much remains to be done. Economic links 
with the EU have been strengthening. These links are also based on a widespread use of the euro. 
Economic and monetary performance in South Eastern Europe 
South  Eastern  Europe  is  a  diverse  and  complex  region,  characterised  by  a  relatively  low  level  of 
income compared to that of Western Europe. The seven countries considered here as South Eastern 
Europe have a combined population of around 53 million people, while the combined GDP in 2003, at 
nominal exchange rates, amounted to around 120 billion euro. This gives an average GDP per capita 
of  around  2,300  euro.  Even  when  one  adjusts  for  purchasing  power  standards,  income  per  capita 
across the region stood in 2003 at only 26% of the EU average (compared to the equivalent figure for 
the new Member States of around 48% of the EU average). 
Another  feature  common  to  the  countries  in  the  region  is  the  relatively  fast  growth  that  has  been 
experienced in recent years. Annual real GDP growth in the region has been above 4% since 2001 
and catching up in real incomes is taking place. In 2003, for a third year in a row, the economies of the 
countries  of  South  Eastern  Europe  grew  faster,  on  average,  than  the  countries  in  central  Eastern 
Europe and the Baltics that joined the EU last May 
However,  estimates suggest  that,  in  real  GDP  terms,  the  economies  from  South  Eastern  European 
countries are still below from where they stood fifteen years ago, reflecting slow progress in transition 
in the early 1990s and economic disruptions due to wars and political turmoil. Thus, in order to catch 
up with living standards in the EU strong growth is needed to foster real convergence.  
                                                      
1   Within  the  context  of  this  conference  South  Eastern  Europe  is  understood  to  comprise  the  following  countries:  Albania, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, FYR of Macedonia, Romania and Serbia and Montenegro. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
Monetary performance across the region has also seen significant improvements in the recent past. 
Up until 1998 no fewer than four countries in the region (out of 7) had inflation rates that exceeded 
20% annually. After 1998 disinflation has proceeded and the median inflation rate among the countries 
in  the  region  has  remained  in  the  single  digits  ever  since.  This  is  not  to  say  that  there  are  no 
challenges  ahead  on  the  disinflation  front.  In  some  cases  inflation  remains  high  and  the  challenge 
remains to continue bringing inflation down. In other cases, adjustments to administered prices and 
indirect prices may still cause a pick up in inflation. In those circumstances, the challenge is to avoid 
that temporary spikes in the inflation rate translate into increases in inflationary expectations. 
Progress in bringing inflation down is being accomplished through a variety of monetary and exchange 
rate  frameworks.  One  can  classify  the  regimes  in  place  in  three  different  groups:  (i)  euro-based 
currency boards (Bosnia and Herzegovina and Bulgaria); (ii) pegs or managed floating with the euro 
as  a  reference  currency  (Croatia,  FYR  of  Macedonia,  Romania  and  Serbia);  and,  (iii)  independent 
floating  (Albania).  In  addition,  there  are  two  territories  within  Serbia  and  Montenegro  (Kosovo  and 
Montenegro)  where  the  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  is  determined  by  their  unilateral 
euroisation - an issue to which I will return to later in my remarks. As the title of the panel discussion 
that will take place this afternoon highlights, country specific circumstances have called for different 
choices  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  and  changing  circumstances  may  have  called  for 
changes in the approaches to be followed. I will not expand on this issue further than to emphasise 
that  regardless  of  the  actual  monetary  and  exchange  rate  framework  chosen,  it  is  crucial  to 
consolidate a culture of price stability, buttressed by independent central banks. 
Outside the realm of monetary and exchange rate policy I would like to briefly touch upon fiscal and 
external developments. In the area of fiscal developments, it is fair to recognise that the fiscal deficit 
for the region as a whole stands at its lowest level, in terms of GDP, since the beginning of transition. 
Nevertheless,  this  should  be  interpreted  with  caution,  particularly  in  light  of  the  very  positive  output 
developments  that  have  been  observed  recently.  The  more  positive  side  of  the  economic  cycle 
provides  in  fact  a  fitting  opportunity  to  procede  further  with  fiscal  consolidation,  as  well  as  with  the 
necessary reforms of the structure of fiscal expenditures and revenues. 
Developments  in  the  external  balances  of  the  countries  in  the  region  provide  a  sobering  reading. 
Current account deficits have increased over the last three years, and stood, for the region as a whole 
above  8%  of  GDP  in  2003.  While  these  deficits  may  partly  stem  from  a  natural  and  welcome 
recapitalisation of the economies in the region, fast credit growth may have contributed to exacerbate 
the  current  account  deficits  in  a  number  of  countries.  Of  course,  given  the  low  levels  of  financial 
intermediation that characterise the economies in the region, the increase in lending activity is to some 
extent a welcome sign of a financial sector that is performing its role within the economy as a whole. 
However,  given  the  links  that  have  often  been  identified  between  lending  booms  and  banking  and 
currency crisis, it is clear that authorities in the region had in a number of cases to take steps to avoid 
credit growth that may be too fast. 
More broadly, countries in the region still lag behind those in central Eastern Europe and the Baltics, 
as measured by indicators such as the EBRD’s transition indicators. Improvements in the quality of the 
judiciary,  the  overall  business  environment  and,  generally,  institutional  reform  are  needed.  On  the 
positive side, it is noteworthy that, among all transition countries, it is precisely in the South Eastern 
European region where one have seen most progress in the last year or so. One cannot help but to 
associate this progress with the pull that enlargement of the EU may provide. 
Economic and financial integration with the EU 
In  recent  years  we  have  observed  a  number  of  developments  that  are  testament  of  the  ongoing 
process of economic and financial integration between the South Eastern European region and the 
EU. 
The  EU  is  by  far  the  most  important  trading  partner  for  the  countries  in  the  region,  accounting  for 
between half and three quarters of the foreign trade of the countries in the region. Moreover, export 
performance of these countries has remained positive regardless of economic conditions in their main 
export markets. At the same time, the old trading patterns within the regions are long gone, leaving 
trading integration among South Eastern European countries at a very low level. More needs to be 
done, for example through the implementation of bilateral free trade agreements already signed, in this 
area. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
Another element pointing towards economic and financial integration between the region and the EU 
is the recent increase in inflows of foreign direct investment. While precise figures are hard to come 
by, such FDI inflows often come from the euro area. This is well known here in Austria - which ranks 
among  the  top  five  leading  investors  in  no  less  than  four  countries  in  the  region.  In  addition  to  the 
financial  sector,  FDI  has  typically  concentrated  in  manufacturing  industry  as  well  as  transport  and 
telecommunications. Often, manufacturing activity in the region is well integrated into the production 
structures of Western European economies, which have been attracted by the comparatively low costs 
in  South  Eastern  Europe  and  a  relative  geographic  proximity.  For  the  region  as  a  whole,  FDI  as  a 
percentage of GDP was close to 5% in 2003. It is to be noted that this level is low compared to the 
central Eastern Europe and the Baltic countries. The cumulative FDI inflows into the countries of South 
Eastern Europe over the period 1989 to 2003 has been on average less than USD 700 per capita, 
approximately one third of the comparable figure for central Eastern European and Baltic countries. 
I mentioned briefly investment in financial intermediaries as an area where euro area investors have 
been  particularly  active.  In  fact,  euro  area  banks  and  financial  institutions  have  been  the  most 
important  investors  in  the  respective  banking  sectors,  contributing  to  financial  development  in  the 
region. Let me now turn my attention to the use of the euro in the region. 
Use of the euro in South Eastern Europe 
South Eastern Europe is a region where one can see the use of the euro as an international currency 
in  all  its  dimensions.  The  OeNB  has  done  much  work  to  document  this.  The  ECB  also  monitors 
regularly developments in the international role of the euro, including its use South Eastern Europe. 
As you all know, the Eurosystem takes a neutral position regarding the internationalisation of the euro. 
In this regard, it is also worth recalling the position adopted, already by the Ecofin in November 2000, 
that countries aiming at EU accession cannot use unilateral euroisation as a way of circumventing the 
stages foreseen by the Treaty establishing the European Community for the adoption of the euro.2 
As  a  financing  currency,  euro  denominated  debt  is  regularly  issued  by  the  countries  of  the  region, 
which  also,  as  I  noted  above,  often  make  use  of  the  euro  as  an  anchor,  reserve  and  intervention 
currency for their monetary and exchange rate frameworks. The euro is also being increasingly used 
as  an  invoicing  currency  in  the  international  trade  of  the  countries  in  the  region.  In  the  case  of 
Bulgaria,  for  which  a  longer  span  of  data  is  available,  we  have  seen  that  while  37%  of  Bulgarian 
exports were invoiced in euro in 2000, the figure had risen to 61% in 2003. The increase is particularly 
notable  given  the  fact  that  Bulgarian  exports  to  the  euro  area  accounted  for  only  51%  of  total 
Bulgarian exports in 2003, compared to 42% back in 2000. That is, while in 2000 Bulgarian exports to 
the euro area were greater than its exports invoiced in euro, by 2003 the opposite was true. 
Euro cash inherited the role of a store of value that some legacy currencies, principally the D-mark and 
also the Austrian schilling, had played in some countries in the region. But the introduction of the euro 
also coincided with an interesting development in the region. In a nutshell, the euro cash changeover 
was  accompanied 
in 
euro-denominated  deposits.  In  many  countries,  particularly  in  the  former  Yugoslav  republics, 
households deposited cash in legacy currencies - previously kept “under the mattress” - with banks 
rather  than  exchange  them  directly  for  new  euro  banknotes,  reflecting  increased  confidence  in  the 
respective banking systems.  
in  many  South  Eastern  European  countries  by  a  strong 
increase 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by focusing on the prospects. To a large extent, these prospects can be summarised 
in just a few words: progress towards EU membership. Of course, countries in the region are at very 
different  stages  in  their  path  towards  EU  membership,  which  is  reflected  in  their  different  status  as 
candidate and potential candidate countries. Indeed, Bulgaria and Romania are expected to sign the 
accession treaty next year whereas other countries are still preparing negotiations on stabilisation and 
                                                      
2   Report by the (ECOFIN) Council to the European Council in Nice on the exchange rate aspects of enlargement, Brussels, 
8 November  2000,  Council  of  the  European  Union  press  release  no.  13055/00.  Also  reiterated  in  “Policy  position  of  the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank on exchange rate issues relating to the acceding countries,” Frankfurt, 
18 December 2003, www.ecb.int. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
association  agreements.  Moreover,  there  are  not  only  economic,  but  also  political  criteria  countries 
have  to  pass  to  transform  the  current  EU  perspective  into  real  progress  towards  association  or 
accession. 
Let me also emphasise that the ECB and the Eurosystem as a whole is a contributor to this process, 
not least through the provision of technical assistance. Cooperation among central banks has involved 
twinning projects - led by some Eurosystem National Central Banks in particular Banque de France, 
Banca d’Italia and De Nederlandsche Bank - with the Bulgarian National Bank and the National Bank 
of Romania, as well as visits and training, all geared towards sharing information and know-how. It has 
taken place in a large number of areas, such as payment systems, supervision and financial stability, 
statistics,  central  bank  operations,  etc.  Looking  ahead,  such  technical  assistance  will  continue  to 
intensify as countries progress towards aligning themselves with EU regulations and directives. Also 
the  Joint  Vienna  Institute,  co-sponsored  by  the  OeNB,  has  played  a  crucial  role  in  offering  training 
opportunities to staff of the central banks of the region. 
The  recent  enlargement  to  ten  new  Member  States,  as  well  as  the  progress  in  the  accession 
negotiations with Bulgaria and Romania and the decision to begin negotiations with Croatia serve as 
powerful reminders that the enlargement of the EU remains an ongoing process.  
However,  for  all  countries  in  the  region,  no  matter  how  far  they  have  already  travelled  on  the  road 
towards  the  EU,  there  is  no  time  for  complacency.  Clearly,  the  speed  at  which  South  Eastern 
European countries progress towards accession to the EU depends on the policies followed. It is the 
culture  of  stability  and  the  exercise  of  responsibility  in  economic  policy-making  that  are  the  crucial 
ingredients to achieve the bright prospects that lie ahead for the region. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2004
