Roger W Ferguson, Jr: Free trade - what do economists really know?  
Remarks by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Conference on Trade and the Future of American Workers, Washington, DC, 
7 October 2004. 
 The  role  of  trade  in  the  U.S.  economy  has  moved  well  into  the  spotlight  in  recent  years,  and  I  am 
pleased  to be  here  today  to  share my  thoughts  on  this  important  topic with such  distinguished  and 
knowledgeable  colleagues.  Over  the  course  of  this  day,  you  will  be  hearing  from  leading  analysts, 
policymakers,  and  commentators  about  recent  developments  in  the  U.S.  economy,  past  and 
prospective trends in job creation, the role of sourcing (both out- and in-), and the implications of trade 
for the coming elections. In my remarks this morning, I would like to put these issues into the broader 
context of the debate over free trade and its implications for the American economy. 
Though my focus will be on free trade, we must remember that prospects for the average American 
depend  on  many  other  factors  as  well,  including  technological  progress,  the  education  required  to 
exploit  this  progress,  a  dynamic  market-oriented  economy,  a  framework  of  limited  but  effective 
regulation, healthy and well-governed financial institutions, and a stable macroeconomic environment. 
And free trade is not necessarily the most important item on this list. Even so, it has been a focus of 
interest and aspiration for economists dating back to Adam Smith and David Ricardo. As you know, 
finding  overwhelming  agreement  on  issues  is  difficult  among  economists,  but  free  trade  is  an 
exception.1
The supporters of free trade have not been ignored. In the past half-century, global trade has become 
freer and has expanded rapidly. The ratio of trade (exports plus imports) to worldwide gross domestic 
product  rose  from  only  16  percent  in  1960  to  40  percent  by  2001.  In  1960,  the  United  States, 
Germany, and Japan had average tariff rates of around 7 percent; these rates were more than halved 
by  1993.  The  number  of  members of  the  World  Trade  Organization  (WTO),  or  its  predecessor,  the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, rose from 18 in 1948 to 146 in 2003, and the number of 
regional trade agreements in the world ballooned from only 1 in 1958 to 161 in 2003. 
Although most economists welcome these trends, the public at large has been much more ambivalent 
about  international  trade.  Attitudes  toward  free  trade  in  principle  remain  generally  positive,  but  a 
substantial - and, perhaps, growing - minority of Americans hold more negative views. According to a 
poll completed around the beginning of this year, 41 percent of respondents viewed the process of 
increasing international trade through reduction of barriers as proceeding too quickly; this number was 
up from 30 percent in 1999. And 43 percent of respondents believed that the government should try to 
slow or reverse the expansion of international trade, up from 39 percent in 1999.2
What accounts for the apparent deterioration in public support for free trade over the past five years? 
The  widening  of  the  U.S.  trade  deficit  may  have  exacerbated  concerns  about  the  country’s 
international  competitiveness.  More  important,  some  have  blamed  overseas  competition  for  the  job 
losses associated with the economic slowdown earlier in this decade. 
Without  solid  public  support  for  free  trade,  achieving  continued  progress  in  reducing  protectionist 
barriers, both at home and abroad, may become more difficult. In the remainder of my remarks, I’d like 
to review the arguments for and against free trade, explore why it has been difficult to muster more 
widespread public support for this goal, and address some of the consequences of trade protection as 
it has been implemented in practice. 
                                                      
1   Ninety-three percent of economists surveyed agreed, to a least a limited degree, with the statement that “tariffs and import 
quotas usually reduce general economic welfare.” Richard M. Alston, J.R. Kearl, and Michael B. Vaughan (1992), “Is There 
a  Consensus  Among  Economists  in  the  1990s?”  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  82  (May,  Papers  and  Proceedings, 
1991), pp. 203-09. 
2   Steven  Kull  and  others  (2004),  “Americans  on  Globalization,  Trade,  and  Farm  Subsidies,”  The  American  Public  on 
International Issues, the PIPA/Knowledge Networks Poll (Program on International Policy Attitudes, University of Maryland, 
January 22), www.pipa.org.
BIS Review 57/2004 
 1
Arguments for free trade 
International trade contributes to prosperity and growth through several channels. These channels are 
not  especially  subtle  or  esoteric,  and  I  would  argue  that  the  public  at  large  understands  them 
reasonably well. At the same time, however, quantifying the contributions of trade to national welfare is 
by no means straightforward. 
First, and most obviously, trade increases the variety of goods available to consumers. Trade provides 
some  products  that  otherwise  would  be  beyond  the  reach  of  most  American  households,  such  as 
roses for Valentine’s Day, or peaches and nectarines during the winter. More generally, international 
trade allows us to choose from a wider array of goods than would otherwise be available: Japanese 
and German cars in addition to American, Chilean apples as well as Washington state, French and 
Australian wine as well as Californian. It is difficult to put a dollar figure on the value of this increased 
variety to the consumer, but estimates range as high as nearly 3 percent of GDP.3
A second benefit of international trade is its role in reducing the cost of goods and hence in raising our 
standard of living. To anyone who has walked into a large discount store and surveyed the range of 
low-priced  items  produced  in  any  number  of  distant  economies,  this  benefit  is  abundantly  clear. 
However, actually measuring the extent to which trade holds down consumer costs is tricky. Between 
1990  and  2003,  for  example,  the  overall  consumer  price  index  rose  41  percent,  whereas  prices 
declined  for  many  highly  traded  goods,  including  toys  (whose  prices  fell  26  percent),  televisions 
(53 percent), and clocks and lamps (15 percent); in just the past five years, the price of telephones, 
calculators, and other such items has fallen 42 percent. Yet, we do not know how much of the decline 
in these prices can be attributed to trade, as most traded products are manufactures and are subject 
to greater productivity growth (and hence steeper declines in costs) than nontraded products such as 
services.  
A more fruitful approach may be to compare the prices of goods that are protected from international 
competition  with  what  they  would  be  in  the  absence  of  such  barriers.  A  recent  study  by  the  U.S. 
International  Trade  Commission  indicates  that  sectoral  trade  liberalization  would  lower  the  price  of 
sugar for U.S. consumers by 8 percent, of apparel by 5 percent, and of footwear and leather products 
by 4 percent.4 Clearly, if international trade were curtailed for a much broader range of goods, the cost 
of living for American workers would be higher and the standard of living correspondingly lower. 
A third key benefit of free trade is that it allows economies to specialize in the activities they do best. 
This notion was at the core of the classical economists’ defense of free trade. By allowing England to 
specialize  in cloth  production  and  Portugal  in wine,  for  example,  international commerce  leads  to a 
higher income for both countries than if each tried to produce both goods for themselves. By the same 
token,  no  American  today  would  object  to  trade  between  Massachusetts  and  Montana,  or  between 
Alaska and Alabama - the various U.S. states obviously have their own comparative advantages in 
producing a variety of different products, and trade among them makes such specialization possible. 
Extending the example of trade among states to trade among countries is not much of a stretch. 
Can we measure the extent to which the specialization associated with free trade may boost incomes 
and welfare? Such an estimate is obviously no simple thing to calculate. Economists frequently use 
so-called  computable  general  equilibrium  models,  often  consisting  of  hundreds  of  equations,  to 
address this issue. A recent analysis of the effects of past trade liberalizations on the U.S. economy 
puts  the  gains  to  U.S.  welfare  at  about  1/2  percent  of  GDP.5  A  separate  analysis  of  a  hypothetical 
33 percent  reduction  in  trade  barriers  around  the  world  suggests  it  would  raise  welfare  by 
1-1/2 percent of global GDP.6
                                                      
3   Christian Broda and David E. Weinstein (2004), “Globalization and the Gains from Variety,” NBER Working Paper Series 
10314 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February). 
4   U.S. International Trade Commission (2004), The Economic Effects of Significant U.S. Import Restraints: Fourth Update, 
Investigation 332-325, Publication 3701 (Washington: ITC, June). 
5   U.S. International Trade Commission (2003), The Impact of Trade Agreements: Effect of the Tokyo Round, U.S.-Israel FTA, 
U.S.-Canada  FTA,  NAFTA,  and  the  Uruguay  Round  on  the  U.S.  Economy,  Investigation  TA-2111-1,  Publication  3621 
(Washington: ITC, August). 
6   Drusilla  K.  Brown,  Alan  V.  Deardorff,  and  Robert  M.  Stern  (2002),  “Computational  Analysis  of  Multilateral  Trade 
Liberalization  in  the  Uruguay  Round  and  Doha  Development  Round,”  Discussion  Paper  489,  Research  Seminar  in 
International Economics, Gerald R. Ford School of Public Policy (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan). 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2004
In addition to promoting specialization, trade boosts productivity through a fourth channel of influence: 
opening the economy to heightened competition. This effect could occur either as firms are spurred by 
foreign competitors to become more efficient, or as the least productive firms are forced to close, thus 
raising  the  average  level  of  productivity  for  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Again,  most  Americans  likely 
recognize  the  importance  of  competition  in  boosting  performance  -  the  ascendancy  of  Japanese 
automobiles, for example, has been cited as a factor that has spurred Detroit to greater innovation and 
better quality. By heightening competitive forces and thus incentives for productivity and innovation, 
international trade has likely accelerated the process of “creative destruction” by which outdated and 
less productive activities are replaced by new technologies and more dynamic enterprises. 
Academic  research  supports  the  view  that  import  competition  has  led  U.S.  manufacturing  firms  to 
become  more  capital  intensive;7  trade  liberalization  apparently  has  enhanced  productivity  in  some 
import-competing  firms  in  foreign  countries  as  well.8  Producing  for  export  markets  may  also  yield 
dividends:  Research  suggests  that  exporters  are  more  productive  than  non-exporters  in  the  same 
industry and that they grow more rapidly as well.9 Finally, many studies suggest that countries that are 
more open to international trade have enjoyed higher rates of economic growth.10 Our sad experience 
after adoption of the Smoot-Hawley tariff of 1930, as well as the record of Latin America, India, and 
other regions that experimented with “import-substituting industrialization,” point to the deterioration in 
economic performance that occurs when countries erect barriers to trade.11  
Arguments against free trade 
If the benefits conferred by international trade are reasonably straightforward, how can we explain the 
apparent  ambivalence  toward  trade  picked  up  by  recent  surveys?  Clearly,  many  people  view  the 
benefits of free trade as being outweighed by its perceived costs.  
One concern about free trade may be that it has given rise to large trade and current account deficits, 
thereby adding to the nation’s debt and putting future prosperity at risk. Now at more than 5 percent of 
GDP,  the  current  account  deficit  is  in  record  territory,  it  is  growing,  and  it  cannot  be  sustained 
indefinitely.  We  cannot  foresee  when  the  deficit  will  stop  growing  and  return  to  more-sustainable 
levels, through what mechanisms this adjustment will occur, or whether this adjustment will be smooth 
or disruptive for financial markets and the economy more generally. No matter how a correction of the 
external imbalance proceeds, however, it will involve a range of adjustments to investment, saving, 
and asset prices, both for the U.S. economy and for our trading partners. Research suggests that past 
corrections of large external imbalances in industrial countries generally have occurred without crisis.12 
Whether  or  not  this  will  remain  the  case,  I  am  confident  that  protectionism  is  not  the  appropriate 
response to our growing current account deficit. The amount of current account adjustment that would 
be gained from a given tightening of import controls is questionable. Yet, it is certain that such actions 
would impose costs on the economy that would persist long after concerns about the deficit dissipated.  
                                                      
7   Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott (2002), “Survival of the Best Fit: Competition from Low Wage 
Countries and the (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants,” NBER Working Paper Series 9170 (Cambridge, Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, September). 
8   Petia  Topalova  (2004),  “Trade  Liberalization  and  Firm  Productivity:  The  Case  of  India,”  IMF  Working  Paper  WP/04/28 
(Washington:  International  Monetary  Fund,  February);  Nina  Pavcnik  (2002),  “Trade  Liberalization,  Exit,  and  Productivity 
Improvements: Evidence from Chilean Plants,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 69 (January), pp. 245-76. 
9   Andrew  B.  Bernard  and  J.  Bradford  Jensen  (1995),  “Exporters,  Jobs,  and  Wages  in  U.S.  Manufacturing,  1976-1987,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1995, pp. 69-119. 
10   David  Dollar  and  Aart  Kraay  (2001),  “Trade,  Growth,  and  Poverty,”  unpublished  paper,  World  Bank,  June; 
Sebastian Edwards (1998), “Openness, Productivity and Growth: What Do We Really Know?” Economic Journal, vol. 108 
(March), pp. 383-98. 
11   Alan  M.  Taylor  (1994),  “Three  Phases  of  Argentine  Economic  Growth,”  NBER  Historical  Paper  60  (Cambridge,  Mass.: 
National Bureau of Economic Research, September); Jagdish Bhagwati (1993), India in Transition: Freeing the Economy 
(New  York:  Oxford  University  Press);  Douglas  A.  Irwin  (2002),  Free  Trade  Under  Fire  (Princeton:  Princeton  University 
Press);  Mario  J.  Crucini  and  James  Kahn  (1996),  “Tariffs  and  Aggregate  Economic  Activity:  Lessons  from  the  Great 
Depression,” Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 38 (December), pp. 427-67. 
12   Caroline Freund (2000), “Current Account Adjustment in Industrialized Countries,” International Finance Discussion Paper 
2000-692 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December).  
BIS Review 57/2004 
 3
A second concern about free trade that is frequently voiced, and probably a more important one to 
many  people,  is  that  trade  destroys  American  jobs  and  creates  unemployment.  The  same  survey  I 
mentioned  earlier,  showing  a  deterioration  in  general  attitudes  toward  trade,  also  indicated  that 
40 percent of respondents believed that trade barriers should be maintained because of the threat to 
U.S. jobs, up from 31 percent in 1999.13
It is worth distinguishing among several variants of the concern about trade and jobs. The first variant 
holds that the rise in imports lowers employment and raises the unemployment rate by shifting jobs 
overseas.  This  claim  is  strongly  contradicted  both  by  theory  and  by  experience.  Make  no  mistake: 
Import  competition  clearly  has  cost  some  American  workers  their  jobs  and  has  caused  them 
considerable  hardship  as  a  result.  However,  economywide  equilibrating  forces,  including  monetary 
policy, ensure that over time such employment losses are offset by gains elsewhere in the economy, 
so that the nationwide unemployment rate averages around its equilibrium level. In fact, the inflow of 
foreign capital that finances our trade deficit provides the funding for investment projects that employ 
U.S. workers just as surely as does any other productive activity in the economy. Between 1960 and 
2003, the trade balance moved from a slight surplus to a deficit of 4-1/2 percent of GDP, and nominal 
imports rose from about 4 percent of GDP to 14 percent - yet, the current unemployment rate of about 
5-1/2 percent is little changed from its 1960 level, while nonfarm private employment has grown by 
more than 60 million jobs.14
It has also been suggested that import competition has caused a significant portion of the decline in 
employment since the recession of 2001. Yet, the ratio of the nominal trade deficit to GDP widened 
less than 1 percentage point between 2000 and 2003. Moreover, this deterioration came entirely from 
a decline in the ratio of exports to GDP, from 11.2 percent in 2000 to 9.5 percent in 2003; the ratio of 
imports to GDP actually declined about 1 percentage point over this period.  
A second variant of the concern over trade and jobs is certainly valid: Import competition can be highly 
disruptive  and  cause  considerable  pain  for  those  who  lose  their  jobs.  One  study  of  worker 
displacement indicates that only about two-thirds of displaced workers found another job within three 
years, and even when they were successful in finding full-time work, the earnings of these workers on 
average  declined  8  percent.15  Another  study  found  that  job  losers  in  industries  facing  heavy  import 
competition  were  slightly  less  likely  to  be  reemployed,  and  suffered  greater  earnings  losses,  than 
workers who lost their jobs in industries facing less import competition.16
We cannot and should not minimize the hardships of workers displaced by imports. However, we must 
also keep in mind that their numbers are relatively small compared with either the total labor force or 
even the total number of jobs lost in the United States. Estimates of the gross number of jobs lost to 
imports vary, but one representative estimate puts them at a bit more than 300,000 per year during the 
1980s  and  1990s.17  This  number,  while  hardly  negligible,  is  dwarfed  by  the  roughly  15  million  job 
losses estimated to occur each year in the United States. As our dynamic market economy evolves, it 
generates substantial churning in labor markets as jobs are gained in some sectors and lost in others; 
jobs gained and lost because of trade are only a small part of that process.  
It is understandable that concerns about job losses from import competition may extend far beyond 
their  actual  incidence  in  the  labor  market,  given  more  general  anxieties  about  employment  security 
among American workers. However, to echo a point that has been made before, the proper response 
to  the  disruptions  associated  with  trade  is  not  to  reduce  trade,  but  rather  to  ameliorate  the  pain 
associated with those disruptions through enhanced assistance and retraining for displaced workers. 
A final concern about trade that I would like to discuss is that import competition, whether or not it 
affects the number of jobs, shifts the employment mix from high-quality jobs to low-quality jobs. For 
                                                      
13   Kull and others (2004), “Americans on Globalization, Trade, and Farm Subsidies.” 
14   My colleague, Ben Bernanke, has discussed many of the issues linking trade and jobs in a speech earlier this year (“Trade 
and Jobs,” at the Fuqua School of Business, Duke University, March 30, 2004). 
15   Henry  Farber  (2003),  “Job  Loss  in  the  United  States,  1981-2001,”  Industrial  Relations  Section  Working  Paper  471, 
(Princeton:  Princeton  University,  January).  This  study  covers  workers  displaced  for  any  reason,  including  import 
competition. 
16   Lori G. Kletzer (2001), Job Loss from Imports: Measuring the Costs (Washington: Institute for International Economics). 
17   Kletzer, Job Loss from Imports,  estimates that 6.4 million workers were displaced from import-competing industries from 
1979 to 1999. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2004
example, critics have long held that international trade pushes workers out of manufacturing jobs and 
into less desirable service-sector jobs. However, no conclusive evidence has shown that, over the long 
haul, the service jobs being created pay less or are otherwise less desirable than manufactured jobs 
being displaced. Moreover, the declining share of manufacturing in U.S. employment most likely stems 
less from import competition than it does from the rapid pace of productivity growth in manufacturing; 
this growth outpaced the productivity growth of the overall economy by about 1-1/4 percentage points 
annually  from  1973  to  1994  and  by  1-1/2  percentage  points  from  1994  to  2000.  The  higher  rate  of 
productivity  growth  in  manufacturing  has  restrained  both  price  increases  and  employment  in  the 
sector, thus leading the services area of the economy to expand its share of spending and jobs. This 
phenomenon is hardly unique to the United States - the share of manufacturing has declined in most 
of our major foreign trading partners as well. 
More recently, the outsourcing of service jobs to developing countries has come under the spotlight. 
The  increasing  use  of  computer  programming  talent  in  India  and  other  low-wage  countries  has, 
understandably,  struck  a  chord  of  anxiety  among  American  workers.  For  years,  the  response  of 
pro-trade advocates to the loss of low-wage jobs in manufacturing has been that they are being made 
up  by  the  creation  of  higher-paid,  higher-skilled  jobs  in  the  service  sector.  The  loss  of  highly  paid 
programming jobs to lower-paid workers abroad now appears to suggest that there is no place where 
American workers can hold their own.  
Yet, as in the case of import competition more generally, we must not exaggerate the importance of 
outsourcing to the nation’s overall employment picture. There are no conclusive data, but a prominent 
study puts the number of jobs displaced through services outsourcing over the next decade or so at 
fewer than 300,000 annually, or less than 2 percent of the 15 million in total gross job losses I noted 
earlier.18 Moreover, only a fraction of those jobs represent high-skilled, high-wage jobs; these numbers 
are quite difficult to pin down, but one study puts the number of software jobs lost to India since 2000 
at  fewer  than  50,000  annually.19  Finally,  we  should  remember  that  the  United  States  gains  jobs 
through what is often referred to as “insourcing,” that is, performing service jobs for other countries. In 
fact, the United States has consistently run a surplus in those categories of the balance-of-payments 
associated with trade in business services. 
Turning  from  the  sectoral  job  mix  to  the  impact  of  import  competition  on  wages,  the  evidence  is 
particularly  unclear.  Some  studies  have  suggested that  import  competition  from  low-wage  countries 
has  depressed  wages  for  low-skilled  workers  relative  to  those  for  higher-skilled  workers  in  recent 
decades.  However,  other  studies  have  argued  that  the  rise  in  skill  premiums  is  attributable  to 
technological developments that have raised relative demands for educated workers. Focusing on the 
past few years, we see no consensus on how the mix of low- and high-wage jobs in the economy has 
evolved; estimates are extremely sensitive to the definition of job classes, the source of data, the time 
period, and method of calculation. In any event, it is doubtful that changes in the pattern of wages in 
the  U.S.  economy  can  be  explained  by  any  single  factor  -  trends  in  trade,  in  population  and 
immigration, in unionization and labor market competition, in minimum wage policy, in the skill mix of 
the labor force, and in technology all play a role. 
Drawbacks of protectionism 
To sum up the discussion so far, the public likely has a reasonably good grasp of the benefits of free 
trade. It is the perceived drawbacks to international trade that probably account for the ambivalence 
indicated  in  opinion  surveys.  Some  of  these  fears  may  be  overstated  -  for  example,  the  claim  that 
imports lower aggregate employment. But other concerns cannot be dismissed out of hand - especially 
the claim that trade leads to disruptions for some workers. Balancing the pain for a few against the 
                                                      
18   This is based on widely cited results from the technology research firm Forrester, which predicts that 3.4 million U.S. service 
jobs will have been moved offshore by 2015. 
19   Martin Neil Baily and Robert Z, Lawrence (2004), “What Happened to the Great U.S. Job Machine? The Role of Trade and 
Offshoring,” paper prepared for the Brookings Panel on Economic Activity, September 9-10. Their rough estimate of nearly 
45,000 software jobs relocated annually to India is consistent with an estimate by Charles L. Shultze that “the number of 
workers  employed  in  producing  computer  and  related  services  relocated  from  the  United  States  to  India  could  have 
increased  by  roughly  185,000  over  the  past  four  years”  (Charles  L.  Schultze,  “Offshoring,  Import  Competition,  and  the 
Jobless Recovery,” Policy Brief 136, Washington: The Brookings Institution, August). 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 5
lasting  gains  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  economists  generally  view  the  latter  as  outweighing  the 
former, but it is admittedly difficult for many individuals in American society to share this assessment. 
Rather than arguing the merits of international trade in the abstract, advocates of free trade might gain 
more traction by arguing against concrete examples of protectionism. Each year brings new actions by 
the U.S. government to protect individual sectors from imports. Antidumping duties are imposed when 
domestic  industry  is  believed  to  be  injured  by  the  sale  of  imported  goods  at  less  than  “fair  value.” 
Countervailing duties are intended to counteract subsidies to foreign producers. Safeguard actions are 
intended to protect a domestic industry that has been seriously injured by a surge in imports.20 As of 
August  2004,  359  antidumping  and  countervailing  duty  orders  were  in  place  in  the  United  States 
against imports from 51 countries.21
By  discouraging  unfair  commercial  practices,  such  actions,  in  principle,  promote  a  more  stable  and 
competitive  environment  for  international  trade.  In  practice,  identifying  anticompetitive  practices  is a 
murky process. For example, in antidumping cases, determining the “fair value” of a good may involve 
a degree of discretion, thereby complicating the assessment of whether foreign goods are being sold 
below their appropriate price.22 Domestic producers have a strong incentive to lobby for trade actions 
regardless of whether such actions are merited.  
Because they inhibit free trade, protectionist actions have an array of adverse consequences that one 
would  expect:  They  reduce  variety  and  raise  costs  for  consumers;  they  distort  the  allocation  of 
resources in the economy by encouraging excessive resources to flow into protected sectors; and they 
foster inefficiency by reducing the extent of competition. Perhaps more important in the eyes of the 
public, however, may be several related and highly egregious consequences of protectionist actions.  
First, by raising the cost of goods that are inputs for other producers, import barriers may destroy more 
jobs in so-called “downstream” sectors than they save in protected sectors. According to one study, 
the 2002 steel safeguard program contributed to higher steel prices that eliminated about 200,000 jobs 
in  steel-using  industries,  whereas  only  187,500  workers  were  employed  by  U.S.  steel-producers  in 
December 2002.23
Second, trade protection may lead to very large payouts to a small number of producers and hence is 
often inequitable. Any time a product receives import protection, of course, a relatively small number of 
domestic producers receive benefits - through higher prices - at the cost of all domestic consumers in 
the  economy.  On  top  of  this,  a  disproportionately  small  number  of  sectors,  and  often  a 
disproportionately small number of firms within a sector, tend to enjoy the gains from protection. For 
example, more than one-half of the antidumping and countervailing duty orders in place as of August 
were  on  iron  and  steel-related  products  alone;  by  contrast,  less  than  one-half  of  1  percent  of  total 
private  nonfarm  employment  is  accounted  for  by  iron  and  steel  producers.24  As  another  example, 
according to a 1993 General Accounting Office study, 42 percent of the benefits to growers from sugar 
protection went to just 1 percent of growers.25 Although Americans favor policies designed to help the 
small farmer, much larger enterprises are also benefiting from agricultural trade protection.  
This disturbingly inequitable distribution of the benefits of protectionism is exacerbated under current 
law  by  provisions  allowing  antidumping  and  countervailing  duties  to  be  disbursed  to  the companies 
that  petitioned  for  the  duties.  These  provisions,  which  have  been  ruled  illegal  by  the  WTO,  lead  to 
protected producers being rewarded twice: Once through the higher prices stemming from the trade 
protection and again through the disbursal of the higher duties paid by importers. The distribution of 
                                                      
20   See  World  Trade  Organization,  “Anti-dumping,  Subsidies,  Safeguards:  Contingencies,  etc.,”;  U.S.  International  Trade 
Commission (1998), Summary of Statutory Provisions Related to Import Relief, Publication 3125 (Washington: ITC, August). 
21   U.S. International Trade Commission (2004), “Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Orders in Place as of August 9, 2004, 
by Product Group (111 KB PDF),” Five-Year (Sunset) Reviews, General Information, item 7: AD and CVD orders in place. 
22   Bruce  A.  Blonigen  (2003),  “Evolving  Discretionary  Practices  of  U.S.  Antidumping  Activity,”  NBER  Working  Paper  Series 
9625 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).  
23   Joseph  Francois  and  Laura  M.  Baughman  (2003),  “The  Unintended  Consequences  of  U.S.  Steel  Import  Tariffs:  A 
Quantification of the Impact During 2002,” CITAC Job Studies (Washington: Consuming Industries Trade Action Coalition). 
24   “U.S.  International  Trade  Commission,  Antidumping  and  Countervailing  Duty  Orders  in  Place  as  of  August  9,  2004,  by 
Product Group.” 
25   U.S. General Accounting Office (1993), “Sugar Program: Changing Domestic and International Conditions Require Program 
Changes,” GAO/RCED-93-84 (Washington: GAO, April). 
6 
 BIS Review 57/2004
these payouts has been extremely skewed: For fiscal year 2003, a single firm received more than one-
fourth of the $190 million in countervailing and antidumping duties that were distributed to U.S. firms.26
Import quotas (as opposed to tariffs) raise a third concern about trade protection. By restricting the 
supply of certain types of imports within the United States, quotas may benefit those foreign producers 
who retain the right to sell to U.S. markets by raising the prices of their goods. For example, one study 
found that, of the $8.6 billion in net welfare costs induced by the Multi-Fiber Agreement, which restricts 
textile  and  apparel  imports,  about  $6  billion  accrued  to  those  foreign  producers  who  were  allotted 
shares of the import quotas.27 Surely, many Americans would cease to support certain types of import 
protections if they knew that such actions were serving to prop up the profits of foreign producers.  
Finally, we must not forget that trade actions, while sometimes protecting some American workers in 
import-competing  industries,  often  invite  the  threat  of  foreign  retaliation  that  would  hurt  American 
workers in export industries. For example, after the imposition of steel safeguard duties in March 2002, 
eight of our trading partners initiated safeguard investigations of their own on steel imports. Given the 
importance of export markets to the most dynamic areas of U.S. manufacturing, we cannot afford to 
jeopardize them by inviting foreign barriers to our products. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, I think it unlikely that we will see a marked global reversal of trade liberalization on the 
order of the restrictions enacted in the 1930s. Policymakers have generally learned the lessons of that 
destructive episode. Nevertheless, it is not inconceivable that progress in dismantling trade barriers 
could stall. Many of the easiest negotiations - such as on lowering tariffs - have already taken place. 
More ambitious and intrusive trade liberalizations, which often involve dismantling barriers to internal 
competition or cherished systems of domestic subsidies, may not have the necessary public support. It 
is also possible that a multiplicity of narrow, targeted trade actions - such as antidumping or safeguard 
actions - could lead to a de facto rollback in the overall degree of free trade even without a concerted 
shift in national policies. 
Thus, it is crucial to maintain public pressure for free trade. First, it is important to continue to educate 
the  public  and  create  a  political  environment  supportive  of  free  trade.  In  this  respect,  targeted 
criticisms of protectionist actions may be more effective than general paeans to free trade. In a recent 
speech, my colleague, William Poole, urged journalists describing trade restrictions to ask who gains, 
who loses, and what is the net gain or loss for the economy as a whole?28 I very much support that 
sentiment.  Second,  it  is  crucial  to  implement  policies  that  foster  stability  and  economic  growth. 
Reducing  unemployment  and  diminishing  economic  insecurity  will  likely  be  more  effective  against 
protectionism than a thousand speeches like this one. Toward that end, the Federal Reserve will do its 
part by working to promote stable financial conditions and sustainable, noninflationary growth. 
                                                      
26   As  of  March  2004.  U.S.  Customs  and  Border  Protection  (2004),  Continued  Dumping  and  Subsidy  Offset  Act  FY  2003 
Annual Report (Washington: CBP). 
27   Gary Clyde Hufbauer and Kimberly Ann Elliot (1994), Measuring the Costs of Protection in the United States (Washington: 
Institute for International Economics).  
28   William Poole (2004), Free Trade: Why Are Economists and Noneconomists So Far Apart? Speech prepared for the Trade, 
Globalization, and Outsourcing Conference, Reuters America, Inc., New York, June 15. 
BIS Review 57/2004 
 7
