Bandid Nijathaworn: Regional financial cooperation - some thoughts on the 
way forward 
Speech by Mr Bandid Nijathaworn, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the APEC Finance 
and Development Program Annual Forum, Sanya, China, 28 November 2004. 
 Thank you 
Mr Chairman, 
I would like to begin by thanking the Ministry of Finance of the People’s Republic of China and the 
AFDP Secretariat for inviting me to speak this afternoon in Sanya. It is a pleasure and an honour to be 
here, especially in the presence of so many distinguished experts and policy makers in the region. 
Today, I have been asked to speak on regional financial cooperation. This is a subject we all know 
well and one that many of us spent a lot time working on in the past years. Given the limitation of time, 
I would like to focus my talk today by making just two points. 
The  first  is  to  highlight  some  of  the  key  achievements  that  have  been  made  in  regional  financial 
cooperation. Next, I would like to share with you some of my thoughts on the way forward, especially 
on the measures that can be taken to further strengthen the process of financial cooperation in the 
region. 
First, on the achievements 
I think there is no doubt that a lot of progress has been made in regional financial cooperation in the 
past years. This progress has been driven by a combination of factors, but the most important has 
been  the  Asian  financial  crisis  itself,  which  prompted  policy  makers  in  the  region  to  recognize  the 
potential benefits of financial cooperation as a mechanism that can allow the region to prevent or to 
better manage the risks of financial crisis. 
Since the 1997-98 crisis, regional financial cooperation has been strengthened in three main ways: 
The first is the strengthening of liquidity arrangements, the second is the introduction of regular policy 
dialogue  and  surveillance,  and  the  third  is  the  coordination  of  efforts  to  develop  the  region’s  bond 
market. 
So far, progress which has been made includes an expanding network of Bilateral Swap Agreements 
between  ASEAN  and  Plus  Three  countries  under  the  Chiang  Mai  Initiatives  to  provide  short-term 
liquidity.  There  is  also  the  Formal  and  Informal  ASEAN+3  Finance  and  Central  Banks  Meetings  to 
exchange information and discuss policy issues, as well as the discussion under the APEC platform. 
Also, new developments from the Asian Bond Market Initiative and the APEC Forum have also been 
launched to develop the region’s bond market. 
My point is that these achievements are important and their realization would not have been possible 
without the awareness and the determination of the authorities concerned to make them happen. But 
notwithstanding the progress made, more can definitely be done to bring regional financial cooperation 
to a level that is on par with the region’s economic and financial potentials. This is to say that although 
the economies of East Asia have recovered and are on the path of sustained growth, regional financial 
cooperation needs to continue and should substantially move forward. The rationale for this is clear: 
First, financial cooperation will lead to a faster pace and a more comprehensive development of the 
region’s financial markets. Such development is crucial for sustaining the momentum of intra-regional 
trade and investment, a factor that has been instrumental for the region’s recent economic success. 
Going  forward,  this  momentum  of  intra  regional  trade  and  investment  has  a  potential  to  become  a 
major source of growth for the region, through the promotion the region’s domestic demand. 
Second, with the globalized flows of finance and capital, maintaining financial markets stability is a 
key condition for preserving macroeconomic stability. To achieve this, in addition to the pursuance of 
sound  economic  and  financial  policies,  the  Asian  region  also  needs  to  have  its  own  financial 
arrangement. Such an arrangement will help ensure an orderly and stable financial environment such 
that  any  emerging  vulnerabilities would  not  pose  serious  risks  to  the  region’s financial  markets  and 
   1/3 
economies. Important in this context, I believe, is for the region to have its own financing facility that 
draws  on  the  region’s  own  financial  strength  and  resources.  With  such  a  facility,  there  would  be 
greater  confidence  amongst  policy  makers  in  the  region  that  we  do  have  the  capability  and  the 
capacity to look after our markets and economies if there were to be a major financial distress. 
On  the  basis  of  this  rationale,  it  is  my  view  that  regional  financial  cooperation  should  move 
progressively  forward,  with  the  process  being  further  strengthened  and  the  work  becoming  more 
focused, aimed at producing more tangible results. 
Let me now spare with you my thoughts on the way forward. On this issue, I should say at the outset 
that the points I am going to make here are not new, and some of them are probably already familiar 
to you. 
The first is the Chiang Mai Initiative or CMI. CMI was created conceptually as a short-term financing 
facility to help participating members manage their balance of payments shortfalls at a time of financial 
distress. Although the economies of East Asia are now much stronger than five years ago, CMI should 
continue to remain a key pillar of regional financial cooperation. This is because it is important for the 
region to have its own liquidity arrangement that can be called upon when the need arises. 
With the crisis now behind us, we do have time to think on how best to improve the existing facility. 
And, one way we can approach this is to look for ways we can credibly turn the existing arrangement 
into a facility that emphasizes a greater level of resource commitment by participating members. This 
is  to  say  that  requesting  members  should  be  in  a  position  to  count  on  this  facility  when  the  need 
arises. Looking at the improvement from this angle, I think there are three ways we can reflect upon. 
The first is to make the size of the arrangement larger and more meaningful with respect to possible 
needs  of  members.  The  second  is  the  simplicity  of  the  activation  process,  especially  for  the  first 
tranche.  This  is  important  for  giving  assurance  to  participating  members  that  liquidity  will  be  made 
available in a timely manner. And the third is the objective of turning CMI into a multilateral facility at a 
later stage. This last feature, if realized, will provide the region with its own financial arrangement that 
can help expand the region’s capability in safeguarding financial stability. 
lt goes without saying that a move to emphasize greater resource commitment by members will entail 
substantial strengthening in the current regional surveillance process. This is a development that we 
all should welcome. Strengthening the surveillance process should in fact be a key prior condition for 
expanding the CMI because it will help make the CMI process credible while reducing the risk of moral 
hazard. 
CMI is currently under review. I hope some of the points I have touched upon will be further explored. 
But whatever the outcome of the review may be, I am confident that it will signify another important 
step forward for regional financial cooperation. 
My second thought is on the region’s bond market. Economists in the region have long made known 
their views that Asia is a region with surplus savings, but the financial surplus of Asia has not been 
effectively  utilize  for  the  benefits  of  the  economies  in  Asia.  This  is  clearly  a  missed  opportunity.  To 
bridge  this  shortcoming,  the  region’s  financial  markets  need  to  be  substantially  expanded  and 
developed so that the region’s markets can effectively allocate surplus savings within the Asian region. 
The current focus on regional bond market development is therefore a step in the right direction. 
But  my  point  today  is  that  while  developing  the  bond  market  is  important,  two  additional  areas  of 
market developments in tandem with the work on the bond market should also be looked at to ensure 
a balanced development of financial infrastructure in Asia. 
The first is human resource: that is the need to build a steady supply of high quality financial personnel 
to serve the Asian financial markets. 
In  the short  term,  this  issue can  be  partly  addressed  by promoting  a  greater  role  of  Asian  financial 
institutions in cross-border transactions or businesses within the Asian market. The expanded role of 
Asian  financial  institutions  will  enhance  the  experience  of  Asian  financial  firms  in  cross-border 
transactions and help transfer financial skills and technology among market participants in the region. 
For  the  long  term,  we  should  be  thinking  of  establishing  a  regional  finance  institute  that  aims 
specifically to train and develop financial personnel for the Asian market. To me, this type of initiative 
looks practical and is economically feasible because Asia’s large domestic market will always call for 
substantial demand for trained financial personnel. Such an institute will also play an important role in 
   2/3 
supporting the development of financial markets in Asia, as well as producing the next generation of 
Asian Financiers. 
The second area that should also be considered is the harmonization and streamlining of the existing 
rules  and  regulations.  This  is  especially  important  for  cross--border  capital  movements  so  that  the 
region’s financial resources can flow more smoothly between economies in the region. Streamlining 
rules and regulations will help reduce unnecessary barriers, and through lower transaction costs, will 
allow  a  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  For  example,  measures  to  protect  domestic  markets 
from outside competition may need to be relaxed. Along the same line, there is room to harmonize 
taxes on capital market transactions so that tax implications are neutral and do not act as a constraint 
to efficient resource allocation. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
My  last  thought  for  today  is  on  ways  we  should  proceed  to  expedite  the  pace  of  regional  financial 
cooperation. At this juncture, there is no disagreement that we all would like to see more and faster 
progress on regional financial cooperation. And, to ensure its progress, we have seen policy makers in 
Asia ready and prepared to take bold and important policy actions. 
My view is also the same. I also want to see a faster pace of development rather than a slow one. But 
one also needs to underscore that, to achieve long term sustainability and continuity, the process of 
development needs to be market driven rather than policy driven. This is important for ensuring that 
resources would be allocated efficiently and that the direction of development would be in line with the 
needs of markets, which reflect private sector’s priority and expectations. 
At the initial stage of development, as is the case now for the Asian Bond Market, government policies 
and  efforts  will  be  important  to  spearhead  the  process  of  growth  and  development.  But  once  the 
momentum  takes  off,  market  mechanism  should  take  over  to  ensure  that  the  pace  and  focus  of 
development are consistent with market expectations. And, at this level, the role of policy should be to 
support  and  facilitate  market  development  by  streamlining  rules  and  regulations,  by  facilitating 
cross-border trade and investment flows, and by providing the necessary financial infrastructure. This 
approach will help ensure that the region’s financial environment remains conducive to private sector 
activities and participation. 
Let me take the opportunity here to stress that, at this juncture of financial markets development in 
Asia, I think that support from the authorities is still important and remains a crucial factor. But in order 
to leverage the impact of government’s support and involvement to the fullest, it is important for the 
authorities to be clear and firm on their commitments to develop the markets. Government involvement 
should  also  be  focused  and  concentrate  on  issues  that  cannot  be  tackled  by  private  market 
participants.  Importantly,  the  authorities  should  engage  the  private  sector  early  into  the  process  of 
market  development  so  that  the  direction  of  policy  and  development  is  aligned  with  needs  of  the 
private sector. 
Most of the issues that I have raised today are not new, but they are the important ones. Again, I will 
not be surprised if many of you are also having the same thoughts. Such convergence of ideas will be 
good in helping to advance our interest and work on regional financial cooperation. I am confident that 
we can move forward more rapidly in the direction that will be most beneficial to our economies, while 
sharing a common vision of greater prosperity and economic well-being for our region. 
Thank you for your attention. 
   3/3 
