Jarle Bergo: Oil prices, cyclical developments and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jarle Bergo, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at Vest-Norsk 
Sparebanklag’s autumn conference, Bergen, 12 November 2004.  
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The address is based on the assessments presented at Norges 
Bank’s press conference following the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 3 November, Inflation Report 3/04 and on 
previous speeches. 
The references and the 
Charts in pdf-format can also be found on the website of the Norges Bank. 
 The objective of monetary policy is to safeguard the value of money in the long term. In the short and 
medium  term,  monetary  policy  can  also  contribute  to  stabilising  production  and  employment. 
Historically, the experience of Norway and other countries is that high inflation has resulted in unstable 
output and employment. A fall in the price level will often occur in tandem with a downturn.  
The  objective  of  low  and  stable  inflation  provides  an  anchor  for  economic  agents’  expectations 
concerning  future  inflation.  We  have  a  very  open  economy  with  free  capital  movements.  Stable 
inflation expectations also contribute to more stable krone exchange rate expectations. I will discuss 
this aspect in more detail later.  
Inflation  targeting  has  proved  to  be  particularly  appropriate  in  very  open,  small  and  medium-sized 
economies  such  as  the  Norwegian  economy.  Commodity  exports  play  a  key  role  in  several  of  the 
countries  that  were  the  first  to  introduce  inflation  targeting  and,  and  as  an  oil  exporter,  we  have 
learned from their experience.  
The first inflation target was introduced in New Zealand in 1990. Canada followed in 1991, the UK in 
1992, and Sweden and Australia in 1993. A number of other countries have followed suit. In Norway, 
the  Government  issued  a regulation  introducing  an  inflation  target  in  2001.  Monetary  policy  in  euro 
area countries and Switzerland is also aimed at price stability, even though this is not referred to as 
inflation targeting in these countries.  
Inflation  targeting  means  setting  the  interest  rate  so  as  to  achieve  a  numerical  target  for  inflation. 
Norges Bank sets the interest rate with a view to stabilising inflation at 2.5 per cent within a reasonable 
time horizon, normally 1-3 years. The more precise horizon will depend on disturbances to which the 
economy  is  exposed,  and  how  they  affect  the  path  for  inflation  and  output.  The  inflation  target 
represents a framework for, not an obstacle to, monetary policy’s contribution to stabilising output and 
employment. We have a flexible inflation targeting regime, i.e. both variability in inflation in relation to 
the target and variability in output and employment in relation to trend are given weight.  
The objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation. The instrument is the interest rate. The 
interest rate influences inflation with a lag and with varying intensity. As interest rates fall, household 
and local government consumption and investment tend to pick up. Higher demand leads to higher 
output and employment. Wage growth may pick up. Higher wage growth combined with higher profit 
margins will result in higher inflation.  
Lower interest rates normally also lead to a depreciation of the krone. Imported goods then become 
more expensive and inflation accelerates.  
Expectations play a key role in price and wage formation, and they are influenced by the interest rate. 
Expectations  concerning  inflation  and  economic  stability  have  considerable  impact,  not  least  in  the 
foreign exchange market.  
Petroleum activity constitutes an important part of the Norwegian economy. Oil gives us an economic 
base that is not available to many other countries. At the same time, the extent of, and fluctuations in, 
petroleum  activity  pose  a  challenge  to  economic  policy  in  Norway.  In  a  long-term  perspective, 
Norway’s petroleum wealth is to be distributed across generations. In the short term, the substantial 
capital revenues from the petroleum sector must be managed in such a way that they do not amplify 
cyclical fluctuations.  
The  Government  Petroleum  Fund  was  established  in  1990  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  long-term 
considerations in the use of petroleum revenues. The idea behind the Petroleum Fund is that the cash 
flow  from  an  increase  in  oil  prices  should  accrue  to  the  Fund  and  be  invested  abroad  so  that  the 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 1
increase in oil prices does not affect the wider budget. As a result, the increase in the cash flow does 
not affect the domestic economy. Likewise, a fall in oil prices does not have an impact on the domestic 
economy, but results in a lower accumulation of foreign assets. The Fund thus acts as a buffer against 
disturbances.  By  building  up  the  Fund,  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  several  generations  will  enjoy  the 
benefits of our petroleum wealth is also taken into account.  
In  2001,  the  Storting  adopted  new  economic  policy  guidelines  in  Norway.  At  the  same  time  as  the 
inflation target was introduced in monetary policy, a strategy was drawn up for the use of petroleum 
revenues over the government budget, i.e. the fiscal rule. The fiscal rule is designed to prevent swings 
in  the  petroleum  sector  from  spreading  to  the  mainland  economy.  This  ensures  that  petroleum 
revenues  are  phased  in  at  a  steady  pace.  The  guideline  specifying  that  only  the  real  return  on  the 
Petroleum Fund is to be used, means that the capital in the Fund is not depleted over time.  
Norges Bank has no set target for the level of the exchange rate. Nevertheless, developments in the 
krone are of considerable importance to interest-rate setting because the exchange rate has an impact 
on inflation and output. An important channel for monetary policy is the foreign exchange market and 
the krone exchange rate.  
Although  the  krone  fluctuates,  the  krone  exchange  rate  is  not  particularly  unstable  compared  with 
other countries’ currencies.  
The krone exchange rate is the price of our currency measured in a foreign currency. Developments in 
other  countries  are  just  as  important  for  the  krone  as  developments  in  the  Norwegian  economy. 
Capital flows freely and flows can change rapidly. This can spill over to exchange rates and interest 
rates as well as output and employment. There is a cost involved for businesses in hedging against 
fluctuations in the krone. A krone that is stable - but too strong - also entails social costs in the form of 
low activity. Likewise, a krone that is stable - but too weak - is a source of high inflation.  
Norway is running a current account surplus as a result of sizeable oil and gas exports. Owing to high 
oil prices, the current account surplus is rising this year. An increase in the current account surplus will 
normally result in higher net demand for the domestic currency. In Norway, however, the additional 
foreign exchange revenues  that  accrue  to  the  Norwegian  state  as  a  result of  high  oil  prices  will be 
invested in foreign securities through the Government Petroleum Fund. As a result, they will not have 
a direct impact on the balance in the Norwegian foreign exchange market. Oil companies hold a large 
share of their financial capital in foreign currency, and higher revenues in these companies therefore 
results in an increase in capital outflows.  
The  effects  of  changes  in  the  current  account  on  net  demand  for  the  Norwegian  krone  can  be 
illustrated  by  adjusting  the  basic  balance  for  transfers  and  earnings  to  the  Petroleum  Fund  and  oil 
companies’ estimated cash surplus. Even though the current account surplus is increasing from 2003 
to  2004  as  a  result  of  high  oil  prices,  the  adjusted  basic  balance  is  falling.  In  isolation,  this  is 
contributing to a decline in demand for the Norwegian krone. The decline is due to high import growth, 
which is reducing the current account surplus.  
In  the  Government’s  budget  proposal,  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  remains  virtually  unchanged 
between  2004  and  2005.  In  spite  of  this,  the  krone  exchange  rate  has  appreciated  recently.  This 
reflects short-term capital inflows and may indicate that foreign exchange market operators expect that 
the use of petroleum revenues will increase in the years ahead.  
Themes in foreign exchange markets shift. In periods, investor focus on stock returns feeds through to 
exchange  rate  movements.  During  periods  of  political  and  economic  unrest,  investors  may  choose 
individual currencies as a safe haven - often the Swiss franc. In the autumn of 2002, the Norwegian 
krone  was  probably  also  perceived  as  a  safe  haven.  In  addition  oil  prices  rose  as  a  result  of  the 
uncertainty associated with the war in Iraq.  
Fluctuations between major currencies also affect the krone exchange rate. In recent weeks, investors 
have  withdrawn  from  the  US  dollar  and  a  number  of  currencies  have  appreciated.  The  Norwegian 
krone market is less liquid than many other foreign exchange markets. This may have contributed to 
amplifying the appreciation of the Norwegian krone.  
The krone exchange rate has appreciated during the autumn. Expectations that the interest rate has 
reached a trough, in conjunction with high spot and futures prices for oil, have probably supported the 
krone. Our previous experience suggests that the value of the Norwegian krone is primarily affected 
when  oil  prices  are  unusually  low  and/or  falling.  Through  2004,  the  krone  exchange  rate  has 
appreciated in line with oil prices. Oil prices have not, however, been as high, in nominal or real terms, 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2004
in since the krone was floated in late 1992. We have therefore no previous experience to draw on. It 
appears that the krone exchange rate also reacts to abrupt upward movements in spot and futures 
prices for oil. Oil prices have declined somewhat since end-October. A levelling off or a fall in oil prices 
and a stable use of petroleum revenues could reverse the short-term capital flows.  
The strong krone has a dampening effect on the inflation outlook. This provides a basis for keeping 
the interest rate level in Norway low for a longer period than would otherwise have been the case and 
for maintaining this low level even though interest rates rise in other countries. Inflation targeting will 
therefore ease the pressure on the krone and stabilise exchange rate expectations.  
Inflation  has  been  low  this  year.  Consumer  price  inflation  adjusted  for  tax  changes  and  excluding 
energy  products  (CPI-ATE)  was  very  low  up  to  the  end  of  the  summer,  but  moved  up  slightly  in 
September. Inflation is still being curbed by the fall in prices for imported consumer goods, in spite of 
the depreciation of the krone through 2003 and the global rise in producer and commodity prices. This 
is partly due to the increasing share of Norwegian imports from low-cost countries. Strong competition 
and high productivity growth in many industries in Norway have also exerted downward pressure on 
inflation.  
The  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  inflation  of  2½  per cent over  time.  Inflation  is  now considerably 
lower. The monetary stance is therefore expansionary.  
As a result of the prospect of low inflation and moderate growth in output and employment, the key 
rate (the sight deposit rate) was reduced by a total of 5.25 percentage points between December 2002 
and March 2004. The key rate has been kept unchanged at 1.75 per cent since then. The reductions 
in  the  interest  rate  have  contributed  to  the  depreciation  of  the  krone.  Measured  by  an  index  of 
44 trading partners (I-44), the krone depreciated through 2003 by almost 11 per cent from its highest 
level in January of the same year. The krone has appreciated again somewhat through 2004.  
Growth in the world economy has been strong over the past year, particularly in the US and China. 
The recovery has also gradually broadened. A number of countries raised their key rates in the course 
of 2004. The Federal Reserve has raised its key rate four times, by a total of 1 percentage point. The 
Bank of England has raised its key rate by 1 percentage point. In October, the People’s Bank of China 
raised its key rate for the first time in nine years.  
After rising sharply for several quarters, economic growth in the US slowed somewhat in the second 
and  third  quarters  of  2004.  Looking  ahead,  growth  among  our  trading  partners  is  projected  to 
moderate, but resource utilisation is expected to increase gradually. Increased global activity has led 
to  rising  commodity  prices.  Oil  prices  are  high.  There  are  still  expectations  of  an  increase  in 
international  interest  rates,  but  market  participants  have  lowered  their  growth  and  interest  rate 
expectations as a result of high oil prices.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy picked up during the second half of 2003. The low interest rate has 
contributed to strong growth in private consumption and housing investment. Activity has picked up in 
service  industries  and  the  construction  sector.  High  petroleum  investment,  the  global  economic 
recovery and a weaker krone through 2003 have improved conditions for manufacturing. Profitability is 
improving for mainland enterprises. There are signs of renewed growth in investment in a number of 
industries. Imports have expanded markedly.  
Potential growth in the Norwegian economy is estimated to increase somewhat more than normal this 
year as a result of increased competition and rationalisation in many sectors. This will contribute to 
fairly high growth in the Norwegian economy without the emergence of constraints on the supply of 
labour or productive capital. The high rate of growth in output nevertheless implies that the output gap 
will approach zero towards the end of 2004.  
The output gap is a measure of the difference between the actual level of output and potential output. 
Developments  in  the  output  gap  provide  a  basis  for  assessing  cyclical  developments  and  can  thus 
shed  light  on  domestic  price  and  cost  pressures  in  the  economy.  It  is  difficult  to  know  how  high 
capacity utilisation is at any given time. Output and employment figures are often revised and do not 
therefore always present an accurate picture of the current economic situation. Norges Bank therefore 
also uses a number of other indicators to gauge the temperature of the Norwegian economy.  
Fiscal  policy  in  2004  appears  to  be  somewhat  more  expansionary  than  assumed  in  the  Revised 
National Budget. The Government estimates that underlying nominal spending growth over the central 
government budget will be close to 11 per cent between 2003 and 2005. Local government revenues 
BIS Review 67/2004 
 3
are estimated to rise by slightly more than 11 per cent in nominal terms during the period. which is 
more than nominal growth in mainland GDP.  
Employment  has  picked  up.  The  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  second  quarter  of  2004  was 
0.2 per cent higher than in the same quarter of 2003. Employment growth has mainly occurred in retail 
trade, commercial services, education and health and social services. Manufacturing employment is 
still falling. Companies often wait to increase employment until the recovery has gained a firm footing. 
Compared with the recoveries in 1982 and 1991, employment growth in the current recovery has been 
weaker relative to output growth. The moderate increase in employment indicates that companies are 
still reaping the benefits of rationalisation measures.  
Household  demand  is  one  of  the  most  important  driving  forces  in  the  Norwegian  economy.  Low 
interest  rates,  high  growth  in  real  wages  and  rising  housing  wealth  are  stimulating  private 
consumption.  Consumption  is  projected  to  rise  by  about  5  per  cent  in  2004,  then  slow  through  the 
projection period as a result of lower growth in real disposable income. Looking ahead, an increase in 
employment and a tighter labour market are expected to result in somewhat higher wage growth. For 
2005,  the  Government  has  proposed  income  tax  reductions  for  households,  but  the  effect  on  real 
disposable income will be partly offset by a higher rise in prices as a result of the increase in VAT. 
Debt accumulation in the household sector has been approximately 11 per cent in the last year. Debt 
has risen at a markedly faster pace than income. Our projections are based on a gradual increase in 
the interest rate in line with forward interest rates. Rising debt and higher interest rates will contribute 
over time to lower growth in household disposable income.  
In  the  first  three  quarters of  2004,  imports  increased  markedly compared  with  the same  period  last 
year.  This  may  indicate  that  some  of  the  growth  in  demand  has  resulted  in  an  increase  in  imports 
instead of higher domestic output. Imports as a share of mainland GDP are rising. This is a result of an 
increase in the international division of labour, due in part to the removal of trade barriers. The rise in 
the  share  of  imports  must  also  be  seen  in  relation  to  low  prices  for  imports  from  many  low-cost 
countries and the weak competitiveness of domestically-oriented industries.  
The deterioration in Norway’s competitiveness relative to other countries stems from high wage growth 
over  several  years  since  1998.  The  nominal  krone  exchange  rate  measured  by  the  trade-weighted 
index  (TWI)  is  now  approximately  at  the  level  prevailing  in  the  mid-1990s,  while  labour  costs  in 
manufacturing have risen considerably more than among our trading partners in the same period. The 
business sector is still burdened with the loss in competitiveness that can be attributed to high wage 
increases in the period 1998-2002. The exposed sector has been scaled back. Companies that are 
still in operation may be in a better position to cope with the high wage level. A more efficient service 
sector may also have strengthened the export industry. Nevertheless, costs may have negative impact 
on activity and employment.  
The  cost  level  with  the  current  krone  exchange  rate  is  close  to  15  per  cent  higher  than  in  the 
mid-1990s  and  about  6  per  cent  higher  than  the  average  for  the  past  30-35  years.  Norwegian 
businesses are losing market shares in domestic and foreign markets partly because of the strong real 
krone exchange rate. In the face of major restructuring as a result of shifts in the international division 
of labour, it is a disadvantage for Norwegian business and industry that costs are high.  
Reports  from  Norges  Bank’s regional network  confirm  the picture  of  an expanding economy.  In  the 
September round of interviews, our contacts throughout the country reported continued growth in all 
the main industries.  
Our  contacts  here  in  western  Norway  report  continued  recovery  in  all  industries.  Suppliers  to  the 
petroleum  sector  report  solid  growth, while  the  export  industry  reports  somewhat  lower  growth now 
than  before  the  summer.  Growth  is  picking  up  in  the  building  and  construction  sector.  New 
developments include activity in commercial construction, which has also increased this time. Growth 
in  retail  trade  is  solid,  and  reports  of  increased  willingness  to  invest  apply  primarily  to  this  sector. 
Signals  from  the  regional  network  indicate  some  increase  in  employment  in  retail  trade  and  the 
building  and  construction  sector.  Manufacturing  now  reports  no  change  in  employment  after  a 
moderate rise in the last couple of rounds.  
Directorate of Labour figures show that unemployment in Region South-West is a little lower than in 
the country as a whole. Measured as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted unemployment 
is  now  4.4  per  cent,  including  persons  on  labour  market  programmes.  The  number  of  unemployed 
persons  not  on  labour  market  programmes  has  fallen  by  8  per  cent  since  October  2003  to  about 
15 500. The largest reduction has been in manufacturing and the building and construction industry. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2004
According to the Directorate of Labour, a sharp decrease in the number of lay-offs has contributed to 
lower unemployment in manufacturing.  
Since  July,  oil  prices  have  varied  between  USD  34  and  52,  the  highest  nominal  levels  recorded. 
Measured  in  real  prices,  oil  prices  are  nonetheless  clearly  lower  than  the  levels  recorded  in  the 
beginning  of  the  1980s.  In  contrast  to  earlier  periods  of  sharply  rising  oil  prices,  the  main  reason 
behind  the  current  rise  in  oil  prices  is  a  surge  in  demand  and  limited  excess  production  capacity. 
Growth  in  oil  demand  has  been  particularly  strong  in  regions  where  production  is  relatively 
energy-intensive,  such  as  China  and  other  non-OECD  countries.  China  alone  accounts  for  about 
1/3 of global growth in oil demand this year. Moreover, there has been a marked reduction in excess 
production  capacity  in  OPEC  countries.  Small  production  problems  have  therefore  affected  prices 
more than would otherwise have been the case.  
In the short term, oil prices constitute the greatest risk to the outlook for the global economy. High oil 
prices may contribute to a sharper-than-expected slowdown in global economic growth. This could in 
turn result in lower demand and lower commodity prices. High oil prices have mixed effects on the 
Norwegian economy. Lower demand abroad will have a negative impact on parts of the Norwegian 
economy. At the same time, domestic demand is normally stimulated by higher petroleum investment. 
The balance in the Norwegian foreign exchange market will not be affected to any appreciable extent. 
So far, the effects of high oil prices on developments in the real economy have been relatively limited.  
Credit  developments  in  the  past  year  have  given  ambiguous  signals  to  our  interest-rate  setting. 
Growth  in  household  debt  is  high.  Enterprises  have  been  reducing  their  debt  for  some  time,  but 
developments over the past months may suggest that this trend has been reversed.  
Norwegian enterprises and households borrow primarily at variable rates. Loans with no form of fixed 
rate agreement  account  for  over  80  per  cent  of  the value  of  loans  to  the  household  and  enterprise 
sector. The current interest rate level is very low. Long-term investments cannot be made based on 
the assumption that this interest rate level will persist. According to money market expectations, the 
interest  rate  will  eventually  stabilise  at  close  to  5½  per  cent.  This  interest  rate,  plus  a  premium  for 
banks’ margins, provides a more realistic indication of the interest rate level that will apply over the 
loan’s life than the variable interest rates prevailing today.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy is now solid. It appears that growth will also be high in 2005. From 
2006, growth is expected to slow gradually to, and eventually somewhat below, the level of growth in 
potential output. In Inflation Report 3/04, the output gap is projected to become clearly positive in the 
course of 2005 and to remain positive until the end of the projection period. Inflation is projected to 
show a marked increase over the next year. In the short run, the depreciation of the krone in 2003 will 
continue  to  exert  upward  pressure  on  imported  consumer  goods.  We  also  assume  that  the 
pronounced fall in prices for some goods and services last autumn will to some extent be reversed. In 
the somewhat longer term, inflation will show a more gradual rise. Higher resource utilisation in the 
Norwegian  economy  will  lead  to  somewhat  higher  wage  growth  and  will  also  make  it  possible  for 
enterprises  to  increase  their  operating  margins.  However,  inflation  will  still  be  restrained  by  low 
external price impulses. The positive contributions from the exchange rate depreciation in 2003 will 
unwind  in  the  course  of  spring  2005.  The  contribution  from  the  exchange  rate  to  inflation  will  then 
gradually  become  slightly  negative.  There  are  prospects  that  inflation  will  reach  the  inflation  target 
towards the end of the projection period.  
There is uncertainty surrounding the projections. The projections are partly based on our analysis of 
relationships in the economy, the exchange rate assumption and the forward interest rate assumption. 
We can give some indication of the uncertainty surrounding the projections on the basis of historical 
deviations between projected and actual price developments. Based on these calculations, inflation at 
end-2007 is projected with a probability of 50 per cent to be between 1.75 and 3.25 per cent.  
In the Inflation Report, we analysed possible effects on inflation and output based on some alternative 
assumptions about the functioning of the economy and the current economic situation. It was assumed 
that  the  krone  exchange  rate  would  remain  fairly  stable  in  the  period  ahead.  This  assumption  was 
based  on  pricing  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  The  analyses  in  the  Report  show  that  if  the 
exchange rate appreciates more than this, inflation may be considerably lower than projected. If, for 
example,  the  exchange  rate  appreciates  by  5  per  cent  in  relation  to  the  baseline  scenario,  inflation 
may stand at 2 per cent at end-2007 - ½ per cent below the inflation target. The change in the interest 
rate path that will also occur if the outlook for inflation and output changes was not taken into account 
in these calculations.  
BIS Review 67/2004 
 5
As mentioned earlier, the strong krone has a dampening effect on the inflation outlook. This provides a 
basis for keeping the interest rate level in Norway low for a longer period than would otherwise have 
been  the  case  and  for  maintaining  this  low  level  even  though  interest  rates  rise  in  other  countries. 
Inflation  targeting  will  therefore  ease  the  pressure  on  the  krone  and  stabilise  exchange  rate 
expectations.  
The projections in the Inflation Report are based on the assumption that the interest rate moves in line 
with financial market expectations. This implies that Norges Bank maintains the key interest rate at the 
current level in the period to summer 2005, with a gradual increase thereafter.  
It  is  the  Executive  Board’s  assessment  that  the  projections  seem  to  provide  a  reasonable  balance 
between the objective of increasing inflation and at the same time avoiding excessive growth in output 
and  employment.  The  projections  imply  a  sight  deposit  rate  in  the  interval  1¼  -  2¼  per  cent  in 
mid-March 2005. This is conditional on economic developments that are approximately as projected in 
the strategy period. The interest rate should be assessed regularly on the basis of new information 
emerging during the strategy period that is of significant importance for the outlook for inflation and 
output. Particular weight must be given to factors that may delay an increase in inflation.  
Uncertainty as to the effects of previous monetary policy easing and the unusually low interest rate 
level  imply,  on  the  one  hand,  that  we  should  exercise  caution  with  regard  to  further  interest  rate 
reductions. On the other hand, the prospect of continued low inflation for a period ahead implies that 
wide deviations from projected economic developments would be required before interest rates should 
be increased. The prospect of continued low inflation in Norway also implies that we should lag behind 
other countries in setting interest rates at a more normal level.  
At its monetary policy meeting on 3 November, the Executive Board decided to leave the sight deposit 
rate  unchanged  at  1.75  per  cent.  At  this  meeting,  the  Executive  Board  did  not  see  any  clear 
alternatives to leaving the interest rate unchanged. In reaching its decision, the Executive Board has 
weighed  the  objective  of  bringing  inflation  back  to  target  against  the  risk  that  output  growth  may 
eventually be too high.  
6 
 BIS Review 67/2004
