Miguel Urrutia Montoya: Declaration of the main aspects of the National 
General Budget Project 
Declaration of Dr Miguel Urrutia Montoya, Governor of Banco de la República (Bank of the Republic), 
in the joint session of economical commissions regarding law project concerning national budget of 
2005, Bogotá, 11 August 2004. 
 Following  are  the  main  aspects  of  National  General  Budget  Project  (GBP)  presented  by  the 
government to the Congress. The macroeconomic consistency of the fiscal data and the sustainability 
of the debt in a middle term basis are evaluated. 
Budget project for 2005 
I. 
The  GBP,  for  the  year  2005  is  of  $93,1  billions,  (b)  which  means  an  increase  of  a  nominal  15,4% 
(10,1% real) in front of the budget for year 2004.1 This increment is explained basically by the increase 
of pensions obligations in the head of the Nation (37,4%), and the debt service (16,2%). These two 
concepts, plus the budget for the Participation General System (territorial transferences), with a 7,6% 
growth, explain the 67% of the GBP. 
2. 
Incomes 
A. 
In  order  to  finance  the  budget,  incomes  of  $91,6  b  were  appraised  and  the  remaining  $1,5  b 
correspond  to  a  complementary  budget  subjected  to  approval  of  the  tributary  reform  that  the 
government presented to congress recently. 
Of the $91,6 b of appraised incomes, $84,1 b was resources of the nation and $7,5 b revenues of the 
national public establishments. Of total resources of the nation, $39 b will be from ordinary incomes, 
$3,8 b of non-tax revenues and special funds and $41,3 b of capital resources. The following aspects 
should be emphasized: 
1. 
82%  of current  incomes  are represented  by  external  and  internal  AVT  (Added  Value  Tax) 
and by tax on incomes (each one provides approximately 41% of the total). 
Capital recourses will be constituted by: 
• 
• 
External credit projected disbursements for an amount of $9,7 b (US$ 3.500 m). 
Internal credit disbursements for an amount of $19,9 b (mainly TES) that includes the 
emission of $2,5 b of TES for covering technical reserve of the ISS. Net financing with 
TES would be close to $7,8 b, of the projected capital expiration given ($12,1 b). 
Actives  expropriation  for  $2,8  b.  However,  it  is  not  clear  the  availability  of  these 
resources, because valuation and sales strategies over the actives affected has not 
been done. 
Other resources of capital $6,6 b. Of this amount there is not a clear manner yet for 
obtaining  these  $1,9  b  that  according  to  budget  project,  the  government  hopes  to 
receive in the following months, budget initial funds (searching) of 2005. 
                                                        
1  For comparative purposes, in the last four years the Budget has increased an average of 5,4% per year in real terms (and 
4,7% without including the debt service). 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
Appropriations 
B. 
Regarding expenditures point of view, 53% of the resources of the GBP are assigned to operations 
($49,1 b), 35% to debt service ($32 b) and 13,0% to inversion ($ 11,7 b). 
1. 
The appropriations for operations are divided in the following manner: 
a. 
b. 
c. 
Personal services ($ 9,5 b), with an annual increment of 8,3%. A salary appreciation of 
5,7% is assumed and an increase in the expenditures of police and military personnel 
of 10,8% due among other things to the promotion foreseen in the roll. 
General  expenditures  ($2,8  b).  Its  annual  variation  of  3,9%,  reflects  mainly  the 
appropriations for Defense Ministry and National Police whose projected growth is of 
11,9%. 
Appropriations for transferences ($36,2 b), that represent 39% of total amount of the 
resources are represented in: 
• 
Participation general system (territorial transferences), whose annual growth is 
of 7,6%. 
Pensions  payments  for  a  value  of  $11,6  b,  with  an  appreciation  of  37,4% 
against  that  of  2004,  including  $4,1  b  of  the  transference  of  the  National 
Government to Instituto de los Seguros Sociales (ISS) due to the depletion of its 
technical 
transferences  will  be  covered  mainly  with 
complementary budget resources ($1,5 b) and the emission of TES agreed, for 
an amount of $2,5 b. 
If other items associated to pensions, (classified in “other transferences”) such 
as teaching funds, Fonpet and other concepts, are added to pensions payment, 
the total of budget resources assigned to pensions would ascend to an amount 
of $16,0 b, equivalent to 17% of the budget. 
reserves.  These 
  2. 
3. 
The  expenditures  for  covering  debt  service  increases  to  16,2%  against  that  of  2004.  Of 
these,  external  debt  service  grows  to  9,9%  and  the  internal  debt  to  20,0%  due  mainly  to 
capital expiration estimated in $12,1 b (23,2% more than in 2004). 
Appropriations  for  inversion  expenditures  will  ascend  to  $11,7  b  in  2005,  $5,2  b  that 
correspond to inflexible items generated through future validities or laws. 
Macroeconomic coherence 
II. 
Budget numbers (that are in accordance with Financial Plan of 2005), assume a lesser deficit in the 
public sector consolidated that would pass from 2,5% to 2,4% of the GDP between 2004 and 2005 
and a deficit in payment balance drawing account that would increase from 1,8% to 3,0% of the GDP 
in  those  same  years.  According  to  the  exercise  of  macroeconomic  programming,  a  higher  external 
saving  and  the  fact  that  in  public  sector  no  resources  absorption  is  had,  this  implies  that  private 
expenditures have a higher space for growing. 
The above mentioned is explained because the lower net internal credit demand by the public sector 
(that would pass from 1,4% to 1,0% of the GDP), would permit the private sector to dispose of higher 
financing resources. In this manner, according to programming exercise, financial system credit offer 
to the private sector could grow in an annual rate of 13,2%, 4,0 percent points above the nominal GDP 
growth (9,2%). 
These  numbers show  that  private  expenditure  in  consumptions and  inversion  would  continue  being 
the  economical  growth  motor,  compensating  the  reductions  foreseen  in  public  inversion  and  low 
growth  of  real  exportations  (due  mainly  to  lower  incomes  from  petrol  exportations).  This  higher 
expenditure  would  change  the  net  financial  position  of  private  sector  against  the  other  sectors  and 
would become the net receiver of the resources of 2005 (equivalent to 0,5% of the GDP), for the first 
time in six years. In this period as an average, the private sector has lent resources to the economy for 
a 2,6% of the GDP. 
As  a  conclusion,  2005  Budget  is  coherent  with  macroeconomic  and  employment  scenery  in  an 
economic  activity  recovery,  based  on  higher  expenditures  from  the  private  sector.  This  expenditure 
expansion  is possible  under  the  assumption  that  in 2005  the economy will  have access  to  external 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
capital flows that will permit the financing of a higher deficit in drawing account. However, if there are 
access restrictions to international financing markets, internal financing capacity of private and public 
sectors could be seriously affected and this would cause a negative impact on economic growth. 
Year 2005 debt sustainability and budget 
III. 
Debt  sustainability  depends  on  the  generation  of  a  primary  balance  required  that  will  stabilize  or 
reduce the in force debt (as a proportion of the GDP), given economic growth rates and a mean real 
rate interest (internal and external) to which the external debt must serve itself and the one contracted 
in the future. Primary balance calculations required are also affected by the evolution of the exchange 
rate. 
According  to  fiscal  projections  of  Treasury  Minister  recently  presented,  primary  balance  required 
should be of 2,9% of the GDP for the period 2006 to 2015 (Basic scenery with an economical growth 
of  4,0%  and  a  real  interest  rate  of  6,0%).  With  this  level  of  primary  surplus,  the  debt/GDP  relation 
would change from 50,5% of the GDP in 2004 to a 38,6% in 2015. 
It  should  be  emphasized  that  this  primary  balance  would  stabilize  the  debt,  even  if  some  negative 
impacts that the economy could pass through occur. In that manner, for example, in the worst scenery 
(with a growth of 0% during 2005 and 2006, and a higher rate interest), the debt would stabilize in 
55,0% of the GDP in 2015. 
Regarding  the  above  mentioned  sustainability  calculations,  the  following  aspects  should  be 
emphasized: 
1. 
For the years 2004 and 2005 it is estimated that consolidated public sectors will generate a 
primary surplus of 2,7% and 3,0% of the GDP, that are coherent with a sustainable public 
debt.  However,  the  Central  Government  will  continue  generating  a  primary  deficit  of  1,1% 
and 1,9% each year respectively. Therefore, the rest of the public sector will be in charge of 
compensating these important unbalances. If these fiscal projections are complied, there will 
be  no  sustainability  problems  in  the  public  debt,  due  to  the  fact  that  non-financed  public 
sector balance (SPNF) projected for these, years is close to the one required. 
However the sustainability of the public debt, in the middle term requires the generation of 
resources that in a permanent manner will guarantee the maintenance of a primary surplus 
of  2,9%  for  the  public  sector.  In  the  figures  of  Treasury  Minister,  incomes  projections  are 
based on taxes created with a transitory character with an expiration date of 2007 (this is the 
case  for  patrimony  tax,  incomes  over  taxation  and  the  addition  of  one  point  in  financial 
movements  taxes).  Therefore,  the  government  will  at  some  moment  consider  formulas  for 
compensating  the  drop  of  these  incomes.  If  this  were  not  done,  primary  balance  would 
diminish in the same proportion, which would cause that public debt be managed in a more 
complex manner in the future. 
Surplus foreseen in the non-centralized sector depends mainly of Ecopetrol’s finances and 
the sector of Social Security. In the case of Ecopetrol its fiscal performance is conditioned by 
different types of contingencies, such as the finding of new crude oil reserves, the evolution 
of international crude oil prices and exchanger rate behavior. 
The  fiscal  deterioration  of  the  ISS,  whose  pensions  obligations  will  have  to  be  covered  in 
great part by budget appropriations due to the depletion of its reserves, makes it mandatory 
the  approval  of  the  pensions  general  regime  reform  project,  as  well  as  the  elimination  of 
special pension regime. It must be emphasized that these reforms will have an impact on the 
mean and long terms because future deficits in Social Security will be diminished. However, 
the cash flow deficit that exists requires complementary measures, not only in incomes but in 
expenditures as well. Otherwise, the fiscal situation will continue being highly vulnerable. 
It should be noticed the great negative impact that devaluation would have over public debt, 
whose trajectory is highly sensible to variations in the exchange rate. For this reason, a big 
part of the positive effect that a real devaluation has over net exportations may be offset with 
the negative impact over public debt and possibly over the confidence of the agents upon 
consequent  deterioration  of  debt  indicators.  In  this  sense,  an  appreciation  over  real 
exchange rate must be accompanied with higher fiscal surpluses (or lower deficit) so that it 
will not have a negative impact over the economy. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 3
Synthesizing, in the fastest and highest grade that fiscal problem is resolved, it will be more feasible 
that  the  economy  will  have  high  economic  growth,  lower  real  interest  rates  and  more  competitive 
levels in real exchange rates without affecting in a negative manner public debt dynamics. Otherwise, 
primary  surpluses  required  in  the  future  will  be  higher  and  therefore  the  costs  in  which  the  society 
must incur to obtain them will be higher. 
4 
 BIS Review 58/2004
