Tarisa Watanagase: Banking supervision and external audits 
Speech by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Regional Meeting 
of SEANZA Forum of Banking Supervisors, Madrid, 21 September 2004. 
 Distinguished guest speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning, let me begin by thanking the SEANZA forum and especially Mr. Reyes, the Chairman 
of SEANZA and Deputy Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pillipinas for inviting me to share my thoughts 
on banking supervision and external audits. 
I would like to spend the next fifteen minutes discussing three main issues. First, I will outline why the 
relationship  between  banking  supervisors  and  external  auditors  matters;  second,  I  will  cover  our 
experience  with  external  auditors  from  both  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  perspectives;  and  I  will 
close by offering a few remarks on the challenges ahead for supervisors and external auditors of Thai 
banks. 
While the auditors’ duties are to report on the reliability of banks’ financial statements to the board of 
directors and shareholders, the supervisors’ main concerns are to maintain the stability of the banking 
system. Despite these differences in our respective goals, the day-to-day work of external auditors can 
complement that of bank supervisors. 
First, many countries are moving towards a risk-based approach to banking supervision, an approach 
which  emphasizes  a  thorough  assessment  of  an  institution’s  internal  control  environment  and  risk 
management  systems.  As  banking  supervisors,  we  can  leverage  off  the  auditors’  significant 
experience in testing for the adequacy of an institution’s internal control environment, as we begin to 
implement this risk-based framework. Second, external audits help to ensure the accuracy of financial 
statements that are provided to the public, which in turn helps to promote market discipline and foster 
a safe and sound banking system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Now,  I  would  like  to  present  our  experience  with  external  auditors  from  both  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory  perspectives.  First  on  the  regulatory  side,  the  value  of  this  relationship  was  initially 
recognized in 1962 when the Commercial Banking Act provides the Bank of Thailand with the authority 
to accept or oppose the appointment of a bank’s external auditor. Based on this act, the framework for 
external auditor qualifications and reporting requirements to the Bank of Thailand was issued in 2000, 
after  extensive  consultations  with  the  Institute  of  Certifed  Accountants  and  Auditors  of  Thailand 
(ICAAT), the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and other relevant regulatory bodies. Let 
me provide some specifics on auditor qualifications with respect to our law. 
First,  qualifed  auditors  must  never  have  had  their  auditing  license  revoked  or  suspended  by  the 
auditing licensing body. Second, auditors that are not authorized to audit entities under the supervision 
of the SEC or other government agencies are not permitted to audit banks. Third, the Bank of Thailand 
prohibits any external auditors to consecutively serve a bank for more than fve years. 
Fourth, the banks are accountable for having their external auditors submit their audit program to the 
Bank of Thailand every year and for allowing the auditors to supply all documents to supervisors upon 
request.  In  addition,  the  auditors  must  report  the  banks’  material  non-compliance  with  any  laws  or 
regulations  derived  from  the  Commercial  Banking  Act  as  well  as  any  material  internal  control 
deficiencies. If any auditors fail to meet these requirements, the Bank of Thailand will either oppose 
the appointment of such auditors and/or revoke their existing appointment. 
On  the  supervisory  side,  the  greatest  reduction  in  supervisors’  workload  is  in  internal  control  and 
irregularities assessment. Our supervisors use these two reports to determine the breadth and depth 
of on-site examination planning. For example, if supervisors determine that the external auditors’ work 
on  internal  control  assessment  is  adequate,  our  examination  efforts  in  this  area  may  be  reduced. 
Delegation of these two tasks aligns with the Basel guidelines, as they are both within the external 
auditors’ technical and practical competence. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 1
The Bank of Thailand has long recognized that to derive the greatest benefits from external auditors, 
the  auditors  need  to  have  a  good  understanding  of  not  only  prudential  regulations,  but  also  key 
supervisory concerns at the client banking institutions. In this regard, the Bank of Thailand meets with 
external  auditors  at  the  beginning  of  each  year,  in  order  to  exchange  views  on  common  areas  of 
concerns and to gain greater insights on the planned audit scope for the coming year, for example, the 
quality of risk management, the reliability of assigned collateral and foreclosure values. 
In addition to ongoing meetings with external auditors, there are periodic discussions at the agency 
level  between  the  Bank  of  Thailand  and  the  accountancy  bodies.  Regularly,  the  Bank  of  Thailand 
seeks  comments  from  the  Institute  of  Certifed  Accountants  and  Auditors  of  Thailand  prior  to  the 
issuance of new regulations. Likewise, the Bank of Thailand’s supervisors are regularly invited to be a 
member  of  the  auditing  standard  committee  whose  responsibilities  involve  the  development  and 
improvement of Thai auditing standards. 
In summary, the Bank of Thailand has signifcantly benefited from the increasing coordination between 
supervisors and external auditors. Despite these benefts, there are several challenges ahead in our 
relationship with external auditors that merits careful deliberation. 
First, supervisors should be sensitive to the independence of the external auditors, particularly when 
the auditors provide various types of consulting services to the bank, which often times may be far 
more  lucrative  than  external  auditing  fees.  In  Thailand,  the  Ministry  of  Commerce  released  a 
ministerial  regulation  in  1991  to  prohibit  external  auditors  from  providing  auditing  services  to  any 
entities  where  their  independence  cannot  be  maintained.  However,  this  regulation  still  leaves  the 
assessment  of  independence  to  the  external  auditors  themselves.  If  necessary,  regulators  may 
consider limiting the scope of non-auditing services or requiring the auditors to submit a request for 
approval  prior  to  engaging  in  non-auditing  activities  in  the  same  entity  that  they  provide  auditing 
service.  One  good  example  is  the  Sarbanes  Oxeley  Act,  which  was  issued  in  the  U.S.  in  2002 
disallowing  audit  firms  from  providing  specifc  functions  to  their  audit  clients  such  as  bookkeeping, 
financial information system design and appraisal service, etc. 
Second, the work of the auditors should never replace supervisory responsibilities. Audited financial 
statements are not prepared to serve supervisory purposes and external auditors are not trained as 
bank  supervisors.  Accounting  policies  and  definitions  used  by  auditors  may  be  different  from  those 
required  by  supervisors  under  Thai  regulatory  standards,  although  in  general  they  tend  to  be  the 
same.  For  example, 
there  are  differences  between  supervisory  guidelines  and  accounting 
requirements on asset classification and provisioning. Whereas the supervisory guidelines prescribe 
minimum specific ratios of loan provisions depending on the quality of loans, the accounting standard 
is less specifc and only requires banks to set aside appropriate provisions. Second, the method used 
by  regulators  to  set  aside  provisions  is  based  on  an  “expected  loss  model”,  while  the  accounting 
standards  require  provisions  based  on  an  “incurred  loss  model”.  These  conceptual  differences  can 
lead to different outcomes on such critical issues as the volume of classified asset, the adequacy of 
provisions,  and  therefore,  capital  adequacy.  It’s  useful  to  be  mindful  of  these  differences  and 
understand the context that leads to the need to maintain these differences. 
In closing, I want to reiterate that external auditors have truly been one of our key partners in the quest 
for greater financial stability. Thailand’s financial industry is currently in the midst of structural changes 
with the implementation of our Financial Sector Master Plan. One of the goals of the master plan is to 
promote greater competition, which in turn, may result in the evolution of bigger and more complex 
financial institutions. Against this background, our supervisors will need to fully embrace a risk-based 
supervisory philosophy and its focus on the quality of internal controls and risk management systems. 
Therefore, our relationship with external auditors will become even more important in the years ahead 
as we seek to strengthen banks’ risk management systems and enhance fnancial stability. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2004
