Y V Reddy: Banking sector in global perspective  
Inaugural address by Dr Y V Reddy, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at Bankers’ Conference 
2004, New Delhi, 10 November 2004. 
 Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is indeed a pleasure and privilege to be amidst this august gathering of eminent bankers, experts 
and policymakers. Over the years, the Conference has evolved as an important forum for structured 
information sharing among not only delegates from the banking sector, but also experts from research 
institutions,  credit  rating  agencies,  international  institutions  and  other  financial  sector  bodies.  The 
Bankers’ Conference, 2004 is a great advancement over the previous years. The most notable feature 
is that Respected President Dr. A.P.J. Abdul Kalam is addressing this gathering. In addition, we also 
have here today, globally renowned policy makers amidst us who will give us the benefit of their views. 
These include, Ms. Anne Krueger, First Managing Director of the IMF, a dear friend of mine, and a 
distinguished Central Banker, Governor Caruana of Bank of Spain who is also Chairman of the Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
The subjects selected for the Conference are of great importance and we, in RBI, look forward to the 
benefit  of  your  deliberations.  My  inaugural  address  today  will  be  brief  and  in  the  nature  of  a  few 
comments on the status of Indian banking industry and challenges ahead in a global perspective.  
Status of Indian banking industry 
I.  
It is useful to note some telling facts about the status of the Indian banking industry juxtaposed with 
other countries, recognising the differences between the developed and the emerging economies.  
First, the structure of the industry: In the world’s top 1000 banks, there are many more large and 
medium-sized  domestic  banks  from  the  developed  countries  than  from  the  emerging  economies. 
Illustratively, according to The Banker 2004, out of the top 1000 banks globally, over 200 are located 
in USA, just above 100 in Japan, over 80 in Germany, over 40 in Spain and around 40 in the UK. Even 
China has as many as 16 banks within the top 1000, out of which, as many as 14 are in the top 500. 
India, on the other hand, had 20 banks within the top 1000 out of which only 6 were within the top 
500 banks. This is perhaps reflective of differences in size of economies and of the financial sectors.  
Second,  the  share  of  bank  assets  in  the  aggregate  financial  sector  assets:  In  most  emerging 
markets, banking sector assets comprise well over 80 per cent of total financial sector assets, whereas 
these figures are much lower in the developed economies. Furthermore, deposits as a share of total 
bank liabilities have declined since 1990 in many developed countries, while in developing countries 
public  deposits  continue  to  be  dominant  in  banks.  In  India,  the  share  of  banking  assets  in  total 
financial  sector  assets  is  around  75  per  cent,  as  of  end-March  2004.  There  is,  no  doubt,  merit  in 
recognising  the  importance  of  diversification  in  the  institutional  and  instrument-specific  aspects  of 
financial  intermediation  in  the  interests  of  wider  choice,  competition  and  stability.  However,  the 
dominant role of banks in financial intermediation in emerging economies and particularly in India, will 
continue in the medium-term; and the banks will continue to be “special” for a long time. In this regard, 
it is useful to emphasise the dominance of banks in the developing countries in promoting non-bank 
financial  intermediaries  and  services  including  in  development  of  debt-markets.  Even  where  role  of 
banks is apparently diminishing in emerging markets, substantively, they continue to play a leading 
role in non-banking financing activities, including the development of financial markets.  
Third,  internationalisation  of  banking  operations:  The  foreign  controlled  banking  assets,  as  a 
proportion  of  total  domestic  banking  assets,  increased  significantly  in  several  European  countries 
(Austria, Ireland, Spain, Germany and Nordic countries), but increases have been fairly small in some 
others (UK and Switzerland). Amongst the emerging economies, while there was marked increase of 
foreign-controlled  ownership  in  several  Latin  American  economies,  the  increase  has,  at  best,  been 
modest in the Asian economies. Available evidence seems to indicate some correlation between the 
extent of liberalisation of capital account in the emerging markets and the share of assets controlled by 
foreign banks. As per the evidence available, the foreign banks in India, which are present in the form 
of branches, seem to enjoy greater freedom in their operations, including retail banking, in the country 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
on par with domestic banks, as compared with most of the other developing countries. Furthermore, 
the profitability of their operations in India is considerably higher than that of the domestically-owned 
banks  and,  in  fact,  is  higher  than  the foreign banks’  operations  in  most  other  developing countries. 
India continues to grant branch licences more liberally than the commitments made to the WTO.  
Fourth, the share of state-owned banks in total banking sector assets: Emerging economies, with 
predominantly  Government-owned  banks,  tend  to  have  much  higher  state-ownership  of  banks 
compared  to  their  developed  counterparts.  While  many  emerging  countries  chose  to  privatise  their 
public  sector  banking  industry  after  a  process  of  absorption  of  the  overhang  problems  by  the 
Government, we have encouraged state-run banks to diversify ownership by inducting private share 
capital through public offerings rather than by strategic sales and still absorb the overhang problems. 
The  process  has  helped  reduce  the  burden  on  the  Government,  enhance  transparency,  encourage 
market discipline and improve efficiency as reflected in stock market valuation, promote efficient new 
private  sector  banks,  while  drastically  reducing  the  share  of  the  wholly  government  owned  public 
sector  banks  in  a  rapidly  growing  industry.  Our  successful  reform  of  public  sector  banks  is  a  good 
example of a dynamic mix of public and private ownership in banks. 
A noteworthy feature of banking reforms in India is the growth of newly licensed private sector banks, 
some  of  which  have  attained  globally  best  standards  in  terms  of  technology,  services  and 
sophistication.  In  many  respects  related  to  performance,  these  domestically  promoted  banks  have 
surpassed branches of foreign banks in India, and could be a role model for other banks. 
Challenges ahead  
II.  
Let  me  highlight  some  thoughts  on  certain  areas which  have  a  key  bearing  on  the  ability  of  Indian 
banks to remain competitive and enhance soundness. Needless to state, these are more in the nature 
of random thoughts, rather than any structured thinking, and are meant to invite discussion.  
First, cost management. Cost containment is a key to sustainability of bank profits as well as their 
long-term viability. To highlight this point, let me,  take recourse to some figures. In 2003, operating 
costs  of  banks  as  a  proportion  of  total  average  assets1  in  the  UK  were  2.12  per  cent,  for  those  in 
Switzerland  they  were  2.03  per  cent,  and  less  than  2  per  cent  in  major  European  economies  like 
Sweden, Austria, Germany and France. In India, however, in 2003, operating costs as proportion of 
total assets of scheduled commercial banks stood at 2.24 per cent. The tasks ahead are thus clear 
and within reach.  
Second, recovery management. This is a key to the stability of the banking sector. There should be 
no  hesitation  in  stating  that  Indian  banks  have  done  a  remarkable  job  in  containment  of 
non-performing loans (NPL) considering the overhang issues and overall difficult environment. Let me 
add  that  for  2004,  the  net  NPL  ratio  for  the  Indian  scheduled  commercial  banks  at  2.9  per  cent  is 
ample  testimony  to  the  impressive  efforts  being  made  by  our  banking  system.  In  fact,  recovery 
management is also linked to the banks’ interest margins. We must recognise that cost and recovery 
management supported by enabling legal framework hold the key to future health and competitiveness 
of  the  Indian  banks.  No  doubt,  improving  recovery-management  in  India  is  an  area  requiring 
expeditious and effective actions in legal, institutional and judicial processes. 
Third,  technological  intensity  of  banking:  This  is  one  area  where  perhaps  India  needs  to  do 
significant ‘catching up’, notwithstanding the rapid strides made over the last few years, though data 
on this score are difficult to come by. Some available figures indicate that in late 1999, the percentage 
of  customers  using  online  banking  was  less  than  1  per  cent  in  India,  compared  with  anywhere 
between 6-30 per cent in developed economies like US, UK, Germany, Finland and Sweden. Even in 
Latin America, these figures are much higher than for India. While admittedly the numbers for India are 
likely to be much higher at present than these figures suggest, so would be the case for these other 
economies as well. The issue, therefore, remains what has been the extent of ‘catching up’ by India on 
this score? In fact, this seems somewhat intriguing: India happens to be a world leader in information 
technology, but its usage by our banking system is somewhat muted. It is wise for Indian banks to 
exploit this globally state-of-art expertise, domestically available, to their fullest advantage.  
                                                      
1   Average assets defined as total assets at the beginning of the year plus total assets at the beginning of the subsequent year 
divided by 2. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
Fourth,  risk  management.  Banking  in  modern  economies  is  all  about  risk  management.  The 
successful negotiation and implementation of Basel II Accord is likely to lead to an even sharper focus 
on  the  risk  measurement  and  risk  management  at  the  institutional  level.  Thankfully,  the  Basel 
Committee has, through its various publications, provided useful guidelines on managing the various 
facets  of  risk.  The  institution  of  sound  risk  management  practices  would  be  an  important  pillar  for 
staying ahead of the competition. Banks can, on their part, formulate ‘early warning indicators’ suited 
to their own requirements, business profile and risk appetite in order to better monitor and manage 
risks. 
Fifth,  governance.  The  recent  irregularities  involving  accounting  firms  in  the  US  have  amply 
demonstrated  the  importance  of  good  corporate  governance  practices.  The  quality  of  corporate 
governance in the banks becomes critical as competition intensifies, banks strive to retain their client 
base,  and  regulators  move  out  of  controls  and  micro-regulation.  As  already  mentioned,  banks  are 
special  in  emerging  markets  since  they  take  a  leading  role  in  development  of  other  financial 
intermediaries  and  of  financial  markets,  apart  from  having  a  large  recourse  to  public  deposits.  No 
doubt, there is nothing like an ‘optimal’ level of governance for one to be satisfied with. The objective 
should be to continuously strive for excellence. The RBI has, on its part, made significant efforts to 
improve governance practices in banks, drawing upon international best practices. It is heartening to 
note that corporate governance presently finds explicit mention in the annual reports of several banks. 
The  improved  corporate  governance  practice  would  also  provide  an  opportunity  to  accord  greater 
freedom to the banks’ boards and move away from micro regulation to macro management. Banks in 
India are custodians of depositors’ monies, monies of the millions of depositors who are seeking safe 
avenues  for  their  hard  earned  savings,  and  hence,  banks  must  accept  and  perform  an  effective 
fiduciary  role.  In  this  light,  improvement  in  policy-framework,  regulatory  regime,  market-perceptions, 
and indeed, popular sentiments relating to governance in banks need to be on the top of the agenda -
 to serve our society’s needs and realities while being in harmony with the global perspective.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
