Li Ruogu: Deepening reform and opening wider to ensure sustainable 
economic growth 
Speech by Mr Li Ruogu, Deputy Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the 42nd Annual Meeting 
of Business Executives, Trujillo, Peru, 23 October 2004. 
 Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, 
Good  Morning!  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  meeting.  My  remarks  will  focus  on  four 
aspects.  First,  the  Chinese  economic  development  against  the  backdrop  of  globalization;  second, 
challenges associated with WTO accession facing the Chinese industries; third, our strategies to cope 
with these challenges; and lastly, prospects of Sino-Latin economic and trade relations. I will also be 
very pleased to answer any questions you might have during the discussion session if time permits. 
I. 
The Chinese economy has entered an important stage of active interactions with the 
rest of the world 
The economic reform, which started in 1978, has brought about remarkable changes in China. This 
high growth episode has largely coincided with the deepening of the economic globalization. And the 
Chinese  growth  story  has  proved  that  developing  countries  should  and  indeed  can  seize  the 
opportunity in the course of economic globalization to promote development. 
Between  1978  and  2003,  China’s  real  GDP  growth averaged  at  9.4  percent,  and  now  China  is  the 
7th largest  economy  in  the  world.  At  the  same  time,  China’s  economic  development  has  created  a 
huge market for the world economy. During the period, China’s total trade volume has grown at an 
annual rate of 16 percent from US$ 20.6 billion to US$ 851.2 billion. China has become the 4th largest 
trading nation and the 3rd largest importer after the United States and Germany. China’s total trade 
volume is expected to exceed US$ 1 trillion in 2004. 
China’s economic development has also generated good opportunity for foreign investment. As of the 
end of July 2004, actual disbursement of foreign direct investment totaled US$ 540.2 billion. And more 
than 400 of the world top 500 multinational companies have direct investment in China. 
Stern challenges facing the Chinese industries in the post-WTO environment 
II. 
As  a  developing  country,  China  has  preliminarily  established  its  socialist  market  economic  system. 
After 15 years of hard negotiations, China eventually joined the WTO in December 2001 in order to 
integrate  into  the  development  process  of  the  world  economy.  In  the  course  of  WTO  negotiations, 
China made maximum concessions and thus endured grave pressures for economic restructuring. 
Since entry into the WTO, China has fulfilled its commitments in real earnest. Tariff rates have been 
massively slashed and are close to the ultimate target; non-tariff protection barriers have been nearly 
completely dismantled; and the service industry has opened further to foreign competition. The WTO 
membership has bought tremendous challenges to Chinese enterprises, particularly as the Chinese 
economy is still in the process of restructuring. Some state-owned enterprises remain inefficient, the 
agricultural  industry  underdeveloped,  the  financial  system  un-resilient  to  risks,  regional  disparity 
widening and unemployment pressures still high. 
First, pressures of agricultural import have heightened as the market has become more open 
to foreign competition. (1) China is a country with small per capita arable land. About 70 percent of 
its 1.3 billion people live in the countryside. In 2003, China’s grain output only totaled 420 million tons. 
In contrast, only 7 percent of the US population live in the rural areas and the US grain production was 
350-380 million tons, not much lower than that produced in China. This fact reflects low productivity of 
China’s agricultural sector. (2) With massive subsidies provided by the developed countries to their 
agricultural industry, China is facing increasing competition from the imports of low-priced agricultural 
products from the developed countries. 
Second, some manufacturing industries also face great challenges. Though I do not like labeling 
China  the  “world  factory”,  it  should  be  recognized  that  the  manufacturing  industry  accounts  for  a 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 1
significant part of both the GDP and the export sector in China. Currently, the manufacturing industry 
contributes 37 percent to the GDP growth. The Chinese manufacturing industry remains uncompetitive 
as evidenced by the following: (1) Weak capacity for technology innovation. According to some survey, 
China owned only 60 percent of the 104 key technologies used in the production of color TV sets, only 
50 percent of the 65 key technologies needed for mobile phone production, and 15.8 percent of the 
57 key  technologies  required  for  DVD  production.  (2)  Lack  of  self-developed  brand  names.  China 
processes products for many famous foreign brands. 53 percent of the exporters are foreign-invested 
enterprises, which account for 60 percent of China’s total export value. (3) Huge discrepancies exist in 
terms of management, marketing strategy and the building of modern corporate system compared with 
the foreign multinational companies. 
Furthermore, trade protectionism and unfair trade practices pursued by certain countries also affect its 
industrial  competitiveness.  In  1990s,  one  of  every  6  to  7  anti-dumping  cases  were  filed  against 
Chinese  companies.  By  the  end  of  2003,  a  total  of  540  anti-dumping  cases  had  been  filed  against 
China’s products. 
Third, competition in the service industry has intensified. One weakness of the Chinese economy 
lies in the underdeveloped service industry. Growth of China’s service industry failed to match that of 
the manufacturing sector. The service industry accounts for 65 percent of the world GDP. It averages 
70  percent  for  developed  countries  and  50  percent  for  developing  nations,  but  lingering  around 
30 percent for China. 
China’s  major  telecommunications  companies  have  long  been  constrained  narrow  business  scope, 
resulting in persistently weak competitiveness. In the retail market, foreign companies like Wal-Mart 
and  Carrefour,  have  obvious  advantages  in  terms  of  capital,  management,  procurement  and 
distribution. 
The gap  is  even  larger with  the developed countries  with  regard to  financial services.  The Chinese 
financial  institutions  are  plagued  by  poor  asset  quality,  capital  inadequacy  and  less  diversified 
products.  There  exists  a  big  gap  between  the  Chinese  and  foreign  financial  institutions  in  terms  of 
business operation, management skills and staff quality. In the 2nd quarter of 2004, non-performing 
loans recorded by the State-owned commercial banks reached RMB1.8898 trillion yuan, accounting 
for  19.2  percent  of  their  credit  assets.  For  the  time  being,  the  fiercest  competition  between  the 
domestic and foreign institutions is over the so-called “high-end” clients as 80 percent of the profits of 
the  financial  industry  is  generated  from  business  with  these  high-end  customers.  Meanwhile, 
competition over quality staff is also becoming ever intense. 
In a broader perspective, the Chinese economy has been growing at a fast speed since the beginning 
of reform and opening up, but its competitiveness has unfortunately not recorded the same impressive 
improvement.  The  Global  Competitiveness  Report  published  by  the  World  Economic  Forum  in 
November 2003 ranks China’s growth competitiveness the 44th among 102 economies in the survey 
while its commercial competitiveness the 46th among 95 economies. And of the “Fortune 500”, only 
14 companies are from China (if those from Hong Kong, Taiwan and Macao are not included). 
Deepening reform and opening wider to improve China’s corporate competitiveness 
III. 
In face of all these challenges, we did not blame other countries, but have resorted to more aggressive 
reform to improve our competitiveness. The 3rd Plenary Session of the 16th National Congress of the 
Communist Party emphasized the strategic objective of improving socialist market economic system 
and  establishing  a  more  vigorous  and  open  economy.  Efforts  have  been  mainly  focused  on  the 
following areas to enhance corporate competitiveness: 
1. 
The reform of SOE has accelerated as reflected in the establishment of state-owned 
asset management and supervision system and improved corporate governance. (1) The State 
Assets  Administration  and  Supervision  Commission  has  been  established.  (2)  Rights  and 
accountability of the board of directors, board of supervisors and shareholders have been defined in 
line with the requirements of modern corporate governance. (3) On that basis, we have taken active 
measures to develop large enterprise groups which are competitive and further revitalize the small and 
medium-sized  SOEs.  Some  SOEs  have  already  established  reputation  in  the  world.  Such  well 
performing  enterprises  as  China  Mobile,  SINOPEC,  PICC  Property  &  Casualty  Co.  Ltd  and  CASIC 
have  successfully  launched  their  IPOs  overseas.  By  the  end  of  2003,  the  net  assets  of  the  top 
10 overseas  listed  companies  have  exceeded  RMB 1 trillion yuan  and  their  net  profits  reached 
RMB 146 billion yuan last year. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2004
Agricultural  restructuring  has  speeded  up  and  government  support  strengthened. 
2. 
(1) Land  system  has  been  reformed  in  the  rural  areas  to  protect  the  interests  of  the  farmers. 
(2) Reform of taxes and fees in the countryside has been deepened. At the beginning of 2004, the 
State Council decided to eliminate agricultural tax within 5 years. By now, agricultural tax has been 
removed in 8 provinces, lowered by 3 percentage points in 11 major grain-producing provinces and by 
1 percentage point in the rest of the country. This practice has reduced the tax burden on the farmers 
by  30  percent.  (3)  Employment  environment  has  been  improved  to  accommodate  increasing  labor 
migration from the countryside. (4) Financial support has been granted to pilot reform of the rural credit 
cooperatives aimed at improving rural financial service. 
3. 
Development  of  the  non-public  sector  has  been  boosted.  The  Chinese  government 
encourages  competitive  enterprises  to  grow  larger  and  stronger,  and  allows  greater  participation  of 
foreign  investment  in  order  to  improve  efficiency  through  competition.  (1)  On  January  1,  2003,  the 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises Promotion Act was promulgated to provide legal protection for 
the  development  of  the  SMEs.  (2)  The  Constitution  has  recognized  the  non-public  sector  as  an 
important part of the socialist market economy and calls for facilitation, support and guidance for its 
development.  The  constitution  also  explicitly  provides  for  protection  of  private  property.  Since  the 
beginning  of  reform  and  opening  up,  the  private  sector  has  been  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of 
20 percent. As of end of 2003, fixed assets of the non-state sector accounted for 61.1 percent of the 
nation’s total. (3) Now there are more than 400,000 foreign-invested enterprises in China. 
4. 
Efforts  are  being  made  to  enhance  innovation  capacity.  (1)  To  seize  the  great 
opportunity brought about by domestic industrial restructuring, the Chinese government has speeded 
up  the  introduction  of  advanced  technology,  management  expertise  and  high  quality  professionals 
from  abroad.  (2)  Enterprises  are  encouraged  to  enhance  their  capacity  for  market  development, 
technological innovation and brand establishment. (3) The government has also redoubled efforts to 
facilitate study and research in basic science. (4) “Soft environment” has been improved to encourage 
multinational companies to build R&D centers in China. 
5. 
The  opening  process  has  been  accelerated.  (1)  The  Chinese  government  has  opened 
certain  sectors  in  an  orderly  and  sequenced  manner  according  to  the  requirements  of  the  market 
economy  and  the  WTO  rules.  Some  sectors,  such  as  insurance  and  tourism  as  well  as  the  local 
currency  business  for  foreign  banks  have  been  opened  even ahead  of  the WTO  schedule.  (2)  The 
“go-abroad”  strategy  has  been  firmly  implemented,  allowing  enterprises  to  grow  stronger  through 
international competition. 
6. 
Financial  reform  has  been  deepened  to  speed  up  the  development  of  the  financial 
markets and improve competitiveness of the financial institutions. The following measures have 
been taken in recent years to strengthen financial stability, promote the reform of financial industry and 
improve the quality of financial service. 
(1) 
Accelerating  joint-stock  reform  of  the  commercial  banks,  taking  advantage  of  the 
strong  economic  growth  momentum.  Commercial  bank  reform  has  undergone  several  important 
stages. First, the Chinese government issued special treasury bonds amounting to RMB 270 billion 
yuan  in  1998.  The  fund  raised  was  subsequently  used  to  recapitalize  the  state-owned  commercial 
banks. In 1999-2000, four asset management companies (AMCs) were established to take over part of 
the  non-performing  loans  from  the  commercial  banks.  Second,  commercial  banks  used  their  own 
resources including reserves, profit and capital, to write off non-performing loans. Third, US$ 45 billion 
foreign exchange reserves were used to recapitalize two state-owned commercial banks - the Bank of 
China  and  China  Construction  Bank.  Meanwhile,  efforts  have  been  made  to  clean  up  their 
non-performing assets and improve their internal risk control and corporate governance. Supervision 
on their capital adequacy has also been intensified. Both banks have finished financial restructuring 
and  transformed  into  joint-stock  companies.  The  banking  system  as  a  whole  has  improved  asset 
quality, capital adequacy and capacity to withstand risks. 
Further promoting market-based interest rate reform. The basic objective and principle 
(2) 
of China’s interest rate reform are as follows: putting in place a market-based interest rate mechanism 
in which the central bank could use monetary policy instruments to adjust and guide the movement of 
the market interest rate so that the market forces can play a dominant role in the allocation of financial 
resources. Interest rate reform should go hand in hand with the economic and financial developments 
and  be  consistent  with  the  improvement  of  corporate  governance  and  internal  control  in  the 
commercial banks. 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 3
In recent years, the market-based interest rate reform has advanced steadily. Money market interest 
rate  is  now  determined  by  the  market.  Administration  of  both  deposit  and  loan  interest  rates  was 
streamlined  and  autonomy  of  the  commercial  banks  in  the  management  of  interest  rates improved. 
Floating band of the lending rates has been widened to expand access of the SMEs to bank credit. 
The floating band of the lending rates was further widened on January 1, 2004, bringing the upper limit 
of the lending rate up to 170 percent of the benchmark rate. 
(3) 
Improving  exchange  rate  regime.  It  was  made  clear  at  the  3rd  Plenary  Session  of  the 
16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in October 2003 that efforts should be made 
to “improve the RMB exchange rate regime and keep the RMB exchange rate basically sable at an 
adaptive and equilibrium level. Provided effective risk control mechanism is in place, restrictions on 
cross-boarder  capital  transactions  will  be  relaxed  in  a  selective  and  sequenced  manner  so  as  to 
gradually move toward capital account convertibility”. 
Over the recent years, we have made great efforts in improving the RMB exchange rate regime and 
such efforts have resulted in the acceleration of the State-owned commercial banks reform, current 
account  convertibility,  reduced control  over  capital  account  transactions,  increased openness  of  the 
capital  market  for  foreign  institutions  and  foreign-invested  enterprises,  and  greater  access  to  an 
increasingly diversified financial market. 
We will further advance the reform and move toward an exchange rate regime with greater flexibility. 
The reform in this area is a complex task and should taken into account numerous factors, including 
macroeconomic performance, social development, balance of payments, the progress of reform in the 
banking sector, and the regional and global economic and financial situation. We will adopt a mix of 
measures to advance the reform of the exchange rate regime in a gradual and steady manner. 
Reform and opening up has facilitated China’s integration into the world economy. At the same time, 
China’s  contribution  to  the  world  economic  development  has  been  growing  steadily.  The  Chinese 
people are well known for being hard working and frugal. Our strategy is to increase the size of the 
cake so that all countries have a bigger cake to share rather than fighting for a larger slice of a small 
cake. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The first 20 years of the 21st century will mark an important period for China’s development. We will 
stick  to  the  scientific  approach  to  development  and  continue  to  deepen  financial  reform  through 
advancing  the  restructuring  of  the  financial  institutions,  strengthening  economic  management  and 
improving  the  financial  supervisory  system.  Persistent  efforts  will  be  made  to  support  the  Chinese 
enterprises to enhance their capability in technology innovation and international competitiveness so 
as to enable them to make greater contribution to the sustained and balanced growth. 
Sustained growth and opening of the Chinese economy have also created favorable conditions 
for the development of the Sino-Latin American trade and economic relations. In the past ten 
years, our trade with the region has been expanding at an annual average rate of 20.5 percent. Brazil, 
Argentina, Chile and Peru have become China’s suppliers of soybean, steel and mineral products. 
Great  potentials  remain  to  be  tapped  in  the  course  of  Sino-Latin  American  economic 
cooperation.  In  2003,  trade  between  China  and  the  Latin  America  reached  US$ 26.8 billion, 
accounting for 3.1 percent of China’s total trade volume. China’s imports from Latin America totaled 
US$ 14.9 billion,  increasing  by  80  percent  over  the  previous  year  while  its  export  to  this  region 
amounted to US$ 11.9 billion, a surge of 25 percent. However, the current trade flows between China 
and the Latin America is still too small either measured by its share in the aggregate trade volume, or 
compared with the economic size of China and the Latin America. In this regard, we are willing to take 
concrete  measures  to  expand  our  bilateral  trade  so  as  to  promote  economic  development  in  both 
China and Latin America. 
Finally, I would like to wish the annual meeting a great success and the Sino-Latin American economic 
and trade cooperation more fruitful. 
Thank you. I am ready to take a few questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2004
