Hermann Remsperger: The Bundesbank’s view of the economic outlook and 
economic policy challenges 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at Swedbank’s Economic Outlook Conference, Stockholm, 25 October 2004. 
 I was very glad to accept your invitation to attend Swedbank’s Economic Outlook Conference. To a 
German  central  banker  comparing  the  economic  developments  in  Germany  and  Sweden  since  the 
1990s  is  interesting  for  a  number  of  reasons.  This  also  holds  true  for  the  question  of  how  we  in 
Germany should tackle the current economic policy challenges. Just an example: Last Wednesday I 
read an article in the Financial Times with the heading “Can Sweden give Germany fertile ideas to 
revive an ailing economy?”. 
In  the  past,  Sweden  was  admired  by  many  for  its  virtually  “perfect”  social  welfare  system.  Today, 
Sweden  is  perceived  as  an  example  of  successful  reforms  because  it  anticipated  the  need  for 
economic restructuring at an early stage - namely in the early 1990s when the country suffered from a 
banking  crisis  and  exchange  rate  problems.  Sweden  reacted  by  making  its  labour  markets  more 
flexible and adapting its social welfare systems to the new environment. 
In  Germany,  by  contrast,  structural  reforms  had  a  much  lower  priority  on  the  agenda  in  the  1990s. 
Unfortunately, German reunification was not seized as an opportunity to explore new approaches in 
economic policy. The preparations for European integration also tied up a lot of resources at the time. 
In the meantime, however, a lot has been done to reform the labour market and the social security 
system. I will talk more about that in just a moment. But first I would like to make a few comments on 
the current economic situation and the monetary policy of the ECB. 
Developments in the global economy 
1. 
In the first half of this year, the world economy grew faster than many experts had been predicting in 
the spring. This is reflected in upward forecast revisions. The IMF’s September forecast is an example. 
It suggests that the increase in global output in 2004 could turn out to be 0.3 percentage points higher 
and reach 5.0% on average. A rate of 4.3% is expected for 2005, which would be still pretty dynamic. 
Since  in  many  countries  actual  GDP  growth  is  above  the  potential  rate,  a  slight  slowing  of  global 
economic momentum must not be viewed as completely negative. At the same time we have to take 
into account that the oil price has undergone further increases since September. In my view, the rising 
price of oil is not just a reflection of the good shape of the world economy. It is also due to a shortage 
of supply. 
The consequences for each economy depend on the oil intensity. Production in developing countries 
and  emerging  markets  is  more  oil-intensive  than  in  the  industrialised  countries.  Oil  intensity  in  the 
industrialised  countries  has  declined  since  the  1980s  but  has  probably  increased  in  the  emerging 
market economies. 
Although the effects are difficult to quantify, we at the Bundesbank assume that the increase in the 
price  of  oil  will  dampen  world  economic  growth.  But  it  will  not  prevent  the  global  economy  from 
growing further. This assessment is, however, subject to the condition that the high oil price level does 
not trigger second-round effects on prices. 
There are still considerable regional differences in the pattern of growth. Strong impetus continues to 
come from the global growth centres, namely the United States and East Asia. 
In China, the slight dip in growth in the second and third quarter has somewhat reduced the risk of the 
Chinese  economy  experiencing  a  hard 
landing,  which  would  have  considerable  economic 
consequences for the neighbouring countries. 
The  cyclical  recovery  has  continued  in  Japan  despite  a  weakening  of  momentum  in  the  second 
quarter. The upturn in the euro area has gathered pace. Even so, it is not yet as dynamic as in other 
regions of the world. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
As I see it, this global constellation with persistent regional growth disparities is vulnerable to shocks 
owing  to  the  ongoing  current  account  imbalances.  In  this  connection,  the  foreign  currency  markets 
merit special attention. 
Economic situation and outlook in the euro area 
2. 
The cyclical recovery in the euro area has gained momentum since the start of this year. In the second 
quarter  of  2004,  seasonally  adjusted  real  GDP  grew  by  0.5  %  as  compared  with  0.7  %  in  the  first 
quarter. These growth rates are the strongest the euro area has seen since early 2001. According to 
the European Commission’s short-term forecast, output will continue to expand within a range of 0.3% 
and 0.7% in the third and fourth quarters. 
However, this upturn is not yet broad-based. Gross fixed capital formation has stagnated until now. 
Private consumption growth slowed to 0.3% in the second quarter. By contrast, exports increased by 
3.1%. These figures primarily reflect the much improved external environment. 
Against this backdrop, the ECB staff back in September expected annual average growth for 2004 to 
be in a range of 1.6% and 2.2%, for 2005 in a range of 1.8% and 2.8%. This corresponds with median 
values of 1.9% and 2.3%. As with any forecast, there are risks to this one, too. First and foremost, 
there is the oil price risk. 
In this context, we of course have to take into account that the level of dependency on oil in the euro 
area is lower than it was during the oil crises of the 1970s and early 1980s. This reduces the negative 
effects of a rise in the oil price on euro-area growth. Furthermore, one should consider the price of oil 
in real terms. 
Not surprisingly, consumer prices reacted immediately and sharply to the jump in oil prices. The ECB 
staff  have  revised  their  forecast  on  HICP  inflation  for  2004  slightly  upwards  to  between  2.1%  and 
2.3%. Inflation in the euro area in September was 2.1%. It will probably not drop below the 2% mark 
until some time next year. For 2005, the ECB staff expect a range of between 1.3% and 2.3%. We 
assume that inflation will return to the stability range in the coming year. 
It  remains  to  be  seen  whether  there  will  be  a  safe  distance  between  actual  inflation  and  the  zone 
which  lies  outside  our  own  definition  of  price  stability.  Moreover,  we  have  to  bear  in  mind  that  the 
marked  expansion  of  the  money  stock  between  2001  and  2003  was  accompanied  by  a  strong 
increase in excess liquidity in the euro area. At the present, estimates show the real money gap at 
around 6½%. 
It is important to remember, however, that these figures primarily reflect the portfolio shifts of the past 
few years. It is not necessarily the case that these money holdings will actually be used to purchase 
goods. But I also would like to emphasize that the domestic forces behind monetary expansion are 
clearly gaining in importance. This is due not only to stronger economic growth in the euro area, but 
also to the very low central bank interest rates. 
If the excess liquidity is still held after the uncertainty in the financial markets declines, the likelihood of 
the  abundant  liquidity  being  used  to  purchase  goods  will  rise.  The  ECB  Governing  Council  must 
therefore keep an eagle eye on monetary expansion so as to be able to stop higher inflation rates at 
their roots. 
Interest rates in the euro area are currently very low, both in nominal and in real terms. This also holds 
true for risk premiums. For instance, euro-area enterprises with a BBB rating for bonds with a maturity 
of 7-10 years have to pay an average interest rate of only around 4¾%. This represents a premium of 
merely  ¾  percentage  point  over  comparable  government  bonds.  On  average,  this  figure  has  been 
twice as high since 1999. 
At  the  present,  corporate  bonds  are  obviously  also  benefiting  from  a  search  for  higher  yields. 
Furthermore, euro-area bank interest rates are very low. Credit standards have not tightened further. 
Economic conditions in Germany 
3. 
Since  early  2004,  the  economic  situation  in  Germany  has  improved  significantly.  For  a  long  time, 
Germany’s growth lagged behind that of the other euro-area countries. This gap has now narrowed 
considerably. Germany is no longer trailing behind the rest of the euro area. In the second quarter of 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
2004, GDP increased by 0.5%. In the first half of this year the annualised growth rate was 1¾%. As 
potential  growth  in  Germany  is  only  about  1½%  this  means  that  there  was  an  increase  in  capacity 
utilisation for the first time since many years ago. 
However,  the  recovery  in  Germany  is  not  broadly  based.  Domestic  demand  has  not  yet  taken  off. 
Growth has been driven mainly by exports. In the first half of this year, exports grew by 6.2%, while 
imports grew by 3.7%. From January to August 2004, exports were up by as much as 10.9%. This 
shows that the price competitiveness of the German economy is still very high, which enables German 
firms’ to benefit from strong growth in their export markets. 
It  is  striking  that  the  appreciation  of  the  euro  has  had  a  far  less  dampening  effect  on  exports  than 
many had expected. It seems that the increase in foreign demand for German products in the wake of 
the  buoyant  global  economy  has  more  than  offset  the  effects  of  the  exchange  rate.  Exports  to  the 
USA, for instance, which declined last year, have improved again. Exports to countries outside the EU 
in particular have increased strongly. From January to July our exports to Russia and China both grew 
by 22.7% on the year. 
Despite  all  these  positive  figures  we  must  not  lose  sight  of  our  export  dependency.  The  German 
economy remains vulnerable to a slowdown in global economic activity. This is the German economy’s 
Achilles’ heel. 
Overall, domestic demand contributed little to growth in the first half of the year. The level of business 
investment was again disappointing. There was no increase in the second quarter, either. 
Nonetheless,  the  conditions  for  an  increase  in  investment  are  still  good.  Firms’  cost  situation  has 
eased  and  is  helping  to  stabilise  their  earnings.  The  financing  situation  is  favourable.  German 
enterprises are not suffering from overindebtedness. Corporate investment plans now point towards a 
recovery. The need for replacement investments is large. A lot of equipment has to be modernised. 
We hope that the slide in private consumption will soon bottom out. Consumers’ propensity to spend 
is, however, still low. A further reduction in income tax scheduled for January 2005 and the falling rate 
of inflation are likely to boost consumption somewhat, especially as the labour market could improve 
over the course of next year. I’ll come back to this point in a minute. 
All  in  all,  from  today’s  perspective,  real  GDP  growth  of  just  under  2%  for  this  year  seems  to  be 
realistic. However, this figure is inflated by working-day effects. Adjusted for working-day variations, 
the current year will show growth of just under 1½%. According to very preliminary estimates for 2005 
(likewise  adjusted  for  working-day  variations)  we  expect  a  growth  rate  slightly  above  the  2004 
outcome. But this forecast is a very conditional one. Above all it depends on the assumption that the 
oil price will come down from its current level. 
Structural problems in Germany 
4. 
The German economy’s structural weaknesses are reflected in the persistent low propensity to invest. 
The total net investment ratio currently stands at merely 2¾% of GDP. The capital stock of machinery 
and equipment has not increased by more than 1% of late. As a result, potential output, with growth of 
1½%,  is  rather  disappointing.  Our  potential  growth  is  considerably  below  that  of  the  euro  area  and 
particularly that of the USA. 
Alongside the burdens arising from reunification, the process of interest rate convergence during the 
transition to the euro is likely to have been a factor which has dampened Germany’s position in the 
European  growth  league.  Previously  existing  interest  rate  advantages  were  lost.  From  a  German 
perspective, competition for investment has become stronger. 
Problem area 1: the labour market 
But over and above these special factors, a simple growth analysis shows that in Germany labour has 
contributed  less  to  economic  growth  compared  to  other  countries,  particularly  the  USA.  The 
US economy has obviously been more successful at integrating labour into the production process. In 
Germany,  by  contrast,  the  high  structural  unemployment  has  resulted  in  enormous  production 
potential remaining idle. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
It  is  also  telling  that  unemployment  in  Germany  has  increased  with  every  cyclical  downturn.  In  the 
following upturns, we have failed to create jobs for the additional number of unemployed. The labour 
force is not being fully utilised owing mainly to labour market rigidities. 
But now we should not overlook the fact that initiatives have been taken to reform the German labour 
market. There can be no doubt that the labour market has recently become more flexible both with 
respect to its institutional framework and as regards collective wage bargaining and working hours. 
For example, the significance of industry-wide collective wage agreements has decreased. In 2003, 
only  63%  of  the  employed  persons  in  western  Germany  were  covered  by  industry-wide  wage 
agreements. In the 1970s, this figure stood at 70%. This suggests that greater account can be taken 
of  local  and  firm-specific  requirements.  Naturally,  industry-wide  wage  agreements  still  play  an 
important  role.  Many  enterprises  which  are  not  formally  covered  by  them  tend  to  adhere  closely  to 
them. 
The  experience  of  the  past  few  years  also  shows  that  the  wage  drift,  the  difference  between 
negotiated pay rates and actual earnings, acts as an important corrective of excessive collective wage 
agreements.  So  actual  wages  are  more  flexible  than  they  appear  at  first  glance.  In  both  2002  and 
2003, for example, there was a negative wage drift of 1 percentage point. This trend continued in the 
first half of 2004. 
While negotiated pay rates are largely sticky downwards, even collective wage agreements provide 
some scope for flexibility. This includes escape clauses as well as the suspension or postponement of 
negotiated pay rises at firms which are in a difficult situation. 
Lower entry-level wages, pay ranges and performance-related wage components are also important 
elements of wage flexibility within the framework of collective labour agreements. By contrast, virtually 
no progress has been made in recent years with regard to the wage structure. Wage differentiation, 
especially  at  the  lower  end  of  the  qualification  scale,  is  urgently  needed  in  order  to  create  more 
employment opportunities for low-skilled people with low labour productivity. 
Coming back to positive developments I’d like to point to increased flexibility in working hours. Many 
companies now operate with a system of working-time accounts. This allows firms to better adapt the 
regular working hours, which are paid at standard rates, to their operational requirements. 
And,  most  recently,  some  companies  have  introduced  longer  working  hours  without  additional 
compensation.  Experience  has  shown  that  employees  are  more  inclined  to  accept  cuts  in  wages  if 
these take the form of longer working hours or reductions in bonus payments. 
The merger of unemployment assistance and social assistance to “unemployment benefit II”, as we 
call  it,  will  increase  the  incentive  to  find  employment.  Recipients  of  such  social  benefits  will  be 
expected  to  accept  any  work  available.  Moreover,  unemployed  persons  will  be  allowed  to  earn  a 
certain  amount  without  any  deductions.  The  maximum  period  of  entitlement  to  the  higher 
“unemployment benefit I” is being cut to one year. Until now, this benefit was paid for up to 32 months. 
In my view, the labour market reforms justify the hope that the economic recovery will spill over into 
higher  employment.  Even  so,  increasing  competition  among  domestic  and  international  production 
sites  will  increase  the  pressure  to  become  more  flexible.  As  a  result,  further  efforts  are  necessary, 
particularly in the area of wage structures. 
The key need now is to generally reduce the tax wedge on the labour market. Particularly as a result 
of the significant rise in contribution rates to the social security funds, the ratio of wage tax and social 
security contributions to labour costs went up from 43% in 1991 to just over 48% in the past two years. 
On  balance,  real  labour  costs  per  hour  have  risen  by  over  24%  since  1991  (or  by  1.8%  per  year), 
whereas real net earnings per hour have gone up by only 8% (or by 0.7% per year). This means that 
for every euro incurred by an employer as labour costs for his employee, the employee receives less 
than 52 cents. 
Problem area 2: the social security systems 
In  our  view,  any  assessment  of  labour  costs  has  to  include  an  assessment  of  the  social  security 
systems in Germany. The financing of social security benefits is largely tied to labor income, which is 
already driving up wage costs. Demographic developments are likely to push non-wage labour costs 
up further. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2004
This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  German  government  recently  introduced  a  whole  package  of 
reforms. These are not just intended to bring about shortterm financial relief. Instead, the reforms aim 
to put the social security systems on a more stable footing in the longer term. Another objective is to 
curb future rises in overall levies and to foster a more efficient use of government benefits. 
For example, a “sustainability factor” has been introduced into the pension system. As a result, future 
pension adjustments will be smaller if the ratio of pensioners to contributors increases. Furthermore, 
the possibilities for early retirement have been further restricted. 
By implementing these measures, the government aims to limit the increase in the contribution rate 
from  the  current  19.5%  to  22%  in  the  year  2030.  From  today’s  perspective,  not  implementing  the 
reforms would see contributions rise to over 24% in the same period. 
Rising life expectancy suggests that the statutory retirement age will also have to be raised. In future, 
we will not be able to dispense with the services of older workers so early as is the case today. 
The healthcare system is another area due for reform. The health reform in 2004 reduced the range of 
insured services. In addition, patients have to pay more for certain services out of their own pockets. 
Finally,  the  traditional  equal  financing  of  the  health  system  by  employers  and  employees  has  been 
adjusted for some benefits in favour of the employer. 
But despite all these measures, the underlying problems in the healthcare system have by no means 
yet been solved. There is still room for improved cost-effectiveness. It is therefore essential that the 
efficiency-enhancing price mechanism should be used as much as possible. 
Furthermore, people must take greater responsibility for their own health. In our view, one of the main 
problems is that the health system is financed on a wage-related basis. A changeover to a flat-rate 
health premium with state aid to avoid hardship in certain cases is one possible solution. 
Problem area 3: public finances 
Germany will record a general government deficit of more than 3% of GDP in 2004 for the third year in 
succession.  The  country’s  debt  ratio  actually  reached  an  historical  high  of  64.2%  in  2003  and  will 
further increase in the current year. There is also a risk that the deficit may exceed the 3% ceiling in 
2005. This highlights the need for substantial fiscal policy action, a need which will intensify in the long 
term owing to demographic changes. 
Due  to  a  fertility  rate  of  1.4  children  per  woman,  which  is  well  below  the  reproduction  rate,  the 
population will decrease. Against the backdrop of an increase in life expectancy of almost 1.3 months 
per year this implies an increase in the old-age dependency ratio. By 2050 the share of the population 
above the age of 64 to the population between 20 and 64, currently at 0.31, can be expected to rise to 
0.55. 
The consolidation of public finances is not an end in itself but rather an economic necessity. Rising 
interest payments on today’s deficits constrains the government’s leeway in the future. In order to foot 
the bill, other expenditures have to be reduced or taxes and contributions raised. Raising taxes and 
contributions is particularly problematic as the levy and tax burden in Germany is already high. You 
cannot impose a rising financial burden on a shrinking population. 
When public finances are perceived as unsound, consumers and investors alike are worried about the 
future. This leads to excessive caution, which dampens economic activity. 
The consolidation of public finances is a key task for all levels of government. For the past three years 
in  a  row,  net  borrowing  in  the  Federal  budget  has  exceeded  the  constitutional  limit,  defined  as  an 
amount equal to total investment expenditure, so that the Federal Government has repeatedly had to 
invoke the exemption clause by claiming that the macroeconomic equilibrium is temporarily disrupted. 
Many  state  government  budgets  are  facing  similar  problems.  The  general  government  deficit 
amounted to €81 bn in 2003. Around 42½% of this deficit was attributable to the regional and local 
level. 
It is crucial to reduce the general government deficits, not least on account of Germany’s international 
commitments. In the run-up to European monetary union, Germany was the most vociferous advocate 
of  a  stability  and  growth  pact.  The  adoption  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  formed  one  of  the 
cornerstones of a successful European monetary union. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 5
The objective of the Stability and Growth Pact is to attain and maintain sound public finances in the 
euro  area.  In  no  way  does  the  pact  constitute  an  excessive  constraint  on  the  flexibility  of  member 
states’ fiscal policy. A budget which is close to balance will generally enable the automatic stabilisers 
to take effect. Healthy public finances are essential so that the European System of Central Banks can 
maintain long-term price stability at relatively low interest rates. 
The  proposals  made  by  the  European  Commission  for  a  reform  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
include widening the exemption clauses, which allow a temporary breach of the deficit criterion, and 
extending the deadlines for correcting excessive deficits. 
We  at  the  Bundesbank  believe  that,  instead  of  strengthening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  the 
proposed changes would have a generally detrimental effect on it. Although some of the Commission’s 
proposals lean towards a more consistent application of the Pact within its current framework, we feel 
that a reform of the Pact is not necessary. The problem with the Stability and Growth Pact lies not in 
its terms but in its implementation. Its credibility depends on the will of those responsible for national 
fiscal policies to support the objectives and underlying ideas of the Pact and to consistently penalise 
any breaches. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  say  that  the  attempts  to  tackle  the  economic  policy  challenges  in  Germany 
reveal a mixed picture of both light and shade. Advances in reforming the labour market and the social 
security systems are qualified by unresolved problems in the field of public finances. It is essential to 
undertake efforts to consolidate the public finances and to continue the process of reform of the labour 
market and social security reforms. 
Last but not least, I’d like to quote a rather long sentence from a report published last week by the 
ECB: “With a view to increasing the employment and growth potential by making the economy more 
flexible,  thereby  maintaining  the sustainability  of  public  finances and  price stability,  national policies 
aiming  at  improving  the  functioning  of  product  and  labour  markets  are  also  needed,  while  social 
partners will need to ensure that wage developments are in line with labour productivity growth and 
developments in competitor countries.” 
I’m sure you know that this statement does not refer to Germany but to Sweden. In my view, however, 
it could be applied to Germany as well. Of course, instead of “maintaining the sustainability of public 
finances” we should read “aiming at the sustainability of public finances”. 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2004
