Eva Srejber: Is there reason for confidence in the future of the economy? 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  KEPA  day1, 
Stockholm, 21 October 2004. 
 Thank you for the invitation to take part in the KEPA day and share my thoughts regarding confidence 
in  the  future  of  the  economy.  I  will  speak  about  economic  growth  and  internationalisation,  draw  a 
parallel  between  current  events  and  historical  events  and  then  look  ahead  to  the  challenges  and 
opportunities that an increasingly interlaced world economy will bring. 
Since  the  Second  World  War,  international  growth  has  been  higher  than  during  previous  centuries, 
while it has spread to a larger number of countries - never before have so many had it so good. During 
the industrial revolution in the 19th century, the growth rate in leading countries like Britain amounted 
to  an  average  of  1.5  per  cent  a  year.  Since  the  middle  of  the  20th  century,  many  countries  have 
managed to achieve growth rates of between 5 and 8 per cent a year. These unparalleled successes 
of course have several explanations, some of the most important being extensive liberalisation of trade 
and capital flows, major technological advances and changes in economic policy. Assuming that the 
trend  towards  increased  global  integration  continues,  there  is  every  reason  to  expect  continuing 
substantial increases in economic wealth. 
Although many people have experienced considerable improvement in their living conditions in recent 
decades, there are still far too many who have not yet been given the opportunity to benefit from the 
increase  in  wealth.  In  addition,  there  are  still  substantial  environmental  problems  in  many  areas. 
However, the good results we have achieved since the Second World War show that we are on the 
right track - we need more and better globalisation, not less! I therefore consider that there is good 
reason for confidence in our economic future, but also that it is important for us to safeguard what we 
have already achieved, to make use of future opportunities that arise and to tackle the challenges that 
come in the wake of globalisation. As I see it, a strong multilateral framework is necessary to enable 
us to manage these challenges effectively. 
The driving forces behind the increased wealth in the world 
After the end of the Second World War, the architects behind the new multilateral economic system 
were determined to avoid a repeat of the fiascos during the 1930s, when countries introduced tariff 
barriers, made competitive devaluations and set up obstacles for payments. These measures halved 
world trade and led to falling GDP figures and declining real wages, mass unemployment and political 
chaos in large parts of Europe. The deliberate work on liberalising trade and capital flows, as well as 
payments for these transactions, within a strong multilateral framework began almost sixty years ago 
and is an important explanatory factor behind the increased economic growth we have experienced 
since then. The strategy was mainly based, within the framework of the GATT, on a gradual removal 
of trade barriers and the building up of a multilateral trade system via regular negotiating rounds and, 
within  the  framework  of  the  IMF,  to  jointly  promote  financial  stability  and  free  payments,  initially  for 
current  account  transactions  and  later  for  an  increasing  number  of  capital  account  transactions. 
Moreover, the World Bank was established, whose primary purpose is now to reduce poverty in the 
world. 
The endeavours towards liberalisation have been, and still are, very successful. With regard to trade, 
this can be illustrated by the fact that average tariffs on manufactured goods have fallen from over 
40 per cent at the end of the Second World War to under 5 per cent today. Trade liberalisation has led, 
through  increasing  specialisation  and  competition,  to  a  more  efficient  distribution  of  labour  between 
countries,  which  has  contributed  to  higher  growth,  and  also  to  greater  options  and  lower  prices  for 
consumers. However, the adjustments have not been easy, as we know from our experiences of the 
                                                      
1 Branchföreningen för Kontorsartiklar, Emballage, Papper och Angränsande produktområden 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 1
changes  in  the  Swedish  shipyard  and  textile  industries.  It  is  necessary  that  the  people  affected  by 
them  receive  support  to  enable  them  to  make  a  living  in  other  industries  and  in  other  regions. 
However, despite the difficulties experienced by some people, these changes have on the whole led to 
improvements. 
A  lot  of  work  remains  to  be  done  to  liberalise  world  trade,  which  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  the 
potential increases in wealth from continued liberalisation are substantial. Calculations made by the 
World Bank indicate that welfare gains of between USD 400 and 900 billion could be made if all of the 
current trade barriers were removed. More than half of these gains would fall to poor countries. The 
agricultural and pharmaceutical industries, where the poorest countries have their largest comparative 
advantages,  would  account  for  70  per  cent  of  the  profits,  that  is  to  say,  USD  230  billion.  For 
comparison  purposes,  it  can  be  mentioned  that  total  foreign  aid  amounts  to  USD  60  billion  a  year, 
while  the  OECD  countries’  total  agricultural  subsidies  are  USD  330  billion  a  year.  Increased  trade 
liberalisation is therefore a better means of achieving wealth than foreign aid could ever be, because, 
to paraphrase the Chinese proverb, “if you give your friend a fish you will feed him for a day, but if you 
allow him to fish he will be able to feed himself for a lifetime”. 
The  other  major  wave  of  liberalisation  -  the  deregulation  of  the  international  capital  markets  -  has 
enabled  savings  to  be  channelled  to  a  greater  extent  to  where  they  will  provide  the  highest  yield. 
When we Swedes were poor at the end of the 19th century, we borrowed money abroad, for instance 
to build the railways and the mine at Kiruna. Now we can invest our savings in emerging markets and 
obtain a better yield than we would at home, while we are contributing to the development of these 
countries. The free movement of capital has also enabled savings capital to be spread more widely 
and thereby reduced the risks entailed. This provides financial security both for the investor and the 
user  of  the  borrowed  capital.  The  effects  of  liberalisation  are  clearly  reflected  in  the  statistics:  the 
Overseas Development Council has calculated that foreign parties invested around USD 1,000 billion 
in  developing  countries  in the  1990s  alone.  In  total,  foreign  direct  investment increased by  400  per 
cent  during  the  same  period,  and  the  corresponding  figure  for  developing countries  was  more  than 
800 per cent. Recently published figures from UNCTAD show that the services sector now accounts 
for around 60 per cent of total foreign direct investment, compared with just under 50 per cent only ten 
years ago. If utilised properly, this development can improve export potential for poor countries, while 
also providing wealth gains for the countries importing the services. 
However, experiences over the past twenty years indicate that we in many respects have had difficulty 
in liberalising the capital markets in the right way, which has led to capital balance and exchange rate 
crises in several countries. Much work has therefore been put into creating international agreements, 
norms  and  standards  -  with  regard  to,  for  instance,  accounting  principles,  capital  adequacy  rules, 
bankruptcy legislation and collateral - with the aim of promoting stability and balance in the corporate 
and banking sectors. This work has progressed fairly well, and the main focus is now on promoting the 
observance  of  these  standards.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  the  basis  for  a 
successful  liberalisation  of  capital  markets  is  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework  aimed  at  price 
stability and sound public finances. 
Up to the end of the 1980s it was only the free world that experienced the liberalisation in trade and in 
the capital markets and benefited from the ensuing growth in wealth. The spread of wealth is therefore 
closely linked to the change in economic policy that has swept through large areas of the world over 
the past fifteen years. After the economic implosion of the Communist states and the ensuing collapse 
of the Soviet bloc, it became clear to most people that it was impossible to achieve wealth or freedom 
in  a  planned  economy.  The  fact  that  the  failure  of  the  planned  economy  finally  became  blindingly 
evident  meant  that  not  only  the  Soviet  bloc,  but  also  most  of  the  developing  countries  that  had 
experimented  with  planned  economies  abandoned  these  ideas  in  favour  of  a  market  economy 
approach. This led to the old Comecon, China, India and several other countries in Asia, Latin America 
and, unfortunately to a much lesser extent, Africa, becoming integrated into world trade and the global 
financial system. 
The fact that many more countries are now participating in the world economy has been a contributory 
factor  to  the  increasing  economic  integration  over  the  past  twenty  years,  when  world  trade  has 
increased at twice the rate of GDP growth, direct investment has increased three times as much and 
both foreign exchange trading and share trading have been around ten times faster than GDP growth. 
This  most  recent  “globalisation  wave”  has  benefited  more  than  three  billion  people  and  led  to  the 
doubling of annual GDP growth per capita in many developing countries; in China GDP growth per 
capita  has  even  increased  fivefold.  The  conclusion  that  increased  openness  contributes  to  higher 
growth is also supported by research; for instance, Sachs and Warner found in a study published in 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2004
1995 that open economies, all else being equal, grow at an average of 2 percentage points a year 
faster  than  closed  economies.  Although  openness  alone  cannot  provide  growth,  one  fact  is  clear  - 
there are no countries that have achieved wealth through autarchy and isolation from the rest of the 
world. 
Openness is thus a necessary condition, but not sufficient in itself, for achieving wealth. Many other 
policy elements are required, including macroeconomic stability, a good standard of education, legal 
security, efficient bureaucracy and protection of private property, to create good conditions for broad 
growth in a market economy. The Peruvian economist Hernando de Soto was a pioneer in the study of 
practical bureaucracy in some developing countries. His view was that it was not primarily a lack of 
property that made people poor, but rather a lack of legal property. The problem is that many poor 
people  have  no  paper  to  prove  ownership  of  their  property,  because  it  is  so  expensive  and 
complicated to obtain in most developing countries. De Soto showed that, for instance, in Lima, Peru, 
it took six years and eleven months going through 207 legal stages among 52 different public authority 
offices  to  obtain  permission  to  build  a  house.  Obtaining  legal  permission  to  start  a  small  company 
required  six  hours  work  a  day  for  289  days  to  follow  the  various  bureaucratic  steps,  and  it  cost 
31 times  as  much  as  the  monthly  minimum  wage  applying  at  the  time.  The  fact  that  poor  people 
therefore cannot formally own their houses or businesses means that they can have them stolen from 
them at any time, without the guilty parties being punished. It is also impossible for these people to 
use their assets as collateral to take out loans and perhaps even to sell them. It is therefore crucial, 
according to de Soto, for developing countries to reduce bureaucracy and thereby release a mass of 
capital with the aid of the law. 
The World Bank has extended the studies made by de Soto to include more countries. The recently-
published report Doing Business in 2005: Removing Obstacles to Growth shows, for instance, that it 
takes on average more than twice as long to register a new company in poor countries than in wealthy 
countries  and  that  it  is  also  much  more  expensive,  in  relation  to  income.  Most  companies  in 
developing  countries  therefore  operate  in  the  informal  sector.  Despite  this,  wealthy  countries 
implemented  more  than  three  times  as  many  reforms  to  improve  their  investment  climate  last  year 
than were made by poor countries. Developing countries can thus, often using fairly simple means, 
ensure that more job opportunities are created by improving the opportunities for entrepreneurs in the 
formal sector and thereby promoting economic growth. 
The  final  basic  explanatory  factor  behind  increased  wealth  that  I  wish  to  highlight  here  is  the 
pioneering  technological  advances  made,  particularly  in  the  fields  of  information  technology, 
international  communications  and  global  transports.  These  have  led  to  large  cost  savings,  which  in 
turn have enabled the rapid spread of technology around the world. This has helped, for instance, give 
developing countries the opportunity to diversify their exports to a greater degree. One example worth 
mentioning is that IT exports now account for almost 40 per cent of India’s total export income. All in 
all, the percentage of manufactured goods in developing countries’ exports has increased from 20 per 
cent in 1980 to just over 70 per cent in 2001 (however, in Africa the figure is less than 30 per cent). In 
addition,  ICT  developments,  which  have  enabled  more  efficient  production  in  networks  and  at  a 
distance,  have  led  to  new  sectors  in  the  service  industries  being  opened  to  trade  and  international 
competition. An important element in this process is the increasingly strong cooperation between ICT, 
trade  and  efficiently-functioning  product  markets  that  allows  labour-intensive  stages  of  goods  and 
services production to be moved to low-wage countries, and that emphasises how closely linked the 
various components of the globalisation process actually are. 
The effects of increased internationalisation on people’s daily lives 
I  consider  it  particularly  important  to  point  out  that  although  integration  and  technological 
developments  entail  large,  and  in  many  cases  difficult,  adjustments  for  individuals,  they  also  have 
direct, positive effects on people’s daily lives. The percentage of people living in extreme poverty - with 
a daily income of less than USD 1 - fell from 40 per cent of the world population in 1981 to 21 per cent 
in 2001. In absolute terms, this is a reduction from 1.5 billion to 1.1 billion people. A large part of this 
improvement  is  due  to  the  rapid  growth  in  China  and  India. Until  fairly  recently,  it  took  at  least  two 
generations to double the standard of living, but in China, for instance, the standard of living is now 
being  doubled  every  ten  years.  The  average  length  of  life  in  developing  countries  amounted  to 
65 years  at  the  beginning  of  the  21st century,  compared  with  just  under  40 years  in  1950.  Even  in 
Africa south of the Sahara the average length of life increased from 35 to 50 years before the spread 
of  HIV/AIDS  caused  some  decline.  The  ability  to  read  has  also  increased  dramatically  since  1950, 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 3
from 40 per cent to just over 70 per cent of the population. The corresponding figures for Africa south 
of the Sahara were from 17 per cent to 56 per cent, which is more than trebled. Another positive effect 
of increased wealth is that more people are expressing demands for democracy and human rights. 
According to Freedom House, the percentage of countries with some form of democratic government 
rose  from  28  per  cent  in  1974  to  65  per  cent  in  2003.  Another  important  aspect  that  should  be 
highlighted is the environment. Studies show that higher growth initially leads to some deterioration in 
the  environment,  but  that  this  phase  is  soon  followed  by  clear  improvements  when  increasingly 
wealthy countries can afford to safeguard their natural resources and invest in environmentally-friendly 
technology  and  production.  The  turning  point  appears  to  be  when  GDP  per  capita  reaches 
approximately USD 5,000 a year. 
Despite  these  successes,  there  remains  a  lot  to  be  done  before  everyone  benefits  from  increased 
wealth. Although developments are moving in the right direction, the total number of poor people is still 
a  problem.  If  the  fruits  of  globalisation  do  not  continue  to  spread  to  more  countries  with  a  poor 
population  and  within  countries,  there  is  also  a  risk  of  more  states  collapsing  or  other  political 
problems that could slow down growth in the poor countries, and also have negative consequences for 
the rest of the world. The growing discrepancy between different regions is therefore worrying. This 
was clearly illustrated during the 1990s, when growth in Asia averaged 7 per cent, while the figures for 
Latin America and Africa south of the Sahara were 3.4 per cent and 2.3 per cent respectively. There is 
a  huge  contrast  between,  for  instance,  China,  which  has  succeeded  in  lifting  around  400  million 
people out of extreme poverty over the past twenty years, and Africa south of the Sahara, where the 
number of poor people increased by 150 million during the same period. In addition to weak states 
and  internal  conflicts,  the  African  continent  is  hard  hit  by  HIV/AIDS,  which  in  some  countries  has 
reduced the average length of life from 55 years in 1990 to below 40 years in 2002, and left many 
children and young people to their own devices, without any adult authority. One of the most important 
challenges in future is thus to try to integrate Africa into the global economy to a greater extent. Here, 
both  the  African  countries  themselves  and  we  in  the  industrialised  world  can  make  important 
contributions. 
Some historical reflections on globalisation and technological changes 
Despite  all  the  talk  of  the  “new”  global  economy,  the  present  international  economic  integration  is 
actually  no  new  phenomenon.  During  the  fifty  years  prior  to  the  First  World  War,  there  was 
considerable  cross-border  mobility  for  both  goods  and  capital.  Then,  as  now,  the  increased 
globalisation  was  driven  by  trade  liberalisation  and  major  technological  advances,  thanks  to  the 
development  of  railways,  steam  engines  and  electricity.  In  some  respects  the  integration  was  even 
more  extensive  at  the  beginning  of  the  20th  century  than  it  is  today.  For  instance,  foreign  direct 
investment was a much greater percentage of GDP, labour was much more mobile across national 
borders and even agriculture was more liberalised. 
However, in other respects it can reasonably be claimed that the world economy is more interlaced 
now  than  it  was  a  hundred  years  ago.  The  first  difference  is  that  a  much  larger  percentage  of  the 
countries in the world now participate in the global economy, after opening up their borders to trade 
and investment and adopting liberal market reforms. Another aspect that should be highlighted is that 
although  the  net  flows  of  international  capital  are  lower  than  prior  to  the  First  World  War,  the  total 
financial flows are much greater today. A third difference is that while the 19th century globalisation 
was  largely  driven  by  falling  transport  costs,  today  it  is  largely  falling  information  costs,  thanks  to 
computers and the Internet, that are the driving force. This development has led to entrepreneurship 
becoming increasingly global, as it has become much easier to localise various parts of the production 
process to different countries. 
An example using telegraphy and the current information technology can illustrate the significance of 
costs for the spread of innovations. Telegraphy was expensive; in the 19th century people had to go to 
a telegraph office or hire a telegraph boy and pay significant sums if they wished to send a telegram. 
In today’s money, it cost them around SEK 2,000 to send a long-distance message of 20 words, while 
the  corresponding  cost  today  is  around  10  öre  for  20  pages.  In  other  words,  the  variable  cost  is 
negligible and the fixed cost is moderate. We can therefore now find powerful computers and Internet 
access  in  most  workplaces  and  in  many  homes.  The  costs  are  so  low  that  many  people  have  the 
financial possibility to use computers and the Internet, at least in industrial nations. This spread also 
means that the time and the cost that lay in the telegraph boy’s running from place to place have been 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2004
eliminated. It is thus this spread that makes the current information technology much more important 
than telegraphy was a hundred years ago. 
However, a historical warning may be appropriate; experiences show that confidence in integration, 
the market and the open society can be rapidly undermined in the event of major economic crises and 
political instability. This happened in the First World War, which broke off the globalisation process of 
the  time.  Later,  the  spread  of  Communism  after  the  Second  World  War  forced  the  previously 
successful industrial nations in central Europe out of the international community. At present, the main 
threat to a free exchange perhaps stems from the risk of an escalation of terrorism leading to more 
closed borders. It is therefore important that we constantly explain why tendencies towards increased 
protectionism and introversion are not good for growth. Globalisation cannot be taken for granted - it 
must be defended. 
Future possibilities and challenges 
I now intend to look ahead to the possibilities and challenges that follow in the wake of the increased 
integration and technological changes. I have already mentioned the importance of safeguarding and 
developing the advances already made, and this cannot be stressed too much. Nor should we forget 
that macro stability, that is to say, price stability and sound public finances, is an important condition 
for stable growth. The Swedish experiences over the past decade are a very good example of this. A 
stable economic policy framework is particularly important in the light of the demographic challenges 
that will soon have a major effect on the economies of many countries, particularly in Europe. 
Mark Twain is supposed to have once said: “I’m all for progress; it’s change I don’t like.” However, 
change  lies  in  the  nature  of  market  liberalism,  which  neither  can  nor  should  be  stationary.  The 
structural  changes  that  come  in  the  wake  of  globalisation  mean  that  less  efficient  production  is 
replaced by more efficient production, and that sectors that do not hold up in competition are replaced 
by sectors where the country has comparative advantages, that is to say, is relatively better than its 
competitors.  Structural  changes  thus  consist  of  two  parts:  closing  down  (or  moving  out)  and  new 
establishment  of  businesses.  The  Austrian  economist  Joseph  Schumpeter  called  this  creative 
destruction; old jobs and technologies disappear and new, more productive jobs arise as technology 
develops and production becomes more specialised. The major challenge in future, in both Sweden 
and other industrialised nations, will therefore be to create dynamic conditions in which new jobs can 
arise as the old ones disappear due to rationalisation or are moved abroad. 
Studies  regarding  some  industrial  nations  indicate  that  many  jobs  lost  during  the  most  recent 
economic  slowdown  have  not  yet  been  replaced  by  new  jobs  in  the  same  branch  when  economic 
activity picked up again; instead productivity has been higher. However, employment has continued to 
increase  in  other  sectors,  which  appears  to  increase  the  number  of  jobs  regardless  of  economic 
activity. The fact that employees have to change sector leads to greater friction unemployment arising. 
While these structural changes are nothing new in themselves, they make substantial demands with 
regard to a good business climate where new jobs can be created and to a good capacity for change 
and flexibility in the labour market, to enable employees to seek work in other industries and regions. 
This can of course be a difficult process for the individual and his or her family, as if often entails a 
change of career and also of the area in which he or she works, and perhaps even the area where 
they live. It is important to facilitate this difficult adaptation process, for instance, by offering support in 
the form of education, retraining and reasonable compensation during the changeover period. 
In  recent  years  the  allocation  of  jobs  abroad,  known  as  offshoring,  has  been  the  focus  of  debates 
regarding  structural  changes.  This  is  not  a  new  trend  in  itself;  as  the  manufacturing  industry  has 
become increasingly internationalised during the post-war period, we have seen equivalent patterns. 
The new element today is that it is jobs in the services sector, which are sometimes well-paid, that are 
being increasingly offshored. This opportunity has arisen as a result of the major advances in the ICT 
sector  and  the  steeply  falling  information  costs.  Thus,  entire  sectors  where  trade  was  previously 
impossible at long distances have been opened up to international competition. The increased trend 
towards offshoring is primarily driven by large cost savings, which can amount to as much as 60 per 
cent. For example, the labour costs in the new EU member states are between five and twelve times 
lower than those in Sweden and Germany, while the productivity gap has declined significantly over 
the past 10-15 years. 
What is interesting in this context - and an important lesson for the future - is that many studies that 
have been published do not find any evidence for the critics’ claims that offshoring will lead to a mass 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 5
migration  of  jobs  and  the  phenomenon  of  jobless  growth.  On  the  contrary,  they  indicate  that 
offshoring,  by  promoting  a  better  division  of  labour  between  countries,  leads  to  cost  savings  and 
productivity gains that in turn mean that labour and investments in the industrialised nations can be 
transferred  to  more  highly  processed  products.  The  consultancy  firm  McKinsey  has  estimated  that 
each dollar invested in outsourcing to India gives the United States an economic gain of USD 1.12-
1.14 and India a gain of USD 0.33. In the long term, this can even lead to a stronger development in 
employment.  Thus,  offshoring  can  be  regarded,  as  President  Bush’s  economic  adviser  Gregory 
Mankiw pointed out, but was much criticised for, as a form of trade that will make production more 
efficient and increase GDP growth in the world economy. 
Offshoring is thus one means of increasing global wealth; continued multilateral trade liberalisation is 
another  means.  Unfortunately,  the  final  negotiations  in  the  Doha  round  have  once  again  been 
postponed,  and  a  final  agreement  will  probably  not  be  signed  until  2006  or  2007  at  the  earliest. 
Although  the  147  member  countries  of  the  WTO  took  an  important  decision  in  principle  regarding 
goals and rules for negotiations in the field of agriculture last summer, the contents are still incomplete. 
In other important areas, such as trade in services, the results were even less substantial. 
Europe  and  the  United  States  can  contribute  in  a  very  concrete  way  in  the  trade  negotiations  by 
reducing their own tariffs and subsidies, particularly in the industries where developing countries have 
their largest competitive advantages, such as agriculture, textiles and the steel industry. An example of 
the potential significance of the reforms is that a European cow receives an average of USD 2.50 a 
day in subsidies, while 75 per cent of Africa’s population are living on less than USD 2 a day.2 More 
free trade within these areas would lead to more poor people being integrated into the world economy, 
and would thus enable one of the major problems with the current system to be remedied. In addition, 
it would contribute to making the global distribution of labour more efficient, which would also benefit 
the industrialised world. However, when wealth reaches our levels, mobility in the labour market has 
tended  to  decline,  at  least  in  Western  Europe.  It  is  therefore  probable  that  the  increased  structural 
changes entailed in the liberalisation of sectors such as agriculture and the textile industry would entail 
demands for support to manage the changes and a better business climate in many industrial nations 
in order to facilitate mobility between sectors. 
I have previously mentioned the important work conducted with regard to creating and implementing 
norms and standards to prevent economic crises in different countries around the world. Despite good 
results, historical experiences show that crises will probably occur nevertheless. In a few cases this 
will lead to states experiencing payment problems. We therefore need to have a multilateral framework 
that can efficiently deal with any problems that arise. Both the IMF and other international forums have 
put  a  lot  of  work  into  improving  crisis  management  in  recent  years.  Several  improvements  can  be 
noted, including collective action clauses, which are increasingly used in sovereign bond contracts and 
will facilitate renegotiation of sovereign bond debts in the future.3 Some progress has also been made 
within the framework for cooperation between the public and private sectors with regard to a voluntary 
code  of  conduct  for  states’  payment  problems.  Of  course  these  improvements  are  very  positive. 
However, my impression is that we need a coherent framework for orderly renegotiations of sovereign 
debt in countries facing insolvency that cover all types of debt. The IMF worked out a proposal for debt 
consolidation  a  few  years  ago,  entitled  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  (SDRM),  but  the 
proposal has not won general approval in this form and the problem of managing sovereign states’ 
payment problems remains. The example of Argentina showed clearly the need for a framework that 
could, for instance, solve the current problem of a risk of different borrower groups receiving different 
treatment, with various “clubs” for different types of loan. It is possible that we can get the ball rolling 
with a lucky name change to Framework for Orderly Restructuring of Debt (FORD). Ford owns Volvo 
and Volvo means “I roll”. 
                                                      
2  This example is taken from a lecture given by the World Bank’s chief economist Nicholas Stern (now at HM Treasury in the 
UK) at Munich University in November 2002. 
3  Collective  action  clauses  are  a  means  of  clarifying  at  the  time  the  loan  agreement  is  signed  how  the  contract  will  be 
renegotiated if the borrower cannot pay according to the agreed amortisation and interest rate plan. 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2004
Conclusion 
There  is  still  a  lot  we  do  not  know  about  the  growth  process,  but  fortunately  the  knowledge  gaps 
appear  to  be  dwindling  as  time  goes  by.  The  research  carried  out  over  the  past  twenty  years  has 
taught us, for instance, that it is not only the right economic policy measures to achieve growth that we 
need; institution building is at least as important, and this must be adapted to local conditions and help 
countries to tackle new challenges. These are important lessons to take into the future with us. What 
we  can  say  with  certainty  is  that  the  path  entered  upon,  towards  greater  liberalisation  and  market 
economy  and  the  promotion  of  technological  advances,  has  shown  good  results.  Many  millions  of 
people have attained a much better standard of living over the past sixty years, both in material terms 
and  in  terms  of  quality  of  life.  At  the  same  time,  all  of  the  available  data  clearly  indicates  that  the 
countries which have had least success are those that are least integrated into the world economy, 
that  have  not  managed  to  create  a  stable  macroeconomic  framework,  have  poor  protection  for 
property,  complicated  and  inefficient  bureaucracy,  a  high  degree  of  corruption  and  a  widespread 
informal sector into which a large part of businesses have been forced. There thus appears to be a 
great deal that developing countries can do themselves to improve their situations and create the right 
conditions for stable growth. However, the wealthier countries also need to do their share, for instance 
by opening up currently protected sectors of their economies to free trade. Moreover, the multilateral 
institutions play an important role. 
Thus, increased growth and globalisation have not solved all of the problems, far from it; there are still 
far too many poor people who are on the outside of the world economy and far too many countries 
with large environmental problems. However, existing shortcomings and defects do not mean that the 
present model needs to be changed; on the contrary, it needs to be defended, extended and spread 
further,  and  its  weaknesses  need  to  be  managed.  I  believe  that  the  positive  effects  of  sustainable 
long-term  growth,  combined  with  the  opportunities  offered  by  continued  internationalisation  of  the 
world economy, indicate that there are good grounds for optimism about the future. 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 7
