Rafael Buenaventura: Central Bank of the Philippines’ commitment to 
microfinance 
Keynote address by Mr Rafael Buenaventura, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (Central Bank 
of the Philippines), at the 2nd International Forum on Microfinance, INAFI-Philippines, Quezon City, 
25 August 2004. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  invited  to  deliver  this  keynote  speech  in  this  2nd  International  Forum  on 
Microfinance  sponsored  by  INAFI  Philippines.  I  welcome  this  opportunity  to  share  with  you  the 
progress that we have achieved thus far in promoting microfinance in the banking sector. 
In  year  2000,  the  BSP  took  up  the  challenge  of  promoting  the  development  of  sustainable 
microfinance.  Since  then  we  have  focused  on  creating  an  enabling  regulatory  policy,  supporting 
training  and  capacity  building,  drumming  up  support  from  potential  practitioners,  and  strengthening 
working ties with other institutions for a broader microfinance network. 
Through these various initiatives, the banking sector has been able to directly contribute to the growth 
of sustainable and viable microfinance institutions. In our own little way, we have been able to make a 
positive transformational impact in the fight against poverty. 
Translated into numbers, the banking system has so far provided a total of P2.9 billion microfinance 
loans to 485,136 micro-borrowers as of end-May 2004. All in all, we have 2 microfinance-oriented thrift 
banks, 4 microfinance-oriented rural banks and 115 rural and cooperative rural banks with some level 
of microfinance operations that finance the credit requirements of the entrepreneurial poor (e-poor). 
We  anticipate  further  expansion  in  microfinance  activities  in  the  banking  sector  judging  by  the 
applications for microfinance-oriented banks that are currently in the pipeline, and by the number of 
banks that have expressed their intention to set up branches for their microfinance operations. 
Even as we strongly encourage the establishment of more microfinance-oriented banks, our focus is 
not  merely  confined  to  statistics.  We  also  aim  to  provide  the  appropriate  policy  and  regulatory 
environment  for  continued  viability  and  sustainability  of  microfinance  institutions.  Without  sound 
financial and credit policies, microfinance can never be an effective intervention for poverty alleviation. 
With this goal in mind, we are building up on our current initiatives to mainstream microfinance within 
the BSP and the banking community. 
BSP microfinance agenda 
Creating an enabling policy and regulatory environment 
High  on  the  list  of  BSP’s  agenda  on  microfinance  is  the  continuous  review  of  existing  policies  and 
regulatory  guidelines  to  make  them  even  more  attuned  to  the  growing  needs  of  the  microfinance 
sector. We believe that with a well-defined vision and strategy for microfinance, we can easily identify 
and fully address the capacity development needs of microfinance players. 
Initially,  we  have  defined  our  policy  agenda  which  is  to  encourage  the  establishment  of  new 
microfinance-oriented thrift and rural banks and the setting up of microfinance operations in existing 
banks.  Through  this  approach,  the  banking  system  can  more  effectively  reach  a  larger  number  of 
e-poor.  This  would  complement  other  microfinance  delivery  channels  like  credit  cooperatives  and 
NGOs that have their own strengths and weaknesses. 
Three important provisions in the General Banking Law (GBL) of 2000 formally authorized the BSP to 
fully  support  microfinance.  In  carrying  out  this  mandate,  we  have  drawn  up  a  set  of  banking 
regulations  that  take  into  consideration  the  peculiarities  of  microfinance  lending:  cash  flow-based, 
typically  unsecured  and short-term,  high  frequency collections,  and  often  featuring  group  guarantee 
and other non-traditional forms of security. 
Specifically, the BSP has issued the following circulars: 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
    Circular 272 (January 2001) implements the provisions of Sections 40, 43 and 44 of the GBL 
and sets out the regulatory guidelines for engaging in microfinance. 
Circular 273 prescribes additional requirements for licensing of microfinance-oriented banks. 
This  was  issued  primarily  to  encourage  banks  to  adhere  to  best  practices  and  high 
performance  standards.  Another  requirement  is  for  the  organizers  to  have  a  good  track 
record in microfinancing. As a minimum operational requirement, banks should have a loan 
tracking system in place that can adequately monitor and manage a microfinance portfolio. 
The  same  circular  also  provided  for  the  partial  lifting  of  the  moratorium  on  the  opening  of 
new thrift and rural banks and branches to allow the entry of microfinance-oriented banks. 
Circular  282  (April  2001)  specifies  the  guidelines  governing  the  rediscounting  facility  for 
microfinance loans of rural and cooperative banks. 
Circular 324, issued in 2002, expanded the coverage of the rediscounting facility to include 
thrift banks. In relation to this, we have provided rediscounting for 26,966 micro-borrowers 
amounting to P219.5 million, as of end-July 2004. 
 We  have  issued  several  other  regulations  to  provide  further  incentive  to  banks  to  engage  in 
microfinance in a sustainable and prudent manner. These are: 
• 
Circular 340, circular 365, and Circular 369 which further liberalized the rules and regulations 
for the establishment of bank branches provided these are microfinance-oriented. 
Circular 409 prescribes guidelines for the measurement of portfolio-at-risk and the respective 
provisioning requirements to ensure sound and prudential microfinance operations of banks. 
To  complement  these  regulatory  initiatives,  we  are  also  strengthening  our  ability  to  supervise  the 
activity  of  microfinance-oriented  banks.  We  are  currently  finalizing  revisions  to  the  BSP  manual  of 
examination  to  incorporate  microfinance  operations.  We  have  started  to  train  a  core  group  of  bank 
examiners knowledgeable in microfinance operations. 
We are also intensifying our efforts, in partnership with the national credit council, to set up a credible 
and comprehensive credit information bureau. We have just completed the first phase of the project 
which  we  highly  think  will  greatly  benefit  microfinance  practitioners,  in  terms  of  promoting  stronger 
credit discipline and reducing the risk of credit pollution. 
Enhancing training and capacity building 
Another priority area in the BSP microfinance agenda is our continuing training and capacity building 
program for bank examiners, officers and employees, as well as the microfinance practitioners, in the 
banking sector. This is being implemented through a series of trainings, workshops and study tours. 
For  the benefit  of  the  banking  sector,  the  BSP  has begun  incorporating  microfinance  into  the  basic 
rural and thrift banking courses .So far, these courses have already been offered to 1,500 participants. 
In  June  2004,  we  launched  a  series  of  seminars  designed  to  educate  banks  on  the  importance  of 
internal controls, performance standards and best practices for sound microfinance operations. 
To  further  augment  our  capacity  to  effectively  supervise  microfinance  activities  within  the  banking 
sector, we have created a top-level microfinance committee to oversee BSP’s microfinance initiatives. 
Likewise,  we  have  set  up  a  microfinance  unit  within  the  BSP  to  implement  and  coordinate  all 
microfinance  activities.  We  are  among  the  first  central  banks  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region  with  a 
permanent office dedicated to microfinance. 
Encouraging promotion and advocacy 
Our  ongoing  initiative  on  microfinance  is  also  focused  on  promotion  and  advocacy.  In  2003,  we 
launched  a  regional  advocacy  program  where  we  conducted  microfinance  seminars  in  strategic 
regions  in  the  country.  To  date,  we  have  been  successful  in  conducting  information  seminars  for  a 
total  of  1,350  participants  in  9  regions  across  the  country.  Our  advocacy  program  is  aimed  at 
encouraging  potential  practitioners  from  the  banking,  cooperative  and  NGO  sectors,  as  well  as 
establishing  links  with  corporations,  foundations  and  international  organizations  that  could  lend 
support to existing microfinance institutions (MFIs) by way of technical assistance and other capacity 
development needs. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
All  of  these  initiatives  underscore  BSP’s  strong  commitment  to  promote  the  development  of 
microfinance. 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  just  point  out  that  although  the  BSP’s  mandate  is  to  focus  on  the  banking  sector,  our 
involvement  in  microfinance  extends  beyond  the  banking  community.  We  are  also  interested  in 
working  with  other  microfinance  practitioners  and  organizations,  such  as  NGOs  and  credit 
cooperatives, so that together we can ensure the long-term viability and sustainability of microfinance. 
Possible areas for collaboration include the transformation of non-bank MFIs into banks, development 
of a uniform set of standards, and the promotion of best practices for sustainable operations within 
banks, NGOs and cooperatives. 
It is vital that we pool our resources if we are to achieve progress in this crusade against poverty. 
On that note, I would like to wish everyone a pleasant day and a meaningful discussion ahead. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
