Joseph Yam: Asian finance 
Speech  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  Swiss 
National  Bank  Event, 
for  Banking  and  Monetary  Studies,  Geneva, 
9 November 2004. 
International  Centre 
 Introduction 
I  am  delighted  to  have  been  invited  to  speak  here  at  the  International  Centre  for  Banking  and 
Monetary Studies in Geneva. I understand that you have in the past had many lectures from central 
bankers  from  Europe  and  the  United  States,  but  no  one  yet  from  Asia.  I  therefore  feel  particularly 
honoured  to  be  the  first  Asian  central  banker  to  speak  to  you.  This  is  timely,  since  banking  and 
monetary  developments  in  Asia  have  been  receiving  increasing  international  attention,  particularly 
after  the  Asian  financial  crisis  of  1997-98.  I  realise,  of  course,  that  monetary  union  in  Europe  must 
have been the monetary event of the past decade, in terms of occupying the time of academics and 
practitioners in the field, particularly in Europe. It has also had a large impact in the financial landscape 
of other economies, as I am sure the many members of the Swiss financial community that are here 
today would agree.  
But  with  the  successful  birth  of  the  euro,  I  hope  we  can  all  devote  a  little  more  time  to  Asia.  I  am 
confident that giving greater attention to Asia will turn out to be a most fruitful venture. Indeed, I would 
argue that such initiatives are now of strategic importance to the future of the global financial system. I 
very much hope that I can convince you today why this is so. As I shall demonstrate later, the financial 
significance of  Asia  is  indisputable.  Yet,  in  many parts of  Asia,  financial  intermediation, which  is  so 
important to  promoting economic growth and development, remains elementary. There is I think an 
urgent  need  for  Asia  to  harness  its  substantial  financial  resources  for  promoting  growth  and 
development  but  also  for  minimising  Asia’s  vulnerability  to  financial  instability.  With  financial 
globalisation, the ability of Asia to get this right has significant implications for global finance. I also 
hope that I can, at the same time, raise your interest in some of the specific monetary and financial 
issues  that  we  are  tackling,  in  the  region  as  a  whole  and  in  individual  economies,  with  a  special 
emphasis on China, including Hong Kong, where I come from.  
Asian finance 
Let me begin with a description of Asian finance, as I see it. There are six characteristics I would like 
to draw your attention to. The first is the financial significance of Asia. As I mentioned earlier, this is 
phenomenal.  It  is  easy  to  appreciate  this  by  pointing  to  some  impressive  numbers,  such  as  those 
relating to the amount of foreign reserves held by Asian economies and the amount of portfolio and 
foreign  direct  investments  going  into,  or  coming  out  of,  Asia.  Indeed,  there  are  seven  economies 
holding foreign reserves in excess of US$100 billion and all seven of them are in Asia1. Together they 
hold a total of over US$2 trillion of foreign reserves, which have doubled over the short period of only 
three  years.  The  sheer  size  of  these  foreign  reserves  and  the  business  opportunities  they  make 
available have  greatly  enhanced  the  level  of  sophistication  in  their  management.  Increasingly,  such 
management  is  making  use  of  advanced  financial  instruments  and  expert  services  offered  by 
international investment banks, and is much more alert to shifts in short-term trends in currencies as 
well as in interest rates.  
Private-sector savings in Asia are also very substantial, given the high savings rate, which is generally 
in double digits and, for some, as high as 30% to 40%. Although the management of private sector 
savings  in  Asia  is  generally  a  lot  less  sophisticated  by  comparison,  it  is  being  increasingly 
institutionalised,  along  with  the  introduction  of  provident  funds,  and  is  managed  by  professionals, 
becoming increasingly active in the international markets. Over half of the new issues of US Treasury 
securities  are  now  taken  up  by  Asian  economies.  And  Asia  is  now  a  large  net  exporter  of  portfolio 
                                                      
1   June 2004 figures. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
capital. For nine emerging Asian economies (excluding Japan), the amount was a net US$225 billion 
in 2003.  
The second  characteristic  of  Asian  finance  is,  by  contrast,  the  lack of sophistication  in  domestic 
financial  intermediation.  The  effective  channelling  of  savings  into  investments  is  crucial  for  the 
promotion  of  economic  growth  and  development.  This  is  something  that  developed  markets  with 
advanced  financial  systems  take  for  granted.  Yet,  in  a  significant  part  of  Asia,  notwithstanding  its 
financial clout, a significant part of domestic savings is still put under mattresses. A convenient and 
effective  channel  that  could  be  used  to  absorb  these  savings,  in  a  manner  that  commands  the 
confidence  of  those  who  save,  does  not  exist.  Where  some  form  of  financial  system  exists  for 
facilitating the important process of financial intermediation, it is usually a system that suffers from a 
preponderance of banks. This lack of diversity in the financial intermediation channels is widespread in 
Asia; and frustratingly so, particularly for those with responsibility for promoting such diversification, for 
the sake of efficiency as well as financial stability. The market capitalisation and turnover of domestic 
debt and equities, in absolute terms as well as relative to GDP, is generally low when compared with 
corresponding  numbers  in  the  developed  markets.  This  is  so  even  in  Hong  Kong,  the  pre-eminent 
international financial centre in the region. The domestic debt market there, in terms of the amount of 
debt outstanding in the domestic currency, is only about 45% of GDP, although this is partly the result 
of a long history of fiscal discipline.  
The emerging markets of Asia are aware of the important need for financial system development. This 
brings  me  to  the  third  characteristic,  which  concerns  the  development  strategies  being  adopted. 
Although these vary between different economies, having regard to the domestic circumstances, one 
underlying strategy common to all is financial openness. Financial systems are opened up, for the 
participation of domestic and foreign financial intermediaries, with a view to obtaining efficiency gains 
through  greater  competition  and  importing  financial  expertise.  This  has  generally  been  a  success, 
although  specific  problems  have  been  encountered.  A  feature  of  these  problems  has  been  that,  at 
times, the profit motive and the enthusiasm of financial intermediaries, not necessarily just the foreign 
ones, might prevail to such an extent as to undermine the public interest of ensuring effective financial 
intermediation.  The  problems  might  also  have  been  the  result  of  ineffective  regulation  of  financial 
markets and supervision of financial intermediaries, and inadequate regard to the basic purpose of the 
financial  system.  One  example,  and  it  is  only  appropriate  that  I  should  use  an  example  from  Hong 
Kong,  is  the  closure  of  the  Hong  Kong  stock  market  in  1987.  This  was  done  in  the  interest  of  the 
financial intermediaries who were about to be hit badly by the world-wide crash that occurred overnight 
because they had taken large and concentrated positions in stock futures. The closure of a secondary 
market,  which  provides  the  liquidity  for  attracting  primary  market  activity  that  channels  additional 
savings  into  investments,  was  blatantly  wrong  and  seriously  damaged  the  credibility  of  the  stock 
market  as  a channel  for  financial  intermediation.  The  damage was  temporary,  as  it  turned  out,  and 
confidence  was  eventually  re-established,  but  not  without  much  soul-searching  and  many  market 
reform measures.  
Such problems notwithstanding, it is clear that emerging markets in Asia are enthusiastic in embracing 
financial openness. To be sure, such willingness has not been entirely voluntary. Neither has the pace 
with which openness is being pursued. For relatively small domestic markets, there is understandably 
a lack of attraction for the large and sophisticated international financial intermediaries. And so there 
may  be  special  privileges  or  incentives  offered,  at  the  risk  of  creating  structural  distortions  in  the 
financial system, as enticement for the esteemed presence of the household names of international 
finance.  More  important,  individual  jurisdictions  have  been,  whether  of  their  own  free  will  or  under 
pressure, pursuing financial openness, not just in respect of the financial system, but also in respect of 
the international mobility of capital. This they do so, in some cases, perhaps prematurely, by reference 
to their ability to manage the associated risks to monetary and financial stability on a continuous basis, 
in  keeping  with  the  demands  arising  from  the  changing  scene,  and  changing  risks,  of  international 
finance. As a result, the path towards financial openness has not been a smooth one, and diversions, 
although  of  a  defensive nature,  have  been  rather  frequent  lately.  This  is an  aspect  to  which  I  shall 
return later.  
Let  me  turn  first  to  how  financial  openness  has  been  manifested  in  the  dynamics  of  financial 
intermediation in Asia: this is the fourth characteristic of Asian finance that I wish to talk about. High 
public-sector  and  private-sector  savings,  less  developed  financial  systems  and  financial  openness 
have affected financial intermediation in two ways. First is a relative shift of dependence on foreign 
savings,  as  against  domestic  savings,  as  a  source  of  funding  domestic  (fixed  and  portfolio) 
investments. Second is reduced availability of such funding, as evidenced by Asia being a net exporter 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
of  capital.  To  be  sure,  there  has  correspondingly  been  more  efficient  allocation  and  use  of  scarce 
funding on a global basis, made possible by the freer mobility of capital and the freer convertibility of 
currencies. But there has also been a change in the dynamics of financial intermediation in Asia, in 
that there is a process of recycling of Asian funds through the developed markets back into Asia that 
has become quite significant. And not only is it significant, it is also quite potent and demanding.  
Whether  we  like  it  or  not,  the  behaviour  of  foreign  savings  in  the  hands  of  foreign  financial 
intermediaries is quite different from that of domestic savings. To start with, they are more volatile than 
domestic savings and more sensitive to shifts in market sentiment and in macro-economic policies, to 
a degree that has proven, in the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98, to be brutally destabilising. Given 
also the existence of some forbearance, in terms of, for example, the disclosure of activities and the 
maintenance of concentrated positions, in the interest of sustaining the presence of foreign financial 
intermediaries  and  foreign  savings,  there  is  a  much  greater  likelihood  of  market  overshooting.  This 
may  at  times  be  so  serious  as  to  lead  to  general  panic,  as  herd  instinct,  following  the  sometimes 
deliberately  transparent  actions  of  the  renowned  market  leaders,  takes  hold.  This  then  results  in 
problems of systemic dimensions, threatening financial meltdown and serious disruptions to financial 
intermediation and economic activities. Furthermore, the revolution in information technology, working 
through  financial  innovation,  has  greatly  increased  the  potency  of  international  capital,  particularly 
portfolio capital. There is no doubt that the dynamics of international finance have become much more 
demanding  than  before,  for  an  emerging  market  in  Asia,  and  elsewhere,  that  embraces  financial 
openness.  This  is  so  in  respect  of  all  areas  of  macro-economic  policies,  including  exchange  rates, 
which  I  shall  also  address  later,  and  all  aspects  of  financial  market  structure.  Domestic 
macro-economic problems, considered to be benign one day, all of a sudden can become malignant 
the next, triggered possibly by some strange events, and then sharp, destabilising reversals of capital 
flow ensue.  
The  new  dynamics,  of  course,  present  difficult  challenges  for  the  maintenance  of  monetary  and 
financial stability, and this is the fifth characteristic of Asian finance worthy of note. The dilemma 
between financial openness and the maintenance of monetary and financial stability is a real one, and 
a  harsh  one  under  globalisation,  particularly  for  those  who  are  less  well  endowed.  Here  I  am 
specifically  referring  to  those  with  financial  markets  that  are  small  relative  to  the  amount  of 
international portfolio capital that can be mobilised by foreign investors, and those acting for them, but 
big  enough 
imposed  on 
macro-economic policies of emerging markets may de facto be more stringent than those imposed on 
developed  markets.  Indeed,  what  is  acknowledged  by  many  as  an  unsustainable,  large  current 
account deficit has been sustained in the United States for some time now, no doubt for a lot longer 
than if one of equivalent size relative to GDP were run by an emerging market.  
To be sure, there is consensus on the need for greater macro-economic discipline, robust institutions 
and market structures, as a defence against monetary and financial instability. There has been much 
progress, for example, on improving corporate governance, and I do not wish to belittle the serious 
efforts  made  at  this  important  micro  level,  through  the  promotion,  and  the  interaction,  of  individual, 
regulatory  and  market  disciplines.  There  is  also  much  greater  discipline  in  pursuing  prudent 
macro-economic policies, to the extent of attracting criticisms of excessive conservatism, particularly in 
respect of the running of substantial current account surpluses and the accumulation of large foreign 
reserves.  I  am  sure  these  independent  efforts  of  individual  jurisdictions,  reflecting  their  different 
pre-occupations, arising from different domestic circumstances, will, in the fullness of time, ease their 
tasks in the maintenance of monetary and financial stability. But the questions that should be asked 
are whether they are sufficient; and if not, what is. These are issues that have been occupying our 
minds post-Asian financial crisis, for I certainly do not wish, in the case of Hong Kong, to mobilise once 
again, in whatever other form or guise, in the type of high-profile intervention in the stock market we 
organised in 1998. But there is, as yet, no regional consensus on the need for a long-term solution 
and what it might possibly be.  
Meanwhile, it is a fact that there has recently been a discreet drift, or at least temporary diversions, in 
the  smaller  emerging  markets  of  Asia  away  from  financial  openness.  They  seem  to  have  become 
more  ready  than  before  to  regulate  the  outflow  and  inflow  of  funds,  through  a  variety  of  formal  or 
informal  measures.  The  measures  fall  into  two  categories  and  are  applied,  where  considered 
appropriate, selectively, targeting a specific group of market participants, for example non-residents, or 
activities  of  a  specific  purpose,  such  as  those  considered  speculative.  The  first  of  these  limits  the 
convertibility of the domestic currency, in either direction, and the second limits the ability of banks to 
expand their assets or liabilities denominated in the domestic currency. So far these have proven to be 
for  profit.  Arguably,  the  market  discipline 
their  appetite 
to  whet 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
helpful in maintaining monetary and financial stability after the crisis of 1997-98, and, most important, 
have  not  undermined  the  flow  of  foreign  direct  investments.  Perhaps  this  will  become  the  new 
paradigm approach to monetary and financial stability in Asia, but elsewhere I have chosen to call this 
a “band aid” approach. Coming from Hong Kong, the freest economy in the world, where by law we 
are  not  allowed  to  impose  any  foreign  exchange  control  policies  and  our  currency  must  be  freely 
convertible,  I  am  reluctant  to  accept  ad  hoc  limitations  to  financial  openness.  But  I  can  quite 
understand  the  plight  of  other  emerging  markets  in  Asia.  When  the  undesirable  elements  of 
international finance assume a predatory character and look us fiercely in the eye there is simply a 
need  for  self-defence,  and  temporary  or  discreet  changes  in  the  rules  of  the  game  are  at  times 
effective.  
Let me turn to the sixth characteristic of Asian finance that I wish to draw your attention to, and this 
concerns  exchange  rate  policy.  You  are,  no  doubt,  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  exchange  rates  of 
currencies  in  Asia  have  become  more  flexible,  as  an  outcome  of  the  financial  crisis  of  1997-98. 
Whether or not this is a desirable outcome remains to be seen, although my view probably represents 
the  exception  rather  than  the  mainstream  opinion.  I  say  this  not  for  the  purpose  of  justifying  the 
maintenance  of  a  fixed  exchange  rate  for  the  Hong  Kong  dollar.  I  shouldn’t  have  to.  The  fixed 
exchange rate has served Hong Kong very well and, with currency board arrangements and a very 
flexible  economy,  I  do  not  see  any  insurmountable  difficulty  in  sustaining  it.  And  I  recognise  the 
theoretical attraction of having an additional degree of freedom in economic adjustment. In practice, 
however,  there  must  be  doubt  about  whether,  in  view  of  the  possibility  of  severe  exchange  rate 
volatility and overshooting, this is a luxury that all economies can afford. There is also the question of 
whether the relationship between the current account balance and the exchange rate is always the 
same  across  different  economies  so  that  exchange  rate  adjustments  are  a  panacea  for  correcting 
external imbalances. Regrettably these questions are simply not asked, or, if asked, they are drowned 
by  political  noises  that  appear  to  be  made  on  the  basis  of  narrow,  political  concern  over  bilateral, 
rather than multilateral, trade imbalances.  
In any case, flexible exchange rates for many currencies in Asia does not necessarily mean exchange 
rates  determined  freely  by  the  market,  as  proponents  would  have  it.  As  it  turns  out,  more  flexible 
exchange  rates  in  Asia  have  meant  exchange  rates  being  determined  in  a  flexible  manner  by  the 
authorities, through intervention, controls and restrictions, at levels that are considered in their best 
interests. And their best interests, whatever they are, seem for the time being to be manifested in the 
substantial accumulation of foreign reserves. Perhaps reserve accumulation is the objective. And I can 
understand  why,  if  this  is  the  case.  The  comfort  of  substantial  ammunition  for  coping  with  the 
recurrence of financial turmoil has become essential for emerging markets in Asia. But exchange rate 
and  other  supporting  policies  that  promote  the  accumulation  of  foreign  reserves,  intentional  or 
otherwise, are questionable in terms of their sustainability, just as we all question the sustainability of 
the  current  global  imbalance,  or  rather,  the  sustainability  of  the  US  external  imbalance.  They  are, 
arguably, the two sides of the same problem.  
From whichever side you are looking at it, a problem that is considered unsustainable will, of course, 
be corrected, sooner or later, and the questions we all would like to have answers to are how, and how 
violent or benign the inevitable market adjustment might be. I am afraid I do not have answers to these 
questions. But I just would like to point out, in this connection, that the style of management of foreign 
reserves, when the exchange rate of the domestic currency is flexible, is likely to be more proactive 
than is otherwise the case, in terms of for example currency allocation. Managers of foreign reserves 
are  ultimately  held  accountable  to  the  people  they  serve,  and  the  amounts,  as  I  pointed  out  at  the 
beginning  of  this  survey  on  Asian  finance,  are  getting  to  be  very  large  indeed.  They  are,  possibly, 
large enough to make a difference to the dynamics of the global markets for foreign exchange and for 
major  classes  of  financial  instruments,  and  enough  to  make  a  lot  of  people  with  the  relevant 
responsibilities feel uneasy.  
Asian monetary co-operation 
Indeed,  this  survey,  focusing  on  six  characteristics  of  Asian  finance,  represents,  to  me  at  least,  a 
rather unhappy state of affairs. Asian finance is in a fragmented state, understandably though, given 
the  many  currency  jurisdictions  present,  each  adhering  to  the  Asian  tradition  of  minding  one’s  own 
business. To be sure, the desire to pursue and maintain financial openness, in view of the potential 
and demonstrated benefits to growth and development, is still strong. But many have become weary, 
worried, cautious or shocked to varying degrees by the experience of financial globalisation that came 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2004
with financial openness and intensified by the revolution in information technology. From a regional 
perspective, it does seem that Asian finance is organised in such a way that, instead of harnessing its 
financial strength to its advantage, it finds itself in a position of vulnerability to financial instability. It is 
with this sentiment that I turn now to the subject of Asian monetary co-operation.  
Some  would  argue  that  the  fragmented  state  of  Asian  finance,  to  the  extent  that  it  is  an  issue,  is 
merely a reflection of the diversity of Asia, in terms of history, geography, culture, stages of economic 
development,  size  distribution,  political  structure,  degree  of  economic  and  financial  openness,  etc. 
Indeed, Asia is a very heterogeneous group of economies. In the richest economy, per capita GDP, if 
this is an appropriate measure of richness, is about 180 times that of the poorest. By contrast, in the 
euro area it is only about four times. And if one assesses the emerging markets of Asia against the 
Maastricht criteria, one can conclude rather conveniently that Asian monetary co-operation, implying 
Asian Monetary union, is a non-starter. This is even more so considering the virtual absence of labour 
mobility and the existence of large patches of different degrees of restrictions in capital mobility.  
But the important thing to realise is that the degree of trade integration, and therefore the degree of 
interdependence  among  Asian  economies,  is  very  high.  About  half  of  total  trade  in  Asia  is 
intra-regional. This is more or less the same as the proportion of Europe’s intra-regional trade to total 
trade when  the  Treaty  of  Rome was  signed.  And  intra-regional  trade  within  Asia  has  been  growing 
rapidly  -  a  trend  that  is  likely  to  continue  in  the  foreseeable  future.  There  is  considerable  vertical 
integration of the production process in Asia, driven by foreign direct investment flows within Asia and 
outsourcing of the process to the area possessing the comparative advantage. China is increasingly 
serving as the manufacturing powerhouse of Asian exports, while other Asian economies supply the 
raw materials, semi-manufactured goods and machinery. Admittedly, the larger part of intra-regional 
trade in Asia, 56% according to our internal estimates2, is related to processing trade, some of which 
is to meet demand from the developed economies in North America and Europe. But this reliance on 
the  demand  from  the  developed  markets  is  likely  to  decrease over  time,  as rapid  economic  growth 
within  the  region  promises  to  provide  a  sustainable  impetus,  helped  by  the  dismantling  of  trade 
barriers and the establishment of free trade agreements within the region.  
This  high  and  increasing  degree  of  trade  integration  and  regional  interdependence  has  clearly  not 
been  matched  by  a  corresponding  degree  of  financial  and  monetary  integration.  It  is,  of  course, 
arguable whether there is a need for such correlation or causal relationship, and if so, whether the 
market can be relied upon to produce the optimum arrangements in due course without official sector 
involvement. My view is that monetary integration is desirable and, given the role of the state in the 
monetary  system,  cannot  be  achieved  by  market  forces.  I  hope  that,  looking  at  the  matter  from  a 
European  perspective,  you  agree  with  me.  The  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  diversity  or  fragmentation 
leads  to  individual  vulnerability,  and  interdependence  is  synonymous  with  contagion,  particularly 
financial contagion. This is notwithstanding the low degree of financial integration and varying degrees 
of  financial  openness.  The  ingenuity  of  the  financial  community  can  be  relied  upon  to  establish 
financial  linkages,  where  there  is  none  officially  allowed,  through  which  what  appears  to  be 
unmanageable financial risks can be managed and, consequently, financial contagion can be readily 
transmitted. The emerging markets of Asia provide fertile ground for financial innovation. For example, 
we  hear  often  that  the  Hong  Kong  financial  markets  provide  a  perfect  hedge,  or  more  modestly,  a 
proxy hedge, for risks in the Mainland of China or the region. There is an element of truth in this. After 
all,  this  is  one  of  the  roles  of  an  international  financial  centre.  But  it  does  mean  that,  in  Asia,  the 
dynamics of financial contagion can be quite complex. For example, financial crises do not necessarily 
erupt and manifest themselves at source - somebody sneezes and others get pneumonia.  
So, it is only prudent that Asian monetary co-operation should be on the agenda of discussions on 
Asian finance, and I have been urging for greater co-operation for some time. I am therefore glad that 
there  has  been  increasing  attention  given  to  the  subject  in  recent  years.  But,  in  terms  of  actual 
co-operative  initiatives,  progress  has  been  slow  and  the  scope  rather  narrow.  To  be  fair,  there  is 
consensus on the need for diversification of financial intermediation channels, for enhancing efficiency 
and financial stability, and this consensus has been manifested in co-operative efforts to develop the 
bond markets in Asia. There are three clusters of initiatives:  
                                                      
2  
"What is driving Asian exports?", HKMA, August 2003. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 5
  The first is the APEC Initiative on the Development of Securitisation and Credit Guarantee 
Markets,  which  is  spearheaded  by  three  APEC  member  economies,  namely,  Hong  Kong, 
Thailand and Korea, and sponsored by the World Bank;  
The second is the Asian Bond Market Initiative (ABMI) of the ASEAN+3 forum; and  
The third is the Asian Bond Fund initiative of EMEAP, comprising eleven central banks in the 
region,  which  has  successfully  launched  ABF1,  denominated  in  US  dollars  and  has  been 
working hard on ABF2 to be denominated in domestic currencies.  
There is inevitably competition among these forums, some overlap on the issues being addressed and 
use of different strategies. In Asia there is no political or institutional framework comparable to the one 
in Europe for taking a more focussed approach and for co-ordinating efforts. But all the initiatives have 
the  common  aim  of  addressing  the  structural  impediments  to  the  development  of  bond  markets, 
including  for  example  harmonising  standards  and  practices,  and  creating  the  necessary  regional 
financial infrastructure to facilitate this much needed development. There is momentum built up and I 
am hopeful that we should see significant progress made in the years to come.  
But I think the long-term solution to the problems of Asian finance lies in co-operation in respect of 
currency  arrangements.  If,  as  I  argued,  financial  market  fragmentation  in  Asia  leads  to  individual 
vulnerability  to  financial  instability,  and  through  contagion  regional  vulnerability,  then  one  intuitive 
solution is to integrate the fragmented markets through some form of monetary union. Admittedly, a 
monetary  union  does  not  remove  all  sources  of  financial  instability  in  the  region,  which  could  arise 
from  volatile  business  cycles,  for  example,  boom  and  bust  induced  by  inappropriate  policies,  and 
moral hazard induced, for example, by implicit government-guarantee of bad credit. But it does take 
care of financial instability associated with volatile capital flows and the associated large swings in real 
exchange rates. But, as of now, this is still not an item on the agenda of Asian monetary co-operation, 
at least in any official forum that I am aware of. As far as I can recall, there have only been some 
limited efforts of mutual assistance:  
• 
The first is the collection of EMEAP bilateral swap facilities that provide US dollar liquidity 
secured  against  US  Treasury  securities  that  were  put  together  in  November  1995,  which 
have not been used;  
The second is the idea originating from Japan in 1997 for an Asian Monetary Fund, which 
did not go beyond being an idea; and  
The third is the collection of ASEAN+3 bilateral swap arrangements (between the US dollar 
and domestic currencies) under the Chiang Mai Initiative, which involve the assumption of 
credit risks.  
  There is, in fact, continued scepticism towards any form of monetary union in Asia. Perhaps this is 
because the structure of the European model - the only successful example - requires convergence as 
a  pre-requisite.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  many  respects,  Asia  is  much  more  heterogeneous  than 
Europe, so that convergence realistically will take time, even if there is agreement to converge. But my 
view  is  that  since  it  takes  so  long  -  50  years  in  the  case  of  Europe  -  we’d  better  start  at  least  the 
thinking process early, hadn’t we? And we can also afford to be imaginative if it is something that aged 
people like us won’t see in our lifetime. The flexibility of Asia is well recognised. We only have to look 
at how individual economies bounced back after the Asian financial crisis. Perhaps they are flexible 
enough for convergence to be forced onto them by just plunging in. And to ease the way, how about 
an  interim  arrangement  that  provides  intra-regional  exchange  rate  stability  through  hard  pegs  to  a 
synthetic,  floating  Asian  currency  unit?  Perhaps  the  International  Centre  for  Banking  and  Monetary 
Studies  has  wise  observations  to  offer.  I  myself  have  found  it  difficult  and  a  little  frustrating  to  go 
beyond articulating the problems and the unsustainable nature of Asian finance, raising interests and 
asking questions.  
China 
Let  me  now  turn  to  China.  I  notice  that  there  is  considerable  interest  in  the  international  financial 
community in the banking and monetary developments there. This is understandable, given the sheer 
size  of  China  and,  particularly  for  Asia,  where  China  is  now  a  most  important  component  of  an 
economically  integrated  region.  As  I  argued  earlier,  interdependence  is  synonymous  with  the 
transmission of financial shocks, particularly financial contagion. It is therefore in the interests of others 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2004
in  Asia  to  understand  China,  where  the  dilemma  between  pursuing  financial  openness  and  the 
maintenance of financial stability is a most difficult one to resolve. The ability of China to get it right in 
meeting the many challenges of this task has serious implications for all. And, as I also argued earlier, 
the  dynamics  of  Asian  finance  are  such  that  financial  crises  do  not  necessarily  occur  or  be  most 
serious at source. The task confronting China is, arguably, a task for others in Asia as well. Whether 
one adopts the inward-looking attitude of trying to limit possible contagion to the domestic market, or 
becomes  more  proactive  in  contributing,  through  appropriate  assistance  and  co-operation,  to  the 
effective performance of that task in China, or both, is a matter of choice for individual jurisdictions. For 
Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, which is part of China but operates different banking and 
monetary systems under the arrangement of “One Country, Two Systems”, we are too close to the 
Mainland  to  afford  to  be  inward  looking.  Indeed,  from  the  business  perspective  and  being  the 
international financial centre of China, we must position ourselves for and try and make the best of the 
opportunities that come with the inevitable process of financial liberalisation of the Mainland. So we 
spend much of our time and attention on monetary and financial issues on the Mainland. But I must 
still confess an occasional inability to understand exactly what goes on there.  
With  a  high  savings  rate,  rapid  economic  growth,  and  the  attraction  of  an  emerging  market  of 
mammoth dimensions and ample opportunities, the Mainland of China can afford to adopt a cautious 
approach  to  financial  liberalisation.  Even  with  continuing,  tight  capital  controls,  there  is  no  lack  of 
foreign direct investments. The size and strength of the economic magnet of Mainland China are such 
that it has become, for a number of economies in the region, one of the largest trading partner and 
destination for outward direct investment. Foreign portfolio investments into the Mainland of China, to 
the extent that these opportunities are available, for example, in the stock market of Hong Kong, are 
also  in  great  demand.  With  an  abundance  of  domestic  savings  (the  savings  rate  is  around  30%  to 
40%),  the  emphasis  is  on  financial  sector  reform,  to  enhance  the  efficiency  of  domestic  financial 
intermediation, in order to sustain growth and development, rather than to attract an inflow of foreign 
savings.  And  the  domestic  financial  markets  in  the  Mainland  are  big  enough  to  attract  many  of  the 
leading  names  in  finance  to  establish  a  presence,  without  having  to  resort  to  offering  business 
opportunities in international financial intermediation through premature capital account liberalisation.  
The strategy of financial sector development, as in the case of the overall development strategy of the 
Mainland of China, is, to the extent that I can observe, one characterised by gradualism, as against 
“big  bang”.  There  is  strong  emphasis  on  achieving  a  balance  among  reform,  development  and 
stability, which also encompasses the theory of path dependency propounded by Douglas North, the 
Nobel  Laureate  in  1993.  This  was  more  vividly  articulated  by  the  late  Deng  Xiaoping,  I  am  sure 
independently  without  consulting Douglas  North,  as “crossing  the  river  by  feeling  the  stones”.  More 
recently, Governor Zhou of the People’s Bank of China has encapsulated these theories - gradualism 
and path dependency - in an interesting, academic exposition, in one of our HKMA lectures in Hong 
Kong, as the concept of ensuring “Pareto Improvement” in achieving “Pareto Optimality”. This concept 
is best described through an analogy of a hiker choosing a path (involving Pareto Improvement) to the 
top of the mountain (the point of Pareto Optimality). The shortest way is of course to go in a straight 
line. But in a three dimensional world this assumes that one can fly, if the slope of the mountain is 
concave, or move through earth, if the slope of the mountain is convex. The practical way is to ensure 
that  you  are  moving  up  each  step  you  take,  in  other  words  making  improvements,  regardless  of 
whether you are following a spiral or a zigzag path, or whether you can see the top, or the point where 
allocation of resources is optimal.  
Appreciation  of  this  concept  is  essential  in  understanding  developments  in  the  Mainland  of  China, 
including those on the financial front. The preponderance of the banking sector in domestic financial 
intermediation  calls  for  great  care  in  the  reform  of  the  banking  system,  in  a  manner  that  does  not 
undermine public confidence in the banking system. This means the continuation of state ownership 
and  financial  support,  and,  for  the  time  being,  de  facto  limited  competition  from  foreign  banks, 
notwithstanding  WTO  commitments.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  a  strong  desire  to  modernise 
management  and  move  towards  the  observation of  international  standards,  to  facilitate  the  ongoing 
commercialisation and the eventual privatisation of the banks. This is a delicate process, particularly 
when, in terms of the prudential numbers, the banking system is clearly weak and, with the greater 
freedom  of  information  that  comes  with  modern  information  technology,  depositors’  faith  will  not 
remain  unwavering  forever.  The  drive  for  diversification  in  financial  intermediation,  evidenced  in 
genuine efforts to develop the debt and equity markets, will further divert funds away from the banking 
system.  
BIS Review 66/2004 
 7
to  effect 
Meanwhile, even with a clear intention to do so, the practice of lending, and the pricing of lending, in 
accordance  with  state  policy  and  not  the  credit  worthiness  of  the  borrower  takes  time  to  get  rid  of. 
Although it does not take long for the credit officer to learn to look at the balance sheet and the profit 
and  loss  account  of  the  borrower,  the  security  of  the  job  requires  an  unspoken  recognition  of  the 
authority of those in a position of power in the government bureaucracy. A further complication is the 
fact that commercial bankers are part of the government bureaucracy. In such a system, it is difficult 
for the bureaucratic position of the individual to be aligned with the commercial interest of the bank, 
which is to make profit. There is an interesting description of the stance of such an individual: where 
you  stand  (on  an  issue)  depends  on  where  you  sit  (in  the  bureaucracy).  Consequently,  it  will  take 
some  time  before  the  process  of  credit  allocation  becomes  entirely  market-based  and  the  banks 
subject to the market disciplines that we are familiar with. One implication of this is that the high NPL 
and low capital adequacy ratios will continue to be a feature, with ebbs and flows, as capital injections 
get  rid  of  the  stock  of  NPL  while  the  flow  of  NPL  continues,  but  hopefully  at  a  reduced  pace  as 
corporate governance improves. Professionalism cannot be acquired overnight. There is also the need 
of  a  proper,  market  based  incentive  system,  in  terms  of  both  monetary  and  career  rewards,  for 
promoting professionalism. This applies not only to employment in the banks, or just in the financial 
system. It is a fundamental issue concerning the labour market as a whole, which is still characterised 
by wage levels still being predominantly centrally determined, but labour market reform is obviously 
out of the scope of this speech. I just want to say that, as in market reform generally, labour market 
reform takes time and that in the interest of social stability, gradualism is once again the key.  
Indeed, in the long march towards a market economy, there will be conflicts or anomalies that require 
pragmatism  in  resolving  and  doing  things  by  trial  and  error.  One  feature  in  this  process  is  the 
continuing  use  of  executive  authority  or  administrative  measures 
the  necessary 
macro-economic adjustments rather than the use of financial market instruments. This is unavoidable 
before the markets have developed to a stage in which they can be relied upon to produce the desired 
results. The transmission mechanism working through inefficient financial markets must be of doubtful 
effectiveness. By contrast, although administrative measures are clumsy and authoritarian, they are 
quick  in  producing  results.  The  administrative  measures  introduced  in  late  April  of  slowing  project 
approvals, reducing land supply, centralising lending authorities and reducing bank credit to specific 
activities have worked reasonably well. The growth of fixed asset investment, broad money and bank 
credit  slowed  down  quickly  in  the  second  quarter  of  the  year,  although  not  without  causing  serious 
concern about the possibility of a hard landing. To be sure, the bluntness of administrative measures 
did lead to inconveniences and perhaps casualties among innocent parties, as cash flow, for a time, 
dried up for almost everybody rather than the targeted activities. But by and large the measures are 
working. And about two weeks ago these were interestingly buttressed by increasing interest rates and 
further liberalisation in the determination of deposits and lending rates. This is another encouraging 
development in market reform.  
Let me, lastly, say a few words about the RMB exchange rate. I do not have the privilege of inside 
knowledge on the subject. The fact of the matter is that there is only a small current account surplus. It 
is  true  that  there has  been  large  capital  inflow  lately,  as  manifested  in  the rapid  build-up  of  foreign 
reserves.  This  was  predominantly  the  result  of  international  political  pressures  for  a  more  flexible 
exchange rate. As such it would be a temporary phenomenon, although, with interest rates of the RMB 
higher than those of the US dollar, there is a significant cost incurred in sterilisation. In so far as the 
maintenance of a fixed exchange rate is concerned, this is currently not a problem, particularly with 
capital  controls.  But  there  is  scope  and  attraction  for  experimenting  with  greater  flexibility  in  the 
fullness of time and that is indeed the declared intention of the Mainland authorities. However, with 
ongoing macro-economic adjustment, I doubt if this is the right time for experimenting.  
Conclusion 
In this speech I have surveyed the characteristics of Asian finance and concluded that it is, at least to 
me,  in  a  rather  unhappy,  and  possibly  unsustainable,  state.  We  have  to  seek  a  long-term  solution 
through Asian monetary co-operation, or continue to be vulnerable to financial instability and defend 
ourselves through ad hoc retreats from financial openness. The Mainland of China, itself facing a most 
difficult task of financial reform, is an increasingly important factor in all this, as trade and economic 
integration of the region continues apace. Thank you.  
8 
 BIS Review 66/2004
