Paul Jenkins: Communication - a vital tool in the implementation of monetary 
policy 
Speech by Mr Paul Jenkins, Senior Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the FMAC/FMA-USA 
Joint Conference 2004, Toronto, Ontario, 30 September 2004. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  address  this  joint  conference  of  financial  market 
professionals from Canada and the United States. At the outset, I want to thank the Financial Markets 
Association of Canada and the Financial Markets Association of the United States for inviting me to be 
your conference keynote speaker.  
The members of these two organizations play an instrumental role in ensuring the efficient functioning 
of North America’s financial markets and, from a central bank perspective, the efficient transmission of 
monetary policy. You are, therefore, among the Bank of Canada’s key target audiences. We rely on 
the effective two-way flow of information between the Bank and financial markets in order to fulfill our 
mandate efficiently and serve the public interest responsibly. In aiming to do so, our overriding priority 
is  to  provide markets with  the confidence  that  the  value  of  money  will  be  preserved  through  sound 
monetary  policy.  Put  differently,  financial  markets  embody  the  views  of  savers,  investors,  and 
borrowers,  and  the  most  basic  consideration  in  the  formulation  of  such  views  is  confidence  in  the 
future value of money.  
Many  of  you,  who  have  worked  in  financial  markets  for  some  years,  may  well  take  for  granted  the 
evolution in the way monetary policy is conducted. But if Rip Van Winkle had been a monetary policy 
“wonk”  and  had  awakened  from  his  20-year  sleep  today,  he  would  surely  be  bewildered  by  the 
extraordinary  changes  that  have  occurred  in  central  banking,  especially  in  the  way  central  banks 
communicate.  
The fact is, few aspects of the conduct of monetary policy have changed quite so dramatically as the 
role of public communications. We have gone from a communication approach that not so long ago 
had central banks doing little to let people know what they were up to and why, to one that is now 
progressively transparent and deliberately forthcoming. Indeed, while central banks used to say little 
and let actions speak for themselves, today it would be accurate to say that words can, and often do, 
speak louder than actions. 
Central bank practitioners of monetary policy have become far more preoccupied with communication 
because communication is so tightly bound to achieving good economic outcomes. As financial market 
players, you are one of the publics that are most sensitive to this new reality. 
Bearing  all  this  in  mind,  I  want  to  focus  my  remarks  today  on  communication  and monetary  policy. 
I will structure my remarks to address three key issues:  
• 
• 
• 
first, why communication has become so important in conducting monetary policy; 
second, the need for central banks to be strategic in their communication approach;  
and  third,  some  practical  challenges  central  banks  must  manage  in  implementing  their 
communication strategies. 
Importance of communication in conducting monetary policy 
1.  
Let me begin, then, with the importance of communication. For the Bank of Canada, communication is 
a strategic priority in supporting our goal of preserving low, stable, and predictable inflation. Indeed, I 
would submit that effective communication has become a vital tool in the implementation of monetary 
policy.  
Why this emphasis on communication as an important monetary policy tool? There are at least two 
key reasons: first, experience has shown that communication improves the effectiveness of monetary 
policy or, put another way, monetary policy is most effective when it is effectively communicated; and 
second, communication helps central banks to be more accountable. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
I want to touch on each of these points in turn. 
Like all public policies, monetary policy benefits from increased public understanding and support. This 
translates into what I call “legitimacy of policy.” Through clear explanation of why our policy objectives 
and actions are the right ones, we aim to gain public support for what we are doing. With success on 
this  front,  we  begin  to  shape  expectations  and  influence  behaviour  in  ways  that  support  policy 
outcomes.  
Central to our effort is clarity of purpose. We at the Bank of Canada have found that a clear statement 
of our objective - an explicit inflation target - is crucial. With the clear recognition and appreciation of 
this objective, agents in the economy - consumers, investors, businesses, financial market participants 
-  begin  to  adjust  their  behaviour  in  ways  consistent  with  an  expectation  that  future  inflation  will  be 
firmly in line with the inflation target. Price, wage, and financial decisions will tend to be consistent with 
the target. And the net effect will be a more stable macroeconomic environment and greater success 
in keeping inflation low and stable.  
The  second  reason  why  communications  is  important  is  accountability.  A  clear  basis  for  judging  a 
central bank’s performance is extremely important to its credibility and independence. For the Bank of 
Canada, the explicit inflation target is that basis for accountability. Put simply, the public can measure 
our performance by how successful we are in achieving the 2 per cent inflation target. The fact that we 
have had a pretty good record in this regard has reinforced our credibility and the public’s confidence 
that we will keep inflation at, or near, the target.  
But for the Bank to be fully accountable, we must not only communicate the information that the public 
needs  to  understand  our  policy  objective  and  our  progress  in  meeting  that  objective,  but  also  the 
challenges that arise in the economic environment and the factors that we take into account in making 
decisions. Communicating all this information has become one of the Bank’s chief activities. 
The need to be strategic in our communications 
2.  
To communicate successfully, we need to be strategic. That requires an effective, proactive approach 
to communications. So we have to identify who our audiences are and what communication vehicles 
are most effective in reaching them. 
We  aim  for  effective  dialogue  with  the  public,  the  media,  the  markets,  and  other  interested  and 
influential constituencies. We want to further their understanding of monetary policy and foster public 
support for our goals and actions. At the same time, and equally important, we want to increase our 
understanding of the public’s views.  
This  is  clearly  a  continuous  and  iterative  process.  And  the  old  communications  principle,  “Repeat, 
Repeat, Repeat,” is entirely appropriate. By repeating our fundamental messages about the framework 
we use to conduct policy and about our policy goals and why they are important, we are increasing the 
odds  that  these  messages  will  take  hold  in  the  public  consciousness  and  resonate  in  shaping 
behaviour. 
Through all our communications, we are providing the opportunity for public critique of our economic 
analysis, by economists, financial market players, journalists and reporters, politicians, and the public 
more  broadly.  This  is  constructive.  Engaging  the  public  in  the  issues  is  important  in  broadening 
awareness and understanding of monetary policy. 
Let me be a little more specific about this. As I have already noted, expectations play a critical role in 
the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  First  and  foremost,  we  want  to  anchor  expectations  about  future 
inflation  to our 2  per  cent  target.  Financial  market expectations about  future policy actions  are  also 
important to us. Market expectations get reflected in medium- and longer-term interest rates, as well 
as  prices  of  other  financial  assets,  and  these  financial  prices  make  up  part  of  the  overall  financial 
conditions in the economy. We therefore pay close attention to market expectations, and indeed look 
to financial markets to get an independent view of the expected future path of interest rates.  
Bank staff, in our trading room and in our regional offices, are in regular contact with market dealers 
and investors in key financial centres, including Toronto, Montréal, New York, and elsewhere around 
the  world.  We  also  apply  analytic  techniques  to  extract  from  asset  prices  the  views  of  market 
participants  about  the  future  path  of  interest  rates.  We  look  at  interest  rate  futures,  expectations 
implicit  in  the  term  structure  of  interest  rates,  and  markets  for  instruments  such  as  bankers’ 
acceptances, term repos, and treasury bills. This involves assessment about relevant term, risk, and 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
liquidity premiums. In this way, we keep our finger on the pulse of the market, on its interpretation of 
our decisions and statements, and on its views as to where policy interest rates are headed. We also 
stay  on  top  of  published  economic  analyses  and  commentaries  from  financial  institutions.  And  we 
review  the  surveys  of  economists’  and  market  participants’  expectations  for  interest  rates  that  are 
published by the major wire services.  
All  of  this  information,  together  with  other  economic  and  financial  analysis,  feeds  into  the  Bank’s 
deliberations leading to our interest rate decisions and then into the messages we communicate about 
the  decision  to  the  public.  If  the  iterative  process  and  the  two-way  communication  that  I  have  just 
described work as they should, the views of the Bank and the markets should be broadly consistent. 
And this should help create an environment in which positive economic outcomes are achieved in an 
efficient manner. 
The Bank of Canada’s communications strategy is based on reaching our target audiences through a 
schedule of key publications and communications events throughout the year. This gives us a regular, 
continuous, and integrated program of communication with the public. It permits us to communicate 
our evolving views on the economy and the trend of inflation on a regular basis through the course of 
the year.  
These communications events include eight scheduled policy interest rate announcements, when we 
issue  a  press  release,  publication  of  our  semi-annual  Monetary  Policy  Report  in  April  and  October, 
Updates to the Report in January and July, frequent speeches by the Governor and other Governing 
Council members, public appearances before parliamentary committees, press conferences, and other 
media events and interviews. And a recent initiative has been to publish our regional office Business 
Outlook Survey, which summarizes business and industry views on their outlook for the economy and 
inflation. 
From the Bank’s perspective, we are encouraged by the progress we are making in engaging public 
interest in economic and monetary policy issues. The quantity and quality of media coverage of the 
Bank  -  both  electronic  and  print  -  has  increased  markedly  in  recent  years,  especially  since  the 
adoption  of  a  fixed  schedule  of  regular  dates  for  announcing  policy  interest  rates.  The  C.D.  Howe 
Institute’s creation of a shadow Monetary Policy Council last year to provide an independent analysis 
and  view  on  interest  rate  decisions  is  making  a  constructive  contribution  to  public  awareness  and 
debate.  And  the  public  traffic  to  the  Bank’s  Web  site  has  grown  enormously,  indicating  a  growing 
public appetite for our published statements and information. These are encouraging indications that 
the public is reacting to our communications and, in many cases, providing us with tangible feedback.  
Some practical challenges to a successful communications strategy 
3.  
Implementing an effective communications strategy for monetary policy in 2004 has some very real 
challenges. Today, I want to touch on a couple of these: first, how to communicate uncertainty; and 
second, how to capitalize on new technologies, specifically an effective Web site. 
How to communicate about an uncertain future 
(i)  
After many years of being involved in developing and communicating monetary policy, I have found 
that dealing with the simple fact that the future is uncertain is one of the most difficult communications 
challenges  a  central  bank  faces.  Clearly,  financial  markets  are  hypersensitive  to  anything  a  central 
bank says about the future because the markets are looking for indications about where interest rates 
may be going. This makes talking about the future all the more challenging.  
Let’s remember, central banks do not have a crystal ball. Economies are always subject to events and 
shocks  that  are  unforeseen.  And  the  fact  that  monetary  policy  operates  over  a  medium-term  time 
frame compounds the communications challenge.  
How can a central bank best address this communications challenge? 
I believe that we must be able to tell a coherent narrative - in other words, a story. The story has to 
explain the logic of central bank decisions, but allow the public and the markets to make their own 
assessment of future Bank decisions. The story must be set in the context of a clear statement of the 
objective  of  policy,  a  view  of  the  key  macroeconomic  relationships,  especially  the  inflation  process, 
and an understanding of the tools and the actions used to achieve our policy objective.  
BIS Review 56/2004 
 3
But  the  story  also  has  to  recognize  the  forward-looking  nature  of  monetary  policy;  that  is,  the 
considerable time lags between monetary policy actions and their effects. And it has to recognize that 
the outlook is uncertain and that the future path of interest rates will be linked to developments in the 
economy.  In  other  words,  the  outlook  is  conditional  -  conditional  on  assumptions,  such  as  an 
assumption about the world price of oil, and on views and analysis based on circumstances at a given 
point in time. 
This may not be an easy story to tell. But for it to be as clear as possible, the elements have to add up 
in a way that reflects the monetary policy framework we have adopted to conduct policy. This includes 
how the exchange rate fits into the framework. Fundamentally, we have to assess the implications of 
movements in the currency for aggregate demand since, in setting policy, we aim to keep aggregate 
demand and supply in balance in order to help keep inflation close to our target. Another important 
aspect of the story is to communicate a sense of the risks and uncertainties facing the economy. If our 
story does all this, then it will properly convey the key relationships, nuances, and conditional nature of 
policy. 
More  specifically,  what  we  do,  primarily  through  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  Updates,  is  to 
provide a projection of those key macroeconomic variables - real GDP growth, the output gap, and 
inflation - that drive monetary policy decisions and give indication to the general direction of policy. We 
do  not  provide  an  interest  rate  path  as  part  of  these  projections.  Under  an  inflation-targeting 
framework, the policy consequences of changing circumstances or unanticipated events fall primarily 
on  interest  rates,  and  thus  any  projected  interest  rate  path  would  be  an  unreliable  guide  to  future 
policy actions. 
In other words, our commitment is to the policy objective, not to a particular interest rate path. Our 
communication  focus  is  therefore  on  presenting  and  updating  our  macroeconomic  “base-case” 
projection consistent with eliminating any output gap - positive or negative - and achieving the 2 per 
cent inflation target over the policy horizon of roughly 1 1/2 to 2 years. But in order to underscore the 
conditional nature of the base-case projection, we also discuss the main risks and uncertainties that 
we see, and we identify those issues that we will be watching closely.  
Let me offer a specific example from the Bank of Canada’s fairly recent experience. In the spring of 
2002, there was evidence that demand pressures in the economy were growing more rapidly than had 
been  anticipated,  even  though  they  were  not  yet  showing  up  in  price  increases.  Based  on  the 
evidence at the time, we raised our policy interest rate three times. By the first quarter of 2003, there 
was  further  evidence  that  inflation  was  above  target,  suggesting  that  strong  domestic  demand  was 
putting pressure on the economy’s production capacity. So we raised our target overnight rate further 
in March and again in April. At that time, we concluded that the risks to the global economic outlook 
were more evenly balanced than they were the previous autumn, and we said so. 
Then  the  Canadian  economy  was  sideswiped  by  a  number  of  unanticipated  developments,  most 
notably  SARS,  BSE,  and  a  rapid  rise  in  the  value  of  the  Canadian  dollar  as part  of  a  broad-based 
weakness  in  the  U.S.  dollar.  The  impact  of  these  developments  caused  us  to  alter  our  outlook  for 
economic  activity  and  inflation  in  Canada.  With  inflation  pressures  easing,  we  lowered  the  policy 
interest rate in July and September to help support domestic demand.  
Through this period, there was some criticism of the Bank, that we had acted prematurely in raising 
rates and that, as a result, we had to reverse our decision. The fact of the matter is that conditions did 
change  significantly.  So  our  analysis  and  outlook  changed  accordingly,  and  we  communicated  the 
evolving story consistent with our monetary policy framework and its forward-looking nature. Like the 
baseball umpire says, “there’s strikes and there’s balls, and I calls ‘em as I sees ‘em.” 
(ii) 
A  second  communications  challenge  that  I  want  to  highlight  is  capitalizing  on  new  technology.  By 
shrinking  time  and  space,  new  communication  technologies  have  created  enormous  pressure  to 
provide markets and the public with access to real-time information about monetary policy.  
Fortunately,  these  technologies  offer  the  means  to  help  address  these  pressures.  So  the  Bank  of 
Canada has put a lot of emphasis on developing and maintaining a high-calibre Web site. The Web 
has become particularly important for monetary policy communication because it helps facilitate equal 
treatment of target audiences and it enables us to respond more quickly to information needs. Our site 
gives the general public and more specialized audiences direct and immediate access not only to our 
releases,  publications,  speeches,  and  technical  information,  but  also  to  more easily  understandable 
Communication technologies: capitalizing on a good Web site 
4 
 BIS Review 56/2004
information  about  the  Bank  and  monetary  policy.  Thus,  the  Web  supports  our  objective  of  being 
proactive in reaching the public, the markets, and specialized audiences with news and information.  
Last year, we were honoured to be presented with the “Central Bank Website of the Year” award by 
Central  Banking  Publications  and  Lombard  Street  Research.  Nonetheless,  we  continue  to  work  at 
improving and expanding the site. (If I might add a plug, our Web site address is bankofcanada.ca; 
banqueducanada.ca.) 
Our  audio  “Webcasts”  of  speeches  and  press  conferences  by  the  Governor  have  been  highly 
successful. They provide the instant access that markets and media want, to what the Bank is saying 
on  monetary  policy  issues,  as  we  say  it.  They  also  enable  journalists  and  market  participants  from 
anywhere in the world to tune in “in real time.” 
Our  Web  site  plays  an  important  role  in  supporting  our  financial  market  activities.  Dealers  and 
distributors  can  find  up-to-the-minute  information  on  securities  auctions  and  tenders,  plus  historical 
yield data and a variety of technical documents. And the site permits much wider distribution of the 
Bank’s research than was possible in the past. 
The  Web  is  maturing  as  a  medium,  and  the  Bank  will  continue  to  exploit  it  to  communicate  more 
directly and effectively with its target audiences. 
Economic outlook 
Now, I want to take a moment to review the economic outlook. As I do this, I will be referring to some 
of the same terms and concepts that I have identified in my remarks today as important in helping the 
Bank tell a coherent story about the conduct of monetary policy. 
Canada’s  economic  growth  in  the  first  half  of  this  year  was  somewhat  stronger  than  the  Bank  had 
been expecting. This was largely as a result of more robust external demand for Canadian goods and 
services. With domestic demand only slightly weaker than expected, the growth of aggregate demand 
in the first six months was a little stronger than we had anticipated. Thus, the output gap at mid-year 
was smaller than we had projected. Indeed, we judge that the economy is now operating close to its 
production capacity. 
Inflation, both total and core, has been volatile in recent months, primarily because of swings in energy 
prices and because of automobile purchase-incentive programs. Despite this volatility, we continue to 
project that core inflation will gradually move up to the 2 per cent target in 2005. 
Looking forward, we expect aggregate demand to grow at, or marginally above, the rate of growth of 
production  capacity.  With  the  economy  operating  close  to  capacity,  monetary  stimulus  needs  to  be 
reduced  to  avoid  a  buildup  of  inflationary  pressures  and  contribute  to  sustainable,  solid  economic 
growth.  It  is  in  this  context  that  we  raised  the  target  for  the  overnight  rate  by  25  basis  points  on  8 
September to 2 1/4 per cent.  
As we pointed out then, there are uncertainties around the outlook. These uncertainties continue to 
relate primarily to three factors: the estimated size of the output gap, the future growth of Canadian 
exports and imports, and the overall effect on the Canadian economy of current and future movements 
in the world prices of oil and non-energy commodities. In conducting monetary policy, the Bank will 
continue  to  pay  attention  to  these  factors  as  we  assess  the  evolving  prospects  for  pressures  on 
capacity and inflation. We will provide a detailed analysis of the outlook for inflation and the economy 
in our Monetary Policy Report, which will be published on 21 October. That Report will also extend our 
economic projections into 2006.  
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by summarizing my main points. First, communication has become another vital tool 
in the implementation of monetary policy. Thanks in part to effective communication, Canadians are 
now more confident that inflation will be kept near the 2 per cent target, and this expectation is feeding 
into their day-to-day decision-making. 
Second, central banks need to be strategic in their approach to communications. By communicating in 
a timely and effective way, we can engage the markets and the public in the issues we face. At the 
same time, public input helps make monetary policy more effective. 
And  finally,  there  will  continue  to  be  numerous  day-to-day  challenges  in  communicating  monetary 
policy.  But  in  addressing  these  challenges,  be  they  complex  ones  like  the  conditionality  and 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 5
forward-looking nature of monetary policy or technical ones like capitalizing on new technology, we are 
always striving to achieve better, more effective policy.  
Communications  is  indeed  a  vital  tool  in  helping  the  Bank  achieve  the  goal  of  low,  stable,  and 
predictable inflation. But it is important to remember that low inflation is not an end in itself. Ultimately, 
it is the means by which monetary policy contributes to Canada’s solid economic performance and to 
the rising living standards of Canadians. 
6 
 BIS Review 56/2004
