Ishrat Husain: Pakistan’s financial sector - a roadmap for 2005-2010 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Ishrat  Husain,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  54th  Annual 
General Meeting of the Institute of Bankers, Pakistan, Karachi, 14 October 2004. 
 The first generation of reforms in the financial sector of Pakistan is about to be completed successfully 
and  we  have  to  lay  down  the  proposals  for  eliciting  wide  discussion  on  the  second  generation  of 
reforms. The reforms should be implemented in the next five years, although they have to be reviewed 
continuously  to  adapt  them  according  to  the  changing  circumstances  both  domestically  and 
internationally. 
The objective of the second-generation reforms is to further deepen the financial sector and integrate it 
into the global economy. Before we lay down the proposed road map, let me recapitulate briefly as to 
what we have learnt from our experience so far and what we have accomplished so far. 
Lessons learnt: 
First,  financial  sector  functions  effectively  and  efficiently  only  if  the  macroeconomic  situation  is 
favourable and stable. The need to maintain macroeconomic stability will thus remain imperative for 
the coming period too. 
Second,  reforms  can  be  successfully  implemented  only  if  there  is  consultation,  involvement  and 
consensus  building  among  all  the  stakeholders  throughout  the  process.  An  institutionalized 
mechanism for this interaction and collaboration has to remain in place. 
Third, there has to be an active champion for conceptualizing, formulating, sequencing, implementing 
and  monitoring  reforms.  In  the  absence  of  such  a  champion,  there  is  a  serious  risk  of  derailment, 
reversal or abandonment. 
Fourth,  application  of  technology,  intensive  use  of  human  resource  competencies  and  managerial 
skills  are  the  key  tools  for  achieving  results  and  have  to  be  carefully  nurtured  and  upgraded 
continuously. 
Fifth, the regulators have the responsibility to communicate and explain the rationale, progress and 
outcomes of their policies and keep the market players fully informed. 
Results accomplished: 
(a) 
Financial  markets  in  Pakistan  have  been  liberalized  and  have  become  competitive  and 
relatively efficient but still remain shallow. 
The array of financial instruments available for various types of transactions in the market 
has widened but the evolution of new instruments has to remain on track. 
Financial  infrastructure  has  been  strengthened  but  the  legal  system  is  still  too  time 
consuming and costly for the ordinary market participants. 
Regulatory environment has improved and the capacity of regulators to oversee and monitor 
is much better today but the enforcement and prompt corrective action capabilities need to 
be further enhanced. 
Financial  soundness  indicators  of  the  system  show  an  upward  moving  trend  in  almost  all 
dimensions but there are weaknesses and vulnerabilities that require to be fixed. 
Corporate governance rules have been clarified and conform to best international practices 
but their consistent application and voluntary adoption by the industry remain uneven. 
Financial sector is opening up to the middle and lower income groups but the commitment 
and mindset of the providers are still out of sync with the new realities. 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 
It can be seen from the above catalogue of accomplishments that we have made a lot of progress but, 
at the same time, challenges ahead of us are quite formidable, the agenda for action is a lot more 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
complex and the need for remaining alert and agile is even more pressing. The industry and regulators 
cannot afford to become complacent on our achievements but strive to work harder and together to 
move forward on the road we have set for ourselves. 
What needs to be done? 
The second generation of reforms should be built on the strengths of the financial system, work on 
removing  the  weaknesses  and  gaps  and  agree  upon  the  speed,  contents  and  phasing  of  these 
reforms. In my humble view, there are at least ten areas in which these reforms will produce promising 
results. 
Broadening access to middle and lower income groups: 
(a)  
The banks have learnt that by broadening their client base, adding new products to their portfolio and 
offering new types of services, they can not only diversify their risks but also earn higher returns. We 
should continue to move along these lines and aim to reach out to at least three million households in 
agriculture  sector  and  two  million  small,  medium  and  micro  enterprises  in  the  next  five  years.  The 
economies of scale and economies of scope make these goals quite feasible but I must also warn that 
only  those  who  have  imagination,  agility  and  capability  will  be  successful  while  others  will  fail. 
Reckless  lending  or  optimistic  forecasting  that  the  current  low  interest  rate  environment  will  remain 
unchanged in times to come, is bound to get your institutions into deep trouble. I would urge you to be 
enterprising but prudent, strategic but not risk averse and flexible but not too indulgent in reaching out 
to the small farmers, small firms or individuals with microfinance or consumer financing needs. 
New liability products: 
(b)  
The  industry  has  paid  adequate  attention  so  far  on developing  new  products on  the  asset  side  but 
neglected the savers and depositors. It is myopic for us to have such one sided approach as it is the 
savers  and  depositors  who  provide  the  wherewithal  for  the  industry  to  perform  its  basic  function  of 
intermediation. The banks and non-bank institutions have to come up with innovative solutions tailored 
to the needs of 28 million depositors and savers of Pakistan. The Government has made the playing 
field level for you by removing the preferential returns in the National Savings Scheme, which has hurt 
the scheme holders badly. It is a wake-up time for all of us to begin looking after the interest of this 
vast majority of small savers and mobilize and utilize their savings in a much better way than we have 
done so far. Development of new liability products should be on the top of the agenda for the next five 
years. This is a serious weakness that we cannot afford to live with any more. 
Corporate restructuring: 
(c)  
Financial Sector Reforms in absence of corporate sector restructuring i.e. pruning costs, reducing debt 
and increasing efficiency will have only shortterm beneficial effects. The ratio of total corporate debt to 
GDP  should  be  lowered,  capacity  has  to  be  expanded  and  labour  productivity  needs  to  be  raised. 
Firms have to be in better shape and invest in productive activities while new firms have to enter credit 
markets. 
Firms will fail in their businesses for a variety of reasons. Bankruptcy law will provide a mechanism for 
an  orderly  settlement  of  obligations.  Bankruptcy  separates  bad  managers  from  potentially  valuable 
assets, lifts debts from shoulders that cannot support them and preserve value that alternatives such 
as liquidation might destroy. 
Infrastructure financing: 
(d)  
The  traditional  mode  of  financing  infrastructure  projects  only  through  Public  Sector  Development 
Programme  has  resulted  in  congestions,  shortages  and  bottlenecks.  The  experiment  with  the 
independent power producer types of arrangements in the private sector has not proved satisfactory 
from the viewpoint of the consumer. We have, therefore, to find some other ways of fostering private-
public partnership in the areas of infrastructure development, and like other countries, the banks and 
capital  markets  have  to  take  the  lead.  You  should  look  at  the  successful  experiences  in  other 
emerging markets and adapt them to our conditions. The State Bank of Pakistan (SBP) is prepared to 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
work with you and we plan to hold a conference next year in which we will bring all the stakeholders 
together to ponder over this issue and come up with some practical course of action. 
E-banking: 
(e)  
It is gratifying to note that a lot of progress has been made in establishing the platform for Electronic 
banking. With the deregulation of telecommmunication sector in Pakistan, the opportunities for further 
value added services to underpin banking transactions have multiplied manifold. 
While  small  and  medium  banks  can  now  offer  on-line  services  to  their  customers,  the  large  banks 
have to move more expeditiously so that the E Banking network can be utilized optimally. Transaction 
costs  will  become  lower  and  customer  service  will  improve.  A  variety  of  new  services  can  then  be 
offered. Our ATM penetration ratio is still quite low and we should expand ATMs more aggressively 
while maintaining them in good stead. 
Private equity, pension and provident funds: 
(f)  
There  is  still  a  mismatch  between  the  growing  appetite  of  institutional  and  contractual  saving 
institutions  for  long  term  investment  vehicles  and  the  demand  for  long  gestation  mortgage, 
infrastructure,  real  estate  and  project  financing.  Private  equity  and  venture  capital  funds,  private 
pension  and  provident  funds  and  insurance  companies  can  play  an  important  role  in  filling  in  this 
market segment. I would very much urge those who are always so keen to obtain a traditional banking 
licence  to  exploit  the  vast  potential  by  setting  up  these  new  types  of  funds  which  are  almost  non 
existent in the country but are badly needed. I can assure you, on the part of the SECP and SBP, that 
we will render all possible assistance to those who wish to move into the fields of private equity funds, 
venture capital funds, private pension and provident funds, real estate investment trusts and similar 
other vehicles. 
Investment banking: 
(g)  
The role of investment banking in Pakistan has remained quite murky so far. The spread of universal 
banking model in the country has led to a certain degree of ambiguity as far as the market niche in 
which investment banks can operate. In my view, the corporates will always require investment banks 
to render services such as investment advisory, corporate restructuring, distressed assets acquisition 
and disposal, mergers and acquisitions, equity and debt financing. The investment banks have to get 
away  from  their  aspiration  to  mimic  commercial  banks  and  build  up  their  capabilities  in  the  areas, 
which are begging for help. Commercial banks will never be able to compete with them either on costs 
or customer satisfaction even if they all profess that they can provide total banking solutions to all the 
clients  needs.  Several  investment  banks  have  merged  into  commercial  banks  but  those  who  are 
serious players in this field should re-examine their strategies and direction and build up their human 
resource capabilities. 
Human resource development: 
(h)  
I wish to thank all the Chief Executives of banks who have put in place transparent and merit based 
system  of  recruitment  of  entry-level  bankers.  The  next  step  in  this  value  chain  of  human  resource 
development  is  the  continuing  education,  training,  testing  and  progression  of  in-service  employees 
and  identification  of  future  managers  of  the  financial  industry.  Recently,  I  had  a  very  productive 
meeting with the Human Resource Heads of some of your institutions at the IBP and we have agreed 
that  this  area  needs  your  personal  attention  and  commitment.  We,  at  the  SBP,  have  gained  some 
experience  in  this  endeavour  and  we are  willing  to  share  that  with  you.  The  IBP  has  been  given  a 
much larger mandate, the NIBAF facilities have been opened up to the whole industry and the five 
large  banks  have  offered  to  upgrade  the  quality  of  their  training  institutions  which  can  then  be 
available to other banks, leasing companies, etc. I attach a lot of importance to this particular area of 
work and I will take personal interest in developing a cadre of professional bankers in Pakistan who 
are of international standards and can move into multinational banks without much difficulty. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
Risk management: 
(i) 
The advent of Basle II regime in a couple of years imposes a sense of urgency on both the regulators 
as well as the financial industry to put their act together as far as risk management is concerned. I 
have very little doubt that the foreign banks operating in Pakistan will have any serious problems in 
making the transition successfully but I remain very much worried about our domestic banks - large, 
medium and small. Although we all have been talking about Basle II for sometime, our response in 
preparing ourselves have been at best patchy. The SBP has installed capacity for risk management 
within the institution and we intend to keep on expanding this capacity but I see that our large banks 
have  not  yet  woken  up  to  attract  the  human  resource  of  the  right  kind,  set  up  the  internal  rating 
systems  and  the  supporting  technology.  We  have  started  the  training courses  in  real  earnest  and  I 
have asked the IBP to give priority to this area but we need trainable material from the banks. I hope 
that the Pakistan Banks Association (PBA) will form an internal working group to bring their member 
institutions to reach minimum standards by certain timelines. 
Promotion of Islamic banking: 
(j)  
I have been very much encouraged by the enthusiastic response to the setting up of Islamic banks 
and branches in the country. This is an extremely positive development as it brings into the fold of 
formal financial sector those who have remained outside because of their faith and beliefs. From my 
interactions, I can tell you that their numbers are in millions and not in hundreds of thousands. That is 
why we have a highly liberal licencing policy for opening Islamic banks, subsidiaries or branches. But I 
must caution you that we do not wish to transform this into another façade by moving too quickly and 
too imprudently. You should have all the ingredients in place - Shariah Advisors and Auditors, credit 
appraisers and marketing specialists, product development capacity, systems and technology - before 
you approach the SBP. Merry-go-around a few experienced individuals in this field by offering them 
attractive compensation packages will soon out price Islamic banking products from the market. This is 
not  in  our  long-term  interest  that  such  kind  of  reckless  actions  put  the  future  of  Islamic  banking  in 
Pakistan at risk. 
Ladies and gentlemen, there are many more tasks we have to do but I thought if I had too many items 
on the platter it would not be possible for us to manage it within the timeframe of the next five years. 
But, as I said earlier, these are only some proposals and suggestions for your consideration, critical 
review  and  scrutiny.  You  may  have  some  other  priorities  in  mind  which  may  make  better  sense. 
Please feel free to articulate them as I do not have any pretensions of having monopoly on wisdom. 
My purpose is to initiate discussion, debate and dialogue as to what we ought to be doing together in 
the next five years. I hope that all of you will come back to me with your feedback and ideas and then 
we can arrive at a consensual roadmap. 
In  the  end,  I  wish  to  thank  each  one  of  you  for  your  support,  cooperation  and  assistance  to  my 
colleagues at the State Bank of Pakistan and myself. Without your active collaboration we could not 
have achieved what we have done so far and we look forward to even better relationships in the future 
to meet these difficult challenges together. 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2004
