Ardian Fullani: Monetary policy challenges in the framework of approximating 
the Bank of Albania to the European Central Bank 
Greeting speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the workshop organised by 
the Bank of Albania in cooperation with the GTZ, Tirana, 8 December 2004. 
 Honorable participants, 
I would like to express my pleasure for participating in this meeting, whose topic has been of great 
interest to me, and not accidentally I expressed in my first public pronouncement the approximation of 
the Bank of Albania to ESCB pattern as one of my essential challenges. I had the possibility to discuss 
this issue even with the Vice President of the ECB, Mr. Papademos, at a meeting in Frankfurt, where I 
launched the idea to be assisted by the ECB and member banks of the ESCB on approximating our 
system with the European one. 
Trying to spare the time for other discussions of interest in this meeting, I would like to briefly mention 
some  of  the main steps  to  be  undertaken  by  the  BoA  in  the  integration  process with  the European 
System of Central Banks, a process that requires not only time, but also dedication, lobbying, financial 
resources and above all, capable human resources. 
1. 
Reviewing the legal and regulatory framework of the Bank of Albania and of the 
financial system in Albania 
In integration process, the reviewing of laws and by-laws is of priority, particularly in the context of the 
prerequisites that a country aspiring for membership has to meet in the central banks area, in financial 
and  banking  system  and  even  broader.  In  spite  of  the  so-far  achievements,  much  work  has  to  be 
done. Therefore, the identification of our needs and priorities in this direction would serve as the first 
step. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  is  not  the  sole  authority  in  supervising  the  financial  operations  licensed  in 
Albania. In this sense, the reviewing of laws and bylaws, involving not only the banking system but 
also  the  financial  one,  would  open  the  way  to  more  effective  supervision  of  the  overall  financial 
system. This process would serve not only to further develop the financial system but also to assist in 
increasing  the  institutional  cooperation  between  the  banking  and  financial  system,  thus  leading  the 
cooperation between these systems to a higher level.  
Reviewing the organizational and institutional system 
2. 
It  is  natural  that  the  pattern  to  be  pursued  is  that  of  the  ECB  and  ESCB.  In  this  issue,  much 
importance  will  be  given  to  the  institutional  development  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  over  the  mid-term 
period, which will be based, above all, on meeting without conditions of a very important requirement 
of  any  aspiring  country,  which  has  to  do  with  the  central  bank  independence.  The  institutional  and 
documentary  approximation  to  practices  on  which  the  ECB  is  based  and  operates  will  be  the  main 
principles of the BoA agenda. 
Improving the monetary policy and operational framework 
3. 
From  the  viewpoint  of  operational  monetary  policy  framework,  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  a  relatively 
advanced  institution,  but  the  same  consideration  may  not  be  valid  concerning  its  transmission 
mechanism.  Significant  improvements  are  required  for  the  development  of  banking  and  financial 
markets.  So,  we  may  mention:  the  development  of  lending  to  economy,  especially  in  Lek,  thus 
creating  a  better  extension  of  operations  according  to  demand,  and  reducing  the  transactions  in 
cash.     
   1/2 
In  the  function  of  market  development,  positive  tendencies  are  expected  in  the  future,  in  terms  of 
increasing competition and banking intermediation efficiency.  
Concerning  cash  reduction  in  economy  (money  outside  banks),  the  BoA  is  not  going  to  work  in 
campaigns  but  will  be  led  by  a  more  active  philosophy  in  terms  of  encouraging  banking  products, 
completion of clearing systems, use of credit cards not only for payments but also for general services 
and particularly for utilitarian ones.  
The  identification  of  factors  impacting  on  inflation  and  the  magnitude  of  this  impact  remains  an 
important  element,  thus  creating possibilities  for  a more accurate inflation  forecasting.  An  important 
role  in  this  direction  will  be  played  by  improvement  of  research  and  information  abilities  and  the 
system  of  statistics  within  the  bank,  which  will  also  be  subject  of  discussion  by  the  BoA 
representatives in this meeting. We may mention here the establishment of an Institute of Scientific 
Research of the Bank of Albania, with a regional dimension, that will impact significantly on raising the 
standards.  
Concerning  price  stability,  the  necessary  institutional  framework  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  the 
independence, credibility, accountability and transparency should be ensured and strengthened. 
Dear participants, 
The above issues constitute some main pillars, which will create a real approximation of the Bank of 
Albania  to  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  On  the  other  hand,  I  am  convinced  that  today’s 
meeting will be a concrete step in this direction. Wishing the successful continuation of this workshop, 
I express once more my determination to lead the integration process of the BoA towards ESCB.   
 
   2/2 
