Axel A Weber: European inflation dynamics and inflation convergence 
Speech  by  Professor  Dr  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Conference 
“Open  Macro  Models  and  Policy  in  the  Development  of  the  European  Economy”  at  the  European 
University Institute, Florence, 15 October 2004. 
The references can be found on the Deutsche Bundesbank’s website. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Maintaining price stability in the euro area is the primary objective of the single monetary policy of the 
European Central Bank. In following this goal, monetary policy cannot prevent, however, inflation rates 
from  differing  between  member  countries  of  EMU.  For  example,  over  the  last  twelve  months,  the 
year-on-year  rates  of  the  HICP  for  Germany,  Austria  and  the  Netherlands  averaged  around 
1½ percent, while Spain and Greece showed rates of around 3 percent.  
The existence of enduring inflation differentials within the euro area has resulted in a lively debate on 
the appropriateness of the stance of the single monetary policy for countries on the lower and on the 
upper  end  of  the  distribution.  Accordingly,  macroeconomists  and  central  bankers  alike  have  a 
considerable interest in measuring and understanding heterogeneity in euro area inflation rates. 
Another  aspect  of  euro  area  inflation  that  is  currently  discussed  and  examined  is  its  dynamics  -  or 
more  specifically  -  its  persistence.  The  investigation  of  this  topic  has  been  stimulated  by  the 
observation that inflation in the euro area seems to respond so sluggishly to policy shifts.1
In the following I would like to talk about both issues - inflation persistence and inflation dispersion - 
which may be referred to as the time series dimension and the cross section dimension of the same 
phenomenon.  
Inflation persistence 
II. 
Understanding the dynamics of inflation in the euro area is of natural interest to the Eurosystem. For 
this reason, the “Inflation Persistence Network” (IPN), a group of researchers from the ECB, my own 
institution and the other national central banks, was set up in 2003.2 On the basis of a broad spectrum 
of  different  methods  and  datasets,  e.g.  individual  consumer  and  producer  prices,  surveys  on  firms’ 
price-setting behaviour, and aggregate inflation data, the IPN tries to shed some light on the patterns, 
determinants and implications of European inflation persistence.  
A crucial question that has to be answered is, of course, the proper definition and measurement of 
“inflation persistence”. The key problems with this issue become clear as soon as we think about how 
the  term  “persistence”  is  used  in  general.  The  American  Heritage  Dictionary,  for  instance,  defines 
persistence as the “continuance of an effect after the cause is removed.”  
When we apply this definition to “inflation persistence”, we immediately see that one aspect we have 
to think about is the “cause” - or in the terminology of economists, the “shock”. Of course, many types 
of shocks are conceivable, e.g. a preference shock or a technology shock. A central bank of course is 
especially interested in monetary policy shocks. 
Inflation persistence in structural models 
Taking a more formal approach, inflation persistence can be defined in structural models and within a 
pure  time-series approach.  As  to  structural  models, a  key  aspect  is  the definition  of  the  equilibrium 
from which the economy starts and to which it tends to return after the shock. The equilibrium path of 
                                                      
1   See Angeloni, Kashyap and Mojon (2003).  
2   For instance, one project at the Bundesbank currently explores the price setting behaviour in Germany based on survey 
data.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
inflation is then implied by the model structure. For instance, it may be given by a credible inflation 
target set by the central bank. 
The response pattern of inflation to shocks can be traced back in particular to the assumptions about 
price  setting  behaviour.  In  this  setting,  the  time  that  a  systematic  monetary  policy  action  needs  to 
reach its peak effect on inflation may be employed as a measure of inflation persistence.3
Inflation persistence in pure time series models 
Another strand of research does not rely on particular structural models. Rather, the inflation process 
is  specified  as  a  (univariate)  stochastic  process.  In  these  models  shocks  come  as  realizations  of  a 
single  innovation  term.  Unlike  with  structural  models  these  shocks  cannot  be  given  a  particular 
economic interpretation. Rather, they are interpreted as the sum of all the various influences that have 
an impact on inflation in a given period. 
Taking  the  simplest  case  of  an  AR(1)  model,  the  implied  long-run  mean  of  the  inflation  rate  is  a 
function of the intercept and the autoregressive parameter. The latter can be seen as a measure of the 
degree of persistence: if the autoregressive parameter is small, there will be a strong tendency for the 
process to return to its long-run mean. The closer this parameter is to unity, the longer it takes for the 
inflation rate to return to its equilibrium level.  
For  specifying  the  long  run  mean  of  inflation  in  a  univariate  time  series  model,  the  most  naïve 
approach is to assume it to be constant for the whole sample period under consideration. This may be 
seen as a reasonable specification for a short time horizon, for which the structure of the economy can 
be assumed to be fairly constant.  
However,  when  analysing  inflation  dynamics  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  the  assumption  of  a 
constant  mean  is  simply  unreasonable.  It  could  be  replaced,  for  instance,  by  a  mean  process  with 
break points, some exogenously given time trend, or some filtered process.  
I  emphasise  this  point  since  it  turns  out  that  the  measured  persistence  crucially  depends  on  the 
specification of the mean inflation.4 Robalo Marques (2004), for example, uses different specifications 
for  the  long-run  inflation  trend,  such  as  linear  trends  for  different  subperiods,  a  moving  average 
process, or a trend resulting from the Hodrick-Prescott filter. His findings are quite intuitive: there is a 
negative  relationship  between  the  assumed  degree  of  flexibility  of  the  mean  process  and  the 
measured  persistence.  Hence,  assuming  a  constant  mean,  as  is  frequently  done  in  the  literature, 
generally tends to result in a very high estimated degree of inflation persistence.  
Results from Levin and Piger (2004) confirm the importance of the assumptions about the long-run 
equilibrium  level  for  the  measurement  of  inflation  persistence.  In  a  study  with  twelve  industrial 
countries they find that, when allowing for structural breaks in mean inflation, inflation persistence is 
not very pronounced. From that they draw the general conclusion that high inflation persistence is not 
an inherent characteristic of industrial economies.  
Inflation persistence and monetary policy 
For monetary policy, the degree of inflation persistence is an important piece of information since it 
measures  the  dynamic  impact  of  policy  measures  on  the  future  path  of  inflation.  A  high  degree  of 
inflation  persistence  could  make  monetary  policy  much  more  difficult  because  monetary  policy 
measures need a long time to affect the rate of inflation. The longer this transmission lag, the higher 
the probability of additional shocks hitting the rate which could render this policy measure ineffective or 
even inappropriate.  
The conduct of monetary policy becomes even more complicated if inflation persistence in a monetary 
union differs across member states. Benigno and Lopez-Salido (2002) analyze the effect of different 
policy rules under such circumstances. Based on a theoretical model, they find that a monetary policy 
that assigns a higher weight to countries with a higher degree of inflation persistence leads to better 
outcomes  than  targeting  the  area-wide  rate  of  inflation.  However,  they  also  stress  that  such  a 
                                                      
3   See Batini (2002).  
4   For estimating the degree of persistence of a time series in the presence of breaks in the mean process, see Perron (1990).  
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
“rigidity-adjusted”  inflation  targeting  comes  with  a  considerable  incentive  problem:  countries  with  a 
high degree of inflation persistence have only a weak incentive to reduce their rigidities because they 
enjoy the special attention of the monetary authority. 
A  further  problem  arises  if  the  central  bank  is  faced  with  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  degree  of 
persistence,  e.g.  because  there  is  uncertainty  about  the  prevailing  price  and  wage  formation 
mechanism. Using small macro models, Coenen (2003) and Angeloni, Coenen and Smets (2003) find 
that in this case the monetary policy maker is well advised to base his decisions on the assumption of 
a relatively high degree of persistence.  
Inflation dispersion 
III. 
Let me now turn to the cross-sectional dimension, i.e. to the observed heterogeneity in inflation rates 
across euro-area countries.  
From  the  beginning  of  Stage  1  of  EMU  in  1990  until  1998,  the  dispersion  of  HICP  inflation  rates 
decreased  steadily.  The  unweighted  standard  deviation,  exceeding  4  percentage  points  at  the 
beginning of the 1990s, fell to about 1 percentage point at the beginning of 1999. After reaching its 
lowest values in mid-1999, inflation dispersion increased again in 2000. From 2001 until the present, 
the standard deviation did not exhibit any strong trend in either direction. This August the measure has 
reached 0.9 percentage points.5  
To give a benchmark for comparison: since 1997 inflation dispersion in the euro area appears to be 
only slightly above the corresponding metric for US states. However, it has been higher than within 
some European member countries. Across German Länder, for instance, the standard deviation has 
moved around 0.4 percentage points since 1994.  
Inflation dispersion in the euro area and in the United States (14 MSAs). Source: ECB (2003). 
Figure 1 
Unlike  among  regions  of  individual  euro  area  countries  and  within  the  United  States,  inflation 
differentials across euro area countries seem relatively more persistent: from 1999 to 2003 Germany 
and Austria have been mostly below the average euro area inflation rate, whereas Greece, Ireland, 
Spain and Portugal mostly exceeded it. 
                                                       
5   ECB Monthly Bulletin April 2003 and own computations. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
HICP inflation rates for EMU and selected member countries. Source: Deutsche Bundesbank. 
Figure 2 
e
t
a
R
n
o
 i
t
a
l
f
n
I
 
P
C
H
I
7,0
6,0
5,0
4,0
3,0
2,0
1,0
0,0
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Austria
Portugal
Spain
EMU
Jan 99
Jul 99
Jan 00
Jul 00
Jan 01
Jul 01
Jan 02
Jul 02
Jan 03
Jul 03
Jan 04
Jul 04
Months
 Measuring inflation dispersion using regional data 
Concerning empirical analysis, one obstacle for an in-depth assessment of inflation dispersion in the 
euro area is the relatively scarce amount of available data. For the small number of member states 
and  the  fairly  short  time  horizon,  neither  pure  time  series  approaches  nor  pure  cross  section 
approaches appear promising for econometric analysis.  
One obvious solution is to use panel data. Moreover, in order to increase the information in the cross 
section, it is desirable to use regional data instead of national data. Let me summarise briefly, at this 
stage, the results of a study by Günter Beck and myself that is based on price data from 1990 to 2002 
which come from 77 European regions belonging to six euro-area countries.6
                                                      
6   Weber and Beck (2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2004
Inflation dispersion: all items, emphasis on Italian regions. 
Figure 3 
The figure plots cross-sectional inflation rates (‘All Items’) for Germany, Austria, Finland, Italy, Spain and Portugal. Inflation rates 
are computed as annual percentage changes. Inflation rates of Italian regions are emphasized.  
 We find that convergence of inflation rates is pronounced especially for tradable goods. The estimated 
half-life for convergence among the 77 regions is 5.3 years. However, looking separately at the two 
subperiods before and after the beginning of EMU, we observe that the speed of convergence has 
changed  substantially:  from  1992  to  1998  the  half-life  was  1.3  years,  while  from  1999  to  2002  it  is 
estimated as 12.8 years.  
This  reflects  the  efforts  to  meet  the  Maastricht  inflation  criterion:  the  inflation  rate  of  a  country  was 
allowed to be no more than 1.5 percentage points higher than the average inflation rate of the three 
countries where inflation was the lowest. Thus, while the requirements of the Maastricht treaty have 
forced convergence in the run-up to 1999, this process came to a virtual standstill after the beginning 
of the final stage of EMU, given the considerable progress reached in inflation convergence at that 
stage.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 5
Figure 4 
Inflation dispersion: European ‘extended’ sample. 
The  figure  plots  the  standard  deviation  of  regional  inflation  dispersion  (total  index)  for  our  European  ‘extended’  sample 
(Germany,  Austria,  Italy,  Spain  and  Portugal)  for  the  period  from  1992  to  2002.  Inflation  rates  are  computed  as  annual 
percentage changes in the CPI. All figures are multiplied by 100. 
 Deeper insights into the nature of inflation dispersion can be obtained by examining the dynamics of 
the  whole  distribution  rather  than  just  the  standard  deviation.  More  specifically,  we  computed  the 
probability  of  regional  inflation  rates  remaining  in  extreme  areas  of  their  distribution.  The  results 
indicate relatively weak convergence dynamics as well. 
Stochastic kernel: European ‘extended’ sample, annual transitions, contour plot and 
conditional expected mean inflation deviations. 
Figure 5 
The left panel of the figure represents the contour plot of the transition density function p(x, y) associated with the stochastic 
kernel P(x, A) that we computed for the European ‘extended’ sample. The right panel of the figure shows how corresponding 
conditional expected period’s t+1 mean-inflation deviations behave relative to period’s t mean-inflation deviations. 
 6 
 BIS Review 61/2004
The determinants of inflation dispersion 
There  has  been  much  discussion  about  the  underlying  reasons  for  the  observed  heterogeneity  of 
inflation rates. It turns out that there is no single factor that explains the observed dispersion, rather, a 
combination  of  different  factors  with  both  temporary  and  more  persistent  effects  seems  to  be 
responsible.7
First  of  all  nominal  convergence  and  real  catching  up  during  the  three  stages  of  EMU  matters. 
Increased  goods  market  integration  and  greater  price  transparency  brought  upon  by  the  Internal 
Market  Programme and  ultimately  by  the  introduction  of  the  Euro  have  led  to convergence of  price 
levels for tradable goods. These in turn implied corresponding differences in price changes. For an 
explanation  of  inflation  dispersion  for  non-tradables,  the  Balassa-Samuelson  effect  is  often  called 
upon.  However,  empirical  studies  show  that  it  can  only  account  for  a  small  share  of  the  observed 
inflation differentials.8
Regional  supply  and  demand  shocks  are  factors  that  can  always  give  rise  to  new  differences  in 
inflation. Since labour markets are not yet closely interlinked, the price mechanism plays a major part 
in  balancing  supply  and  demand.  Hence,  short-term  inflation  differentials  can  be  interpreted  as  a 
natural reflection of the necessary adjustment mechanisms taking place. Inflation differentials following 
asymmetric shocks are intensified by inflation persistence, as Michael Ehrmann showed today.9
Besides  region-specific  shocks,  euro  area  wide  shocks  can  also  be  responsible  for  inflation 
heterogeneity. Different regions are affected differently according to their specialization, their market 
structure,  or  the  way  in  which  expectations  are  formed.  For  instance,  the  effect  of  exchange  rate 
shocks  vis-à-vis  the  dollar  differs  among  countries  depending  on  their  share  of  imported  goods  in 
private consumption.  
Implications of inflation dispersion 
After a look on the degree and the potential causes of inflation dispersion, let me now comment on its 
implications. 
With nominal interest rates having largely converged, different inflation rates appear to imply different 
real interest rates. High-inflation countries have lower real interest rates than low-inflation countries. 
For the former, this tends to have a stimulating effect on consumption and investment and to lower 
real  interest  expenses  on  public  debt.  For  low  inflation  countries,  the  opposite  holds  true.  Ceteris 
paribus, both effects would tend to increase the inflation dispersion even further. 
In the case of Germany, there has been an intensive discussion on whether the resulting higher real 
interest rate can be held (at least partly) responsible for Germany’s weak economic performance of 
the recent years. However, I have at least three objections to this argument.  
First of all, real interest rates in Germany are still low from a historical perspective. Therefore, I do not 
think that they form an obstacle to a stronger economic activity. Second, it has to be noted that the 
relevant real interest rate is an ex ante concept. It is based on expected rather than on actual inflation. 
Given  that  inflation  expectations  do  not  change  in  step  with  actual  inflation,  real  interest  rate 
differentials  can  be  expected  to  be somewhat  lower  than  inflation  differentials.  And  third,  especially 
within a monetary union, there is an important re-equilibrating effect: countries with low inflation rates 
gain price competitiveness within the currency area and this tends to increase aggregate demand in 
those countries.  
Estimations with the macroeconometric model of the Bundesbank suggest that for Germany the net 
effect  of  the  relatively  low  rate  of  inflation  on  aggregate  activity  cannot  be  deemed  restrictive.  With 
increasing time horizon, indeed, the net effect should be expected to be positive, as the recent export 
performance of the German economy seems to confirm.  
As  stated  before,  there  are  countries  in  the  euro  area  that  are  characterized  by  continuing 
above-average  inflation.  These  countries  have  to  carry  the  cost  associated  with  it,  for  instance, 
                                                      
7   See ECB (2003). 
8   See Sachverständigenrat (2001) and ECB (2003).  
9    See Angeloni and Ehrmann (2004). 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 7
shoe-leather costs, tax distortions and menu costs. Moreover, their export industry is expected to lose 
competitiveness.  
Inflation dispersion and the role of policy 
With  view  on  inflation  dispersion,  for  a  central  banker,  the  natural  question  of  the  role  of  monetary 
policy arises. Monetary policy in the euro area is necessarily uniform; therefore it cannot exert a direct 
influence on inflation differentials.  
In a way, one may even conclude that it should not try to bring down inflation dispersion beyond a 
certain level. “Breathing” of relative prices is an essential element of the equilibrating and adjustment 
mechanism  and  in  that  sense  a  crucial  feature  of  the  functioning  of  market  economies.  As  such,  a 
certain level of heterogeneity in inflation rates can be interpreted as a reflection that necessary price 
adjustment processes are taking place. 
Moreover, the Eurosystem has already taken account of inflation heterogeneity explicitly by spelling 
out  its  stability  policy  objective  in  terms  of  a  medium-term  euro-area  inflation  rate  of  “just  under 
2 percent”. Given the current dispersion of inflation rates, in my opinion, the safety margin implied in 
this definition is sufficient to protect all member countries against deflation. However, the Eurosystem 
has to continue to analyse national developments in inflation rates and check if they are compatible 
with the prevailing price norm. 
If persistent deviations of a national inflation rate can be traced back to inappropriate domestic policies 
or  other  unwarranted  domestic  developments,  such  as  inadequate  wage  policies  or  structural 
deficiencies,  national  policy  is  asked  to  react,  taking  area-wide  monetary  policy  as  given  for  their 
decisions. 
The effect of structural reforms on inflation differentials can be expected to be ambivalent. Due to the 
different  speeds  at  which  structural  reforms  are  being  implemented  in  the  various  countries,  a 
temporary  increase  in  inflation  dispersion  may  be  induced.  For  example,  the  deregulation  of  the 
telecommunications industry in some countries has led to a pronounced decrease in prices for quite a 
long time. In the long run, however, retrenching rigidities on product and labour markets is expected to 
increase  an economy’s capacity  to  adjust  efficiently  to shocks  and  thus  to  reduce  the  probability  of 
enduring inflation differentials. 
Conclusions 
IV. 
I think my quick tour through the topics of inflation persistence and inflation dispersion has shown that 
there are still many open questions left. We still do not know enough about the factors that determine 
inflation persistence in the euro area; we cannot even be sure about the prevailing degree of inflation 
persistence. I am therefore very much looking forward to the presentation of the results of the IPN in 
2005. 
Almost the same applies to the issue of inflation dispersion. We do not know yet in how far observed 
inflation differentials are reflecting  price adjustments between regions and countries within the euro 
area, which are necessary and desirable, and to what extent they should be viewed as being harmful. 
Nevertheless, I think that two important conclusions can be drawn. On the one hand, a high degree of 
inflation  persistence  and  a  high  dispersion  in  national  inflation  rates  within  the  euro  area  tend  to 
complicate  the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem.  On  the  other  hand  -  and  this  is  the  second 
conclusion  -  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  can  contribute  to  alleviating  at  least  some  of  the 
problems.  
As  regards  inflation  persistence,  the  credibility  of  monetary  policy  plays  an  important  role.  Since  a 
credible  monetary  policy  oriented  to  price  stability  is  capable  of  stabilising  inflation  expectations, 
positive shocks to the price level - e.g. an increase in oil prices - may not cause a persistent increase 
in the rate of inflation because the public - specifically the wage-setting parties - are convinced that the 
central bank will act to keep inflation low. I can also put it differently: Should monetary policy lose its 
credibility, then the degree of inflation persistence will surely increase, rendering monetary policy even 
more  difficult.  Insofar  as  inflation  differences  across  euro-area  countries  are  due  to  differences  in 
inflation  persistence,  credibility  of  the  area-wide  monetary  policy  also  contributes  to  a  reduction  of 
inflation differentials. 
8 
 BIS Review 61/2004
However,  since  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole,  it 
cannot directly affect inflation differentials within the euro area. Therefore, national economic policies 
such as fiscal, structural and wage setting policies need to be adjusted to counteract persistent and 
potentially damaging inflation differentials.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 9
