European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 7 October 2004. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  press 
conference here in Brussels. Today’s meeting is the tenth time that the Governing Council has met 
outside Frankfurt, and I would like to thank Governor Quaden for his invitation. Let me also express 
our gratitude to the staff of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique for their kind 
hospitality and perfect organisation of today’s meeting. 
Let  me  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today’s  meeting.  As  regards  economic  growth,  while  some 
uncertainty  has  recently  arisen  concerning  the  expected  strengthening  of  activity,  the  economic 
recovery in the euro area is ongoing. Looking at price developments, high oil prices have had a visible 
direct impact on inflation rates this year. However, the risk of second-round effects still seems to be 
contained,  and  the  overall  outlook  remains  consistent  with  price  stability  over  the  medium  term. 
Accordingly, we have left the key ECB interest rates unchanged. This means that the level of interest 
rates continues to be very low by historical standards, in both nominal and real terms. Strong vigilance 
is warranted with regard to all developments which could imply risks to price stability over the medium 
term.  
I shall now explain our assessment in more detail, turning first to the economic analysis. 
The information available to date indicates that the economic recovery in the euro area is continuing. 
In particular, survey indicators up to September point to ongoing growth in industrial production and 
the services sector. Moreover, the gradual recovery in consumer confidence is proceeding, and there 
are  some  tentative  signs  of  an  improvement  in  the  prospects  for  employment,  although  available 
indicators  for  household  spending  do  not  yet  point  to  an  immediate  strengthening  of  consumption 
growth. 
All  in  all,  the  growth  momentum  seen  in  the  euro  area  in  the  first  half  of  2004  should  be  broadly 
maintained in the coming quarters, in line with available forecasts from international organisations. On 
the  external  side,  euro  area  exports  should  continue  to  benefit  from  favourable  global  demand 
conditions,  not  least  from  trade  with  the  new  EU  Member  States,  where  import  demand  has  been 
strengthening. On the domestic side, investment should benefit from the positive global environment 
and  the  very  favourable  financing  conditions  in  the  euro  area.  As  companies  restructure, 
improvements  in  corporate  efficiency  and  higher  profits  are  also  supporting  business  investment. 
Moreover, there is scope for a recovery in euro area private consumption, in line with growth in real 
disposable income. 
Any central scenario for future developments is surrounded by a good deal of uncertainty, which at 
present is particularly related to oil prices. If oil prices were to remain high, or even increase further, it 
could dampen the strength of the recovery, both inside and outside the euro area, even though the oil 
intensity of production has fallen significantly since the 1970s and 1980s. All in all, while the burden 
resulting from higher oil prices cannot be avoided, its medium-term impact should be of a more limited 
magnitude than in the past. Obviously, for this outcome to materialise, all parties concerned must live 
up to their responsibilities.  
Turning to consumer prices, the oil market developments have had a direct impact on the euro area 
HICP. Following an annual rate of inflation of 1.7% in the first quarter of 2004, inflation reached 2.3% 
in  the  second  quarter  and  remained  at  that  level  in  July  and  August.  According  to  Eurostat’s  flash 
estimate, annual HICP inflation seems to have fallen slightly in September, to 2.2%. Higher energy 
prices  may  have  been  more  than  compensated  by  lower  food  prices,  partly  due  to  base  effects 
resulting  from  last  year’s  strong  increases  in  this sub-category.  Still,  on  the basis of  current  market 
expectations for oil prices, it appears unlikely that annual inflation rates will return to levels below 2% 
in the remainder of this year.  
Nevertheless,  looking  further  ahead,  the  available  information  does  not  indicate  that  stronger 
underlying  inflationary  pressures  are  building  up  domestically.  Recent  wage  developments  have 
remained  moderate,  and  this  trend  should  continue.  On  the  basis  of  this  assumption,  and  provided 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
that there are no further significant shocks to prices, annual inflation rates should drop below 2% in 
2005. 
Several upward risks to the outlook for price stability continue to exist. Concerns again relate to oil 
price  developments,  in  particular  to  the  extent  that  second-round  effects  stemming  from  wage  and 
price-setting  behaviour  materialise.  It  is  therefore  of  the  utmost  importance  to  avoid  inappropriate 
reactions, as observed in past episodes of strong oil price increases. A further upward risk relates to 
the future development of indirect taxes and administered prices. These upside risks call for ongoing 
vigilance, which is a necessary condition for keeping medium to long-term inflation expectations in line 
with our definition of price stability. 
As  regards  the  monetary  analysis,  M3  growth  remains  resilient.  The  downward  trend  in  annual  M3 
growth  from  mid-2003  appears  to  have  halted  over  the  summer  months,  and  the  shorter-term 
dynamics of M3 have strengthened. This reflects the fact that the historically low level of interest rates 
in  the  euro  area  continues  to  support  monetary  expansion,  especially  of  the  most  liquid  assets 
included in the narrow aggregate M1.  
The low level of interest rates also fuels the growth of MFI credit. The annual growth rate of loans to 
the private sector remains robust, largely driven by the dynamism of mortgage loans. These are also 
supported by strong house price increases in several euro area countries.  
There remains substantially more liquidity in the euro area than is needed to finance non-inflationary 
growth. At present, it is not clear how this excess liquidity, which is mainly the result of past portfolio 
shifts, will be used in the future. If significant parts of these liquid holdings were to be transformed into 
transaction balances, particularly at a time when confidence and economic activity were strengthening, 
inflationary risks would rise. In addition, high excess liquidity and strong credit growth could become a 
source of substantial asset price increases. 
To sum up, annual inflation rates should fall below 2% in 2005, but a number of medium-term upside 
risks to price stability need to be carefully monitored. Cross-checking with the monetary analysis also 
supports the case for strong vigilance with regard to the materialisation of risks to price stability.  
Let  me  also  address  the  current  evidence  on  fiscal  developments,  where  the  latest  budgetary 
notifications are a source of concern. While some countries will maintain a sound budgetary position, a 
significant number of euro area countries are expected to record deficits near to or above 3%. The 
aggregate euro area fiscal deficit-to-GDP ratio is expected to increase somewhat, as is the debt-to-
GDP ratio. In the coming years, important challenges for the consolidation of public finances will have 
to be faced. Member States need to renew their consolidation efforts and should not rely on one-off 
measures, so as to comply with their commitments under the Stability and Growth Pact and to foster 
confidence.  They  must  also  set  the  right  priorities  in  public  finances,  towards  structural  reform, 
innovation  and  competitiveness.  This  would  very  much  support  the  Lisbon  agenda  and  thereby 
promote economic growth, foster job creation and reduce unemployment. 
Concerning  the  European  fiscal  framework,  the  Governing  Council  is  convinced  that  substantial 
improvements  in  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  are  possible  and  would  be 
beneficial, while we would warn against a change to the text of the Treaty or the Regulations which 
form  the  basis  of  the  Pact.  We  consider  the  Pact  as  key  to  ensuring  macroeconomic  stability  on  a 
sustainable basis. It is a framework which is necessary to preserve sound fiscal policies in the euro 
area,  for  which  strict  surveillance  and  effective  peer  pressure  on  national  budget  policies  are 
indispensable. 
It is of vital importance to the credibility of the budgetary surveillance that the reliable compilation and 
timely reporting of government finance statistics is ensured. The European accounting rules must be 
fully respected when recording all types of expenditure and revenue. This should be done in a manner 
that is consistent and stable over time and homogeneous across countries. The procedures must not 
be  vulnerable  to  political  and  electoral  cycles,  as  stated  by  the  ECOFIN  Council.  Countries  should 
consider the quality and integrity of their statistics as a priority matter.  
Finally,  let  me  report  on  the  detailed  discussion  we  had  today  on  employment  and  unemployment 
developments in the euro area. Two observations stand out when we look at the period of relatively 
slow real GDP expansion since early 2001. First, after an initial rise, the euro area unemployment rate 
has  remained  broadly  unchanged  since  early  2003.  And  second,  there  seems  to  have  been  a 
relatively  limited  negative  impact  on  employment  growth  over  the  past  few  years.   The  following 
factors might help to explain this pattern. While the period of slow growth has been relatively long from 
a historical perspective, the cyclical amplitudes have been smaller and have not therefore triggered 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
very sharp reactions of employment and unemployment. In addition, wage developments have been 
more favourable than in previous episodes, and firms may have - to a greater extent than previously - 
adjusted  labour  input  downwards  in  term  of  hours,  rather  than  in  terms  of  employees.  This  in  turn 
might indicate that firms have gained an element of flexibility to adjust costs.  
Looking forward, from a cyclical point of view, employment should recover and unemployment could 
start falling in the course of next year if overall demand develops as expected. This should support 
economic  growth  through  an  increase  in  labour  income  and  a  positive  impact  on  consumer 
confidence, and thus on consumption. However, structural problems remain large. This is highlighted, 
for example, by the fact that over 40% of all unemployed people in the euro area have been without a 
job  for  more  than  a  year.  In  order  to  decisively  overcome  the  obstacles  towards  more  employment 
growth  and  to  reduce  the  trend  or  structural  level  of  unemployment,  further  comprehensive  labour 
market reforms are of the essence. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
