Bodil Nyboe Andersen: The significance of Basel II for Danish banks 
Speech  by  Mrs  Bodil  Nyboe  Andersen,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers’ Association, Copenhagen, 1 December 2004.  
 At  all  recent  annual  meetings  of  the  Danish  Bankers’  Association  the  various  speakers  have 
commented on the Basel framework. This framework sets the international standards for the capital 
adequacy of the banking organisations.  
In  the  1970s  the  G-10  countries  set  up  the  Basel  Committee,  whose  secretariat  is  at  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements (BIS). Located in Basel, BIS is often called the central bank to central banks.  
In the 1980s the Basel Committee started its work of formulating international standards for the capital 
adequacy  of  banking  institutions.  In  1988  this  resulted  in  the  Basel  framework  -  now  called  the 
Basel I framework. This is still the basis for the requirements of the size and structure of the capital of 
banking organisations in more than 100 countries all over the world.  
The strong expansion and increasing complexity of the financial markets and banking organisations 
since the Basel I framework was drawn up have made it necessary to formulate a more sophisticated 
framework. The Basel Committee therefore took on the drafting of new international standards, and 
the first proposal was put forward in 1999.  
This work has proved to be more complex than expected. The Committee has on several occasions 
issued consultative papers inviting the financial world, authorities and other stakeholders to comment 
on the drafts put forward.  
This process has been quite comprehensive, but also highly valuable, since it has given all countries 
and parties the opportunity to table suggestions and constructive criticism. In this way, a number of 
special circumstances could be taken into consideration.  
The consultations have by no means made the process less protracted, nor have they simplified the 
proposal. Nonetheless, on 26 June 2004, the Basel Committee closed the file and reached a decision 
on  the  new  international  standards.  The  framework  now  fills  more  than  200  pages,  while  Basel  I 
comprised 30 pages.  
On the basis of these standards the European Commission has put forward a draft directive for a new 
capital adequacy framework. The directive is expected to be adopted in 2006, and to come into force 
in 2007-2008. 
The  new  standards  are  of  course  considerably  more  complicated  than  the  1988  framework.  A 
noteworthy  departure  from  the  current  framework  is  that  individual  banks  will  be  able  to  choose 
between two different principles for compiling the capital required to cover credit risks. Larger banks 
may  base  their  capital  requirement  on  an  internal  risk  model,  while  others  may  opt  for  a  simpler 
standard method closer to the current principles.  
The  purpose  is  to  allow  for  the  differences  between  small  local  banks  and  large  international 
institutions that apply sophisticated risk management tools.  
As  always,  the  bank’s  board  and  management  are  responsible  for  capital  adequacy,  including  a 
necessary buffer to ensure sound operations. Basel II sets out firmly and clearly the principle that the 
supervisory authorities must perform an overall evaluation of each individual bank’s need for capital. 
The  board  and  management’s  assessment  of  the  need  for  capital  must  be  discussed  with  the 
supervisory authority, which in the end may require the bank to hold more capital than the equivalent 
of the minimum requirement of 8 per cent.  
Finally, the Basel II framework also includes standards for the disclosure of information relating to risk 
and capital adequacy.  
The idea behind the disclosure requirement in the set of standards is that the soundness of banking 
institutions  is  evaluated  not  only  by  the  supervisory  authorities,  but  also  by  market  participants. 
Monitoring  by  the  authorities  and  the  market  in  combination  enhances  the  certainty  that  signs  of 
weakness will be spotted in time, avoiding potential crises. Avoiding financial crises is, of course, the 
whole purpose of the exercise. 
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
The  banks  play  an  exceptional,  central  role  in  society.  This  is  the  background  to  the  extensive 
regulation of banking activities.  
One sometimes hears the remark that regulation by the authorities is a special burden imposed on the 
banks. This leads to the argument for uniform international regulations, to ensure a level playing field. 
This is the purpose of the Basel framework.  
Often  the  banks  also  point  out  that  the  authorities  should  remember  that  banks  are  business 
enterprises that need some scope for manoeuvre in order to be competitive.  
One could pose the theoretical question of how the banks would behave in the absence of regulation 
by the authorities.  
In  our  time,  this  question  is  so  hypothetical  that  there  is  no  clear  answer.  However,  it  is  thought-
provoking that back in the days when the banks were not subject to any regulation - before the first 
Danish  banking  act  in  1919  -  capital  adequacy  was  generally  far  higher  than  today.  Around  the 
mid-19th century capital and reserves were approximately 40 per cent of the balance-sheet total, and 
by around 1900 a good 20 per cent. In the 1920s this had fallen to around 12 per cent. Today, the 
banks’ net capital is an average of approximately 6 per cent of the balance-sheet total. 
A  comparison  of  this  nature  should  naturally  not  be  taken  too  literally,  although  it  may  lead  to  the 
realisation that regulation should not be perceived as a burden, but perhaps a valuable asset!  
On  1  January  2005  the  EU’s  new  accounting  regulation  comes  into  force.  It  introduces  the 
international accounting standards (IAS) and will also affect the banks’ financial statements. The fact 
that - in the special EU version - it also poses some particular problems for mortgage-credit institutes 
should also be mentioned here.  
With  IAS,  the  previous  Danish  accounting  principle  for  financial  enterprises  to  state  securities  at 
market value will no longer apply in every case. Danmarks Nationalbank regrets that under the new 
rules some elements of a securities portfolio can be subject to cost measurement.  
So far there has been agreement in Denmark that market value is the most regular principle. However, 
this  now  has  to  defer  to  the  need  for  uniform  rules  within  the  EU,  where  the  market  valuation  of 
securities has not been consistently applied.  
The interplay between the IAS rules and Basel II is especially significant for Danish banks. So far, we 
have  applied  a prudent principle  to  the  compilation of  losses  and  provisions.  Instead,  the  IAS  rules 
introduce a neutrality principle for the assessment of the provision requirement.  
The term itself states the case: the banks must no longer be quite so prudent in their evaluation of the 
need for provisions. This may require substantial provisions to be carried back, reducing the banks’ 
buffer against potential losses. To put it another way, the change of principle may release substantial 
funds in Danish banks. 
Added to this, on the introduction of the Basel II rules a reduction of the capital requirements of Danish 
banks can be expected, since loans to households as well as to small and medium-sized enterprises 
are subject to a lower risk weighting under the new framework. These loans weigh relatively heavily in 
Denmark.  
In overall terms, this is a considerable relaxation of the capital requirements and provisions. So it is 
important that the boards and managements of the various banks consider carefully how much capital 
they need in order to ensure an appropriate buffer in case of unforeseen adverse events.  
In  order  to  promote  this  process,  the  current  bill  for  a  Financial  Business  Act  anticipates  the 
Basel II framework. Already in 2005 the requirement  is introduced that the banks must assess their 
need  for  capital  and  engage  in  dialogue  with  the  Danish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority  in  this 
respect. The Bill does not require the disclosure of the results of these deliberations. Since these are 
provisional  rules  prior  to  the  full  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  framework  there  can  be  arguments 
against disclosure. The few years involved can be perceived as a running-in period during which the 
previous dialogue between the banks and the Authority concerning provisions is supplemented by a 
dialogue on capital adequacy.  
Danmarks Nationalbank would like to emphasise, however, that the assessment of the need for capital 
should be disclosed when the full Basel II framework is implemented.  
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
The financial markets and the financial products are becoming more and more technically advanced 
and sophisticated. New products are constantly appearing to match customers’ changing needs and 
preferences.  
In overall terms this is good for both business enterprises and households. Choice is always a good 
thing - so that everyone’s needs can be catered for. For large groups of especially households it can 
be  very  difficult,  however,  to  pinpoint  exactly  what  is  needed,  and  even  harder  to  understand  the 
various products and the risks they entail, and make the right choice. This applies especially to life’s 
major financial decisions, not least financing the purchase of a home and choosing the right pension 
scheme.  
This  is  where  advisory  services  come  into  play.  Bank  employees  devote  a  lot  of  effort  to  advising 
households.  It  is,  however,  important  that  clients  understand  that  there  is  no  certain  answer  to  the 
question of how e.g. interest rates and share prices will develop in the future. The adviser may have 
certain expectations, but nobody can know for sure. 
Today  many  banks  do  a  lot  to  emphasise  that  they  are  profit-driven  commercial  enterprises.  This 
means that their employees must be good at selling their products. For this reason, some banks have 
incentive structures to reward successful salespeople.  
Undoubtedly the interests of the bank and the private client may coincide, but it is hard to believe that 
this is always the case. This applies to many types of professional advisers - from insurance brokers to 
pharmacies, opticians and banks. 
Denmark is now harvesting the fruits of more than 20 years’ stability-oriented economic policy during 
which major structural reforms have been implemented.  
As a result, we have favourable growth, low inflation, a large current-account surplus and a surplus on 
government finances. Unemployment is low in international terms. After rising for two years the curve 
seems  to  be  on  the  way  down  as  the  unemployment  level  has  stabilised,  or  is  dropping  slowly, 
depending  on  whether  people  in  job  creation  schemes  are  included  or  not.  The  krone  is  extremely 
stable against the euro and both short-term and long-term interest rates are only marginally above the 
euro interest rates.  
So  what  are  the  challenges  to  economic  policy?  Although  no  short-term  economic  measures  are 
called  for,  significant  structural  challenges  are  waiting  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  Our  life 
expectancy  is  longer,  which  is  good  news,  even  though  it  is  often  presented  as  a  problem. 
Nonetheless, the consequence is that the demand for welfare benefits will rise. Greater affluence will 
also make us demand more in terms of the quality of these services.  
Moreover, in years to come more people will retire from than join the labour force, while many groups 
would like more time away from work. There is no obvious way of reconciling these aspirations. The 
government has therefore set up a Welfare Commission to investigate all of these issues.  
Before  the  Commission’s  reports  are  published  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  express  the 
hope  that  all  groups  of  society:  the  business  community,  stakeholder  organisations,  politicians  and 
ordinary citizens, will read the reports with an open mind towards discussing the issues raised. We 
need a serious debate without avoiding or skirting these issues. Pointing to other countries that face 
even bigger problems is not the solution either. 
At a time when the economy is flourishing and no short-term measures are required it is important that 
we make a start on debating the long-term economic structures.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 3
