Michael C Bonello: Opportunities and challenges of the euro for business 
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  conference  The 
Transition to ERM II, EMU Convergence & EURO Adoption - Implications for Enterprises, organised 
by the Malta Business Bureau and the Mediterranean Bank Network, Valletta, 15 October 2004. 
 The rationale for a common currency 
In addressing this topic it is first of all important to understand that the adoption of the euro marks only 
the last stage in a much broader process which started with accession to the EU. At that point, Malta 
concurrently joined the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), but its participation in EMU is for the 
time being limited. In particular, Malta has not yet entered ERM II. This means that both monetary and 
exchange rate policy are still under the control of the local authorities.  
This is in line with the EC Treaty, which confers upon new members the status of Member State with a 
derogation, allowing them considerable discretion as to how and when they should proceed towards 
the euro. Such an approach builds on the premise that whereas a currency union offers the prospect 
of considerable benefits to its members, these can only materialise when a high level of convergence 
has  been  reached  with  the  other  participants  in  the  union.  When  this  point  has  been  reached,  a 
prospective new member is much less susceptible to asymmetric shocks, i.e. shocks which are not 
common to other members, and which would therefore require a monetary policy stance that differs 
from that which is appropriate to the currency union. The Treaty’s provision for a flexible time-table is 
grounded in this fundamental economic principle.  
Now, while most of us are probably familiar with the fact that Malta has an obligation to adopt the euro 
at some point in the future, the rationale for doing so might be less obvious. Perhaps an appropriate 
way to put it is that EMU has come to play a central part of what the EU is today and of what it is 
expected  to  become  in  the  future.  This  is  because  by  significantly  reducing  transaction  costs  and 
intra-area exchange rate risk, the euro facilitates progress towards the completion of the Single Market 
and gives access to a large pool of financial resources. By increasing price transparency, moreover, 
the  euro  fosters  a  more  competitive  environment,  which,  in  turn,  is  conducive  to  higher  levels  of 
efficiency.  
In this sense, the euro also contributes to the achievement of the Lisbon Strategy’s goal of making the 
EU the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world. Indeed, the Strategy 
states explicitly that it is essential to exploit the potential of the euro to promote the integration of EU 
financial markets and also, therefore, SME growth and job creation. 
With this one should factor in the other elements of EMU: the arrangements in place to promote fiscal 
discipline  and  economic  policy  co-ordination;  and  the  pursuit  of  price  and  financial  stability  by  the 
European  Central  Bank  (ECB).  These  contribute  to  a  stable  macro-economic  environment  which, 
together  with  the  climate  of  greater  predictability  ensuing  from  reduced  exchange  rate  risk,  support 
investment and growth.  
It is with this perspective in mind that fellow central bankers and government officials in the other new 
Member States have expressed their preference for an early adoption of the euro. It also constitutes 
the motivation for the Maltese Government’s commitment to implement the necessary reforms that will 
prepare the economy for the heightened levels of competition ensuing from the Single Market, while 
providing businesses with a favourable environment in which they should be better able to profit from 
Malta’s entry in the euro area.  
New opportunities for business 
The benefits of the single currency for business could be substantial, and will occur along the various 
stages from EU entry through the ERM II period to entry in the euro area. They will, however, become 
more tangible when the euro is introduced as an accounting and physical currency. At that point, the 
value of the Maltese lira in terms of the euro will be fixed and foreign exchange risk in euro will be 
eliminated. The need for dual accountancy systems and software will likewise be reduced. The single 
currency will also minimize the need for maintaining separate cash floats, a widespread practice in the 
local tourist sector.  
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
At the level of the individual firm, the single currency should also translate into a reduction in the risks 
and  costs  associated  with  managing  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  When  Malta  adopts  the  euro, 
currency risks will be hedged automatically for a large volume of transactions, allowing businesses to 
focus their resources on those activities which generate real value.  
For  locally-oriented  SMEs  in  particular,  the  potential  reduction  in  currency  mismatches,  and  in  the 
volatility  in  cash  flows  and  profitability  associated  with  them,  can  be  substantial  for  whatever  their 
dependence on  foreign  markets  in  terms  of  exports,  they  are  all,  in  varying  degrees,  consumers  of 
imports.  The  end  result  should  be  lower  operating  costs,  higher  levels  of  efficiency,  improved 
profitability  and  healthier  balance  sheets,  all  of  which  should  result  in  access  to  credit  on  more 
favourable terms. 
Some of these benefits will indeed materialise ahead of entry in the euro area. You will recall that in 
ERM  II  the  Maltese  lira  will  be  fully  pegged  to  the  euro,  so  that  the  variability,  albeit  limited,  in  the 
lira/euro exchange rate associated with the fact that the euro has a weight of 70% in the Maltese lira 
currency basket will disappear. On the other hand, some variability could nevertheless manifest itself 
to the extent that the currency fluctuates within the ERM II band. 
The  advantages of  pegging  fully  to  the  euro  area should  nonetheless  be  considerable,  as  the  euro 
area already accounts for more than half of Malta’s external trade in non-primary products. For the EU 
as a whole, the share is even higher. This share is set to increase as Malta integrates further with the 
EU and as more of the current non-euro area Member States join the euro area.  
While prospects for the UK’s entry in the euro area remain uncertain, the analysis does not change 
much, as a large number of companies operating in the UK have already switched to the euro as an 
accounting currency to gain exposure on international markets and to preserve their competitiveness. 
This trend is set to continue and is likely to spread to other countries as the euro continues to establish 
itself as an international currency. This means that the local business community could face pressures 
to  make  payments  in  euro  even  while  Malta  is  outside  the  euro  area,  acquiring  new  currency 
mismatches  in  the  process.  There  comes  a  point,  therefore,  when  delaying  adoption  of  the  euro 
results in more pain than gain. 
Membership of the euro area will also present considerable financing opportunities associated with the 
large  size  and  liquidity  of  financial  markets  in  euro.  Businesses  will  be  in  a  better  position  to  shop 
around for the cheapest terms and the highest return. These advantages are an inevitable outcome of 
the  presence  of  a  large  number  of  market  participants  and  the  further  unfolding  of  the  Financial 
Services Action Plan, which will enhance the tradability of euro assets in the euro area and beyond.  
Participation in the single currency area provides scope for further cost savings in the form of lower 
risk premia resulting from adherence to the EU’s strict macroeconomic policy framework. This aspect 
is particularly relevant in the Maltese context, as the small size of the country and the prevalence of 
micro-enterprises make the economy highly susceptible to developments abroad. Foreign banks and 
suppliers seek to cover this perceived risk by building a higher risk premium into the prices quoted to 
Maltese businesses. The insurance provided by the discipline of EMU, and the high level of intra-EU 
integration  should  reduce  this  perceived  vulnerability  and,  with  that,  the  risk  premium.  This  is 
conducive to lower interest rates and to access to financing on more favourable terms. 
A related advantage is the improved marketability and acceptance of collateral. Maltese lira assets are 
not  considered  sufficiently  liquid  by  foreign  lenders  in  view  of  the  thinness  of  domestic  financial 
markets.  Many  SMEs  are  consequently  either  denied  foreign  financing  altogether,  or  offered 
prohibitive  rates.  This  constraint  should  ease  considerably  with  the  adoption  of  the  euro,  as  the 
redenomination of domestic assets into euro will improve the marketability of the collateral offered by 
local businesses. 
Further benefits should accrue to business from the eventual linkage of the domestic payment system 
to  the  EU’s  TARGET  system.  By  linking  together  the  national  systems  of  Member  States  with  the 
payment  mechanism  of  the  ECB,  TARGET  allows  payments  in  euro  to  be  effected  much  faster, 
potentially improving liquidity conditions in the financial sectors of participating countries while lowering 
the processing costs of cross-border payments in euro.  
The challenges posed by the single currency 
Thus far we have reviewed the opportunities inherent in membership of the euro area. As might be 
expected,  however,  membership will  also  present  new  challenges.  For  example,  while  it  places  the 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
economy  in  a  better  position  to  compete  internationally,  it  exposes  businesses  to  additional 
competitive  pressures.  For  a  start,  customers  will  be  better  able  to  compare  local  prices  with 
comparable  prices  abroad  and  will  increasingly  question  price  differentials.  Some  operators  will,  of 
course, benefit from lower procurement costs, but others might find it difficult to survive. It is, therefore, 
advisable  for  pricing  strategies  to  be  reassessed  well  in  advance  of  the  date  of  the  actual  euro 
changeover, especially where price is an important variable in marketing strategies.  
In the same manner that the euro will facilitate price comparisons, other monetary variables such as 
cost  per  unit,  average  wage,  annual  sales  volumes,  administrative  expenses  and  profits  will  also 
become  easier  to  compare  across  countries.  In  other  words,  the  single  currency  will  expose  the 
performance of Maltese businesses to a much more detailed scrutiny than they are accustomed to.  
From a broader macroeconomic perspective, it could also be argued that just as the euro will enable 
domestic operators to reap the full benefits of the Single Market, a higher level of integration with the 
EU could also make the Maltese economy more susceptible to developments abroad. This applies in 
particular to the financial sector. Thus, for example, while participation in European financial markets 
will present unprecedented opportunities for risk diversification, this also carries with it an increased 
danger of contagion should weaknesses develop in specific segments of the market. Furthermore, the 
TARGET payment system will facilitate the transmission of financial risks between different institutions 
operating within Member States, calling for extreme vigilance on the part of the Central Bank of Malta 
and the MFSA.  
While  most  sectors  of  the  Maltese  economy  have  been  exposed  to  international  competition  for  a 
number of years now, and while the financial sector incorporates adequate safeguard measures, there 
is  clearly  no  room  for  complacency.  As  Hari  Vittas,  Alternate  Executive  Director  for  Malta’s 
constituency in the IMF aptly put it during a recent IMF Economic Forum, “The potential benefits of 
monetary  integration  may  be  large,  but  they  are  not  automatic  and  can  easily  be  wasted  in  the 
absence of good policies.”1 
On  balance,  however,  the  benefits  of  participation  in  the  euro  area  should  more  than  outweigh  the 
costs, such that over a sufficiently long time span the growth potential of an economy should be higher 
than  it  would  have  been  outside  the  union.  This  expectation  is  supported  by  the  results  of  recent 
research.  An  extensive  study  by  Andrew  K  Rose  of  the  University  of  California  at  Berkeley,  for 
example, concludes that a currency union results in approximately a doubling of trade. Within the euro 
zone, moreover, it is estimated that trade volumes have increased by 15 per cent, beyond what can be 
explained by growth and other factors. 
Recognizing such benefits of EMU, many credit rating agencies foresee an upgrade in the ratings of 
those  new  Member  States  that  are  among  the  first  to  adopt  the  euro,2  although  they  generally 
emphasize  that  what  matters  is  establishing  a  track  record  with  respect  to  the  implementation  of 
reforms, especially fiscal consolidation.3 
The broader macroeconomic challenge 
These  observations  notwithstanding,  premature  participation  in  a  currency  union  is  nevertheless 
associated  with  some  potential  pitfalls.  These  result  from  the  loss  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate 
policy as a tool for stabilisation purposes. As I will shortly explain, however, the arguments typically 
advanced against participation in a currency union are not very strong in Malta’s case.  
It is sometimes argued, for example, that the Maltese economy might be on a different point on the 
business cycle relative to the euro area, warranting a different monetary policy stance from that of the 
                                                      
1  
2  
IMF Survey. Adopting the Euro. Vol. 33. Number 10. May 31 2004. 
In July, for example, while noting that “credible convergence towards adoption of the euro was likely to be a positive driver 
of  foreign  currency  ratings  over  the  coming  years”,  Fitch  Ratings  only  upgraded  the  ratings  for  the  Baltic  States  and 
Slovenia.  They  refrained  from  making  other  EMU  related  changes  for  those  Member  States  where  the  size  of  the  fiscal 
deficit is such that it is likely to delay entry in the euro area, noting that further changes are still premature. 
3   Thus, for example, Moody’s latest credit opinion on Malta notes that “far-reaching structural reforms - most of which are 
guaranteed by compliance with EU requirements - will support the country’s A3 rating over the medium term. “ Similarly, 
Standard and Poor’s note that “being a member of EMU is not a direct rating factor in our analysis. Once Malta is an EMU 
member, the foreign currency and local currency rating will be equalised but at what level will depend mostly on the fiscal 
account.” 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
ECB;  and  that  even  if  the  degree  of  business  cycle  synchronisation  with  the  euro  area  is  already 
significant,  national  economic  and  financial  structures  might  respond  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
stimuli differently from the average euro area Member State. While this might not matter much when 
other tools of adjustment such as the exchange rate are available, the argument continues, the use of 
these  tools  is  thwarted  in  a  single  currency  area  such  as  EMU.  On  the  one  hand,  exchange  rate 
flexibility is conditioned by the maximum allowable bands in ERM II, and is given up altogether upon 
the irrevocable fixing of the exchange rate at the point of euro adoption. Additionally, the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  constrains  the  use  of  fiscal  policy  for  fine  tuning  the  economy.  Consequently,  any 
underlying imbalances in the economy are bound to persist.  
While  based  on  sound  theoretical  principles,  this  argument  is  largely  not  applicable  to  Malta.  In 
particular, the business cycle is already fairly synchronised with that of the euro area, and the degree 
of trade integration is also quite significant. At the same time, sectoral GDP and employment data both 
reveal a strong correspondence with euro area economic structures, after allowance is made for the 
relatively  more  dominant  role  of  tourism  in  Malta.  Moreover,  the  small  size  of  the  domestic  labour 
market and the extent of migration in and out of the country in past years suggest that in the event of 
an external shock specific to Malta, the labour market is sufficiently flexible to adapt. On a number of 
counts,  in  fact,  labour  market  indicators  are  already  comparable  to  those  of  the  euro  area.  The 
resemblance  is  not  complete,  but  further  progress  in  this  regard  is  to  be  expected  as  public  sector 
employment  is  downsized  further  and  as  the  structural  reform  programme  continues  to  unfold.  A 
similar  conclusion  emerges  from  a  comparison  with  the  euro  area  of  the  structure  of  the  domestic 
financial  sector  and  indicators  of  real  convergence;  the  degree  of  similarity  is  already  significant, 
although there remains scope for some catching up with respect to income and price levels.  
As  far  as  fiscal  policy  is  concerned,  this  has  rarely  been  used  for  fine  tuning  purposes  in  Malta.  If 
anything, the disciplinary mechanisms of EMU should serve to reverse the current trend of negative 
balances, allowing fiscal policy to respond to the needs of the economy and leaving monetary policy to 
focus more on price stability. 
As for the exchange rate, by pegging the Maltese lira to a basket of currencies, which is recognized as 
being the preferred regime for a small, open economy, the monetary authorities have long since given 
up the exchange rate as a tool of adjustment. Although the lira fluctuates on a daily basis against the 
euro and other foreign currencies, it is fixed in terms of the basket. The use of a fixed exchange rate in 
which the euro is the main reference currency, moreover, already requires our interest rates to shadow 
those  of  the  euro  area.  In  practice,  therefore,  Malta  has  already  largely  relinquished  monetary 
independence, so that entry in the euro area will not represent a major loss in this regard. 
Overall, therefore, the evidence suggests that neither ERM II nor the irrevocable fixing of the Maltese 
lira/euro exchange rate at a later stage involve a radical shift in policy regime. And since the Maltese 
economy already possesses many of the characteristics required for a smooth transition to a complete 
peg with the euro and full participation in EMU, the adoption of the euro does not only carry with it the 
prospect of substantial benefits, but is also an objective which can be pursued without fear of serious 
economic repercussions. 
Entry  in  the  euro  area,  however,  is  not  automatic  but  is  subject  to  the  fulfilment  of  a  number  of 
conditions. In this respect, since the legal, institutional and operational preparations are on track, the 
only  significant  challenge  is  represented  by  the  Maastricht  criteria.  As  for  the  inflation  rate  and  the 
long-term interest rates, these have generally been within, or close to, the reference values in recent 
years. As far as ERM II is concerned, the minimal exchange rate movements observed over the past 
few years suggest that Malta would have kept within a hypothetical ERM II band. The indications are, 
therefore, that this criterion, too, is achievable. Indeed, this should not be any more difficult than the 
current task of maintaining a hard peg with a currency basket. 
This leaves the fiscal criteria as the major outstanding problem since the budget deficit is well above 
the 3% limit and the debt ratio likewise exceeds the 60% reference value. The need to curb the deficit 
is  widely  acknowledged  and  is  a  central  objective  of  the  Government’s  Convergence  Programme 
2004-2007. This is most welcome because progress in the area of fiscal consolidation and structural 
reforms is desirable not only because of the need to satisfy the Maastricht criteria. It is also required to 
support the exchange rate as long as Malta continues to pursue a fixed exchange rate regime. 
Progress in this direction is certainly also necessary if we want to have a smooth passage through 
ERM II. Indeed, the size of the fiscal deficit is a determinant of the degree of exchange rate fixity which 
a country can afford, and thus also has implications for the width of the band which will apply to the 
Maltese lira in ERM II. On the one hand, Malta’s successful experience with a peg in terms of price 
4 
 BIS Review 61/2004
stability, coupled with the importance of exchange rate fixity for a small open economy that is heavily 
dependent on foreign trade and investment, suggest that it would be desirable if the features of the 
present exchange rate regime - predictability and stability - were preserved while Malta participates in 
ERM II. On the other hand, the appropriate width of the bands in ERM II is inversely related to the 
degree  of  convergence  achieved  with  the  euro  area,  but  positively  related  to  the  size  of  the  fiscal 
deficit. Whether the continuation of the features of the current regime will remain possible or not, with 
all the advantages that it brings to the business community, thus depends on the extent of progress 
with structural reforms and fiscal consolidation. 
It is, therefore, vital that the reform agenda remains on track. It is in the common interest to ensure 
that  the  economy  converges  faster  towards  the  high levels  of  efficiency  and  living  standards  of  the 
euro area. The business community clearly has an interest in contributing to the achievement of this 
objective,  both  by  modernizing  its  structures  and  operational  practices  so  as  to  be  better  placed  to 
seize the opportunities and also by participating constructively in national fora such as the MCESD. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 5
