Alan Bollard: Being a responsible host - supervising foreign-owned banks 
Address by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  Chicago  Conference:  Systemic  Financial  Crises  -  Resolving  Large  Bank  Insolvencies, 
Chicago, 2 October 2004. 
 This  speech  addresses  a  theme  that  has  received  increasing  attention  internationally  and  at  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  of  late  -  the  issue  of  how  a  host  supervisory  authority  can  most 
effectively  maintain  a  sound  banking  system  and  respond  to  bank  failures  when  the  system  is 
dominated by foreign-owned banks. 
For  any  country,  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  critical  to  a  healthy  economy  -  a  point  that 
becomes  dramatically  apparent  when  systemically  important  banks  fail.  This  is  equally  true  for  a 
financial  system  dominated  by  foreign-owned  banks  as  for  one  composed  mainly  of  domestically-
owned banks. In either case, the supervisory authority and central bank - whether home or host - must 
ensure that they have the capacity to maintain a robust financial system and to respond quickly and 
effectively to any financial crisis - often within hours. This is a challenge for any supervisor, but it is all 
the  more  complicated  when  it  is  a  foreign-owned  bank  that  gets  into  difficulty,  given  different 
jurisdictions, potentially different statutory objectives between home and host authorities, and a greater 
degree  of  jurisdictional  separation  between  taxpayers  and  depositors  than  is  the  case  with 
domestically-owned banks. 
In  a  world  of  increasing  global  and  regional  integration,  the  difficulties  faced  by  a  host  supervisory 
authority is an issue of growing importance for many countries throughout the world. My counterparts 
in Central and Eastern Europe, Scandinavia and Latin America will readily relate to this theme, given 
that  they  also  face  increasing  foreign  bank  participation  in  their  financial  systems.  The  challenge, 
therefore, is to ensure that home and host authorities respond to these changes in ways that enhance 
the stability of both of their financial systems, while continuing to derive the benefits that cross-border 
banking can provide. 
New Zealand’s banking system is dominated by foreign banks 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand - New Zealand’s banking supervision authority - is well practiced at 
being a host supervisory authority. Our banking system has been dominated by foreign-owned banks 
for over a decade now. Few, if any, countries have a banking system as foreign-dominated as ours. 
Let me quote some statistics to illustrate the point: 
• 
• 
All but two of the 16 registered banks in New Zealand are foreign-owned. 
All of the four systemically important banks in New Zealand are Australian owned - holding 
around 85 per cent of banking system assets. 
The  four  large  banks  dominate  the  banking system, with  individual  market  shares  ranging 
from around 15 per cent to 35 per cent of banking system assets. 
 Overall, the strong presence of foreign banks has brought many benefits to New Zealand, in terms of 
both soundness and efficiency. It has enhanced risk management capacity within the banking system, 
facilitated  the  entry  of  new  banking  products  and  services,  and  reduced  the  financial  system’s 
vulnerability to domestic economic shocks. 
Against  these  benefits,  of  course,  there  are  also  risks  associated  with  such  strong  dominance  by 
foreign banks. The New Zealand financial system is exposed to contagion risk from the parent banking 
systems - all the more so given the strong industry concentration and the dominant position of banks 
from just one country. Extensive foreign bank participation in the banking system can also complicate 
the supervision of banks in the host financial system - particularly if core functionality is outsourced to 
parent  banks.  It  also  complicates  the  process  for  dealing  with  bank  crises  in  ways  that  adequately 
meet the needs of the host financial system. 
In order to maintain a sound financial system when most of the banks are foreign owned, robust host 
supervision  arrangements  are  essential;  so  too  are  structures  for  coordinating  home  and  host 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 1
supervision. But, as I will shortly explain, the coordination of home and host supervisory arrangements 
in ways that meet the needs of both countries is both complicated and challenging. 
Differences in the interests of home and host supervisors 
One  of  the  important  issues  arising  from  a  banking  system  dominated  by  foreign  banks  is  the 
relationship  between  the  home  and  host  supervisory  agencies  and  central  banks.  Home  and  host 
countries undertake their banking supervision roles and responsibilities within the framework of home-
host  supervision  set  out  in  the  Basel  Concordat  -  the  internationally  agreed  framework  for  the 
supervision  by  national  authorities  of  multinational  banks.  The  Concordat  emphasises  the  general 
responsibility of home country authorities to supervise banks’ worldwide consolidated activities, as well 
as  the  host  country  responsibility  to  supervise  foreign  bank  establishments  in  their  territories  as 
individual institutions. The Concordat, and its subsequent elaborations, have a strong emphasis on the 
need  for  adequate  exchange  of  information,  but  have  not  -  to  date  -  sought  to  establish  an 
international framework for the cross-border co-ordination of interventions responding to bank distress. 
It will not be easy to establish such a framework. 
A host financial system derives benefit from the home supervision of the parent banks. This provides 
some assurance  to  the host  supervisor  that  the  parent  bank’s and  consolidated  group’s soundness 
comes  under  regular  scrutiny  by  the  home  authority,  including  in  respect  of  capital  adequacy,  risk 
positions,  risk  management  systems,  governance  arrangements,  and  parent  oversight  of  foreign 
subsidiaries and branches. Equally, the home supervisor benefits from effective supervisory and bank 
governance  arrangements  in  the  host  country  -  especially  when  the  home  country’s  banks  have 
substantial foreign operations. 
In New Zealand, we openly acknowledge the benefit that our financial system derives from the role 
played by the Australian and other regulatory authorities in this regard. However, this does not cause 
us to be complacent or to place excessive reliance on the home supervisory authorities. We are well 
aware  that,  although  home  and  host  supervisory  authorities  and  central  banks  have  broadly 
complementary interests, they can also have divergences - and even conflicts - of interests in some 
key respects. Indeed, the areas of potential divergence or conflict are likely to become most apparent 
when the stakes are at their highest - in a bank distress situation. 
The potential divergences and conflicts can arise in a number of ways. For example: 
Home  and  host  authorities  may  have  different  statutory  objectives  to  meet  in  the  exercise  of  their 
supervisory responsibilities. In some countries, depositor protection is a primary goal of supervision. In 
other countries - such as New Zealand - the soundness and efficiency of the financial system is the 
primary goal. Such divergences can lead to significant differences in supervisory policies and in the 
strategy for responding to financial crises. 
There  can  also  be  conflicts  of  interest  between  the  home  and  host  authorities  in  the  allocation  of 
capital  and  risks  across  a  multinational  banking  group.  The  home  authorities  have  an  interest  in 
retaining  as  much  capital  within  the  home  jurisdiction,  and  particularly  within  the  parent  bank,  as 
possible. Conversely, the host authority would like to see a reasonable portion of the group’s capital 
vested in the local subsidiary. A similar dichotomy of interest applies in respect of the spread of risk 
across the banking group. In times of stress, the allocation of capital and risk within the group can be 
crucial.  Tensions  between  home  and  host  authorities  can  quickly  become  apparent  in  those 
circumstances.  This  is  especially  so  when  the  bank  subsidiary  is  under-capitalised  and  the  host 
authorities  are  requesting  the  parent  bank  to  inject  more  capital.  The  situation  is  even  more 
complicated when the bank in distress is a branch of a foreign bank. 
The home and host authorities may also have different interests in deciding the response to a banking 
crisis.  The  home  authorities’  primary  interest  and  (generally)  their  primary  statutory  duty  is  the 
maintenance of stability in the home financial system. They have no responsibilities for the stability of 
the  host  financial  system.  To  the  extent  that  they are  interested  in  the stability  of  the  host  financial 
system, it is likely to relate to the possible impact on the parent bank’s operations in that system and 
the likely flow-on effects to the home financial system. A host supervisor therefore cannot rely on the 
home supervisor to act in the interests of the host financial system. Similarly, host countries do not 
generally owe any formal duties to home countries or their supervisory authorities. 
The home and host countries can have very different views on the choice of techniques for responding 
to bank distress. Clearly, the authorities in each country will have a menu of choices available, ranging 
2 
 BIS Review 55/2004
from  institutional  bail-outs  to  liquidation,  with  intermediate  options  available  in  some  circumstances. 
These choices have to be made on the basis of an assessment of the costs and benefits of alternative 
approaches within each market, and there can be no assurance that different countries will - or should 
- necessarily come to the same conclusion. 
Moreover, home and host authorities may have quite different perceptions of when a crisis is systemic. 
The failure of a bank operating in the home and host countries may represent a major systemic crisis 
or a threat to the reputation of the financial system in the host country, while being of relatively minor 
significance  in  the  home  country  -  or  vice  versa.  In  the  former  case,  the  host  authorities  would 
therefore  attach  great  importance  to  a  quick  and  effective  resolution  of  the  crisis,  while  the  home 
authorities  may  be  less  concerned.  Again,  this could  impede  the  ability  to  implement a  coordinated 
response to the crisis. 
These matters are not straightforward when there is a largely bilateral relationship between home and 
host countries, of the kind faced by New Zealand. Matters become even more complicated when a 
parent  bank  has  many  operations  in  different  countries.  In  these  circumstances,  the  prospect  of  a 
large number of supervisors being able to agree on co-ordinated action within a short time-frame is not 
good.  The  international  record  tends  to  show  that  supervisors  have  effectively  been  placed  in  a 
position  where  they  have  had  to  act  on  their  own  judgement,  in  the  light  of  their  own  particular 
circumstances, when complex cross-border bank insolvencies have occurred. 
The need for robust host supervision arrangements 
For  these  reasons,  and  in  the  absence  of  any  fair  and  formalised,  operationally  and  legally  robust, 
international framework, we at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand think it would be very imprudent for 
a host authority to rely on the home authority to protect the host financial system. This does not mean 
that we are not still considering the issues with an open mind. But at this point, we need to continue to 
place  importance on  our ability  to  supervise  the  New  Zealand  banking system  and  to respond  to a 
banking crisis in ways that enable us to protect New Zealand’s interests without placing undue reliance 
on the actions of the home authorities. That said, we also recognise that the most effective response 
to a cross-border crisis would desirably involve close cooperation and coordination between the home 
and host authorities. 
We  are  therefore  actively  working  towards  the  implementation  of  enhanced  home/host  supervisory 
and crisis response arrangements, while still retaining a strong capacity to independently manage a 
banking crisis. Our dual aims are to maintain the capacity to protect the New Zealand financial system 
on a stand-alone basis, while also building the framework for closer coordination between the host and 
home authorities. Let me highlight the key features of both aspects of this approach. 
Our supervisory tools are similar to those of a home supervisor. While we have adopted a somewhat 
less  intrusive  approach  than  some  supervisors,  we  require  all  banks,  whether  foreign-owned  or 
domestically-owned,  to  comply  with  the  same  basic  requirements,  including  in  respect  of  minimum 
capital  adequacy,  related  party  exposure  limits,  comprehensive  public  disclosure  requirements, 
governance requirements, and so forth. We monitor all banks on a regular basis and consult with the 
senior  management  teams  of  each  bank  annually,  again,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  foreign-
owned or domestically-owned. We also take a close interest in the parent banks of the systemically 
important banks in New Zealand, including monitoring their financial condition and meeting with their 
senior management teams. 
In all of these areas, we have sought to dovetail our supervisory arrangements with those of the home 
supervisors  -  particularly  Australia  -  in  order  to  keep  banks’  compliance  costs  relatively  low  and  to 
avoid excessive operational inefficiencies for banks. We are a welcoming, but responsible, host. This 
approach is reflected in a range of areas, including in the approach we have taken to the prudential 
requirements for banks and in the way we monitor and assess banks. Looking forward, we see scope 
for further dovetailing of this nature in the context of closer coordination between the New Zealand and 
Australian authorities. 
However, the dominance of foreign banks in the New Zealand banking system has resulted in some 
additional supervisory measures being taken to ensure that the interests of the New Zealand financial 
system  can  be  protected.  By  and  large,  these  policies  are  common  to  many  countries,  particularly 
countries with substantial foreign bank participation. In New Zealand, they form a key part of being a 
responsible host supervisor. I would like to highlight two of our most recent requirements: 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 3
 that all systemically important banks be incorporated in New Zealand; and 
that  foreign-owned  banks  in  New  Zealand  are  not  overly  reliant  on  parent  bank  or  other 
outsourced functionality. 
Like many supervisors, we require all systemically important banks to be incorporated in New Zealand, 
rather than operate as a branch of a foreign bank. Currently, all but one of the systemically important 
banks in New Zealand are locally incorporated. We are working with the other bank to determine how 
it can meet our requirements. 
The local incorporation policy has three main objectives. 
First,  local  incorporation  is  an  important  element  of  being  able  to  respond  to  a  financial  crisis 
effectively, in New Zealand’s interests. It provides a significantly higher degree of certainty over the 
balance sheet of a bank in New Zealand, enabling a statutory manager to assume control of a failed or 
distressed bank with greater certainty over legal jurisdiction than would be the case with a branch. 
Second,  local  incorporation  enhances  the  Reserve  Bank’s  ability  to  supervise  the  banks  on  an 
ongoing  basis  in  the  interests  of  the  New  Zealand  financial  system.  It  enables  the  imposition  of 
minimum capital adequacy requirements and risk limits, and provides a degree of separation between 
the  subsidiary  and  the  parent,  thereby  reducing  intra-group  contagion  risk.  Not  least,  local 
incorporation makes it much more difficult, legally and practically, for assets to be removed from the 
local operation to the parent bank; any such transaction must be for good value. This is not the case 
for a branch. 
Third, local incorporation establishes a basis for sound bank governance in the host country, including 
a board of directors with a responsibility to act in the interests of the local bank. This is particularly 
important in New Zealand, given the strong emphasis we place on the role of corporate governance as 
the foundation for effective risk management. In our supervision framework, we stress the need for the 
local  board  of  directors  to  take  ultimate  responsibility  for  overseeing  the  management  of  the  bank, 
including its risk management capacity. Of course, we also recognise that, subject to complying with 
the  laws  and  regulations  of  the  country  in  question,  the  parent bank  has  the  right  to  determine  the 
strategic direction and overall management of its foreign operations - in New Zealand and elsewhere. 
But we wish to ensure that, within this overall constraint, the local board has much more than a rubber-
stamping role. 
Another  important  policy  requirement  that  we  are  developing  to  protect  the  New  Zealand  financial 
system relates to the growing practice of outsourcing core bank functionality. Here, I am referring to 
the tendency for foreign-owned banks to move large parts of their functionality to the parent bank or to 
third  parties  -  which  are  often  in  another  country.  In  New  Zealand,  this  has  been  occurring  on  a 
significant  scale.  And  it  has  not  just  been  confined  to  the  obvious  areas,  such  as  IT  systems, 
accounting functions and the like. Outsourcing to the parent banks has also included the movement of 
risk management capacity, some treasury functions and some senior and mid-level management and 
technical expertise. 
Outsourcing  makes  it  more  difficult  to  supervise  a  bank  effectively  on  an  ongoing  basis.  This  is 
especially  so  where  core  risk  management  functionality  has  been  migrated  offshore.  In  these 
circumstances, there is a limit to what any supervisor can achieve in seeking to promote sound risk 
management structures within the local bank. It also has the potential to weaken the role of the local 
board,  thereby  compromising  the  ability  to  ensure  that  governance  arrangements  are  adequate  to 
protect the interests of the local bank. 
But when the storm clouds gather, the effect of outsourcing can be very serious for a host banking 
system. In a situation where a parent bank is in acute difficulty, it is likely that its foreign operations will 
also  be  in  difficulty.  If  the  parent  bank  is  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide  financial  support  to  the 
subsidiary, and if the home authorities are unable or unwilling to extend official support to the foreign 
subsidiaries  of  the  parent  bank,  then  the  host  authority  needs  to  have  sufficient  functionality  in  the 
bank in its jurisdiction to maintain systemically important functions. 
A bank that relies substantially on outsourced services to its parent, or on inadequately outsourced 
arrangements to unrelated third parties, will not have that capacity. It will be substantially dependent 
on  the  outsource  provider  in  order  to  maintain  even  quite  basic  functions.  In  a  situation  where  the 
outsource  provider  is  in  serious  strife,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  the  bank  will  be  able  to  maintain 
essential functions. In this situation, the host authority has limited scope to manage the crisis in its own 
jurisdiction. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2004
For these reasons, and in accordance with our legislation, we have initiated an outsourcing policy for 
application to all systemically important banks and potentially to some of the other banks. In essence, 
the  policy  will  require  banks  to  maintain  sufficient  functionality  within  the  jurisdictional  reach  of  its 
board of directors - and of a statutory manager if the bank has failed - to enable the bank to maintain 
all essential functions if the parent bank, or any other service provider, fails. We have no difficulty with 
outsourcing, provided that it is done properly and prudently, and that it meets our required outcomes. 
We must have the capacity to manage a bank distress or failure in ways that minimise damage to the 
New Zealand financial system. 
Managing financial crises 
As with any supervisory authority and central bank, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand attaches great 
importance to the ongoing preparedness to respond to a financial crisis. We have a broad range of 
measures in place and under development to ensure that we have the capacity to resolve a banking 
crisis in ways that maintain a robust financial system, preserve market disciplines, and minimise moral 
hazard risks. In this regard, our statutory duty is to protect the soundness and efficiency of the New 
Zealand financial system, rather then seeking to protect particular institutions or depositors. 
The tools required by a host supervisor to respond effectively to a banking crisis are much the same 
as those required by a home supervisor. However, in the case of a host supervisor, two elements are 
worth emphasising: 
• 
First, there is a need for clear legal and operational capacity to assume control of, and to 
maintain operational capacity within, banks that are in acute distress or insolvent. 
Second, there is a need for balance sheet certainty for banks operating in the host country. 
• 
As I outlined earlier, our supervisory policies are intended to deliver these outcomes. 
I wish to make particular reference to one aspect of our crisis management work - the development of 
what  we  currently  call  “bank  creditor  recapitalisation”.  This  is  a  mechanism  that  would  enable  the 
Reserve Bank to respond to a bank failure - including the failure of a systemically important settlement 
bank - in a manner that avoids or minimises the cost to the taxpayer, while still maintaining systemic 
stability. It comprises a number of elements, including: 
• 
applying a “haircut” to depositors and other creditors of the failed bank at a level assessed to 
be sufficient to absorb likely losses; 
giving depositors access to the non-haircut portion of their deposits within a very short period 
of  the  failure  occurring,  but  providing  a  government  guarantee  of  those  deposits  so  as  to 
encourage depositors to keep their funds at the bank; and 
facilitating  either  the  recapitalisation  of  the  bank  or  some  other  resolution  option  that  is 
consistent with maintaining a sound financial system. 
  While we are still developing the concept, we see this failure management structure as an important 
potential option for meeting systemic stability objectives, while preserving - indeed enhancing - market 
disciplines. 
Enhanced cooperation and coordination between home and host authorities 
Although these measures are all essential, we are mindful that a banking crisis in a largely foreign-
owned banking system should preferably include coordination between the home and host supervisors 
and  central  banks.  This  is  most  likely  to  occur  when  there  is  a  well-developed  relationship  of 
cooperation  between  the  parent  and  host  authorities  -  in  good  times  and  bad,  in  sickness  and  in 
health. 
We are therefore now developing our thinking, and building on the existing relationships we have with 
the supervisor and central bank in Australia, as to the arrangements required to ensure that there is 
effective coordination between home and host authorities, both in the day-to-day supervisory process 
and, especially, in periods of financial distress. We want to ensure that there is a clear understanding 
between the banking supervisors, the central banks and the finance ministries of both countries as to 
their  respective  roles  and  responsibilities.  We  want  to  explore  the  scope  for  more  defined  and 
potentially  more  formalised  cooperation  and  coordination  so  that  both  sides  are  better  placed  to 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 5
supervise their respective financial systems more efficiently and effectively. And we want to have well-
designed structures for responding swiftly and effectively to cross-border financial crises in ways that 
recognise the respective roles of the relevant government agencies in each country. 
What  would  be  the  key  elements  in  these  arrangements?  Ideally,  they  would  include  a  number  of 
attributes, such as: 
• 
Closer cooperation between the home and host authorities in the design and implementation 
of  supervision  policy,  possibly  including  areas  of  policy  harmonisation  and  mutual 
recognition.  The  implementation  of  Basel  II  provides  a  good  opportunity  for  this,  as  do  a 
number of other supervisory policy areas. Indeed, the implementation of Basel II is perhaps 
the  greatest  ‘fair  weather’  challenge  for  cooperation  and  coordination  between  home  and 
host regulators for many years. Striking a balance between the consistent adoption of Basel 
II  methodology,  while  retaining  the  ability  to  set  capital  requirements  that  reflect  each 
country’s  risks,  is  essential.  This  is  not  to  mention  the  challenges  arising  from  the  more 
regulatory intensive nature of some elements of the Basel II requirements. 
Improved coordination of on-site and off-site supervision in some areas, including the regular 
candid exchange of information on banks operating in each other’s jurisdictions. 
Agreement on the allocation of responsibility for the provision of liquidity support between the 
home and host central banks in defined circumstances. 
Formal  understandings  on  the  respective  roles  of  the  home  and  host  supervisors,  central 
banks and finance ministries in responding to a cross-border bank failure, including protocols 
for determining when and how a joint home/host bank resolution strategy could be used to 
resolve a cross-border crisis. 
Facilitating coordination of public communication between the home and host authorities in 
responding to cross-border financial crisis, where appropriate. 
    This framework for coordination and cooperation needs to be pre-determined in order to be reliable. 
Memoranda of Understanding between home and host authorities can be useful, but they might not 
prove  to  be  sufficiently  reliable  in  a  crisis  situation.  Indeed,  most  Memoranda  of  Understanding 
between home and host authorities tend to take a soft-edged approach to the respective obligations of 
the parties, creating too much uncertainty for them to be useful in a crisis. 
Some form of formalised cooperation arrangement between the home and host authorities is therefore 
likely  to  be  necessary.  This  needs  to  strike  a  balance  between  creating  reasonable  certainty  of 
coordination in specified circumstances, while preserving the flexibility for each country’s authorities to 
take  independent  steps  to  protect  their  own  interests.  It  also  needs  to  be  structured  in  ways  that 
recognise that bank ownership - and hence home country supervision - can change. There is therefore 
a need to avoid being locked into arrangements that might later prove to be unworkable or no longer 
appropriate.  And  there  is  a  need  for  home/host  arrangements  to  maintain  a  degree  of  internal 
consistency in the supervisory frameworks of the respective countries, so as to maintain clarity and to 
avoid  conferring  any  competitive  advantages  or  disadvantages  on  particular  categories  of  banks. 
Creating the right balance in all of this is no easy task. 
Even if formalised coordination frameworks can be developed, their utility ultimately depends on how 
effective they are in a crisis. Rather than wait for a financial crisis to occur to see if the coordination 
arrangements  work,  it  would  be  better  to  periodically  test  their  effectiveness.  Although  no  form  of 
testing can ever fully simulate a real crisis and the tensions that go with it, we think that periodic crisis 
simulation  exercises  involving  home  and  host  supervisors,  central  banks  and  finance  ministries  will 
become  an  important  mechanism  in  testing  coordination  arrangements.  They  could  also  make  a 
material contribution towards building closer and more cooperative relationships between home and 
host authorities and central banks. 
Conclusion 
Maintaining a sound and efficient financial system and being able to respond to a crisis effectively is a 
crucial  prerequisite  for  a  country’s  economic  and  social  welfare.  This  is  true  whether  the  financial 
system is largely composed of domestic banks or dominated by foreign banks. And it is critical in a 
small,  open,  indebted,  economy,  such  as  New  Zealand’s,  given  the  potential  vulnerability  to 
international sentiment and cross-border capital flows. 
6 
 BIS Review 55/2004
In the absence of any fair and formalised, operationally and legally robust, trans-national regulatory 
framework, the financial stability buck stops at national laws and the supervisor’s and central bank’s 
duties under those laws. The financial stability stakes are too high to pass on such a responsibility 
lightly. In banking, while the home and host authorities have some complementary interests, they also 
have areas of potentially diverging and conflicting interests, as well as jurisdictional limits. 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is committed to doing all it can to maintain a sound and efficient 
financial system in New Zealand. We believe that it is essential to maintain the frameworks needed to 
fulfil  our  responsibilities.  This  includes  a  clear  legal  and  practical  basis  to  supervise  the  financial 
system and the capacity to respond to a financial crisis effectively on a stand-alone basis if necessary. 
Equally, we must have a clear legal basis for providing liquidity support when required, on the basis of 
bank  balance  sheets  and  capital  positions  that  are  as  meaningful  and  clear  as  they  can  be  in  the 
circumstances. 
But,  we  also  recognise  the  benefits  of  mutual  recognition  and  harmonisation  of  regulatory  policies 
where  sensible,  and  the  benefits  of  cooperation  and  coordination  between  the  home  and  host 
supervisory  authorities.  The  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  our  banking  supervision  will  be  greater, 
and the crisis management options wider, the closer the home and host authorities are. 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand is committed to remaining a welcoming, albeit responsible, host. 
However, the regulatory risks and rewards have never been greater. 
BIS Review 55/2004 
 7
