Antonio Fazio: A brief look at the economy in Southern Italy and accounting 
practices 
Address  by  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  to  the  Otranto  City  Council,  Castello 
Aragonese, 25 September 2004. 
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  everyone  for  their  warm  welcome  and  the  civil  and  religious 
authorities for honouring the institution I represent by their presence. 
It is indeed a pleasure to be here in your city, known in ancient times as Hydruntum, after the nearby 
river Idro. The monuments and the outline of the old town immediately evoke its magnificent history 
and the role it once played in the Salentine Peninsula, which for many centuries was Terra d’Otranto - 
the ‘Land of Otranto’. 
The beatification of the Hydruntum martyrs recalls an episode firmly imprinted in the memory not only 
of this part of Italy: the valiant resistance of its citizens against a violent siege raised long ago in 1480, 
when 800 men paid with their lives for refusing to renounce their Christian faith; it brings to mind other 
tragic times in the history of our country. It leads us to reflect on the goals to which humankind aspires, 
and on the principles that we must, especially now, preserve and reinforce in the international order in 
defence of life, liberty and democracy. To ensure détente will prevail among nations and people will 
live  together  in  peace;  to  foster  the  development  of  relations  between  different  races,  religions  and 
lifestyles in the name of human dignity. 
1.  
This is my first visit to Otranto, and I am struck by the picture I see. In addition to its rich 
artistic heritage, the city enjoys an enviable position, set as it is in lovely countryside, with the sea and 
a beautiful stretch of coast. 
Otranto has all the right qualities for a substantial growth of tourism. Its residents possess the spirit of 
initiative  and  organizational  skills  needed  to  capitalize  on  the  available  environmental  and  artistic 
resources and local produce and crafts, which are renowned for their excellence. 
In 2004 Otranto again came top of Legambiente’s ranking of Italian summer resorts published in the 
Italian Touring Club’s Blue Guide for the year. The current project to set up a marine park along the 
Otranto-Santa Maria di Leuca coast will also make an important contribution to environmental policy 
and benefit the local community. 
The  city  looks  across  the  sea  towards  the  East;  it  responds  with  equanimity  and  solidarity  to  the 
problems  raised  by  the  influx  of  immigrants  who  reach  land  in  this  area.  Hospitality,  open-minded 
acceptance,  rules,  controls,  law  and  order,  and  far-sightedness  are  closely  related  aspects  of  the 
attitude  towards  immigrants  in  search  of  better  living  conditions  and  a  more  advanced  social  and 
human context. 
Today, more than ever before, globalization demands that we pay attention to events beyond our own 
borders, and not only in the economic field. 
Immigration can be a positive force, particularly in view of the demographic problems facing us, and 
we should keep an open attitude towards it, provided its negative aspects are tackled and its legality is 
assured by creating the conditions required for security. 
2.  
Southern Italy. Today’s guests include representatives of the business world and the professions. 
Firms, all firms, are indispensable and powerful forces of economic growth. A business culture, a drive 
to improve production techniques, innovate, and manufacture better goods with more value added are 
crucial for the progress of the productive fabric. 
Although  the  South  of  Italy  has  experienced  periods  of  exceptionally  fast  economic  and  civil 
modernization in the past fifty years, it continues to be a national problem. 
The economy of the South has opportunities and potential. There must be a drive to accelerate the 
process and overcome dualism, with Italy’s public institutions, corporate sector and social partners all 
contributing. 
This  morning,  in  Lecce,  I  had  time  to  consider  the  economic  outlook  for  the  regions  of 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
for  governing 
Today’s guests include auditors and accountants. Members of these professions perform a 
The  South  of  Italy  is hampered  by  poor  infrastructure;  this shortcoming, and  particularly  the  lack of 
transport and service networks, affects production, which is thus less competitive than in the regions of 
the Centre and North. 
An  additional  boost  for  public  works  and  infrastructure  investment  is  likely  to  stimulate  aggregate 
demand and create good prospects of recovery. 
An  increase  of  productivity  and  competitiveness  in  the  South  of  Italy  necessitates  an  efficient  and 
effective public administration and conditions of safety and legality. Moreover, a problem of solidarity 
exists between the regions of Italy with regard to making good use of the institutional and functional 
forms of decentralization. 
The available labour force, particularly of young people, and the cultural and environmental resources 
of the less developed regions constitute a “reserve” that can be tapped for growth, to the benefit of the 
whole of Italy’s economy and society. 
Technical  and  scientific  capabilities  are  crucial 
transformation  and  avoiding 
marginalization. Basic and applied research play a leading role in international competition, process 
and product innovation, and the introduction of new technologies. 
3.  
complex task with great responsibilities. 
I  have  often  stressed  that  accounting  rules  are  indispensable  in  order  to  know  and  certify  the 
truthfulness of economic and administrative facts, which are a fundamental aspect of the organization 
of society. 
The whole of civil life could not function in fact if people did not tell each other the truth. In Summa 
Theologiae Thomas Aquinas said that truth was one of the values underlying social coexistence. The 
same holds for the economy and business, which must rest on an order made up of relationships and 
rules that include accounting standards. 
In Italy great masters laid the foundations of the art of accounting. In the fifteenth century Luca Pacioli, 
adopting the practices long in use among Venetian merchants, developed the theory of “double entry” 
bookkeeping Goethe called “one of the most wonderful discoveries of the human mind”. Fabio Besta 
arranged  these  studies  on  a  scientific  basis,  perfecting  the  tools  available  to  make  correct  entries. 
These are the solid foundations on which we now work. 
As  a  consequence  of  the  function  they  perform,  accountants  are  expected  to  show  professional 
autonomy, independence of judgement, and constant dedication, vis-à-vis clients, to transparency and 
honesty.  Members  of  the  profession  now  face  new  duties;  they  must  cope  with  all  the  forthcoming 
changes  in  the  methods  of  accounting  for  corporate  facts;  they  must  keep  constantly  abreast  of 
developments and study the innovations in company and fiscal matters. 
The recent financial difficulties of several industrial firms have highlighted the crucial role of internal 
controls and of external audits to verify that accounts are properly kept, that transactions are correctly 
recorded,  and  that  the  financial  statements  conform  with  the  book  entries  and  the  rules  for  valuing 
assets and liabilities and recording corporate facts. 
The bankruptcy laws are in urgent need of reform, which is now under study, to shorten procedures, 
offer  greater  certainty  and  broaden  the  scope  for  mutually  agreed  solutions  and  the  survival  of 
worthwhile economic projects in temporary difficulty. Firms, banks and the economy will benefit. 
In the financial sector, reliable judgements and proper conduct are equally important. Intermediaries 
are required to assess fully all the risks of their clients’ investment decisions and present them clearly. 
4.  
The discipline of accounting is undergoing far-reaching review at the moment in response to 
the demand for standardization stemming from the growing international openness of our economies. 
According to the principles derived from the European framework of harmonized legislation, from 2005 
onwards listed companies, and banks and financial corporations will have to draw up their financial 
statements in compliance with the International Accounting Standards. In Italy the process of adapting 
our legislation, including civil and tax law, is under way. 
The  new  Capital  Accord  for  banks  known  as  Basel  2  will  entail  changes  in  the  way  financial 
statements are presented. It will come into force between the end of 2006 and beginning of 2007 and 
will introduce more efficient methods of defining the capital employed to hedge different types of risk 
that reflect the best business practices at international level. 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
I affirm once again that, on the basis of existing studies, we do not expect there to be adverse effects 
on corporate financing, particularly of small and medium-sized firms. In fact the adoption of the new 
system  will  certainly  encourage  banks  to  become  more  efficient,  improve  their  ability  to  assess 
creditworthiness,  and  better  satisfy  the  needs  of  the  business  sector.  At  the  same  time  firms  must 
provide  banks  with  exhaustive  information  about  their  assets  and  revenues,  and  the  structure  and 
scope of their activities at home and abroad. 
All  this  indicates  that  accountants  will  be  expected  to  perform  an  increasingly  important  role,  and 
highlights  the  advisory  nature  of  their  work  and  its contribution  to  dynamism.  They  must always  be 
guided by ethics and professionalism. 
 A joint effort is needed, based on a climate of complete trust and cooperation between firms, banks 
and  institutions,  to  help  lay  the  foundations  for  economic  recovery,  foster  a  reversal  of  the  current 
trend,  and  encourage  new  models  of  growth  to  emerge  in  Southern  Italy  as  well.  The  people,  the 
intelligence, the savings and the business ability to do so are all present. 
I wish to thank you once again and wish you pleasure and success in the performance of your work. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
