Erkki Liikanen: Comment to Prof Gérard Roland: After enlargement - 
institutional achievements and prospects in the new member states 
Comment  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  to  Prof  Gérard  Roland:  After 
enlargement  -  institutional  achievements  and  prospects  in  the  new  member  states,  at  the  Central 
Banking Conference, Frankfurt, 21 October 2004. 
 Introductory remarks 
1. 
Professor Roland’s paper raises some essential issues regarding institutional development of the new 
member  states  and  prospects  as  to  how  enlarged  European  Union  will  work.  The  paper  looks  at 
various institutional indicators compiled by ERBD and the World Bank. By the use of these indicators, 
the  paper  aims  at  answering  the  following  specific  questions  i)  Have  new  member  states  achieved 
their institutional transition in a stable and satisfactory way, ii) Has EU played a positive role in this 
process,  iii)  Is  there  anything  that  EU  can  learn  for  its  needed  structural  reforms  in  labor  markets, 
pension and welfare reform and iv) How will EU work with 25 members. 
Summing up the main results of the paper 
2. 
The  paper  provides  some  tentative  answers  regarding  the  first  two  questions.  It  argues  that 
institutional  problems  in  the  future  are  not  going  to  be  essentially  worse  than  those  facing  existing 
EU-member  countries.  Furthermore,  the  paper  argues  that  EU  has  been  playing  “fundamentally 
positive role in anchoring the institutions of the new member states to sound market system”. As a 
general message, the paper suggests that fundamental market institutions and the basics of market 
institutions are well established and solid. 
The  last  two questions  get  understandably  less  attention  in  the  paper,  given  the  wide scope  of  the 
paper. 
First I want to comment two questions; 
1. 
Hypothesis  on  external  anchor  and  enforcement  powers  vis  a  vis  the  governments  of 
Member states 
Stable and satisfactory institutional transition 
2. 
External anchor and enforcement powers 
3. 
Regarding  the  first  point,  Prof.  Roland  argues  that  prospects  on  EU  membership  has  enforced  an 
institutional reform, but that once inside, incentives to fulfil future reforms will be weaker. The paper 
builds analogy to weak implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) and argues that EU 
does not have appropriate (very strong) enforcement powers. 
While  to  some  extent  it  is  rather  easy to  agree with  this  point,  one  may  also  recognize  that  SGP  - 
similarly  to  Maastricht  criteria  -  has  improved  fiscal  prudence  within  the  EU  markedly  over  the  last 
decade. And this in spite of all the difficulties. 
On the other hand the SPG is still a relatively new instrument. The Commission has even stronger 
powers in the field of the internal market and competition policy. And there is a long tradition and case 
law. By these tools the commission has accelerated the liberalisation in member states, controlled the 
state  aids  and  promoted  competition.  I  am  sure  the  commission  will  not  hesitate  to  use  these 
competencies in the new member states. 
And there are two more incentives: 
Most of the new member countries are working towards joining the European Monetary Union (EMU). 
Maastricht criteria and associated institutional reforms required will certainly foster future reforms, and 
not just those required in Maastricht criteria explicitly. For instance, some studies show that structural 
reforms in the labour markets may be associated with implementation of new monetary regimes, such 
as inflation targeting. 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 1
And secondly there is and will be a lot of healthy competition between new member states about new 
foreign investments. A successful reform process will be an asset in this field. 
Stable and satisfactory institutional transition 
4. 
Regarding institutional transition, we need to define “stable” or “satisfactory” institutional transition. 
The paper seems to take a view according to which “stable” institutional transition means a process 
that has evolved progressively without major disruptions or reversals. By looking how the number of 
interesting indicators that the paper has compiled has evolved, this indeed seems to be the case: most 
of the institutional indicators show a steady pattern of improvement. Yet, as can be observed from the 
same indicators, there are also rather large differences between the countries. 
One  may  also  want  to  assess  stability  and  satisfaction  of  institutional  transition  by  analyzing  its 
consequences on economic, political and societal development. 
One may use indicators such as fluctuations in inflation, public sector deficit, interest rates, exchange 
rates, different measures of political stability, number of strikes, etc to measure stability from this point 
of view. 
Looking  some  important  macro  indicators  to  convergence,  the  economic  stability  has  improved  as 
regards  to  inflation.  As  an  average  in  the  new  member countries,  the  harmonized  index  of  inflation 
declined from close to 10 % in early 1997 to around 2 % in mid-2002, where it remained until early 
2004. 
On  the  contrary,  progress  with  fiscal  consolidation  has  generally  been  too  slow  and  majority  of 
countries have yet to achieve a situation which, in broader view, might be judged as sustainable in the 
medium term. 
One may also assess the satisfactory element of an institutional transition by looking at some more 
indirect measures. For instance, extent to which there has been reversal or drastic changes in inflow 
of  foreign  direct  investments  gives  rather  good  indication  as  to  how  foreign  investors  judge  the 
institutional  transition.  There  are  indeed  rather  large  changes  as  regards  inflow  of  foreign  direct 
investments in many of the new member countries. 
In many countries high foreign direct investments have supported high output and investment growth 
rates.  However,  maintaining  a  steady  inflow  of  FDIs  will  constitute  a  major  challenge  in  the  future 
because FDI inflows have tended to decrease in many new member states partly linked to reduced 
privatisation  activity.  The  decrease  in  FDI  inflows  have  accompanied  by  a  net  outflow  of  portfolio 
investments,  with  loans  and  trade  credits  becoming  the  main  source  of  financing  of  the  current 
accounts. 
All in all institutions has developed to right direction during the last decade and as paper argues, they 
are mostly compatible with market driven economy. Of course, institutions as such are not important 
but they provide necessary conditions for creating environment for future growth and prosperity. But 
reforms are needed, in particularly as regards to corruption and legal system. 
Professor Roland also raises a question: What can we learn from reforms in labour markets, pension 
and welfare reform? Not much, is his conclusion. 
I  would  like  to  put  the  question  differently:  What  will  the  impact  of  the  new  member  states  on  the 
regulatory development in the EU of 25? 
I think that the new member states will be very sensitive with new regulation which will add costs on 
European. They compete directly with Asian countries about FDI’s. They don’t want to weaken there 
position. There will be less new regulation. 
How will EU work with 25? 
5. 
Let me finally, turn to the most important and topical issues on How will EU work with 25? 
I agree with Professor Roland that the new member states will be active and enthusiastic members. 
They have not come to use a veto. And the larger is the Union, the more difficult it is to prevent a 
decision by one veto. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2004
I would like to discuss also on growth and productivity prospects of European economies during the 
years to come. As already argued, for Europe to work as a stable political entity, and build room for 
enlarged  EMU  it  is  necessary  to  close  the  income  gap  between  the  new  and  the  old  member 
countries.  Probably  the  best  way  to  achieve  this  is  to  facilitate  competition  and  thus  enhance 
productivity growth in all the sectors of the economies. 
The rationale for, and success of, the single market is that it reinforces a principle of market economy 
of the European economies. The market economy is reinforced by subjecting otherwise closed sectors 
to  greater  competition  and  by  the  prospect  of  wide  range  of  cross-border  exchanges  of  goods  and 
know how. In doing so, it improves resource allocation and provides both dynamic and static efficiency 
gains that, in turn, offer the promise of improved economic performance. 
As for the new member states, many of above mentioned positive features have already been felt as 
can be seen from faster economic growth and productivity in all of the new member countries. 
The new member countries will in the future benefit also from greater markets for their products [and 
thus scale economies], while the old member countries are facing stiffer competition in many industrial 
sectors. Stiffer competition is likely to enhance productivity in Europe as a whole. 
Large part of the productivity growth in the new member countries has been associated with inflows of 
foreign direct investments as well as restructuring of the domestic companies. 
In  this  process,  large  internationally  operating  companies  have  been  playing  an  important  role  by 
importing  capital,  but  also  by  transferring  business  management  skills  and  know  how  and  thus 
decreasing  the  knowledge  gap  to  rest  of  the  Europe.  Indeed,  a  large  proportion  of  trade  is  intra-
industry  and  intra-company  trade  where  a  significant  proportion  of  global  trade  runs  through 
international production and distribution networks. 
Increases  in  intra-industry  and  intra-company  trade  reflects  the  motives  of  large  companies  for 
diversifying their supply chain and deepening economies of scope in the world market, rather than just 
reflecting the differences in costs of inputs at different locations. Moreover, due to stiffer competition 
and complexity of the products, companies concentrate on their core competencies. 
This  has  a  tendency  to  reinforce  the  development  of  a  more  concentrated,  but  spatially  diverse 
economy.  In  the  short  run,  there  can  be  significant  employment  losses  and  unbalanced  regional 
development, yet in the medium term European economies will be more efficient. Nevertheless, spatial 
agglomeration across territorial boundaries is a real challenge for Europe, as there is a need to find a 
right balance between strengthening the European most productive areas and their competitiveness 
globally, yet to develop policies that minimize a risk of excessive regional diversification. Policies that 
enhance exchange of know-how across borders are of crucial importance to minimize such a risk. 
Especially  for  small  new  member  countries,  key  to  success  is  to  be  attractive  and  adaptive.  In  the 
medium term, this requires further strengthening of those business areas with comparative advantage 
and aiming at attracting foreign direct investment to those areas. This requires also continuing with 
institutional  and  legal  reforms  that  strengthen  ownership  rights,  reduce  corruption  and  provide  with 
favourable business environment in general. Otherwise, there is a risk that some countries lock-in to 
low-wage/low  productivity  production.  This  would  lead  into  rapidly  widening  income  differences 
between the EU countries. 
In the longer term, know how, business management skills, and capital imported through FDI need to 
be “rooted” in the societies such as to build up domestic capacity and ability for further increases in 
productivity. As static comparative advantages based on lower labour costs has been deployed, the 
new  member  countries  need  to  base  longer  term  industrial  strategy  on  dynamic  comparative 
advantage and policies that enhance productivity through innovative activities of the firms. Once more, 
competition combined with appropriate renewal of institutions would be essential. 
BIS Review 64/2004 
 3
