Adrian Orr: A prosperous but vulnerable nation 
Excerpt from an address by Mr Adrian Orr, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to 
the New Zealand Society of Actuaries, Napier, 17 November 2004. 
 Reserve Bank Deputy Governor Adrian Orr is warning that the rise in New Zealand’s external debt in 
recent years stresses the need for policies to promote the soundness of the financial sector. That’s 
come  in  a  speech  in  Napier  to  the  New  Zealand  Society  of  Actuaries  entitled  “A  prosperous  but 
vulnerable nation”. The following is an excerpt from that address. 
“When  we  talk  about  the  risks  of  indebtedness,  it  is  important  to  remember  that  New  Zealand  is  a 
reasonably prosperous nation. We can take on a certain amount of debt with comfort, and in some 
cases it is sensible to do so. The growth in borrowing in the last decade has not, in itself, raised the 
odds  of  a  major  financial  crisis.  But  if  things  do  go  wrong,  the  losses  from  such  a  crisis  could  be 
severe - and more so now than they would have been, say, ten years ago. 
“The Reserve Bank’s interest in this area stems mainly from two features of borrowing behaviour in 
New  Zealand.  First,  New  Zealand  relies  heavily  on  funds  borrowed  from  offshore,  and  a  large  and 
increasing share of these funds is channelled through the banking system. This channel has become 
more  industry  and  geographically  concentrated:  just  four  Australian  banks  now  own  85  per  cent  of 
New  Zealand’s  banking  system  assets,  and  they  also  perform  some  of  the  key  functions  of  their 
New Zealand  operations.  In  a  banking  sector  crisis,  an  interruption  to  these  intermediation  services 
would create disruptions across the whole economy. 
“Second,  a  great  deal  of  the  funds  raised  offshore  end  up  as  household  debt.  In  normal  times, 
households  are  quite  capable  of  managing  their  own  balance  sheets,  and  their  decisions  about 
spending,  saving  and  investment may  well  be rational.  But  there  is  always a  risk,  albeit small,  of  a 
major economic shock that could leave many households without any income to service their debts. 
“Ideally, households would have used the recent run of strong economic growth to build up a buffer 
against such an event; instead, they have tended to leverage up further and invest more heavily in a 
few domestic asset classes, especially housing. The result is that a major shock could result in more 
defaults and heavier losses for banks and other lenders. 
“For policymakers, the stakes are higher now than they have been in the past. In response, we have 
taken  a  fresh  look  at  our  approach  to  banking  regulation  and  supervision.  In  particular,  we  are 
developing our capacity to respond to banking crises in ways that serve the interests of New Zealand. 
This includes policies that aim to ensure that foreign-owned systemically important banks can be run 
legally and operationally from New Zealand on a stand-alone basis if and when needed. We are also 
working  to  ensure  that  there  is  as  much  coordination  and  cooperation  as  is  possible  between 
regulatory authorities both here and abroad during times of financial stress.  
“We  also  have  a  brief  to  monitor  the  wider  financial  system  for  emerging  signs  of  stress.  The 
publication  of  our  first  regular  Financial  Stability  Report  (PDF  888KB)  is  another  step  in  raising 
awareness and debate around financial stability issues. 
“Banking policy should be part of a safeguard against rare, but costly, financial crises. We can think of 
it as a form of insurance: if the potential loss from an unforeseen event rises, it is appropriate to add a 
little  more  insurance cover.  We believe  that  recent policy  developments  provide  this  extra cover,  in 
ways  that  are  consistent  with  our  duty  to  promote  the  soundness  and  efficiency  of  the  financial 
system.”  
BIS Review 69/2004 
 1
