Sunil Mendis: Risk management in Sri Lankan banks in the changing 
environment 
Inaugural  address  by  Mr  Sunil  Mendis,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Sri  Lanka,  at  the  CRISIL-
SLBA  seminar  on  risk  management 
the  changing  environment, 
Colombo, 15-16 November 2004. 
in  Sri  Lankan  banks 
in 
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen,  
Let me first thank the SLBA (Sri Lanka Banks Association) and the representatives from CRISIL India 
(Credit Rating Information Services of India Ltd) for the initiative taken to organize this Seminar on a 
very important aspect of banking business - risk management. 
As  we  all  know,  risk  management  in  banking  is  a  continuous  process  of  planning,  organizing  and 
controlling a bank’s assets and liabilities, their volumes, maturities, rates and yields. This is the most 
simple  definition  that  I  can  think  of.  However,  its  implications  on  banking  business  are  what  we 
concern ourselves with, especially from the regulatory point of view. 
In the context of Sri Lankan banks at least, of the major risks confronting financial institutions, credit 
risk  remains  the  predominant  or  core  risk.  Risktaking  is  part  and  parcel  of  banking.  The  highly 
leveraged nature of banking business itself illustrates the risk exposure level of banks. Therefore, what 
is  important  is  how  we  manage  these  risks,  how  we  measure  and  price  risk  and  above  all  what 
measures we take to mitigate these risks. 
The primary responsibility of understanding the risks run by the bank and ensuring that such risks are 
appropriately controlled and are within the risk parameters of the Bank, i.e. its risk appetite, is vested 
with the Board of Directors. It is now a widely accepted principle of good corporate governance that 
bank  management  understands new banking  products  and  businesses of  the  Bank.  Without  proper 
understanding of the risks associated with such new products the management should not give their 
assent to the introduction of such products. It is the responsibility, therefore, of the Board of Directors 
to set the parameters for risk taking beyond which banking business should not be permitted. 
What  then  are  the  essential  pre-requisites  for  good  and  effective  risk  management?  Timely  and 
reliable  information  is  the  foundation  upon  which  good  risk  management  is  built.  Lots  of  questions 
come to my mind here - do those responsible for credit decisions have a knowledge of the industry 
they  are  lending  to?  Why  do  banks  depend  so  much  on  collateral  when  we  all  know  it  is  the  last 
resort? This is where information plays an important part. If you do not have knowledge of the industry 
or  sector  to  which  you  are  lending,  your  credit  decision  is  seriously  flawed  and  sooner  or  later  will 
translate  itself  into  NPA.  Why  do  we  have  high  levels  of  NPA?  Is  the  information  necessary  for 
evaluation of creditworthiness of a borrower available to the banks? Is the credit decision taken on the 
basis of such evaluation - how current is the financial information on the borrower with the bank? The 
market is a dynamic place, where change takes place all the time. It is imperative that credit officers of 
banks be given maximum exposure to the real sector - the numbers in financial statements must have 
a direct relationship to the real sector to reflect the current status of the borrower’s business? They 
should  support  the  repayment  programme  undertaken  by  the  borrower  on  which  the  Bank’s  credit 
decision was predicated. You will see thus that information is critical to risk management without which 
you are groping in the dark and before long you will be faced with large losses. 
The emphasis should therefore be on the early identification of risk, which if addressed at the very 
initial stages, would not expose the bank to large scale losses at a later stage. 
Effective credit risk management is the key to the health of the banking industry today. It is not the 
resolution of NPA but the cause of NPA that should be addressed. Internal rating systems must be 
developed to afford an accurate and continuous picture of the level of risk exposure of the bank to 
individual  credit  risk  so  that  timely  action  can  be  taken  to  soften  the  risk.  Management  Information 
Systems must be strengthened. Preventive and remedial actions should encompass additional capital, 
better  internal  controls  and/or  safer  provisioning  policies.  Capital  is  not  a  substitute  for  sound  risk 
management. An operating environment based on prudent risk management rather than aggressive 
risk taking, gives us regulators comfort that profits are conservatively stated. This is the essence of 
prudence which underpins safe and sound banking.  
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
In an increasing trend to harmonise prudential frameworks across the globe, in recognition of the fact 
that  banks,  wherever  they  may  be  domiciled,  are  exposed  to  the  same  risks,  it  is  becoming 
increasingly  difficult  to  pursue  country-specific  solutions.  We  recognize  that  we  too  have  to  be 
internationally  compatible  in  adopting  common  standards  for  regulation  and  supervision  which  are 
spearheaded by the Basel Committee. Global financial reporting practices are not far away and there 
are  efforts  underway  to  establish  a  common  set  of  internationally  accepted  financial  reporting 
standards.  Differences  of  opinion  between  standard  setters  and  regulators  need  to  be  reconciled  - 
IAS 39 is one such which is being hotly debated. 
The  efforts  taken  by  CRISIL  India,  together  with  the  SLBA,  in  this  regard  are  commendable  and  I 
would like to see this initiative gather momentum to provide the platform for the improvement of risk 
management techniques by the banks in Sri Lanka which would, in turn, make them ready, if not in 
2007, even later, to meet the challenges of Basel II. The transition to Basel II calls for a fundamental 
shift from the basic rudiments of risk management to sophisticated risk management techniques. The 
period  of  transition  and  the  cost  of  transition  has  to  be  closely  examined  by  the  banking  industry. 
Considerable investment in information technology will have to be made to complete this transition. 
The  strong  platform  of  good  risk  management,  therefore  has  first  to  be  in  place.  Therefore,  the 
incentive that I can see from Basel II now is to commence the process to improve risk management 
especially operational risk by banks in Sri Lanka. As you may know Basle II requires specific capital to 
be allocated to operational risk, which is one of the main differences between Basle I and Basle II. 
Some internationally reputed banks have already allocated about 20% of capital for operational risk. 
To effectively mitigate risks, banks need to have risk managers or risk management specialists. If you 
don’t have such specialists, you need to look for them or enhance the capacity of the existing staff to 
meet this need. Sound risk management practices lead to cushions that are built in good times so as 
to be run down , up to a point, in bad times. Provisions for loan losses dictated by prudence when 
profits are good, can always be written back when profits are low. It is that degree of caution in the 
exercise  of  judgements,  in  making  estimates  when  there  is  an  element  of  uncertainity,  that  makes 
prudence the most critical factor in risk management in banks. 
This is my message to you today and I wish this Seminar every success. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
