Caleb M Fundanga: The Bank of Zambia and the insurance industry   
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the end of year cocktail party 
for the Zambia State Insurance Corporation Limited clients, Lusaka, 1 December 2004. 
 The Master of Ceremony  
The Registrar - Pensions and Insurance Authority  
The Board Chairman-Zambia State Insurance Corporation  
The Board Chairman-Zambia State Insurance Pension Trust Fund  
Madam Managing Director - Ms Muyenga  
Distinguished Invited Guests  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good Evening!  
I wish to thank the Managing Director of Zambia State Insurance Corporation Limited - Ms Muyenga, 
for inviting me and my wife to be the Guest of Honour at this end of year cocktail party. Despite the 
fact that the Bank of Zambia is not directly associated with the insurance industry, this function gives 
me a rare opportunity to say something about the relationship between the Bank of Zambia and the 
insurance industry.  
In the past few years, the Bank of Zambia has taken keen interest in the operations and performance 
of the insurance companies and pension funds. This is because insurance companies and pension 
funds have a direct impact on macro-economic variables, since most of them are leading players in 
the  Government  securities  market.  Whenever  the  Government  wishes  to  raise  funds,  it  is  these 
institutions together with commercial banks that provide them.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  many  of  you  will  agree  with  me  that  the  recent  downward  trend  and 
stabilisation  in  the  macro-economic  variables,  such  as  interest,  inflation,  and  exchange  rates,  has 
induced  high  levels  of  investor  confidence  in  our  economy.  As  many  of  us  are  aware,  a  stable 
macroeconomic  environment  is  one  of  the  critical  ingredients  for  achieving  sustainable  economic 
growth and, ultimately, poverty reduction, in our country.  
In this regard, allow me to reiterate what I have been saying at other fora that the insurance industry 
plays  a  critical  role  in  the  economic  growth  and  development  of  any  country.  Here  in  Zambia,  the 
insurance  industry,  with  gross  annual  premiums  of  approximately  K273  billion  for  life  and  non-life 
business, and about K550 billion for pensions, controls colossal sums of money which could be used 
for investment locally; and if properly regulated could contribute to developing a strong financial sector 
in Zambia.  
However, the problem has been that the insurance industry has been under-regulated for many years. 
In  this  respect,  it  is  high  time  that  regulations  are  put  in  place  to  harmonise  the  operations  of  this 
important  industry.  I  have  several  times  been  told  that  the  Insurance  Act  of  1997  is  inadequate  in 
many  areas  such  as  licensing,  separation  of  life  and  non-life  business  and  investment  outside  the 
country.  I  have  similarly  been  told  that  the  Pension  Schemes  Regulation  Act  of  1996  is  equally 
deficient.  
To  make  matters  worse,  the  Zambian  public  has  insufficient  knowledge  of  insurance  matters.  In 
addition,  the  industry  itself  has  failed  to  co-operate  to  enable  it  handle  mega  risks  and  stop  the 
externalisation of insurance funds.  
Unlike the Bankers Association of Zambia (BAZ), whose existence and strength is cemented by the 
banks themselves, the insurance industry has a very loose arrangement about how it should promote 
a  common  front.  There  is  neither  a  written  nor  binding  memorandum  of  understanding  among  the 
insurance  companies  to  foster  cooperation  on  some  of  the  thorny  issues  confronting  the  insurance 
industry today! 
However, I must acknowledge here, that there is an organisation called the Insurers Association of 
Zambia  (IAZ),  whose  membership  is  compulsory  but  which  may  not  be  very  strong  in  guiding  its 
membership.  
BIS Review 74/2004 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, from my observation, the insurance and pension industry in Zambia is facing 
many challenges. These include:  
1) 
Amendments to the Insurance Act of 1997 and the Pension Schemes Regulation Act of 1996 
so  that  laws  and  regulations  that  impose  stricter  corporate  governance  practices  and 
structures in all institutions managing pension and insurance funds are introduced;  
The  Investment  Act  must  be  harmonised  with  the  Insurance/Pensions  Acts  in  such  a  way 
that  all  insurance  companies  formed  or  already  formed  must  have  local  ownership/equity 
partnership. This would greatly contribute to minimising capital flight and huge repatriation of 
dividends;  
Need for the establishment of a national re-insurance company to avoid capital flight;  
Insurance  companies  need  to  harmonise  their  operations  so  that  clients  benefit  from  fair 
competition.  In  other  words,  data  on  operations  for  all  insurance  companies  should  be 
captured easily for planning purposes; and  
Along  the  same  lines,  the  insurance  companies  should  focus  on  their  core-insurance 
business, as this has the effect of reducing outflow of capital.  
2) 
3) 
4) 
5) 
If insurance companies had an avenue for co-operation amongst themselves, some arrangements to 
compensate for fore-gone income on ceded commission could be worked out under the co-insurance 
programme. 
In  this  regard,  I  call  upon my  counterparts at  the  Pensions  and Insurance  Authority  (PIA)  to  strictly 
supervise the industry in order to ensure, among other things, the proper investment of the insured 
funds. On our part as the Bank of Zambia, we would like to assure you of our continued support, and 
our doors are open for consultations.  
As I do not want to take much of your leisure time, I wish to conclude by thanking you, once again, for 
according  me  the  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  with  you.  To  this  end,  I  wish  you  all  a  Merry 
Christmas and profitable New Year. Please, have a pleasant evening!  
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2004
