Erkki Liikanen: External financing condition, the exchange rate and policy 
tradeoffs for central banks 
Speaking  notes  by  Mr  Erkki  Liikanen,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  for  the  second  high-level 
seminar of the Eurosystem and Latin American central banks, Rio de Janeiro, 26 November 2004. 
 Let me start by saying that the debate on appropriate exchange rate regimes has been surprisingly 
lively  over  the  last  few  years.  My  impression  is  that  this  debate  is  partly  boosted  by  the  fact  that 
economic  theory  has  proved  to  be  rather  lame  in  guiding  policymakers  on  exchange  rate  regime 
choice and many countries have experienced severe foreign exchange crises in recent years. In this 
connection,  the  role  of  free  capital  movements  in  determining  the  performance  of  exchange  rate 
regimes appear to have been at the core of recent policy discussions. 
In  the  1990s,  too  many  economies,  I  believe,  were  victims  of  economic  crises.  The  fall  of  tightly 
managed  exchange  rate  regimes  in  East  Asia,  Russia,  Brazil,  Turkey  and  Argentina  resulted  in  a 
massive decline in living standards in these countries. These crises also brought the issue of optimal 
exchange rate regimes to the core of the international policy agenda.  
While there are no simple recipe for the optimal choice of a currency regime in any country, one can 
safely  emphasise  the  importance  of  consistency  within  the  exchange  regime  and  its  underlying 
macroeconomic policies and economic fundamentals. It is easy to agree with those who have pointed 
out that no regime can ultimately substitute for sound macroeconomic policies. 
In this short talk I will try to argue that, in the current environment of high capital mobility, sound fiscal 
policy and the choice of exchange rate regime are even more important. I will illustrate my point by 
highlighting  the  general  developments  in  emerging  markets  and  by  two  examples  from  Finland’s 
neighbouring countries.  
I  believe  that  free  capital  mobility  is  the  key  factor  underlying  not  only  the  appropriate  choice  of 
exchange rate regime, but also understanding the recent crises in emerging markets. There is a broad 
consensus  today  that  the  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  played  a  central  role  in  triggering  recent 
crises.  Compared  to  more  advanced  economies  emerging  markets  seem  to  be  more  prone  to 
institutional and financial sector weaknesses. Consequently, they are less capable to manage these 
large  capital  flows.  Capital  flows  often  depend  not  only  on  domestic  fundamentals  and  policy 
management, but also on external variables. Higher interest rates in the US or crises in other countries 
can bring about abrubt changes in financial conditions and trigger crises in emerging markets.  
But domestic policy management is very important as well. Recent studies, including one made at the 
Bank of Finland, show that excessive borrowing by the government or private banks seem to be key 
reasons  for  the  recent  crises.  Today  -  with  free  capital  mobility  -  high  level  of  indebtedness  of  the 
government  or  domestic  banks  make  countries  highly  vulnerable  to  changes  in  investor  confidence 
and may easily lead to sudden capital outflows and a subsequent crisis. Indeed, public debt, foreign 
indebtedness of banks or even M2 to reserves are all important indicators of crisis vulnerability.  
Here I would like to stress the importance of sustainable fiscal policy. To illustrate my point, I would 
like  to  discuss  the  positive  developments  in  Estonia.  The  country  has  used  succesfully  a  currency 
board arrangement through the turbulent period in the 1990’s. In Estonia, the average budget deficit 
was less than 1% of GDP in the period between 1992 and 2001, and the public debt level was only 
4% of GDP. As the appetite for risk declined and many emerging market countries ended up in crises, 
in Estonia there were practically no assets from which the sudden capital outflows were able to occur. 
Indeed, Estonia even navigated nicely through the crisis in the neighbouring Russia.  
Interestingly,  Estonia  -  along  with  the  two  other  Baltic  countries  -  have  all  been  able  to  combine 
1) a fixed  exchange  rate,  2)  liberalisation  of  the  capital  account  before  having  a  well-functioning 
financial system, and 3) very large current account deficits. At the same time they have gone through 
deep structural and institutional change. This raises an interesting question. How have they been able 
to manage such a combination that would usually be regarded as inconsistent? 
In  addition  to  sound  fiscal  policy,  small  domestic  financial  markets  have  been  crucial.  In  Baltic 
countries there are hardly any inter-bank markets. The banking sectors have been sold to foreigners, 
and, consequently, banking supervision has been outsourced to a large extent. After the boom and 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
bust  of  1997,  the  Baltic  stock  exchanges  have  generally  stagnated.  Not  only  are  these  economies 
extremely small, but their degree of monetisation is very low. As mentioned, public debt is absent or 
very small. As a result, there are very few assets and markets for speculative capital flows in Baltic 
countries. Partially, this reflects sound fundamentals, but mostly it is an unintended consequence of 
policy decisions. Unfortunately, I don’t know how easily these Baltic experiences can be repeated in 
other countries. 
Let me continue with fiscal policy and by discussing another interesting example. Namely, the recent 
economic developments in Russia. The crisis in 1998 was mainly caused by excessive government 
borrowing. Before the crisis, budget deficits in Russia were between 5-12% and the public debt level 
exceeded 50% of GDP. Again capital flew away from government bonds and other Russian assets, 
and the crisis materialised.  
But  since  2000,  the  Russian  government  has  run  fiscal  surpluses  and  the  debt  level  has  been 
decreased to less than 30% of GDP. Today nobody seriously predicts a currency crisis in Russia, and 
the economy has grown comfortably between 5 and 7% per year. Of course high oil prices have a 
played  an  important  role.  In  fact  the  Russian  authorities  have  used  the  windfall  oil  revenue  fairly 
wisely. For example, the Russian authorities have recently established a oil stabilisation fund.  
Our beautiful host country seems to be following a similar path to recovery. After the crisis in 1999, 
successive  Brazilian  governments  have  run  up  sizeable  budget  surpluses  and  the  public  debt  level 
has  been  decreased.  Maybe  more  remarkably,  the  authorities  have  improved  the  institutional 
framework  of  fiscal  policy.  The  fiscal  responsibility  law  and  the  voluntary  fiscal  commitments  have 
improved  the  credibility  of  the  fiscal  policy  nicely.  Consequently,  the  interest  rates  have  fallen, 
investments  are  rising,  and  GDP  is  growing  satisfactorily  by  around  5%.  Hopefully,  this  tight  fiscal 
policy  will  continue  now  when  the  capital  inflows  and  economic  growth  are  recovering.  If  the  fiscal 
consolidation continues and is imitated by others, this Brazilian success story will contribute positively 
to the stability of the whole region.   
Given  the  capital  mobility  and  the  need  for  sound  macroeconomic  policy,  how  should  emerging 
economies chose their exchange rate regime? Rigid exchange rate regimes may enhance monetary 
policy  credibility  and  lower  inflation  with  little  costs  particularly  in  countries  with  low  exposure  to 
international  capital  movements.  But  as  a  recent  IMF  study  indicates,  these  economies  are  often 
developing countries.  
Nevertheless,  in  emerging  economies  with  relatively  large  financial  markets  and  large  capital 
movements, rigid exchange rate systems might be quite a risky choice. As we have seen, fixed and 
other  rigid  exchange  rate  regimes  are  highly  vulnerable  to  sudden  capital  outflows  and  crises. 
Especially if the domestic fundamentals are not perfect.  
Nowadays many emerging market countries have chosen a regime where the currency floats but the 
authorities, in practice, still target an exchange rate level. This fear of floating may well be a adequate 
exchange  rate  regime  for  many  emerging  economies.  In  these  countries  credibility  is  still  low, 
dollarisation is high and the intermediation of monetary policy is unstable. But as the countries develop 
economically  and  institutionally,  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  and  proper  inflation  target  may  well 
represent a less costly regime choice.   
To conclude, it is difficult nowadays to isolate oneself totally from external shocks and sudden capital 
movements. But the authorities in emerging markets can render their economies less vulnerable by 
running sustainable fiscal policies and choosing a suitable exchange rate regime. To build a sounder 
banking sector might be more challenging. Again it is very difficult to isolate the banking sector from 
capital movements, but the authorities can demand large capital requirements. Authorities could also 
supervise  the  currency  mismatches  in  the  banking  sector  properly.  More  capital  and  less  foreign 
currency  liabilities  might  render  the  economies  less  vulnerable  to  sudden  capital  movements  and 
crises. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
