David Dodge: Global economic developments and the implications for Ontario 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Ontario  Economic  Summit, 
Niagara-on-the-Lake, Ontario, 7 October 2004. 
 Good afternoon. I am glad to be here, and to participate in this very important summit.  
It’s not easy to come up with something fresh to say this late in the conference agenda. My topic is 
“Ontario’s Place in the World,” but, of course, you’ve already spent a day and a half listening to the 
opinions  of  smart  people  who  spend  a  great  deal  of  their  time  studying  this  very  subject.  You’ve 
discussed at length the forces at play in the world economy, and how they are influencing Canada’s 
economy and, of course, the economy of Ontario.  
Unfortunately, I have not been able to attend the entire event, so I have missed hearing many of the 
interesting  speakers  and  presentations  that  have  gone  before.  So,  to  contribute  to  this  discussion 
about Ontario and its place in the world, I thought that I would begin by giving you a brief synopsis of 
what  I  heard  this  past  weekend  at  the  meetings  of  the  G7  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in 
Washington. I’ll recap what was said about the challenges facing the global economy, both over the 
next year and further out over the medium term. Then, I will talk about how those themes and their 
implications relate to the Ontario economy. 
The global economy in the near term 
One theme that I heard repeatedly in Washington is that 2004 is turning out to be a better year than 
many had thought, particularly over the first half of the year. Indeed, the IMF is now projecting global 
economic growth of 5 per cent in 2004, which would be a marked improvement from the 3.9 per cent 
rate seen in 2003. Globally, while the United States continues to be an important source of growth, it is 
encouraging to note the very strong growth in Asia and the improved momentum in Europe.  
There  have  been  a  few  factors  underpinning  this  growth,  including  a  still-favourable  financing 
environment, and a general improvement in the banking sector and in private sector balance sheets 
and profitability. The outlook for consumption and investment in most countries continues to be good. 
This  outlook  bodes  well  for  the  rest  of  this  year  and  2005,  even  though  there  was  a  sense  at  the 
meetings that growth over this period will not be quite as strong as we saw in the first half of 2004. The 
IMF’s own forecast, for example, pegs global growth for 2005 at 4.3 per cent - still above the trend 
rate, but off a bit from 2004. 
However, this optimistic outlook came with a clear caveat. The balance of risks for the global economy 
in 2005 has shifted slightly to the downside. Let me briefly mention some of the risks that were talked 
about. There was a general sense that the sharp rise in oil prices could become a more significant 
drag on growth next year, particularly if prices were to stay at current levels. Higher oil prices have cut 
into the rate of economic growth, but the consensus is that, so far, the overall effects appear to be 
manageable.  
Geopolitical events remain a risk to the world economy. As well, we are beginning to see the potential 
for  inflationary  pressures  in  some  countries,  as  economies  approach  the  limits  of  their  production 
capacity.  The  challenge  for  monetary  authorities  will  be  to  manage  the  transition  from  a  very  low 
interest-rate environment to one where policy rates are somewhat higher. 
Medium-term prospects for the global economy 
Looking beyond 2005, there was a general consensus that economic policy-makers around the world 
need to move ahead with addressing the problems that the global economy will face. So let me now 
take  a  few  minutes  to  discuss  what  was  said  about  the  medium-term  challenges  for  the  global 
economy. 
In 2006 and beyond, a key concern will be how economies will adjust to the current global economic 
imbalances.  A  large  U.S.  current  account  deficit  has  its  counterpart  in  the  large  current  account 
surpluses in almost every other region of the world, most notably in Asia. At the same time, we have 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 1
seen a sharp rise in the net foreign liability position of the United States and a massive accumulation 
of foreign exchange reserves by the Asian countries. 
Looking  forward,  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  is  likely  to  continue  to  deteriorate,  and  current 
account surpluses in emerging Asia may remain larger than desired for longer than desired. For now, 
there is no reason to believe that world capital markets cannot manage these imbalances. But, over 
the longer haul, the magnitude of these current account imbalances cannot continue, and no country 
can  pile  up  foreign  exchange  reserves  indefinitely.  Global  adjustment  will  be  needed  to  restore 
balance.  
This  global  adjustment  could  take  place  in  several  ways  and  through  several  channels.  Hopefully, 
these will allow the adjustment to take place in an orderly way. The first channel is through changes in 
the global pattern of savings and consumption. Domestic savings in the United States could rise - both 
government and household savings rates can be expected to head up. And foreign consumption could 
increase, as economies and markets continue to expand.  
It is worth noting that in North America, household consumption is running well over 60 per cent of 
GDP. As we look ahead, and take into account the aging population, it is important that savings rates 
increase in North America. At the same time, household consumption in emerging Asia is only about 
40  per  cent  of  that  region’s  GDP.  As  Asian  incomes  rise,  there  is  great  potential  for  household 
consumption in that region to increase. So these are natural forces that will be working towards the 
adjustment of these imbalances. 
The second channel for adjustment will undoubtedly involve changes in real exchange rates; that is, 
the relative value of currencies taking into account the effects of inflation. Changes in real exchange 
rates could come about either through movements in relative inflation rates, or movements in nominal 
exchange  rates,  or  some  combination  of  the  two.  With  respect  to  nominal  exchange  rates,  the  big 
issue is the need for some effective depreciation of the U.S. dollar against the currencies of emerging 
Asia. A key element here is China’s fixed exchange rate, and how successful the Chinese authorities 
will be in meeting their stated goal of moving to a floating currency. 
In all likelihood, both of these channels of adjustment will play some part in facilitating the correction of 
global  imbalances.  As  these  adjustments  take  place,  two  things will  be  critical  to  ensuring that  real 
incomes continue to rise worldwide. First, global trade flows must continue unimpeded. That is why we 
must  push  for  continued  progress  at  the  Doha  Round  of  trade  negotiations  under  the  World  Trade 
Organization. It is also why we must fight against any outbreak of protectionism.  
Second, all economies must take steps to enhance their flexibility so that the adjustment doesn’t have 
to  take  place  through  loss  of  real  incomes.  Here  in  Canada,  we  have  to  continue  to  increase  the 
flexibility of our markets for goods and services, for capital, and crucially, for labour. At the same time, 
all of us leaders of corporations and public sector institutions must work to enhance the productivity of 
our workplaces. That leads me to the issues that we have to consider here in Ontario. The remainder 
of my remarks today will deal with these issues.  
Adjustments in Ontario 
Now, as I mentioned, I was not able to participate in your earlier discussions about the structure of 
Ontario’s economy. But, having outlined the forces that the international experts believe will be at work 
in  the  years  ahead,  let  me  now  spend  a  few  minutes  talking  about  the  competitive  and  structural 
issues that we face here at home in light of these global forces.  
Experience has taught me that one has to be very careful in trying to predict exactly how structures in 
an economy are going to evolve. But I think that we can safely predict that the first and most obvious 
adjustment will be a transformation of manufacturing processes around the world, as low-cost, highly 
efficient  capacity  is  built  in  Asia.  This  means  tremendous  and  continuing  competitive  pressure  on 
industries  that  have  traditionally  been  mainstays  of  the  Ontario  economy  -  automobiles  and  parts, 
other  transportation  equipment,  and  some  areas  of light  manufacturing.  Over  time,  those  pressures 
will increasingly be felt by industries such as steel and heavy manufacturing. There are no signs that 
these pressures will abate in the years ahead. 
A second adjustment will be to higher energy costs in the years ahead. This is a major issue for all 
countries,  and  poses  a  problem  for  Canada  and  Ontario,  which  are  energy-intensive  by  world 
standards. But energy cost increases and supply concerns are not limited to oil and natural gas. The 
blackout  of  August  2003  was  a  spectacular  example  of  the  need  to  have  adequate  and  failsafe 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2004
electricity supplies. We know that our electricity supplies are often stretched to the limit. And we know 
that demand in Ontario will continue to grow in the future, and that there is no clear plan to replace the 
capacity that has been slated for closure. 
A third adjustment relates to non-energy commodities. Strong demand from the booming economies of 
Asia is behind the rise in non-energy commodity prices such as nickel and iron ore. In response, we 
are seeing significant efforts in countries around the world to find new sources for these commodities 
and  to  improve  their  efficiency  in  extracting  them.  This  province’s  commodity  producers  must  take 
advantage  of  this  healthy  environment  to  boost  their  own  productivity  to  meet  new  competitive 
challenges. 
Fourth, we are in the process of adjusting to the fact that services, once thought to be non-tradable, 
are increasingly open to worldwide competition because of changes in technology. Ontario’s service-
producing  industries  are  facing  increased  competitive  pressure  from  new  suppliers,  such  as  India’s 
burgeoning  information  technology  and  business  services  industries.  All  indications  are  that  this 
pattern will continue, and will be repeated in other service industries.  
Perhaps  the  biggest  challenge  for  Ontario’s  service  sector  will  be  from  the  continued  consolidation 
within financial services industries around the world. This poses a real competitive challenge to the 
financial  services  industry  that  is  so  important  to  the  Greater  Toronto  Area.  Indeed,  while  financial 
services companies may be concentrated around Toronto, they are important to the whole province - 
the finance, insurance, and leasing sector represents almost 15 per cent of Ontario’s GDP.  
All these competitive challenges are compelling Ontario’s businesses, politicians and policy-makers to 
find ways to increase industrial productivity and market efficiency.  
Let  me  just  stop  for  a  second,  because  what  I’ve  said  so  far  may  sound  overly  negative  about 
Ontario’s economic prospects. We need to keep in mind that changes in the global economy are also 
creating income and wealth in China and India, thus increasing their demand for goods and services 
from  abroad.  These  emerging  markets  are  just  that  -  markets.  This source  of  growing  demand  can 
provide a boost to the global economy in general, and the Ontario economy in particular. 
Now, in the past two days, you have heard from people who are far more expert than I am about how 
individual  sectors  can  meet  this  competition  and  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities.  So  I’m  not 
going  to  try  to  add  my  own  specific  policy  prescriptions  to  the  debate.  But  I  would  like  to  point  out 
some issues that I believe must receive considerable focus in order to position Ontario to meet the 
global challenges facing us over the medium term. 
The  first  is  the  need  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  labour  markets  and  the  quality  of  Ontario’s 
human resources. This is a critical element of Ontario’s ability to meet future competitive challenges. 
To develop the skilled workers that this province will require to meet its labour demands, Ontario must 
ensure  that  its  education  and  training  systems  are  second  to  none.  This  applies  to  early  childhood 
education  and  development,  the  provincial  school  system,  and  post-secondary  education  and  skills 
training. And all employers, both public and private, have a responsibility to provide their workers with 
opportunities  to  upgrade  their  skills.  Appropriate  investment  by  individuals,  by  employers,  and  by 
governments, will be needed. 
But even the best-educated and trained workforce will still face inevitable economic adjustment that 
will lead to displacement and additional burdens on some groups in society. This does not mean that 
we should shy away from the task. But it does mean that a second area of focus should be to have 
policies in place that help to smooth the adjustment. These include providing access to training, or 
helping workers relocate or shift into expanding areas of the economy.  
The third area would be to improve the efficiency of capital markets and the financial system in 
Ontario and Canada. We all know that an economy works better when its financial services sector is 
sound and efficient. A robust and well-functioning financial system is key, so that growing firms have 
access to credit, and savings can be efficiently recycled to help businesses expand. 
Now, I am not here with a prescription for what needs to be done in this area. But we must not lose 
sight of the fact that the financial sector is an important contributor to economic growth in Ontario. An 
efficient  financial  sector  will  continue  to  be  a  competitive  advantage  for  this  province,  both  in 
maintaining efficiency in our own market, and in providing an opportunity to export expertise around 
the  world.  So  policy-makers  have  an  interest  in  providing  a  framework  that  will  allow  our  financial 
institutions and markets to compete in an increasingly globalized world. With global standards evolving 
rapidly, Canada and Ontario must be at the forefront in terms of efficiency and competitiveness. 
BIS Review 56/2004 
 3
A  fourth  area  of  focus  is  the  province’s  infrastructure  -  it  needs  to  be  a  contributor  to  industrial 
efficiency, not an impediment. An important part of this is transportation infrastructure. And this applies 
not only within the province, but also to the links with our trading partners in other provinces, other 
parts of North America, and overseas. But it is not just physical infrastructure that is important. We 
also need the right policy infrastructure in areas such as security, inter-provincial trade, and regulation. 
For  example,  as  industries  increasingly  rely  on  just-in-time  delivery,  border  delays  can  cause  real 
damage to businesses. That is why it is critical to develop and maintain border crossings that are as 
safe as these times require, yet open enough to allow the rapid flow of goods and people. 
The  fifth  issue  would  be securing  reliable  sources of  cost-effective  energy  for  the  future.  Ways 
must be found to foster the development of new sources of energy and to provide the right incentives 
for the efficient use of that energy. Clearly, there is a need for an appropriate framework to encourage 
investment  in  electricity  transmission  and  generation,  including  renewable  energy  and  alternative 
technologies.  
So those are five critical elements that I see as part of Ontario’s efforts to meet the challenges that lie 
ahead,  and  to  take  advantage  of  the opportunities  presented  by growing world  markets.  It  is  by  no 
means a comprehensive list. There are many other important issues that I have not discussed. But I 
have  tried  to  point  out  five  areas  that,  in  my  opinion,  policy-makers  and  business  leaders  cannot 
ignore. 
Conclusion 
We  know  that  the  challenges  facing  our  economy  will  not  be  easy  to  meet.  We  know  that  tough 
choices will have to be made to secure an economic framework that enhances Ontario’s efficiency and 
its  flexibility.  We know  that  the  burden of  adjustment  will  fall  disproportionately on  some  individuals 
and groups and that we have a collective responsibility to help with that adjustment. 
But  we  also  know  that  Canadians  and  Ontarians  have  made  tough  choices  in  the  past  that  have 
proved right. These choices have yielded an economy that is resilient, and capable of competing with 
the best in the world. That tradition must continue. The choices Ontarians make in the years ahead will 
determine  our  ability  to  meet  the  challenges  thrown  at  us  by  this  changing  world  economy,  and  to 
seize the opportunities that growth in world markets will bring. This province has tremendous human 
and  natural  advantages.  I  am  confident  that  it  also  has  the  will  to  make  the  choices  that  will  help 
Ontario thrive in this new world economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 56/2004
