Peter Nicholl: Is the capital in Bosnia and Herzegovina expensive? 
Speech  by  Mr  Peter  Nicholl,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Bosnia  and  Herzegovina,  at  the 
Conference “Is the capital in Bosnia and Herzegovina expensive?”, Sarajevo, 13 October 2004. 
 Is the price of capital in BiH high? Based on a simple comparison with Western Europe and a number 
of  the  countries  in  Eastern  Europe  that  are  further  down  the  reform  path  than  BiH,  the  answer  is 
clearly yes. Given the risks and uncertainties that still exist in the political, economic and legal systems 
in BiH the answer is no. What we need to focus on today is what are these risks and uncertainties and 
how can we work together to reduce them. 
This meeting today is focusing on the banking sector. There are a lot of improvements that still need to 
be made in the BiH banking sector. But we also need to remember that reform in the banking sector 
has gone further and faster than reform in any other sector of the economy. As a consequence of that, 
both the availability and the cost of capital has come down substantially in BiH over the last few years. 
The first area to focus on therefore is the reform of the rest of the economy. The banking sector is 
extremely liquid at present - even though their lending is growing at a rate that worries the IMF. They 
are  holding  KM  790  million  more  on  their  reserve  deposits  at  the  CBBH  than  required  by  our  10% 
reserve ratio. They are also holding substantial short-term funds abroad. 
One of the reasons for this is that there is still a shortage of credit-worthy borrowers. It is easy for a 
bank to lend money. The challenge for a successful bank is to make sure the borrowers will be able to 
pay it back. While this simple rule seems blindingly obvious, the BiH banking system in the past was 
burdened by bad debts because this simple banking rule was ignored. 
What needs to be done to increase the number of credit-worthy borrowers in BiH? 
a) 
Company registration process ( and the process for closing a company): a simplified system 
is under preparation but I am very surprised by how slow the process has been. The banks 
and  the  Central  Bank  together  reformed  the  internal  payments  system  in  BiH  over  nine 
months. The issue of simplifying the company registration process has been talked about for 
about  four  years.  It  is  time  some  of  these  reforms  were  completed  rather  than  just  talked 
about. 
Tax system: the current tax system is very fragmented and costly for businesses, especially 
small  businesses.  The  introduction of  the  VAT  system  should  go  a  long way  to  improving 
this. I know the Government is now trying to get this system introduced as soon as possible. 
Some of the delays are now being caused by the international community. I urge everybody 
involved, including the international community, to work to get this system in place as soon 
as possible. 
Regulatory system: in this area there has been little progress despite it being identified as a 
problem area by a World Bank study several years ago and despite the gains that have been 
made by the bulldozer exercise. In fact, I think the situation may have got worse as many 
new  regulations  have  been  introduced  but  the  old  ones  don’t  seem  to  be  removed.  The 
extensive regulations allow a bureaucrat to decide how a business should operate - often in 
great detail - rather than the investor who is risking his money to set up the business. 
Public utilities: the costs of the products supplied to businesses by public utilities in BiH, such 
as  electricity  and  telephones,  are  very  expensive.  They  are,  in  effect,  another  tax  on 
business. 
b) 
c) 
d) 
Legal  system  and  courts:  like  most  things  in  BiH,  the  court  system  is  very  complex  and  it  tends  to 
move very slowly. For a commercial sector, including the banking sector, to be able to take business 
decisions and invest with confidence, it must have recourse to a legal and court system that resolves 
contract disputes quickly and fairly. A recent World Bank study covering 126 countries concluded that 
a poorly-functioning court system may add as much as 2-2.5% to all interest rates in the country. It is 
therefore very significant. If there is one single area that can have a large impact on getting the cost of 
capital  in  BiH  down  it  is  improving  the  legal  and  court  system.  The  introduction  of  specialist 
commercial courts is aimed at improving this situation. I would be interested to hear from the bankers 
at this meeting whether they have yet noticed any improvement. 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 1
I have made these comments about the regulatory and legal systems first as I think the biggest impact 
on getting the cost of capital down in BiH will come from improvements in these areas. But that does 
not  mean  there  is  nothing  we  can  do  in  the  financial  sector  itself  that  will  continue  and  hopefully 
accelerate the reduction in the cost of capital that has already occurred. 
Country risk: there is a country-risk element in interest rates in BiH. Most of us who live and work here 
believe it is higher than justified because external perceptions of BiH are still more negative than the 
reality of BiH. We all have to work on changing these perceptions and on improving the reality of BiH 
even further. What can we do: 
• 
show more political cohesion and decisiveness. I see many signs that the three governments 
in BiH are working together in BiH much more than before. This has to be continued by the 
BiH politicians, encouraged by the international community and explained to the rest of the 
world by both; 
one  of  the  main  reasons  we  got  a  formal  sovereign  credit  rating  earlier  this  year  was  to 
improve the external perception of BiH. The initial rating of B3 with a positive outlook was 
quite good and has helped improve BiH’s international image. Once the laws on the internal 
debt  issue  are  passed  in  both  entities,  I  intend  to  go  back  to  Moodys  Rating  Agency  and 
request that they consider an upgrade for BiH; 
information:  road-shows,  article  etc.  The  Government,  banks  and  business  can  all  play  a 
role. We all need to be ‘salesmen’ for BiH. 
  Capital  markets:  BiH has a  strong  Central  Bank and  a banking system  that  is  now  playing  a  major 
economic role. We need to focus now on accelerating the development of the capital markets in BiH 
as they are still extremely small. This will have two major impacts on the cost of capital in BiH: 
• 
it  will  provide  the  banks  with  instruments  in  which  they  can  invest  their  substantial  liquid 
funds and earn a better return than they do at present. Banks at present have quite a large 
proportion of their asset portfolio on which they earn very little: 1-2%. They therefore have to 
earn more on their loan portfolio in order to improve their overall rate of return on assets; 
it  will  give  enterprises  a  larger  range  of  sources  of  capital.  This  should  allow  the  types  of 
capital  available  to  better  meet  their  needs  and  could  also  reduce  the  cost  of  capital  by 
increasing competition. 
 What are we doing to develop the capital markets: 
• 
Stock exchanges: two stock exchanges have been established in BiH but both are still very 
small. But there are two very positive trends already underway: 
a) 
b) 
turnover on both exchanges is steadily increasing; 
most  of  the  stock  exchanges  in  the  region  have  agreed  to  develop  a  common 
database.  They  have  announced  that  this  is  the  first  step  towards  common  trading. 
This is very good news for the capital markets in the region. 
  Government securities market: a draft law that will give a legal basis for this market is ready 
and  hopefully  will  be  introduced  to  Parliament  very  soon.  A  lot  of  work  has  already  been 
done  on  the  infrastructure  for  this  market.  Most  of  the  elements  already  exist  -  registries, 
clearing and settlement systems - and the CBBH is getting financial and technical assistance 
from the US to establish a new issue facility. At a technical level I think we could be ready to 
issue the first short-term security as early as the first quarter of 2004 - provided the law is 
passed. This meeting should support the speedy introduction and passage of this Law. 
A leasing law has been drafted and will also hopefully be introduced to Parliament soon. 
One company has issued a company debenture (I am not sure if this is the name you use in 
BiH) on the RS Stock Exchange. It is very small but it is the first example of a new capital 
raising instrument for enterprises in BiH. 
Reserve requirements: the final issue I want to comment on is the reserve requirements imposed by 
the CBBH. I am sure the banks here today will say this is one element in the high cost of capital in 
BiH. Before they do so, they should think about the following two facts: 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2004
   The  reserve  requirement  we  impose,  which  is  currently  7.5%  and  will  rise  to  10%  from 
1 December, is much lower than in neighboring countries. I understand that the ratio is 19% 
in Croatia and 22% in Serbia for example. 
The remuneration we pay banks on the reserve deposits at the CBBH, which is around 2% 
on  required  reserves  and  1%  on  excess  reserves,  is  quite  generous  compared  with  most 
other central banks in Eastern Europe. We are one of the few central banks to remunerate 
total reserve deposits. 
The banks can say that these reserve requirements do impose a cost on them. My point is 
that  the  cost  the  CBBH  imposes  on  you  is  less  than  the  central  banks  in  the  neighboring 
countries impose on their banks so it is not an explanation for the cost of capital being higher 
in BiH. 
Conclusion: the banking system has improved significantly in BiH and this has brought down the cost 
of capital. But there are further improvements that can be made. In particular, it is very important to 
accelerate  the  development  of  the  capital  markets  in  BiH.  The  CBBH  promises  to  continue  to  be 
actively involved in this process. BUT, the things that will do most to bring down the cost of capital in 
BiH  are  outside  the  financial  system  -  they  are  improving  the  court  system,  easing  the  tax  and 
regulatory burden on business and working together to improve the external perception of BiH in order 
to lower the country risk premium in our interest rates. 
BIS Review 60/2004 
 3
