Antonio Fazio: Overview of global economic and financial developments in first 
half 2004 
Address  by  Mr  Antonio  Fazio,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  to  the  ACRI  (Association  of  Italian 
Savings Banks), Rome, 5 November 2004. 
 The international economy 
1. 
The recovery in economic activity, which began in the spring of 2003 in the United States and was 
sustained by the growth of the Asian economies, has gradually spread to Europe and Latin America. 
In the first half of 2004 the world economy continued to expand rapidly; in the second half the pace 
moderated, partly as a consequence of the rise in the price of oil. 
In the United States economic activity slowed in the second quarter, after expanding strongly in the 
first; the growth in household spending slowed to 1.6 per cent, but that in investment accelerated to 
13.9 per cent. In the third quarter GDP grew by 3.7 per cent, fueled by a pick-up in consumption and 
the continuation of the expansionary phase of the investment cycle, which has now spread from IT 
products to include traditional capital goods. 
Payroll employment rose, at a monthly rate of 300,000 from March to May and of 100,000 from June 
to September. 
The economic expansion will remain strong in the last few months of this year and will carry over into 
next year. 
Core  inflation,  measured  by  the  deflator  of  consumption  excluding  energy  and  fresh  food  products, 
has  held  steady  since  March  at  around  1.5  per  cent  on  a  twelve-month  basis.  In  view  of  the 
progressive reduction in unutilized capacity, the Federal Reserve began to raise the federal funds rate 
at a measured pace, so that it now stands at 1.75 per cent. 
The budget deficit, after worsening progressively for three years, has stabilized in 2004, thanks to the 
growth of the economy. According to the estimates put out by the Congressional Budget Office, the 
federal deficit, including the social security balances, was 3.6 per cent of GDP in fiscal 2004, virtually 
unchanged compared with the previous fiscal year and 0.5 percentage points less than estimated in 
the spring. 
The deficit on the external current account was equal to 5.4 per cent of GDP in the first half of 2004. 
From  March  to  September  the  dollar  fluctuated  between  1.20  and  1.24  against  the  euro;  since  the 
middle of October a further weakening of the US currency has taken it to 1.28 against the euro. Since 
February 2002, when the prolonged decline of the dollar began, US competitiveness - measured by 
the  fall  in  the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  that  is  with  account  taken  of  inflation  differentials  -  has 
improved by 13 per cent. 
In Japan, exports continued to expand very fast in the first half of the year, at an annualized rate of 
nearly  19  per  cent  in  real  terms,  despite  the  slowdown  in  those  to  Asia.  Productive  investment 
increased  by  12  percent.  The  slowdown  in  GDP  growth  from  6.4  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  to 
1.3 percent  in  the  second  was  partly  due  to  the  fall  in  public  investment.  The  latent  data  available 
indicate that economic activity is likely to have remained weak in the third quarter. 
Growth  continued  at  a  rapid  pace  in  China,  India  and  the  other  emerging  Asian  economics.  The 
recovery has spread to the countries of Latin America. 
In  the  last  few  weeks  the  persistence  of  international  tensions  has  aggravated  the  threats  to  the 
continuation  of  the  strong  phase  of  global  expansion.  In  real  terms  the  price  of  oil  has  risen  to 
50 percent  of  the  peak  recorded  during  the  upswing  at  the  end  of  the  1970s;  the  latest  figures 
available suggest that the rising trend may have come to a halt. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
The state of the financial markets 
2.  
The yields on US government bonds rose between mid-March and mid-May, primarily in response to 
the  faster-than-expected  growth  in  economic  activity,  by  1.2  percentage  points  to  4.9  percent;  they 
subsequently came down and are about 4 per cent today. 
In  the  euro  area  the  yields  on  ten-year  government  bonds  have  also  come  down  and  are  about 
4 percent; in Japan they are about 1.5 per cent. 
The abundant liquidity of the financial markets is helping to keep interest rates down and at the same 
time to reduce the volatility of the prices of shares and bonds. 
The risk premiums on US corporate bonds have remained virtually unchanged, at a historically low 
level.  Stock  market  indices  have  remained  near  the  highs  reached  at  the  end  of  2003;  the 
price/earnings ratio has returned close to its long-term average value. 
The  volatility  of  stock  and  bond  prices  has  been  extremely  low.  In  an  environment  marked  by 
abundant  liquidity  and  low  interest  rates,  major  international  intermediaries  have  reacted  to  the 
weakness of the demand for credit by increasing the share of investments in high-yield instruments, in 
order to improve the return on capital. They have increased the supply of derivative instruments that 
provide protection against possible variations in the value of financial assets and assumed the related 
risks. The increased supply is deemed to have caused a fall in the price, and hence in the volatility, of 
options,  which  has  spread  to  the  cash  markets.  In  such  a  situation,  a  return  to  normal  levels  of 
volatility could bring substantial losses. 
In the emerging countries, after the rise in risk premiums that occurred in the spring as a consequence 
of expectations of an imminent increase in US interest rates, financial conditions have become easier 
everywhere;  the  recovery  in  exports  has  been  a  contributory  factor.  The  low  cost  of  financing  has 
encouraged numerous emerging countries to bring forward bond issues and increase their amount. In 
the first half of 2004 the value of the gross issues of the emerging countries as a group was two thirds 
of the historically high value of nearly $100 billion recorded in the whole of 2003. 
Economic developments in the euro area and ltaly 
3.  
The upturn in economic activity in the euro area has not been as buoyant as in the rest of the world. In 
the  fast  half  of  this  year  GDP  expanded  at  an  annual  rate  of  2.3  per  cent.  Between  the  first  and 
second quarters there was a slight slowdown. 
Growth was sustained chiefly by household spending. Consumption expanded substantially in France; 
in Germany it continued to contract. 
Investment  continued  at  a  modest  level,  growing  at  an  annual  rate  of  0.7  per  cent.  A  pronounced 
acceleration in France contrasted with continuing contraction in Germany, once again determined by 
investment in construction. 
The area’s exports accelerated to an annual growth rate of 7 per cent in the first six months of the 
year, fueled by the powerful expansion of world trade and the stabilization of the effective exchange 
rate  of  the  euro.  This  result  reflects  the  good  performance  of  German  exports,  which  are  highly 
competitive  even  at  current  exchange  rates.  The  stimulus  to  economic  activity  was  blunted  by  the 
substantial increase in imports. 
The contribution of net exports to GDP growth was negative in both France and Italy. 
Italian  economic  growth picked  up slightly  in  the  first  halt  but  remained significantly  below  the  area 
average. Italian GDP growth followed the area-wide trend in decelerating between the first and second 
quarters. 
The main impediment to Italian economic growth is weak export performance. After diminishing in the 
first  quarter,  foreign  sales  increased  appreciably  in  the  second;  growth  apparently  continued  in  the 
third quarter, albeit at a slower pace. For the year, export growth is projected to be much less than the 
growth in world trade; Italy’s share of the world market is expected to decrease further. 
Italian export penetration has met with difficulties both in the euro area and in the rest of the world. 
The loss of market shares began to intensify in 2002. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
With  deteriorating  competitiveness  and  the  unfavourable  trend  in  exports,  industrial  production 
recorded no increase between the second quarter of 2003 and the third quarter of 2004; in the euro 
area as a whole it grew by 2.8 per cent. Compared with the average for 2000, in September industrial 
production was down in Italy by 2.8 per cent; in the euro area, it showed an increase of 2.5 per cent. 
In  the  fist  half  of  this  year  Italian  investment  recouped  the  decline  registered  in  2003.  The  most 
substantial increase was in investment in machinery, equipment and transport equipment. Household 
expenditure increased at an annual rate of 1.6 per cent. This gain came entirely in the first quarter; in 
the  second  consumption  showed  a  marginal  decline,  due  to  spending  on  services.  Purchases  of 
durable goods continued to grow strongly, in connection with easy credit terms and a modest recovery 
in households’ confidence. 
In  the  second  quarter  the  twelve-month  rate  of  consumer  price  inflation  in  Italy  was  around 
2.3 percent. In the last few months it has fallen below the average for the other euro-area countries. 
The effects of higher oil prices on electricity and gas prices have yet to be felt. 
According to national accounts data, in the first half of the year the number of persons employed in 
Italy rose by 0.6 per cent on an annual basis. For the euro area as a whole the increase was scarcely 
0.2 per cent. In recent years the increase in the number of persons employed, despite the stagnation 
of economic activity, has been driven by the greater flexibility of the labour market and the moderation 
of real wage growth. 
Nevertheless, in the first half of the year unit labour costs in the service sector grew more than two 
percentage  points  faster  on  an  annual  basis  than  the  average  for  the  main  euro-area  countries.  In 
industry excluding construction the gap exceeded four points. The main factor was labour productivity, 
which evolved less favourably in Italy than in the other countries. 
The unemployment rate has continued to fall, but geographical disparities remain extremely great. 
Looking ahead 
4.  
The expansion in the world economy in 2005 will not match the exceptional rate of growth estimated 
for the current year, of the order of 5 per cent. 
In September the International Monetary Fund forecast growth of 4 3 per cent next year. It may be 
lower than that in view of the uncertainties stemming from international political tensions and the rise 
in oil prices, although this appears to have run its course. 
In the United States output is expected to grow by 3 to 4 per cent, in line with its potential; in Asia 
growth should be between 6 and 7 per cent, and in Japan, between 2 and 2.5 per cent. 
The rapid expansion in world trade is expected to continue, although not as fast as this year. 
The euro-area economy will continue to grow in the last part of the year and in 2005. 
In view of recent trends, the expansion of the Italian economy appears uncertain. 
Industrial  production  has  not  yet  shown  any  sign  of  recovery.  Preliminary  estimates  indicate  that  in 
October the level was no higher than at the end of 2003. Gross domestic product rose by 0.5 per cent 
in the first quarter and 0.3 per cent in the second; the increase is expected to remain about the same 
in the third quarter. For the year as a whole the estimated increase is 1.2 per cent, which is well below 
the average for the other European countries. 
Household  consumption  is  increasing  in  line  with  GDP.  The  sharp  upturn  in  world  trade  concerns 
Italy’s exports as well; if the recovery observed in the second quarter continues, they may increase by 
as much as 5 per cent in volume in 2004. 
After falling sharply in 2003, investment is showing signs of recovery. 
According  to  a  survey  conducted  by  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  branches  between  17  September  and 
7 October  on  4,157  firms,  including  3,094  in  industry  excluding  construction  and  1,063  providing 
non-financial services, capital spending in 2004 will be only slightly below the amount initially planned; 
the recovery in investment is expected to continue in 2005, both in the service sector and in industry. 
In the first nine months of the year, the majority of firms saw their turnover increase in nominal terms 
with respect to the year-earlier period; during the third quarter orders showed some improvement with 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
respect to June; a large percentage of firms in industry and services expect demand to pick up further 
in the next six months. 
In view of the favourable performance of international trade, it is expected that output will be sustained 
by  exports.  Poor  competitiveness  on  the  domestic  market  will  entail  a  sharp  rise  in  imports;  GDP 
growth will be faster than this year; however, on the basis of current trends, it will amount to less than 
2 per cent. 
Estimates  made  with  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  econometric  model  indicate  that  investment  in  machinery, 
equipment, and means of transport could expand by 3 to 4 per cent in real terms. 
Economic policy 
5. 
The twelve-month inflation rate fell to 2 per cent in October, according to preliminary data. 
On a seasonally adjusted basis, the consumer price index registered a slight decrease with respect to 
September. This is a development whose interpretation is multifaceted. Undoubtedly, the weakness of 
demand  played  a  part  in  the  decrease.  After  the  criticisms  and  discussion  of  the  behaviour  of  the 
distributive  trades  on  the  occasion  of  the  changeover  to  the  euro,  the  sector  needs  to  regain 
consumers’ confidence. A broadly shared determination to act in this direction can bring benefits for 
the level of economic activity and for the distributive sector itself. 
In  a  cyclical  phase  that  remains  uncertain  but  is  showing  signs  of  improving,  it  is  crucial  to  launch 
policies designed to create the conditions for faster economic growth. 
It is indispensable to proceed with the adjustment of the public finances. Curbing the rate of growth of 
current  expenditure  is  part  of  this  strategy;  the  recoupment  of  tax  bases  is  necessary  in  order  to 
reduce the benefits accruing to tax evasion and avoidance. 
There is ample scope for increasing the efficiency of the public sector. Major advantages can come 
from further administrative simplification and a drastic reduction in authorization procedures. 
Structural measures can contain the rise in expenditure on health care, without affecting the quality 
and availability of services. 
In the medium term, the size and certainty of the expenditure savings connected with the changes in 
the pension system will have to be verified in depth. 
The  process  of  decentralization  of  government  powers  must  necessarily  involve  a  transfer  of 
personnel and administrative units. 
In a context of deficient infrastructural endowment, even in such essential services such as transport, 
water  supply  and  the  provision  of  energy  at  moderate  costs,  spending  on  public  works  in  2004 
remained at the previous year’s levels in real terms. Extraordinary measures and adequate financing 
can  accelerate  the  transition  from  the  phase  of  decision-making  to  that  of  project  execution. 
Arrangements  to  prevent  or  resolve  conflicts  of  authority,  together  with  innovative  mechanisms  of 
cooperation  with  the  banking  system,  can  help  to  get  the  projects  effectively  under  way.  Private 
enterprise  can  take  on  an  important  share  of  the  cost  of  the  investments,  when  these  regard  the 
provision of services remunerated by user charges. 
The intensification of activity in this sector enhances the competitiveness of the economy; it will yield 
immediate results in term of an increase in domestic demand. 
The policies of liberalization, of stimulating competition, must be strengthened. Tax reduction will have 
a positive effect on expectations and growth if it does not lead to an increase in the public sector’s 
deficit and debt. 
If, in other words, it is perceived as sustainable. 
It is necessary to move to lighten the fiscal burden for firms as well. Measures aimed at facilitating 
their expansion in size and encouraging technological innovation are indispensable in order to operate 
well in a system increasingly exposed to international competition. 
The  situation  of  firms  in  the  last  three  years  has  been  affected  by  the  uncertainty  of  the  cyclical 
situation.  Banks  have  continued  to  provide  support  in  this  difficult  phase.  In  the  context  of  the  new 
collaborative relationships, they are committed to making it still easier for small firms and innovative 
enterprises to obtain access to credit, in part by offering a wider range of services. 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2004
There can be no delay in an organic reform of bankruptcy law. Although the conditions for a complete 
overhaul in the near future may be lacking, some institutes can be reformed and new ones introduced. 
Legislation  must  be  adopted  to  provide  for  timely  management  of  corporate  crises,  outside  the 
framework of bankruptcy procedures or before recourse to them becomes necessary. Reform of the 
law on revocations in bankruptcy is needed to ensure certainty in relationships between the company 
and its creditors, especially suppliers and banks, and to avoid the sudden interruption of financing to 
the firm, due in the first place to the legal aspects involving penal responsibility. 
We are in a difficult moment for our economy. 
In  a  situation  of  less-than-full  employment  of  productive  factors  and  low  growth,  the  formation  of 
saving  in  the  economy  and  the  amount  of  savings  at  households’  disposal  depend  on  increasing 
investment and accelerating growth. 
The defence of savings, above all through the stability of intermediaries, and the allocation of these 
resources by the banking system to the benefit of the most valid and innovative firms through efficient 
disbursement are indispensable in order to raise the economy’s potential growth rate. 
Consistent action on the part of politicians, the social partners and firms themselves must strengthen 
the signs of recovery. 
The  perception  by  firms  and  households  of  a  will  to  proceed  in  this  direction  by  making  up  the 
shortcomings and encouraging productivity and competitiveness can dispel pessimism, foster a more 
solid recovery of economic activity and investment and put our economy back on the track of growth. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 5
