Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Eden  Project,  Cornwall, 
12 October 2004. 
 A  year  ago  I  described  the  period  since  the  early  1990s  as  a  non-inflationary  consistently 
expansionary  -  or  “nice”  -  decade;  a  period  in  which  growth  was  above  trend,  unemployment  fell 
steadily,  and  inflation  remained  low  and  stable.  The  ups  and  downs  of  the  economy  were  much 
smaller in the nice decade than in any previous historical period. Will this stability last? 
To answer that question it is necessary to understand the causes of our new-found stability and, in 
particular, the link between growth and inflation. In the long run there is no trade-off between the two. 
Monetary policy determines inflation and the supply capacity of the economy determines the rate of 
growth. In the short run, however, it is reasonable to suppose that when the economy is running at 
above-normal levels of capacity utilisation there is upward pressure on inflation, and the opposite to 
hold  when  the  economy  is  running  below  capacity.  Such,  at  least,  is  the  conventional  wisdom.  But 
over the nice decade inflation was much less sensitive to movements in output and employment than 
in  the  earlier  inflation-prone  1970s  and  1980s.  Inflation  barely  moved  despite  substantial  falls  in 
unemployment. Indeed if you were to plot inflation against unemployment on a chart - described by 
economists  as  the  Phillips’  curve  -  you  would  see  not  a  downward-sloping  line  of  the  conventional 
wisdom but a completely flat line. Over the nice decade, the unemployment rate fell from nearly 9% to 
below 3% on the claimant count measure. Yet over the same period, inflation was broadly constant 
and never deviated from its target rate by more than 1 percentage point. Not only was there no long-
run trade-off between inflation and unemployment, there was no short-run tradeoff either. As a result, 
both inflation and unemployment were lower than the Monetary Policy Committee had expected. And 
the  inflation  figures  released  this  morning,  with  CPI  inflation  at  only  1.1%,  show  that  inflation  has 
remained low - below the 2% target - despite a tight labour market. The position was very different in 
the 1980s. Unemployment then fell by a similar amount, from around 11% in 1985 to just over 5% in 
1990. But inflation rose from 5 to 9.5%. 
How  should  we  interpret  this  reduced  sensitivity  of  inflation  to  changes  in  unemployment?  Does  it 
mean that the economy can grow faster than before without leading to a pickup of inflation? Or is there 
a risk that the apparent insensitivity of inflation to movements in the economy is only temporary, and 
might  lead  to  mistakes  in  monetary  policy  if  low  inflation  were  taken  for  granted?  To  answer  those 
questions, I want to consider three possible explanations for why inflation has not so far risen despite 
substantial falls in unemployment and spare capacity. 
First, reforms enacted over the past twenty-five years have made the labour market more flexible and 
lowered the rate of unemployment consistent with stable growth in money wages. Incentives to work 
have increased - through initiatives like the New Deal and the Working Tax Credit. Benefits paid to the 
unemployed have fallen relative to earnings. And the share of wage settlements covered by collective 
bargaining has fallen sharply. Those reforms, and a steady growth in total money spending, ensured 
that  unemployment  fell  in  almost  every  quarter  since  1992  while  wage  inflation  remained  broadly 
stable. Moreover, changes in unemployment have resulted in smaller movements in the rate of wage 
increases than in the past. It is possible that migrant labour may be easing the bottlenecks and skill 
shortages in what is undoubtedly a tight labour market. Reports from our business contacts around the 
country,  collected  by  our  Agents,  suggest  that  migrant  labour  is  indeed  relieving  some  of  those 
shortages, more so in recent months with recruitment from the new members of the European Union. 
Migrant workers are employed in fish processing here in the South-West, and even in the production 
of  Cornish  pasties,  as  they  are  in  an  increasingly  wide  range  of  industries  in  manufacturing, 
construction  and  services.  That  may  be  suppressing  signs  of  underlying  wage  pressure  that  would 
otherwise have become evident by now. 
Second, an increase in the pace of productivity improvement may have made it possible for output to 
grow  more  rapidly  without  adding  to  inflationary  pressure.  On  the  face  of  it,  however,  there  is  little 
evidence for this hypothesis. Productivity in the private sector - measured as output per hour worked - 
has  grown  at  an  annual  rate  of  around  2  ½  %  since  1995,  around  the  average  rate  in  the  period 
1980-1995. In the United States, private sector productivity growth increased from 1 ½ % in the earlier 
period to almost 3% after 1995. It is striking that productivity growth in the private sector was higher in 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 1
Britain  than  in  the  United  States  for  most  of  the  past  quarter  of  a  century,  although  our  level  of 
productivity  remains  inferior.  Only  in  the  past  few  years  has  American  productivity  accelerated.  No 
such change is yet visible in the official data for the United Kingdom. It is possible that the effect of 
productivity improvements, especially the temporary boost to profits, was obscured by the impact of 
the rise in sterling since 1996 and by global competition which have lowered prices and compressed 
margins.  So  it  is  too  soon  to  dismiss  the  possibility  of  an acceleration  in  productivity  similar  to  that 
experienced in the United States. Indeed, productivity growth has increased to more than 4% over the 
past  year.  Revisions  to  the  official  data  and  the  volatility  of  measured  productivity  -  reflecting  the 
business cycle - make it extremely difficult to infer changes to long-term growth rates. The absence of 
any compelling evidence for a rise in underlying productivity growth suggests that this is an unlikely 
explanation for consistently low inflation over the past decade. 
Third, the new monetary policy framework - a symmetric inflation target and the transfer of interest 
rate decisions to an independent Bank of England - has helped to anchor inflation expectations to the 
target. It is less likely now that a shock to inflation would lead to a further and persistent deviation of 
inflation from target. There is a belief that inflation will soon return to target. As a result, a surprise 
movement in inflation is expected to be temporary and so less likely to lead employers and employees 
to adjust their desired prices and wages. And there is convincing evidence that changes to inflation 
are much less persistent under the new monetary policy arrangements. 
So there you have it: three possible explanations for the recent low and stable level of inflation despite 
falling unemployment and rapid output growth. But this is no time for complacency or hubris. Part of 
the improved short-run trade-off between growth and inflation may reflect temporary factors. Inflation 
may have been close to target because of one-off explanations, such as increased competition that 
temporarily  depressed  retail  prices  relative  to  costs,  or  larger  flows  of  migrant  workers  that  have 
temporarily held down wage inflation. And even if inflation expectations are well anchored to the target 
they will remain so only if interest rates continue to be set to keep inflation close to the target. The 
1980s provided a stark example of a rapid acceleration of prices with few early warning signs. From 
1983 onwards, RPIX inflation was stable - relative to recent experience at that time - with most of the 
outturns in the 3.5% to 5.5% range until mid- 1989, and wage inflation was high but not on any clear 
upward path. Within a year, and despite a 6 percentage point increase in interest rates between 1988 
and  1989,  RPIX  inflation  reached  9%  and  wage  inflation  exceeded  10%.  Inflation  expectations,  as 
measured by surveys, began to rise as soon as inflation itself took off. 
What does this analysis mean for the future path of interest rates? For some time the Monetary Policy 
Committee  has  been  expecting  a  rebalancing  of  the  economy  as  domestic  demand,  especially 
consumer spending, slowed in order to make room for faster growth in public spending, net exports 
and investment. Revisions to the official statistics suggest that consumer spending has slowed to a 
more  sustainable  rate  over  the  past  two  years  from  its  heady  pace  during  the  previous  five  years. 
Investment has now picked up, growing by over 7% over the past year. And this has been against the 
background of the fastest growth of the world economy for almost thirty years. The British economy is 
facing strong pressure of demand on supply capacity, on the one hand, and low inflation, below the 
2% target, on the other. Whether that combination can or will continue is, as I argued earlier, not easy 
to know. 
Since  our  August  Inflation  Report,  the  rise  in  oil  prices,  now  at  their  highest  level  in  real  terms  for 
twenty years, has moderated somewhat the outlook for the world economy. And there have been two 
developments at home, with conflicting implications for inflation. First, there are some signs that the 
economy is experiencing a softer patch after rapid growth in the first half of the year, even if the official 
production  data  are  not  entirely  easy  to  square  with  business  surveys.  Second,  sterling  has  fallen 
significantly, by some 4% on its effective rate against all other currencies, from its previous high level, 
and there is continuing rapid expansion of total money spending, broad money and credit. 
Looking ahead the MPC will have to balance the impact on inflation of this evidence of weaker activity 
against  the  fall  in  sterling  and  other  signs  of  cost  pressures.  The  implications  for  interest  rates  will 
depend  on  developments  in  the  economy  which  the  MPC  will  monitor  carefully  both  in  the  official 
figures  and  through  our  regular  visits  to  this  and  other  parts  of  the  United  Kingdom.  So,  if  you  are 
interested in the future path of interest rates, don’t read my lips, read the economic data! 
What  is  clear,  however,  is  that  the  combination  of  low  and  stable  inflation  and  continuously  falling 
unemployment must come to an end at some point, and may already have done so. Starting, as we do 
now, with little if any spare capacity, it is unlikely that we can expect unemployment to fall indefinitely. 
From time to time shocks will hit our economy, as we have seen with oil prices and world trade, and so 
2 
 BIS Review 61/2004
there will be fluctuations in growth and unemployment, as well as in inflation. Unemployment can be 
maintained at lower rates than in the past, even though there will inevitably be times when it will rise 
because  no  monetary  policy  can  hope  to  prevent  all  fluctuations  of  demand,  output,  and  hence 
employment. The nice decade we might expect to be followed by the not-so-bad decade.1
Moving  from  a  nice  to  a  not-so-bad  decade  would  still  represent  a  significant  improvement  in  our 
economic fortunes compared with the period of high inflation. We must be conscious of the dangers of 
hubris. After all, starting from the Garden of Eden there can be only a fall from grace. 
ENDS 
                                                      
1   For those looking for a suitable acronym let me suggest that the degree of stability to which we can reasonably aspire, in 
comparison with the nice decade, will be not of the same order but also desirable, or not-so-bad. 
BIS Review 61/2004 
 3
