David Dodge: Recent review of the Canadian economy 
Opening statement by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Senate Committee on 
Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 24 November 2004.  
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee. We appreciate the opportunity to meet 
with  this  committee  twice  a  year,  following  the  release  of  our  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  These 
meetings help us keep Parliamentarians and, through you, all Canadians informed about the Bank’s 
views on the economy, and about the objective of monetary policy and the actions we take to achieve 
it. 
When Paul and I appeared before this Committee last April, we told you that we judged the economy 
to be operating significantly below its potential. That is no longer the case. The Canadian economy 
grew faster in the first half of the year than we had projected, largely because of a surge in exports. 
The  economy  is  now  operating  near  its  production  capacity  and  continues  to  adjust  to  global 
developments. 
Our latest Monetary Policy Report, released on 21 October, presents the Bank’s base-case projection 
for the period to the end of 2006. It calls for aggregate demand for Canadian goods and services to 
expand, on average, at about the same rate as potential output. Given the effects of higher oil prices 
and the past appreciation of the Canadian dollar, economic growth in the Report is projected to be 
slightly less than 3 per cent in 2005, and slightly more than 3 per cent in 2006.  
With  the  economy  expected  to  remain  near  its  production  capacity  throughout  this  period,  core 
inflation is projected to move back up from the current level of 1.4 per cent to the 2 per cent target by 
the end of 2005. This is essentially the same projection that we made last April. However, in October 
we expected that total CPI inflation would rise to near the top of the 1 to 3 per cent target range in the 
first half of 2005 before falling slightly below core inflation in early 2006. This projection incorporates 
the path suggested by futures prices for crude oil in mid-October, when we finalized the Report. 
It is against that background, that the Bank raised the target for the overnight rate to 2.5 per cent on 
19  October,  our  most  recent  fixed  announcement  date.  The  base-case  projection  in  our  October 
Report  assumes  further  reduction  of  monetary  stimulus  over  time,  to  keep  the  economy  near  its 
production potential and to achieve the inflation target. We also emphasized that the pace of interest 
rate increases will depend on the Bank’s continuing assessment of the prospects for factors that affect 
pressures on capacity and, hence, on inflation.  
Paul  and  I  have  just  returned  from  last  weekend’s  meeting  of  the  G-20  in  Berlin.  The  issues  we 
discussed  there  line  up  very  closely  with  those  issues  we  identified  and  analyzed  in  our  Report  - 
commodity  prices,  realignment  of  currencies,  global  imbalances,  and  the  growing  presence  of 
emerging-market economies such as China and India.  
While  we  remain  broadly  comfortable  with  the  global  growth  scenario  we  outlined  in  our  Report, 
discussions  this  weekend and  at  other recent  international  meetings suggest  a  slight  moderation  in 
global  growth  prospects,  despite  the  fact  that  both  spot  and  futures  prices  for  oil  have  declined 
somewhat during the past month.  
Since the October Report, one of the most significant developments has been a further depreciation of 
about 5 per cent in the value of the U.S. dollar against other major floating currencies, including the 
Canadian  dollar.  If  current  exchange  rates  were  to  be  sustained  -  and  if  all  other  economic  and 
financial  factors  were  to  remain  unchanged  -  this  would  have  a  dampening  effect  on  aggregate 
demand  for  Canadian  goods  and  services.  Since  monetary  policy  aims  to  keep  aggregate  demand 
and supply in balance in order to keep inflation close to our target, we need to assess the implications 
of movements in the currency for aggregate demand and the context in which they occur - that is, the 
changes in other economic and financial factors.  
In conclusion, I want to stress that the Bank assesses the full set of information before each of its fixed 
announcement dates, and we will do so again before our 7 December announcement.  
Mr. Chairman, Paul and I now will be happy to answer your questions.  
BIS Review 71/2004 
 1
