Niklaus Blattner: Economics is what economists do 
Speech by Professor Niklaus Blattner, Vice Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank,  at  the  Opening  Session  of  the  Integrated  Master  Programme,  Faculty  of  Economics  and 
Behavioral  Sciences,  Department  of  Economics,  Albert-Ludwigs-Universität,  Freiburg  im  Breisgau, 
22 October 2004. 
 Introduction 
1. 
This is an important moment in the professional life of all of you who have chosen to participate in one 
of the three Master Programmes starting today and offered by the University of Freiburg. Your choice 
was  either  the  Master  of  Economics  and  Politics,  the  Master  of  Finance  or  the  Master  of  Internet 
Economics.  A  common  denominator  of  all  these  programmes  is  economics.  I  felt  it  might  be 
worthwhile,  right  at  the  beginning  of  your  undertaking,  to  draw  your  attention  to  what  economics 
stands for. This begs the question of what economics is. Jacob Viner (an eminent international trade 
theorist,  1892-1970)  gave  a  slightly  disturbing  answer:  “Economics  is  what  economists  do”.  This 
sounds less scientific than you might have wished. But Viner has a point: when talking about a subject 
that has a history of constant change and development, why not simply look at the empirical facts and 
take instruction from what one observes? 
This is exactly what I propose to do. - I base on my own experience and observation. My justification, 
since we are in the country of Johann Wolfgang Goethe, is a quote from Faust: “Grau, teurer Freund, 
ist alle Theorie und grün des Lebens goldner Baum”. (“Grey is all theory and green the golden tree of 
life.”) 
My professional life includes periods at university, in government, in business, and finally at a central 
bank. My experience is nevertheless limited. Moreover, most of it has been collected in Switzerland. - 
But let’s find out what my experience and thinking still can tell you. 
If you now fear that I am going to tell you the story of my life, please relax. I shall refrain from this, but I 
cannot,  and  should  not,  completely  ignore  it.  I  shall  present  sketches  of  what  economists  do, 
sometimes adding examples. The examples are modelled on real life; they are not real life itself. What 
do they say in books and movies? “Every resemblance to a real-life economist is purely accidental …” 
Economists at university 
2. 
You are all familiar with university. You went there after school. You first had to choose your field of 
study and then you entered a world unknown. Why does one select economics? What does it mean to 
stay at university and possibly end up as a professor? 
One may have chosen economics out of a feeling of social responsibility. As Arthur Cecil Pigou (1877-
1959)  put  it:  “The  social  enthusiasm  which  revolts  from  the  sordidness  of  mean  streets  and  the 
joylessness  of  withered  lives  …  is  the  beginning  of  economic  science.”  One  may  have  chosen 
economics to find out how to become wealthy. Woody Allen said: “Economics is the study of money 
and why it is good.” Or one may have chosen economics to find out how society functions. Economics 
certainly  offers  a good  starting  point  for  this  endeavour.  Let  me quote  Alfred Marshall (1842-1924): 
“Economics is a study of mankind in the ordinary business of life; it examines that part of individual 
and social action which is most closely connected with the attainment and with the use of the material 
requisites of wellbeing.” Or one may have chosen economics because it is so hopelessly difficult and 
therefore enormously attractive to, and here I quote Robert Solow, “the overeducated in pursuit of the 
unknowable”. 
In the process of studying economics, every student sooner or later will have to decide whether do 
drop out or to continue. Most of the students opt for the practical application of what they have learned 
and quit university after their final exams. Some, however, will opt to stay on. 
In practice, this means to teach, to do research and increasingly to administrate since the universities 
have become large and slow-moving institutions. Let’s forget the latter and talk about the former. 
In teaching and in research lies most of the professional fulfilment of a university economist. But one 
will have to bear the consequences of having selected the “pursuit of the unknowable”. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 1
Looking at the subjects list according to which in the Journal of Economic Literature (JEL) publications 
are  classified,  you  get  an  idea  of  the  scope  of  today’s  economics.  It  ranges  from  A.  General 
Economics and Teaching to Z. Other Special Topics with Z1 Cultural Economics as a last one-digit 
subclass. The total number of one-digit subclasses is well over 600. In fact, there are no subject limits 
for economists for applying their methods. This attracts many of the best minds. 
For success at a university, articles published in refereed journals are all-important. The well-known 
rule,  not  exclusive  to  economics,  is:  publish  or  perish!  When  applying  for  a  university  position,  the 
applicant  knows  that  the  selection  committee  bases  its  choice  on  the  list  of  publications  submitted. 
Who  decides  what  papers  are  to  be  accepted  for  publication?  In  refereed  journals  the  selection  of 
articles  is  largely  delegated  to  anonymous  referees.  These  are  academic  economists  of  good 
reputation.  The  editors  of  the  journals  apply  the  principle  of  peer  review.  Nevertheless,  Bruno  Frey 
(University of Zurich) recently attacked this system in an article - itself published in a refereed journal - 
under  the  heading  “Publishing  as  Prostitution”.  He  argues  that  in  the  current  system  authors  might 
unduly trim their own original ideas in order to enhance their academic success.1 
To  research  and  to  publish  is  one  thing.  But  professors  also  have  to  teach.  This  is  an  area  where 
students  exercise  their  own  judgment.  But  let  me  tell  you  what  my  own  experience  is.  Whether  a 
teacher belongs to the economists driven by “social enthusiasm” (Pigou), by the wish to find out “how 
society  functions”  (Marshall)  or  by  the  “pursuit  of  the  unknowable”  (Solow),  to  teach  is  not  only 
challenging but also most rewarding. 
First, one has to define the contents of a course and then how to present it. Then, one has to find out 
how to stimulate curiosity because this is the best motivation for learning. One has to understand how 
students  react  to  complexity,  and  one  has  to  be  prepared  to  answer  their  questions  as  they  arise. 
Ideally, a professor is able to take his students on a journey of learning that never ends. Once the 
course is over, a student should know more than before, have an interest in applying what he or she 
has learned and never forget the most important lesson: what she or he was taught is never a recipe, 
but only a first step in an ongoing sequence of learning, collecting experience and further learning. 
If  you  think  this  sounds  too  good  to  be  true  you  may  have  a  point.  So  let  me  end  this  section  by 
painting a bleaker type of university economist: the university economist is a master of his profession 
who  prefers  not  to  apply  his  knowledge  to  the  resolution  of  real-life  problems,  but  to  improve  his 
knowledge further in order to impress his peers. If it cannot be helped, he shares part of his riches with 
his students. - You might find this type of economist too, but only very, very rarely! 
Economists in government 
3. 
“Give me a one-handed economist! All my economists say, ‘on the one hand … on the other’.” - You 
surely  know  this  quote  which  goes  back  to  the  late  Harry  S.  Truman  (1884-1972),  when  he  was 
President of the USA. It is an expression of the impatience that befalls politicians when they call on 
economists for advice. Another quote by the same man is: “If you can’t stand the heat, get out of the 
kitchen.”  The  two  quotes  describe  better  than  almost  anything  the  challenges  an  economist  has  to 
face when he chooses to work for the government. 
Politicians are usually confronted with sensitive questions. The replies are decisive for a politician’s 
success. Frequently time is short and straightforward answers are preferred - as long as they fit the 
preferences.  Politicians  have  a  natural  predisposition  to  seek  advice  that  is  compatible  with  their 
political  needs.  Economists  acting  as  civil  servants  or  as  government  advisers  are  therefore  quite 
naturally tempted to behave opportunistically. This will not pay since in the long term a serious loss of 
professional reputation is inevitable. Economists must not let themselves be carried away by a desire 
to  please.  Their  added  value  lies  in  an  objective  application  of  their  analytical  and  empirical  tools. 
Economics is, not without justification, sometimes called the “dismal science” (Thomas Carlyle, 1820-
1905). Economics is about tradeoffs. An economist’s duty is to identify tradeoffs, especially when it 
hurts.  For  a  politician  to  take  decisions  without  knowing  the  relevant  tradeoffs  is  surely  even  more 
painful because it necessarily leads to disappointment and eventually to failure. 
                                                      
1  Frey, B.S. (2003), “Publishing as Prostitution? - Choosing between One’s Own Ideas and Academic Success”, in: Public 
Choice, 116, 1-2, 205-23. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2004
In examples of economists’ work in government controversy plays a central role because economists 
regularly  disagree.  Different  economists  time  and  again  identify  different  tradeoffs.  This  may  be 
deemed a fundamental weakness of economics. I do not share this view. I rather think that although a 
lack  of  consensus  among  economists  makes  life  more  difficult  for  politicians,  it  ultimately  improves 
their rationality. Politicians have to assume full responsibility; they must not pass it on to advisers. Just 
as  everyone  benefits  from  a  “second  opinion”  from  doctors  before  undergoing  medical  treatment, 
politicians  benefit  from  a  second  or  even  a  third  opinion  from  economists  before  deciding  on  a 
particular political programme. 
The  example  -  or  should  I  say  controversy  -  I  have  selected  to  illustrate  the  task  of  economists  in 
government is the introduction of the euro, which took place on January 1, 1999. 
From  the  perspective  of  an  economist,  the  launch  of  a  common  currency  promises  benefits  and 
causes costs. Since the benefits are mainly the result of structural improvements and the costs are 
due largely to the greater difficulty in steering inflation and economic activity, it is difficult to offset the 
advantages of a monetary union against its disadvantages. Whether a monetary union, on balance, 
creates  benefits  or  causes  costs  depends  on  a  whole  range  of  factors.  Robert  A.  Mundell  can  be 
summarised as follows: in order to form a so-called optimal currency area, the member countries must 
be structured along similar lines and exhibit a high degree of flexibility. 
The benefits of a monetary union consist in a reduction of transaction costs for changing money, the 
elimination  of  internal  exchange  rate  uncertainty,  tighter  competition  thanks  to  easier  price 
comparisons, the expansion of trade within the common currency area, the prevention of competitive 
depreciation and speculative attacks on a currency, and growth in the liquidity of the financial markets. 
The  most  significant  costs  of  a  currency  union  arise  from  the  loss  of  the  individual  countries’ 
independent monetary policies. 
The  loss  of  monetary  policy  autonomy  is  particularly  felt  when  the  size  or  number  of  asymmetric 
shocks  is  large.  Such  disruptions  affect  the  economic  structure,  business  activity  and  inflation  of 
member countries in different ways. Thus, they cannot be combated with a uniform economic policy. A 
controversy that has not yet completely died down is this: was the reunification of the two Germanys 
after 1989 a shock that significantly impaired the prospects for a successful integration of Germany 
into the European Monetary Union? Related to this is today’s debate on the economic soundness of 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Is  it  right  to  adhere  strictly  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty’s  stability 
requirement even if in Germany business conditions diverge strongly from the euro-zone average? 
The jury is still out. But in the eyes of most economists when asymmetric shocks abound, a uniform 
monetary policy and similarly restricted fiscal policies are not recommendable. 
In a longer-term perspective, the costs of the loss of monetary and fiscal policy independence will be 
progressively lower as the pace of economic adjustment accelerates over time. The speed with which 
the economy recovers depends largely on the flexibility of the labour market and on job mobility. When 
salaries  develop  in  line  with  a  regional  economy,  when  direct  investment  is  strong  and  when  the 
workforce is mobile, regional shocks are more easily absorbed. This type of reasoning favours reform 
programmes like Hartz IV in Germany. 
Let me stop short. It is not my task to offer advice to European authorities in general or to German 
authorities in particular, all the more so since the creation of the European Monetary Union has proven 
a great success despite the inevitable teething troubles that regularly come with great innovations. I 
wanted  to  give  a  pertinent  example  of  the  work  of  economists  in  and  for  government.  There  were 
economists advocating an early European Monetary Union and they gave their reasons. There were 
other economists who would have preferred seeing more economic convergence between and within 
euro-zone member countries first, and they spoke out too. Both groups of economists did their jobs 
remarkably  well.  Today,  most  economists  speak  out  in  favour  of  labour  market  reform  and  other 
programmes for reform to make the euro zone work. Other economists prefer macroeconomic demand 
management. All of them want to help politicians to realise their legitimate economic ambitions. The 
economists’ papers, non-papers, reports and opinions are welcome. Economists in government work 
hard and their work is useful. Their professional life is fascinating. 
Economists in business 
4. 
The Occupational Outlook Handbook of the US Department of Labor contains the following description 
of  what  economists  in  business  do:  “Economists  working  for  corporations  are  involved  primarily  in 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 3
microeconomic  issues,  such  as  forecasting  consumer  demand  and  sales  of  the  firm’s  products. 
Economists working for corporations might also analyze their competitors’ growth and market share 
and  advise  their  company  on  how  to  handle  the  competition.  Other  economists  working  for 
corporations  monitor  legislation  passed  by  Congress,  such  as  environmental  and  worker  safety 
regulations, and assess its impact on their business. Corporations with many international branches or 
subsidiaries might employ economists to monitor the economic situations in countries where they do 
business, or to provide a risk assessment of a country into which the company might expand.”2 - This 
list is by no means complete but it provides a good first impression. 
Let me tell you the story of a young economist who joined a large multinational business corporation 
many years ago. The post he held was that of a junior economist in the “central staff of economics”. 
Coming straight from university, he was clearly impressed by the sheer size of the headquarters and 
the complexity of the organisational structure of the company. There was a plethora of administrative 
units  and  of  important  production  units.  The  organisation  was  of  the  matrix  type,  i.e.  there  were 
product  divisions,  there  were  so-called  “regions”  responsible  for  large  segments  of  the  globe  like 
Europe, North America, Latin America and Asia, there were central functions like human resources, 
legal services, research and development and there were central staff units like corporate planning, 
politics and economics. Numerous important persons assuming significant responsibilities rushed from 
meeting  to  meeting  and  from  business  lunch  to  business  lunch,  mostly  with  clients  and  corporate 
visitors from abroad and sometimes just with local colleagues. The food and the wines served at the 
visitors’ restaurant easily matched what was on offer in the best restaurants in town. 
Clearly  the  junior  economist  felt  great  from  the  very  first  day.  He  sensed  that  he  was  expected  to 
contribute to the development of this grand corporation, that he was finally in a position to apply what 
he had learnt at university and that his superiors, the more senior or even very senior economists in 
his unit, were waiting for him to deliver. It was all the more sobering for the young economist to find 
that during many months his main task consisted in reading the economic section of newspapers in 
order  to  compose  summaries  that  went  as  newsletters  to  other  organisational  units  which  had  the 
same newspapers on their desks. 
Later on, after having been observed attentively by superiors, more serious tasks were given to the 
young  economist.  The  corporate  planning  unit  requested  economic  data  serving  as  exogenous 
variables in their divisional or regional planning exercises. The young economist was enthusiastic. He 
thought  that  now  the  moment  had  come  to  apply  his  macroeconomic  and  econometric  forecasting 
skills.  But  again  he  was  disappointed.  Senior  colleagues  explained  that  forecasting  had  long  been 
outsourced to independent forecasting institutes. What was required from the junior was simply to take 
these outside forecasts and fit them into the tables according to the requirements of the planners. He 
then  found  out  why  his  professional  skills  were  not  in  demand.  The  reason  was  not  the  greater 
efficiency and quality of outsourcing. The reason simply was that outsourcing made it easier for the 
company’s economics unit to avoid responsibility. The planning of corporate production was a heavy 
responsibility  indeed.  The  exogenous  economic  variables  affected  the  outcome  of  the  planning 
process decisively. Erroneous economic data were likely to produce disaster, and for disaster nobody 
in the central staff of economics was prepared to accept the blame. Therefore, economic forecasting 
was outsourced. If disaster did strike, the external provider of the data would be blamed. He would 
lose  his  contract  and  a  different  forecasting  firm  would  be  hired.  In  this  way,  the  blame  was 
externalised elegantly. 
It  is  not  surprising  that  under  such  circumstances  the  young  economist  had  to  reassess  his 
professional  situation  and  to  look  for  other  fields  to  develop  his  skills.  But  he  kept  many  valuable 
souvenirs. Don’t forget that he acquired first-hand knowledge of what a powerful giant multinational 
company  can  be,  but  also  how  fragile  it  can  become  when  the  growth  of  its  organisation  is  not 
sufficiently controlled. - Incidentally, this same company is still prospering, but over the decades it has 
been  thoroughly  reorganised  many  times.  Restructuring  has  become  a  habit.  If  the  former  young 
economist revisited “his” company today, he would not recognise it anymore. The complicated matrix 
organisation, including the central staff of economics, has disappeared. Responsibility is structured in 
much  simpler  ways.  The  hierarchy  is  considerably  flatter.  The  game  of  externalising  blame  can  no 
longer be played as easily as in former times. Even the quality of food and wine served at the visitors’ 
                                                      
2 
http://www.bls.gov/oco/ocos055.htm. 
4 
 BIS Review 62/2004
restaurant is more modest. One might still be offered a cigar after lunch, but the selection would most 
likely be narrower than in the ‘good old days’. 
With  respect  to  the  disappearance  of  economics  units  in  business  corporations,  John  J.  Casson 
writes: “During the past two decades, several corporations, including IBM, Citibank, American Express 
and General Electric, eliminated their economists units. According to a recent article in The New York 
Times,  the  poor  forecasting  record  of  economists  was  a  principal  reason  for  such  cutbacks.  A 
re-examination of the results of a survey conducted by the author found another possible explanation 
for corporate disenchantment with their economists. It appears that many business economists have 
not furnished information that can be employed in business planning.”3 
Neither the story of the young economist nor Casson’s findings should de-motivate those of you who 
think of venturing into business after university. There are two conclusions to be drawn. The first is: the 
professional  quality  of  the  business  economist  is  important.  But  professional  quality  alone  is  not 
sufficient.  Quality  may  easily  be  drowned  in  a  flood  of  bad  management  following  from  an  over-
complex organisation. This leads to a second conclusion: every young economist confronted with bad 
management  has  a  choice.  Albert  O.  Hirschman  distinguishes  two  possibilities  of  reaction  besides 
‘loyalty’, i.e. keeping mum, namely ‘exit’ or ‘voice’.4 In my story the young economist decided to exit 
the corporation. This was fine because he made his way elsewhere. Had he chosen ‘voice’, i.e. had he 
stayed  with  the  company  and  fought  for  its  improvement  he  would  have  had  a  good  chance  of 
succeeding within the organisation instead of outside of it. Indeed, not a few of our young economist’s 
colleagues  who  stayed  with  this  or  similar  companies  and  helped  to  drive  them  forward  were  duly 
rewarded. Today some of them are even on the companies’ boards. 
Economists in central banking 
5. 
“Never  has  central  banking  been  more  subjected  to  scientific  analysis  than  during  the  last  two 
decades. Increasingly, the economic profession has moulded the behaviour of the central banker into 
abstract economic models. This has made it possible to analyse how the central banker can be given 
incentives  that  will  make him  do  the right  thing: how  he should set  interest  rates optimally;  how he 
should be made accountable; and what his punishment should be if he fails to comply with the terms 
of his contract. Yet, after the scientific onslaught of the last decades, there is still the feeling that, after 
all,  central  banking  is  mainly  an  art,  and  that  the  success  of  a  central  banker  depends  on  such 
intangibles as feeling the mood of the market.”5 - This quote from Paul De Grauwe tells us that central 
banking is a place where economists are particularly challenged. They have to excel as professional 
economists and, at the same time, they need to understand what drives the moods out there in the 
markets. “Scientific analysis must be combined with artistic feelings to produce a successful central 
banker.”6 
Central bankers assume responsibility for price stability as well as for financial stability. This in some 
countries  includes  banking  supervision  and  financial  market  oversight.  At  the  same  time,  they  take 
care  of  the  side  effects  of  their  policy  on  economic  growth,  employment  and  international  trade.  In 
other words, theirs is the world of economics in a very comprehensive sense of the term. The better 
central  bankers  understand  real  and  monetary  macroeconomics,  microeconomics,  financial  market 
economics,  labour  economics,  industrial  economics,  international  trade,  public  finance  and  public 
choice, the better equipped they are for their task. 
The favourite intermediary targets or policy instruments of central banks are short-term interest rates. 
When  attempting  to  influence  the  rate  of  inflation  by  changing  interest  rates  one  needs  reliable 
economic models. In the Swiss National Bank, we start with a definition of price stability. There is price 
stability as long as the annual increase in the consumer price index does not exceed 2%. We then use 
an inflation forecast over a period of three years. The three years correspond to the known range of 
                                                      
3   Casson,  John  J.,  “The  Role  of  Business  Economists  in  Business  Planning”,  http://www.findarticles.com/p/articles/ 
mi_m1094/is_n3_v31/ai_18481623. 
4   Hirschman, Albert O., Exit, Voice and Loyalty, Cambridge Mass., 1970. 
5   De Grauwe, Paul, “Central Banking as Art or Science? - Lessons from the Fed and the ECB”, in: International Finance, 5:1, 
2002, p. 129. 
6   Loc.cit., p. 130. 
BIS Review 62/2004 
 5
monetary  policy  lags.  To  forecast  inflation,  we  have  developed  a  number  of  state-of-the-art 
econometric models. The results of these models are translated in what we call ‘consensus forecast’. 
It  shows  different  inflation  paths  as  a  function  of  alternative  short-term  target  rates  of  interest.  The 
Governing  Board  has  to  select  the  preferred  target  rate  of  interest  (3M-CHF-LIBOR),  which  is 
implemented through daily money market operations. It is in the process of selecting the target rate of 
interest  that  art  comes  into  the  picture.  The  econometric  models  are  not  sufficient.  Judgment  is 
needed. This judgment is of a sophisticated nature. The Board members have to understand the limits 
of  the  models  in  order  to  be  able  to  identify  the  weakness  of  their  results.  They  also  have  to 
understand  what  is  actually  going  on  in  the  economy  despite  imperfect  statistical  data.  “The  art  of 
central banking requires more than just intuition.”7 
At  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  we  review  monetary  policy  at  least  every  quarter.  In  addition,  our 
economists  produce  quarterly  financial  stability  reports.  Our  economists  pursue  programmes  of 
academic research and regularly publish their papers in refereed journals. The Swiss National Bank 
pretty  much  resembles  a  department  of  economics  at  university.  The  professors  are  there,  the 
research economists and the statisticians are there. The students are lacking. But many of us continue 
to teach at one of the Swiss universities. 
This picture of the activities of economists at a central bank is not unique for Switzerland, but is similar 
to that found in most central banks. 
Conclusion 
7. 
The title of my paper is “Economics is What Economists Do”. By presenting a review of what this may 
mean at university, in government, in business and in central banking, I hope I was able to support 
your motivation for your study of economics. Listening to my talk, you might have noted that the real 
issue  is  not  so  much  what  an  economist  does  as  how  she  or  he  does  it.  After  having  been  an 
economist for more than three decades myself I have never regretted having chosen economics as my 
profession. You are young, and you presently face one of those crossroads that inevitably shape a life. 
The  future  is  full  of  surprises.  I  wish  you  the  necessary  enthusiasm  and  strength  without  which 
professional and personal development is hardly achievable. - Remember my quote from Goethe. It is 
Mephisto who says: “Grey is all theory and green the golden tree of life.” 
Good luck to you all! 
                                                      
7   Duchatczek, Wolfgang, Schubert, Aurel, “The Art of Central Banking Requires More Than Just Intuition”, paper to be found 
at www.ecb.int/events/pdf/ conferences/eastats/duchatczek.pdf. 
6 
 BIS Review 62/2004
