Alan Greenspan: Euro in wider circles 
Remarks  by  Mr  Alan  Greenspan,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System, at the European Banking Congress 2004, Frankfurt, 19 November 2004.
 I am pleased to join my central bank colleagues in appraising an increasingly important issue - the 
globalization of trade and finance. I should emphasize that I speak for myself and not necessarily for 
the Federal Reserve. 
Among the many aspects of the euro addressed in today’s discussion, we should include its role in the 
ongoing  globalization  of  economic  activity.  The  euro  ties  together  a  sizable  share  of  the  world 
economy with a single currency and, by doing so, lowers transaction costs associated with trade and 
finance within the region. 
More generally, globalization of trade in goods, services, and assets continues to move forward at an 
impressive  pace,  despite  some  indications  of  increased  resistance  to  that  process  and  the  evident 
difficulties  in  completing  the  Doha  Round.  The  volume  of  trade  relative  to  world  gross  domestic 
product has been rising for decades, largely because of decreasing transportation costs and lowered 
trade  barriers.  The  increasing  shift  of  world  GDP  toward  items  with  greater  conceptual  content  has 
further  facilitated  increased  trade  because  ideas  and  services  tend  to  move  across  borders  with 
greater ease and speed than goods. 
Foreign  exchange  trading  volumes  have  grown  rapidly,  and  the  magnitude  of  cross-border  claims 
continues  to  increase  at  an  impressive  rate.  Although  international  trade  in  goods,  services,  and 
assets rose markedly after World War II, a persistent dispersion of current account balances across 
countries did not emerge until recent years. But, as the U.S. deficit crossed 4 percent of GDP in 2000, 
financed  with  the  current  account  surpluses  of  other  countries,  the  widening  dispersion  of  current 
account balances became more evident. Previous postwar increases in trade relative to world GDP 
had  represented  a  more  balanced  grossing  up  of  exports  and  imports  without  engendering  chronic 
large trade deficits in the United States, and surpluses among many other countries.  
 Home  bias  -  the  propensity  of  residents  of  a  country  to  invest  their  savings  disproportionately  in 
domestic assets - prevailed for most of the post-World War II period. Indeed, Feldstein and Horioka 
found  a  remarkably  high  degree  of  home  bias  in  their  seminal  1980  study.1  Through  most  of  the 
postwar  period  up  to  the  mid-1990s,  the  GDP-weighted  correlation  coefficient  between  domestic 
saving  and  domestic  investment  across  countries  accounting  for  four-fifths  of  world  GDP  hovered 
around 0.95. 
That bias, however, diminished rather dramatically over the past ten years, arguably in large measure 
because of the acceleration in productivity growth in the United States. The associated elevation of 
expected real rates of return relative to those available elsewhere increased investment opportunities 
in the United States. The correlation coefficient accordingly fell from 0.95 in 1993 to less than 0.8 by 
2002.  When  one  excludes  the  United  States,  the  correlation  coefficient’s  decline  was  even  more 
pronounced. Preliminary estimates for a smaller sample of countries over the past two years indicate a 
continued decline on net. 
Basic national income accounting implies that domestic saving less domestic investment is equal to 
net foreign investment, a close approximation of a nation’s current account balance. The correlation 
coefficient  between  domestic  saving  and  domestic  investment  varies  inversely  over  time  with  the 
dispersion of current account balances across countries. Obviously, if the correlation coefficient is 1.0, 
meaning that every country allocates its domestic saving only to domestic investment, then no country 
has  a  current  account  deficit,  and  the  variance  of  world  current  account  balances  is  zero.  As  the 
correlation  coefficient  falls,  as  it  has  over  the  past  decade,  one  would  expect  the  near  algebraic 
equivalent - the dispersion of current account balances - to increase. And, of course, it has. Over the 
                                                      
1   Martin  Feldstein  and  Charles  Horioka  (1980),  “Domestic  Saving  and  International  Capital  Flows,”  The  Economic  Journal 
(June), pp 314-29. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
past ten years, a large current account deficit has emerged in the United States matched by current 
account surpluses in other countries. 
 How far can the decline in home bias and the increase in the variance of current account balances be 
expected to proceed, and where will it lead? 
Current account imbalances, per se, need not be a problem, but cumulative deficits, which result in a 
marked  decline  of  a  country’s  net  international  investment  position  -  as  is  occurring  in  the 
United States - raise more complex issues. The U.S. current account deficit has risen to more than 
5 percent of GDP. Because the deficit is essentially the change in net claims against U.S. residents, 
the U.S. net international investment position excluding valuation adjustments must also be declining 
in dollar terms at an annual pace equivalent to roughly 5 percent of U.S. GDP. 
 The question now confronting us is how large a current account deficit in the United States can be 
financed before resistance to acquiring new claims against U.S. residents leads to adjustment. Even 
considering  heavy  purchases  by  central  banks  of  U.S.  Treasury  and  agency  issues,  we  see  only 
limited indications that the large U.S. current account deficit is meeting financing resistance. Yet, net 
claims  against  residents  of  the  United  States  cannot  continue  to  increase  forever  in  international 
portfolios at their recent pace. Net debt service cost, though currently still modest, would eventually 
become  burdensome.  At  some  point,  diversification  considerations  will  slow  and  possibly  limit  the 
desire of investors to add dollar claims to their portfolios. 
Resistance to financing, however, is likely to emerge well before debt servicing becomes an issue, or 
before the economic return on assets invested in the United States or in dollars more generally starts 
to erode. Even if returns hold steady, a continued buildup of dollar assets increases concentration risk. 
Net cross-border claims against U.S. residents now amount to about one-fourth of annual U.S. GDP. A 
continued financing even of today’s current account deficits as a percentage of GDP doubtless will, at 
some  future  point,  increase  shares  of  dollar  claims  in  investor  portfolios  to  levels  that  imply  an 
unacceptable amount of concentration risk. 
This situation  suggests  that  international  investors will  eventually  adjust  their  accumulation  of  dollar 
assets  or,  alternatively,  seek  higher  dollar  returns  to  offset  concentration  risk,  elevating  the  cost  of 
financing  of  the  U.S.  current  account  deficit  and  rendering  it  increasingly  less  tenable.  If  a  net 
importing country finds financing for its net deficit too expensive, that country will, of necessity, import 
less.  
 It seems persuasive that, given the size of the U.S. current account deficit, a diminished appetite for 
adding to dollar balances must occur at some point. But when, through what channels, and from what 
level  of  the  dollar?  Regrettably,  no  answer  to  those  questions  is  convincing.  This  is  a  reason  that 
forecasting the exchange rate for the dollar and other major currencies is problematic. 
Our analytic difficulty is that the forces driving the current account deficit are more, perhaps far more, 
visible  than  those  determining  the  ex  ante  financing  of  the  deficit.  The  former  are  captured  by 
reasonably reliable estimates of income- and price-driven trade imbalances and net interest income; 
the latter by the considerably more amorphous assessments of international portfolio choices. 
The inability to anticipate changes in supply and demand for a currency is at the root of the statistically 
robust finding that forecasting exchange rates has a success rate no better than that of forecasting the 
outcome of a coin toss.2  
                                                       
2   The exceptions to this conclusion are those few cases of successful speculation in which governments have tried and failed 
to support a particular exchange rate. Nonetheless, despite extensive efforts on the part of analysts, to my knowledge, no 
model projecting directional movements in exchange rates is significantly superior to tossing a coin. I am aware that, of the 
thousands who try, some are quite successful. So are winners of coin-tossing contests. The seeming ability of a number of 
banking  organizations  to  make  consistent  profits  from  foreign  exchange  trading  likely  derives  not  from  their  insight  into 
exchange rate determination but from the revenues they derive from making markets.  
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
U.S.  policy  initiatives  can  reinforce other  factors in  the  global  economy  and marketplace  that  foster 
external  adjustment.  Policy  success,  of  course,  requires  that  domestic  saving  must  rise  relative  to 
domestic investment. Policy initiatives addressing individual components of domestic saving in years 
past  appear  to  have  had  significant  effects  on  total  domestic  saving,  even  though  changes  in  the 
individual components are not wholly independent of one another. 
Reducing  the  federal  budget  deficit  (or  preferably  moving  it  to  surplus)  appears  to  be  the  most 
effective action that could be taken to augment domestic saving. Significantly increasing private saving 
in the United States - more particularly, finding policies that would elevate the personal saving rate 
from  its  current  extraordinarily  low  level  -  of  course  would  also  be  helpful.  Corporate  saving  in  the 
United States has risen to its highest rate in decades and is unlikely to increase materially. Alternative 
approaches to reducing our current account imbalance by reducing domestic investment or inducing 
recession to suppress consumption obviously are not constructive long-term solutions. 
It is of course possible that U.S. policy initiatives directed at closing the gap between our domestic 
investment and domestic saving, and hence narrowing our current account deficit, may not suffice. But 
should  such  initiatives  fall  short,  the  marked  increase  in  the  economic  flexibility  of  the  American 
economy  that  has  developed  in recent years  suggests  that  market  forces should  over  time restore, 
without crises, a sustainable U.S. balance of payments. At least this is the experience of developed 
countries,  which  since  1980,  have  managed  and  eliminated  large  current  account  deficits,  some  in 
double digits, without major disruption.3
Flexibility, as history persuasively shows, enables an economic system to better absorb and rebound 
from shocks. In the United States, for example, real output contracted very little during our most recent 
cyclical episode despite having been subjected to a number of shocks: the bursting of the technology 
bubble, the terrorist attack of September 2001, and the corporate governance scandals. Indeed, the 
U.S.  economy  has  exhibited  a  degree  of  resilience  in  the  face  of  these  adversities  not  evident  in 
previous decades. Presumably, the rise in product and labor market flexibility in the United States and 
in a number of other countries over the past quarter-century is continuing to pay off. If such flexibility 
can be achieved more fully on a global scale, adjustments to the future current account imbalances of 
both  developed  and  emerging  economies  could  be  rendered  significantly  less  stressful  than  in  the 
past. 
An admittedly exceptional example of how a flexible system adjusts even with fixed exchange rates is 
seen  at  the  state  level  in  the  United  States.  For  more  than  two  centuries,  the  United  States  has 
experienced largely unencumbered interstate free trade. Although we have scant data on cross-border 
transactions  among  the  separate  states,  anecdotal  evidence  suggests  that  over  the  decades 
significant  apparent 
interstate 
balance-of-payments crises. The dispersion of unemployment rates among the states - one measure 
of imbalances - has tended to spike up during periods of economic stress but has then rapidly returned 
to  modest  levels,  reflecting  a  high  degree  of  adjustment  flexibility.  That  flexibility  is  even  more 
apparent in regional money markets. Interest rates, which presumably reflect differential imbalances in 
states’  current  accounts,  and  hence  cross-border  borrowing  requirements,  have  exhibited  very  little 
interstate  dispersion  in  recent  years.  This  observation  suggests  either  negligible  cross-state-border 
imbalances, an unlikely occurrence given the pattern of state unemployment dispersion, or more likely 
very rapid financial adjustments. 
Although we have examples of the efficacy of flexibility in selected markets and evidence that, among 
developed countries, current account deficits, even large ones, have been defused without significant 
consequences, we cannot become complacent. History is not an infallible guide to the future. We in 
the United States need to continue to increase our degree of flexibility and resilience. Similar initiatives 
elsewhere will enhance global resilience to shocks. 
Many  steps  have  been  taken  in  the  euro  area  to  facilitate  the  free  flow  of  labor  and  capital  across 
national borders, and considerable progress is being made to enhance competition in product, labor, 
and  financial  markets.  But  more  will  need  to  be  done  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  the  United  States  to 
ensure  that  our  economies  are  sufficiently  resilient  to  respond  effectively  to  all  the  shocks  and 
adjustments that the future will surely bring. 
resolved  without  precipitating 
imbalances  have  been 
                                                      
3   Caroline  Freund  (2000),  “Current  Account  Adjustment  in  Industrialized  Countries,”  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 692, December. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
Jean-Claude Trichet: Euro in wider circles 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Conference 
“Goodbye Lisbon” organised by the European Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 19 November 2004. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to share with you some thoughts on the euro in wider circles. Reflecting on what 
the term “wider circles” means for the euro, I think of the EU Member States that still use their national 
currencies  and  that  aim  to  adopt  the  single  currency  in  the  future,  and  in  particular  the  ten  new 
Member States that joined the EU earlier this year and their path towards the euro. Let me briefly say 
a few words on this aspect.  
The euro goes east 
It is now 15 years ago that the Berlin Wall fell, giving rise to one of the most astonishing political and 
economic transformations in European history. Who could have imagined 15 years ago that in May 
2004, eight countries in central and eastern Europe, together with two countries in the Mediterranean, 
would  be  members  of  the  European  Union?  The  perspective  of  joining  the  European  Union  and 
eventually adopting a European single currency was out of sight for even the most imaginative minds. 
In only 15 years, these countries managed to restore and entrench democratic institutions and market 
economies, replacing the communist ones that were imposed there before.  
The accession of ten new countries to the EU was an important milestone in a process that will lead to 
the eventual adoption of the euro by these new Member States. The euro will go east and south and 
the road to the adoption of the euro is embedded in a well-defined institutional framework. A crucial 
phase before euro adoption is ERM II membership for at least two years. Although there are no formal 
criteria to be met for entry into ERM II, successful participation in the mechanism requires that major 
policy adjustments - for example relating to fiscal policy and price liberalisation - are undertaken before 
joining the mechanism. Participation in ERM II is an important means to anchor exchange rate and 
inflation  expectations  and  to  promote  consistently  sound  policies.  It  helps  to  orient  macroeconomic 
policies to stability, while at the same time allowing for a degree of flexibility, if needed, through the 
wide standard fluctuation band and the possibility of adjusting the central parity. 
As  you  know,  three  new  EU  countries  have  in  the  meantime  entered  the  ERM  II:  with  effect  from 
28 June 2004, Estonia, Lithuania and Slovenia joined Denmark as participants in the mechanism. The 
three new entrants joined with a standard fluctuation band of ±15% around their central rates against 
the euro, while Estonia and Lithuania kept their currency boards as a unilateral commitment. In order 
to  ensure  a  smooth  participation  in  ERM  II,  countries  have  firmly  committed  to  take  the  necessary 
measures to preserve macroeconomic and exchange rate stability. Participation in ERM II has been 
smooth. The four currencies in the ERM II have traded continuously at or close to their central rates, 
while short-term interest rate differentials vis-à-vis the euro area have been small.  
Beyond ERM II membership lies the adoption of the euro, the crowning achievement of the monetary 
integration process. In order to adopt the euro, non-participating EU Member States have to achieve a 
high degree of sustainable economic and legal convergence. Every country will be assessed on its 
own merits and its own particular situation, on the basis of a strict analysis of the performance relating 
to  the  Maastricht  convergence  criteria.  Let  me  stress  that  there  is  no  pre-set  timetable  for  the 
enlargement of the euro area.  
Economic challenges for the new Member States 
How far are the new Member States on this road towards the euro? The countries that joined the EU 
this  year  have  shown  impressive  economic  growth  rates  and  have  made  great  strides  in  reducing 
inflation.  They  belong  to  the  most  dynamic  economies  in  the  EU,  having  gone  through  profound 
structural  changes.  For  example,  they  have  taken  thorough  measures  to  reform  their  product  and 
labour markets, and some new Member States, in some respects, may be even more advanced than 
other, existing EU countries. They have become more integrated with the euro area, with the major 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2004
part of their trade now occurring with the euro area and tight financial links: as a matter of fact, the 
share of the new 10 Member States in the total external trade of the euro area stands around 11%, 
compared  with  around  14%  for  the  US  and  3%  for  Japan.  In  addition,  the  transition  process  has 
brought their economic structures closer to those of the euro area. At the same time, while remaining a 
diverse group in many respects, the new Member States still display distinct economic characteristics 
that differ from the euro area. Their income-per-capita and productivity levels are still low relative to 
the euro area, which may have an impact on their inflation rates. 
Let  me  mention  two  particularly  important  economic  challenges  that  the  new  Member  States  are 
confronted with on the road to the euro: price stability and fiscal policy. Price stability is an essential 
requirement for a successful monetary integration process. Inflation rates in many new Member States 
have picked up recently to an average of almost 5%, following increases in food and energy prices 
and indirect tax changes. The challenge for the new Member States is to contain inflation and inflation 
expectations in an environment of rapid catching-up. Besides solid macroeconomic policy frameworks 
and prudent wage policies, progress in structural reforms is conducive to price stability by improving 
the supply side of the economy and enhancing the growth potential.  
This  brings  me  to  the  second  challenge  that  I  want  to  mention:  the  need  to  achieve  sound  fiscal 
positions. Fiscal deficits are on average high or even very high in a number of new Member States 
and  mostly  despite  very  high  economic  growth.  Their  governments  are  confronted  with  competing 
expenditure  demands,  including  public  investment  in  infrastructure  and  the  need  to  strengthen  the 
effectiveness of public administration and the judicial systems. This, however, should not be seen as 
an  excuse  to  delay  fiscal  consolidation,  but  as  an  additional  reason  to  design  and  implement  a 
credible consolidation path based on durable and growth-enhancing structural reforms. It is important 
to bear in mind that fiscal consolidation in the new Member States becomes increasingly important in 
the course of the monetary integration process and it is essential for a smooth participation in ERM II 
and the eventual adoption of the euro. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. The historic enlargement of the EU is now six months ago and I think we can say 
that is has been a genuine success. Following a remarkable transformation in the past 15 years, the 
further integration of the new Member States into the European family has progressed smoothly and 
without any disruptions. The new Member States have shown an impressive economic performance, 
though  various  important  challenges  still  remain  to  be  fully  tackled,  including  those  relating  to  the 
recent pick-up in inflation and to fiscal imbalances. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 5
