Jean-Pierre Roth: Life in a two-headed monetary system - the Swiss experience  
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the 
50th Anniversary of the Bank of Israel, Jerusalem, 29 November 2004. 
 Introduction  
1.  
It is almost a common-place to state that the birth of the euro on January 1, 1999 was a milestone in 
the process of European integration. Giving up national sovereignty in monetary matters was without 
doubt  a  very  bold  move  of  historical  proportions.  It  will  have  long  lasting  economic  and  political 
consequences. It is meant to promote efficiency, transparency, and growth. The creation of a single 
currency should also act as catalyst towards further European integration. Moreover, and this is really 
what  I  would  like  to  focus  on  today,  the  creation  of  the  euro  has  changed  the  world’s  monetary 
landscape. I believe that one can say without fear of exaggeration that it has led to a new international 
monetary order. Countries such as Israel and Switzerland, situated on the periphery of the euro area, 
are affected as well. I would like to share with you some of our experiences in this regard, and I would 
be very interested to know to what extent these findings apply to your country too.  
Our pre-euro worries  
2. 
Quite  frankly,  my  colleagues  and  I  at  the  Swiss  National  Bank  were  somewhat  worried  before  the 
introduction of the euro. Although we fully appreciated the benefits that Switzerland would draw from 
the creation of the euro in terms of increased transparency and lower transaction costs, we were also 
quite concerned about the possible risks. Three of these came to mind.  
First, we feared that the Swiss franc might be in for a bumpy ride. In the past, whenever the dollar was 
under attack, international investors turned their attention to the German mark and the Swiss franc. 
Their status as safe-haven currencies meant that at times of turbulences on foreign exchange markets 
they would move well beyond what economic fundamentals could justify. In fact, the Swiss franc often 
revealed  a  tendency  to  appreciate  even  more  than  the  German  mark,  a  phenomenon  that  was 
generally attributed to the relative narrowness of the Swiss financial markets. Now with the German 
mark gone, wouldn’t all attention focus almost exclusively on our currency? Would it not mean that in a 
dollar crisis the franc would have to bear even more of the adjustment than in the past? Even more 
frightful, what would happen if the euro itself were under attack? The last thing we needed was for the 
franc  to  become  the  first  currency  in  the  line  of  fire,  or  something  like  the  lightening  rod  of  the 
international monetary system. 
A second apprehension that we had was that it might become very difficult in the future to conduct an 
autonomous  monetary  policy.  Switzerland,  together  with  Liechtenstein,  would  now  be  totally 
surrounded  by  a  single  monetary  zone.  As  you  know,  Switzerland,  like  Israel,  is  a  small  open 
economy, and I emphasize both the words small and open. Indeed, we are widely open. Nearly half of 
our national income is generated abroad, and the European Union is by far our largest foreign partner. 
About two thirds of our exports head in that direction, and we are one of the best customers of the EU. 
We are also very small, meaning that although we have no significant impact on the rest of Europe, we 
are very exposed to foreign shocks, whether they are real or monetary in nature. Our activity is highly 
correlated with that of the eurozone. Under these conditions, would the SNB still be in a position to 
conduct an independent monetary policy? Would it be realistic to expect the SNB to follow a course 
that deviated from the one set by the European Central Bank, or would the SNB be forced to shadow 
the actions of the ECB?  
The question of an independent monetary policy is not just a matter of safeguarding the appeal and 
the prestige of our jobs as Swiss central bankers. The stakes are much higher. For one thing, even if 
Swiss activity and economic conditions more generally are highly correlated with events in Europe, the 
correlation  is  less  than  perfect.  Our  economy,  although  offering  many  similarities  with  those  of 
Germany, France, and Italy, also has its specific features. Thus, Switzerland is very well endowed with 
physical and human capital. As a consequence, the return on capital is relatively low and wages are 
comparatively high, particularly so for unskilled labour. We thus tend to specialize in capital intensive 
and high-value added activities. External shocks tend to impact on us in a way that is not quite the 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 1
same as on the rest of Europe. Moreover, we also have to cope with home-brewed shocks. It is for 
these reasons that we are eager to keep an autonomous monetary policy.  
Furthermore, if markets became convinced that in the future the SNB’s actions would simply mimic 
those of the ECB, they would rapidly force a convergence between Swiss nominal interest rates and 
those of the eurozone. Our real interest rates might remain lower for a while, given our relatively large 
supply of physical capital, but a tendency towards equalization would nonetheless set in. What this 
might mean for us is a higher rate of inflation for some time, together with a collapse in asset prices 
and  in  domestic  gross  capital  formation.  A  mixture  of  higher  interest  rates  and  high,  sticky  wages 
would be very harmful to our economy.  
The third fear that was sometimes expressed, although here I must say I was rather sceptical myself, 
was  that  the  euro  would  gradually  render  the  Swiss  franc  obsolete.  With  many  of  our  trading  firms 
billing and paying their suppliers in euros, there might be a tendency for them to adopt the euro more 
generally for their accounting as well as for their domestic transactions. Some people even went as far 
as  predicting  that  before  long  wages  would  be  paid  in  euros.  Shops,  hotels  and  restaurants  would 
rapidly be forced to accept euros, so that visitors from abroad would no longer see the need to convert 
their euros into francs. Eventually Swiss consumers themselves would follow suit, so that Switzerland 
would be de facto integrated into the eurozone.  
More than national pride would be hurt by such an “euroization” of the Swiss economy. For one thing, 
such  a  development  would  entail  the  loss  of  seigniorage  income.  With  a  monetary  base  of  about 
40 billion francs (26 billion euros), that is about 5’700 francs (3’700 euros) per person, seigniorage in 
our  case  is  far  from  trivial.  But  even  more  seriously,  the  loss  of  monetary  autonomy  caused  by  a 
displacement of the Swiss franc by the euro would prevent the SNB from creating liquidity in case of 
need.  
To  a  large  extent,  the  fears  that  we  had  reflect  the  more  fundamental  debate  about  fixed  versus 
flexible  exchange  rates.  Which  foreign  exchange  regime  is  appropriate  for  a  given  country  at  a 
particular time? Although this view is not universally shared, many economists argue in favour of a 
corner solution: either purely flexible exchange rates, or rigidly fixed ones. Intellectually, I tend to share 
this view, except that I would like to take it one step further: either purely flexible exchange rates, or 
monetary union. Rigidly fixed exchange rates do not constitute a polar case. In fact, they accumulate 
many drawbacks. Thus, fixed exchange rates have never been known to be fixed for very long. Fixed 
exchange  rates  are  fixed  until  the day  they  change,  and  when  they  do  change,  they  tend  to  do  so 
brutally  in  an  atmosphere  of  crisis,  of  pain,  and  of  tears.  No,  I  believe  that  if  one  really  aims  at 
exchange rates that are irrevocably fixed, then one should go all the way, that is, one should opt for 
monetary  union.  As  long  as  two  currencies  are  distinct,  their  relative  price  might  change.  So  the 
options boil down to a choice between purely flexible exchange rates and monetary union. Needless 
to  say,  since  Switzerland  is  not  a  member  of  the  European  Union,  joining  the  eurozone  is  not  an 
option worth discussing at this stage. Far from being a second best solution, fixing the franc against 
the euro would rather cumulate all the negatives, by suppressing our monetary independence, and, at 
the same time, exposing us to all the dangers of speculative attacks by setting us up, the back against 
the wall, alone against the market.  
Our post-euro experience 
3.  
What  has  happened  since  January  1999  has  proven  very  reassuring.  Our  worst  fears  did  not 
materialize, and indeed, in some ways, the outcome was even much more positive than we could have 
hoped for. 
First, let me briefly sum up our experience with regard to the fears of “euroization” and of the loss of 
our  monetary  degree  of  freedom.  As  expected,  the  Swiss  franc  was  not  crowded  out  by  the  euro. 
Sure, the euro circulates in Switzerland, just like the Swiss franc is being used in neighbouring France, 
Germany,  and  Italy,  but  the  phenomenon  remains  marginal,  and  it  does  not  exceed  the  use  the 
French francs, German marks, and Italian liras in the pre-euro world. This is not surprising for, even 
though the euros (and dollars for that matter) are happily accepted in Swiss shops, cafés, and hotels, 
the exchange rate is usually unattractive and the change is given in Swiss francs. Shopkeepers and 
restaurant owners are not in the business of providing financial services, and foreign tourists are still 
better  off  changing  their  euros  at  banks  or  using  their  credit  cards.  True,  Swiss  firms  use  the  euro 
extensively,  some  do  much  of  their  billing  in  the  European currency,  and  a  few  of  them  have  even 
switched their accounting to euros. Some natural hedging takes place as well, although it is not clear 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2004
how efficient this is. It is worth pointing out, however, that some of our largest firms do much of their 
billing and their accounting in dollars, while others continue quite happily to use the Swiss franc. The 
fact  that  “euroization”  has  not  taken  place  should  not  really  surprise  us.  There  have  been  other 
examples  of  small  independent  currencies  surviving  in  the  neighbourhood  of  much  larger  monetary 
zones. The example of the Canadian dollar comes to mind. The Loonie has been floating for the past 
several decades, and it has served Canada rather well. More generally, there is nothing to be gained 
in having more than one currency for transaction purposes. Much of the benefit that allows one to get 
around  the  double  coincidence  of  wants  gets  lost  if  several  currencies  circulate  simultaneously. 
“Dollarization”  only  occurs  in  those  countries  where  hyperinflation  threatens.  This  is  not  about  to 
happen in Switzerland which has a long established record of price stability. 
The fear of losing our monetary independence was clearly misplaced as well. Over the past six years 
the SNB has repeatedly demonstrated that it can act decisively and independently, often well before 
the ECB. Given its openness, Switzerland was badly affected by the world slowdown a couple of years 
ago.  The  situation  was  made  worse  by  the  fact  that  our  main  trading  partner,  Germany,  was  itself 
severely  hit,  and  to  compound  our  difficulties,  the  worldwide  capital  overhang  had  a  very  adverse 
effect  on  our  exporters,  many  of  whom  specialize  in  the  production  of  capital  goods.  Exceptional 
circumstances require extraordinary measures. From March 2001 to April 2003, the SNB cut interest 
rates  aggressively,  lowering  the  target  range  for  our  reference  rate,  the  three-month  Libor,  by 
325 basis  points,  from  3.5%  to  just  0.25%.  And  earlier  this  year,  the  improved  performance  of  our 
economy has allowed us to take some of our interest-rate easing back, even though the ECB did not 
budge.  
What about the stability of the external value of the Swiss franc? Here, I must say, our fears proved 
not just to be unfounded, but the reality turned out to be much more favourable than we could have 
hoped for. The exchange rate between the Swiss franc and the euro ended up being much steadier 
than expected, in fact even steadier than it used to be against the German mark, not to mention the 
French franc and the Italian lira. Over the past six years, the real exchange rate has moved within a 
relatively  narrow  band  little  more  than  five  percentage  points  wide.  Except  for  the  immediate 
after-September-11 period, when the Swiss franc appreciated significantly, the external value of the 
franc has largely reflected economic fundamentals. In fact, even the post 9/11 safe-haven effect was 
relatively mild compared to what we experienced in the past, during the seventies and the eighties, for 
instance. 
But  vigilance  is  of  the  essence. Recent  foreign  exchange market  developments show  that  in  highly 
turbulent times the Swiss franc can come under upward speculative pressure. This may interfere with 
our domestic monetary strategy and can eventually trigger corrective policy actions.  
A new international monetary order  
4.  
I truly believe that one can make the case that the introduction of the euro has brought about a new 
international monetary order, that it has produced an element of stability that benefits many countries, 
not just Europe’s immediate neighbours, but nations around the globe. As we have seen, movements 
in the dollar/mark exchange rate were magnified as far as the Swiss franc is concerned in the past, but 
are much dampened since the birth of the euro. When the euro depreciated against the dollar at first, 
the Swiss franc did so too, but to a much lesser degree. And later, when the euro recovered against 
the  dollar,  the  franc  appreciated  as  well,  but  again  to  a  lesser  extent.  In  order  words,  our  effective 
exchange  rate  has  been  less  affected,  the  movement  of  the  dollar  being  offset,  at  least  to  some 
extent, by a movement of the euro in the opposite direction. It seems to me that this phenomenon has 
benefited not just Switzerland, but also many other countries with their own independent currencies, 
such as the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, and Norway. I would be 
very curious to know what your experience has been in this respect.  
This  evolution  might  not  last.  Perhaps  it  is  the  outcome  of  chance,  but  it  has  been  sufficiently 
persistent over the past few years to be noticeable. Maybe one day some bright graduate student will 
write a thesis on this topic, and confirm or falsify my hypothesis, but in the meantime let me outline 
why I think that there are some good reasons to believe that the stability of the international monetary 
system has been enhanced by the creation of the euro.  
I do not think that anybody would argue that the world as a whole today makes up an optimal currency 
area. Our planet is not yet ready for a single currency. We are therefore bound to live in a world with n, 
n greater than one, currencies. For the second half of the 20th century, we lived with one dominating 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 3
currency,  the  U.S.  dollar,  and  many,  less  important  currencies,  such  as  the  British  pound,  the 
Japanese yen, the German mark, the Swiss franc, and so on. Moreover, the United States is a largely 
closed economy, so it could regard fluctuations in the external value of the dollar with benign neglect. 
Of course, most other countries, being rather small and quite open, were fully exposed to turbulences 
in  foreign  exchange  markets,  but  there  was  not  much  they  could  do  about  it.  There  were  several 
episodes when the internal stability of the dollar was threatened as well, with U.S. inflation rates in the 
double digits. The flight into more stable currencies put considerable pressure on these.  
Today, the arrival of the euro has changed the landscape in some important ways. First, as the new 
kid on  the block,  the  euro  commands attention  and respect.  In economic size,  the eurozone  nearly 
rivals the United States. There is now an obvious alternative to the dollar as an instrument of portfolio 
diversification. If investors have doubts about the dollar, there is no need any longer to rush into the 
Swiss franc, the euro will do just fine.  
Second,  the  eurozone,  although  not  quite  to  the  extent  of  the  United  States,  is  largely  a  closed 
economy. Movements in the euro are far less devastating than movements of similar magnitude in the 
Swiss franc or in the German mark. The euro is much more capable than any other currency to take 
on the role of shock absorber against the U.S. dollar. The eurozone, in some ways, is the large closed 
economy  that  the  world  needed  as  the  counterweight  to  the  U.S.  economy.  Be  it  by  intent  or  by 
chance,  the  new,  two-headed  international  monetary  system,  far  from  being  a  freak  of  nature,  is  a 
harmonious  and  balanced  construct  that  should  benefit  all  small  open  economies,  not  least 
Switzerland. 
There  is  a  third  reason  why  the  arrival  of  the  euro  has  changed  the  landscape  and  should 
fundamentally  prove  beneficial  to  the  stability  of  the  international  monetary  system,  and  that  is 
competition. Even though the U.S. monetary authorities do not have a mandate that is as specifically 
directed at price stability as the ECB does, investors now have a choice and can vote with their feet. 
Thus the pressure is on the United States to deliver price stability as well. I find it very unlikely that we 
should again experience any time soon double digit inflation rates in the United States, and this is very 
good news indeed for the continued health of the international monetary system.  
The  two-headedness  of  the  new  international  monetary  system  confers  special  responsibility  to  the 
guardians of the dollar and the euro. Does this mean that their role and duties now extend beyond 
their  respective  monetary  areas?  Should  the  Fed  and  the  ECB  become  the  policemen  of  the 
international  monetary  system?  I  do  not  think  so.  Markets  tend  to  police  themselves.  The  greatest 
contribution that the United States and Europe can make to the good health of the global economy is 
to  keep  their  house  in  order.  Price  stability  and  responsible  fiscal  and  trade  policies  in  both  the 
European  Union  and  the  Unites  States  would  go  a  long  way  in  ensuring  that  the  new  international 
monetary order is a framework for world growth and prosperity.  
Conclusion 
5.  
Our experience convincingly demonstrates that a flexible exchange rate regime and an autonomous 
monetary policy are perfectly feasible in a world dominated by two currency blocs. The external value 
of the franc today is much more likely than in the past to reflect fundamentals. We are now free to 
pursue domestic policies destined to improve the working of our economy, without excessive concern 
about external implications. Ultimately, the markets’ reaction will give us an objective assessment of 
our action.  
All  in  all,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  been  a  very  positive  development  for  the  international 
monetary  system  in  general,  and  for  Switzerland  in  particular.  We  benefit  from  the  greater 
transparency  offered  by  the  euro  and  the  lower  transaction  costs  made  possible  by  its  creation. 
Perhaps for the first time in history, we are surrounded by an area that shares the same monetary 
policy  objectives  as  we  do,  namely  price  stability.  This  explains  to  a  large  extent  why  the  Swiss 
franc/euro exchange rate has been relatively stable over the past five years. But the presence of a 
single European currency has per se also shielded third currencies - like the Swiss franc - from too 
much volatility in the case of dollar turbulence. 
At  the  same  time,  we  keep  the  trump  card  of  an  independent  monetary  policy  that  enables  us  to 
respond very rapidly to the specific needs of the Swiss economy. Between 2001 and 2003, we have 
thus lowered interest rates more quickly and more decisively than the ECB. Once economic activity 
showed signs of recovery, we were able to gradually shift to a less expansionary stance, again well 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2004
before  any  similar  move  by  the  ECB.  With  inflation  around  the  one  percent  mark,  we  enjoy  price 
stability and our interest rates lie clearly below corresponding rates in the eurozone.  
Thanks to enhanced stability in Europe with the introduction of the euro, a two headed international 
monetary system is good news for small countries. It provides them with a more stable environment 
than the former dollar-based regime. Today, the euro and the dollar act to some extent like mutual 
shock absorbers. As a result, small currencies are closer to their economic fundamentals than earlier, 
which gives third countries a real opportunity to implement independent monetary policies aiming at 
price stability. 
BIS Review 72/2004 
 5
