Radovan Jelasic: Monetary policy, current economic movements and 
challenges facing Serbian economic policy 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelasic, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the press conference on 
the International Savings Day, Belgrade, 29 October 2004. 
 1.  
• 
   Deposit base 
The  banking  sector  deposit  base  as  of  August  31  amounted  to  274.2  billion  dinars, 
registering an increase of 51.2 billion dinars, i.e. 22.8%, compared to the end of the last year 
balance. 
Total savings (dinar and foreign exchange)  as of August 31, 2004 reached the amount of 
106.3  billion dinars,  which  is  about  21.3  million  dinars (+25.1%) higher  than  at  the  end  of 
2003. 
So  far  this  year,  as  of  October  19,  new  foreign  exchange  savings  deposits  increased  by 
25.1%, or EUR 261 million, exceeding the amount of EUR 1.3 billion, i.e. USD 1.6 billion. 
The increase in savings and domestic accumulation increase represent a vital condition for a 
vigorous  lending  activity  of  the  banks,  which  means  not  only  new  investments  -  new 
employment opportunities, but also lower interest rates.  
The NBS announces a campaign: SAVE MORE TODAY SO AS TO HAVE MORE TOMORROW 
• 
As  part  of  activities  designed  to  celebrate  October  31,  Savings  Day,  and  with  a  view  to 
stimulating  an  increase  in  savings,  the  National  Bank  has  supplemented  its  regulations 
relieving  the  banks  from  the  compulsory  allocation  of  a  part  of  newly  deposited  foreign 
currency savings with the NBS in the period from November 1 to November 7 this year. The 
NBS hopes that banks shall also confirm in practice their professed readiness to ensure that 
the total effect of this measure be felt by the end-users, that is, savings depositors. 
For savings deposited in the course of the “SAVINGS WEEK”, banks will apply higher than 
usual interest rates, up to 2 percent annually, or a fixed bonus (one-off reward) as well as 
special privileges for certain population groups (newborns, newly married couples…) etc. 
 The NBS hopes that this facility shall contribute to a more widespread response of savings depositors 
and to a further strengthening of the banks’ deposit base, increasing, in return, their lending potential.  
Lending activity 
2.  
In the course of the first eight months this year, total lending of the banking sector increased by 30.4%, 
or 73.7 billion dinars. Within this figure, loans to economy increased by 37.8 billion dinars (+27.8%), 
whereas  loans  to  households  increased  by  18.8  billion  dinars  (+66.6%).  The  remaining  part  of  the 
lending  activity  of  17.1  billion  dinars  is  comprised  of  loans  to  public  sector  and  investments  in  the 
public sector, banks and nonresidents. 
Maturity structure is also improving: total long-term loans have increased by 42.8 billion dinars, which 
represents  an  increase  of  56.1%.  Short-term  loans  and  investments  have  increased  by  30.9  billion 
dinars, or by 18.6%. According to data for the first eight months of this year, dinar loans amounted to 
45.4  billion  dinars,  and  foreign  exchange  ones  by  28.3  billion  dinars.  Five  largest  banks  have 
accounted for 65.9% of the total lending increase in the course of this year. 
Given its low basis, the growth of household loans is apparently more quick-paced, amounting to an 
average of 6,300 dinars per capita. However, a large share of funds obtained from loan resources is 
used by the citizens for purchasing imported goods. Such consumption results in increased imports 
(January - August + 44.8%; however, export expressed in euros accounts for 31.6%), and results in an 
increase  of  foreign  trade  deficit  (USD  4.5  billion)  at  a  slight  increase  of  export  level  (January  - 
September +21.7%; however, export expressed in euros is 10.5%). 
Restricting demand - acting in accordance with our resources 
BIS Review 65/2004 
 1
The  NBS  is  currently  considering  the  measures  which  would  provide  for  directing  loan  potential 
towards  investments,  i.e.  economy,  since  the  NBS  bears  the  responsibility  to  ensure  a  sustainable 
economic growth rate in the long term, without which there will be no new employment opportunities 
nor any higher incomes in the long term. By contrast, if consumption is given priority over investments, 
everything can be consumed very quickly - not only incomes and foreign exchange, but the achieved 
macroeconomic  stability  as  well.  In  case  foreign  debts  are  used  for  consumption  rather  than 
investments, the NBS shall have to react, which means that we have to act in accordance with our 
resources, - our real resources! 
Incomes - inflation - exchange rate 
3.  
Compared to the matching period last year, in the course of the first nine months of 2004, net incomes 
registered an increase of 23.7% in nominal, and 12% in real terms. 
Bearing in mind the already achieved level of incomes in public companies and constant pressures 
that these be increased, it is necessary to point out that by increasing the cost of services rendered by 
public  companies,  without  improving  their  efficiency,  the  price  shock  is  transferred  to  a)  the  entire 
economy, b) the living standard of the population, which again places additional pressure on income 
increase, independently of productivity. 
What  significance  does  a  real  income  increase  have  without  an  increase  in  productivity?  It  is  like 
buying goods on credit! And since, ultimately, someone always has to pick up the bill, the role of the 
“volunteer”  will  be  assumed  by  the  NBS  through  adapting  the  exchange  rate,  which  means  that  all 
citizens of Serbia will be paying someone else’s bill. This is a scenario well-known to us from the 80s 
and the 90s, and we all know to what extremes this has brought our country in the economic sense! 
Exporters are those who know best how difficult it is to really earn some money, since it is them who 
balance the world market forces on a day-to-day basis, and who should represent the driving force of 
economic growth and employment. 
If  we  want  to  realize  a  real  increase  of  incomes,  this  should  be  done  through  an  increase  in 
productivity - the distribution of the unearned does not bode well for the country! 
The inflation amounted to 0.5% in October, whereas in the first nine months this year it reached 9.7% 
(if October 2004 is viewed relative to October 2003, the inflation amounts to 11.1%). 
This year’s increase of prices was caused to a considerable degree by the increase of world oil prices 
of approximately 42.3% and a 36.1% hike in metal prices. However, inflation was also influenced by 
increased domestic demand, and especially by a high growth of real incomes. Therefore, the reduction 
of public consumption, adopted by means of the budget rebalance, is a necessary and sound move, 
from which public companies must in no way be exempted. 
Increased  production  is  also  well  illustrated  by  the  fact  that  real  turnover  of  goods  in  retail  trade 
increased by 14.2% in comparison to the same period (January - September) last year, as well as that 
consumption tax, calculated as revenues from turnover tax and excises, registered a real increase of 
10.6%. 
Inflation determines the exchange rate, the exchange rate does not determine inflation!!! Therefore, 
the main issue is NOT what the dinar exchange rate will be, but whether we ourselves are spurring 
inflation on by excessive domestic consumption. 
Monetary policy 
4.  
At present, there is barely any room for tightening the monetary policy, primarily due to the fact that it 
is already extremely restrictive, which has been arrived at through measures implemented in August 
this year: 
• 
• 
• 
As regards a possible relaxation of the policy, it will depend primarily on the budget deficit realized 
until the end of the year, as well as by the wages policy of the Government.  
Increase of banks’ required reserves rate from 18% to 21% 
Increase of interest rates, and 
Changed method of calculating required reserves. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2004
In  such  a  situation,  with  room  for  further  tightening of  the  monetary  policy  is  restricted,  a  still  more 
responsible  policy  of  the  RS  Government  is  required  for  the  implementation  of  the  economic 
programme as agreed with the International Monetary Fund. This can be achieved through: 
• 
• 
Restrictive fiscal policy, directed at limiting public consumption and incomes 
Increase of the efficiency of public companies, primarily through 
accelerated separation of core from ancillary activities 
a. 
privatization 
b. 
c. 
reduction of the number of employees. 
Privatization of the real sector and the banks 
Privatization of large public companies in the process of restructuring. 
 Foreign exchange reserves 
5.  
Foreign exchange reserves remain stable at USD 3.76 billion. In the course of 2004, there occurred an 
increase  of  as  much  as  USD  218  million,  although  this  was  partly  due  to  euro/dollar  exchange 
differentials. When it comes to dealers, ending with this week, the NBS will have purchased a total of 
approximately USD 1.42 billion, which is equal to the amount purchased from dealers in the course of 
the entire 2003. When it comes to the sale of foreign exchange, the NBS sold a daily average of USD 
7.9 billion on the interbank foreign exchange market. Foreign exchange trade among banks increased 
considerably.  In  October,  ending  with  October  28,  the  trade  between  the  NBS  and  the  banks, 
amounted to USD 5.1 million, while among banks alone it amounted to USD 10.9 million.  
Although for a central bank: 
• 
• 
The  present  level  of  reserves  does  represent  a  solid  basis  for  a  continuation  of  the  exchange  rate 
policy as it has been to date. 
Inflation can never be sufficiently low and 
Foreign exchange reserves can never be sufficiently high 
Serbian state budget for 2005 
6.  
The NBS has given its support to the Serbian State Budget for 2005, pointing out the following issues: 
Incomes: 
• 
Since incomes still account for a high portion of the GDP, incomes of budget beneficiaries (both direct 
and indirect ones) should not outstrip the growth of nominal domestic product (a slower-paced income 
growth  would  have  a  favorable  effect  on  the  increase  of  competitiveness  of  our  economy  and  on 
overall macroeconomic stability). Incomes in public companies (even if not financed from the budget) 
should be urgently placed under direct supervision of the Government/Ministry of Finance with the aim 
of establishing ex-ante the incomes levels. 
Restructuring: 
• 
The  restructuring  of  large  public  companies  should  be  accelerated,  and  the  payment  of  subsidies 
should depend on the outcome of implemented reforms. 
Privatization: 
• 
In the course of 2005, the process of privatization should be accelerated, both through tenders and 
auctions, as well as privatization of the companies undergoing restructuring. This process, rather than 
an  increased  sale  of  government  bonds,  should  provide  funds  for  the  real  financing  of  the  budget 
deficit. 
BIS Review 65/2004 
 3
State administration reform: 
• 
Reform in this field should be accelerated, both from the aspect of improving efficiency, productivity 
and quality, as well as with the aim of a further reduction of budgetary expenditures. 
Aside from the abovementioned, the NBS pointed out that “in case the abovementioned measures are 
not implemented, the notoriously well-known past model of functioning of our economy shall shortly 
begin  threatening  the  macroeconomic  balance  (foreign  and  domestic),  which  may  lead  to  a  further 
increase in incomes unaccompanied by increase in productivity (i.e. without real grounds), as well as 
to a further increase of export (outstripping the increase in demand) and further deterioration of the 
balance of payments position of our economy on the one hand, and a further acceleration of inflation, 
on the other hand.” 
Privatization of banks 
7.  
Six banks have submitted their statements of interest in the privatization of the Novosadska Banka - 
Banca Intesa and Unicredito from Italy, General Electric (Great Britain), Erste Bank (Austria) and two 
Greek banks, EFG Eurobank and Piraeus Bank. 
Four banks have submitted their statements of interest in the privatization of Kontinental Banka- Nova 
Ljubljanska  Banka  (Slovenia),  General  Electric  (Great  Britain),  EFG  Eurobank  and  Piraeus  Bank 
(Greece). 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2004
