David Dodge: The new Canadian $50 banknote 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Nation Builders Dinner, Famous 
5 Foundation, Calgary, 13 October 2004. 
 Good  evening.  I  am  very  glad  to  be  here  tonight.  This  has  been  an  exciting  day  for  the  Bank  of 
Canada.  This  morning,  we  unveiled  a  new  $50  note  that  celebrates  nation  building:  shaping  the 
political, legal, and social structures for democracy and equality. 
As you know, one of the events and themes commemorated on the new $50 bank note is the Persons 
Case.  I  am  especially  pleased  to  be  here  tonight,  helping  to  celebrate  the  75th  anniversary  of  that 
historic case, and honouring the Famous Five, who helped to enshrine the rights of all individuals, in 
Canada and other countries around the world, to participate on equal terms in political life. 
Like  the  Persons Case,  the  new  $50  note  is  about more  than  the  rights  of women  to participate  in 
public office. This new bank note celebrates the ability of individuals to make a profound difference 
and to help make Canada a country where rights and freedoms are secure. 
That is why we have also included on the new note a tribute to Thérèse Casgrain, a pioneer of civil 
rights  in  Canada.  Through  her  involvement  in  provincial,  national,  and  international  organizations, 
Thérèse Casgrain worked to help the disadvantaged, improve the rights of women, and reform society 
for the benefit of all citizens. In honour of this remarkable Canadian, the Thérèse Casgrain Volunteer 
Award medallion, pictured on the back of the note, celebrates Canadian volunteers who advance a 
worthy  cause  and  contribute  to  the  well-being  of  their  fellow  citizens.  We  were  honoured  to  have 
Renée Casgrain-Nadeau, Thérèse Casgrain’s daughter, help us to unveil the $50 note earlier today. 
And I’m very glad to see members of the Casgrain family here tonight. 
Above all, the $50 note celebrates the right of all people to participate fully in society and to enjoy the 
benefits of living in a culture that protects their individual rights and freedoms. That is why we have 
included on the $50 note a quote from the Universal Declaration of Human Rights: “All human beings 
are born free and equal in dignity and rights.” 
These rights help to shape and advance a democratic society. And it is through a nation’s laws and 
public institutions that these rights are supported and protected. 
The Bank of Canada has played an integral role in Canadian society since 1935. We’re just a little 
younger than the Persons Case - next year, we celebrate the 70th anniversary of our founding. And 
we’re keenly aware of our place in this country’s civic infrastructure. 
The Bank was founded at a time when this country was struggling to define itself and to survive the 
economic  and  social  turmoil  of  the  Great  Depression.  Let’s  remember  that,  during  the  1930s, 
Canada’s  economy  shrank  by  more  than  that  of  any  nation  other  than  the  United  States  and  took 
longer to recover. The Depression hit especially hard in Western Canada - at its peak, an estimated 
two-thirds of the people in the rural Prairies were on some form of government relief. 
During this time, the first elements of Canada’s social welfare system were being created. And new 
social  pressures were  altering  the  economic  and  political  life  of  the  nation.  In  this  environment,  the 
Bank  of  Canada  opened  its  doors  in  March  1935,  to  provide  an  effective,  centralized  monetary 
authority for Canada. Then, as now, our mandated role has been to regulate credit and currency in the 
best interests of the economic life of the nation and, generally, to promote the economic and financial 
welfare of Canada. 
To that end, the Bank’s monetary policy contributes to solid economic performance and rising living 
standards for Canadians by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. We issue bank notes that 
Canadians can use with confidence that they will be widely accepted. The new $50 is a good example 
of that. We also promote a safe, sound, and efficient financial system, and provide funds-management 
services for the Government of Canada. 
BIS Review 58/2004 
 1
Our work is hardly the stuff that usually gets people excited. No one has erected a statue to celebrate 
really effective monetary policy. But no civic infrastructure is more important than one that allows all 
citizens to have confidence in the value of money and in the soundness of their economy. 
Building a civic infrastructure that promotes social, economic, and political confidence is no easy task. 
It requires hard work by dedicated individuals. Irene Parlby was such an individual. Her support of the 
United Farmers of Alberta, and her subsequent political career, began as a struggle to improve the 
incredibly harsh conditions faced by women on Alberta’s farms. 
As societies have progressed, and economies have become more open and connected around the 
world,  there  has  been  growing  attention  paid  to  the  ideas  of  economic,  social,  and  cultural  rights. 
These are part of a larger body of human rights law that developed following World War II. In 1948, 
they were enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 
The Famous Five recognized the importance of economic rights much earlier than that, and worked to 
put in place laws that extended these rights to women. For example, Louise McKinney, Henrietta Muir 
Edwards, and Emily Murphy helped to establish the Dower Act in 1917, which granted Alberta women 
property rights in marriage. And Nellie McClung spent much of her political life fighting for mother’s 
allowances, better public health services, and improved property rights for married women. 
Now, in Canada, we have created a society where most of us can take for granted our right to earn a 
fair  wage  and  provide  for  our  families.  But  we  should  not  underestimate  the  importance  of 
macroeconomic policies, frameworks, and institutions that support the standard of living that we enjoy. 
For  example,  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation  means  that  our  salaries  and  our  savings  aren’t 
eroded by rising prices, nor will our economy be devastated by deflation as it was in the 1930s. Good 
monetary policy means that we can plan for the future with confidence. 
A sound financial system means that we can conduct financial transactions with equal confidence. A 
secure currency means that we can use cash with confidence that bank notes will be readily accepted, 
and without fear of being stuck with a counterfeit bill. 
At the Bank of Canada, we are always mindful of our commitment to Canadians - to contribute to the 
economic well-being of this country. Part of that commitment is to communicate our objectives openly 
and effectively and to stand accountable for our actions. 
The Famous Five and Thérèse Casgrain remind us of the tremendous influence that individuals can 
have on society. As Louise McKinney said, and I quote, “The purpose of a woman’s life is just the 
same  as  the  purpose  of  a  man’s  life  -  that  she  may  make  the  best  possible  contribution  to  the 
generation in which she is living.” 
We each have a responsibility to contribute to the society in which we live. As a public institution, the 
Bank  of  Canada  takes  this  responsibility  seriously.  We  know  that  by  fulfilling  our  economic  role  in 
Canadian  society  -  by  giving  Canadians  confidence  in  the  value  of  money - we  make  an important 
social contribution as well. The Bank of Canada will continue to promote the economic well-being of 
Canada and Canadians. That is our commitment to you. 
Tonight,  we  celebrate  the  commitment  of  five  individual  Canadians  to  the  advancement  of  human 
rights in our country. This is something truly worth celebrating, and I thank the Famous 5 Foundation 
for inviting me to join you on this occasion of the 75th anniversary of the Persons Case. 
2 
 BIS Review 58/2004
