Axel A Weber: Stability and growth 
Closing remarks by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt, 19 November 2004. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Although I have been entrusted with delivering today’s closing remarks, I am unwilling to say goodbye 
to Lisbon. 
The Lisbon agenda started off as a visionary project in March 2000, which was at the very peak of the 
hype surrounding the New Economy, the pinnacle of irrational exuberance in the stock market - if I 
may refer thus to Alan Greenspan -, and the high point of overconfidence. At times like those, visions 
tend to become oversized - which is fine for visions. 
European Monetary Union started off once as a seemingly oversized vision, too. The original plan was 
aired as early as 1970. From then on, it took more than 30 years before you could feel the change in 
your pocket. Now that we are almost six years into the euro era, we can safely conclude that the euro 
was a vision worth pursuing. The vision of a stable single European currency has come true. 
The  Lisbon  project  basically  aims  at  boosting  the  EU  member  states’  potential  for  dynamic  growth. 
Progress towards the Lisbon goal hinges crucially on the efforts of national governments. For keeping 
up spirits during the nitty-gritty of making this vision become reality, European leaders need, as the 
Kok report rightly states, “to instil (the) hope that tomorrow will be better than today”. This visionary 
stance contrasts sharply  with  the present  reality,  where  there  is a prevalent, rather  vague sense  of 
Europe being an underachiever. 
Institutional foundations of stability 
2.  
The  two  big  European  visionary  projects  -  EMU  and  the  Lisbon  agenda  -  are  interrelated.  First, 
reinvigorating  the  growth  dynamics  in  Europe  is  crucial  for  fully  exploiting  the  potential  of  a  stable 
single currency. Second, sustainable economic growth requires more than Lisbon-style reforms; price 
stability is of the essence for sustainable economic growth. Stability and growth go hand in hand. 
Stability  must  be  safeguarded  by  a  cleverly  designed  institutional  framework  that  generates  proper 
incentives.  I  very  much  welcome  the  fact  that  this  year’s  Nobel  Prize  for  Economics  rewards 
theoretical research on the importance of a sound institutional setting. It should come as a useful and 
timely  wake  up-call  for  those  who  are,  in  effect,  contemplating  watering  down  the  institutional 
foundations of the euro’s stability. 
Reforming the Stability and Growth Pact under the pretext of rendering it more growthfriendly would be 
the wrong path to take. There is no such thing as the alleged trade-off between economic growth and 
fiscal prudence! Nor is the budgetary discipline to be guaranteed by the Stability and Growth Pact a 
hardship that central bankers wish to impose on finance ministers. Budgetary discipline is a “must” in a 
monetary union of sovereign states. That is because the consequences of fiscal misbehaviour would 
have to be borne by all the participants in the form of higher interest rates - which in itself might weigh 
on growth. In history, currency unions used to fail due to a lack of fiscal commitment. Fiscal rules are 
of the essence, and they need to promote sustainable fiscal positions. 
The  Maastricht  Treaty  enshrines  the  core  fiscal  rules  of  the  EU:  the  obligation  to  avoid  excessive 
deficits, the practice of budgetary surveillance, and the excessive deficit procedure. The Stability and 
Growth  Pact  clarifies  these  rules  and  puts  them  in  more  concrete  terms:  member  states  have 
committed themselves to the aim of achieving budgetary positions close to balance or in surplus and 
to  submitting  to  annual  stability  (or  convergence)  programmes.  Rules  need  to  be  straightforward, 
transparent  and  binding.  In  its  present  shape,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  straightforward  and 
transparent. Its Achilles heel lies in its unsatisfactory lack of binding character in practice. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 1
Changes to the Stability and Growth Pact 
3.  
Let me comment briefly on the changes now envisaged for the Stability and Growth Pact. This week 
the ECOFIN Council discussed the “strengthening, clarification and better implementation” of the Pact. 
The new framework is scheduled to be finalised in spring 2005. The debate keeps on going under its 
own momentum, and new proposals are constantly being ventilated. 
Against this backdrop, it may be worthwhile recalling the basic economic idea behind the Stability and 
Growth Pact: Sound public finances are to prevent the emergence of conflicts between monetary and 
fiscal policies right from the outset. The state of sound public finances is characterised by a balanced 
budget and a low level of public debt. This state of sound public finances is to be realised as soon as 
possible. Nobody has ever refuted the underlying economic rationale of the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Thus, the Pact suffers from neither a lack of economic reasoning nor a lack of clarity. 
For a monetary policymaker committed to stability, the ongoing debate on revising the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  is  utterly  uninspiring.  Placing  greater  weight  on  the  long-term  sustainability  of  public 
finances  sounds  reasonable;  however,  this  provision  should  not  be  used  as  a  “back  door”  for 
introducing all kinds of exceptions. Discriminating between good and bad types of expenditure is of no 
help either. I have serious misgivings about any endeavours to loosen the obligation to trim excessive 
deficits in a speedy manner and about tolerating excessive deficits in periods of economic stagnation 
or low growth. 
Overall, the debate on reforming the Stability and Growth Pact has the air of reshaping the rules to fit 
current fiscal practice - instead of reshaping fiscal practice to fit the pre-agreed rules. 
Basically,  the  proposals  now  under  discussion  amount  to  substituting  discretion  for  rules.  The 
implications  of  this  paradigm  shift  must  be  borne  in  mind:  heightened  complexity,  reduced 
transparency, and discarding the principle of equal treatment. Abandoning rules in favour of discretion 
would represent a major step backwards. EMU was once meant to be placed on a solid institutional 
foundation  instilling  credibility.  Rewriting  the  Pact  as  envisaged  would  deal  another  blow  to  the 
credibility  of  the  fiscal  framework  of  the  monetary  union.  From  the  viewpoint  of  a  monetary 
policymaker  committed  to  stability,  the  envisaged  change  to  the  nature  of  the  Stability  and  Growth 
Pact would not yield any major benefits. It could, however, come at a great cost. 
Fiscal policy and structural reforms 
the completion of the internal market, 
stimulating competition and deregulating the product markets, 
reforms improving flexibility in the labour market, 
generating a climate conducive to entrepreneurial activity, to research and development. 
4.  
The growth policies agreed on in the Lisbon agenda are, amongst other things: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I very much support this agenda. I do, however, not support proposals which, with reference to the 
Lisbon  agenda,  suggest  that  expenditure  related  to  growth  policies  should  be  disregarded  when 
calculating the deficit. In my, view, using the Lisbon agenda as an excuse for weakening the Stability 
and Growth Pact amounts to upending conventional economic wisdom. The correlation between debt 
and  deficits,  on  the  one  hand,  and  economic  growth,  on  the  other,  is  negative.  Never  in  economic 
history have spendthrift policies produced sustainable growth. The opposite is true, and all the more 
so as all European countries have to brace themselves for sharply rising fiscal costs resulting from the 
pending demographic shift in an ageing society. Loosening budgetary discipline is no viable option for 
promoting economic growth. On the contrary, it would undermine the long-term sustainability of fiscal 
positions and thereby weigh heavily on future growth. 
Public  finances  in  Europe  are  already  characterised  by  a  large  sustainability  gap.  Future  pension 
obligations  in  most  countries  are  several  times  higher  than  the  explicit  debt  burden  revealed  in  the 
national accounts. By a very rough calculation, it would, for example, take Germany three and a half 
years’ output to honour its combined explicit and implicit debt. If future generations are to handle this 
sizeable burden - in Germany as well as elsewhere - there is, first, no way of getting around a tough 
course of fiscal consolidation, which has to be augmented, second, by coherent policies to lift growth 
potential - as agreed on in the Lisbon agenda. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2004
I appreciate the fact that, last year, Germany directed its attention to structural reforms in the spirit of 
the Lisbon agenda - even if this was driven more by the “push” of persistent economic stagnation than 
by  the  “pull”  of  the  Lisbon  vision.  Under  the  Federal  Government’s  “Agenda  2010”,  labour  market 
flexibility  has  been  improved  in  terms  of  the  institutional  framework,  collective  wage  bargaining 
agreements and working hours. Reforms in the social security systems have been enacted and will 
help to contain the implicit debt burden. Among the remaining tasks, priority status should be given to 
untying the link between labour costs and social security and to raising the statutory retirement age. 
Concluding remark 
5.  
Stability  and  growth  go  hand  in  hand.  The  Lisbon  agenda  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
complement each other in lifting the EU’s growth potential. Both are needed and we should not say 
goodbye to either of them. 
BIS Review 70/2004 
 3
