Jean-Pierre Roth: International monetary policy 2005 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the  Swiss 
National Bank, at the 19. Internationales Zins-Forum - Zinsen 2005, Frankfurt am Main, 6 December 
2004. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The major central banks reacted to the lacklustre global economy in 2002 by relaxing the monetary 
policy. The low money market rates in 2002 and 2003 were appropriate for a recession. They are not, 
however, indicated for a sustained and global upswing. This is why several central banks began to 
steer their monetary policy back to a normal course in 2003 and 2004. The tempo of monetary policy 
normalisation  obviously  depends  on  the  progress  of  economic  recovery,  which  leads  to  different 
reactions in each country.  
In this rather favourable climate, oil prices began to soar in 2003. However, there is no reason to fear 
a repeat of the dire consequences witnessed during past oil crises. On the one hand, the rise in oil 
prices comes at a time when the economic environment is much more stable than it was back then. 
On the other hand, strong global economic growth drives up oil prices.  
In  order  to  ensure  price  stability,  a  normalisation  of  economic  activity  must  be  accompanied  by  a 
normalisation in the interest rate policy. The latest oil price hike has no bearing on this basic premise. 
The  constellation  of  a  weaker  growth  dynamic  and  higher  oil  prices  could,  however,  delay  getting 
monetary policy back on track. Since central banks are committed to the goal of price stability, a lot will 
depend  on  the  transmission  of  oil  price  increases  to  inflation  expectations.  In  most  industrialised 
countries,  inflation  expectations  give  no  cause  for  concern  for  the  time  being.  Low  inflation 
expectations  and  flexible  monetary  policy  concepts  allow  central  bankers  to  carefully  adjust  their 
monetary policy for 2005, provided that it seems appropriate for business cycle reasons. 
   1/1 
