Lars Nyberg: The securities market today and tomorrow  
Speech by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at a conference organised by 
Dataföreningen, Stockholm, 10 November 2004. 
 First, thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference about the Swedish securities market today 
and  tomorrow.  Securities  markets  are  of  course  a  significant  part  of  a  modern  economy  and  fulfil 
several  important  functions,  which  include  mediating  information,  supplying  capital  and  acting  as  a 
channel  for  risk  management.  They  also  undergo  an  almost  continuous  process  of  change,  which 
offers new challenges to operators in the financial sector as well as to public authorities. It is therefore 
particularly exciting - and important - to be able to discuss these developments here today. 
Developments  in  the  securities  markets  in  recent  years  have  been  dramatic  in  many  respects.  For 
instance,  we  have  experienced  an  intensive  stock  market  upturn,  followed  by  one  of  the  largest 
crashes  in  modern  times.  IT  shares  went  from  being  unbeatable  profit-makers  according  to  tabloid 
headlines  to  being  worth  only  a  fraction  of  what  was  promised.  However,  I  am  not  here  to  discuss 
earnings,  although  the  bubble  phenomenon  is  an  interesting  subject  in  itself.  Today  I  intend  to 
concentrate mainly on structural change processes. 
We have relatively recently witnessed some tendencies to increased integration in trading in financial 
instruments. This includes the closer linking of the stock markets in Stockholm, Helsinki, Tallinn and 
Riga through the establishment of OMX and - prior to this - the stock markets in Amsterdam, Brussels, 
Lisbon  and  Paris  through  EuroNext.  An  example  of  far-reaching  integration  in  the  clearing  and 
settlement  of  securities  transactions  is  Euroclear.  The  agreement  on  a  merger  of  the  Swedish  and 
Finnish  central  securities  depositories  is  another  example  of  tendencies  towards  integration  in  the 
securities market. 
Understanding  developments  in  the  securities  markets  and  what  these  in  turn  mean  for  the  future 
requires an understanding of the economic driving forces behind them. Today I shall discuss some 
long-term  trends  that  I  consider  of  particular  importance.  These  include  changes  in  the  population 
structure,  the  demography;  technological  developments;  internationalisation;  changes  in  ownership 
structure and - as I mentioned at the beginning - changes in what we usually refer to as the financial 
infrastructure. This refers to the financial markets' railways and bridges; all of the systems that enable 
financial  transactions  to  be  made  and  the  data  regarding  them  to  be  transported  as  efficiently  as 
possible, for instance, stock markets, clearing and settlement systems. 
In addition to these economic driving forces, regulations play an important role for developments in the 
financial  markets.  Later  on,  the  Director  General  of  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial 
Supervisory Authority), Ingrid Bonde, will give her views on the new EU regulations that are about to 
be introduced. I shall also touch upon this work and comment from the Riksbank’s perspective. 
A  natural  question  in  this  context  is  why  these  driving  forces  and  regulations  are  of  interest  to  the 
Riksbank. The Riksbank has two statutory tasks, to maintain price stability and to promote a stable 
and efficient payment system. Both of these tasks give us reason to take an interest in the securities 
markets.  To  begin  with,  it  is  evident  that  the  Riksbank’s  monetary  policy  requires  an  efficient  fixed 
income market so that inflation will be affected by interest rate decisions. With regard to the payment 
system,  the  securities  markets  are  becoming  increasingly  important  to  the  banks,  which  in  turn  are 
central  to  the  functioning  of  the  payment  system.  In  addition,  large  parts  of  the  securities  market 
infrastructure are directly linked to the payment system in different ways. The Riksbank therefore has 
every  reason  to  monitor  developments  in  the  securities  markets  and  to  actively  promote  the 
development of regulations that contribute to stability as well as efficiency. 
Demographic changes 
One  of  the  fundamental  economic  driving  forces  behind  developments  in  the  securities  markets  is 
demographic changes. The age distribution of the population sets the framework for savings. It is not 
too far-fetched to assume that people mostly borrow while they are young, save while middle-aged 
and then live off their savings when they are older. Savings vary over a life cycle. Studies show that 
household debt is mainly built up during the ages 20 to 40; while people aged 40 to 65 have positive 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 1
net  savings.  At  retirement  age,  net  saving  becomes  negative  once  again.  When  the  percentage  of 
people in the respective age groups changes, it affects savings at a national level. 
Seen from a longer perspective, the most spectacular demographic trend is that we are living longer. 
In 1950, 10 per cent of the population was aged 65 and over. Today the figure has risen to 17 per 
cent,  and  in  2035  it  will  be  23  per  cent,  according  to  Statistics  Sweden’s  forecasts.  Savings  at  a 
national  level  need  to  be  adapted  to  be  able  to  support  this  growing  band  of  long-lived,  active 
pensioners.  The  collective  social  insurance  systems  are  currently  undergoing  development,  which 
emphasises the need for additional private saving. There is uncertainty over what expectations and 
needs  the  welfare  state  should  and  can  fulfil,  but  most  people  appear  to  agree  that  the  role  of  the 
welfare state must decline as a declining workforce has to support a greater number outside of it. The 
original delegation of savings from the individual to society will revert to the individual in different ways. 
For  instance,  individual  choices  have  been  introduced  within  the  framework  of  the  pension  system, 
giving  the  individual  some  responsibility  for  management  of  the  savings.  This  applies  to  both 
occupational  pensions  and  the  state  pension  system.  These  changes  stimulate  savings  and  also 
channel  some  of  the  earlier  collective  savings  into  savings  markets,  particularly  mutual  funds  and 
pension  funds.  The  fact  that  we  have  had  a  large  inflow  of  capital  into  the  securities  markets  is 
therefore fairly unsurprising. 
However,  one  interesting  question  is  what  effect  the  change  in  population  structure  will  have  on 
savings and on the securities markets in a few years time, when those of us born in the 1940s retire. 
We are a fairly large group from the baby boom years. The life cycle hypothesis assumes that we will 
sell large parts of our assets, which will lead to negative net savings. However, some studies indicate 
that pensioners may not consume their capital to the extent assumed. And of course, some people 
actually have something left to pass on to their descendants. 
One decisive factor for the future development of savings is how the pension system will function in 
practice and what responsibility the individual will have in the future for other parts of the traditional 
welfare system. 
Technological developments 
Another important driving force behind the securities markets is technological developments. These 
occur in several ways. Look, for example, at the current procedure for a securities transaction, from 
start to finish. The process from placing the order to buy or sell until the transaction is finally settled 
has  become  increasingly  automated.  I  don’t  just  mean  the  actual  trading,  which  has  become 
increasingly electronic, but also the processes following on from this, namely clearing and settlement. 
Straight through processing, usually referred to as STP, is becoming more common. This involves the 
entire  chain  from  placing  the  order  to  clearing  and  settlement  being  implemented  without  manual 
intervention. The increased automation has led to transaction costs falling. However, it is still possible 
to rationalise further and there is considerable scope, in my opinion and the opinions of many others, 
for reducing transaction costs further, particularly in cross-border securities trading.  
The technological developments also inspire hope of reducing the time between trade and settlement. 
A  situation  where  settlement  could  be  made  as  soon  as  possible  after  the  deal  would  be  very 
welcome. This is because it would limit the risks the various counterparties have against one another. 
Most financial instruments traded in Sweden today are settled three days after the trade. It should be 
possible  to  reduce  this  period now, so  that  settlement  is  made  one  day  after  the  trade.  This  would 
increase efficiency and reduce the settlement risks. If I act as visionary a moment, I can see that in the 
not  too  distant  future  settlement  could  in  principle  be  simultaneous  with  trade,  so  that  no  time  lag 
arose at all. There still remain some practical obstacles before this becomes a reality. However, I have 
every hope that these obstacles will be overcome in time. 
Another, equally important aspect of the technological developments is that they have made it easier 
for  new  operators  to  enter  the  financial  markets.  This  has  led  to  stiffer  competition,  which  has  put 
further pressure on transaction costs. Technological developments affect competition in several ways. 
Improved information technology enables operators to offer customer more and cheaper services. The 
Internet has revolutionised both the spread of information and order systems. Physical distances have 
lost significance as a result of these developments, which promotes cross-border securities trading. 
However, cross-border transactions are still unnecessarily dear. As I said, there is reason to hope that 
transaction costs can be pushed down further as cross-border trading becomes smoother. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2004
Increased internationalisation 
Cross-border trade is part of an increasing internationalisation process in the financial markets. Over 
the  past  ten  years,  both  non-resident  ownership  of  Swedish  securities  and  trading  by  non-resident 
investors in Swedish securities have increased. At the same time, Swedish investors have invested 
more  of  their  capital  abroad.  The  internationalisation  of  capital  is  a  development  welcomed  by  the 
Riksbank. It entails both improved risk spreads and the opportunity for higher earnings. In addition, it 
could  lead  to  better  competition  and  more  efficient  use  of  capital  in  the  economy  and  thereby  to 
greater welfare. This development also makes greater demands on the Swedish securities markets. If 
we diverge too much from international practice with regard to norms and regulations, particularly tax 
regulations, it will reduce the economic benefits we obtain from the internationalisation of the markets. 
However, it does not mean that we should stop thinking about designing regulations. I shall return to 
this later. 
Altered ownership structure 
Another  trend  that  affects  the  securities  markets  is  the  increased  institutional  ownership.  When  an 
increasing  share  of  financial  savings  in  the  economy  is  through  mutual  funds  and  large  financial 
institutions,  securities  trading  is  also  affected.  Financial  intermediaries  are  often  more  focussed  on 
short-term earnings than private investors, and more likely to move capital in the event of anxiety or 
problems.  There  is  therefore  a  risk,  although  this  should  not  be  exaggerated,  that  increased 
institutional  ownership  will  reinforce  herd  behaviour  and  lead  to  larger  fluctuations  in  prices  in  the 
financial markets. 
Increased institutional ownership also means that the passive owners will have relatively substantial 
influence  over  the  companies.  In  most  cases,  the  mutual  fund  companies  do  not  participate  in  the 
management of the various companies. This in turn means that corporate governance issues gain in 
significance. What ability and interest do the mutual fund companies have in influencing management 
to participate in the board work of the limited companies? In recent years, mutual fund companies and 
other  institutional  owners have  shown slightly  greater  interest  in  the  work  on  management  of  these 
companies. 
However,  an  interesting  question  of  principle  here  is  what  mandate  they  have  for  this.  The  primary 
goal for a unit trust investor ought to be to achieve the highest possible yield at a given risk level. It is 
not necessarily in the interests of the mutual fund investor for the mutual fund company to conduct 
corporate governance. However, from the point of view of the economy as a whole it is important that 
there are owners who can actively govern the companies. I find it difficult to believe that the mutual 
fund  companies’  growing  interest  in  influencing  boards  of  directors  through  the  selection  of  board 
members or using other means would solve the fundamental problem of weak institutional ownership. 
We cannot therefore ignore the conflict of interests in indirect ownership. 
Changes in the financial infrastructure 
There are other important ownership issues in the securities market. Here, I am thinking in particular of 
corporate  governance  with  regard  to  marketplaces,  clearing  houses  and  other  systems  used  for 
trading financial instruments and which are part of the financial infrastructure. Many companies active 
in  the  financial  infrastructure  have  traditionally  functioned  as  cooperatives  or  been  owned  by  their 
largest  users.  In  some  cases,  these  companies  have  been  transformed  into  profit-making  limited 
companies, where other parties than the users have gone in as important owners. Stockholmsbörsen 
is of course the most striking example of this. This development is not specific to Sweden. The same 
tendencies exist in the international securities markets. 
Otherwise, each country has traditionally had a separate organisation for each vertical stage of the 
transaction chain: a stock market, a clearing house and a central securities depository for the financial 
instruments. There has thus been a significant degree of centralisation at national level. The reason 
for this is of course that there are substantial economies of scale in these operations. The fixed costs 
for operating the systems are high, while the floating costs are low. Moreover, there are considerable 
network effects. If a marketplace has a high level of liquidity in an asset, many people will probably 
trade  there,  as  they  will  be  able  to  trade  at  the  best,  that  is  to  say,  the  most  correct  prices.  If  a 
marketplace  has  liquid  trading  in  one  asset,  it  will  often  attract  trade  in  other  assets,  as  other 
companies  want  their  instruments  to  be  traded  on  a  marketplace  with  many  participants.  In  other 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 3
words, there are natural tendencies towards concentration in financial instruments trading. The same 
applies to settlement and registration of ownership. 
However, technological developments have enabled increasing integration of the various parts of the 
transaction chain. This has also created incentives to establish automated systems all along the line, 
from order placement to settlement. The result is a vertical integration, where different stages of the 
value chain are integrated. Integration requires cooperation between, or even a merger of, the various 
parts of the infrastructure. 
Even if this, as I have mentioned earlier, leads to lower transaction costs, it is not certain that these 
cost reductions will benefit the end customers. When all of the stages of the chain are implemented 
automatically and ownership of the various parts may even lie with the same organisation, everyone 
will be dependent on a single supplier. This creates a risk that pricing will follow monopoly principles, 
which rarely benefits the economy. 
Parallel with the move towards vertical integration, the internationalisation of the capital markets and 
harmonisation of laws and rules within the EU has led to increased pressure to consolidate operations 
across  national  borders.  In  many  cases  there  have  previously  been  legal  barriers  to  international 
consolidation. Now that the barriers are gradually being removed, competitive pressure on the existing 
national  infrastructure  companies  is  increasing.  At  the  same  time,  there  are  stronger  incentives  for 
cooperation and even mergers between stock markets in different countries and also between clearing 
and settlement organisations. In other words, there are also tendencies towards horizontal integration. 
The  question  of  what  is  most  beneficial  for  the  functioning  of  the  economy  as  a  whole  -  vertical 
integration  or  horizontal  integration  -  is  not  an  easy  one.  In  both  cases  there  are  benefits  from 
economies of scale. There are also concentration tendencies, which can in turn lead to deficiencies in 
competition in the markets for trading and clearing securities. I believe that it is extremely important 
that  we  authorities  -  and  I  mean  here  financial  supervisory  authorities,  competition  authorities, 
ministries of finance and central banks - closely monitor developments in this field. 
The public authorities' supervision and oversight of the financial infrastructure is also affected by how 
the infrastructure companies are owned. 
When these are run as profit-making limited companies with external owners, there is an evident risk 
of  monopolistic  pricing.  Here  the  Swedish  Competition  Authority  has  a  difficult  but  important  task. 
There are also reasons for closer study of the potential threats to the stability of the financial system 
arising from such developments. Finansinspektionen and the Riksbank play important roles here. 
If  the  infrastructure  is  instead  mainly  owned  and  run  by  the  users,  the  problems  may  not  primarily 
concern pricing, but rather how the conditions for changing established structures are affected. Here I 
am  thinking  of  the  incentives  for  new  developments  and  the  possibilities  for  new  participants  to 
become established in the market. This is extremely important to avoid rigid structures in the financial 
markets. 
The conclusion is that it must be possible to adapt the rules and supervision governing the companies 
working  in  the  financial  infrastructure  to  the  organisational  form  chosen  by  the  companies.  In  a 
changing world, our task is to ensure we employ the best methods for carrying out our supervision and 
oversight work. The picture is further complicated by the fact that the authorities in different countries 
become involved when consolidation work crosses national boundaries. 
EU regulations 
Another  important  driving  force  for  change  is  the  new  regulations  being  produced  within  the  EU, 
arising from the Financial Services Action Plan of 1999. One of the purposes of these plans was to 
harmonise  regulations  for  securities  trading  between  the  different  European  countries.  The  EU  has 
decided to introduce what is known as the Lamfalussy Process to achieve the target of implementing 
all  parts  of  the  plan prior  to  2005.  This  entails  the EU  Parliament  and Council  providing  framework 
directives on issues of principle, while the Commission chisels out the details in follow-up directives 
and regulations. After this, a group of representatives of the countries' different supervisory authorities 
will adapt the interpretations of these directives. This plan can be regarded as a building stone of the 
Lisbon Strategy - the ambitious target set at the summit meeting in Lisbon in March 2000 - which aims 
to  make  the  European  economies  “the  world’s  most  competitive  and  dynamic  knowledge-driven 
economy  by  2010”.  An  admirable  ambition,  although  it  could  possibly  have  been  worded  more 
modestly. 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2004
Harmonising  regulations  and  strengthening  competitive  advantage  in  the  European  economies  is  a 
commendable  aim.  Increased  harmonisation  simplifies  price  comparisons  and  thereby  strengthens 
competition  between  producers  of  financial  services.  If  these  producers  also  become  competitive 
internationally, there will be benefits for both domestic consumers and shareholders in these countries. 
I  nevertheless  wish  to  say  a  few  words  of  warning.  While  harmonisation  that  is  achieved  through 
regulations can promote competitiveness in the short term, it can also cause concern in the slightly 
longer  term.  When  all  participants  have  to  follow  the  joint  regulations,  it  makes  competition  in  the 
dynamic sense more difficult. This is not the idea behind the Lamfalussy Process. We often forget that 
regulations may also need to be subject to competition in order to become efficient. As the directives 
produced by the EU are often compromises between views expressed by different countries, it is not 
certain that the final result will be the most efficient solution for the securities markets. If the EU wants 
to  promote  competitive  economies,  it  must  also  ensure  that  this  does  not  result  in  a  competitive 
advantage based on more or less explicit subsidies. The best way to build up competitiveness is by 
creating  environments  for  competition.  It  is  only  then  that  the  economies  will  become  efficient. 
Competitiveness in itself is not the goal; efficiency is. 
Some issues for the future 
In this speech I have pointed out some long-term developments that affect the future of the securities 
markets. Unfortunately, they give rise to more questions than answers. I would like to conclude with a 
few questions you can ponder. 
In recent years, inflation in many countries has fallen, and inflation expectations have stabilised at a 
level  that  reflects  the  monetary  policy  targets.  This  can  reasonably  be  said  to  have  reduced  the 
uncertainty in the financial markets caused by fluctuating prices. Interest rates have also fallen and 
this, combined with reduced uncertainty over price trends, has increased households’ incentives for 
borrowing. It has affected house prices, but may also affect other asset prices. At the same time, it 
strengthens  institutional  investors’  search  for  yield.  Does  this  mean  that  the  risks  in  the  financial 
system  will  increase  and  make  it  easier  for  exaggerated  speculation,  such  as  the  IT  bubble  in  the 
stock market, to develop? 
Earlier, I drew the conclusion that demographic changes will increase the need for long-term saving. 
This need is reinforced by the transition from allocation-based pension systems to systems that are 
based  to  a  greater  extent  on  premium  reserves.  In  addition,  the  indications  are  that  individuals  will 
need  to  take  greater  responsibility  for  their  own  pensions.  All  in  all,  this  should  lead  to  a  larger 
percentage of savings being channelled through the securities markets. How will the markets be able 
to meet this need? Are new products required, for instance, bonds with a much longer time to maturity, 
to manage the assets side of the life insurance companies? 
One of my earlier points was that we probably have not seen the end of the international consolidation 
of the financial infrastructure. On the contrary, there are indications that we will see more cooperation 
and  more  mergers  between  different  stock  markets  and  between  different  clearing  and  settlement 
organisations. A few years ago there were 27 stock markets in Europe. Now there are 20. Will this 
consolidation process continue? My guess is that in five years’ time there will be 10 or less. 
When  we know  the  answers  to  these questions,  we  will  also  know  more  about  the  shape  of  future 
securities markets. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 66/2004 
 5
