Mr Duisenberg discusses the role of capital markets and financing in the euro area
Speech  by  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the
Waarborgfonds Sociale Woningbouw in Utrecht, the Netherlands, on 14 June 1999.
Introduction
The  European  capital  markets  have  gone  through  a  major  structural  change  with  the
introduction of the euro. Eleven national markets have received a strong impetus to integrate
into  a  single  euro  area  capital  market.  In  addition,  the  process  of  integration  seems  to  go
beyond the euro area, with links being forged with other European markets.
Capital  markets  represent  a  fundamental  element  of  the  financial  system  of  any  modern
economy  and  they  play  an  important  role  in  the  allocation  of  capital  within  the  economy.
Therefore public authorities responsible for economic policy as well as private sector agents
who are active in the capital markets have a vested interest in capital markets that are both
efficient and stable.
Today,  I  would  first  like  to  discuss  the  role  of  the  capital  markets  and  the  advantages  of
possessing deep and liquid capital markets. Secondly, I will turn my attention to the effects on
capital markets that we have already seen since the introduction of the euro, and the process of
further integration in capital markets that is expected to continue in the future. The emphasis
of this discussion will be on the euro area bond markets. Thirdly, I will focus my attention on
the important issue of how these developments which are expected to take place are likely to
shape  financing  in  the  European  capital  markets  and  in  particular  how  they  might  affect
financing through the euro area bond markets. Finally, I will turn my attention to the role that
public authorities have already played and will play in this process in the future.
The role of efficient and stable capital markets
Turning first to the role of capital markets, it might be asked why one should be interested in
the depth and liquidity of capital markets at all. After  all,  capital  markets  are  mostly  in  the
business  of  trading  in  bonds  and  equities  that  have  been  issued  in  the  past.  The  actual
financing or allocation of new capital represents only a fraction of the daily turnover of capital
markets.
Indeed, from the point of view of allocating capital across productive purposes the secondary
market is not of direct relevance. And as you know, in most financial systems there has been a
phase  in  which  markets  have  been  more  or  less  non-existent  and  financing  has  taken  place
through intermediaries, banks.
However, deep and liquid secondary markets play a very important indirect role for financing
in capital markets. First of all, well functioning secondary markets provide transparent market
prices  for  capital  market  financing.  Those  economic  agents  involved  in  planning  physical
investments know at all times what the cost of capital is, and can take this into account in their
investment  decisions.  Furthermore,  savers  know  at  all  times  what  yield  they  can  earn  from
various instruments. In addition, the existence of an active and deep secondary market ensures
that  savers  and  borrowers  can  be  relatively  confident  that  their  decisions  will  not  have
significant effects on market prices.
For those that provide financing through capital markets, the existence of a liquid secondary
market  provides  the  means  to  adjust  portfolios  without  incurring  large  costs.  In  these
circumstances investors will tend to reduce the rate of return that they demand. This clearly
1
BIS Review   69/1999
means  that  the  liquidity  of  the  capital  market  is  a  key  consideration  for  the  efficiency  of
allocation of capital.
In short, depth and liquidity are key ingredients for capital markets that function in an efficient
and  stable  manner,  and  these  necessary  elements  can  only  be  achieved  through  active
secondary markets.
This background should have convinced you that I see great merit in the existence of deep and
liquid  capital  markets  alongside  a  stable  and  efficient  banking  sector.  This  is  not  for  the
markets themselves, but for the important role they play in the allocation of capital and indeed
for investments and growth in the economy.
The introduction of the euro and the European capital markets
The introduction of the euro has already affected and is likely to affect the euro area financial
markets in a profound manner in the future. A good example of this influence is provided by
developments in the euro area money markets since the beginning of this year. Following the
changeover to the euro, a highly competitive single money market has already emerged in the
euro  area  as  banks  were  well  prepared  for  the  changeover  to  the  euro  and  the  TARGET
system  has  provided  an  efficient  means  of  making  cross-border  payments.  In  particular,
differences  in  overnight  interest  rate  spreads  now  mainly  reflect  differences  in  the  credit
standing of banks rather than that of the country in which money market transactions occur.
So, in the course of a very short period of time, the original eleven mechanisms to allocate and
price  short-term  financing  within  the  respective  banking  sectors  of  participating  countries
were transformed into a single mechanism for the entire euro area.
Concerning longer-term financing, we have good reasons to believe that a similar evolution
towards a single market is already well under way. With the integration of the markets, what I
mean is that market prices of the euro area will increasingly provide an accurate reflection of
differences  in  quality  between  various  issuers  as  well  as  differences  in  liquidity  between
securities.  Furthermore,  divergences  purely  related  to  the  location  of  market  participants
within the euro area will have to become less and less relevant over time.
It  is  important  to  remember  that  the  capital  markets  of  the  euro  area  began  the  process  of
integration  well  before  the  start  of  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union.  An
indication  of  the  pace  of  integration  before  January  1999  is  provided  in  particular  by  the
evolution of spreads between yields on bonds issued by the various central governments of the
euro area, which narrowed continuously from mid-1995 onwards. The factors that contributed
to this favourable pattern included increased convergence towards low rates of inflation across
the euro area during Stage Two, the gradual reduction and finally the elimination of exchange
rate  risks,  the  commitment  of  governments  towards  improving  the  sustainability  of  public
finances. A further factor was the improvement of the depth and liquidity of government bond
markets themselves.
The integration of the euro area central government bond market is therefore well under way.
Differences in bond yields should be reflective of differences in creditworthiness of debtors,
and even more so of the liquidity of a given bond. This liquidity effect is visible in the term
structure of yields across the euro area, as the lowest yields at different points on the maturity
spectrum  have  been  seen  on  bonds  that  have  been  issued  by  different  countries  in  the  euro
area that have had different credit ratings.
Turning  to  equity  markets,  a  similar  process  of  integration  is  apparent.  With  regard  to  the
behaviour of investors, an increasing number of equity market participants already appear to
BIS Review   69/1999
2
be  taking  investment  positions  on  the  equity  market  of  the  euro  area  from  a  sectoral  rather
than  a  national  perspective.  Reflecting  this  development,  various  market  participants  have
made  both  area-wide  and  sectoral  equity  indices  available,  thus  providing  investors  with
opportunities to monitor area-wide equity investment positions.
Furthermore  the  institutional  set-up  of  stock  exchanges  is  showing  signs  of  an  evolution
towards more integration and greater market efficiency. As consolidation within the financial
services  sector  has  increased  the  size  and  geographical  reach  of  intermediaries  and  fund
management institutions, they and also some listed companies seem to be pressing for market-
places to become more concentrated in order both to reduce costs and to enhance liquidity.
Financing in the euro area capital markets
The  euro  area  bond  market  is  the  second  largest  market  in  the  world  after  the  US  market.
However, the euro area market is not yet as integrated as the US market, implying that some
of the benefits of a large market have yet to be realised.
Looking  at  financing  in  the  European  bond  market,  two  groups  of  debtors  account  for  the
large majority of the outstanding stock of debt securities, namely public sector and financial
institutions.
The amount of outstanding public sector bonds in the euro area is more than 3 trillion euros,
somewhat less than 60% of euro area GDP. While that amount provides the market with depth
and  liquidity,  you  will  not  be  surprised  to  hear  that  I  would  like  to  see  this  ratio  to  GDP
coming down. The amount of public debt in the euro area is still too high. For a stable euro it
is  also  –  though  not  solely  –  of  vital  importance  that  governments  should  keep  their
commitment to reduce their indebtedness to more sustainable levels as agreed in the Stability
and Growth Pact. This would support monetary policy, create room in government budgets to
accommodate periods of unfavourable economic developments and make it possible to bear
the  burden  on  the  budget  resulting  from  the  imminent  ageing  of  the  population.  Reduced
borrowing by the public sector would also leave more room for the private sector to issue debt
securities.
In terms of issuance of bonds, the euro area financial sector ranks second to the public sector
in euro area capital markets. And indeed, longer-term debt financing by the corporate sector in
Europe  still  takes  place  predominantly  via  financial  intermediaries,  which  partly  fund
themselves through capital markets. For this part, the European capital markets do not allocate
capital directly between savers and investors, but rather through intermediaries. In the United
States, where there is a very active corporate bond market, the situation is quite different, with
bank loans only forming a major source of financing for small and medium sized companies.
There are a number of reasons why corporate sector financing in the euro area capital markets
is likely to benefit from integrated markets in the future.
Firstly,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  capital  markets  are  important  for
capital  markets  to  perform  their  functions  efficiently.  With  integrated  markets  we  will  see
deeper  and  more  liquid  markets  than  was  the  case  beforehand  in  any  of  the  euro  area
countries.  Private  sector  issuers  in  general  and  companies  in  particular  are  by  definition
heterogeneous  and  the  development  of  an  efficient  market  for  corporate  bonds  for  various
types  of  companies  and  within  various  maturity  ranges  requires  the  existence  of  a  large
market.  In  order  to  guarantee  a  competitive  market  price  for  a  given  corporate  bond,  it  is
necessary for there to be a large number of bonds which share similar characteristics in the
market.
3
BIS Review   69/1999
Secondly,  for  large  companies  in  particular,  it  makes  sense  from  the  point  of  view  of
efficiency to have all the various means of financing at their disposal, namely bond and paper
financing as well as bank loans and equity financing. Indeed, the credit ratings of many large
companies in the euro area are better than the credit ratings of most banks. This should lead to
savings on the cost of capital for the most creditworthy companies, if they were to be more
active in bond issuance.
Thirdly, it is important to note that in a number of countries, the debt  securities  market  for
longer-term  maturities  in  their  own  currency  was  close  to  non-existent  in  the  past.  For
example, 20 or 30 year debt issuance was available only in some currencies, at least with a
fixed interest rate. These types of debt securities are now available across the euro area.
Fourthly, an increase in global demand for euro-denominated debt securities can be expected,
as the euro becomes an even more important reserve currency than it already is. Moreover, the
demand for higher risk euro-denominated debt securities is likely to increase, particularly as
the current low level of sovereign yields increases incentives to search for higher yields.
A factor that is not related to the integrated market but is nonetheless important for the future
evolution  of  the  capital  markets  is  the  pattern  of  demographic  trends  in  most  euro  area
countries. The euro area population is ageing, and this means that we have to save in order to
be  able  to  take  care  of  future  pension  payments.  In  the  Netherlands  this  is  already  done,
traditionally, on a larger scale than in some other euro  area  countries.  Part  of  these  savings
will be invested in capital markets. Furthermore, with ageing, we have also seen an increase in
the wealth of individuals, and this wealth is being invested more and more in financial assets
rather than in real assets.
I  have  now  listed  a  number  of  factors  that  suggest  that  activity  in  the  euro  area  as  well  as
European  capital  markets  more  generally  will  increase  in  the  future.  And  indeed,  since  the
introduction of the euro, corporate bond issuance seems already to have gathered pace. During
the first quarter of this year, the amount of new issues was high compared with previous years.
According  to  some  sources  it  was  nearly  on  par  with  the  full  year  of  1998  and  it  was
considerably  more  than  in  1997.  There  may  have  been  some  exceptional  factors  that  could
have accounted for part of this development. For example some companies may have timed
their  bond  issuance  to  benefit  from  the  expected  increased  interest  in  euro-denominated
securities at the beginning of the year. Nonetheless, it seems rather likely that an upward trend
in corporate bond issuance has commenced in the euro area.
Public authorities and efficient and stable capital markets in Europe
I  touched  upon  the  fact  earlier  that  public  authorities  also  see  merit  in  having  efficient  and
stable  capital  markets  in  the  euro  area  and  in  Europe  generally.  In  order  to  contribute  to  a
favourable development, authorities have been and are active in a number of fields. I will first
mention  something  about  the  activities  of  other  authorities  and  then  I  will  conclude  my
presentation  today  with  some  remarks  on  how  we  in  the  Eurosystem  are  contributing  to  a
favourable development in this field. When I say Eurosystem, I am referring to the European
Central Bank and the eleven national central banks of the countries which have adopted the
euro.
A  prudent,  harmonised  regulatory  framework,  on  the  one  hand,  and  harmonised  market
practices,  on  the  other,  are  key  factors  in  guaranteeing  the  smooth  integration  and
development  of  European  capital  markets.  In  these  areas  a  lot  of  work  has  already  been
conducted, and a lot more has still to be achieved in order to pave the way for truly integrated
BIS Review   69/1999
4
financial markets. Harmonisation in repurchase agreements, national company laws including
bankruptcy laws, and other aspects of the legal and regulatory framework, for example, would
enhance  legal  clarity  and  certainty  and  thereby  improve  the  efficiency  and  stability  of  the
financial markets.
At this point, I would like to draw your attention to the Action Plan recently published by the
European Commission. It contains priorities and timetables for measures aimed at improving
the  functioning  of  the  single  market  for  financial  services.  In  particular,  measures  are
proposed  to  advance  the  harmonisation  of  the  legal  framework  and  market  information,  as
well as to facilitate investors’ operations throughout the single market.
Finally, what is the role of the Eurosystem  in  this  whole  process?  I  could  first  mention  the
“market-friendly”  operational  framework  of  the  Eurosystem,  which  facilitates  the  efficient
functioning of capital markets, for example, by being very transparent and accepting a wide
list of securities as collateral.
Moreover, capital markets trade in long-term commitments, be they equities or bonds. When
pricing these long-term commitments, investors face many uncertainties, not only concerning
the issuer but also the future economic environment. The latter uncertainties are reduced by
the Eurosystem’s clear commitment to its primary objective, price stability.
Looking  at  the  current  situation  in  euro  area  capital  markets,  we  can  see  that  market
participants consider this commitment by the Eurosystem to be credible. Yields on long-term
government  bonds  are  at  relatively  low  levels.  These  low  levels  reflect  a  high  degree  of
confidence in the ability of the Eurosystem to maintain price stability in the euro area over the
longer term. In other words, both inflation expectations and the risk premia associated with
inflation uncertainty are low at present, a situation that we wish to maintain.
For  the  bond  markets  and  therefore  for  companies  financing  themselves  in  the  market,  the
high level of credibility attached to the Eurosystem is highly beneficial. In particular, the fact
that  inflation  risk  premia  are  low  means  that  companies  as  well  as  housing  associations
seeking long-term financing do not have to pay for the risk that the central bank may not be
able to maintain price stability over the longer term.
For the economy as a whole, this environment of low costs of long-term financing should be
conducive  for  the  private  sector  to  undertake  productive  investments.  Companies  can  also
take  advantage  of  the  longer  planning  horizon  provided  by  the  knowledge  that  the  cost  of
capital they employ in their investments will remain stable. I do not have to tell you that this is
also of fundamental importance in your sector, i.e. housing.
For the last minutes I have focused on the developments in the European financial markets in
general rather than what these developments specifically mean for you. I wanted to outline to
you the European environment in which you will increasingly be operating. In Europe, we are
unquestionably moving towards integrated financial markets. Clearly, this will have an impact
on the financing of housing as well. I have mainly described general consequences and will
leave  it  to  you  to  draw  your  own  conclusions  about  how  this  will  affect  the  financing  of
housing associations.
5
BIS Review   69/1999
