Mr Reddy looks at external debt policies in emerging economies
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, Dr Y V Reddy, at the Seminar
on Corporate External Debt Management in Kathmandu, Nepal, on 11 June 1999.
Mr Chairman and friends,
At the outset, I would like to express my gratitude to Dr Shanker Acharya, Mr Ravi Mohan
and Mr Sanjay Kathuria, who gave me an opportunity to attend this seminar on “Corporate
External Debt Management”. The deliberations have indeed been a feast and there is nothing
but admiration for the outstanding organisational abilities of all concerned. There has been an
ideal mix of participants and subjects. In the previous seminar on external debt at Trivandrum
last year, we had flagged the corporate angle to external debt as a priority item. We should all
be  happy  that  the  suggestion  has  been  acted  upon  now.  Like  the  proceedings  of  the  earlier
seminar  which  have  been  published  by  the  RBI,  I  hope  CRISIL  would  arrange  to  get  the
papers and proceedings published soon.
A  number  of  valuable  suggestions  have  been  made  in  the  seminar  and  some  of  them  are
particularly  relevant  to  the  RBI.  Some  of  them  require  clarifications  as  to  the  rationale  of
current policies and procedures. A few of them need immediate attention while others have to
be pursued in the medium term. They require careful examination. I assure you that we in the
RBI will consider all of them seriously and seek your advice and cooperation.
Let me not try to either summarise the highlights of this seminar or respond to the valuable
insights. I intend sharing with you some thoughts on new dimensions in external debt policies
of emerging economies, consequent upon the recent crises in  East  Asia,  Latin  America  and
Russia.  New  approaches  are  being  advocated  in  the  context  of  discussions  on  the  new
international financial architecture.
The responses to the recent crises, the follow-up consideration of measures to prevent similar
crises, and possible actions to meet them when they occur, have covered a wide spectrum of
policies.  The  debate  covered  many  policy  issues:  domestic  and  external,  macro  and  micro,
financial  and  regulatory,  national  and  multilateral,  relating  to  both  developed  and  emerging
economies. Eminent academics have also contributed to the debate. At policy level, there have
been  discussions  in  G-7,  G-24,  and  the  newly  founded  G-22,  G-33  and  Financial  Stability
Forum, not to speak of the Commonwealth Secretariat, UN, IMF, World Bank and BIS. India
has  been  invited  to  participate  in  most  of  these.  In  all  these  deliberations,  external  debt
policies were a crucial part. Perhaps this is an ideal forum to describe these new dimensions
briefly and narrate the Indian position.
The new dimensions relating to external debt policies can be analysed under five broad heads,
viz.: level of reserves and external debt; maturity pattern; issues relating to short-term debt;
policies relating to transparency and standards; and involving the private sector in forestalling
a debt crisis.
Level of Reserves and External Debt
There  has  always  been  a  continuous  but  inconclusive  discussion  on  the  optimum  level  of
reserves. Traditionally, however, the adequacy of reserves has been mainly linked to import
requirements.  Incidentally,  recent  experience  has  shown  that  countries  which  were  holding
large  levels  of  reserves  did  not  necessarily  escape  the  crisis.  This  shows  the  importance  of
appropriate policies and avoidance of excessive comfort from level of reserves. Nevertheless,
the  level  of  reserves  continues  to  be  an  important  source  of  comfort  on  matters  relating  to
1
BIS Review   69/1999
stability  in  the  external  sector,  and  consequently  on  the  domestic  economy.  Because  of  the
importance of showing the real level of reserves in a transparent manner, there are increasing
efforts to measure unencumbered reserves. The emphasis has also shifted from measuring the
adequacy of reserves only in relation to imports to measuring in terms of short-term liabilities,
in particular short-term debt.
Two  notable  suggestions  in  this  regard  have  emanated  –  one  from  Pablo  Guidotti,  Deputy
Finance Minister of Argentina, and the second from the Bank for International  Settlements.
Mr  Pablo  Guidotti  proposed  a  simple  guideline  for  policy  makers  in  emerging  market
economies. He suggested that countries should manage their external assets and liabilities in
such a way that they are always able to live without new foreign borrowing for up to one year.
In other words, usable foreign exchange reserves should exceed the scheduled amortisation of
foreign  currency  debts  (assuming  no  rollovers)  during  the  following  year.  In  terms  of  debt
management, this implies a limit on the size of the debt, in particular short-term debt and debt
that is falling due for repayment.
The  BIS,  in  its  latest  Annual  Report,  recognises  the  importance  of  countries  preparing
themselves for the possibility of sudden outflows, and identifies ways in which reserves can
be built up. One way of doing this is to run trade surpluses and what the BIS terms as a less
disruptive  solution  is  the  Argentine  proposal,  namely  to  borrow  reserves  and  arrange
contingent lending facilities with the private sector. In the view of the BIS, “Given the swings
of  mood  in  these  markets,  the  authorities  might  at  certain  times  find  it  relatively  easy  and
inexpensive  to  lock  in  longer-term  foreign  currency  loans  for  later  use.  Finally,  countries
might then make use of the recently announced Contingent Credit Lines offered by the IMF.
In conjunction with similar private sector arrangements, this would be a joint testimonial to
the soundness of the country in question and could contribute materially to the avoidance of
contagion problems”.
In a somewhat similar vein, Chairman Greenspan expressed a view that countries could adopt
a “liquidity-at-risk” standard to manage their exposure to financial risks. This standard would
give the ex ante probability that a country would avoid new borrowing for one year, based on
the level of reserves.
In India, we have been steadily building up reserves by encouraging non-debt-creating flows
and de-emphasizing debt-creating flows. India’s foreign exchange reserves have been steadily
increasing  over  the  years.  For  instance,  the  last  three  years  saw  increases  in  reserves  in  the
range of $4.7 billion in 1996/97, $2.9  billion  in  1997/98  and  $3.1  billion  in  1998/99,  i.e.  a
cumulative $10 billion. However, between end-March 1996 and December 1998, India’s total
external debt increased by a mere $2 billion.
Our policy of building and maintaining an adequate level of reserves while at the same time
constraining  debt,  especially  short-term  debt,  will  continue  though  we  would  continuously
monitor the international debate in this regard.
Maturity Pattern
In many emerging countries, with deregulation and liberalisation, adequate attention has not
been paid to the maturity profile of the external debt portfolio. In fact, in some cases, even
information gathering on this subject was dispensed with as part of deregulation. Determining
the maturity was a micro decision left to the final borrowers, whose main consideration was
cost. Thus, borrowers in many emerging market economies have tended to borrow short with
a view to minimising cost. Creditors lent short-term since they expected their claims to mature
BIS Review   69/1999
2
quickly. The recent crises showed that this could be risky. The policy dimension relating to an
appropriate  maturity  structure,  which  was  earlier  viewed  as  a  micro  decision,  is  now  being
recognised as a macro aspect and a stability issue.
Elongation of the average maturity ensures a sort of private sector burden sharing in times of
crisis.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  insurance  embedded  in  long-term  debt  often
outweighs the cost.
These issues  have  direct  relevance  to  corporates’  access  to  external  funds,  both  in  terms  of
cost and the period of borrowing. The cost of borrowing may increase on account of longer
maturities,  but  they  will  have  the  comfort  of  stable  flows.  In  times  of  crisis,  the  costs  of
disruption  on  account  of  destabilising  flows  may  far  exceed  the  cost  of  raising  longer-term
debt.
There  are  issues  on  how  the  policy  makers  could  promote  or  ensure  an  optimal  maturity
structure.  There  can  be  several  views  on  what  an  optimal  maturity  itself  is.  There  is  one
influential view that the average maturity of a country’s  external  liabilities  should  exceed  a
certain threshold, say three years.
In India, from 1992, emphasis has been laid not only on the cost and size of debt, but also on
the  maturity.  The  desired  maturity  profile  is  taken  into  account  in  policy  articulation  and
clearance of individual cases. The average maturity of our ECB, as you may be aware, is five
years. Basically, considerations of the size, cost and maturity are embedded in the clearance
mechanism for ECB.
Thus, the ECB policy, though it is being liberalised gradually, will ensure built-in measures
towards  an  optimal  maturity.  The  instruments  by  which  this  objective  is  achieved  will
continue to be refined from time to time, taking account of international developments also.
Short-Term Debt
A major source of vulnerability in the Asian crisis was the large stock of short-term liabilities
of banks and corporates. In the short-term liabilities, debt constitutes a contractual obligation
and  is  thus  on  a  different  footing.  As  mentioned,  the  link  between  short-term  debt  and
reserves has come to the fore in these deliberations. There is a cost to building  up  reserves
through large debt flows since the cost of debt would generally be higher than the return on
reserves. However, not all short-term flows are bad and some short-term finance is essential to
finance  transactions.  In  fact,  it  is  recognised  that  trade-related  short-term  credit  is  not  as
volatile as non-trade-related credit.
Overall, there appears to be a consensus now in favour of restraining the inflow of short-term
capital  until  markets,  institutions  and  regulatory  frameworks  have  been  sufficiently
strengthened.
There  is,  however,  a  growing  debate  on  the  means  by  which  short-term  flows  can  be
controlled. Major suggestions relate to effective monitoring, tax on spot transactions, varied
reserve  requirements,  increased  capital  requirements  on  interbank  transactions,  changes  in
capital  adequacy  requirements  of  lending  banks  to  non-OECD  countries,  and  discouraging
local  firms  from  undertaking  external  borrowing  by  imposing  taxes.  Quantitative  controls
have also been recognised as effective.
The  oft-quoted  measure  relates  to  reserve  requirements  imposed  on  short-term  flows.  Chile
and  Colombia  imposed  unremunerated  reserve  requirements  of  30  per  cent  on  short-term
3
BIS Review   69/1999
flows, subsequently reduced to 10 per cent. This represented a tax on short-term holdings. The
empirical evidence on its effectiveness is inconclusive.
A  favourite  for  economists  has  been  the  never-tried  Tobin  Tax,  though  it  has  often  been
seriously considered by policy makers. The Tobin Tax proposal envisages a levy of uniform
tax  on  all  spot  transactions  in  foreign  exchange.  The  objective  is  to  discourage  a  one-night
stand  by  speculators  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  as  the  tax  burden  will  be  inversely
proportional to the maturity of flows. Another economist, Dornbusch, seeks a variant of the
Tobin tax, viz., to impose a tax on all cross-border flows. This is also on the drawing table so
far.
Paul  Krugman  has  recently  suggested  that  emerging  nations  should  consider  using  taxes  to
discourage local firms from borrowing in foreign currencies. Tax at uniform rate will have a
larger impact on short-term borrowing, and will thus operate in a somewhat similar way to the
Tobin tax.
The  role  of  financial  intermediaries,  especially  banks,  in  short-term  flows  has  figured
predominantly in these deliberations. Alan Greenspan has also proposed imposing increased
capital requirements on borrowing banks to bring greater discipline to cross-border interbank
markets.
It  is  now  accepted  that  just  as  there  is  no  irresponsible  borrowing  without  irresponsible
lending, there is no short-term borrowing without short-term lending. Hence, it is argued that
capital requirements in the banking system should be so prescribed as to discourage lending
banks also. In fact, the current policy is biased in favour of short-term lending. The current
Basle Accord provides  that  all  claims  on  banks  incorporated  in  OECD  countries  and  short-
term claims (i.e. up to one year) on banks incorporated in non-OECD countries carries a risk
weight of only 20 per cent, whereas long-term claims on banks in non-OECD countries carry
a  risk  weight  of  100  per  cent.  The  new  Capital  Adequacy  Framework,  which  has  just  been
issued by the BIS as a consultative paper for comments, is reviewing this norm.
Most of the above proposals have the effect of increasing the cost of short-term debt. Hence,
these developments would be of interest to the corporate sector.
In India, we carefully monitor short-term debt. We maintain a difference in treatment between
trade- and non-trade-related debt. The authorities sanction short-term debt over six months on
a  case-by-case  approval  of  purpose,  amount  and  terms,  within  a  sub-ceiling  of  the  total
external commercial borrowings ceiling. NRI deposits are controlled through specification of
interest  rates  or  interest  rate  ceilings  for  different  maturities  in  respect  of  deposits  in  select
schemes. According to the latest Status Report on External Debt circulated by the Ministry of
Finance, our short-term debt is very modest by all criteria.
The international consensus on the need for controlling short-term debt vindicates our policy
thrust  with  regard  to  discouraging  short-term  flows.  We  will  have  to  continue  with  the
objective of restricting short-term flows, though the means of doing it could be refined from
time to time in consonance with domestic and, to some extent, global developments.
Policies Relating to Transparency and Standards
A  major  area  of  concern  has  been  lack  of  transparency  in  regard  to  macroeconomic  and
financial health. The issue of transparency has generated some debate. Transparency cannot be
one-sided – say only by public systems and not the corporate sector. Transparency provides
information  and  inference  is  a  matter  of  interpretation  or  judgement.  There  are  country-
BIS Review   69/1999
4
specific circumstances also that govern the degree of transparency, which include the timing
of some disclosures.
India is one of the earliest members of the SDDS of the IMF. The RBI provides up-to-date
weekly  data  on  all  relevant  macroeconomic  and  financial  indicators  through  the  Weekly
Statistical Supplement to the RBI Bulletin, which is available on the RBI website. In addition,
the  RBI  and  Government  disseminates  as  much  information  as  possible  through  monthly,
quarterly and annual publications.
The  World  Bank,  IMF,  BIS,  OECD  and  other  international  institutions  are  active  in  the
evolution  of  standards  relevant  for  the  functioning  of  domestic  and  international  financial
systems. These cover a wide range of areas including data dissemination, fiscal, monetary and
financial  policy  transparency  (IMF),  banking  regulation  and  supervision  (BIS),  securities
market  regulation  (International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions), 
insurance
regulation  (International  Association  of  Insurance  Supervisors),  accounting  (International
Accounting  Standards  Committee),  Auditing  (International  Federation  of  Accountants),
Bankruptcy  (United  Nations  Commission  on  International  Trade  Law)  and  Corporate
Governance  (OECD,  World  Bank  and  Basle  Committee).  In  addition,  work  relating  to
improving the robustness of payments systems, general principles of good practices in social
policies, identifying practices and structures that support deep and liquid forward markets is in
progress.
It would be interesting to see how these standards evolve. While it may not be possible for all
countries  to  adopt  these  standards  completely  and  promptly,  countries  will  have  to  take
account of these standards, depending on individual country circumstances.
Increasingly, these international standards will have to be adapted to suit local requirements.
These will have an impact on our corporates trying to access international markets in terms of
costs  and  regulatory  compliance.  Corporates  will  need  to  impute  these  into  their  debt
management strategies.
Role of the Private Sector in Forestalling a Crisis
The efforts to involve the private sector in debt management have many objectives, viz., bring
about  a  more  orderly  adjustment  process,  limit  moral  hazard,  strengthen  market  discipline,
help  protect  countries  against  volatility  and  contagion.  The  idea  is  to  have  mechanisms  in
place before any crisis takes place – so that resolution of the crisis is more orderly.
While  there  is  consensus  regarding  the  need  for  the  private  sector  to  share  the  burden,
discussions  in  the  various  fora  have  centred  on  the  mode  of  burden  sharing.  Ideas  that  are
being  considered  include  contingent  credit  lines,  embedded  call  options,  debt-service
insurance,  bond  covenants,  bankruptcy  procedures,  debt  standstill  and  creditor-debtor
councils.
Basically,  these  mechanisms  bind  private  sector  participants  to  either  provide  additional
funds,  or  reduce  debt  service  burdens  in  times  of  crisis  without  creating  moral  hazard  or
disrupting the normal market conditions. For instance, countries could contract market-based
Contingent Credit Lines with commercial banks to trigger liquidity support in times of crisis.
If  the  credit  lines  are  fairly  priced,  they  could  provide  effective  insurance  against  adverse
market developments. Call options on interbank credit lines would provide the basis for the
extension of maturities during times of trouble. Standstill arrangements will allow the private
sector to give additional borrowing when there has been a default on existing debt. Creditor-
debtor  councils  could  serve  to  improve  the  flow  of  information.  Bond  and  debt  covenants
5
BIS Review   69/1999
could  introduce  sharing  clauses,  provisions  for  the  modification  of  terms  by  qualified
majorities  will  speed  up  the  negotiation  process.  There  is  also  a  suggestion  that  the  G-10
countries  could  start  including  these  new  contractual  terms  in  their  fresh  sovereign  bond
issues in order to initiate the demonstration effect.
Another proposal relates to a universal debt rollover option with a penalty. The idea is that all
foreign currency debt should have attached to it an option, exercisable at the discretion of the
borrower, to roll over the liability at a penalty rate.
It is too early to comment on how these suggestions would evolve. These deliberations and
their  outcomes  are  of  interest  not  only  to  the  Government  of  India  and  the  RBI,  but  to  the
corporates, since these would impinge on their operations. I trust that financial intermediaries
are  closely  following  these  developments.  The  RBI  would  welcome  and  indeed  invite
suggestions in these matters.
When I started this address, I expressed happiness  over  the  focus  on  the  corporate  angle  to
external debt in this  seminar.  Encouraged  by  the  response,  I  have  a  suggestion  for  the  next
seminar. It would be worthwhile if the next seminar focuses on external debt management by
financial  intermediaries,  viz.,  banks,  financial  development  institutions  and  non-bank
financial companies. The discussions could include risk management systems.
BIS Review   69/1999
6
