Bank of Japan’s monthly report of recent economic and financial developments
Bank of Japan, Communication, 21/1/99.
The Bank’s View
The  economic  deterioration  in  Japan  is  easing  gradually  mainly  due  to  the  increase  in  public
investment.
With  respect  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  been  declining  significantly,  and
housing investment continues to be sluggish. Private consumption, as a whole, remains stagnant.
Meanwhile, net exports (exports minus imports) are basically increasing at a moderate pace, and
public investment has turned to follow a distinct upward trend. Reflecting this development of
final demand and the progress in inventory adjustments, the decline in production is slowing.
Corporate  profits  continue  to  worsen.  Employment  and  household  income  conditions  have
deteriorated as the unemployment rate has reached a new historical high, the ratio of job offers to
applications  remains  at  its  lowest  ever  level,  and  winter  bonuses  have  decreased  significantly.
Financial  conditions  are  improving  with  the  effects  of  the  policy  measures  taken  by  the
government and the Bank. Nonetheless, firms apparently cannot eliminate their anxiety about the
availability  of  funds  toward  the  end  of  fiscal  1998.  Consequently,  corporate  and  household
sentiment remains cautious, and a recovery has not yet been observed in private demand.
As for future developments, the increase in public investment is likely to underpin the economy
toward  the  first  half  of  fiscal  1999  with  the  implementation  of  the  government’s  economic
measures.  Furthermore,  the  Bank’s  monetary  and  financial  measures  and  the  government’s
measures  to  alleviate  the  credit  crunch  will  remain  in  effect.  Nevertheless,  an  immediate  self-
sustained recovery in private demand is hardly expected since  corporate  profits  and  household
income are deteriorating and the constraints from corporate finance are likely to persist for some
time due to the cautious lending attitudes of private banks. Moreover, attention should be paid to
the effects of the continued appreciation of the yen since autumn 1998, and to the uncertainty in
financial and economic developments abroad. To lead Japan’s economy into a steady recovery, it
is  important  to  prepare  an  environment  where  firms  and  households  can  regain  confidence  in
Japan’s economic future by, for instance, promptly restoring the stability of the financial system.
With  regard  to  prices,  reflecting  the  large  output  gap,  domestic  wholesale  prices  are  on  a
downtrend, and corporate service prices are weakening. Consumer prices have increased above
the previous year’s level due to the rise in prices of perishables. Excluding this effect, however,
consumer prices basically continue to be weak. As for the outlook, the economic deterioration is
likely to continue easing mainly due to the increase in public investment. Nonetheless, distinct
narrowing  in  the  output  gap  is  hardly  expected  for  the  time  being  as  private  demand  remains
sluggish. Furthermore, the decline in wages and the appreciation of the yen since autumn 1998
are likely to continue exerting downward pressure on prices.  Hence,  the  decline  in  prices  may
somewhat accelerate in the future. In the financial markets, a slight increase was observed in the
Japan  premium  and  Euro-yen  interest  rates  both  on  three-month  contracts,  as  these  contracts
mature beyond the fiscal year-end in March. In general, however, the premium is smaller and the
                                                     
1 
2 
This report is based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting
was held on January 19, 1999.
The Bank’s view on recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on January 19, as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
BIS Review   8/1999
– 2 –
Euro-yen rates are lower than those on contracts maturing beyond the end of accounting terms in
1998.
Between mid-December and early January, yields on Japanese government bonds rose further to
reveal the market concern over the deterioration in the supply-demand balance due to the planned
massive issuance. Stock prices weakened, reacting to the appreciation of the yen and the rise in
the long-term interest rates. Although such movements in these markets appear to have reversed,
the ensuing developments and their economic consequences require close attention.
With regard to corporate finance, credit demand for economic activities seems to remain weak,
although  firms,  particularly  large  ones,  are  further  seeking  to  secure  ample  on-hand  liquidity.
Meanwhile, private banks are keeping their cautious lending stance as they face the worsening
performance of borrower companies. However, the enhanced credit guarantee  system  has  been
actively  utilized.  Such  government  policy  measures  and  the  Bank’s  new  measures  to  facilitate
firms’  financing  activities  have  presumably  contributed  to  easing  the  once  seriously  tightened
credit conditions.
Nevertheless, firms, especially those with low credit standings, are still subject to severe fund-
raising conditions.
How  corporate  financing  conditions  develop  and  how  such  developments  influence  business
activities and the economy as a whole continues to warrant careful monitoring.
 BIS Review   8/1999
