Mr Duisenberg’s opening statement at the press conference held on 7 January 1999
Introductory statement by the President of the European Central Bank, Dr W F Duisenberg, at the press
conference in Frankfurt on 7/1/99 (with transcript of questions and answers)
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  here  today  to  report  on  the  outcome  of  the  first
meeting  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank  in  Stage  Three  of  Economic  and
Monetary Union. For the first time, the Governing Council took decisions of an operational nature in the
context of the single monetary policy.
On 1 January 1999 the euro was successfully launched. From that day onwards, the “Eurosystem” – that
is, the ECB and the eleven national central banks of the Member States that participate in the euro – has
assumed responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy in the euro area with the primary objective of
maintaining price stability.
The Governing Council today expressed its satisfaction with the changeover to one integrated euro area
money  market  in  the  initial  days.  Money  market  interest  rate  differentials  across  countries  were
significant only in the first few hours of 4 January 1999, but narrowed quickly thereafter, indicating that
credit institutions were efficiently using arbitrage possibilities within the single money market.
As you will recall, the Governing Council of the ECB decided at its previous meeting that the corridor
established by the interest rates on the Eurosystem’s standing facilities would, as a transitional measure,
be kept narrow. This was achieved by setting the marginal lending rate and the deposit rate at 3.25% and
2.75%  respectively,  for  the  period  of  4–21  January  1999.  We  observed  a  relatively  large  recourse  by
credit  institutions  to  these  facilities  in  the  first  few  days  of  Stage  Three.  To  some  extent,  this  is  not
surprising since the spread between the Eurosystem’s marginal lending facility and the overnight money
market  rate  has  been  relatively  small.  As  we  noted  after  our  last  meeting,  the  measure  of  a  narrow
corridor is aimed at facilitating the transition to the new regime by market participants. However, we also
noted  then  that  over  a  longer  period  of  time,  such  a  measure  would  hamper  the  development  of  an
efficiently  functioning  euro  area  money  market.  We  therefore  confirm  our  intention  to  terminate  this
transitional measure following the next meeting of the Governing Council on 21 January 1999.
On 22 December 1998 the interest rate on the first main refinancing operation of the Eurosystem was set
at 3.0%, with the intention to maintain this level for the foreseeable future. This first operation of the
Eurosystem  was  successfully  settled  today.  The  decision  on  the  amount  of  liquidity  allocated  to  the
banking system (EUR 75 billion) is aimed at providing sufficient liquidity to allow credit institutions, on
aggregate, to neutralise their reserve deficit relatively soon within the first reserve maintenance period. It
was taken on the basis of the liquidity conditions in the whole euro area money market, while paying due
attention to the uncertainties related to the phasing-in of the new system.
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  Governing  Council’s  discussion  on  recent  monetary,  financial  and  economic
developments  and  the  decisions  that  the  Governing  Council  has  taken  today  in  the  field  of  monetary
policy.
At today’s meeting, the Governing Council reviewed the latest data. The new pieces of information have
not altered in any significant way the outlook for price developments. The Governing Council therefore
decided that for the main refinancing operations to be announced on 11 and 18 January 1999 the same
conditions will apply as for the first one, i.e. they will be fixed rate tenders conducted at an interest rate
of 3.0%. A separate press release was issued on these ECB interest rate decisions at 6.15pm today.
Furthermore, I should like to recall that the first longer-term refinancing operation will be announced on
12 January 1999 and settled on 14 January 1999. It will be conducted as a variable rate tender, using the
single rate auction procedure.
BIS Review   3/1999
– 2 –
Let me report in some more detail on the Governing Council’s regular assessment of monetary, financial
and economic conditions, and thereby provide the explanations for our decisions of today.
On 30 December 1998 we released to the public the first of the monthly statements on recent monetary
developments in the euro area. The 12-month growth rate of the broad monetary aggregate M3 decreased
from 5.0% in October to 4.5% in November 1998. The latest three-month moving average of M3 growth
(September to November 1998) was approximately 4.7%. This result was similar to the value estimated
for the three-month period of August to October 1998 (which was revised upwards from the  figure  of
4.5% published on 14 December 1998) and remains very close to the reference value of 4.5% set by the
Governing Council on 1 December 1998.
With respect to the broadly based outlook for price developments and risks to price stability, financial
market developments may be seen as indicating a favourable assessment of the recent monetary policy
decisions of the Eurosystem, signalling that financial market participants expect the environment of price
stability  to  continue.  In  this  connection,  I  could  mention  the  fall  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  last
couple of days to new historical lows and also the downward shift of the yield curve.
No  major  news  has  come  in  on  the  outlook  for  the  euro  area  economy  since  we  last  met.  Hence,  we
continue to face uncertainties originating from the evolution of the world economy in 1999, which are
reflected in a weakening of industrial confidence in the euro area over recent months. Also, euro  area
real GDP growth in the third quarter weakened when compared with the first half of 1998. On the other
hand, consumer confidence remained high until late 1998. This mixed picture is also reflected in other
indicators. Order books and capacity utilisation point to a less optimistic outlook, while retail sales and
the  recent  pattern  in  employment  and  unemployment  suggest  more  favourable  trends.  In  general,  this
pattern of mixed evidence appears to characterise the economic situation in the euro area around the turn
of the year and we shall continue to carefully monitor developments.
With  respect  to  the  latest  data  on  the  Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices,  the  annual  increase  for
November 1998 showed a further slowdown to 0.9%, compared with 1.0% in the two previous months.
This  development  was  in  line  with  previous  trends,  i.e.  it  was  mainly  due  to  lower  annual  percentage
changes  in  the  prices  of  food  and  a  further  reduction  in  energy  prices.  On  balance,  the  general
environment continues to suggest that there is no significant upward or downward pressure on prices in
the short term. The pattern of risks to price stability has remained broadly unchanged. On the one hand,
downward  pressures  could  materialise  if  import  or  producer  prices  were  to  fall  further,  while,  on  the
other,  wage  developments  would  become  a  matter  of  concern  if  wage  increases  were  higher  than
expected. In addition, any relaxation of fiscal policies would negatively affect the price climate as well as
the credibility of the Stability and Growth Pact.
In conclusion, taking into account the latest evidence available, the Governing Council has not altered its
assessment  regarding  the  outlook  for  price  developments.  This  is  why,  as  I  already  mentioned,  the
Governing  Council  decided  that  for  the  two  forthcoming  main  refinancing  operations  the  same
conditions will apply as for the first one, i.e. they will be fixed rate tenders conducted at an interest rate
of 3.0%. We also confirm our intention to maintain this rate for the foreseeable future.
I should now like to inform you about the Governing Council’s review of the changeover to the euro.
First and foremost, I am happy to be in a position to report that, overall, the transition to the euro within
the Eurosystem and the banking and financial industry has been accomplished to our satisfaction. With
regard to the changeover weekend itself, the ECB informed you, by means of a first press release issued
in  the  evening  of  3  January  1999,  that  there  had  been  no  reports  of  any  incidents  that  would  have
impaired the smooth start of the system. With regard to the first experiences of our operational existence,
let me focus in particular on the performance of the TARGET system.
Overall,  during  the  first  days  of  operation,  the  TARGET  system  has  functioned  well.  TARGET  has
contributed  substantially  to  the  integration  of  the  euro  money  market  and  it  has  made  possible  the
BIS Review   3/1999
– 3 –
consolidation  of  the  treasury  management  of  institutions  with  different  activity  centres  throughout
Europe.  TARGET  has  handled  more  cross-border  payments  than  anticipated  in  these  early  days  of
Monetary Union and, in doing so, has demonstrated its processing capacities.
The  problems  which  are  being  experienced  in  this  initial  period  can  be  regarded  as  teething  troubles;
after all, it is completely normal for operators – both in commercial banks and at the central bank level –
to need some time to adapt to the system and to the new euro environment. In this respect, it is worth
noting that more than 5,000 credit institutions are currently participating directly in TARGET.
The value of cross-border transactions settled through TARGET already exceeded EUR 310 billion on
the  second  operating  day  and  this  figure  does  not  yet  include  domestic  RTGS  transactions,  which
themselves accounted for at least another EUR 660 billion. The total value of transactions settled was
therefore almost EUR 1,000 billion.
In addition to the news concerning TARGET, the ECB also informed you, by means of a press release on
5  January  1999,  that  its  first  refinancing  operation  –  announced  on  4  January  1999  –  was  completed
successfully. Also here, the Governing Council obviously recognised that a learning process is still under
way. The Governing Council will continue studying the best ways to adapt the liquidity provision to the
changing conditions of this initial period.
As a final point, as indicated at our press conference on 22 December 1998, the Governing Council today
revisited the issue of front-loading euro banknotes and coins.
The  Governing  Council  holds  the  view  that  front-loading  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins  to  the  general
public is excluded by Articles 10 and 11 of Council Regulation (EC) 974/98 on the introduction of the
euro, since it would have the same effect as issuing or putting them into circulation.
However, front-loading of euro banknotes and coins is considered legally possible to credit institutions
and security carriers as well as to other organisations (e.g. retailers and vending companies) if, but only
if, legal or contractual arrangements can be put in place in each national legal system in order to ensure
that euro banknotes and coins will not be put into circulation prior to 1 January 2002.
We stand ready to answer any questions you may have.
Transcript  of  questions  asked  and  answers  given  by  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the
ECB, and Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the ECB
Question:  The  teething  problems  that  you  mentioned  for  TARGET,  can  you  describe  what  the  main
problems have been, even if they are teething problems, exactly what form they have taken?
Noyer:  The  main  problems  have  not  been  technical  ones,  and  they  have  not  been  problems  linked  to
TARGET itself. They have been mainly problems linked to human factors, mainly in commercial banks.
The  cause  might  also  have  been  sometimes  in  the  central  banking  system,  but  mainly  in  commercial
banks.  Small  errors  made  in  addresses  for  payments  or  that  sort  of  thing,  so  that  the  payment  did  not
arrive at the exact time when it was deemed to be received by the receiver. That sort of problem, you
know, developed in some cases, but – because of this – all problems identified have been repaired in a
relatively short time. This is why we are rather confident. Of course, issues may appear that we have not
yet discovered. But, for the time being, no failure or real difficulty in the system itself has appeared and
all problems which appeared so far to have been solved in a relatively short time.
Duisenberg:  And  I  want  to  emphasise  once  again  that  for  today  there  were  no  problems  whatsoever.
Simply the amount of payments to be handled was so enormously large and is growing so fast that it was
the larger banks in some countries which simply were not able to handle them in time.
BIS Review   3/1999
– 4 –
Question:  Mr  President  and  Mr  Vice-President,  is  the  ECB  aware  of  the  fact  that  in  several  or  many
European  commercial  banks  to  exchange  paper  money  at  the  counter  now  between  two  euroland
currencies is more expensive than before, significantly more expensive than before?
Duisenberg: I wasn’t aware of that fact.
Question (translation): Mr Duisenberg, over the past few days there have been a whole range of issues of
government paper on the European capital market. How do you assess this wave of issuing activity? Is
there  reason  to  fear  an  increase  in  interest  rates  at  the  long  end  and  is  there  not  a  need  for  a
harmonisation of the issuing calendar in the 11 European countries?
Duisenberg: We have not discussed this today in the Governing Council, but on one thing – on interest
rates  –  I  would  like  to  say  that  it  is  our  impression  that  the  way  in  which  long-term  interest  rates,  in
particular,  have  developed  over  the  last  few  days  can  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  that  inflationary
expectations of the market remain very, very subdued indeed and that there are thus no expectations in
the market of a change even in the longer term.
Noyer: If I may add something. I suppose that you are referring to some issuing that has taken place this
week, particularly in Germany and France. But this was related to a calendar established well in advance
in both cases. On top of that, I know, we know, that Governments, Treasuries have discussed together a
sort  of  harmonisation  of  calendars.  Harmonisation  is  perhaps  not  the  proper  word,  but  they  have
exchanged their calendars of what they plan to issue, to avoid as far as possible having a lot of issues on
the same day. So this process is going on, but for the total amount the President has just answered that
there is no reason to think that there is any change.
Question: Mr Duisenberg, you stressed again the phrase: “for the foreseeable future”. Could you explain
more explicitly what it means. Is it just a diplomatic phrase not to say that you want to say anything or
could this foreseeable future end on 21 January 1999?
Duisenberg: We do not put a horizon to our future that we can see. Contrary to you, I come from a very
flat country where we can always see the horizon which is very far there. So it certainly does not imply
any date as you indicated that will be the end of our foreseeable future. As far as we can see, now we see
no tendency which would force us to change interest rates in the future, as far as we can foresee it.
Question (translation): President Duisenberg, the euro euphoria over the past few days must be satisfying
to you, but is it not also reason for some concern because, in the long run, as you know, confidence in a
currency is something that is difficult to build up. A second question: given that there is such euphoria,
what must policymakers do to ensure that such confidence is actually established?
Duisenberg: We as a central bank should continue to behave the way as we do, i.e. come up with clear
and  transparent  decisions  which  gain  the  credibility  and  gain  the  confidence  that  we  indeed  will  be
successful in achieving our aim which is price stability over the medium term. What politics should do is
also to continue to strive for a stability-oriented policy, particularly in the fiscal sphere, also in order to
gain the confidence of the people and thereby to firmly establish this idea of euphoria, so that it becomes
an idea which is settled in the minds of the people. It will no longer be euphoria, but it will be confidence
and credibility that we are after.
Question  (translation):  Mr  Duisenberg,  today  there  have  been  renewed  calls  for  a  stabilisation  of
exchange rates from Mr Lafontaine in Brussels. Such calls have also been heard in Tokyo, and Mr Chirac
has likewise again spoken out in its favour. A meeting of the G7 countries has been scheduled to take
place  on  20  February  in  Bonn.  Will  you  be  participating  in  this  meeting  and  what  message  and
conviction will you express with respect to this issue?
Duisenberg: When I go to Bonn, and I will go, I will give the message to those who will listen there that
we, as the central bank, are interested first and foremost in achieving our statutory aim, i.e. internal price
BIS Review   3/1999
– 5 –
stability. The exchange rate for the central bank is not an explicit aim. It is one of the indicators we will
look  at,  at  its  development,  together  with  a  broad  range  of  other  indicators  in  determining  our  policy
decisions. But then one cannot repeat often enough that the impact of the exchange rate on the domestic
European  economy  is  much  less  than  we  were  used  to  in  the  fragmented  markets  when  we  were  still
eleven different markets with ten different exchange rate regimes. As you know, exports account for only
10–11% of the combined GDP and which makes the impact of exchange rate variations comparable to
those  in  the  United  States  or  Japan.  So,  most  of  all,  we  are  interested  in  stable  internal  prices  and,
secondary,  we  are  also  interested  in  a  stable  exchange  rate  development.  But  that  is  the  outcome  of
policies rather than as the aim.
Question: Mr President, I have a further question on the same issue: the euro exchange rate policy. Could
you  inform  us  about  any  exchange  rate  interventions  during  the  last  days  to  support  the  euro  or  the
dollar? And if you cannot inform us about that – for obvious reasons, I would like to ask if for internal
price stability revaluation would be needed, would you prefer to have this revaluation in the short run or
in the longer run, more gradually?
Duisenberg: I did not inform you about interventions, although I could easily mention a figure, the figure
is  zero,  but  then  we  do  not  have  an  exchange  rate  policy,  we  have  a  policy  aimed  at  achieving  price
stability and we do not have an explicit exchange rate policy or exchange rate aim vis-à-vis other major
currencies. That’s about all I can say about that.
Question:  The  euro  has  been  not  as  strong  as  it  has  been  in  the  first  days.  Are  you  happy  with  that
tendency, that is the first question, and then the second question is similar to the one of the colleague: the
Americans have always been saying the dollar is our currency and it’s your problem. Are you saying that
Europeans will say the same with the euro?
Duisenberg:  I  was  happy  when  the  euro  took  off  with  a  very  strong  start.  I  was  equally  happy  when
yesterday the euro came down again somewhat vis-à-vis the dollar in  the  direction  of  the  value  it  had
right at the start of the conversion, and I’m equally happy today that again the euro rebounded somewhat
to a level, when we left the bank, of USD 1.1675. So I’ve been happy for three days already. There will,
of  course,  not  be  any  neglect,  neither  malign  neglect  nor  benign  neglect,  of  the  exchange  rate.  The
exchange  rate  will  be  one  of  the  indicators  we  closely  watch  in  determining  our  monetary  policy
decisions, but only one of them.
Question: Mr Duisenberg, I just wanted to  come  back  to  these  teething  troubles.  Well,  what  are  these
troubles?  There  has  been  reference  to  the  TARGET  system,  but  are  these  problems  which  are
encountered by the European monetary market as a whole, and could we say that, if more than EUR 20
billion has to be covered on a single day by you, is that what you mean by teething troubles, or if this
doesn’t depend upon TARGET, if TARGET doesn’t really have any problems, are there other problems
which have been encountered or can you say, no, there aren’t any other problems?
Duisenberg: Structural problems and the problems which Mr Noyer has just indicated, the problems that
there were mainly the result of human errors and sometimes human ignorance. The operational personnel
at the various commercial banking institutions has to get used to the new techniques, even to writing the
new instructions to their computer, sometimes they make mistakes which they will learn to avoid in the
very near future, but which then cause hiccups in the smooth process of transferring these large payments
from  one  country  to  another.  So  far  it  looks  like  there  are  no  systemic  problems  with  TARGET,
TARGET  is  functioning  extremely  well.  To  be  quite  honest,  the  teething  problems,  or  birth  pangs,  or
whatever you may want to call them, were rather smaller than we had thought at some moment that they
might emerge. We regard it as quite normal that there are these problems. If you suddenly switch over to
a real-time gross settlement cross-border payment system which, as I indicated, already within three days
turns out to be the largest in the world encompassing more than 5,000 credit institutions, it is no wonder
that there may be some ripples in the water sometimes but that’ll settle down.
BIS Review   3/1999
– 6 –
Question: There is one additional question on TARGET: Which consequences does it have, this closing
down later? Can you quantify it, that it brings additional costs to the banks, and how much?
Duisenberg: No, on the contrary, it is more or less the result of the banks, the banks’ eagerness to be able
to make more and more transfers even on this day, and they asked for that only in their own interest. I
can assure you, this does not create more costs.
Question: My question is quite similar to the one before, but I’d like to have your opinion about the forex
control  system  that  the  German  and  Japanese  governments  suggest.  What  can  you  do  to  control  forex
rates when you have the big power now?
Duisenberg: Well, what I can do is a lot, but what I want to do is nothing. It’s as simple as that. I mean,
the  same  question  was  put  to  Mr  Greenspan  a  few  weeks  ago  when  we  had  this  exchange  here  in
Frankfurt,  and  Greenspan  said,  it’s  simply  not  feasible  at  the  moment.  Well,  I’m  inclined  to  listen
carefully to what he says, and then to have a similar opinion.
Question: I’d just like to talk to you about gold reserves. The ECB said it will readjust the value of its
gold reserves on its books each quarter, and I think it has also decided to keep about 15% of its exchange
reserves in gold. If there was a major change in the price of gold on the world market, that percentage
would be likely to change, and so I would like to ask you if that means that the ECB would buy or sell
gold in order to keep its proportion of reserves at that percenrage amount.
Duisenberg: Christian, you’re the gold man!
Noyer: No, there is no such conclusion to draw, because it was not a decision to hold 15% of foreign
exchange  reserves  in  gold,  as  a  structural  decision  of  the  Governing  Council.  The  decision  of  the
Governing Council at the time was that in the initial transfer 15% would be made of gold, but that has no
consequence  on  the  structure  of  foreign  exchange  reserve  to  develop  in  the  future,  nor  has  it  any
consequence on the total percentage of gold holdings of the system, including the reserves that are still in
the balance sheet of national central banks, and we know that in some cases they have more than 15%
gold,  and  in  some  cases  they  have  less,  but  they  are  for  the  moment  and  for  the  foreseeable  future
keeping the proportion they have.
Duisenberg: And in this case, the foreseeable future is much longer than in the earlier case.
Question:  Mr  Duisenberg,  the  fact  that  the  euro  has  got  off  to  such  a  good  start  is  to  some  extent  an
expression of confidence in you and can we expect you to stay for eight years?
Duisenberg: This is for the first time that I give the answer which I announced I would give already on 31
December 1998, that is “no comment”.
Question: Concerning TARGET, you spoke about human errors in dealing with this, and I would like to
know  if  you  can  be  more  specific  about  in  which  countries  did  these  errors  happen,  in  what  areas  of
euroland did they happen. And the second question is, the fact that there were human errors, does it mean
that  the  people  were  not  prepared  enough,  that  the  technology  didn’t  take  into  account  the  human
possibilities?
Duisenberg: No, it means very different things. In all countries, errors were being made, but they were of
a minor nature, and I mean people also have the right to make errors. They were of a minor nature, only
during two days it so happened that use was made of a rule that any single central bank can ask towards
the closing time of the payment system for an extension of opening time by one hour. Now this extension
in fact was asked for the first day and the second day. On the third day, yesterday, it was not asked. So
yesterday everything already operated, I would not say normally, but at least within the limits set. Today
again there was a request to extend it by half an hour, due not, in this case, to any faults or errors in the
system or the participating institutions but due to the enormous amount of payments that still had to be
BIS Review   3/1999
– 7 –
processed in order to be able to be processed within this single day. And the causes, well, they differ. It
was simply making errors in the techniques, in some cases, also we think that the number of personnel
engaged with executing these payments is not sufficient to handle this enormous amount of payments as
it is developing. In a way today for example, as the experts at the bank said to me, what happens today is
that TARGET is a victim of its own success.
Question: In October/November, several people – you, Mr Tietmeyer – were talking about a scope to cut
rates, and in fact we did have the coordinated rate cut on 3 December. Now you are saying rates are on
hold  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Does  that  indicate  that  we  no  longer  have  an  easing  bias  and  more  a
neutral bias as far as rates are concerned?
Duisenberg: Effectively, there has been a considerable easing in the course of last year to the extent that
the average three-months rate have in the course of last year gone down by slightly more than 100 basis
points, and one third of that easing has happened in the last month, in December. And for now, I think I
would agree with you that there is no bias any longer in either direction.
Question: One more time about the exchange rate: There are, in the market at least, expectations that the
euro will get at least moderately stronger in the near future. Do you have the same kind of expectations
or do you see this level that we now have that it will stay so in the foreseeable future?
Duisenberg: If I had expectations, I wouldn’t tell you. Sorry, but when you talk to a central banker about
exchange rates, always expect either no answer or expect a lie.
Question: Of course, journalists aren’t as well informed as you and there are some important questions
that we didn’t ask at the start of the year, so maybe you could help us now?
Duisenberg: I think you have asked everything which was important.
BIS Review   3/1999
