Mr Stals talks about the international economic environment
Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr Chris Stals, at the Convention of
the Institute of Life and Pension Advisers (ILPA) in Johannesburg on April 12, 1999.
1.
The international financial crises of 1997/98
The past eighteen months witnessed disrupting turbulences in world financial markets that led to
the collapse in financial structures in many countries, and to a serious decline in economic growth
in the world at large.
A chronic weakness in the Japanese economy over a prolonged period of time should perhaps be
regarded as the major cause of the financial crisis, which is generally linked to the collapse of the
economies  of  a  number  of  countries  in  East  Asia.  These  included  Thailand,  Korea,  the
Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia -- countries that managed their economies with great success
for many years. What went wrong in these countries is now part of history, and some consensus
has been found on an ex post basis of the reasons for the collapse in the economies of what used
to be referred to as the East Asian Tigers. In general, the following can be offered as a summary
of mistakes that were made in the economic management of the afflicted countries:
       Governments failed  to  react  timeously  to  overheating  economies.  This  was  manifested  in
unsustainable high levels of economic growth, inflated property and share prices, as well as
large deficits on the current account of the balance of payments.
Prolonged pegging of currencies to the United States dollar at unsustainable levels, making
monetary policy less effective and making the exchange value of domestic currency appear
to be guaranteed. This encouraged huge external borrowing, leading to excessive exposure
to foreign exchange risks for borrowers in the public and in the private sectors.
Insufficient supervision of financial institutions and poor enforcement of prudential rules,
reinforced by cronyism.
Lack of sufficient and accurate data to enable market players to make a correct assessment
of economic fundamentals.
In  the  situation,  international  investors  under-estimated  risks  as  they  searched  for  higher
income  yields.  In  particular,  investors  failed  to  grasp  inevitable  links  between  market
(liquidity) risks and credit risks.
The  expanding  world  financial  market  and  lax  controls  over  multi-national  financial
institutions  encouraged  excessive  leveraging  based  on  a  relatively  small  capital  base  for
hedge funds and certain banking institutions.
A herd-like reaction by international investors, once the bubble burst, that led to an almost
panic-withdrawal of funds from economies that could not in a short period of time absorb
the shock of the turnaround in the sentiment of international investors.
The adverse developments in East Asia almost immediately affected emerging markets all around
the world. Initially, that is from the middle of 1997 up to the second quarter of 1998, most of the
other emerging markets succeeded in keeping afloat and there was still a chance to keep the crisis
restricted  to  the  East  Asian  region.  The  situation  was  exacerbated,  however,  by  the  complete
collapse  of  the  situation  in  Indonesia,  and  by  the  early  signs  of  an  emerging  second  crisis  in
1
BIS Review  42/1999
Russia. The effective devaluation of the rouble and unilateral restructuring announced by Russia
in  August  1998,  triggered  a  further  series  of  sharp  market  corrections,  indicating  a  generalised
increase in perceived risk or risk aversion.
A third threat to a major collapse of the global financial system came towards the end of last year
with  the  deterioration  of  the  financial  situation  in  Brazil,  mainly  because  of  chronic  fiscal
imbalances  and  large-scale  speculative  attacks  on  what  markets  perceived  to  be  an  overvalued
currency.
In general, the immediate effect of a loss of confidence of investors in any specific economy was
reflected in a decline in the inflow of foreign capital or, in many cases, a large withdrawal by non-
residents of previously invested funds from the country.
The widespread flight to quality and liquidity gave rise to a severe tightening of credit conditions
in the affected countries: equity prices fell sharply; yields on bonds rose to extremely high levels,
followed  by  soaring  interest  rates  in  general,  and  exchange  market  pressures  intensified  as
exchange rates went in an uncontrollable tumble. As a by-product of these developments, many
international  investors  and  banks  suffered  substantial  losses,  especially  on  highly  leveraged
investment positions.
Gradually, the worsening conditions in the financial markets also affected real economic activity.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) revised its outlook for world economic growth in 1998,
first from 3 to 2½ per cent (in August 1998), and then to 2 per cent (in October 1998). For 1999,
the projection was similarly reduced from 3¾ per cent to 2¼ per cent at this stage.
2.
The contagion effect of the financial crisis
A special feature of the financial crisis of the past two years has been the contagion effect, or the
spill-over  of  the  economic  problems  of  a  few  important  emerging  market  economies  to  other
countries, and eventually to the world economy.
The transmission mechanism, or the conduit followed in the contagion process, was not the same
for all countries. Initially, with countries in East Asia, perceptions played an important part in the
process.  Once  the  Thai  baht  came  under  pressure  in  the  middle  of  1997,  it  did  not  take  long
before  international  investors  discovered  many  similarities  in  the  economies  of  Korea,  the
Philippines, Indonesia and Malaysia.
The  serious  collapse  of  the  Russian  financial  system,  and  particularly  the  action  taken  by  the
Russian  Government  in  the  unilateral  restructuring  of  its  sovereign  debt,  gave  rise  to  an
indiscriminatory  withdrawal  of  funds  previously  invested  in  sovereign  debt  of  other  emerging
market  governments.  It  was  also  noted  at  the  time  that  the  IMF,  the  World  Bank,  and
Governments of other countries were rather reluctant to provide the massive amount of assistance
needed for propping up the Russian balance of payments problem. The following quotation from
a recent IMF publication summarises the Russian events of mid-1998:
“More important was the role of Russia’s default as a defining event that challenged widely held
views  about  the  default  risks  associated  with  all  emerging  market  investments,  and  the
willingness  and  ability  of  the  international  community  to  provide  assistance  to  countries  in
difficulty.”
(World Economic Outlook and International Capital Markets, December 1998)
BIS Review  42/1999
2
The flight to high quality assets and, at a later stage, a major “de-leveraging” process of multi-
national  investment  institutions,  reduced  international  capital  flows  in  general,  and  therefore
provided a second conduit for contagion. It is estimated at this stage that net private capital flows
from  the  industrial  countries  to  the  developing  and  emerging  markets,  including  countries  in
central and Eastern Europe “in transition”, declined from US $118 billion in 1997 to $70 billion
in 1998. In the case of the Asian countries, it changed from an $100 billion net inflow in 1996 to
an $18 billion outflow in 1998.
A third obvious conduit for the transfer of the economic ills of the East Asian economies to other
countries,  and  particularly  countries  with  vulnerable  balance  of  payments  positions,  is  the
deterioration  of  current  account  positions  caused  by  the  generally  depressed  world  economic
environment. The negative effects of this development are only now beginning to filter through to
some  of  the  poorer,  developing  countries  in  the  world  that  do  not  have  developed  financial
markets but are nevertheless dependent on the exports of basic commodities, metals and minerals.
Examples in Southern Africa can be found in Botswana (diamonds), and Zambia (copper).
Finally,  the  weakening  or  full  collapse  of  the  banking  systems  in  a  number  of  the  afflicted
economies has had a major impact on the global banking sector. Not even financial institutions in
the major industrial countries have been immune to this problem. The near-collapse of the Long
Term Capital Management Fund  in  New  York  towards  the  end  of  September  1998,  provided  a
stern warning to the world that the East Asian  crisis  had  indeed  become  a  worldwide  financial
problem.  Quick  action  by  the  American  Federal  Reserve  and  the  major  New  York  banks
prevented serious problems for other financial institutions, including many multinational banking
institutions with similar over-leveraged positions.
3.
Policy reactions to the global financial crisis
The initial “fire-fighting” reactions of countries in the midst of the crisis obviously differed from
country  to  country.  Led  by  initiatives  from  the  IMF,  however,  a  relatively  standard  policy
procedure  was  adopted  that  required  of  countries,  firstly,  to  adjust  important  macroeconomic
fundamentals  to  new  levels  as  dictated  by  market  forces;  secondly,  to  restore  some  stability  to
financial  markets,  and  thirdly,  to  introduce  structural  and  other  remedial  adjustments  that  will
regain the confidence of international investors.
In the process, the countries directly afflicted by the crisis had to accept:
   a sharp depreciation in the external value of their currencies;
a substantial tightening of liquidity conditions in domestic financial markets;
a  tightening  in  fiscal  policy,  mainly  through  significant  reductions  in  government
expenditure.
In some countries, inflation also increased to higher levels and necessitated even more restrictive
monetary policies.
These  developments  obviously  depressed  real  economic  growth,  and  led  to  increased
unemployment in the affected economies. It is estimated, for example, that the rate of economic
growth in the ASEAN Countries (Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand) changed from
positive growth of more than 7 per cent in 1996, to negative “growth” of more than 10 per cent in
1998.
3
BIS Review  42/1999
In  the  case  of  two  important  countries  also  afflicted  by  the  crisis,  a  different  approach  was
followed  with  macroeconomic  policies  to  address  the  problem.  In  the  case  of  Malaysia,  the
Government  preferred  a  route  of  self-protection  by  the  reintroduction  of  exchange  controls  on
international  capital  flows.  The  wisdom  of  this  policy  was  severely  criticised  at  the  time,  but
history will eventually provide a final verdict on the issue. There is general belief, however, that
international investors will in future be much more reluctant to invest again in Malaysia than, for
example,  in  the  other  East  Asian  countries  that  were  more  prepared  to  bite  the  bullet  with
extremely painful and costly macroeconomic adjustment processes.
The second country to follow a different route, Russia, perhaps had no alternative but to introduce
an  almost  complete  moratorium  on  the  repayment  of  its  foreign  debt.  Private  market  investors
have  more  or  less  written  off  their  Russian  exposures  as  a  complete  loss.  It  will  take  major
adjustments before these bitten investors will ever return to Russia.
4.
Promising signs of a reversal in the financial markets
It would seem as if the global financial crisis reached a lower turning point in about October last
year and, although still very fragile, there are encouraging signs of a return of greater stability in
the  global  financial  markets.  In  retrospect,  the  demise  of  the  Long  Term  Capital  Management
Fund of New York at that  time  may  have  triggered  the  required  concerted  international  action,
also from the major industrial countries, to help restoring a measure of calm to financial markets.
Actions taken since October 1998 included:
     The  easing  of  interest  rates  by  central  banks  in  most  industrial  countries,  including  the
United States, United Kingdom, and the newly-established European Central Bank.
In Japan, new policy measures to address banking sector problems and announcements of
further fiscal actions to stimulate demand. The Japanese Government indeed provided ¥60
trillion (about US $500 billion) to restructure the banking sector.
Commitments and actions by Brazil to address its chronic fiscal imbalances, and the large-
scale  support  of  the  international  community,  agreed  in  mid-November,  for  a  strong
programme of assistance that would forestall a financial crisis in that country.
Continued progress with stabilisation and reform in the Asian crisis countries implementing
policy  programmes  supported  by  the  IMF.  With  current  account  balances  having  moved
into surplus and financial market confidence having begun to recover, the strengthening of
exchange rates has allowed monetary policy to be eased, which in turn has helped to boost
equity markets.
Recent increases in IMF quotas and other measures taken to replenish the funds of the IMF
improved  the  international  community’s  ability  to  assist  countries  in  the  resolution  of
financial crises.
It would seem as if the first objective of macro-economic policy has therefore been achieved in
the major crisis centres (with the exception of Russia). Some stability has now been restored in
the financial markets. The attention of the world debate has now been shifted, firstly, to what is
needed and prudent to re-stimulate the world economy and, secondly, what structural adjustments
to  national  and  global  economic  structures  will  be  necessary  to  avoid  a  recurrence  of  the  East
Asian crisis and its contagion effects in future.
BIS Review  42/1999
4
5.
The lessons learned from the experience of the past two years
The analyses of the reasons for the financial markets’ disaster of 1997/98 are still continuing and
the dissection of the major casualties is continuing. Some consensus may be developing, however,
that  both  at  the  macroeconomic  and  at  the  microeconomic  level,  important  adjustments  are
necessary to strengthen the fibre of financial systems and markets in order to meet the challenges
of the irreversible process of globalisation. These structural adjustments must include:
       An  improvement  and  standardisation  of  accepted  institutional  arrangements  covering
aspects of property protection, bankruptcy procedures and accounting standards.
Bank and other financial institution supervision and regulation must be upgraded, and new
standards of adequate risk management must be introduced.
The architecture, role and policies of the multilateral institutions such as the World Bank
and the IMF, not  only  on  an  ex  post  basis  but  also  in  the  prevention  of  a  crisis,  must  be
reviewed.
Policy  makers  must  follow  sound  and  credible  economic  and  financial  policies.  The
experience  in  a  number  of  countries,  for  example,  warned  against  a  policy  of  excessive
short-term borrowing by governments and by countries to finance chronic fiscal or balance
of  payments  deficits.  Credibility  comes  from  monetary  policies  aimed  at  achieving  price
stability. Macro-economic policies that are judged by investors to be responsible are those
that allow free markets to work with undue intervention from governmental authorities.
The international exchange rate regime of floating exchange rates and its contribution to the
increasing volatility of the global financial markets has come under the spotlight.
The  need  for  greater  transparency  at  the  level  of  multinational  institutions,  governments
and public sector institutions and, very importantly, also from private sector participants in
global markets has been identified.
The ability of countries to attract long-term foreign capital, e.g. direct foreign investment,
should be improved. This once again leads to the conclusion that exchange controls and/or
excessive  protectionist  policies  should  be  avoided  by  developing  and  emerging  market
countries that want to remain competitive in the global market environment.
6.
Prospects for the world economy
Although  there  are  still  a  number  of  downside  risks  in  the  global  economy,  there  is  growing
optimism that some recovery will take place in most of the more seriously affected economies of
the  East  Asian  crisis.  The  main  priorities  in  these  countries  are  now  to  end  the  decline  of
economic  activity,  limit  the  adverse  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  welfare  of  the  most  vulnerable
members of the community, promote the resumption of sustainable growth, and accelerating the
restructuring of financial and corporate sectors. In Korea, Thailand, and more recently, Indonesia
and the Philippines, the tightening of monetary policies that occurred in the wake of the crises has
achieved considerable success in re-establishing financial stability. A strengthening of exchange
rates has indeed allowed interest rates to be lowered significantly.
In Brazil, a determined and sustained implementation of a front-loaded fiscal adjustment effort,
accompanied  by  appropriately  tight  monetary  policies  and  wide-ranging  structural  reforms  is
5
BIS Review  42/1999
making  an  essential  contribution  to  sustaining  the  improvement  in  global  financial  market
sentiment.
Russia  continues  to  lack  macroeconomic  policies  that  would  help  to  restore  the  confidence  of
investors  and  establish  the  preconditions  for  sustainable  growth.  Once  again,  however,  the
financial  markets  of  the  world  have  marginalised  the  Russian  situation,  and  seems  to  have
discounted it as, for the time being, a lost cause.
In  Japan,  the  critical  challenge  for  the  authorities  remains  to  find  a  quick  and  forceful
restructuring, including a recapitalisation, that will restore the financial health and profitability of
the banking system. It remains a problem to re-stimulate demand in the highly saving-conscious
community of Japan.
For  the  other  industrial  countries,  although  there  have  been  widespread  downward  revisions  to
growth  projections  for  1999,  the  outlook  in  most  cases  is  still  fairly  good.  Continuing  low
inflation provides scope for monetary easing, if warranted, to support demand and out-put growth,
and also to help stabilise financial markets.
There is, therefore, cautious optimism in general that the painful macroeconomic adjustments of
the past year have succeeded in restoring financial stability in most parts of the world, and that a
basis has been laid now for some recovery in real economic activity in the depressed economies
that suffered most from the East Asian crisis of the past two years.
Note:
Information used in this presentation has been taken mainly from: World Economic Outlook and
International  Capital  Markets  -  Interim  Assessment,  December  1998;  published  by  the
International Monetary Fund.
BIS Review  42/1999
6
