Mr Gjedrem reports on economic perspectives in Norway
Annual address by the Governor of the Central Bank of Norway, Mr Svein Gjedrem, at the meeting of
the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank on 18/02/99.
Background
Twenty-two  years  ago,  in  1977,  the  Norwegian  economy  witnessed  the  onset  of  a  deep  crisis.  An
economic  recession  in  industrial  countries,  high  price  and  wage  inflation  in  Norway  and  the
expansion of public welfare services resulted in large current account deficits. Thirteen years ago, in
1986,  the  Norwegian  economy  was  also  in  a  difficult  situation.  A  debt-financed  upswing  in
consumption and investment, a fall in oil prices and a reduction in working hours gave rise to major
imbalances in the Norwegian economy.
In  1998  clouds  again  gathered  over  the  economic  horizon.  Costs  rose  to  a  high  level  in  Norway
compared with other countries, oil prices fell, and the current account balance deteriorated sharply.
This  signalled  a  period  of  sluggish  growth  following  six  years  of  a  strong  upswing  in  economic
growth and employment. The krone depreciated and interest rates were raised.
There are many features that distinguish the three turning points in economic developments. However,
one common denominator is the sudden shift in the assessment of future oil revenues. Fluctuations in
petroleum revenues have proved to be a source of instability in the mainland economy.
Following  the  last  two  turning  points,  the  Norwegian  economy  went  through  a  period  of  major
restructuring, particularly at the end of the 1980s. Today the situation in the Norwegian economy is
different. However, this time there is also reason to ask whether we are sufficiently prepared. Is our
economy sufficiently robust?
The fall in oil prices was triggered by an international financial crisis and slower growth in the world
economy.  The  Norwegian  economy  is  highly  exposed  to  international  fluctuations.  Is  our  own
financial system and business sector strong enough to cope with this situation? How should monetary
and fiscal policy be formulated in such an exposed and oil-dependent economy? These are the issues I
would like to address this evening.
A turbulent world
Even  before  oil  prices  started  to  fall,  the  warning  signals  were  flashing  for  everyone  to  see.  The
Norwegian  economy  was  overheating  in  an  environment  of  global  economic  distress.  The  signals
from Asia were clear.
1
BIS Review   20/1999
The  problems  first  appeared  in  Thailand  a  little  more  than  18  months  ago,  but  spread  quickly  to
Malaysia, the Philippines, Indonesia and South Korea. In most of these countries, a sharp upturn had
been stimulated by low interest rates and financed through a considerable accumulation of debt in the
business sector. Borrowers became increasingly nervous and withdrew capital. Capital inflows from
industrial countries were suddenly reversed to massive capital outflows.
Equity and property prices fell sharply and currencies came under pressure. The contagion effect led
to  a  sharp  downturn  in  production  and  employment.  Large  population  groups  that  had  recently
experienced a pronounced increase in living standards slid back into poverty.
The  crisis  in  Asia  spread  to  Russia,  where  the  decline  in  commodity  prices  led  to  an  even  further
deterioration in government finances. The announcement that Russia could no longer service its debt
was  met  with  strong  reactions  in  global  financial  markets  in  August  and  September.  There  were
growing fears that the world economy would be caught in a financial crash. Many investors withdrew
from  small  and  risky  markets,  particularly  in  Latin  America.  The  Brazilian  currency  came  under
pressure.  It  was  difficult  to  raise  loan  capital  even  in  the  most  advanced  markets.  As  financial
institutions throughout the world experienced growing losses, fears of a world economic depression
intensified.
Reductions in interest rates in the US and Europe facilitated access to credit and prevented a market
collapse. Measures perceived as credible were finally implemented to resolve the Japanese banking
crisis. Additional capital was allocated to the International Monetary Fund.
There are still many challenges ahead. Brazil and Russia are running government budget deficits and
are having problems establishing a credible monetary policy. China is bearing substantial costs as a
result  of  the  crisis  in  surrounding  countries  and  may  experience  difficulties  of  its  own.  Other
countries  may  also  feel  the  contagion  effect.  However,  even  though  the  outlook  points  to  lower
growth in the global economy this year  than  forecast  earlier,  fears  of  a  worldwide  depression  have
receded.
This is by no means the first time we have experienced an international financial crisis. In this decade
alone we have seen a currency crisis in Europe in 1992–1993 and the Mexican crisis in 1994–1995. A
number  of  the  countries  affected  were  suffering  from  major  economic  imbalances,  which  triggered
currency  outflows  and  capital  flight.  These  crises  also  revealed  fundamental  shortcomings  in  the
functioning of the international financial system.
BIS Review   20/1999
2
In  principle,  access  to  efficient  international  capital  markets  is  an  advantage  for  a  country,  not  a
disadvantage.  Norway  used  international  capital  to  finance  the  development  of  its  oil  sector  and
sizeable current account deficits in the 1970s and 1980s. Norwegian enterprises have access to credit
that would be very expensive in periods if we were to rely solely on domestic financing. The central
government invests the capital in the Petroleum Fund in foreign markets because this is expected to
generate high returns.
In  the  long  term  there  is  hardly  any  better  alternative  than  to  improve  the  functioning  of  capital
markets. This is in the interest of Norway  and  other  industrial  countries,  particularly  countries  that
have a surplus of saving that must be invested abroad. This is also in the interest of many developing
countries that sorely need international capital to develop their economies.
One solution that is not effective is the reimposition of direct capital controls, given the vast increase
in  technological  capabilities  to  evade  them.  The  business  sector  is  already  international.  Capital
controls are disadvantageous to the business sector in the countries that introduce them. Nor are taxes
on capital movements or currency trading a realistic or effective alternative. Taxes will not prevent
substantial  short-term  speculative  waves.  A  tax  system  would  have  to  have  broad  international
support, because without it currency trading would only shift to countries without taxes. The benefit
of remaining outside would increase with the number of countries that participate.
What can be done to improve a system that is functioning poorly? If a country is to benefit from a free
capital  market,  it  must  draw  up  legislation  providing  for  regulations  and  supervision  that  ensure
stability. Countries with poorly developed capital markets may benefit from some limitations. They
should  exercise  some  caution  in  opening  these  markets  too  suddenly.  The  flow  of  capital  is  like
electricity. Adequate insulation should be in place before turning it on.
When  the  Nordic  countries  liberalised  credit  markets  in  the  1980s,  we  experienced  considerable
problems because supervision and rules were not adequate. The same has been witnessed in the crisis
in Asia and Russia. Inadequate and ineffective legislation and supervision resulted in weak control of
financial sectors in the beleaguered countries.
The crisis is not only due to an unsuccessful policy in the countries concerned. Banks and funds in
industrial countries accounted for the sharp growth in capital inflows to emerging market economies
in  the  years  prior  to  the  crisis.  Those  who  invested  in  these  countries  based  their  decisions  on
insufficient and,  in  part,  misleading  information.  With  hindsight,  we  may  ask  why  so  much  capital
was lent to countries about which lenders knew very little.
An additional problem is moral hazard: lenders may have assumed that the authorities or international
organisations would bail them out if borrowers experienced payment problems. As a last resort, they
may have expected the IMF to back the national authorities, which again are expected to support their
banking systems. Lenders can thereby neglect to make a thorough evaluation of credit risk.
The liberalisation of the capital market within a country requires national regulations and supervision.
The liberalisation of capital movements across national borders requires coordination and regulations
at an international level.
Countries on the European continent have a regional approach to this. They have drawn up a set of
laws and rules that govern a common European market, the single market. Norway also participates in
this market by virtue of the EEA Agreement. From 1 January 1999, 11 EU countries introduced the
single  currency,  thereby  implementing  one  of  the  greatest  monetary  reforms  of  this  century.
Moreover,  European  monetary  union  effectively  eliminates  the  opportunity  to  speculate  between
countries’ currencies, thereby enhancing the stability of the financial system in Europe.
3
BIS Review   20/1999
International  rules  for  economic  relations  with  other  countries  are  important,  particularly  for  small
countries. Cooperation within the framework of the WTO and GATT agreement on trade in goods and
services is an example. The OECD Capital Code, which provides a framework for member countries’
laws and regulations on capital movements, is another example.
Initiatives have been taken by both the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International
Settlements  to  create  a  new  international  regulatory  framework  and  system.  This  work  is  aimed  at
reducing  the  risk  and  effects  of  severe  financial  crises,  and  is  so  far-reaching  that  it  has  also  been
referred  to  as  a  new  ‘architecture’  for  the  global  financial  system.  Norway  should  support  these
endeavours.
First,  the  new  architecture  must  improve  surveillance  systems  and  promote  greater  openness  and
transparency in the finances and practices of government and enterprises. Necessary measures include
more uniform accounting procedures and the development of international statistical standards. More
modern company, bankruptcy and securities legislation must be drawn up in many emerging market
economies.  Second,  private  investors  must  to  a  greater  extent  bear  the  costs  of  their  ill-advised
investments.  The  IMF  must  impose  requirements  on  banks  in  industrial  countries  so  that  they
contribute  to  resolving  the  crisis  they  have  contributed  to  creating.  This  will  deter  banks  from
assuming  excessive  risk.  Third,  supervision  of  the  financial  sector  must  be  tightened.  Capital
requirements  that  are  more  closely  linked  to  financial  institutions’  exposure  to  risk  are  among  the
measures  under  consideration.  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  enhance  crisis  management  systems
because,  irrespective  of  what  we  do  on  the  preventive  level,  we  will  probably  never  be  able  to
eradicate financial bubbles that escalate into financial crises.
The work on a new international financial architecture is a demanding and long-term process.  This
work nevertheless offers hope of achieving international agreement on some effective measures. Over
time, it should also reduce the risk of local and regional crises and their contagion effect on the rest of
the world.
There is still a long way to go. As far as Norway is concerned, we must act on the assumption that we
will  continue  to  live  in  an  unstable  world.  The  financial  crises  have  shown  that  a  small  country  is
vulnerable to international turbulence. The Norwegian economy is fragile and vulnerable.
Stability and buffer against financial shocks
Norway has also experienced a banking crisis. If nothing else, we learned from it. Laws, regulations
and  supervision  have  been  tightened.  Financial  institutions  place  greater  emphasis  on  risk
management.  The  debt  burden  of  households  is  lower  than  in  the  1980s,  and  for  a  long  period  the
business sector was also more cautious about incurring new debt.
BIS Review   20/1999
4
Losses  at  Norwegian  financial  institutions  have  been  low  since  the  banking  crisis.  There  is  greater
uncertainty now as the  economy  is  approaching  a  turning  point.  The  sharp  growth  in  fixed  income
business has led to a substantial increase in corporate debt, which has been reflected in the high level
of credit growth in recent years.
The rise in interest rates has made it more demanding for households and enterprises to service their
debt in the short term, but has had a restraining effect on credit growth. If interest rates had not moved
up, the business sector could have continued to build up debt for a somewhat longer period, which
would  hardly  have  promoted  long-term  stability.  Somewhat  higher  losses  on  corporate  lending  are
now  expected,  although  there  is  hardly  any  imminent  risk  to  the  financial  strength  of  the  banking
system.
However, there is cause for concern about the evolution of the structure of the Norwegian financial
industry in the longer term.
The  free  flow  of  capital  in  Europe  paves  the  way  for  structural  changes  in  the  European  financial
industry. These changes will be prompted by the increased use of fund-based pension systems and the
ever  wider  application  of  technology  in  the  euro  area.  Banks  in  Europe  will  become  larger,  more
efficient and more competitive, and securities markets will be larger and more liquid.
Structural  changes  are  also  taking  place  in  the  financial  industry  in  the  Nordic  countries.  Nordic
financial  institutions  are  adjusting  capacity,  enhancing  efficiency  and  realising  economies  of  scale.
The  largest  banks  are  developing  their  activities,  with  the  Nordic  area  as  their  home  market,  by
building up their branch networks or through acquisitions. Not many Norwegian financial institutions
have found it profitable to participate in this process.
The  government’s  ownership  in  the  banking  sector  was  expanded  as  part  of  the  solution  to  the
Norwegian banking crisis. It was not necessary to allow ownership to be permanent. Currently, the
government  owns  the  state  banks,  Postbanken  and  more  than  50%  of  Norway’s  two  largest
commercial  banks.  The  government  therefore  controls  banks  that  account  for  about  50%  of  bank
lending in Norway. The stake in the two largest commercial banks is to be reduced to a third.
State ownership of banks constitutes, in my opinion, a structural weakness in the Norwegian financial
system.
There is a risk that the ownership function is not exercised actively enough. A lack of control on the
part of active owners may give the board and management excessive influence in these banks. In the
long run this could lead to less efficient operations and lower profitability. Private owners with lower
capital stakes may also wield a disproportionately high level of influence if the state as owner is too
passive.
The  political  parties  widely  disagree  on  the  issue  of  government  bank  ownership.  This  may  be  a
disadvantage when decisions on mergers and other structural measures are to be taken. When there is
a profitable basis for growth, which requires increases in capital, the state-owned banks must pose the
following question: is it possible to gain political support? They cannot merely ask: will investors find
this profitable?
It is important to reach political consensus on the question of state ownership. One example of a case
where  the  political  parties  reached  agreement  on  structure  and  ownership  in  the  1980s  is  the
petroleum sector. The oil companies have therefore enjoyed stable operating parameters over the last
15 years, although this sector is also faced with the challenge of finding new solutions in response to
the sharp shifts in market  conditions  that  we  have  witnessed  recently.  This  will  once  again  require
forward-looking strategies and willingness to compromise.
5
BIS Review   20/1999
The  government’s  supervisory  tasks  are  substantial.  Confidence  in  the  banking  system  in  critical
situations may also be contingent on the government’s willingness to provide financial backing. There
is a fundamental conflict between these two roles and the government’s role as bank owner. People
must be confident that the government does not conceal its own mistakes when intervening in the face
of  a  crisis  in  the  banking  system  should  this  again  prove  necessary.  It  is  virtually  impossible  to
establish such confidence if the government is also responsible for the crisis through its ownership.
State ownership in the banking industry has been maintained with a view to ensuring stable national
ownership.  It  seems  that,  in  practice,  most  comparable  countries  attach  importance  to  having  large
financial  institutions  with  a  national  anchor,  but  most  of  them  avoid  state  ownership  and  the
associated conflicts of interest. We should also be able to do this.
However, I would like to stress that a greater number of foreign financial institutions could also be
advantageous.  Foreign  institutions  will  normally  be  larger  and  more  diversified  than  Norwegian
institutions.  This  could  generate  better  and  cheaper  services  in  the  Norwegian  market.  Moreover,
these  institutions  might  be  in  a  stronger  position  to  cope  with  a  cyclical  downturn  in  Norway  or  a
crisis situation than banks concentrated in Norway.
At the beginning of the recession at the end of the 1980s, the Norwegian financial system plunged into
a  deep  crisis.  The  debt  consolidation  that  was  necessary  in  the  business  and  household  sectors
contributed to a sharp and prolonged downturn.
In the long term our financial system may, in my opinion, suffer in the absence of restructuring and
growth capabilities. However, the overall picture is that we are better prepared this time. Households
are not grappling with the same debt burden and our financial industry is in better balance.
An oil-dependent economy
The fall in  oil  prices  has  resulted  in  a  substantial  loss  of  revenues  in  Norway.  Since  1997  this  has
resulted in a decline in export earnings corresponding to about 5.5% of total national income. This
represents the same decline in our disposable income as between 1985 and 1986, when oil prices fell
by close to 50% over a few months. This time, however, the current account balance has deteriorated
by  a  smaller  margin.  Growth  in  imports  has  been  slower  than  12  years  ago.  The  value  of  non-oil
exports has increased this time, while it fell in 1986. But the effect on the external account has been
substantial this time as well.
BIS Review   20/1999
6
The fall in oil prices has weakened Norway’s terms of trade. The terms of trade measure the price of
imported  goods  in  relation  to  exported  goods.  When  oil  prices  decline  and  import  prices  remain
steady, we must export more in order to buy the same quantity of imports.
This is not the first time that we have experienced substantial changes in our terms of trade. The most
pronounced variations – in 1986 and 1998 – were due to the sharp drop in oil prices. Variations in
Denmark’s terms of trade are negligible compared with Norway.
In  this  sense,  the  Norwegian  economy  has  more  in  common  with  countries  like  New  Zealand  and
Australia, which are also large exporters of commodities. A substantial change in the terms of trade
7
BIS Review   20/1999
translates into considerable changes in these countries’ earnings and balance of payments. Over the
years this has resulted in sizeable exchange rate fluctuations.
The exchange rate is a buffer against changes in the terms of trade. While a country like Denmark has
also managed to maintain a stable exchange rate, commodity-producing countries typically experience
fluctuations in the exchange rate in tandem with changes in the terms of trade.
In  New  Zealand,  Australia  and  many  other  countries,  monetary  policy  is  oriented  directly  towards
price  stability,  and  these  countries  permit  short-term  fluctuations  in  the  exchange  rate.  This  means
that monetary policy bears the primary responsibility for price stability, whereas fiscal policy is to a
greater extent oriented towards long-term stability in government finances.
Norway has established the Government Petroleum Fund  in  order  to  promote  long-term  stability  in
government finances and ensure fiscal leeway in the long term. The Government Petroleum Fund also
acts as a  buffer  against  fluctuations  in  petroleum  revenues.  Swings  in  oil  prices  lead  to  changes  in
allocations to the Fund. As a large share of petroleum revenues accrues to the state, smaller variations
in these revenues will only have a limited effect on the wider economy. This makes the Norwegian
economy more robust and in the short term less dependent on oil, at least as long as the government
budget  is  running  a  substantial  surplus.  This  is  part  of  the  reason  why  Norway  seeks  to  maintain
exchange rate stability rather than orienting monetary policy directly towards the objective of price
stability.
Many  countries  are  struggling  with  government  finances.  After  several  years  of  large  government
budget  deficits,  interest  expenditure  is  laying  claim  to  a  considerable  portion  of  tax  revenues  and
thereby limiting the government’s scope for carrying out its tasks. The main challenge to fiscal policy
is to eliminate these deficits and reduce government debt and interest expenditure.
Norway has had greater fiscal scope for manoeuvre, although this has not solely been used to promote
long-term balance. Therefore, Norway established a different division of responsibility in economic
policy. As the objective of monetary policy is to maintain a stable exchange rate, fiscal policy has an
important responsibility for stabilising the economy.
BIS Review   20/1999
8
Division of responsibility fails
Stabilisation  policy  is  a  very  demanding  task  in  an  economy  like  Norway,  with  occasional  major
exogenous shocks. The question that must now be asked is how our system functions when exposed to
pressure.
Oil prices were high in 1996, 1997 and into 1998, which resulted in large  surpluses  on  the  current
account  and  the  government  budget.  Domestic  activity  was  also  rising,  with  strong  growth  in
employment. Deliveries to the petroleum sector generated a strong and uncontrolled growth impetus
to  the  mainland  economy.  During  the  budget  deliberations  in  the  Storting  (Norwegian  parliament),
major changes were made. Compared with the large surpluses generated by petroleum revenues, the
changes  to  the  budget  may  have  seemed  small,  but  these  changes  were  important  for  economic
developments.
I will illustrate this by means of an example. Assume that the oil price temporarily increases by NOK
10 per barrel, or a little less than USD 1.50 per barrel. This is a small change in the oil price, well
within normal variations from one year to the next. Government revenues – and thereby the budget
surplus – would then increase by about NOK 9 billion in the first year and NOK 11–12 billion the
next year. This corresponds to about 1% of Norway’s GDP. The assumption is that all the revenues
from such a minor increase in oil prices will be transferred to the Government Petroleum Fund and
that  fiscal  policy  will  remain  firm.  In  this  case,  the  additional  revenues  will  not  influence  the
economy, but be invested abroad via the Government Petroleum Fund.
On the other hand, if the additional revenues are absorbed in the domestic economy through increased
government budget expenditure, total domestic demand is influenced. Increased expenditure requires
an  increase  in  the  public  sector’s  use  of  resources,  primarily  labour.  In  this  case,  1%  of  GDP  is
substantial. If such an increase in oil revenues is used domestically, it corresponds, for example, to
around  half  of  average  annual  growth  in  the  economy.  If  the  private  sector  of  the  economy  also
expands while the economy is nearing capacity limits, such a policy will heighten the pressures on
resources in the economy, which in turn fuels inflationary pressures.
Unfortunately  there  was  a  clear  tendency  of  such  a  policy  in  1996,  1997  and  1998.  The  non-oil
government budget deficit was indeed reduced, but the division of responsibility in economic policy
required  a  more  active  tightening.  Rather  than  conducting  a  tight  policy  and  countering  the  higher
9
BIS Review   20/1999
growth in the business sector, the increase in budget expenditure entailed that the public sector also
contributed to fuelling pressures in the labour market. As a result, a small change in oil prices had the
effect it was not intended to have: it was accompanied by an increase in public sector demand.
Foreign  exchange  market  participants  observed  that  economic  policy  was  not  oriented  towards
containing  pressures  in  the  labour  market.  In  a  different  situation  such  a  policy  could  have
undermined confidence, leading to a depreciation of the krone and higher interest rates. Owing to high
oil prices, however, the krone was very strong in 1996 and 1997. It may be that the foreign exchange
market accepted that Norway was in a situation – with large government budget and current account
surpluses  –  where  the  country  both  could  and  should  have  transferred  resources  from  the  business
sector to the public sector. It could be that market participants believed that this transfer of resources
would occur with the help of a strong krone exchange rate, which reduces profitability in the business
sector.
Appreciation  pressures  mounted  and  culminated  in  a  reduction  in  interest  rates  by  Norges  Bank  in
January 1997 in order to counter the sharp strengthening of the krone.
If the central bank had not acted, the krone might have appreciated by an even greater margin. This
could  have  given  a  strong  signal  to  the  business  sector  to  move  out  of  Norway.  However,  in  a
situation where fiscal policy was not sufficiently tight, the reduction in interest rates increased the risk
of an acceleration in price and cost inflation.
Then came the fall in oil prices, with an associated erosion of the external account. Income growth for
liberal  professions  had  been  substantial,  wage  growth  for  salaried  employees  accelerated  and  the
wage  and  income  settlement  in  1998  was  very  generous.  This  eliminated  the  basis  for  the  strong
krone. In late summer the international financial crisis escalated and the krone depreciated.
High wage growth cannot be attributed to flaws in wage and income determination. On the contrary,
the flexible wage and income system can probably be cited as the main factor behind the high level of
employment  and  low  unemployment  in  Norway.  In  periods  of  strong  labour  market  pressures,
particularly in 1974–1976, 1986–1987 and last year, wage growth accelerates sharply. Such periods
are normally followed by a slacker labour market and higher unemployment. The positive feature of
income  determination  in  Norway  has  been  that  wage  growth  returns  to  normal  relatively  quickly,
BIS Review   20/1999
10
which  has  allowed  Norway  to  avoid  the  persistently  high  levels  of  unemployment  experienced  by
most West European countries. Even though some increase in unemployment must be expected, we
should be able to avoid a rise in unemployment to European levels or to the level prevailing in the
period 1989–1992 if wage and cost inflation is rapidly reduced also during this business cycle.
Fiscal policy failed in 1996, 1997 and 1998. Developments illustrate that budget discipline must be
exercised down to the last billion.
The  economy  overheated  because  fiscal  policy  was  not  sufficiently  tight  when  the  economy  was
faring well. This brought the krone under pressure and external conditions intensified this pressure,
making it impossible to keep the krone on track. It is only this year that fiscal policy is again well
adapted to the economic situation.
If  fiscal  policy  is  systematically  too  expansionary  during  booms  and  when  petroleum  revenues  are
higher than expected, Norway will in periods experience pressures in the economy and rising price
and  cost  inflation.  This  will  often  give  rise  to  situations  where  the  krone  depreciates,  thereby
undermining  the  credibility  of  our  monetary  policy.  There  is  a  price  to  be  paid  for  this.  Market
participants will lose confidence in the krone and demand a higher interest rate for maintaining krone
positions  rather  than  switching  to  other  currencies.  The  result  is  a  permanently  higher  interest  rate
level in Norway compared with other countries.
Intricate relationships
Earlier, monetary policy was based on extensive use of interventions – in other words, purchases and
sales  of  foreign  exchange  in  order  to  defend  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Denmark  has  used  this
instrument  with  positive  results.  There  are  probably  many  reasons  for  this  in  addition  to  its  stable
terms of trade. For instance, fiscal policy in Denmark has on numerous occasions made a substantial
contribution to exchange rate stability.
Over time our experience of large-scale and persistent interventions has been mixed. When the central
bank  intervenes  heavily  to  defend  the  krone,  market  participants  may  easily  move  into  a  game
situation and perceive central bank intervention as an interesting opportunity to make a profit. Market
operators know that a situation in which the krone is being propped up only because Norges Bank is
buying kroner cannot continue. It is then tempting to take reverse positions in the foreign exchange
market  in  relation  to  the  central  bank.  This  means  that  heavy  and  prolonged  interventions  may
intensify the pressure on the krone over time, steadily increasing the necessary volume of intervention
purchases. The foremost example of such a game situation in Norway’s exchange rate policy history
was Friday 20 November 1992, when Norges Bank made intervention purchases for NOK 37 billion
from  the  time  the  market  opened  until  the  time  it  closed.  Intervention  purchases  amounting  to
NOK 14 billion were also made the previous day after Sweden allowed its currency to float. Norges
Bank had thereby depleted its foreign exchange reserves by more than NOK 50 billion in the course
of six trading hours over two days.
Norges Bank does not want to intervene in such a way that this type of game situation arises. Nor can
we  expect  other  central  banks  to  help  us  to  an  extent  that  makes  a  decisive  contribution  to  our
resistance.  However,  the  Bank  may  use  interventions  to  a  limited  extent  if  the  krone  moves
substantially out of line with what we consider to be reasonable based on fundamentals or in the event
of exceptional short-term volatility in thin markets. In such situations, we must assume that the risk of
ending up in a game situation against exchange market players is marginal.
The instrument available to Norges Bank for influencing economic fundamentals is the interest rate. If
the exchange rate comes under pressure, Norges Bank can counter this over time by adjusting interest
rates. However, we must take into account that in the long run the krone exchange rate cannot deviate
substantially  from  the  level  implied  by  economic  fundamentals.  We  must  therefore  to  some  extent
expect a change in the krone exchange rate in response to major changes in our terms of trade.
11
BIS Review   20/1999
Norges Bank’s mandate has been formulated in the light of the experience of a fixed exchange rate
policy  earlier  in  the  1990s.  This  experience  does  not  imply  that  the  central  bank  is  to  conduct  a
traditional  fixed  exchange  rate  regime,  with  established  fluctuation  margins  and  the  obligation  to
intervene, as reflected in the mandate. Norges Bank will orient monetary policy ‘towards maintaining
a stable krone exchange rate against European currencies’. However, it is taken into account that the
krone exchange rate will vary. The Exchange  Rate  Regulation  therefore  states  that  ‘in  the  event  of
significant changes in the exchange rate, monetary policy instruments shall be oriented with a view to
returning the exchange rate over time to its initial range’.
We must learn from the situation that arose in the autumn of 1996 and winter of 1997 when strong
appreciation pressures prompted Norges Bank to reduce its key rates.
Norges Bank’s first response to such appreciation pressures is to provide advice concerning changes
in the budget.
Norges Bank will orient its instruments towards maintaining a stable krone exchange rate. We must
not allow ourselves to be blinded by daily exchange rate quotations. The experience of recent years
shows that Norges Bank must take into account the fundamental conditions for exchange rate stability
over time.
The  krone  is  influenced  by  unrest  in  international  financial  markets,  changes  in  oil  prices,
inappropriate fiscal policy responses and high cost increases peculiar to Norway. Norges Bank cannot
fine-tune exchange rate movements through exchange market interventions. This means that the krone
exchange rate will fluctuate. It is up to Norges Bank to evaluate the best means of returning the krone
to  its  initial  range.  This  also  means  that  the  Bank  must  exercise  a  large  degree  of  discretion  when
using the Bank’s instruments, essentially the interest rate. In exercising its discretion, Norges Bank
emphasises the fundamental conditions for exchange rate stability.
There are two fundamental conditions necessary for achieving stability against European currencies.
BIS Review   20/1999
12
First, price and cost inflation must  fall  to  the  level  aimed  at  by  euro  area  countries.  A  high  rise  in
prices  and  costs  will  in  itself  fuel  depreciation  expectations.  Monetary  policy  must  therefore  be
oriented with a  view  to  bringing  price  and  cost  inflation  in  Norway  down  to  the  inflation  target  in
Europe. As illustrated in the chart, price inflation in Norway has been about 1% higher than in euro
area  countries  over  the  last  two  years.  Wage  growth  differentials  are  even  wider.  In  this  situation,
pressures in the economy require a relatively tight monetary policy, as is the case today.
Second, interest rates must not be set at such high levels that monetary policy contributes to economic
downturns that undermine confidence in the krone. If unemployment rises sharply, market operators
may  perceive  the  exchange  rate  as  being  overvalued  and  that  employment  can  be  boosted  by
improving  business  sector  competitiveness.  This  would  tend  to  fuel  depreciation  expectations.  A
tightening of monetary policy in such a situation would not be credible, and might trigger renewed
speculation against the krone. This mechanism came into evidence during the currency crisis in the
autumn of 1992.
When  both  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  are  oriented  with  a  view  to  influencing  the  domestic
economy, it is important that the two components of economic policy are complementary. However,
there is a risk that a situation may arise where Norges Bank maintains a high interest rate level based
on  its  evaluation  of  the  economic  outlook,  while  the  government  authorities  increase  spending  in
order to stimulate employment. This is a genuine dilemma.
In view of its mandate and responsibilities, the best way for Norges Bank to address this challenge is
probably  to  promote  transparency  in  its  analyses  and  reaction  patterns  so  that  the  government
authorities  can  take  into  account  the  implications  for  Norges  Bank’s  setting  of  interest  rates  when
decisions concerning the government budget are taken. The objective of monetary policy and Norges
Bank’s remit are drawn up by the political authorities.
For monetary policy to be successful, it is vital that fiscal policy plays an effective role.
In the short term monetary policy can influence developments in the real economy. Norges Bank can
do  this  through  two  channels.  First,  Norges  Bank  will  proceed  gradually  when  the  krone’s  value
moves outside the initial range and instruments are oriented to returning it to this range. We seek to
avoid  a  situation  whereby  monetary  policy  contributes  to  abrupt  shifts  in  the  economy.  Second,
13
BIS Review   20/1999
developments  in  the  labour  market  and  product  markets  influence  wage  growth  and  inflation,  and
thereby  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Norges  Bank  takes  this  into  account  when  evaluating  economic
developments and when setting interest rates.
However, monetary policy is not a suitable instrument for influencing production and employment in
the long term. Nor can it be used to influence the size of the internationally exposed sector over time.
It is primarily wage and income determination, the use of oil revenues over the government budget,
and the adaptability and efficiency of the economy that determines this.
Nor is monetary policy an effective tool of incomes policy. Interest rates cannot be used to influence
the negotiating climate of the income settlements. This could act as a highly negative constraint on the
freedom of manoeuvre.
Long-term fiscal policy challenges
The fall in oil prices has  obvious  and  immediate  implications  for  monetary  policy.  But  what  about
long-term balance in the Norwegian economy? What if oil revenues remain low in the longer term as
well?
Norway’s  government  finances  are  sound  thanks  to  the  large  surpluses  of  recent  years.  A  country
normally  seeks  to  achieve  balanced  public  sector  budgets  over  the  business  cycle.  Norway  is  in  a
special  situation,  however,  because  of  its  petroleum  activities.  Revenues  fluctuate  sharply  in  pace
with the oil price and domestic business cycles. Oil and gas production will peak a few years into the
next century. It is therefore important to achieve a substantial surplus now, and accumulate financial
wealth that can be used to finance the welfare system when oil revenues taper off. Otherwise, welfare
schemes may have to be scaled back considerably when these revenues fall.
The Petroleum Fund consists of the accumulated surpluses of government finances. Capital was first
allocated  to  the  Fund  in  1995.  At  the  end  of  1998  the  market  value  of  the  Fund’s  capital  was
approximately NOK 170 billion.
National insurance scheme expenditure will increase in the future. In 1999 expenditure on retirement
and disability pensions is expected to amount to NOK 91 billion. This corresponds to about 8% of
Norway’s  GDP.  The  percentage  will  probably  double  over  the  next  30  years,  and  this  will  happen
after  Norwegian  oil  production  has  peaked.  The  challenge  to  the  real  economy  is  that  the  working
population  will  decline  sharply,  while  the  proportion  receiving  income  from  the  public  sector  will
rise.
Projections for government oil revenues have been based on an oil price in the order of NOK 100 to
NOK 120 per barrel. This will generate substantial government surpluses in the years ahead, and a
seemingly steady accumulation of capital in the Petroleum Fund. The 1999 national budget estimates
that  in  20  years  the  central  government’s  net  wealth  will  have  risen  to  120–130%  of  GDP.
Financially, the state will thus be well equipped to cope with the higher expenditure associated with
an ageing population.
So far this year, the oil price has averaged slightly more than NOK 80 per barrel. The chart shows
allocations to the Petroleum Fund with oil prices of NOK 110 and NOK 90 per barrel in the years
ahead.  An  oil  price  of  NOK  90  will  alone  result  in  a  substantially  smaller  surplus  than  previously
anticipated. In this scenario, the Petroleum Fund will peak at 75% of GDP in 2015.
The bottom line in the chart shows a different scenario. We are still assuming an oil price of NOK 90
per barrel – in other words, one that is not especially low under present circumstances. In addition, we
have assumed a further reduction in the budget surplus, equivalent to 0.5% of GDP, each year for the
next  10  years.  The  combined  effect  is  that  after  10  years  the  budget  surplus  will  have  declined  by
about 5% of GDP compared with the other calculations.
BIS Review   20/1999
14
This may seem substantial, but is no greater than the changes in the budget balance that we have seen
previously. In the previous downturn, the government reduced its surplus by slightly more than 5% by
means  of  an  active  countercyclical  policy  –  and  that  was  only  during  a  five-year  period.  The
tightening  so  far  in  the  1990s  has  been  of  roughly  the  same  magnitude.  By  contrast,  we  are  now
looking at a permanent change in the government surplus.
This scenario is not entirely improbable. A pause in growth lies ahead for the Norwegian economy,
and  we  must  expect  some  increase  in  unemployment.  This  will  quickly  translate  into  demands  for
expanded  public  sector  activity.  The  government  has  some  room  for  manoeuvre  to  address  this
challenge by boosting public expenditure or cutting taxes.
However, our calculations show that in the course of a few years an expansionary fiscal policy could
lead to a substantial reduction in the government’s scope for manoeuvre.
What I want to demonstrate is that pursuing such a policy now – assuming that the oil price remains
low – would have a major impact on the ability of the government to finance the welfare society. As
we see, it would not result in any increase in the budget surplus in the next few years. On the contrary,
the  surplus  would  gradually  be  reduced,  and  in  about  10  years  the  budget  would  begin  to  show  a
deficit.
The Petroleum Fund would suffer a sad fate and would be depleted in 18 years.
This is just an illustration, however. Developments would compel a shift in fiscal policy long before
the Petroleum Fund is depleted. But that in turn would mean that the state would not have the scope
for manoeuvre to stimulate total employment. It would not be easy to reduce the central government
deficit in a situation with declining oil revenues.
We might, of course, be fortunate enough to experience a rise in oil prices again, so that we do not
have to deal with this problem. Perhaps the oil price is abnormally low at present. But it is important
to be aware that the government, in expanding welfare programmes and public sector activities, has
not taken due account of the possibility that oil prices will remain low over a longer period.
15
BIS Review   20/1999
We have already witnessed a depreciation of the krone in response to the deterioration in Norway’s
terms of trade. This may reflect expectations of continued low oil prices and lower revenues in the
long term. This also compromises confidence in the government’s long-term financial position. It is
risky to increase expenditure and reduce taxes when there is doubt regarding the long-term balance of
the  economy.  An  expansionary  fiscal  policy  could  increase  uncertainty  and  the  fluctuations  in  the
exchange  rate,  and  reduce  Norges  Bank’s  freedom  of  manoeuvre.  On  the  contrary,  fiscal  policy
should be oriented to provide room for lower interest rates that can counter a cyclical downturn in an
environment of stable wage and price inflation.
The authorities must be very cautious about further embedding fixed long-term priorities in the central
government budget. If oil prices remain low, it may quickly become necessary to take a critical look at
the  scale  of  welfare  schemes  and  public  sector  services,  and  it  may  also  be  necessary  to  increase
taxes. If, later in the business cycle, measures are called for to curb unemployment, they should be
designed to be readily reversible and in such a way that they do not erode government finances in the
long term.
Conclusion
By way of introduction, I posed the following question: is our economy sufficiently robust to  cope
with the fall in oil prices without a new round of major structural adjustments?
Our financial system is in a stronger position to cope with a new downturn than it was in the 1980s.
We have avoided a debt bubble of the scale we witnessed last time. However, I am in doubt as to the
financial industry’s long-term restructuring capacity.
Norway must endorse the development of a new architecture for the global financial system. This is a
demanding and long-term process, and we cannot expect all the problems to be solved over night. On
the other hand, if we are to have any hope of a more stable and predictable world economy, the only
real alternative is to enhance international codes for financial markets.
We have observed that confidence in the krone is fragile. In order to restore confidence and maintain
a stable exchange rate, monetary policy must be a credible anchor for expectations of continued low
price  inflation.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  must  be  complementary  in  order  to  curb  cyclical
fluctuations.
BIS Review   20/1999
16
Fiscal policy must be credible in the long term. The welfare society is dependent on solid government
finances.  The  authorities  must  exercise  caution  in  establishing  fixed  long-term  priorities  in  the
government  budget.  Measures  aimed  at  countering  an  increase  in  unemployment  must  not  be
irreversible and undermine long-term credibility.
The conditions for addressing the challenges are favourable. Employment is high and the population
is well educated. However, our economy is also exposed and vulnerable.
In recent years fiscal policy has been too expansionary. This year the fiscal stance is appropriate. A
continued tight fiscal policy can contribute to restoring credibility and confidence so that interest rates
can gradually be reduced. Let this be my hope for future developments.
17
BIS Review   20/1999
