Mr George’s closing speech at the Euromoney International Bond Congress
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr E A J George, at the Euromoney International
Bond Congress in London on 10/02/99.
Thank you, Padraic. I wasn’t quite sure what you had in mind when you asked me to wind up this
Congress once again this year. I couldn’t remember what I’d done to wind you all up last year! But I
am happy to join you anyway at what has become – in five short years – an unmissable event in the
calendar for anyone with an interest in the international bond markets.
And  what  an  extraordinary  year  it’s  been  since  we  all  last  met  here.  Despite  all  the  upsets  –
beginning  in  Asia,  then  Russia  and  most  recently  Brazil  –  which  had  everyone  scrambling  for
liquidity  and  desperate  to  reduce  risk,  it  proved,  on  IFR’s  figures,  to  be  a  record  year  for
international bond issues, with total issuance rising by some 17% to over a trillion dollars equivalent.
That can’t have been bad for fees! And altogether it suggests you had a pretty good year – apart from
those  of  you  who  chose  to  go  on  holiday  in  August  leaving  someone  else  to  look  after  your  long
positions in Russian bonds.
Inevitably  issuance  by  emerging  market  economies  fell  away,  but  issuance  by  supranational  and
sovereign borrowers in aggregate still accounted for some 30% of total issuance.
At  the  same  time,  higher  rated  corporate  borrowers  took  advantage  of  lower  yields  to  strengthen
their balance sheets, accounting for 45% of total issuance. This was despite a general widening of
credit spreads – which though they have come back some way from the peak levels of the autumn
are  –  and  are  likely  to  remain  –  substantially  wider  than  before  the  emerging  markets  crisis,
reflecting a more sober assessment of relative credit risk. Against that, the bond markets generally
benefited  substantially  from  continuing  low  inflation  and  a  further  decline  in  inflationary
expectations,  so  that  yields  have  declined  in  virtually  all  the  main  currency  sectors.  In  terms  of
government bonds they have come down by 100 basis points in the US, by 150 basis points in bunds,
by close to 200 basis points in the sterling gilt market, and even by over 100 basis points in Japan
before yields there began to back up late last year. Borrowers have been attracted by lower nominal
borrowing costs; and investors in the market have been attracted by the prospect of rising values as
yields have declined. Significantly, the decline in yields in the underlying government bond markets
has typically more than offset the widening in spreads faced by lesser credits. In the US corporate
bond  market,  for  example,  BBB  spreads  widened  over  the  year  from  around  75  basis  points  to
around 140 basis points, but because of the underlying fall in yields, yields paid by BBB borrowers
actually  fell  from  around  6½%  to  6%.  Similarly,  in  the  sterling  market  here,  lower  grade  spreads
widened from around 80 basis points to over 150 basis points but yields paid fell from just over 7%
to around 6%. The result has been a notably effective contribution by the bond market to meeting the
financing needs of the corporate sector.
The  past  year  has,  also,  in  a  real  sense  been  the  year  of  Europe.  In  any  event,  the  prospect  then
advent  of  the  euro  was  undoubtedly  a  major  factor  driving  the  increase  in  bond  market  activity.
Issues  by  European  borrowers  accounted  for  some  25%  of  the  total,  and  issues  in  European
currencies rose to nearly 30%. Many issuers took the opportunity to issue tributary or parallel bonds
which  were  fungible  with  the  launch  of  the  euro.  Others  offered  large  benchmark  issues  with
provision  for  redenomination  into  the  euro.  In  parallel,  1998  saw  a  further  rapid  expansion  in  the
volume of equity issuance by European names, fed partly by privatisation sales, but reflecting also
increased  corporate  use  of  the  equity  market  to  finance  expansion  and  acquisitions.  Even  more
remarkably,  merger  and  acquisition  transactions  in  Europe  rose  nearly  50%  in  1998,  continuing  a
trend which has seen this area of activity increase by around 35% a year over the past five years.
BIS Review   17/1999
– 2 –
Moreover, January 1999 has by all accounts started the New Year in an even more active vein, with
a very high volume of bonds issued, and with the euro accounting for over a third of the total. In part,
this  no  doubt  reflects  the  fact  that  the  euro  is,  for  the  moment,  the  new  kid  on  the  block  which
everyone wants to meet. But more fundamentally it is a clear vote of confidence in the new currency
that such  international  interest  should  already  be  apparent  in  borrowing  and  investing  in  the  euro,
and in adapting and rebalancing portfolios to take account of this major change in the structure of the
capital markets.
A  hugely  important  contribution  to  this  process  has,  of  course,  been  the  vast  exercise  to  prepare
conventions,  processes  and  systems  for  the  euro,  both  within  firms  and  in  the  shared  market
infrastructure.  The  scale  of  work  undertaken  in  all  centres  –  but  notably  in  London,  because  of
London’s pre-eminent position as the international centre for the bond markets – has been immense
and I want to pay tribute to the high professionalism with which the preparations and the conversion
itself were conducted. People commented on how empty the bars and restaurants were in the City of
London over conversion weekend – which is remarkable in itself; but inside and indoors, 30,000 or
more people achieved a remarkable feat of engineering, all within the space of a three-day holiday
weekend. It may not have been everyone’s preferred way of spending New Year’s Eve, but it was
certainly a very productive one. The good news is that everyone can come back and do it again this
year for Y2K!
So there is a lot you can feel positive about in the past year’s achievements and in the start you have
made  to  1999.  But,  looking  ahead,  the  world  prospect  remains  uncertain.  Notably,  the  emerging
markets  crisis  has  had  an  immense  impact  on  international  financial  flows,  and  the  economic
adjustments  that  those  shifts  will  bring  in  their  wake  are  likely  to  have  important  impacts  on  the
bond markets and on your business activity.
As a measure of the impact of the emerging markets turbulence, the Institute of International Finance
recently  published  data  which  show  that  total  net  private  capital  flows  to  the  emerging  markets
(broadly defined) fell from some $325 billion in 1996 to around $150 billion last year. Within this,
nonbank  lending  and  portfolio  equity  inflows  also  fell  back  by  around  $60  billion  (to  around  $50
billion). Although direct investment in the emerging market countries held up pretty well (at around
$100 billion), and despite a big increase of nearly $50 billion in official lending, there was a sudden
huge decline in the overall availability of finance to the emerging market economies. And that left
many of them with sharply weakening exchange rates, and little choice but to contract their domestic
economies.
The immediate international priority last year was to contain the financial contagion – and there was
some  progress  in  this  direction  following  the  initial  shocks  in  Asia.  But  after  the  series  of  new
shocks  during  last  summer  –  Russia,  LTCM,  the  deepening  recession  in  Japan  and  the  worsening
position  in  Brazil  –  the  prospects,  at  around  the  time  of  the  IMF  meetings  in  Washington  last
autumn, were looking pretty bleak.
Now I would completely destroy my reputation as a central banker if I were to suggest that we are
out of the woods. But the darkest financial storm clouds have lifted a little since the Fund meetings.
The  US  Congress  finally  approved  more  resources  for  the  IMF,  the  threat  of  a  credit  crunch
extending  to  the  industrial  economies  in  the  wake  of  LTCM  receded,  helped  also  by  an  easing  of
monetary  policy  in  Europe  as  well  as  in  the  United  States.  In  Asia,  Japan  took  more  determined
policy action to address the fragility of the banking system and to stimulate domestic demand; the
yen  strengthened;  China  and  Hong  Kong  both  remained  admirably  resolute;  and  there  have  even
been some encouraging signs of renewed capital inflows to some of the Asian countries. The floating
of  the  exchange  rate  in  Brazil  last  month  inevitably  increased  concerns  about  emerging  market
instability, but it is encouraging that adverse effects on other markets have so far been limited.
BIS Review   17/1999
– 3 –
There may be further particular setbacks, as far as the overall financial situation is concerned, but I
think I can confidently say that if it doesn’t get any worse it is likely to get better. Risk aversion is all
very well for a time, but it doesn’t pay the rent!
What  we  are  now  having  to  cope  with  are  the  economic  consequences  of  the  earlier  financial
disturbances.  The  inevitable  counterpart  of  recession  in  much  of  the  rest  of  the  world  is  a  sharp
slowdown of net external demand – particularly for manufactures – in the industrial world. That has
been  reflected  in  growing  weakness  and  falling  business  confidence  in  large  parts  of  the
manufacturing  sector  in  both  the  United  States  and  Europe.  The  prospective  growth  in  world
economic activity has already roughly halved – from its trend rate of about 4%. Unless this fall in net
external demand is offset by sustained domestic demand growth in the industrial countries – unless,
in other words, the industrial economies collectively accommodate the necessary improvement in the
external  current  account  position  of  the  emerging  countries,  through  a  deterioration  in  their  own
current account positions – the prospects for world economic activity would be dismal.
Happily,  we  start  from  a  position  of  relatively  low  inflation  throughout  the  industrial  world  and,
faced  with  weakening  external  demand,  we  can  afford  to  see  higher  offsetting  domestic  demand
growth without jeopardising price stability. Indeed we need to see higher domestic demand growth
than we otherwise would if overall demand is not to fall short of underlying supply capacity, and we
need it, too, to offset the effects of weak world prices and of lower exchange rates in many emerging
market producers on our own domestic price level.
These considerations largely explain the easing of monetary policy in the US and in  Europe  since
last  autumn.  The  fact  that  we  reduced  interest  rates  by  different  amounts,  and  that  they  remain  at
different levels, is explained by differing assessments of the prospective impact on the pressure of
overall demand, taking account of our own particular starting points. But the general nature of the
response was driven by essentially similar considerations.
Managing this global imbalance will be a considerable challenge for policymakers over the next few
years;  and  helping  to  finance  it  –  including  helping  to  finance  re-emerging  markets  –  will  be  a
considerable  challenge  for  international  bond  markets.  The  fact  that  you  are  all  here  –  and  in
evidently good form – after the past remarkable year suggests that you have strong nerves. You may
well need them again in the period ahead. But think of it this way. By the time we meet again for this
great Congress next year, Y2K will be behind you – and if you have survived that, you can survive
anything! I wish you all possible success.
 BIS Review   17/1999
