Mr Brash addresses the subject of the New Zealand dollar and the recent business cycle
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Dr  Donald  T.  Brash,  to  the
Canterbury Employers’ Chamber of Commerce in Christchurch on 29/1/99.
Introduction
Mr Chairman, Ladies and gentlemen,
I am delighted to be addressing you once again, on your first meeting of the New Year. If my
memory is correct,  this  is  the  sixth  occasion  on  which  I  have  done  this,  and  I  appreciate  your
courtesy and tolerance in inviting me back each year.
Last year, I addressed the subject of New Zealand’s balance of payments deficit. Today, I want to
talk a little about a related issue, the exchange rate and its behaviour in recent years, because I
recognise that, in an export-oriented economy like that of Christchurch, the exchange rate has a
substantial  impact  on  the  viability  of  many  businesses.  I  feel  relatively  safe  in  Christchurch
today, with the trade-weighted measure of the New Zealand dollar around 57, but I felt distinctly
less secure when I was here just two years ago, with the TWI up around 69! And certainly the
appreciation from around 53 in early 1993 to 69 in early 1997, or an appreciation of some 30 per
cent in four years, made life very difficult for many businesses.
Eleven  years  have  passed  since  the  Minister  of  Finance  first  gave  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New
Zealand an explicit, quantitative, inflation target, and we have now experienced one full business
cycle under that inflation targeting regime, from recession in 1991 to recession in the first half of
1998.  For  this  reason,  it  seemed  like  an  opportune  time  for  us  in  the  Bank  to  review  that
experience to see what we could learn. Accordingly, over much of the last year, we have been
doing a careful study of the evolution of the New Zealand economy during the nineties. And to
me at least, the results of that review are intensely interesting. Some of them were published just
prior to Christmas in the December 1998 issue of the Reserve Bank’s quarterly Bulletin, while
others will be published in the March Bulletin.
Why did the appreciation take place?
I can’t even begin to summarise all of these results, but I want to record a few of them, as they
relate  to  the  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand  dollar  between  early  1993  and  early  1997.  In
particular I want to address four questions:
• 
• 
• 
• 
Was the appreciation in some sense abnormal or unusual?
What part did the Reserve Bank play in the appreciation?
Can large appreciations be avoided in the future?
First, why did the appreciation take place?
When we look back over the last business cycle, from the recession in 1991 to the recession in
the first half of 1998, one of the dominant impressions is that the New Zealand economy grew
for longer than in either of the two previous business expansions. An even stronger impression is
of  an  economy  growing  at  quite  a  fast  pace,  certainly  in  comparison  to  growth  in  most  other
developed  countries.  Indeed,  in  1993  GDP  growth  peaked  at  7.1  per  cent  and,  while  growth
slowed from that point on, the slow-down was quite mild by historical standards. The result was
BIS Review   11/1999
– 2 –
that economic growth in New Zealand exceeded the average growth among 18 OECD countries
from 1992 to late 1996. By the December quarter of 1997, the New Zealand economy was 25 per
cent larger in real terms than it had been at the trough of the recession in 1991. (See Figure 1.)
Figure 1
Real GDP growth: New Zealand and selected OECD countries
(Sources: Statistics New Zealand, International Financial Statistics, RBNZ calculation)
At the same time as we were enjoying that relatively rapid growth, inflation (as measured by the
CPI excluding interest rates) was both low and stable, fluctuating between a minimum of 1.1 per
cent  and  a  maximum  of  2.7  per  cent  between  1991  and  the  present.  In  the  early  part  of  that
period, inflation was slightly below the average for these OECD countries, while in the later part
of  the  period,  New  Zealand’s  inflation  rate  was  virtually  identical  to  the  OECD  average.  (See
Figure 2.)
But although actual inflation was subdued, inflationary pressures were, for several years at least,
intense.  The  New  Zealand  economy  initially  expanded  more  rapidly  than  several  of  its  major
trading partners, fuelled at the outset by rapid export growth but sustained by strong growth in
investment  and  consumption,  and,  later,  by  strong  inward  migration  and  an  expansive  fiscal
stance.  The  prices  of  goods  and  services  not  exposed  to  international  competition  rose
significantly  faster  than  the  average  increase  in  all  prices.  There  can  be  little  doubt  that  our
inflation  rate  would  have  been  appreciably  higher  –  that  is,  more  typical  of  the  seventies  and
eighties – had monetary policy not been leaning hard against those inflationary pressures.
BIS Review   11/1999
– 3 –
Figure 2
Annual inflation rates: New Zealand and selected OECD countries
(Sources: Statistics New Zealand, International Financial Statistics, RBNZ calculation)
And of course ‘leaning hard against inflationary pressures’ is a euphemism for pushing up real
(inflation-adjusted)  short-term  interest  rates.  In  1992,  our  real  short-term  interest  rates  were
actually lower than the OECD average; in 1993, they were very close to the average; but from
1994 until some six months ago they were well above the OECD average. (See Figure 3.)
Figure 3
Short-term real interest rates: New Zealand and selected OECD countries
(Sources: RBNZ, International Financial Statistics, RBNZ calculation)
BIS Review   11/1999
– 4 –
While various factors help to explain why the New Zealand dollar appreciated from early 1993 to
early 1997, our research suggests that the dominant explanation is the obvious one, namely the
relative  strength  of  the  domestic  economy  and  the  resulting  inflation  pressures.  Those
inflationary pressures necessitated significant monetary restraint, as reflected in the rise in New
Zealand’s short-term interest rates relative to those in our trading partners. Higher interest rates
in New Zealand than elsewhere ensured plenty of demand for New Zealand dollar assets, which
is another way of saying that there was upward pressure on the exchange rate. In other words, the
strong  appreciation  of  the  mid-nineties  was  the  direct  result  of  demand  growing  to  the  point
where inflationary pressures would have pushed up measured inflation markedly had it not been
for firm monetary policy. It was not until the domestic inflation pressures had clearly dissipated
that the TWI began to depreciate, around May 1997.
Secondly, was the appreciation in some sense abnormal or unusual?
It is helpful in answering this question to look not at the movement in the nominal exchange rate
but  at  the  movement  in  the  real  (inflation-adjusted)  exchange  rate.  Figure  4  shows  the  real
exchange  rate  measured  on  a  trade-weighted  basis.  What  the  graph  shows  is  that  the  real
exchange rate rose between early 1993 and April 1997 by 29 per cent, compared with an increase
of  36  per  cent  between  late  1984  and  mid  1988.  So  the  most  recent  appreciation  was  slightly
smaller than the one experienced in the mid- to late eighties.
Figure 4
New Zealand trade-weighted real exchange rate
(Source: RBNZ)
Another important point can be seen in the graph, and that is that, although some exporters are
particularly prone to measuring exchange rate appreciations from the very bottom of an exchange
rate cycle, it is as unrealistic to imply that the bottom of the cycle is in some way the norm as it
would  be  to  imply  that  the  top  of  the  cycle  is  the  norm.  The  real  exchange  rate  goes  through
BIS Review   11/1999
– 5 –
cycles, sometimes appreciating above its long-run average and sometimes depreciating below its
long-run average.
In early 1993, it is quite clear that the New Zealand dollar was significantly below its long-run
average,  and  no  exporter  should  have  been  expecting  that  the  exchange  rate  would  continue
indefinitely  at  those  levels.  In  early  1997,  it  is  equally  clear  that  the  New  Zealand  dollar  was
significantly above its long-run average, indeed above its long-run average to almost exactly the
same  extent  as  had  been  the  case  in  the  middle  of  1988  (almost  12  per  cent).  Today,  the  real
exchange  rate  again  seems  to  be  somewhat  below  its  long-term  average  level.  Given  New
Zealand’s relatively low short-term interest rates, and the size of our current account deficit, I do
not myself expect any rapid change in that situation. Indeed, any strong appreciation of the New
Zealand dollar at this stage would be surprising. But on the other hand it is no more reasonable to
expect the exchange rate to remain below its long-term average indefinitely than it is to expect it
to remain above that level for a lengthy period.
But,  I  am  often  asked,  why  do  we  have  to  endure  these  big  appreciations  at  all?  Surely  other
countries  have  managed  their  affairs  without  suffering  from  such  strong  appreciations?  Well,
some  may  have  done  so,  but  it  is  not  at  all  difficult  to  find  other  countries  which  have
experienced  similarly  strong  real  appreciations  in  the  recent  past,  including  Japan  (an
appreciation of 62 per cent from 1990 to 1995), the United Kingdom (an appreciation of 31 per
cent from 1995 to mid-1998), Germany (an appreciation of 25 per cent from 1991 to 1995), and
the United States (an appreciation of 24 per cent from 1995 to mid-1998). Indeed, Japan’s real
appreciation was very substantially greater than New Zealand’s, while Britain’s was somewhat
greater  and  over  an  even  shorter  period.  And  of  course  none  of  these  countries  is  small  or
particularly prone to being buffeted by international shocks. (See Figure 5.)
Figure 5
Recent episodes of exchange rate appreciation
(Sources: RBNZ, International Financial Statistics)
BIS Review   11/1999
– 6 –
But  what  about  Australia?  Surely  Australian  exporters  have  not  been  so  badly  affected  by
movements  in  their  real  exchange  rate  as  New  Zealand  exporters  were?  To  be  sure,  the
Australian real exchange rate appreciated rather less strongly than the New Zealand dollar did in
the mid-nineties but, as Figure 6 shows, over the whole period since 1980 it is not immediately
obvious that the Australian real exchange rate has behaved in ways which have been kinder to
exporters  than  the  New  Zealand  dollar  has.  Indeed,  looking  at  the  volatility  of  real  exchange
rates,  while  the  Australian  dollar  has  clearly  been  through  a  more  subdued  cycle  than  has  the
New Zealand dollar over the last five years, taking the eighties and nineties together the volatility
of  the  Australian  dollar  (in  real  terms)  has  been  somewhat  greater  than  has  that  of  the  New
Zealand dollar.
Figure 6
Trade-weighted real exchange rates: Australia and New Zealand
(Sources: RBNZ, International Financial Statistics)
There are various reasons why the Australian dollar appreciated more modestly than did the New
Zealand dollar during the most recent business cycle: Australia’s commodity prices were weaker
than were New Zealand’s at various times during the nineties, and more generally Australia had
more subdued inflationary pressures, requiring less firm monetary conditions, than New Zealand
did.  My  point  is  simply  that  it  would  be  unwise  to  assume,  on  the  basis  of  one  cycle,  that
Australia  has  found  some  enduringly  relevant  way  of  avoiding  strong  exchange  rate
appreciations.
A comparison of New Zealand with Singapore and Hong Kong is also interesting perhaps, since
they are two small, very open, economies, one of them operating a managed float and the other a
currency board peg to the United States dollar. Both economies are often held out as models of
economic  management,  and  certainly  are  economies  which  have,  over  many  years,  achieved
strong  export  growth.  If  we  consider  the  period  of  maximum  New  Zealand  dollar  real
appreciation, from late 1992 to April 1997, we see that the New Zealand dollar appreciated by
rather more than did either the Hong Kong dollar or the Singapore dollar over the same period.
But if we consider the whole of the nineties, from January 1990 to late 1998, we find that over
BIS Review   11/1999
– 7 –
that longer period the New Zealand dollar ended up at almost exactly the same point as it started
in real terms, whereas the Singapore dollar appreciated by some 12 per cent, and the Hong Kong
dollar,  pegged  though  it  was  to  the  US  dollar,  appreciated  by  a  very  substantial  39  per  cent.
(Figure 7.)
Figure 7
Real exchange rates: New Zealand, Singapore and Hong Kong
(Source: JP Morgan)
The  conclusion  we  reached  from  all  this  analysis  is  that  the  appreciation  of  the  New  Zealand
dollar in the mid-nineties was not unusual, either internationally or in terms of our own history.
Thirdly, what part did the Reserve Bank play in the appreciation?
This  may  seem  a  very  odd  question,  since  I  have  already  acknowledged  that  the  main  factor
driving up the exchange rate in the mid-nineties was the need to tighten monetary policy to head
off  the  inflationary  pressures  caused  by  demand  growing  faster  than  the  potential  of  the  New
Zealand economy to meet that demand. This pushed up not only the nominal exchange rate, but
also the real (inflation-adjusted) exchange rate.
But suppose the Reserve Bank had acted differently. Would matters have been much different?
The answer is ‘almost certainly not’. Suppose the Bank had not tightened monetary policy. At
some  point,  the  rise  in  the  price  of  houses  and  other  goods  and  services  in  the  non-tradeable
sector of the economy would have begun to spill over into the general price level. Wages  and
other  costs  would  have  started  to  rise.  Other  things  the  same,  exporters  would  have  found
themselves squeezed by these rising costs. In other words, they would have been squeezed by a
rise in the inflation-adjusted exchange rate. So no matter what policy the Bank had pursued, the
real  exchange  rate  would  have  appreciated  considerably,  and  exporters  would  have  been  put
under  pressure.  The  only  issue  is  whether  the  real  exchange  rate  appreciation  took  place
alongside low inflation within New Zealand or whether it took place through an inflation blow-
out within New Zealand.
BIS Review   11/1999
– 8 –
It is fair to acknowledge, however, that the way in which the Reserve Bank sees the exchange
rate in the implementation of monetary policy has evolved over the years.
In the first years of the fight against inflation, the Bank paid very little attention to the exchange
rate. In the years immediately following deregulation, both interest rates and the exchange rate
were very volatile. We had very little sense of what ‘normal’ levels for these prices were, and
hence put little weight on movements in them when we were thinking about monetary policy and
the outlook for inflation. Instead, we paid particular attention to keeping the quantity of ‘primary
liquidity’ stable.
By  the  time  I  became  Governor  of  the  Bank  in  1988,  we  had  come  to  recognise  that  the  very
short-term volatility in interest and exchange rates was largely unnecessary, and might well have
real  costs  –  if  only  in  obscuring  the  price  signals  facing  investors  and  producers  in  the  real
economy.  As  inflation  targeting  became  more  formalised,  we  tended  to  implement  monetary
policy by making a careful assessment of all the  factors  relevant  to  inflationary  pressures,  and
then  working  out  some  internal  ‘comfort  zones’  for  the  key  financial  prices.  These  were  not
targets  in  the  sense  that  we  were  totally  dedicated  to  maintaining  interest  or  exchange  rates
within  these  ranges.  But  they  were  designed  to  shape  our  own  thinking,  and  to  guide  us  in
deciding when it made sense to take some action to limit movements in interest or exchange rates
between the periodic reassessments of the inflation outlook.
Over time, the exchange rate band became increasingly prominent. This was partly because we
had little formal sense of the linkage between interest rates and inflation, whereas we did have
statistical estimates of the direct effect, other things being equal, of a movement in the exchange
rate  on  prices  –  in  other  words,  the  effect  of  a  movement  in  the  exchange  rate  on  the  New
Zealand dollar price of imports and things like meat and milk which were also exported. Largely
because  the  inflation  outlook  was  still  so  uncertain  during  the  disinflation  period,  but  also
because  we  thought  we  had  a  reasonable  handle  on  the  direct  price  effects  of  changes  in  the
exchange rate, monetary policy often tended to be  focused  principally  on  the  inflation  outlook
over the following 12 months or so.
By the mid-nineties, this approach was becoming increasingly less relevant. Our confidence that
a 1 per cent movement in the trade-weighted exchange rate would produce a change in consumer
price  inflation  of  about  0.3  per  cent  within  about  12  months  began  to  wane,  as  first  the
depreciation of 1991 and then the appreciation of 1993-97 produced a much smaller impact on
inflation than previous research had suggested. Indeed, by the end of 1995 reference to ‘exchange
rate comfort zones’ had largely disappeared from our monetary policy implementation lexicon.
The impact of interest rates on inflation was becoming more evident, and in particular it became
clear  that  the  low  interest  rates  of  1992  and  1993  were,  with  a  lag  of  more  than  a  year,
encouraging strong credit growth, rapidly increasing house prices, and inflationary pressures in
the domestic sectors of the economy.
More importantly, with inflation having been within the agreed target for 1991, 1992, 1993, and
1994, there was also gradually increasing confidence, within financial markets  and,  to  a  lesser
extent, in the general public, that the commitment to low inflation was credible. This increased
credibility meant that we could afford to be less concerned about the one-off direct price effects
of exchange rate movements. Even if we had had a lot of confidence in our estimates of the size
and timing of these effects, the risk that they would spill over into higher inflation expectations,
creating ongoing problems, was much diminished. While mindful that a change in the exchange
rate might in itself be telling us that monetary policy had become inappropriate, we could afford
to  focus  mainly  on  the  medium-term  channels  by  which  interest  and  exchange  rates  affect  the
BIS Review   11/1999
– 9 –
ongoing  rate  of  inflation.  In  recent  years  this  has  meant  trying  to  focus  more  on  the  inflation
outlook 18 to 24 months ahead.
Keeping that medium-term focus means recognising that monetary policy mistakes take time to
correct – that even if we could turn our monetary policy super-tanker very quickly it might not be
sensible to do so.
To illustrate, in April 1996, when the Minister of Finance requested an explanation of inflation
falling outside the agreed target by 0.1 per cent, I advised him that indications at that time were
that  inflation  might  remain  outside  the  target  for  two  or  three  more  quarters.  Despite  this,  I
advised him that we did not intend to tighten policy sufficiently to avoid those further breaches
since the only way that that could have been achieved would have been through a very aggressive
tightening of policy that would have both created a risk of going below the inflation target the
following year and considerably exacerbated the exchange rate and interest rate cycle. What we
were  implicitly  recognising  is  that,  while  monetary  policy  can  not  be  used  to  engineer  a
sustainably faster growth rate in the long-term, there can be a trade-off between the variability of
inflation and the variability of monetary conditions in the short-term.
In late 1996, of course, the inflation target was amended from 0 to 2 per cent to 0 to 3 per cent
and,  though  not  requested  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  this  increased  the  scope  for  flexibility  when
faced with the many lags and uncertainties in setting monetary policy.
All of these factors drove us in the direction of being less concerned about the direct price effects
of exchange rate movements and more concerned about the medium-term effects of interest rates
and the exchange rate. Our focus lengthened from a primary interest in the next 12 months to an
18 to 24 month view.
So in short, over the decade we have moved from a primary focus on the relatively short-term
direct price effects of exchange rate movements as a way of reducing inflation, when there was
an urgent need to reduce inflation quickly and where the credibility of policy was very low, to a
focus  on  the  medium-term  effects  of  interest  and  exchange  rates  on  the  real  economy,  and
therefore  on  inflation.  In  large  part  this  change  has  been  made  possible  by  the  increased
confidence within the community that the Reserve Bank will continue to deliver stable prices, the
result in turn of eight years of low and stable inflation.
Finally, can large appreciations be avoided in the future?
Let me say first that a gradually appreciating exchange rate is something to which all countries
should  aspire.  A  trend  appreciation  in  the  real  exchange  rate  is  usually  the  direct  result  of  a
country’s  relatively  superior  record  of  productivity  improvement,  and  that  is  obviously
something to aspire to. A trend appreciation in the nominal exchange rate may arise from that
superior record of productivity improvement or it may arise from a superior record of keeping
inflation  under  control.  And  I  think  most  New  Zealanders,  including  most  exporters,  would
welcome an appreciation which arises from one or both of those factors.
But  what  we  are  talking  about  here  is  the  kind  of  appreciation  which  raises  the  New  Zealand
dollar  by  close  to  30  per  cent  over  three  or  four  years,  faster  than  any  plausible  increase  in
relative  productivity  or  inflation  performance.  Can  that  be  avoided?  Can  we  even  reduce  the
amplitude of the swings around the long-run average from, say, plus or minus 12 per cent to, say,
plus  or  minus  5  per  cent?  If  I  could  assure  you  that  the  Reserve  Bank  is  confident  that  it  can
operate monetary policy without the risk of such large fluctuations in future, I would leave here a
BIS Review   11/1999
– 10 –
much  more  popular  man,  and  you  would  leave  here  feeling  very  much  happier  too.
Unfortunately, I can give you no such assurance.
In principle, the ways in which large and rapid appreciations might be avoided are of four kinds.
First,  to  the  extent  that  large  appreciations  are  a  function  of  firm  monetary  policy,  one  option
might be to resist inflationary pressures less vigorously. Alas, all the evidence from our own and
international experience suggests that allowing inflationary pressures to become more embedded
in the economy makes the subsequent job of eliminating inflation much more difficult. In other
words,  when  inflationary  expectations  become  more  deeply  embedded  in  society,  eliminating
inflation requires more pressure from monetary policy, higher real interest rates and a higher real
exchange rate, not the reverse. And in any event, as already indicated, failing to resist an increase
in inflation still leaves exporters facing a loss of competitiveness because of the increase in the
domestic costs which they face. The United States, the United Kingdom, Germany, and Japan all
approach keeping inflation low in rather different ways, but all have experienced periods of sharp
exchange rate appreciation this decade.
The second way in which we might avoid strong appreciations in the future is to avoid, or at least
to minimise, the situations where a strong tightening of monetary policy is required. In part, this
is a Reserve Bank responsibility, and involves our being quick to spot situations where demand
looks likely, 18 to 24 months ahead, to exceed the economy’s sustainable capacity to deliver. We
are  doing  a  great  deal  of  work  to  assist  us  in  forecasting  but,  as  I  have  remarked  on  several
occasions before, no matter how good our research, no matter how good the statistical data on
which we make decisions, no matter how good our formal and informal information networks,
no  matter  how  good  our  models,  by  the  nature  of  the  case  the  future  will  often  turn  out  very
differently to our expectations. Neither we nor any other central bank has a perfect crystal ball.
This means that there is simply no guarantee that we will be able to avoid vigorous tightening of
monetary policy in the future.
Some have suggested that monetary policy would not have needed to tighten so aggressively in
the mid-nineties if fiscal policy –  government  taxation  and  spending  policy  –  had  not  been  so
expansionary.  It  is  certainly  true  that,  after  acting  to  dampen  aggregate  demand  in  the  early
nineties,  fiscal  policy  became  rather  more  expansionary  in  the  mid-nineties,  and  this  required
monetary  policy  to  be  tighter  than  would  otherwise  have  been  necessary  at  that  time.  To  that
degree, the stimulatory fiscal policy of 1996 and 1997 must bear some of the blame for the strong
appreciation of the exchange rate. Moreover, there can be little doubt that, if strong appreciations
are to be avoided in the future, a full recognition of the monetary policy implications of changes
in fiscal policy will be imperative.
But it has to be acknowledged that it is not always easy to adjust fiscal policy to take account of
cyclical pressures, for  reasons  which  are  sometimes  technical  and  sometimes  political.  Indeed,
some would argue that the Fiscal Responsibility Act is based on the premise that adjusting fiscal
policy in response to cyclical pressures is neither necessary nor appropriate.
New Zealand’s experience in 1996 and 1997 illustrates some of the technical problems well. In
late  1995,  the  Government  publicly  announced  that  they  would  proceed  with  a  reduction  in
income tax rates in mid-1996 only if the Reserve Bank were satisfied that the tax cuts could take
place without putting undue pressure on monetary conditions. We were formally asked if the tax
cuts  could  proceed  without  creating  such  upward  pressure  on  monetary  conditions,  and  after
careful consideration we formally advised Government that we believed the tax cuts would not
create  any  undue  upward  pressure  on  monetary  conditions.  As  Reserve  Bank  watchers  may
BIS Review   11/1999
– 11 –
recall,  this  was  close  to  the  time  when  we  reached  the  judgement,  in  October  1995,  that
inflationary  pressures  were  abating  and  that  some  easing  in  monetary  conditions  might  be
appropriate. We in the Bank, others in the Treasury, and many private sector forecasters all felt
that  the  economy  would  slow  down  markedly  in  1996,  and  that  the  proposed  fiscal  stimulus
would not create undue pressure on monetary conditions.
In retrospect, our judgement was incorrect: inflationary pressures in the economy had not eased
by  as  much  as  we  thought  at  the  time  and,  as  it  turned  out,  a  firm  monetary  policy  had  to  be
maintained  for  a  further  year.  And  of  course,  by  the  time  we  thought  that  the  outlook  was
sufficiently  subdued  that  monetary  restraint  could  be  eased  without  inflation  becoming  a
problem, the Asian crisis was about to break. This course of events serves to underscore just how
difficult it is to fine tune monetary policy, and why  I  am  reluctant  to  claim  that  swings  in  the
exchange rate are a thing of the past.
There  may  also  be  difficult  political  obstacles  in  using  fiscal  policy  to  carry  some  of  the  load
otherwise carried by monetary policy. In late 1995, the New Zealand public sector was in very
substantial operating surplus and, in the absence of tax cuts or increases in government spending,
that  surplus  looked  likely  to  continue  indefinitely.  Even  leaving  aside  the  fact  that  both  the
Reserve Bank and other forecasters mis-read what was likely to happen to the economy in 1996,
it could well have been difficult to persuade any Parliament in those circumstances to forego tax
cuts or increases in government spending. In the end we got both, and part of the price may well
have  been  a  continuation  of  strong  exchange  rate  appreciation  for  longer  than  anybody  in  the
export sector enjoyed.
Thirdly,  measures  might  be  taken  to  drive  a  wedge  between  New  Zealand  interest  rates  and
foreign  interest  rates,  so  that  when  monetary  policy  is  tightened  in  New  Zealand  to  head  off
inflationary  pressures  this  does  not  result  in  an  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate,  or  at  least
results in a rather smaller appreciation than otherwise.
Various  countries  try  to  do  this.  Some,  for  example,  have  tried  to  cut  themselves  off  from
international capital markets by instituting  comprehensive  controls  on  capital  flowing  into  and
out of the country, of the kind that New Zealand used to have. Few would seek a return to this
kind of regime in New Zealand and indeed, even in the countries of Asia which have been most
affected by recent turbulence, few have seen the benefits of such controls as likely to exceed their
very substantial costs. Those who advocate such controls usually do so only for countries which
have not yet got  their  macro-economic  policies  in  order,  or  which  have  serious  weaknesses  in
their  financial  systems.  In  other  words,  controls  of  this  kind  are  often  seen  as  a  temporary  or
transitional measure, while more fundamental weaknesses are addressed.
Other  countries  have  tried  to  drive  a  wedge  between  domestic  and  foreign  interest  rates  by
instituting  a  tax  on  interest  income  accruing  to  foreigners,  a  non-resident  withholding  tax.  In
principle, this has considerable appeal because it means domestic interest rates can be pushed up
to a level appropriate to the restraint of domestic inflationary pressures while not encouraging a
strong  capital  inflow  which  would  push  up  the  exchange  rate.  But  New  Zealand’s  own
experience  suggests  that  it  is  in  fact  quite  difficult  to  make  such  taxes  work  effectively,  since
there are lots of ways in which foreign investors, working in conjunction with locals, can find
ways around that tax.
Some  academic  economists  have  suggested  that  countries  institute  a  small  tax  on  all  foreign
exchange transactions, a so-called Tobin tax after the economist who first proposed it, in order to
discourage speculative capital flows. But very few policy-makers give such a tax any chance of
BIS Review   11/1999
– 12 –
being  implemented  and,  if  implemented,  of  actually  working  as  intended.  To  be  effective,  it
would  need  to  be  applied  in  all  countries  at  the  same  rate,  lest  foreign  exchange  transactions
simply migrate to a country where the tax is not applied. And if this substantial hurdle could be
overcome, most observers believe that the effect of the  tax  would  be  to  substantially  diminish
liquidity  in  financial  markets,  so  that  large  ‘beneficial’  transactions  would  produce  very  large
movements in the exchange rate. Worse still, there seems little prospect of such a tax deterring
large-scale capital flight: who will resent paying, say, a 0.1 per cent Tobin tax if he fears a 30 per
cent devaluation?
The  only  serious  contender  on  the  international  stage  at  present  as  a  way  to  drive  a  wedge
between domestic and foreign interest rates is the so-called Chilean approach. In principle, that
involves  no  restrictions  on  capital  outflow  and  no  restrictions  on  incoming  foreign  direct
investment, but a requirement that a proportion (initially 30 per cent but later reduced to 10 per
cent) of incoming portfolio investment be deposited with the central bank at zero interest for a
period  of  one  year.  The  intention  of  this  measure  was  to  discourage  short-term  capital  inflow
while creating no barriers to other forms of capital movement. Whether such a measure would
work in the relatively sophisticated financial markets which we now have in New Zealand is at
this stage an open question. Indeed, there is intense debate internationally whether the policy has
even  had  a  beneficial  effect  in  Chile  itself,  and  Chile  has  recently  reduced  the  proportion  of
incoming portfolio investment which must be deposited with the central bank to zero. As I noted
in my speech on the balance of payments deficit last year, there would clearly be some real risks
in  introducing  such  a  policy  in  New  Zealand,  not  least  the  longer-term  costs  of  undermining
investor confidence in New Zealand’s commitment to free and open markets.
A  fourth  idea  for  avoiding  strong  exchange  rate  appreciations  has  recently  been  gaining  some
media play, namely the idea that New Zealand should irrevocably peg to some larger currency, or
even form a currency union with some larger country or group of countries. The New Zealand
dollar is simply too small and insignificant to float alone in the turbulent ocean of world financial
markets,  it  is  argued,  and  would  be  better  securely  linked  to  a  bigger  vessel.  Many  countries
contemplating this possibility see a link to the United States dollar as having huge appeal, while
in the past the German mark has also had a number of adherents. No doubt in the future the euro
will also attract its strong adherents.
In the New Zealand situation, it is not surprising that most of those who advocate New Zealand
becoming a part of a larger currency area argue for a currency union with Australia (although in
reality, given the relative size of our two economies, a currency union between New Zealand and
Australia  would  be  more  akin  to  New  Zealand  pegging  to  Australia  than  a  genuine  currency
union in the European sense). Australia is our largest trading partner, and there is essentially free
mobility of labour and capital between the two countries. This means that two of the key criteria
for  an  optimal  currency  area  would  be  at  least  partly  met  in  the  case  of  an  Australian/New
Zealand currency union.
But while Australia may well be the most logical country for New Zealand to form a currency
union with, and this idea may well be worth further exploration for a whole raft of economic and
political reasons, it is quite misleading to imply that forming a currency union, with Australia or
anybody else, would avoid the problem of strong currency appreciation in the future. As I have
already  indicated,  most  of  the  world’s  largest  economies  have  within  the  last  decade  seen
appreciations of a size similar to that experienced by New Zealand in the mid-nineties. The Hong
Kong dollar, effectively tied to the United States dollar since the early eighties, saw a huge real
appreciation  during  the  nineties  in  part  as  a  result.  Australia  did  not  have  such  a  strong
BIS Review   11/1999
– 13 –
appreciation during the nineties but, as also indicated, the Australian dollar has had rather more
volatility over the last 20 years than the New Zealand dollar has.
It  is  not  very  long  ago  that  the  most  common  complaint  made  to  me  in  areas  of  the  country
outside Auckland related to the fact that non-Aucklanders were facing real interest and exchange
rates  which  were  quite  inappropriate  to  the  inflationary  pressures  in  areas  outside  Auckland.
Why, I was often asked, do we have to pay these high real interest rates, and suffer the penalties
of the high real exchange rate, when the only inflationary problem is in Auckland? Of course,
inflationary  pressures  were  far  more  widespread  than  this  question  implied,  but  my  answer
always included the point that, in a single currency area (New Zealand), there can only be one set
of interest rates and one exchange rate. Sometimes those monetary conditions will be too loose
for some parts of the country and too tight for other parts of the country. But that is the nature of
the beast: it simply isn’t feasible to have a different set of monetary conditions in different parts
of the same currency area. This means that if we were part of a currency union with Australia and
the  Australian  economy  were  very  buoyant,  perhaps  because  of  booming  exports  of  iron  ore,
gold,  and  wheat,  it  is  quite  possible  that  New  Zealand  exporters  would  be  facing  a  rising
(common) exchange rate and all of us would be facing relatively high real interest rates at a time
when  the  New  Zealand  economy  was  quite  subdued.  New  Zealand  exporters  who  were
concerned about an exchange rate dominated by Auckland conditions can hardly feel confident
that Sydney or Melbourne economic conditions will always be more relevant to them.
But  surely,  if  it  makes  sense  for  11  European  countries  to  form  the  Economic  and  Monetary
Union,  with  a  common  currency  throughout  those  11  countries,  it  must  make  sense  for  New
Zealand to link with Australia (or somebody else) also? Not necessarily. Although 23 per cent of
our  total  merchandise  trade  is  with  Australia,  that  is  a  relatively  small  part  of  our  trade  in
comparison to the proportion of trade between members of the new European monetary union.
Thus, for example, 45 per cent of France’s total trade was with EMU members in 1997, 46 per
cent of Germany’s, and 57 per cent of Holland’s. While Australia is our largest trading partner,
and  joining  a  currency  union  with  Australia  might  well  make  life  easier  for  those  companies
trading  primarily  with  Australia,  it  would  not  solve  any  of  the  problems  caused  by  currency
variability  for  those  conducting  the  other  77  per  cent  of  our  international  trade.  Indeed,  I  can
imagine  New  Zealand  beef  exporters  might  argue  for  a  link  to  the  US  dollar,  dairy  exporters
might argue for a link to the euro, and fruit and vegetable exporters might argue for a link to the
yen!
BIS Review   11/1999
Conclusion
– 14 –
So  where  does  that  leave  us?  It  has  sometimes  been  argued  that  developments  in  monetary
conditions in New Zealand were abnormal or unusual in the nineties. Without a doubt, the rise in
interest rates and the appreciation of the currency were large. But this tells us little about whether
they were, in some sense, too large or inexplicable. I have suggested that monetary conditions
were not dramatically out of line with past experience here and abroad, and were broadly what
we should have expected given the length and strength of the business cycle.
I also believe that the policy framework has coped well through these testing times. For the first
time  in  many  years,  we  have  been  through  a  business  cycle  without  an  explosion  in  inflation
expectations and without a large structural fiscal deficit. We have weathered the Asian crisis with
our  banks  in  good  stead,  and  we  remain  well  positioned  to  take  advantage  of  the  next
international upswing. Given the circumstances, we have also experienced a remarkably orderly
shift in the mix of monetary conditions, to one more reflective of the current realities facing the
economy.
But clearly it would be a mistake to believe that this is the last time the framework will be tested.
What we have learnt from our study is that we need to view these developments in the context of
our  own  business  cycle  pressures,  developments  in  international  capital  markets,  and  the
business cycle and inflationary pressures of our major trading partners. Looking ahead, another
business cycle upswing will occur at some point, and monetary conditions will again need to be
tightened in order to constrain inflation. The extent to which that is reflected in upward pressure
on the exchange rate will depend on the strength of the inflationary pressures and  the  level  of
interest rates both here and abroad.
Alas, there is no magic bullet which can  avoid  this  situation.  Ongoing  changes  at  the  Reserve
Bank in the way in which we operate policy may, at the margin, slightly reduce exchange rate
fluctuations.  These  changes  have  included  a  more  flexible  approach  to  inflation  targeting  by
shifting the policy horizon out to 18 to 24 months, assisted in part by a wider inflation band of 0
to 3 per cent.
Over recent years, I think that the Reserve Bank may have slightly reduced the risks of strong
exchange rate appreciation by making it unambiguously clear that we have no secret exchange
rate floor in the back of our mind. We have an inflation target, not an exchange rate target. For
this  reason,  those  buying  New  Zealand  dollar  assets  with  foreign  currency  always  face  the
possibility  that  they  might  lose  on  their  investment.  There  is  no  one-way  bet  in  buying  New
Zealand dollars.
We in the Reserve Bank are committed to doing our utmost to avoid situations where monetary
policy has to be tightened aggressively. In other words, we will do our best to tighten in a timely
way, so that the tightening can be gradual and moderate. And I hope you will be loud in your
support of the Reserve Bank next time we begin such a gradual tightening! But with the best will
in  the  world,  it  will  be  necessary  to  tighten  aggressively  from  time  to  time  to  deal  with
unexpected events.
The message I want all exporters – and indeed those competing with imports – to take from this
speech is this. You should assume in your business planning that the current relatively low dollar
is not the norm, and will not last indefinitely. As already indicated, I  myself  do  not  expect  an
early  appreciation  in  the  New  Zealand  dollar,  given  our  relatively  low  interest  rates  and  large
current  account  deficit.  Indeed,  the  New  Zealand  dollar  could  well  depreciate  further.  But  in
BIS Review   11/1999
– 15 –
deciding  how  to  run  your  business,  especially  in  a  strategic  sense,  you  should  look  at  the
historical record, and note that the exchange rate cycle experienced over the last decade was not
exceptional, either for New Zealand or by international standards. Exchange rate fluctuations of
that magnitude are just part of the rough and tumble of an economy such as New Zealand’s. They
will happen again.
My plea to you therefore is this: just because the currency is low now, don’t sit on your hands
and  enjoy  it.  Invest  in  quality;  keep  costs  under  tight  control;  reduce  your  vulnerability  to
exchange-rate-driven  price  fluctuations;  don’t  pay  too  much  for  land  (especially  relevant  to
farmer  exporters);  develop  brands  that  are  less  price  sensitive.  As  I’ve  said  before,  a  good
Canterbury farmer knows that droughts are inevitable from time to time, and plans accordingly.
Likewise a good exporter knows  that  fluctuations  in  the  real  exchange  rate  are  inevitable,  and
plans accordingly. You should be doing this now.
 BIS Review   11/1999
