Mr Tietmeyer looks at the euro and the challenges ahead
Address by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof Hans Tietmeyer, at the Frankfurt
International Banking Evening, in Frankfurt on 20 May 1999.
This year’s Frankfurt International Banking Evening is a special occasion for me. It’s the last
one I shall attend as President of the Bundesbank.
And what is the consequence of that to me? Well, this time I must hold the lecture myself.
Up to now, I have always had the pleasure of delivering the shorter supplementary address. It
seems that the Bundesbank President was regarded - at least by the organisers of this meeting
- as particularly suitable for that purpose, being the local “Frankfurt” central banker.
Seen in those terms, Wim, it is noteworthy that this evening that is your privilege. Since you
appear to be performing the role of the “Frankfurt” central banker tonight.
I hope, by the way, that you will occupy the position of a central banker in Frankfurt for a long
time to come. I shall be watching from the sidelines of my retirement, and shall be delighted if
you remain “in the best of health” for a long time yet.
If we combine “de facto monetary union” and “official monetary union”, we can look back
today not only on almost six months of the euro, but actually on an entire year - even if the
formal launch in January marked a particular watershed.
At all events, already in 1998 some crucial decisions were taken affecting the credibility of the
new currency:
•  on balance, a number of convincing personnel decisions,
•  a credible monetary policy strategy,
•  effective and easily comprehensible policy instruments,
and some major technical preparations, not to be underrated in terms of the credibility of the
euro.
And, as a matter of fact, the interest rate decision taken last December was virtually the first
interest rate measure adopted by the Governing Council of the ECB.
Not least on account of this thorough preparatory work, the Eurosystem was happily able to
assume full responsibility for monetary policy at a time of low inflation rates and favourable
medium-term prospects for stability, thus linking up pretty smoothly with the monetary policy
pursued by the national central banks.
Indeed, the medium-term price outlook appeared so favourable to the Governing Council that
we were actually able to lower central bank rates by a further 50 basis points in April.
The  technical  side  of  the  transition  to  the  euro  went  off  better  on  the  whole  than  some
financial market players had expected. At any rate, the media expressed surprise that no major
1
BIS Review   57/1999
mishaps  were  to  be  reported.  A  steep  rise  in  equity  and  foreign-exchange-market  prices
seemed to bear that out.
Some people actually believed that the longer-term potential of the euro could be exploited in
full in the first few days. A few apparently thought that
•  global investors would quickly switch a large proportion of their assets into euros, and that
•  central banks would rapidly diversify their reserves in favour of the euro.
In  the  meantime,  a  rather  more  cautious  assessment  -  at  least,  as  compared  with  the  initial
euphoria  -  has  won  through  in  the  markets,  especially  as  regards  the  pace  of  any  such
assumption by the euro of the role of a major investment and reserve currency.
Exaggerated  short-term  expectations  have  thus  inevitably  been  followed  by  a  certain
disillusionment, and even disappointment, which has ultimately been reflected in the external
value.  Political  developments  in  the  Balkans  have  likewise  played  (and  are  still  playing)  a
role, at least in the short run.
However, there is no reason at all to write off the enormous potential of the euro - which some
people  have  seemingly  been  tending  to  do  of  late.  The  potential  is  there.  Yet  the  markets
should not be too short-term in their orientation.
The  international  attractiveness  of  the  euro  will  hinge  crucially  on  the  extent  to  which  it
manages to gain investors’  long-term  confidence,  and  to  which  it  succeeds  in  accumulating
credibility of its own.
Of course, that will owe a great deal to the economic and political setting. That has likewise
been the case in the past six months:
• 
in the economic setting, it has transpired that - contrary to some fears expressed during the
past year - the US economy continues to be marked by an exceptionally buoyant growth
process.
In a number of euro countries, by contrast, the impression of a certain short-lived slackening
in growth has been confirmed. In the meantime, however, there are signs of activity starting to
pick up again soon.
And as far as the political setting is concerned, a number of euro countries are still rather far
away from the medium-term objective of the Stability and Growth Pact, namely a balanced
budget, as is mentioned in the recent Monthly Bulletin of the European Central Bank.
That forms a distinct contrast to the United States, which is in the enviable position of being
able to think about what it can do with its budget surpluses. In the process, it is reaping the
fruits of an investment-friendly tax system and of vigorously pursued longer-term reforms.
In a number of euro countries, on the other hand, investment-friendly tax systems and resolute
reforms  of  the  labour  market  and  social  security  systems  remain  obligations  that  policy
makers urgently need to fulfil.
BIS Review   57/1999
2
Now  that  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  done  its  bit  to  create  an  environment  in
which price stability is largely assured on the monetary side, and in which the considerable
growth  potential  of  the  euro  area  can  be  exploited  more  effectively,  such  reforms  are
particularly necessary.
A preliminary outcome therefore reads as follows: alongside a number of expectations met,
particularly in the area of stability prospects, there is also a certain degree of disappointment
over some decisions still outstanding on the part of policy makers and over the stance of the
parties to pay settlements in some countries.
Only after the requisite reforms have been implemented is the die cast as to whether and when
the monetary union actually culminates in a successful  and  durable  Community  of  Stability
with an inherent dynamism of its own which can live up both to the expectations of growth
and  employment  prospects  placed  in  it  and  to  the  idea  of  an  internationally  attractive
investment and reserve currency that can stand up to competition from the dollar.
Making a lasting success of monetary union is and will remain the ongoing task of, ultimately,
all policy areas - not just of the single monetary policy, but likewise of fiscal and economic
policy, which have largely remained national responsibilities.
Member states must recognisably discharge their obligations and make that perfectly clear for
all to see. Only in that way can lasting credibility be achieved.
And credibility is the name of the game.
For that will convince the markets, too, of the long-term determination and long-term capacity
of the Community to ensure stability.
Nobody can simply lean back, or perhaps seek to instrumentalise the euro for one purpose or
another.
The yardstick of monetary policy is, and will remain, lasting internal stability. In the long run,
it is on such stability that the external attractiveness of the currency will depend. Happily, that
is  generally  agreed  in  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  And  that  objective  is  clearly
expressed in the monetary policy strategy we are pursuing.
True enough, monetary policy has not exactly become any easier since the turn of the year.
How the transmission mechanisms of monetary policy operate over the euro area as a whole is
not  yet  known  beyond  dispute.  This  is  why  we  do  not  know  very  precisely  just  what  the
monetary indicators are telling us. Above all, it is not yet manifest just how far the financial
markets and consumers have changed their habits as a result of the introduction of the euro.
Altogether, therefore, monetary policy in the euro area is in a position in which it can rely less
than  it  used  to  in  the  Federal  Republic  of  Germany  on  the  old  relationships,  laws  and
experience familiar from national monetary policy.
That, of course, confronts it with new, serious challenges. Incidentally, the Governing Council
foresaw that development and formulated its monetary policy strategy accordingly.
In the light of past experience - not least that of the Bundesbank - it assigned a special place in
its analysis to the money stock.
3
BIS Review   57/1999
At the same time, however, it is also trying to estimate inflation prospects and inflation risks
direct, on the basis of an analysis of a broad range of the factors determining prices.
Needless to say, these factors include (besides foreseeable movements in costs) real economic
trends. They likewise include the exchange rate. We cannot, and must not, ignore either the
one or the other.
But  we  are  not  thereby  pursuing  the  objective  of  activist  demand  management.  Nor  are  we
pursuing an exchange rate target.
Instead,  we  are  analysing  these  factors  very  carefully,  along  with  the  money  stock,  and
evaluating  them  in  the  light  of  their  implications  for  the  objective  -  that  is  the  logical
consequence of the strategy we have chosen.
Of course, I know that this seems too “discretionary” to some people; it smacks too much of
“muddling through” to them, and seems to require too much confidence in persons and too
little in rules.
And  I  know  that  some  people  would  best  like  a  strategy  that  could  easily  be  expressed  in
terms  of  mathematical  formulae,  so  that  monetary  policy  could  be  forecast  by  computer  or
actually computerised.
Perhaps  those  mathematically  oriented  watchers  will  be  glad  to  hear  that  there  are  some
people in the Governing Council who are pretty good at maths - for instance you, Wim. At all
events - as I have recently read in the magazine “Focus” - the Dutch Ministry of Education has
recently been advertising for young teachers, using a nice picture of you, Wim, in your youth.
The caption below the photo reads:
“Wie heeft Wim Duisenberg leren rekenen? - Mooi werk, juf.”
And  for  all  those  who  are  not  so  conversant  with  Dutch  as  Wim  and  I,  here  is  the  English
translation:
“Who taught Wim Duisenberg maths? - Well done, teacher.”
But, to be serious: a rule-bound approach entails too great a knowledge of the relationships
involved for us to be able simply to hand over monetary policy to a computer.
If need be, the computer would have to be reprogrammed if the structural relationships and
laws  changed  over  time.  And  considering  that  every  player  in  the  markets  anticipates  the
potential  fallibility  of  mechanistically  applied  rules,  such  rules  are  beset  by  credibility
problems of their own from the outset.
Rules  are  naturally  important  and  useful  for  orientation  purposes,  but  they  must  not
degenerate  into  automatic  responses.  They  cannot  be  a  substitute  for  the  responsibility  of
decision-makers  in  a  concrete  situation  -  although  they  can  provide  an  orientation  for  such
responsibility.
Incidentally, the Bundesbank has never applied its monetary targeting policy in mechanistic
fashion, especially not during the nineties. And the experience it gained of that approach was
excellent.
BIS Review   57/1999
4
The point of properly understood strategies - not wrongly understood automatic responses - is
to  provide  longer-term  orientation.  They  should  certainly  have  a  binding  character  -  in  the
sense  that  the  central  bank  is  required  to  justify  the  extent  to  which  actual  decisions  are
compatible with the strategy.
That gives rise to transparency. The ship needs both a course and a helmsman. Both together
result in credibility.
Has  not  the  strategy  of  the  Governing  Council  already  contributed  substantially  to  the
accumulation of credibility by the euro?
I,  at  all  events,  do  not  rate  the  criticism  voiced  here  and  there  about  the  last  interest-rate
decision as being negative. After all, it gave rise to a need for the central bank to justify how
far the decision was compatible with monetary growth. That indicates to me that the strategy
has  already  attained  a  major  objective.  A  debate  on  that  point  cannot  but  foster  the
accumulation of credibility by the euro.
A  different  matter  is  the,  in  my  view,  mistaken  criticism  that  the  decision  constituted  a
paradigm change. That is unequivocally wrong. Certainly, there were many arguments to be
weighed  up.  But  the  crucial  yardstick  was  the  long-term  safeguarding  of  internal  stability.
That was and remains the main thing that monetary policy can contribute to the movement of
growth and stability.
One  of  the  fathers  of  the  Reichsbank,  the  member  of  the  Reichstag  from  Mainz,  Ludwig
Bamberger,  rightly  said  (back  in  the  last  century)  something  about  the  proper  relationship
between people and rules that is no less valid today:
“There is one thing that neither an Act of Parliament nor a Statute - be they never so perfect -
can accomplish: namely, the right application of the right regulations. Final perfection must be
ensured by individual human ability. A bad rule of the road can do much damage and a good
one can prevent many mishaps, but even with the best rule of the road a good coachman is
indispensable.”
In the same sense, responsibility for the euro is ultimately likewise borne by those who, while
not monetary decision-makers, shape the political and economic setting of the euro by their
actions.  For  what  Joseph  Schumpeter  once  rightly  said  about  the  “Nature  of  money”  still
applies today:
“(...) that a people’s monetary system reflects everything that that people wants, does, suffers,
is (...) The state of its monetary system is a symptom of all its states.”
It is not immaterial for a currency’s lasting ability to be stable
•  whether  its  public  finances  are  in  good  shape,  whether  unemployment  is  consistently
being reduced,
•  whether the social systems in the euro countries are based on firm foundations, or
•  whether  the  conditions  for  a  sustained,  dynamic  growth  process  in  Euroland  are  met
everywhere.
5
BIS Review   57/1999
According  to  Schumpeter,  all  these  factors  are  also  reflected  in  the  state  of  a  country’s
monetary system, implying in this country today: in the state of the euro.
Thus, all those responsible in the various policy areas must constantly ask themselves whether
everything is really in order in their own sphere of responsibility, or whether improvements
are not needed, indeed, badly needed - in the interests of the currency, and also in their own
interests.
To that end, there is no need for “ex ante coordination”. On the contrary, that only blurs the
responsibility,  and  not  infrequently  endangers  a  medium-term-oriented  anti-inflation  policy.
What is necessary, rather, is the discharge of one’s own responsibility.
And since we have to deal with eleven countries in the monetary union, the euro reflects the
ability of all those countries to settle the outstanding question.
Nobody  should  adopt  a  “free  rider”  position,  in  the  hope  that  his  own  failure  will  be
counterbalanced  by  the  others.  That  would  endanger  the  lasting  stability  of  the  euro  and
jeopardise its international attractiveness. That would be bound to sap its credibility. It would
also result in political tensions.
This  is  why  the  euro  is  an  “ongoing  challenge  and  task”  for  all  those  who  currently  bear
responsibility in business and politics.
And the euro will likewise be an “ongoing challenge and task” for those who will assume that
responsibility in the future.
BIS Review   57/1999
6
