Mr Brash comments on the address given by Mr Trichet
Comments by Dr Donald Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, on the Third
Hong Kong Monetary Authority Distinguished Lecture given by Mr Trichet, in Hong Kong on
8 July 1999.
Thank you for giving me this opportunity to comment on M. Trichet’s address. The subject
of  the  address  -  “Risks  and  Challenges  of  the  International  Financial  Scene”  -  is  indeed  a
very topical and appropriate subject  for  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  Distinguished
Lecture. And M. Trichet has raised a number of interesting points for me to comment on.
The  Asian  crisis  and  other  episodes  of  economic  and  financial  distress  have  undoubtedly
highlighted  a  number  of  vulnerabilities  in  the  global  economy.  As  a  small  and  open
economy, New Zealand has not been immune to the effects of regional and global financial
distress,  and  we  are  mindful  of  the  lessons  that  can  be  taken  from  it.  My  comments  this
afternoon are therefore made from the perspective of someone who is acutely aware of the
potential vulnerability of small, open economies in a world of mobile international capital.
Financial  crises  are  inherently  complex  and  each  one  has  its  own  unique  causes  and
dynamics. I am therefore wary of generalising as to the factors that have contributed to the
Asian crisis. In the short time available to me, I will not attempt a comprehensive analysis.
But  I  think  a  number  of  general  observations  can  he  made.  This  provides  a  basis  for
reflecting on the changes to international financial architecture that are required to reduce the
risk and severity of future economic instability.
To me, there are four issues that particularly warrant policy attention:
•  The risks associated with short-term foreign capital – and particularly the risk of sudden
and large capital outflows in response  to  perceived  or  actual  deterioration  in  economic
conditions and associated changes in market sentiment.
•  The risks associated with pegged exchange rates. These risks include the potential fiscal
costs  of  supporting  an  exchange  rate  perceived  by  the  market  as  unsustainable,  the
potential  for  the  exchange  rate  to  become  incompatible  with  other  economic  policy
objectives,  the  risk  of  currency  speculation  and  market  manipulation,  and  the  reduced
incentives for exchange rate risk hedging.
•  The implications of weak financial systems. We have seen that weaknesses in financial
systems can place constraints on the maintenance of a pegged exchange rate, but can also
create  systemic  instability  and  impose  severe  costs  on  the  real  economy  when  the
currency is permitted to depreciate. And we have seen that weak financial systems can
place substantial constraints on the availability of new credit and hence delay economic
recovery.
•  The risks of inadequate transparency. Lack of transparency, both in the public and private
sectors, can exacerbate financial distress by reducing the scope for market disciplines to
operate  and  by  weakening  the  ability  of  creditors  and  investors  to  make  informed
decisions. In some cases, herd behaviour and resultant over-selling of currencies can be
attributed in part to inadequate transparency.
What, then, can be done to address these problems and restore the global economy to sound
health?
1
BIS Review   81/1999
Before  setting  out  some  specific  thoughts,  I  think  a  number  of  general  points  are  worth
mentioning:
•  First,  we  should  not  pretend  that  risks  can  be  eliminated  or  that  we  can  create  a  world
where financial distress does not occur. There will always be periods of financial distress.
No  policy  framework  at  national  or  international  levels,  will  entirely  eliminate  these
risks. And nor should we seek to do so. For we need to remind ourselves that there is
always a trade-off between risk and return. If we seek to eliminate risks, not only will we
be  bound  to  fail,  but  we  will  also  risk  undermining  the  prospects  for  strong  and
sustainable economic growth. And, within reason, a degree of financial distress need not
necessarily be a bad thing. The most we can hope to achieve is to reduce the risks and
severity  of  economic  distress  in  the  future,  and  to  create  a  resilience  within  economic
structures to facilitate orderly recoveries from periods of distress.
•  Second, we need to accept that modem economies are inherently complex and that there
are no magic solutions. We need to be realistic as to what can be achieved. In that regard,
I  believe  the  best  solutions  will  not  lie  in  grand  designs,  but  rather  will  be  relatively
modest and incremental in nature.
•  Third, while some solutions may  lie  in  changes  to  international  financial  architecture,  I
believe that the most productive remedies are generally those that apply at the national
level - a point made strongly in an address given last month by Joseph Yam. There is a
danger  that  the  debate  on  the  grander  elements  of  international  financial  architecture
could distract attention from the need for sound policy reform at the national level.
•  And  finally,  we  should  not  fall  into  the  trap  of  placing  excessive  reliance  on  any  one
policy response. For example, financial regulation alone cannot provide all the solutions.
And  equally,  improved  transparency  and  market  disciplines  on  their  own  will  not  be
sufficient.  The  answer  lies  in  striking  a  sensible  balance  among  a  number  of  mutually
supportive  policies.  That  balance  will  almost  certainly  vary  from  country  to  country.
Hence, we should not seek to pursue a “once size fits all” type of approach.
Taking  into  account  these  general  observations,  I  believe  the  most  productive  focus  for
international and national economic reforms lies in a few key areas:
•  Strengthening financial markets.
•  Reducing vulnerability to short-term capital flows.
•  Promoting greater transparency – at all levels.
• 
Involving private creditors in debt resolution arrangements.
As you will note, these four areas overlap significantly with some of the issues addressed by
M. Trichet.
Let me elaborate a little on these points.
Strengthening  financial  markets.  The  importance  of  robust  financial  markets  has  been
clearly demonstrated in many countries over recent years, most recently in Asia. Given the
critical role that financial markets play in the wider economy, and the problems created when
BIS Review   81/1999
2
financial  markets  are  in  a  weakened  state,  particularly  in  a  world  of  mobile  capital,  it  is
essential that steps be taken to strengthen financial markets.
A number of positive measures are already being taken to this end. The development of the
Basel Core Principles on Banking Supervision is one of these, as M. Trichet has mentioned.
Effective  banking  supervision  arrangements  are  clearly  an  important  element  in  creating
robust financial systems and the Basel Core Principles have the potential  to  play  a  helpful
role in assisting governments to improve their supervisory arrangements. However, I would
make two cautionary points.
First, it is important that the Core Principles do not become prescriptive, rigid templates to
be  applied  uniformly  in  all  countries.  The  optimal  design  of  banking  supervision
arrangements will necessarily vary from country to country, depending on market structure,
institutional arrangements and the effectiveness of market disciplines. It is important that, in
advancing the Core Principles, governments have the leeway to depart tom the specifics of
the principles where they consider it appropriate to do so. And, in assessing compliance with
the Core Principles, it is important that emphasis is placed on the quality of policy and policy
outcomes,  rather  than  on  whether  there  has  been  strict  compliance  with  the  details  of  the
Principles. This is also true for the other international standards being developed.
Second,  it  will  not  surprise  you  when  I  say  that  there  are  dangers  in  placing  too  much
reliance  on  banking  supervision,  or  in  pursuing  regulation  with  excessive  vigour.  Banking
supervision and some regulation of risk-taking are important ingredients in the policy mix,
but they are not sufficient in themselves to promote financial system stability. And there are
dangers  in  taking  regulation  too  far  –  we  need  to  be  sensitive  to  the  compliance  costs,
regulatory distortions, moral hazard risks and potential impediments to financial innovation
that can result from excessive or poorly designed regulation.
The  essential  partnership  to  banking  supervision  is  the  role  market  discipline  can  play  in
creating the right incentives for the sound management of banking risks. I believe that many
governments  have  tended  to  under-estimate  the  importance  of  market  discipline  and  that
some  government  interventions  have  reduced  the  effectiveness  of  this  discipline  –  to  the
detriment of banking system soundness. I would therefore urge policy-makers to take steps to
strengthen market discipline in their economies. This ran be done in a number of ways. An
important step in this process is increasing the quality and frequency of disclosure made by
financial institutions and strengthening the accountability of bank management and directors.
In  this  regard,  international  initiatives  to  improve  corporate  governance  and  to  strengthen
financial disclosure and auditing arrangements are welcome developments.
A  number  of  other  measures  can  also  be  taken  to  strengthen  financial  markets  –  although
some of these are not without controversy and do require political commitment. Possibilities
include privatising or improving the governance arrangements for government-owned banks,
improving  the  contestability  of  financial  systems  and,  importantly,  ensuring  that  financial
safety nets and the strategies for addressing  bank  failures  do  not  shield  creditors  from  any
possibility of loss.
Reducing vulnerability to short-term capital flows. Short-term capital flows clearly played a
major  role  in  the  Asian  crisis.  In  some  cases,  large  capital  inflows  contributed  to  an
overheating  of  asset  markets  and  an  excessive  growth  in  credit  while  shifts  in  market
sentiment resulted in rapid capital outflows, with severe consequences for currency stability,
liquidity  and  financial  system  soundness.  It  is  obviously  important  that  steps  be  taken  to
3
BIS Review   81/1999
reduce  the  vulnerability  of  economies  to  the  volatility  of  short-term  capital  flows,  to  the
extent possible.
We  live  in  a  world  of  increasing  capital  mobility  and  I  think  we  would  all  agree  that  the
benefits  this  brings  outweigh  the  costs.  In  particular,  international  mobility  of  capital
strengthens  the  disciplines  on  policy-makers  to  maintain  sound  and  credible  policies,
improves the efficiency of resource allocation and assists in economic development. Turning
the clock back to a world of closed capital accounts is neither feasible nor desirable.  But I
think  a  number  of  measures  can  be  taken  to  reduce  the  risks  associated  with  short-term
capital volatility.
•  Adopting  and  maintaining  sound,  sustainable  and  credible  macro  and  microeconomic
policies  is  clearly  essential.  Although  credible  policies  will  not  eliminate  the  risk  of
sudden capital outflows, they can be expected to assist in reducing volatility by creating a
stronger basis for creditors and investors to make intelligent investment decisions and by
improving investor confidence.
•  The  choice  of  exchange  rate  regime  is  also  an  important  factor  in  determining  an
economy’s vulnerability to short-term capital flows. We have seen the dangers associated
with  pegged  exchange  rates  –  including  the  tendency  for  pegged  rates  to  become
inconsistent with economic fundamentals, the risk of currency speculation and the costs
of holding the peg in the face of sudden capital outflows. Another danger is that pegged
exchange  rates  reduce  the  incentives  for  financial  institutions  and  corporate  entities  to
hedge against foreign exchange risk, with predictable consequences in the event that the
peg proves to be unsustainable. For these reasons, a new orthodoxy seems to be emerging
an  exchange  rate  policy.  This  thinking  suggests  that  currencies  should  either  be  firmly
anchored (for example, by way of a currency board arrangement such as that operated by
Hong  Kong)  so  that  markets  have  confidence  that  the  rate  will  be  maintained,  or  that
more flexible exchange rate regimes should be adopted.
My  own  inclination  is  to  think  that  there  are  advantages  in  countries  adopting  more
flexible  exchange  rate  regimes.  Flexible  exchange  rate  regimes  offer  a  number  of
benefits,  including  promoting  greater  scope  to  pursue  an  independent  well  focused
monetary policy, reducing the risks of market manipulation and one-way bets, reducing
the  fiscal  costs  inherent  in  supporting  fixed  rates  and  sharpening  the  incentives  for
exchange rate risk hedging by government and private sector entities.
This  last  point  should  perhaps  be  stressed.  When  banks  and  corporates  know  that  the
exchange  rate  is  floating,  and  may  move  in  either  direction,  the  incentive  to  borrow
heavily  overseas  is  sharply  reduced  –  or  at  the  least,  the  incentive  to  hedge  the  risks
associated  with  overseas  borrowing  is  greatly  increased.  On  this  basis,  when  capital
inflows become capital outflows, and the exchange rate falls, banks and corporates – and
indeed governments – are much less likely to be seriously damaged.
•  Where a fixed exchange rate is maintained, then another important element in reducing
the  risks  associated  with  short-term  capital  flows  is  for  a  country  to  ensure  that  its
holdings of reserves at least equal total short-term borrowings.
•  The imposition of controls on capital flows – particularly capital inflows – has been an
approach  adopted  by  a  number  of  countries  to  reduce  capital  volatility,  with  varying
degrees of success. I would certainly not rule out the role that controls on capital inflows
BIS Review   81/1999
4
can play in reducing the volatility of capital flows or in altering the maturity composition
of capital flows, particularly as a transition measure or when financial systems are weak.
However,  I  must  confess  that  I  do  have  some  serious  reservations  about  them.  In
particular, I am mindful that capital controls are susceptible to evasion and that there is a
risk  of  them  becoming  less  effective  as  market  participants  become  more  adept  at
evading them. This is particularly so in a market where new derivative instruments are
evolving  rapidly  and  national  boundaries  are  becoming  increasingly  less  relevant.
Moreover, capital controls can be expensive to enforce and have the potential to create
undesirable distortions to resource allocation. I also believe there is a risk that controls on
capital flows can reduce the incentives for governments to adopt and maintain sound and
credible  macro  and  microeconomic  policies.  It  is  for  these  sorts  of  reasons  that  New
Zealand has rejected the use of capital controls.
Promoting greater transparency. The third key issue I have identified as a focus for national
and  international  economic  reform  is  transparency  –  a  point  made  by  M.  Trichet.  In  my
assessment, lack of transparency – in the public and private sectors – has been an important
element in contributing to financial instability. I therefore endorse international initiatives to
encourage  greater  transparency  –  at  all  levels  within  the  economic  community  –  including
the  transparency  of  the  international  financial  institutions,  national  governments,  central
banks, government-owned corporate entities and the private sector. Greater transparency can
be  expected  to  increase  the  quality  of  economic  policy  and  public  and  private  sector
decision-making, to sharpen the effectiveness of market discipline and to reduce the tendency
for herd behaviour in currency and bond markets.
The development of international standards on transparency of fiscal monetary and financial
regulation  policy  by  the  IMF  is  a  positive  development  in  this  context.  Similarly,  the
development of disclosure principles by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and
continued  development  of  international  accounting  and  audit  standards  will  also  be  of
assistance.
Involving private creditors in debt resolution arrangements. One of the important themes in
the  ongoing  discussions  on  international  financial  architecture  is  the  need  to  find  ways  to
more effectively involve the private sector in international debt default resolution processes.
This is a very important issue and one that warrants careful attention, as M. Trichet’s address
made clear.
Existing  responses  to  international  financial  crises  tend  to  either  run  the  risk  that  some
private sector creditors are insulated from loss as a result of rescue operations, or run the risk
that debt defaults occur in a disorderly and damaging manner. Neither is satisfactory.
Insulating private creditors from loss, by bailing out sovereign or private borrowers, clearly
weakens market discipline – both on the borrowers and the lenders. I have little doubt that
this is one of the reasons why international lenders have, in some cases, under-estimated the
risks associated with their lending, resulting in an inappropriate pricing of debt. As a result,
borrowers have, in some cases, enjoyed access to an excessive level of credit and have not
been as discerning as they might otherwise have been in determining how these funds will be
applied.  Involving  private  creditors  in  the  resolution  of  debt  servicing  difficulties,  and
ensuring that they are exposed to their fair share of potential losses, are therefore important
steps in creating an appropriate set of market disciplines on both lenders and borrowers.
5
BIS Review   81/1999
However, it is equally important that this process does not lead to disorderly debt defaults.
Defaults  by  debtors  certainly  help  to  instil  market  discipline,  but  they  also  risk  significant
disruption to financial markets and tend to impose higher costs on borrowers and lenders, as
well as third parties, than might have been the case had the debt servicing difficulties been
resolved in a more orderly manner.
A number of policies have been identified in the debate on this issue – some quite modest,
and others rather ambitious. The issues involved are highly complex. Overall, I believe the
most productive initiatives are those that involve relatively modest, practical solutions. In my
assessment, the options that offer greatest chance of implementation, and that warrant further
detailed work, include:
•  The  adoption  of  majority  voting  clauses  in  loan  documentation.  This  would  facilitate
negotiated solutions for the benefits of the majority of creditors and assist in achieving a
more orderly workout process.
•  Collective representation clauses, enabling a trustee to negotiate on behalf of creditors,
might also assist in facilitating orderly resolution of debt defaults.
•  Developing  structures,  such  as  standing  committees  of  creditors,  to  facilitate  better
communication  between  creditors  and  debtors  may  also  assist  in  reducing  information
gaps and initiating negotiations.
•  Another  important  element,  particularly  in  dealing  with  debt  defaults  by  banks  and
corporate entities, is the development of appropriate insolvency laws at a national level,
equipping  national  judicial  systems  to  administer  these  laws  and  facilitating  effective
cross-jurisdictional enforcement.
Let me conclude by thanking M. Trichet for his address and for providing us with some new
perspectives on issues relating to reforms of the international financial architecture. I am sure
we can all agree that the issues are complex and that there are no easy solutions to be found.
However, I am confident that discussions such as these, and the good work being carried out
in many international fora, will lead to a better understanding of the causes and dynamics of
financial crises and will provide the basis for developing appropriate policy responses.
BIS Review   81/1999
6
