The Bank of Japan’s June report on recent economic and financial developments
Bank of Japan, Communication, 16 June 1999.
The Bank’s View2
Japan’s economy, at present, has stopped deteriorating, but clear signs of recovery have not
been observed yet.
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  has  basically  been  on  a  downward
trend,  although  there  was  a  slight  improvement  in  early  1999.  Recovery  in  private
consumption  continues  to  be  weak  on  the  whole.  Net  exports  (exports  minus  imports)  are
decreasing  slightly  at  present,  due  mainly  to  an  increase  in  imports.  Meanwhile,  housing
investment  has  been  recovering.  Public  works  seem  to  be  increasing  rapidly  against  the
background of the surge in orders in early spring.
Reflecting  such  developments  in  final  demand  and  continued  progress  in  inventory
adjustment, industrial production has stopped decreasing. The deterioration in corporate and
consumer sentiment seems to have ceased due  to  this  economic  situation  and  the  effects  of
measures taken to restore the stability of Japan’s financial system. However, corporate profits
remain  weak,  and  employment  and  household  income  conditions  are  deteriorating  as  the
unemployment  rate  remains  historically  high  and  wages  continue  to  be  below  the  previous
year’s level. In corporate finance, firms’ concern about the availability of funds in the future
has subsided, but has not completely disappeared yet.
As for the outlook, with the progress in inventory adjustment gradually paving the way for a
recovery in production, the government’s economic measures and the monetary easing by the
Bank  will  continue  to  underpin  the  economy.  Improvements  in  the  financial  environment,
such  as  alleviation  of  concern  about  Japan’s  financial  system,  are  also  expected  to  exert
positive  effects  on  the  economy  gradually.  Moreover,  the  recovery  of  overseas  economies,
especially  of  Asian  economies,  is  likely  to  have  a  positive  effect  on  domestic  production.
With respect to corporate activities, however, firms have started taking steps toward full-scale
restructuring, facing the continued decline in profits.  Although such corporate restructuring is
expected  to  improve  productivity,  it  may,  in  the  short  run,  reduce  fixed  investment  and
                                                     
This report was written based on data and information available when the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy
Meeting was held on June 14, 1999.
2  The  Bank’s  view  on  recent  economic  and  financial  developments,  determined  by  the  Policy  Board  at  the
Monetary Policy Meeting held on June 14 as the basis of monetary policy decisions.
1
BIS Review   71/1999
discourage  household  expenditure  through  the  resulting  deterioration  in  employment  and
income conditions. Under such circumstances, it is still difficult to expect an immediate self-
sustained  recovery  in  private  demand.  Overall  economic  developments  require  careful
monitoring  in  consideration  of  the  above  points.  It  is  also  important  to  promote  structural
reform in order to assure the economy’s sustained growth in the medium term.
With regard to prices, import prices continue to rise due to the bottoming out of international
commodity prices such as crude oil prices. The pace of decline in domestic wholesale prices is
slowing due to a rise in prices of some products closely related to international commodities,
such as those of petroleum products. On the other hand, corporate service prices continue to
decline. Consumer prices remain weak. In relation to price developments in the future, there is
a possibility that prices overall, which have been on a downtrend, will temporarily level off
reflecting the rise in import prices. However, distinct narrowing in the output gap is unlikely
for the time being even though the economy has stopped deteriorating, and wages continue to
decline.  Thus, downward pressure on prices is expected to remain.
In the financial market, the overnight call rate has stayed at nearly zero, and many financial
institutions  have  become  confident  about  the  availability  of  liquidity.  Interest  rates  on  term
instruments  have  declined  further,  reflecting  the  market’s  view  that  monetary  easing  will
continue for some time. The Japan premium has almost disappeared. Furthermore, the yield
spread between government bonds and private bonds––bank debentures and corporate bonds–
–has narrowed.
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  have  risen  since  late  May  to  the  current  level  of
around 1.6-1.7 percent. Stock prices, which had generally been in the range of 16,000-17,000
yen, have recently risen and exceeded 17,000 yen.
The amount outstanding of funds in the call money market has continued to decrease. To date,
this  has  not  led  to  any  difficulty  in  funds  settlement,  but  close  attention  should  be  paid  to
future market developments.
With regard to corporate finance, private banks have basically retained their cautious lending
attitude.  However,  constraint  that  had  been  caused  by  severe  fund-raising  conditions  and
insufficient capital base has eased considerably. Under these circumstances, major banks have
gradually become more active than before in extending loans, especially for projects involving
relatively small credit risks.
BIS Review   71/1999
2
However,  credit  demand  for  economic  activities  such  as  business  fixed  investment  remains
weak.  In  addition,  firms’  moves  to  increase  their  on-hand  liquidity  are  apparently  settling
down. As a result, credit demand in the private sector has weakened further.
Money stock (M2+CDs) has recently been showing a slightly higher year-to-year growth rate,
mainly because firms’ curtailment of on-hand liquidity has been less significant than that of
the same period in the previous year.
In these financial environments, credit conditions, which had tightened previously, have eased
somewhat.
The following continue to warrant careful monitoring: how actively investors will take risks;
how far private banks will ease their lending stance; and how these changes will affect firms’
propensity to invest.
3
BIS Review   71/1999
