Mr Duisenberg evaluates the single European monetary policy
Speech  by  the  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Dr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  at  the
University of Hohenheim, Germany, on 09/02/99.
Ladies and gentlemen,
The single European monetary policy has been a reality for a little more than five weeks. After
years of intensive preparatory work and successful economic convergence, monetary policy is
now jointly determined for a large part of Europe by the Governing Council of the European
Central Bank. The monetary policy is implemented by the Eurosystem, the name given to the
ECB and the 11 central banks of the EU Member States participating in Monetary Union.
The single currency is quoted on the international financial markets and is used in non-cash
payments. However, the euro will not appear as yet in tangible form as banknotes and coins.
Nonetheless there is no doubt that this currency, which was only brought into existence on 1
January 1999, will play an important role both within the euro area and beyond.
There is good reason for this confidence, ladies and gentlemen. Overall the first few weeks
went smoothly for the single currency and the monetary policy of the Eurosystem. The start
did not pass by entirely without a hitch – which was not to be expected in any case, given the
significance and scale of this project – but there were no major complications.
Monetary Union is a unique and outstanding achievement. It provides the great opportunity to
achieve  the  goal  of  lasting  price  stability  throughout  Europe.  Price  stability  is  the  best
contribution that monetary policy can make to lasting economic and employment growth in
Europe.  The  national  governments  and  all  those  involved  in  collective  wage  bargaining  are
being  called  on  to  remove  the  structural  causes  of  the  excessively  high  unemployment.  We
can  only  hope  that  the  introduction  of  the  euro  will  spur  the  implementation  of  structural
reforms.
The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem
The  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community  assigns  the  European  System  of  Central
Banks  (ESCB)  and  thereby  the  Eurosystem  the  primary  objective  of  maintaining  price
stability.  The  Governing  Council  will  do  its  utmost  to  fulfil  this  task  and  to  explain  its
monetary  policy  so  as  to  be  comprehensible  to  the  general  public.  For  this  reason  we  have
developed  a  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  which  essentially  consists  of  three  main
elements.
The Governing Council has published a quantitative definition of its primary objective, price
stability. This gives clear guidance for expectations in relation to future price developments.
Price stability is defined as an increase in the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP)
of  the  euro  area  of  less  than  2%  compared  with  the  previous  year.  The  publication  of  this
definition  provides  the  public  and  the  European  Parliament  with  a  clear  benchmark  against
which  to  measure  the  success  of  the  single  monetary  policy,  and  thereby  provides  for  the
transparency and accountability of the Eurosystem and its policy.
The  wording  “less  than  2%”  clearly  defines  the  upper  limit  for  the  measured  inflation  rate
which is compatible with price stability. I do not think I need emphasise that deflation – or a
1
BIS Review   18/1999
sustained fall in prices – would be incompatible with price stability. The latest available data
for the annual rate of inflation according to the HICP for the euro area as a whole fall within
the definition of price stability. This outcome is clearly the result, above all, of the successful
monetary policy of the national central banks in the years before the start of Monetary Union.
The ECB has only been responsible for monetary policy for a little more than one month. It
will only be possible to judge the success of its current policy in one to two years’ time. This
reflects the fact that the transmission of monetary policy impulses is subject to relatively long
and variable time lags. The Governing Council has therefore emphasised that price stability
must  be  maintained  in  the  medium  term.  This  statement  underlines  not  only  the  need  for  a
forward-looking approach to monetary policy, but also takes into consideration the short-term
volatility  of  prices  in  response  to  non-monetary  shocks  which  are  beyond  the  control  of
monetary policy.
In order to achieve the goal of price stability, our strategy rests, in particular, on two “pillars”.
Before I explain this in more detail, I should like to emphasise that traditional and previously
established macroeconomic relationships could change as a consequence of the introduction
of the euro. This was one key reason why neither a monetary targeting nor a direct inflation
targeting strategy could be applied. Our strategy is also more than just a simple combination
of these two approaches. Rather, it is precisely tailored to the needs of the ECB.
The first pillar of the monetary policy strategy is a prominent role for money. Since inflation
is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon  in  the  medium  term,  the  money  supply  provides  a
natural  “nominal  anchor”  for  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  safeguarding  price  stability.  To
emphasise this prominent role, the Governing Council has published a quantitative reference
value  for  growth  in  the  money  supply.  The  first  reference  value  decided  upon  by  the
Governing Council for growth in M3 was 4.5% per annum and was published on 1 December.
This value is based on the above-mentioned definition of price stability and assumes a trend
growth  in  real  gross  domestic  product  of  2-2.5%  per  annum,  as  well  as  a  medium-term
reduction in the velocity of circulation of M3 of around 0.5-1% per annum.
We  shall  not,  however,  respond  mechanistically  to  deviations  from  the  reference  value  for
money supply growth, but shall first analyse them carefully for signals relating to future price
developments. Larger or sustained deviations normally signal risks to price stability.
The second pillar of the monetary policy strategy consists in a broadly based assessment of the
outlook  for  price  developments  in  the  entire  euro  area.  This  assessment  will  be  based  on  a
broad range of monetary policy indicators. In particular, those variables which could contain
information on future price developments will be analysed in depth. This analysis should not
only provide information on the risks for price development, but should also help to identify
the causes of unexpected changes in important economic variables.
Some commentators reduced this comprehensive analysis to an inflation forecast. At the same
time, there were demands for the ECB to have to publish these forecasts in order to satisfy the
need for transparency and accountability. Therefore allow me to make this clear: our strategy
includes a comprehensive analysis of numerous indicators and several forecasts. To focus on a
single official inflation forecast of the Eurosystem for a specific point in time would in no way
accurately reflect our internal analytical and decision-making process. It would impinge upon
the  transparency  and  clarity  of  the  explanation  of  our  policy.  The  publication  of  an  official
inflation forecast would also be inappropriate with regard to the accountability of the ECB, all
BIS Review   18/1999
2
the more so if this forecast were based on the assumption of no change in the monetary policy.
The success of the monetary policy of the ECB should primarily be measured in terms of the
maintenance of price stability, not the accuracy of its conditional forecasts.
The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem, which I have just outlined,
constitutes a new and clear strategy. It emphasises the primacy of the goal of price stability. It
takes into account the inevitable uncertainties concerning economic relationships inherent in
the transition to Monetary Union and the associated systemic changes and guarantees a high
degree of transparency.
Ladies and gentlemen,
Allow  me  to  comment  on  certain  suggestions  on  the  orientation  of  monetary  policy  which
have recently appeared in the press. Some of these ideas give the impression  that  monetary
policy should concentrate upon objectives other than price stability, since stable prices have
already been achieved. Inter alia, it has been suggested that the ECB should react more or less
mechanistically  to  exchange  rate  developments  or  other  variables  such  as  unit  labour  costs.
Furthermore, there were calls for monetary policy, by means of reductions in interest rates, to
be used to combat unemployment. Against this background there is a need to set out clearly
the possibilities and limitations of monetary policy.
Both the reasoning in the Maastricht Treaty and many economic analyses show that the best
contribution the single monetary policy can make to employment growth is to concentrate on
price stability. Without such a clear approach there is a danger that the public may question
the  commitment  of  the  Eurosystem  to  the  goal  of  maintaining  price  stability.  Inflation
expectations, risk premia and thus long-term rates would rise. This would increase the cost of
the investment which is necessary for a sustained and lasting rise in the standard of living.
Even under the best possible circumstances, though – i.e. if it proves to be possible to assure
lasting price stability – monetary policy alone cannot solve the major economic problems of
unemployment and future problems in social security systems.
The Governing Council regards the current high level of unemployment in the euro area as a
matter of great concern. This problem is, however, predominantly a structural one. It is mainly
the result of the rigidities in the labour and goods markets in the euro area which have arisen
partly  through  an  excessive  and  disproportionate  degree  of  regulation.  Structural  economic
reforms,  which  target  the  reduction  of  rigidities,  are  the  appropriate  solution.  In  those  euro
area  countries  in  which  such  reforms  have  been  implemented  unemployment  figures  have
declined markedly. In addition, I should like to emphasise that moderate wage developments
and a reduction in the burden of tax and social security contributions would generally help to
reduce  unemployment.  This  would  be  the  case  even  if  the  country  concerned  did  not  trade
heavily  with  its  neighbouring  countries.  The  positive  influence  of  low  taxes  and  wages  on
employment  clearly  has  overall  benefits  from  an  international  perspective.  Such  a  policy
should not be denounced as “wage dumping”.
Turning to the role of exchange rates between the euro and other important currencies outside
the EU, in  particular  the  US  dollar,  the  Eurosystem  has,  in  formulating  its  monetary  policy
strategy,  made  an  unambiguous  choice.  This  strategy  clearly  rules  out  explicit  or  implicit
objectives  or  target  zones  for  the  euro  exchange  rate.  The  pursuit  of  an  exchange  rate
objective could easily jeopardise the maintenance of the objective of price stability and could
3
BIS Review   18/1999
thereby  also  be  detrimental  to  real  economic  development.  Target  zones  for  exchange  rates
could,  for  example,  lead  to  the  ECB  having  to  raise  interest  rates  in  a  recession,  despite
increasing  downward  pressure  on  prices.  I  am  sure  you  will  agree  that  such  a  mechanistic
response  to  a  change  in  the  euro  exchange  rate  would  not  be  optimal.  Furthermore,  it  is
important to remember that we are living in a world with high capital mobility. Exchange rate
agreements,  which  might  have  been  possible  to  implement  until  recently,  are  no  longer
feasible.
The  lack  of  an  exchange  rate  target  does  not  mean  that  the  ECB  is  totally  indifferent  to  or
takes  no  account  of  the  euro  exchange  rate.  On  the  contrary,  the  exchange  rate  will  be
observed and analysed as a potentially important monetary policy indicator in the context of
the  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price  developments.  A  stability-oriented
monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  as  stipulated  by  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  Stability  and
Growth Pact, is an essential pre-condition for a stable euro exchange rate. Of course, there is
no  guarantee  of  lasting  exchange  rate  stability,  not  even  in  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.
Exchange  rate  fluctuations  are  often  caused  by  structural  or  fiscal  policy,  asymmetric  real
shocks or conjunctural differences. Monetary policy would clearly be overburdened if it had to
prevent such movements in the exchange rate.
We cannot and shall not gear our monetary policy towards a single variable, whether a money
supply aggregate, an index, the exchange rate or an inflation forecast for a particular point in
time. Nor can we be involved in any ex ante co-ordination which would entail an obligation to
react to particular commitments or plans. The ECB will always carefully analyse all relevant
indicators.  In  this  context,  it  is  particularly  important  that  the  economic  causes  of  potential
risks  to  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  are  understood  as  fully  as  possible.  Appropriate
monetary policy decisions also depend upon the causes of unexpected changes in important
economic  variables.  The  Governing  Council  must,  for  example,  take  a  view  on  whether
changes  in  important  indicators  are  of  a  temporary  or  permanent  nature,  and  whether  a
demand or supply shock is involved. In our deliberations we also attempt to take into account
how  the  financial  markets,  consumers  and  firms  are  expected  to  react  to  monetary  policy
decisions. I believe few would contest that such a complex analysis cannot meaningfully be
reduced to a more or less mechanistic reaction to a few variables or a single official forecast.
In  addition,  concern  was  often  expressed  that  the  Eurosystem  would  not  act  transparently
enough.  In  this  context,  it  was  said  that  a  transparent  monetary  policy  also  necessitated  the
publication  of  the  minutes  of  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  and  disclosure  of  the
voting behaviour of the individual members of the Council.
For sound reasons the Governing Council decided not to adopt this approach. The publication
of  individual  positions  could  easily  lead  to  national  influence  being  exerted  over  the
individual Council members. The members of the Governing Council must not, however, be
seen as national representatives. They decide together on the monetary policy for the euro area
as  a  whole.  The  Governing  Council  has  committed  itself  to  go  beyond  the  reporting  and
explanatory requirements laid down in the Treaty, which are among the most comprehensive
requirements by international standards.
On  the  basis  of  our  strategy,  after  every  first  meeting  in  the  month  I  deliver  to  the  press  a
detailed explanation of our assessment of the overall economic situation and, in particular, the
outlook for price stability. The content of this so-called “introductory statement” is very close
to what other central banks refer to as minutes. In this way, the public receives comprehensive
BIS Review   18/1999
4
information immediately following the meetings of the Governing Council. In addition, each
month  we  shall  publish  a  detailed  report  on  the  economic  situation  and  monetary  policy
throughout the euro area in our Bulletin. Such rapid information on the results of the meetings
of  the  Governing  Council  and  the  current  economic  analysis  of  the  ECB  without  doubt
demonstrates a high degree of openness and transparency.
The most recent monetary policy decisions and operations
Co-operation  between  the  European  central  banks  was  always  very  close.  In  the  last  few
months of 1998 the countries participating in the third stage of Monetary Union co-operated
more  and  more  closely.  The  co-ordinated  reduction  in  leading  rates  at  the  beginning  of
December 1998 clearly showed that the currency union had begun de facto before the start of
Stage Three. This co-ordinated measure contributed substantially – as we now know – to the
stabilisation of market expectations.
For more than five weeks the ECB has been conducting monetary policy operations, mainly in
the  form  of  reverse  open  market  operations.  The  main  operation  will  be  carried  out  at  a
weekly  frequency  with  a  maturity  of  two  weeks.  So  far,  five  such  operations  have  been
conducted successfully, at a fixed interest rate of 3%.
Besides the reverse transactions which constitute the main instrument for liquidity control and
targeting interest rates, the Eurosystem offers two “standing” facilities: the marginal lending
facility and the deposit facility. These can be accessed by credit institutions via the national
central banks. The marginal lending facility is primarily a safety valve for short-term liquidity
shortages in the banking system and thereby limits upward movements in money market rates.
To  some  extent,  its  counterpart  is  the  short-term  deposit  facility,  which  is  used  to  absorb
short-term liquidity surpluses. This forms the lower limit for money market rates. For the start
of Monetary Union the interest rate on the deposit facility was set at 2% and the rate on the
marginal lending facility was set at 4.5%.
As  a  transitional  measure,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  establish  a  narrow  corridor  of
2.75-3.25% between the rates on the marginal lending facility and the deposit facility from 4
to  21  January  1999.  The  intention  was  to  facilitate  the  necessary  adjustment  to  the  new
institutional  environment  brought  about  by  the  transition  to  Stage  Three.  As  already
announced, on 21  January  1999  it  was  decided  to  return  to  the  rates  on  the  two  “standing”
facilities  that  were  set  for  the  start  of  the  single  monetary  policy.  Since  22  January  1999,
therefore, the rate on the  deposit  facility  has  been  2%  and  the  rate  on  the  marginal  lending
facility has been 4.5%.
A critical factor in this decision was the behaviour of the money market for the euro area as a
whole since the beginning of the year. The Governing Council established that over time there
had been a marked reduction in the difficulties experienced by some market participants with
the introduction of the integrated money market and, in particular, with cross-border liquidity
flows. All in all, the integration of the money market in the euro area reached a satisfactory
stage only three weeks after its implementation. In analysing the money market it should be
noted that, inter alia, there can be a marked difference between ECB interest rates and short-
term market rates. On the one hand, market rates may include credit risk premia and, on the
other, expectations may lead to differences between the two rates.
5
BIS Review   18/1999
At its meeting last Thursday the  Governing  Council  confirmed  its  earlier  assessment  of  the
outlook for price stability. Therefore it was decided to leave the conditions for the next main
refinancing operations, on 10 and 17 February 1999, unchanged. They will be carried out as
volume tenders at a fixed rate of 3%, the same conditions as for the last such monetary policy
operations.
In addition, in recent weeks the first longer-term open market operations were conducted, in
the form of reverse transactions. These were carried out on 14 January 1999 in three parallel
tender  procedures  with  maturities  of  one,  two  and  three  months.  The  fixed  rate  tender
procedure was used. By contrast with the regular main refinancing operations, the Eurosystem
does not use these longer-term operations to send signals to the market and therefore usually
acts as a price-taker. The ECB thus gives advance indication of the planned allocation. The
interest rates which arise from these monetary policy operations should therefore be seen as
indicators of prevailing market conditions.
Regular assessment of the monetary, financial and economic situation
To conclude, I should like briefly to report on the Governing Council’s current assessment of
the  monetary,  financial  and  economic  situation.  On  the  basis  of  these  assessments  the
Governing Council decided last Tuesday to leave interest rates unchanged.
Taking  into  account  the  latest  monetary  data  for  December  1998,  the  three-month  moving
average  of  the  12-month  growth  rate  of  the  monetary  aggregate  M3  (for  the  period  from
October to December 1998) remained more or less stable at 4.7%. This value is very close to
the reference value set by the Governing Council. According to our analysis, the evolution of
the  money  supply  shows  no  risks  to  price  stability.  Credit  to  the  private  sector  also  grew
strongly  in  December  last  year.  Although  at  present  we  do  not  perceive  any  inflationary
signals, further developments will be very carefully monitored.
With regard to the broadly based assessment of the outlook for price developments and the
risks to price stability in the euro area, monetary and financial developments can be seen to
indicate a favourable assessment of  the  latest  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  Eurosystem.
They  indicate  that  market  participants  expect  a  continuation  of  the  environment  of  price
stability. Long-term rates fell to new historical lows at the beginning of 1999 and there was an
overall downward shift in the yield curve. Therefore, financing conditions for investment are
currently exceptionally favourable.
At  present  the  growth  prospects  for  the  euro  area  are,  however,  still  marked  by  the
uncertainties relating to the development of the world economy in 1999. These uncertainties
have had a negative impact on indicators of the economic climate in the euro area. There are
widespread expectations of an economic slowdown in the near future. This deterioration in the
external economic environment can be linked, above all, to the financial crises in Asia, Russia
and Latin America. However, there is a  mixed  picture.  While  the  growth  rate  for  industrial
production  fell  up  to  November  1998,  retail  sales  figures  and  consumer  confidence  have
recently shown positive trends. Furthermore, growth in real gross domestic product in the euro
area was relatively robust in the third quarter of 1998. In the United States real growth in the
fourth quarter actually turned out higher than expected. Measured against the HICP, consumer
prices in the euro area rose by 0.8% in December 1998. This is a tenth of a percentage point
lower than in November. This development is in line with earlier trends. It can be linked, in
BIS Review   18/1999
6
particular, to a further decline in energy prices and a weakening in price increases in industrial
goods.
All in all, the above-mentioned economic development and the available forecasts for 1999 do
not indicate any noticeable  upward  or  downward  pressure  on  prices.  Potential  upward  risks
could arise from a change in the external global economic situation and any associated effects
on  the  euro  area,  via  import  and  producer  prices.  These  developments  must  be  carefully
monitored. There is concern that inflationary pressure might develop in the event of a strong
increase in wage prices and an easing of fiscal policy. Developments in the exchange rate will
also be closely monitored in view of their significance for price developments.
Finally, let me emphasise that the current level of real interest rates is exceptionally low. If
real  interest  rates  are  taken  simply  as  the  difference  between  nominal  rates  and  the  current
increase  in  consumer  prices  (HICP),  short-term  real  interest  rates  in  January  1999  stood  at
2.3%, i.e. around 80 basis points lower than one year  ago.  Long-term  real  rates  have  fallen
even  more,  by  110  basis  points,  and  stood  at  3%  in  January.  These  levels  are  very  low,
compared both with other countries and with historical data. In line with the safeguarding of
price  stability,  the  current  monetary  and  financial  conditions  thus  clearly  support  future
economic growth. Monetary policy can do no more than this  without  jeopardising  the  great
overall economic advantages of price stability and its own credibility.
Real  structural  reforms  which  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  labour  markets,  as  well  as  a
continuation  of  the  moderate  increase  in  wage  prices,  would  not  only  ease  the  burden  on
monetary policy but would also support employment growth. This will be all the more true if
the  deterioration  in  the  economic  situation  this  year  is  worse  than  expected  owing  to  the
negative aspects of the external economic environment.
7
BIS Review   18/1999
