Mr Bergström reports on why Sweden has changed its stabilisation policy regime
Speech  by  Mr  Villy  Bergström,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  the  central  bank  of
Sweden,  at  the  140th  anniversary  of  the  establishment  of  Norrbärke  Sparbank  in  Smedjebacken,
Darlana on 21 May 1999.
It is obvious to everyone that we live in a different economic world than we did ten years ago. Ten
years ago, registered unemployment was 1.3 per cent and inflation 7 per cent. Now inflation is non-
existent while total registered unemployment is over nine per cent.
Why has such a drastic change in the economy taken place?
What is characteristic for the new economic conditions?
Are there alternatives to the policies now being carried out?
Background
Since the second war, Sweden, in principle, had a fixed exchange rate. However, in practice, it was
not particularly fixed after the mid-1970s. From autumn 1976 to autumn 1982, Sweden devalued five
times.
I will come back to the sorry history of 1982-92.
In autumn 1992, the fixed exchange rate was abandoned and the krona immediately fell by 11.5 per
cent.  Thereafter  the  krona  declined  further  so  that  the  total  fall  in  the  exchange  rate  to  the  lowest
position of 13 December 1993, was 31.5 per cent.
Note that the starting point for the fall in the value of the krona in November 1992 was a cost level
that was 25 per cent lower, measured in common currency, than it had been in 1976.
This was a failure for stabilisation policy. A good illustration of this is the industrial worker’s wage in
1975 and 1994. In 1975, an industrial worker earned 27 kronor per hour on average while in 1994 the
hourly wage was SEK 95.
However, if 1975’s hourly wage is recalculated at the 1994 price level, the 1975 wage was worth SEK
107 in 1994. Thus, twenty years of trade union struggle when nominal wages rose by an average of
6.9 per cent per year, resulted in a decline in real wages of 12 kronor per hour in 1994’s prices.
However,  it  was  not  just  trade  union  policy  that  failed.  It  was  just  as  much  a  failure  for  the
Government’s stabilisation policy.
How could it have been so bad?
Stabilisation policy activism
The  large  devaluation  of  16  per  cent  that  the  newly-appointed  Palme  Government  carried  out  in
October 1982 was what could be called an offensive (aggressive) devaluation, on top of that that had
taken place in 1981.  Through  the  10  per  cent  devaluation  in  1981,  the  real  cost  situation  had  been
somewhat normalised and the competitiveness of Swedish industry restored.
Now Sweden was to get off to a flying start. This was also the case as there was an upswing in the
USA at that time and an exceptional long boom.
1
BIS Review   59/1999
The  Social  Democratic  government  considered  that  their  relations  with  the  trade  union  movement
were  so  good  that  the  Government  would  be  able  to  cope  with  the  devaluation,  and  carry  out  the
necessary  “aftercare”  to  prevent  the  benefits  of  devaluation  being  eaten  up  by  wage  and  price
inflation.  Sweden  would  “save  and  work  its  way  out  of  the  crisis”  as  the  social-democratic  crisis
programme put it in the 1982 election campaign.
However, between 1982 and 1992, the hourly cost of labour for an industrial worker rose in round
figures by between 8 and 11 per cent per year. Inflationary expectations were clearly well rooted in
the labour market and the aftercare of devaluation was a failure.
The effects of the rapid rise in costs were softened first by the size of the devaluation and then by the
fall in value of the dollar, which de facto depreciated the Swedish krona between 1985 and 1987 as
the krona was partly linked to the dollar.
What did the Government do then to stabilise wage and price movements after 1982?
It is possible to make a list of the Government’s attempts to stabilise wage increases, a list that takes
up  measures  in  a  corporative  spirit,  the  idea  that  the  social-democratic  government  could  make  a
stabilisation of prices possible by working closely together with the trade unions.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
In  spring  1983,  the  Government  launched  an  inflation  norm  of  4  per  cent  for  1984.  The
outcome was 8 per cent.
In  spring  1984,  a  crisis  package  was  presented  with  a  price  freeze  and  a  rent  freeze  and  a
norm of 3 per cent inflation in 1985. The outcome was over 7 per cent.
In  1984,  the  so-called  foreign  loan  norm  was  launched,  namely  that  the  state  should  not
borrow abroad to finance the current trade balance deficit.
In  1985  a  tax-based  income  policy  was  introduced.  State  income  tax  was  to  be  reduced  by
SEK 2 billion if the Swedish Metalworkers Union and the Swedish Engineering Employers
Association concluded an agreement with wage rises of at most 5 per cent.
In  1982,  1984,  1985  and  1986  negotiations  took  place  after  discussions  on  taxes  and
collective  agreements  between  the  Government  and  various  constellations  of  labour  market
organisations.
Some of these measures were inspired by the so-called norm debate. This was to establish firm norms
in  economic  policy.  In  order  to  stabilise  inflation  at  a  low  level.  The  most  important  norm  was
naturally the fixed exchange rate although the Government had regularly accommodated to counteract
the problems that arose when the fixed exchange rate led to unemployment and falling profits.
The industrial sector was very competitive for a long time although public expenditure rose at a rapid
rate as well. This led to the labour market overheating. As I mentioned, registered unemployment was
down  to  1.3  per  cent  in  1989  and  1.5  per  cent  in  1990.  Unemployment  in  Mälardalen  (the  region
around Lake Mälare) was 0.5 per cent.
It  is  evident  that  no  wage  formation  system  can  operate  under  such  conditions.  The  labour  market
researcher  (Bertil  Holmlund  in  Uppsala)  argued  at  that  time  that  NAIRU  –  the  unemployment
consistent  with  constant  inflation  was  between  2.5  and  3  per  cent,  which  today  appears  to  be  very
low.
The  stabilisation  policy  problems  accumulated  towards  the  end  of  the  1980s.  The  Government
encountered  a  crisis  situation  in  1990  and  introduced  a  prohibition  on  strikes,  a  number  of  freezes
such as a wages freeze, a rent freeze, a freeze of local government tax increases among others. The
Government announced that Sweden was to apply  for  membership  of  the  EU.  On  15  February,  the
Government lost a  vote  in  the  Riksdag  on  the  prohibition  against  strikes.  Kjell-Olof  Feldt  resigned
(the Minister of Finance).
BIS Review   59/1999
2
It can probably be said that the events of autumn 1990  were  the  last  of  the  old  stabilisation  policy
interventionist  kind.  The  “corporative”  co-operation  policy  had  failed.  The  fact  that  the  end  of  the
road was reached in February 1990 was actually a result of the Government’s own actions in the latter
half of the 1980s and its inability to restrict demand.
The credit market had been successively deregulated during the 1980s. Foreign exchange regulation
began to be dismantled in 1986 and was completely abolished in summer 1989.
Foreign exchange policy formally changed course when the krona was linked to the ECU at Whitsun
1991. It was an important signal to the foreign exchange market that the change, which was expected,
took place without a depreciation of the krona. On the contrary, the krona was linked to the ECU at a
rate somewhat above the central exchange rate.
A number of measures had preceded a formal change of the stabilisation policy. The most important
document  that  marks  a  new  direction  is  the  Government’s  budget  statement  in  January  1991.  The
Minister  of  Finance  and  the  Government  wrote  there  that  combating  inflation  was  to  be  given
precedence over other political goals.
This decision was reflected in the budget by a 40 per cent reduction of appropriations for relief work.
In spring 1993, unemployment rose month by month and it was clear that the Government was not
giving priority to full employment in the same way as before.
This was the first major change of course in stabilisation policy.  Now it was combating inflation that
was important by means of a fixed exchange rate. The change was well prepared by experiences of
previous  failures  and  by  the  intellectual  debate  on  stabilisation  policy  that  had  begun  in  the  USA
during the 1970s.
From  the  beginning  of  1991,  a  price  stability  goal  was  applied.  This  was  given  priority  over  full
employment. The means was a fixed exchange rate. Employers and trade unions would be forced to
bear the consequences of excesses in wage formation. The exchange rate was to be maintained. So, if
wage  costs  rose  over  the  room  created  by  the  growth  of  productivity  and  price  rises  on  the
international  markets,  unemployment  would  be  allowed  to  rise.  The  state  would  no  longer
accommodate economic disruptions neither by devaluations nor by public expenditure.
I do not need to go into more detail about the period from January 1991 to November 1992. A fixed
exchange rate  and  free  capital  movements  are  hardly  compatible.  I  can  only  draw  to  attention  how
such regimes have collapsed. Scandinavia and the United Kingdom in autumn 1992, the EU’s ERM
system in 1993, Mexico in 1994-95, South-East Asia in 1997, Russia in 1998 and Brazil in 1999.
With  free  capital  movements,  it  is  necessary  to  choose  between  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  an
inflation  target  (or  a  target  for  the  quantity  of  money).  The  only  alternatives  would  seem  to  be  an
irrevocable  linking  of  the  currency  by  a  “currency  board  arrangement”  or  a  fully  implemented
monetary union.
In January 1993, the Riksbank announced an inflation target of 2 per cent inflation –
target was to be achieved in 1995.
 1 per cent. The
This was the second major realignment of stabilisation policy. Sweden went in for an inflation target
and  a  floating  exchange  rate.  This  had  been  forced  on  Sweden  by  international  developments  with
deregulation  of  the  capital  markets,  in  Sweden  as  well,  and  not  least  by  failures  in  attempts  at
corporative co-operation and stabilisation policy interventions. The Government could now look back
at 15 years of unsuccessful stabilisation policy. The shift to a new policy took place between 1993
and 1995.
3
BIS Review   59/1999
However, it should be added with regard to the failed defence of the krona, that experiences of free
capital  movements  were  not  especially  extensive.  The  Government  and  the  Riksbank  and  political
analysts in Sweden did not have any experience of the conditions for economic policy in a globalised
world.
The new stabilisation policy regime
The Government formulated the goal for monetary policy itself in January 1993. Inflation was to be
maintained at two per cent per year with a tolerance interval of +/- 1 per cent. The goal is symmetric.
It is as important to bring inflation up to two per cent when actual inflation is under two per cent as it
is to bring down inflation when it is higher than the target.
This can be said but a lot of practical issues remained to be resolved and the answers are not at all
obvious:
1.  How  is  inflation  to  be  measured:  by  CPI,  the  GDP  deflator,  or  some  other  measure  of  price
movements?
2. Shall the Riksbank have other objectives besides price stability?
3. Shall policies be directed at controlling the money supply or inflation directly?
4. How is confidence to be established in the Riksbank’s policy and expectations about low inflation?
1. The inflation target
The Riksbank’s objectives has been expressed in the following way in legislation:
“The objective of the Riksbank’s operations shall be to maintain price stability.
In addition, the Riksbank shall promote a safe and efficient payment system.”
The first objective has therefore been made concrete by the Riksbank itself as 2 per cent inflation with
a tolerance of one per cent upwards or downwards.
The second objective, stability in the payment system requires monitoring of the “infrastructure” in
the payment system and of the major institutions that could be associated with a systemic risk for the
banking system. The second objective is hardly known although important and it will also continue to
be the Riksbank’s responsibility if Sweden joins the monetary union, the EMU.
The  Riksbank  has  opted  to  measure  inflation  by  the  consumer  price  index,  CPI.  This  measure  has
certain  disadvantages,  although  it  has  the  great  advantage  of  being  known  and  spread  among  the
general public. “Inflation” is understood by the general public as a slow rise in CPI.
The  disadvantages  with  CPI  are  that  the  measure  itself  is  affected  by  the  policy  carried  out  by  the
Riksbank. If inflation is low and risks turning into deflation, the economy needs to be stimulated. The
Riksbank  then  reduces  the  instrumental  rate  to  increase  activity  and  capacity  utilisation  in  the
economy.
However, the first thing that happens is that inflation is further reduced or even becomes deflation as
interest rates fall and housing costs become lower. These are namely included in CPI. Only after some
delay is there an effect on the level of activity and inflation in the right direction. This can lead to
misjudged policies.
Another example of problems with CPI is as follows: If the Government tightens fiscal policy with a
VAT increase, CPI rises, as VAT has a direct effect on inflation measured in this way. The effects of
BIS Review   59/1999
4
such measures, interest rate changes and tax changes are temporary. These normally result in one-off
effects on the price level.
However, it cannot always be right to tighten monetary policy and increase the interest rate because
inflation  has  been  increased  by  a  VAT  increase  which  in  time  will  dampen  demand  and  lower  the
level of  activity  and  capacity  utilisation.  In  time,  inflation  will  be  dampened  by  the  VAT  increase,
although this takes place by means of an increase in prices – bear in mind though that this depends on
inflationary expectations not being affected. A different situation arises then.
This shows that CPI movements must be interpreted and analysed when deciding on monetary policy.
Temporary effects on the price level should not initiate changes in monetary policy. The Riksbank is
therefore studying a number of other indexes that do not have the weaknesses of CPI in the aspects
taken up here.
A harmonised index, HICP, is being designed for the entire EU area. This is used by the European
Central Bank, ECB, and this measure does not include interest rate changes, although it does include
indirect taxes and subsidies.
Another  index,  UNDIX,  measures  the  “underlying”  inflation  by  excluding  the  direct  effects  of
indirect taxes, as well as interest effects.
By studying such indexes and comparing with CPI, the Riksbank can obtain a view of the temporary
effects of economic policy that should not lead to monetary policy changes.
However, this means that the Riksbank should be able  to  say  in  advance  that  inflation  will  deviate
from the two per cent target due to such temporary effects that I have spoken about.
2. Should the Riksbank have other objectives besides inflation?
As regards stabilisation policy, the Riksbank has one task by law, namely to strive for a stable price
level, that the Riksbank interprets as two per cent inflation. The Bank does not aim at constant prices
primarily  because  prices  and  especially  wages  display  inertia  in  a  downward  direction.  It  would
therefore be difficult to change relative prices and relative wages if the price level was constant on
average. The Riksbank would also be forced to carry out a deflationary policy on repeated occasions,
if constant prices were the objective.
Moreover, we know that quality improvements, which are reflected in rising prices, are not measured
in  a  correct  way  by  different  price  indexes.  A  particular  (low)  measured  inflation  can  in  fact
correspond to price stability, if consideration is taken to technical development continually improving
the quality of goods and services.
Monetary policy operates with a considerable lag. The current view is that a monetary policy change
has its maximum effect six to eight quarters afterwards. This involves a considerable difficulty with
respect to carrying out monetary policy as well as evaluating the policy carried out.
Monetary policy must therefore be elaborated taking into consideration a view of inflation over a one
or two year period. Therefore, the Riksbank makes inflation forecasts for this time period at regular
intervals.  Monetary  policy  is  therefore  controlled  by  an  intermediate  goal,  namely  the  inflation
forecasts.
It would be unreasonable to try to immediately bring back inflation to two per cent if inflation was
higher.  It  would  require  a  dramatic  reduction  of  capacity  utilisation  and  a  deterioration  of  the
situation on the labour market.
5
BIS Review   59/1999
The  Riksbank  therefore  weighs  in  the  situation  on  the  labour  market  and  the  real  activity  in  its
assessments. In the short run, there is a trade-off between stability of the inflation rate and stability in
the real economy. An unremitting stabilisation of the rate of inflation very narrowly around two per
cent would at times lead to real economic instability.
Precisely for this reason, the target horizon is set at between one and two years, during which time the
Riksbank endeavours to gradually meet the inflation target, by steering inflation towards two per cent,
guided by the inflation forecasts, which have been made for this period.
In  the  long  run,  however,  there  is  no  trade-off  between  inflation  and  employment.  A  low,  stable
inflation  provides  the  prerequisites  for  fast  growth  and  high  employment,  according  to  experiences
from earlier periods, such as the first two decades after the war. We are now seeing a development
that seems to confirm this hypothesis.
It  can  therefore  be  said  that  employment  and  capacity  utilisation  directly  affect  the  Government’s
monetary  policy  to  the  extent  that  compliance  with  the  inflation  target  only  takes  place  gradually
within  a  period  of  two  years.  This  is  to  avoid  too  great  fluctuations  in  the  real  economy  –  in
employment and capacity utilisation otherwise.
However,  unemployment  and  capacity  utilisation  affect  inflation  and  are  therefore  included  as
components  of  inflation  forecasts.  These  circumstances  therefore  also  play  an  indirect  role  for  the
Riksbank’s monetary policy.
The exchange rate is not an objective for Riksbank policy although it also has a direct and indirect
effect on inflation.
An  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate  will  have,  all  other  things  being  equal,  an  immediately
dampening effect on import prices. As import prices are included in CPI, inflation will be reduced.
The exchange rate will affect inflation indirectly by affecting demand.  A  higher  real  exchange  rate
reduces exports and thereby reduces the level of activity with some time lag. This indirect effect tends
to reduce inflation in the somewhat longer run.
Supply is also affected by the exchange rate in time by (initially) affecting import and export prices,
which eventually spreads to other prices and wages.
By the direct and indirect effect of the exchange rate on inflation, the exchange rate plays a role for
the Riksbank’s policy in those cases when a change in the exchange rate is expected to be, or proves
to be durable.
The Riksbank is also studying various measures for changes in the quantity of money as well as bank
lending. These quantities also have varying degrees of co-variation with inflation, but with a rather
long time-lag.
Altogether, it can be said that capacity utilisation, inflation expectations, and the exchange rate are the
most important determining factors underlying inflation forecasts.
What  has  been  said  summarises  the  main  content  of  the  stabilisation  policy  regime  that  was
established after 1992. On 1 January 1999, the Riksbank was made formally autonomous of political
influence and has since then been governed by an executive board of six members.
BIS Review   59/1999
6
3. Shall policy control the quantity of money or inflation directly?
Some central banks, previously the German Bundesbank and now the European Central Bank, ECB,
have  an  (unclear)  quantity  of  money  target  for  their  policy.  These  banks  endeavour  to  meet  the
inflation target by trying to control the expansion of the quantity of money.
In fact, there are considerable similarities between the methods of aiming at the quantity of  money
and at inflation.
The  banks’  means  is  the  repo  rate  that  can  be  set  to  affect  the  quantity  of  money  or  inflation.
However, as in the case of inflation, the quantity of money cannot either be directly controlled by the
repo rate. Both when the bank aims at the quantity of money and inflation, it works with a so-called
intermediary target, as inflation control has in view an inflation forecast that can diverge from actual
inflation, just as the growth of the quantity of money can diverge from inflation.
This shows that the difference is inconsiderable between the two approaches in practice. Banks with
an inflation target also study changes in the quantity of money when they make inflation forecasts.
Banks that say that they have a quantity of money target deviate from this without ceremony when it
clearly leads in the wrong direction taking into consideration the inflation forecasts that the banks also
work with.
4. Confidence
There  is  great  benefit  in  publishing  an  inflation  forecast.  The  general  public  can  then  see  how  the
bank assesses inflation in one or two years’ time, how well founded the forecast is, and how policy is
carried out in relation to the forecast that has been made.
The  Riksbank’s  task  has  been  laid  down  by  the  Swedish  people  through  a  Riksdag  decision,  as  I
mentioned to begin with, namely to maintain a fixed monetary value.
To that end, the Riksbank has been made autonomous, so-called autonomy of means.
However,  the  Riksbank  is  responsible  to  the  Riksdag  for  its  policy  by  presenting  an  account  of  its
policy twice a year to the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance. The Riksdag’s possibility of
sanction is to replace a member of the executive board each year, as the members of the executive
board have varying periods of office.
The  Chairman  and  Vice-Chairman  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  Riksbank  follow  the  executive
board’s work by having the right to attend and speak at board meetings.
This is how it must be in a democracy. Delegation of power must be accompanied by a possibility of
holding to account. By the Riksbank being open about its objectives, its forecasts and the assessments
that have been made by the executive board, confidence can be established in the Riksbank’s policy
among politicians, investors and the general public. I consider that Sweden has a found a reasonable
and balanced approach to implementation of the EU directive.
5. Are there alternatives?
We  have  thus  noted  that  Sweden  has  undertaken  a  fundamental  change  of  policy.  From  having
directed stabilisation policy at full employment as the highest priority, policy has been realigned to
create  stability.  Low  inflation  is  to  constitute  the  economic  environment  in  which  full  employment
shall be restored.
7
BIS Review   59/1999
The objective of “price stability” is delegated to an autonomous Riksbank instead of – as previously –
fiscal and monetary policy being co-ordinated by the Government  to  achieve  both  full  employment
and price stability. Full employment is aimed at by long-term economic growth.
I have given a fairly detailed account of the failures of stabilisation policy that have led to this change
of course.
Sweden is not alone in changing its approach to economic stabilisation policy. A similar change of
course  has  taken  place  in  country  after  country  –  in  fact,  this  took  place  very  late  in  Sweden  –  in
which context the deregulation of the financial markets nationally and internationally played a crucial
role.
Sweden’s  economic  successes  during  this  century  are  the  result  of  an  openness  towards  the
surrounding world, a large foreign trade, and the growth of large multinational companies. It would
not  have  been  possible  to  adopt  a  completely  different  approach  than  liberalisation  of  foreign
exchange legislation and the capital market without very large costs for Sweden. It can therefore be
said that the alternative to the new approach to economic policy would not have been feasible.
However, this also says that when the present economic order changes, then Sweden will follow the
tide.  No  economic  policy  regime  lasts  forever.  To  date  we  can  distinguish  at  least  five  distinct
regimes/epochs this century. History has not come to an end.
6. Conclusion
The  principles  I  have  outlined  above  are  illustrated  by  the  Riksbank’s  policy  this  spring.  At  the
special  monetary  policy  meeting  on  2  November,  the  repo  rate  was  at  3.4  per  cent.  The  Riksbank
noted then that at that interest rate inflation would be less than the target of two per cent in one or two
years’ time. The Bank considered that this was due to temporary factors such as the direct effect of
earlier  reductions  in  the  interest  rate  on  housing  costs  and  some  adjustments  of  indirect  taxes  and
subsidies. The temporary factors were considered to correspond to 0.5 per cent inflation in 1999 and 1
per cent in 2000.
However, even taking into consideration the temporary transitional factors, inflation was expected to
be less than two per cent in one or two years’ time. The interest rate was therefore reduced to 2.9 per
cent, a bit less than the European Central Bank’s repo rate.
This  illustrates  how  the  Riksbank  works.  Painstaking  inflation  forecasts  are  worked  out.  The
adjustment of monetary policy to reach the inflation target takes place successively without the Bank
glancing  at  monetary  policy  in  other  countries,  except  to  the  extent  that  their  policies  affect  the
Riksbank’s own inflation forecast.
By publication of forecasts, minutes from meetings and taking into account the Riksbank’s explicitly
declared objectives, the clients, the Swedish  people,  through  the  Riksdag,  can  evaluate  the  policies
carried out.
BIS Review   59/1999
8
