Mr  Yam  elaborates  on  the  role  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  as  the  lender  of  last
resort
Speech by  the  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  JP,  at  the
Half-yearly Dinner of the Hong Kong Association of Banks in Hong Kong on 29 June 1999.
The HKAB and HKMA Partnership
I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak to the Hong Kong Association of Banks (HKAB) at
its half-yearly dinner again. The last opportunity for doing so was in December 1992 when, ahead of
the  formation  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  (HKMA),  I  spoke  as  the  Chief  Executive
(Designate) of the HKMA. It has been almost seven years, and although it is rare for the HKAB to
invite the same speaker a second time, I must confess that I was privately beginning to wonder. Then
your  current  Chairman  picked  up  the  phone  with  this  very  timely  invitation  that  I  gladly  accepted.
This is perhaps yet another good indication of the close partnership and understanding built up over
the years between HKAB and HKMA. Together we have been through a lot and have achieved a lot.
Our work together has embraced the continuous process of monetary reform; the strengthening of our
supervisory  framework;  the  building  of  a  sophisticated  financial  infrastructure,  notably  the
establishment  of  CMU  and  the  introduction  of  RTGS;  the  preparation  for  the  handover;  and  the
handling of the Asian financial turmoil or, to give it perhaps a more appropriate term, the crisis of
globalisation.  And  we  emerged  from  all  this  with  the  most  robust  banking  system  in  the  region.
Indeed,  the  HKAB  and  HKMA  partnership  is  a  very  important  one,  as  we  continue,  in  accordance
with the requirement laid down in the Basic Law, to develop Hong Kong as an international financial
centre.
And there are many more challenges ahead for us that require an even stronger partnership to handle.
We are all well aware of the forces of globalisation and technological advance, and the opportunities
and risks associated with them. The Asian financial turmoil has also put us on clear notice that those
forces, made more potent by the activities of the highly leveraged institutions, can be brutal and do
not  tolerate  excesses  or  mistakes.  It  takes  great  effort,  particularly  in  a  small  and  entirely  open
international  financial  centre,  for  both  the  regulated  and  the  regulator  to  harness  these  forces,  and
derive and maximise the benefits that undoubtedly flow from them. This process is likely to involve
changes to both the structure of the banking sector and to the supervisory framework, perhaps to the
extent of affecting special interest groups. But the  fact  of  the  matter  is  that  changes  are  inevitable.
And in coping with them, we have a choice between either dealing with the relevant issues ahead of
time, making full use of our strong partnership, or leaving them to the brute forces of the market. I
must say that I have a preference for the former, even at the risk of inviting further accusations that
the HKMA is being interventionist, for I am concerned about the possible disruptions and systemic
risks of the latter. But I can assure you that the HKMA has never been, and never will be, in the habit
of  handing  down  directives  to  the  banking  sector,  or  of  requiring  commercial  banks  to  take  any
actions that go against their own commercial interests. The strong partnership between HKAB and the
HKMA is built upon dialogue and realism, on the ability of both sides to appreciate the issues at hand,
and on a determination to tackle them in a co-operative spirit without any political fanfare. Long may
this strong partnership continue.
The Banking Sector Consultancy Study
,QGHHGZRUNLQJFORVHO\WRJHWKHUZHDUHQRZDVZHOOSUHSDUHGDVZHFDQEHIRUWKHQH[WFKDOOHQJH
the arrival of the new millennium. In our preparations for the challenges of the new century we have
benefited from the cooperation of HKAB in the Banking Sector Consultancy Study. As you are aware,
the Consultancy Study was commissioned last year with the aim, among other things, of assessing the
regulatory and supervisory changes necessary to enable Hong Kong’s banking sector to address the
challenges and opportunities of the coming five years. It is a strategic attempt to enable the banking
1
BIS Review   77/1999
system to manage the forces of globalisation and technological advance in a way that will make banks
more efficient, more innovative and more competitive.
The  thrust  of  the  recommendations  in  the  Consultancy  Study  is  greater  competitiveness  through
liberalisation,  deregulation  and  simplification.  But  an  equally  important  message  is  that  greater
competitiveness  should  not  be  achieved  at  the  expense  of  the  safety  and  soundness  of  the  banking
system.  The  challenge  is  how  best  to  exploit  future  opportunities  while  containing  the  risks.
Recognising  that  the  global  trends  it  has  identified  are  likely  to  increase  the  level  of  risk  to  which
banks are exposed, the Study makes a number of recommendations designed to enhance the safety and
stability of the system as a whole. You are aware of the details of the recommendations. You may also
wish  to  be  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  internal  deliberation  within  the  Government,  after  the  three-
month public consultation period earlier this year, is drawing to a close, and an announcement on the
Government’s decision on the recommendations will likely be made shortly. I would like to take this
opportunity to thank HKAB again for the very helpful views expressed on them. I would also like to
take  this  opportunity  to  deal  specifically  with  one  of  the  recommendations  that  has  been  widely
supported in the comments received during the consultation period, although the subject matter itself
may involve a certain degree of controversy both in theory and practice. This is the recommendation
that the HKMA should clarify its role as lender of last resort.
HKMA as Lender of Last Resort
It  might  be  worth  pointing  out  first  that  some  clarification  of  this  issue  was,  in  fact,  provided  in  a
luncheon speech I gave to the American Chamber of Commerce as long ago as October  1994.  The
speech was subsequently published in our Quarterly Bulletin of November 1994 under the somewhat
bland title “Stability of the Banking System in Hong Kong”. It is not a good practice to quote from
one’s own speeches, particularly those that are nearly five years old, but I could not resist plucking
out two sentences from about half way through that speech, in which I state that:
“there is an official lender of last resort in Hong Kong and that this is the HKMA. Some persons, even
within the banking community in Hong Kong, still seem to be not quite clear about this.”
A long explanation of the concept and functions of the lender of last resort as applied to Hong Kong
followed this remark. Despite the explanation, it seems that there remains some confusion about the
policy.  The  Report  on  the  Consultancy  Study  finds  that  “there  is  still  a  substantial  level  of
uncertainty” about this issue and “a large number of participants in the sector who are either unaware
that there is actually a lender of last resort or are unclear as to the conditions under which the HKMA
would provide this assistance”. This has not been helped by erroneous suggestions in some prominent
newspapers  that  the  replacement  of  the  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  with  a  Discount  Window,  as
one of the seven technical measures introduced last September, has effectively  ended  the  HKMA’s
role as lender of last resort. The issue has been further clouded by the equally  erroneous  academic
argument that the role as lender of last resort should not be mixed with the HKMA’s role as operator
of a Currency Board system.
The Consultants offer a number of other reasons why there should continue to be such uncertainty:
the strongest, perhaps, is the fact that, since our establishment in 1993, the HKMA has never had to
exercise its function as lender of last resort. I think we would all hope that this will long continue to
be the case. And so, in the absence of an actual demonstration of the lender of last resort policy in
action, we have to continue to rely on explanations of the principles behind the policy. With this in
mind, I shall shortly be sending copies of a detailed policy statement on the HKMA’s role as lender of
last resort to the chief executives of all authorised institutions in Hong Kong, and we shall be giving
extensive publicity to the policy statement. I shall give here both a summary of, and an elaboration on,
that policy statement.
The Need for Clarification
BIS Review   77/1999
2
Further clarification is particularly necessary at this time, notwithstanding the point that the general
principles  outlined  in  my  1994  statement  still  apply.  The  banking  environment  has  changed  quite
dramatically in the past five years. Last year,  after  many  years  of  growth,  Hong  Kong,  in  common
with  much  of  the  rest  of  the  region,  entered  a  period  of  sharp  recession,  with  all  the  stresses  and
uncertainties that this has brought to the banking sector. The face of banking across the world has also
developed  rapidly  in  the  last  five  years.  There  are  strong  justifications  for  the  HKMA  not  only  to
restate  the  principles  under  which  we  are  ready  to  provide  liquidity  support  to  institutions
experiencing  difficulties,  but  also  to  further  clarify  the  objectives,  the  mechanics,  and  the  limits  of
this support.
As I have said, it has so far not been necessary for the HKMA to exercise its role as lender of last
resort,  though  we  have,  on  one  or  two  occasions,  said  that  we  stand  ready  to  do  so.  Given  the
volatility that has been generated by the Asian financial crisis and the serious problems that have been
faced by banks elsewhere in the region, this is in itself a remarkable testament to the resilience and
prudence of our banking sector. It also underlines the effectiveness of our regulatory and supervisory
system, which, as any good system should, takes a preventive rather than a curative approach. During
the  more  extreme  periods  of  the  Asian  crisis,  however,  one  of  the  main  concerns  of  market
participants was the high level of uncertainty in the market about whether and to what extent lender of
last  resort  support  would  be  forthcoming  should  it  be  required.  In  fact,  the  liquidity  shortages
experienced  during  the  more  volatile  periods  may  have  been  in  part  attributable  to  this  market
uncertainty. Arguably, this uncertainty may also have aggravated the credit crunch during the crisis
periods.  The  introduction  of  the  Discount  Window  in  September  1998  has  helped  to  ease  this
problem. A greater knowledge and awareness of the availability of a lender of last resort facility will,
we hope, further help to reduce uncertainty, and will, in turn help to improve overall market liquidity
in  the  event  of  future  crises,  should  they  arise.  A  formalised  policy  framework  will  also  help  the
HKMA itself to ensure speed and consistency in considering whether or not to extend lender of last
resort support. A quick response in an uncertain environment could be of vital importance in helping
to restore stability and confidence to the banking system.
But  it  must  be  acknowledged  that  there  are  also  good  arguments  for  not  saying  too  much  on  the
subject. The HKAB, while expressing general support for clarification, has rightly observed that the
HKMA must be able to maintain sufficient flexibility to be able to handle widely differing situations,
to  deal  with  abrupt  changes,  and  to  take  action  in  a  timely  way.  There  is  a  further  argument  for
maintaining a degree of constructive ambiguity in order to avoid encouraging moral hazard by setting
out too clearly the terms on which support might be forthcoming. This is a valid point. But it is also
worth  noting  that  the  problem  of  moral  hazard,  while  it  can  never  be  entirely  eradicated,  has  been
considerably  reduced  in  Hong  Kong  in  recent  years.  A  sound  and  well  established  regulatory  and
supervisory framework has increasingly limited risk-taking  activities,  and  the  trend  is  towards  risk-
based  rather  than  institution-based  supervision.  A  high  level  of  market  transparency  allows  market
discipline  mechanisms  to  work  effectively,  and  risk  control  systems  at  the  institutional  level  are
generally adequate. In fact, given the degree of sophistication and stability that Hong Kong’s banking
environment has achieved, spelling out the rules clearly would, in my view, have positive advantages.
Clear criteria on collateral requirements in the event of lender of last resort support, for example, may
well  provide  incentives  for  institutions  to  hold  better  quality  assets  and  thus  further  reduce  moral
hazard.
The Scope of Lender of Last Resort Support
But it is necessary to be clear about what is meant by lender of last resort support. So let me now deal
with this important definitional point. Lender of last resort is  a  term  which  tends  to  be  used  rather
loosely,  and  may  mean  different  things  to  different  people.  There  are  in  fact  three  activities  of  a
central  bank  which  might  be  referred  to  as  lender  of  last  resort.  Two  of  these  do  not  concern  me
today.  They  are,  first,  the  provision  of  intra-day  liquidity  under  the  RTGS  system  and  overnight
liquidity  through  the  Discount  Window,  the  main  objective  of  which  is  to  ensure  the  smooth
3
BIS Review   77/1999
functioning of the interbank payment system on a day-to-day, short-term basis; and, secondly, and at
the other extreme, longer-term liquidity support or capital support to a probably insolvent bank, the
failure of which would have wider implications for the stability of the monetary and financial systems
of Hong Kong.
The role of lender of last resort which I am addressing today is neither of those, but comes somewhere
between  the  two.  It  involves  the  provision  of  support  to  banks  that  are  basically  solvent  but  are
troubled by short-term funding difficulties. The immediate purpose of such support is to provide some
breathing space to allow the institution to implement corrective measures. The overall aims would be,
first,  to  prevent  illiquidity  in  that  particular  institution  from  precipitating  a  situation  of  insolvency
and, secondly, to prevent the contagion to other banks and hence a crisis for the system as a whole.
The Legal Framework
This  crucial  consideration,  the  effect  on  the  system  as  a  whole,  brings  me  to  the  question  of  the
resources available to the HKMA, and the legal and other limitations placed on the HKMA, in  the
exercise of its role as lender of last support. These resources are to be found in the Exchange Fund,
the use of which, as you know, is governed by the Exchange Fund Ordinance. Under this Ordinance,
the uses to which the Fund may be put are quite specific. Section 3(1) of the Ordinance states that the
Fund “shall be used primarily for such purposes as the Financial Secretary thinks fit affecting, either
directly  or  indirectly  the  exchange  value  of  the  currency  of  Hong  Kong  and  for  other  purposes
incidental thereto”. Section 3(1A) further provides that “the Financial Secretary may, with a view to
maintaining Hong Kong as an international financial centre, use the Fund as he thinks fit to maintain
the stability and integrity of the monetary and financial systems of Hong Kong”. Under section 5B of
the Ordinance, the Financial Secretary has delegated day-to-day decisions on the use of the Exchange
Fund under these sections to the Monetary Authority.
The clear indication here is that the use of the Exchange Fund must be for systemic purposes. The
guiding  principle  in  considering  whether  to  provide  lender  of  last  resort  support  to  an  individual
authorised  institution  is  therefore  whether  the  failure  of  that  institution,  either  by  itself  or  through
spreading  contagion  to  other  institutions,  would  damage  the  stability  of  the  exchange  rate  or  the
monetary and financial systems. It is neither possible nor necessary to give an exhaustive list of all the
instances  that  might  be  covered  by  this  principle.  Contagion  might,  for  example,  arise  where  other
institutions  are  heavily  exposed  to  the  troubled  institutions  or  share  characteristics  that  could  be
interpreted as the origin of its problems. General sentiment could also be a factor, when, for example,
there is heightened nervousness about the stability of the banking or monetary systems. But there are
many other possible scenarios.
Consistency with Currency Board Arrangements
A limitation on the HKMA’s exercise of lender of last resort support is the need for consistency with
the  Currency  Board  arrangements  in  Hong  Kong.  Our  Currency  Board  system  requires  that  the
monetary  base,  which  in  effect  represents  the  ultimate  liquidity  of  the  financial  system,  can  only
H[SDQGDORQJZLWKLQFUHDVHVLQIRUHLJQUHVHUYHV
RUPRUHSUHFLVHO\ZLWKWKHIRUHLJQUHVHUYHVLQWKH
backing  portfolio,  which  has  been  established  to  segregate  the  Currency  Board  component  of  the
foreign reserves. However, the system would not preclude use of the Exchange Fund’s other assets,
including its Hong Kong dollar assets, outside of the Currency Board account, to provide last resort
support to a problem institution. Nor would it preclude funding temporary liquidity injections through
borrowing  from  the  interbank  market  or  through  a  sale  of  foreign  currency  assets  held  by  the
Exchange Fund, again outside of the Currency Board account, not touching those assets earmarked for
the Backing Portfolio. A further option would be for the HKMA to operate within the Currency Board
account  and  conduct  repos  using  Exchange  Fund  paper  or  US  dollar  assets.  None  of  these
mechanisms  would  breach  the  Currency  Board  rules,  since  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  liquidity  thus
created,  in  the  form  of  the  addition  to  the  Aggregate  Balance  of  the  banking  system,  would  be
BIS Review   77/1999
4
matched either by a decline in another component of the monetary base (the Exchange Fund paper) or
an increase in US dollar assets.
Beyond this, we have stated on several occasions in the past that, in exceptional circumstances, where
there is a risk that large-scale Hong Kong dollar transactions might create extreme conditions in the
LQWHUEDQN PDUNHW DQG DIIHFW WKH VWDELOLW\ RI WKH H[FKDQJH UDWH
 WR DQ H[WHQW XQZDUUDQWHG E\ DQ\
economic fundamentals - the HKMA may temporarily lend or borrow Hong Kong dollars to or from
the interbank market to dampen these extreme conditions. Should an imminent bank failure pose the
threat  of  triggering  extreme  conditions  in  the  money  and  foreign  exchange  markets,  there  may  be
justifications  for  the  HKMA  to  inject  liquidity  directly  into  the  interbank  market,  on  a  temporary
basis,  to  ensure  systemic  stability.  This  would  represent  a  departure  from  the  strict  rules  of  the
Currency Board system. The availability of excess foreign currency reserves allows some scope for
discretion, but the intention would anyway be that this injection should be only temporary.
Preconditions for Lender of Last Resort Support
The  basic  precondition  for  lender  of  last  resort  support  is  the  systemic  risk  that  would,  in  the
judgement  of  the  HKMA,  arise  from  the  failure  of  a  troubled  institution  if  it  were  deprived  of
liquidity assistance. This is the basic precondition, but not the only precondition. The institution in
question would also need to satisfy a number of further conditions designed to demonstrate that lender
of  last  resort  support  is  genuinely  being  sought  as  a  last  resort,  and  that  such  support  would  not
amount to throwing good money after bad. To be specific, the additional preconditions are:
•  First,  the  institution  would  need  to  have  a  sufficient  margin  of  solvency.  As  a  measure  of
sufficiency, we would generally require the institution to demonstrate that it maintains a capital
adequacy ratio of at least 6% after making adjustment for any additional provisions that might be
necessary.
•  Secondly,  the  liquidity  support  extended  to  the  institution  would  need  to  be  adequately
collateralised.
•  Thirdly, the institution should have sought other reasonably available sources of funding before
seeking lender of last resort assistance.
•  Fourthly, the shareholder controllers of the institution should have made all reasonable efforts to
provide liquidity or capital support as a demonstration of their own commitment to the institution.
•  Fifthly, there must be no prima facie evidence that the management is not fit and proper, or that
the liquidity problem is due to fraud.
•  And sixthly, the institution must be prepared to take appropriate remedial action to deal with its
liquidity problems.
The policy applies to locally incorporated institutions whose failure might have systemic implications,
and not to branches of foreign banks operating in Hong Kong, since the liquidity of a branch cannot
readily  be  divorced  from  that  of  the  bank  as  a  whole.  The  expectation  is  that,  in  the  event  of
difficulties, the head office of the branch, supported if  necessary  by  the  lender  of  last  resort  in  the
home country, would provide enough funding to enable the branch to meet its obligations. There are,
however, two circumstances in which the HKMA might provide financial assistance to a branch of a
foreign bank with funding problems. The first would be for the HKMA to swap Hong Kong dollars
for US dollars held by the branch if no suitable counterparty could be found in the market. The second
would be to provide urgently required bridging finance on a secured basis to a branch pending receipt
by it of funds from head office.
5
BIS Review   77/1999
Instruments for Lender of Last Resort Support
The  policy  statement  that  will  shortly  be  issued  to  banks  contains  extensive  details  about  the
instruments  that  the  HKMA  would  use  for  lender  of  last  resort  assistance.  Since  the  supply  of
Exchange  Fund  debt,  even  at  about  HK$100  billion,  is  limited,  and  there  is  a  lack  of  other
Government  debt,  the  range  of  collateral  against  which  lender  of  last  resort  support  would  be
provided must necessarily be wider than in some other economies. There are three basic instruments
that  the  HKMA  would  use  to  provide  support:  purchase  of  the  institution’s  placements  with  other
banks; repos of eligible Hong Kong dollar securities; and a credit facility against the security of the
institution’s  residential  mortgage  portfolio.  The  details  are  set  out  in  the  policy  statement  and  its
annexes, and I do not intend to go into them here, but I do wish to highlight three points. First, given
that the purpose of liquidity support is to provide a temporary breathing space to allow the institution
to  sort  its  problems  out,  any  support  provided  through  repos  or  through  a  credit  facility  would  be
provided for an initial term of no more than 30 days, although there would be a provision for it to be
rolled over for a further 30 days. Secondly, the interest rate charged on lender of last resort support
would be pitched at a level sufficient to maintain incentives for good management but not at a level so
high  as  to  defeat  the  purpose  of  the  facility,  which  is  to  prevent  illiquidity  from  precipitating
insolvency. Thirdly, notwithstanding the availability of suitable collateral, there will be a maximum
limit  on  the  amount  of  support  provided  to  an  individual  institution  through  repos  or  the  credit
facility.  This  limit  would  normally  be  set  at  between  100%  and  200%  of  the  capital  base  of  the
institution concerned subject to a cap of HK$10 billion.
Exceptions
We believe that the provision of these details will go a long way towards removing market uncertainty
and improving market liquidity, especially in times of crisis. This is the first time that we have made
clear our requirements and parameters in setting out the mechanics for lender of last resort support.
The emphasis, both in these details and in the preconditions for support, is on a rule-based approach
more than on discretion or constructive ambiguity, and this is consistent with the HKMA’s policy of
transparency.
It is, however, necessary to stress that the policy still requires the exercise of discretion by the HKMA
DWYDULRXVVWDJHV
LQMXGJLQJZKHWKHUDV\VWHPLFULVNH[LVWVIRUH[DPSOHLQGHFLGLQJZKHWKHUDQ
institution meets the preconditions for support, and in determining the methods and level of support.
Furthermore, any policy that is essentially a contingency plan for dealing with unusual, unanticipated,
and undesirable situations must necessarily contain a provision for circumstances that fall outside the
framework outlined in the policy. Such a situation might arise where, for example, an institution is
unable to comply with the preconditions for lender of last resort support that I have outlined. Or it
may require a longer breathing space or a larger amount of support than that prescribed in the limits I
have  set  out.  Or  it  may  propose  other  forms  of  security  than  the  three  that  have  been  specified.
Support  in  such  cases  would  be  considered  in  the  light  of  the  implications  of  failure  on  systemic
stability and would not be granted without the specific prior approval of the Financial Secretary. In
addition, the Monetary Authority would consider whether to appoint a Manager under Section 52 of
the  Banking  Ordinance  to  safeguard  the  interests  of  depositors  and  other  creditors.  The  aim  in
providing for cases that fall outside the conditions set out in the policy statement is to allow sufficient
flexibility for the HKMA to deal with unpredictable situations, a point that has been well made by the
HKAB, but also to ensure that this flexibility is matched by adequate checks and balances.
Conclusion
Before offering my concluding remarks on the policy of lender of last resort, I should like to make
some  observations  on  the  institutional  position  of  the  HKMA  as  lender  of  last  resort.  When  I
BIS Review   77/1999
6
addressed this subject in 1994 I pointed out that the establishment of the HKMA, and the placing of
both  monetary  and  banking  supervision  functions  under  one  roof,  had  given  a  much  more  precise
institutional focus to the lender of last resort function, and that the amendments to the Exchange Fund
Ordinance in 1992 had further helped to clarify the scope of that function. I should like to reiterate
that point this evening, more especially in the context of the world-wide debate about the merits of a
super-regulator  system,  under  which  supervisory  functions  would  be  institutionally  separate  from
central bank functions. Quite apart from the question, which still remains to be answered, of whether
monolithic super-regulators really provide the efficient, economic, streamlined system they set out to
achieve, there are, in my view, strong arguments, in the interests of efficient crisis management, for
having the banking regulator as close as possible to the lender of last resort. From this point of view, I
share the doubts expressed in the latest BIS Annual Report about “whether central banks stripped of
supervisory responsibilities will be able to obtain the information they require, when they need it, to
use their emergency liquidity support powers wisely and effectively in a market-driven world.”
One of the arguments of those who would like to see the institutions of regulator and lender of last
resort  clearly  separate  is  that  too  close  a  relationship  may  give  rise  to  serious  conflicts  of  interest
which could prove costly to the public purse in terms of over-generous support operations. However,
the arrangements which I have described here ensure that there is no use of public funds, except those
which are fully collateralised, at least until referral to the Financial Secretary has been triggered.
To conclude, I should like to repeat the simple statement that I made in 1994: that there is an official
lender of last resort in Hong Kong, and that this is the HKMA. My speech this evening, and the policy
statement soon to be circulated, will, I hope, help put a speedy end to the doubts  and  uncertainties
about  this  point  and  about  whether  our  role  as  lender  of  last  resort  is  consistent  with  our  role  as
operator of a Currency Board system. The detailed policy statement has also set out, more clearly and
precisely than ever before, the circumstances in which lender of last resort support will be extended,
the preconditions for obtaining support, and the mechanics for arranging it. The lender of last resort
function - the ultimate source of liquidity in a banking system - is one of the most important functions
of any central bank. One of the measures of the soundness of a banking system, however, is the rarity
with which this function is exercised. The fact that the HKMA has not yet had to activate its lender of
last resort policy is perhaps one of the firmest demonstrations of the soundness and stability of Hong
Kong’s banking system that we could have. We owe this success to the prudent policies and skilful
management pursued by the members of this Association and to the productive partnership between
UHJXODWHGDQGUHJXODWRU
EHWZHHQ+.$%DQGWKH+.0$7KLVLVDVWURQJDQGKHDOWK\EDVLVIURP
which to tackle the challenges that now face us, and I look forward to seeing that partnership continue
to flourish in the years ahead.
7
BIS Review   77/1999
