Mr  Gehrig  focuses  on  special  structural  characteristics  involved  in  solving  the  Year  2000
problem for the financial sector in Switzerland
Speech by Prof Bruno Gehrig, a member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National Bank, at the
Global 2000 Coordinating Group Meeting in Montreux on 30 April 1999.
I am most delighted to be your luncheon speaker today and thank you for your invitation. I am sure
that Montreux provides you with a highly stimulating environment for today’s Global 2000 meeting.
As you are no doubt aware, you are leading the way in tackling the Year 2000 issue. I would like to
thank you for your extremely important and valuable commitment, and I am certain that I also speak
on behalf of my colleagues from other central banks, bank supervisors and - even more importantly -
countless customers in the financial industry.
On the threshold of the third millennium we are indeed confronted with most complex and - in many
regards - unique challenges. In terms of methodology, I believe it is essential to realise that we are
dealing with complex network problems which cannot be solved on the basis of the behaviour patterns
of market and competition we are all familiar with. In this context, external or third-party effects are
in  fact  so  significant  that  remarkable  collective  effort  is    necessary  in  order  to  minimise  potential
damages resulting from malfunctions. This applies both to the preparatory work and the challenge to
overcome frictions which - in spite of our best efforts - will be unavoidable. Public institutions and
private companies are equally called upon to engage in a high level of cooperation and coordination
beyond  competition,  even  if,  and  especially  where  no  individual  business  case  can  be  made.  The
scope of preparations for the Year 2000 is unprecedented in many dimensions. I cannot think of any
other  project  which  requires  a  similar  degree  of  cooperation  and  coordination  within  and  across
organisations, industries, sectors and countries.
Features of the Swiss case
Even though preparations are generally making good progress in Switzerland, the country’s readiness
chart  exposes  areas  in  which  efforts  will  have  to  be  strengthened.  As  far  as  the  financial  sector  is
concerned, which will be the focus of my  remarks,  there  are  some  special  structural  characteristics
involved  in  solving  the  Year  2000  problem.  Our  financial  centre  is  the  home  of  some  large  global
players  in  the  banking  and  insurance  sectors  as  well  as  the  place  where  numerous  cross-border
customer relationships are concentrated. We are, therefore, exceptionally vulnerable to international
shocks. On the other hand, this also means that we must take on more responsibility with regard to the
risk of inflicting damage on third parties through our own failure. A second phenomenon, which is
germane to Switzerland, is the fact that - in comparison with other countries - the two big banks, CS
and UBS, garner a very significant share of all banking transactions. Without doubt, this results in a
high concentration of risk, but also yields some significant advantages. Two  such  advantages  stand
out:
-  The collective efforts of our banking sector are governed by a natural leadership structure which
facilitates and accelerates development processes,
 and,  secondly,  the  two  big  players  act  in  some  measure  as  know-how  brokers,  swiftly
incorporating the Year 2000 experiences gained abroad into the process of solving the problem in
this country.
More generally speaking, our long tradition of practical cooperation between competitors and of close
ties  between  regulators  and  banks  is  a  distinct  plus  in  the  preparatory  work.  Jointly  managed
institutions like the Swiss Exchange, our central securities depository, or the Swiss Interbank Clearing
System are well-known examples of this spirit of cooperation.
1
BIS Review   46/1999
I am confident that the large-scale interbank tests scheduled to begin in May will provide us with a
positive picture of the state of preparations.
Assuring liquidity
From the viewpoint of a central banker, assuring adequate liquidity must be the prime concern. Based
on  the  nature  of  their  business,  banks  are  inherently  vulnerable.  Withdrawals  and  redistribution  of
deposits can jeopardise the banks’ capacity to pay. Such effects, should they materialise at all, may
take place as a millennium shadow before or during entering the next millennium.
It is primarily the duty of individual banks to brace themselves for such events. They must undertake
careful  liquidity  planning,  comprising  both  a  normal  scenario  as  well  as  different  stress  scenarios.
They must have a clear idea where, in what form, and to what extent they can cover their liquidity
needs and make the necessary limits and collateral available. In this process, it is crucial that banks -
interfacing with large customers - enter into agreements with one another, thus creating a high degree
of  transparency.  The  goal  is  to  limit  the  range  of  unexpected  behavioural  changes  by  creating
transparency and reaching an understanding.
Looking at the issue from this vantage point also makes it clear that a strategy of avoiding transactions
is  completely  contra-productive.  Even  though  it  makes  sense  to  avoid  settlement  dates  of  forward
contracts falling immediately before and  after  the  millennium  transition,  it  is  vital  that  transactions
can be carried out and that markets remain liquid. It is at least conceivable that smaller banks or those
with a somewhat lower rating will be confronted with an outflow of deposits while the top names in
the  industry  receive  an  influx  of  deposits.  This  generates  stress  which  can  only  be  reduced  by
efficiently  re-channelling  funds  between  banks.  It  is  obvious  that  the  availability  of  sufficient
collateral is crucial.
The availability of collateral - just in case - is therefore the central focus of liquidity planning. In the
case of Switzerland, the potential re-channelling problem has both an aspect ameliorating the problem
and one making it more difficult. What may actually ease the situation is the fact that the cantonal
banks, with roughly one-third of the market share, operate with a state guarantee. They are, therefore,
not  likely  to  face  any  outflows  of  deposits.  The  Swiss  franc  money  market,  on  the  other  hand,  is
dominated  by  the  two  big  banks.  These  play  a  key  role  in  ensuring  the  stability  of  the  system  and
therefore must shoulder a heavy responsibility.
Role of the Swiss National Bank
Central banks also play a significant role in the preparations toward securing liquidity. They are the
providers of central bank money which is the medium with which the final settlement of payments is
carried out. I would like to give the following brief outline of our plan:
1.  Banks  and  the  public  can  count  on  our  providing  the  liquidity  necessary  for  coping  with  the
millennium generously and flexibly, i.e. by maintaining a continuous presence in the market. I do
not think that there is any basis to the objection that such a promise will lead to a moral hazard.
Firstly, because the liquidity planning of each bank is monitored and enforced by a supervising
body. Secondly, because we will create liquidity on a collateralised basis only.
2.  We  will  provide  liquidity  with  the  usual  monetary  policy  instruments  on  a  spot  and  -  if
appropriate -  forward  basis.  We  are  aware,  however,  that  the  processes  connected  with  the
individual  instruments  differ  considerably  as  regards  their  vulnerability  to  malfunction  or
breakdowns.  Settlement  of  a  foreign  exchange  purchase  against  Swiss  francs,  for  instance,  is
relatively  complex  and  therefore  exposed  to  a  non  negligible  operational  risk.  Settlement  risks
BIS Review   46/1999
2
with  repo  transactions,  however,  are  significantly  lower  because  in  our  system,  collateral  must
only  be  transferred  between  accounts  by  the  central  securities  depository.  This  is  a  simple  and
straightforward  process  which  -  if  necessary  -  could  even  be  implemented  manually.
Consequently,  we  encourage  banks  to  pay  special  attention  to  their  holdings  of  repo  collateral
when  engaging  in  their  liquidity  planning.  Furthermore,  we  will  considerably  expand  our  repo
basket by including selected foreign currency securities. This step which is primarily motivated
by  our  intention  to  transact  also  with  counterparties  abroad  obviously  produces  a  useful  side-
effect  on  collateral  availability  over  year-end.  It  is  our  clear  commitment  to  provide  liquidity
sufficient  to  smooth  market  developments  before  and  at  the  transition.  Of  course,  all  banks,
especially those which do not engage in repo transactions, can avail themselves of significantly
increased lombard limits just for the year-end, if they wish so.
As  regards  the  distribution  and  the  available  stock  of  banknotes,  we  have  made  the  necessary
provisions. After having put a new banknote series into circulation recently, our inventories are more
abundant than they would have to be even in a worst-case scenario.
Final remarks
Let me conclude by making two final remarks.
Firstly, the need for successful active and reactive communication can hardly be overestimated. The
millennium  has  an  almost  magical  fascination  which  may  stimulate  crisis  fantasies  and  is  perfectly
capable  of  triggering  herd  effects.  We  must  counter  this  by  creating  credible  transparency  and
reacting to any possible alarming rumours swiftly and in a co-ordinated fashion. This is one  of  the
tasks  of  the  Swiss  Staff  2000  which  involves  the  Bankers’  Association,  the  important  providers  of
services  like  clearing,  settlement  and  the  Exchange,  banking  supervision  and  the  central  bank.  It
seems  indispensable  that  the  authorities  play  an  important  part  both  in  active  and  reactive
communication.
And,  secondly,  we  must  diligently  carry  on  our  preparatory  work,  continuously  and  openly
report  on  the  progress  made,  as  well  as  adjusting  the  allocation  of  resources  in  accordance
with the risks involved. At the same time, we must bear in mind that we will be faced with
unexpected  friction  and  bottlenecks.  While  it  is  true  that  the  millennium  transition  poses  a
veritable  challenge,  I  am  fully  convinced  that  it  is  manageable  and  that  we  will  rise  to  the
occasion. Let us all build on the positive relationship between our ongoing efforts to improve
our  readiness  including  a  whole  variety  of  contingency  plans  and  the  chance  to  eventually
enjoy  the  pleasure  of  having  been  wrong  and  unnecessarily  pessimistic  in  providing  for  all
kinds of gloomy scenarios.
3
BIS Review   46/1999
