Mr Tietmeyer discusses the euro: the new common currency
Address by the President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, Prof Hans Tietmeyer, on the occasion
the  VSB  Foundation,  Utrechts
of 
Nieuwsblad/Amersfoorts Courant and Hogeschool van Utrecht in Utrecht on 29 March 1999.
the  7th  Europe  Lecture 
sponsored  by 
I
It is a great honour and pleasure for me to address you here in Utrecht this evening. Holding a
Europe  Lecture  in  the  Netherlands  is  really  something  special.  In  your  open-minded,  lively
and progressive country, European spirit and culture are at home. Since the establishment of
the  European  “Community  of  six”,  your  country  has  certainly  ranked  among  the  most
integration-oriented  nations  in  the  EU.  So  it  comes  as  no  surprise  to  find  that  some  of  the
most momentous decisions have been taken under Dutch presidencies.
Particularly  in  the  field  of  monetary  integration,  European  history  has  undoubtedly  been
written in the Netherlands.
   The summit meeting at The Hague in 1969 marked the starting point of the first (albeit
vain) approach to a common European currency during the seventies.
It was in Maastricht in 1991 that the Community mapped out and adopted a new route
to  a  common  currency.  On  the  basis  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  entry  into  monetary
union was finally accomplished at the beginning of this year.
The  Amsterdam  Summit  of  1997  was  intended  to  lay  the  political  foundations  for  a
lasting monetary union. As you will know, for a long time it seemed essential to us in
Germany, too, that definite political progress should soon supplement that far-reaching
monetary step towards integration. Unfortunately, although some headway was made,
the  agreements  reached  in  Amsterdam  proved  unable  to  fulfil  expectations  in  major
respects. But that was least of all the fault of the Dutch hosts. All that remains for the
time being is for us to pin our hopes on an Amsterdam II.
The  Netherlands  has,  however,  not  only  been  the  venue  of  major  formal  agreements  on
monetary  integration;  it  has  also  engaged  in  practical  monetary  integration  itself  –  not  only
multilaterally, but also in bilateral terms. Given the close links between the guilder and the D-
Mark,  the  Dutch  have  lived  from  an  early  date  in  a  de  facto  monetary  union  with  their
neighbours  in  Germany.  That  early,  bilateral  monetary  union  had  two  major  characteristics
that  we  all  desire  for  today’s  European  monetary  union  as  well:  First,  it  was  unequivocally
stability-oriented.  And  second,  it  proved  viable  even  in  difficult  times.  Such  as  during  the
upheavals in the European Monetary System in 1992-3. At that time the Dutch flatly rejected
preconditions on the part of others for the purpose of separating – at least for a while – the
guilder from  the  D-Mark.  The  D-Mark/guilder  duo  held  up,  even  in  hard  times.  The  Dutch
always  turned  out  to  be  reliable  partners,  even  when  German  policies  were  themselves
temporarily  in  turmoil  in  the  wake  of  reunification.  And  where  overcoming  structural
problems  on  the  labour  market  is  concerned,  the  Dutch  have  for  some  time  rightly  been
mentioned as a model for us in Germany.
1
BIS Review   35/1999
In the meantime, both currencies, the guilder and the D-Mark, have integrated their tradition
of stability into the euro. And the Dutch and Germans alike hope that the euro will take over
and expand that legacy.
II
The  common  currency,  with  its  present  structure  and  present  strategy,  did  not  just  fall  into
Europe’s  lap.  The  road  to  that  goal  was  a  long  one,  and  involved  many  setbacks.  And  the
present  blueprint  for  the  design  of  monetary  union  and  for  a  monetary  policy  geared  to  the
medium term is the quintessence of the experience gained over the last thirty years. Needless
to say, that also includes good experience, such as the lastingly successful linking of our two
currencies  on  the  basis  of  our  common  orientation  towards  stability.  But  disappointments
likewise played a part. Europe had to learn why over-hasty exchange-rate experiments and a
monetary policy aiming directly at employment and growth targets ultimately always failed.
The long road began back in the sixties, when changes in the fixed rates of the Bretton Woods
system altered the exchange rates within the Community as well. It was then that initial ideas
of a common European currency came up in the Commission. To many people, they appeared
to  be  a  logical  consequence  of  the  common  market,  and  particularly  of  the  Common
Agricultural Policy, which was based on fixed units of account. The subject was first taken up
seriously by the summit meeting at The Hague in 1969. A working group chaired by the then
Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Pierre Werner, was commissioned to map out the route to a
monetary union.
It  was  not  long  before  the  two  key  questions  of  a  monetary  union  cropped  up  at  that  time:
First, how can the necessary economic convergence of the participating countries be ensured?
That is the question as to the economic foundation. And second, which political framework is
needed, and how can it be achieved? That is the question as to the political foundation. At the
time, the Werner Group recommended, in answer to those questions and after a heated debate,
that  economic,  political  and  monetary  integration  should  be  implemented  in  parallel,  in
various  stages.  At  the  end  of  each  stage,  the  progress  made  in  all  three  areas  should  be
scrutinised with a view to deciding, in the light of the result of that scrutiny, whether the next
stage could be inaugurated. In the final stage, not only the monetary policy responsibilities but
also,  in  particular,  key  economic  and  fiscal  policy  powers  should  be  transferred  to  the
Community.
But it soon turned out in the ensuing negotiations that, above all, the political leadership in
France  at  that  time  was  not  prepared  to  make  any  such  a  conceptual  commitment.  Hence
virtually  all  that  was  achieved  was  exchange-rate  cooperation  in  the  context  of  what  later
came to be known as the “Currency Snake”. The more far-reaching plans for a monetary union
were largely shelved again.
After a number of upheavals, the Bretton Woods system finally collapsed at the beginning of
the  seventies.  That  collapse  was  accompanied  by  the  first  sharp  oil-price  hike.  After  that,
some  considerable  differences  emerged  in  Europe  between  the  ways  individual  countries
weighted their economic and monetary policy objectives. One group of countries relied on an
expansionary  monetary  policy.  They  hoped  that  such  a  policy  would  help  the  economy  to
adjust quickly to the changed conditions. Another group, by contrast, took advantage of the
latitude  that  had  been  gained  by  the  ending  of  the  linkage  to  the  dollar  to  regain  monetary
stability relatively swiftly. Thus, France, Italy and the United Kingdom left what was known
BIS Review   35/1999
2
as  the  “Snake”  in  the  mid-seventies.  Only  the  “little  Snake”  (comprising  the  Benelux
currencies, the Danish krone and the D-Mark) was left as a community of stability.
It was not until 1978, on the joint initiative of French President Giscard d’Estaing and German
Chancellor  Helmut  Schmidt,  that  the  subject  of  wider-ranging  monetary  cooperation  in
Europe was taken up again. After long discussions in the countries themselves – some of them
controversial – the European Monetary System (EMS) was set up in 1979, once more with the
participation  of  France  and  Italy.  The  crucial  question  in  the  negotiations  had  been,  in
particular, whether this EMS would tend to gear itself to the best stability standard or only to
the average level. In the end, the proposal was accepted that a parity grid should be devised
for the currencies participating in the EMS, rather than making the ECU (which was a basket
of  currencies,  and  therefore  represented  their  weighted  average  value)  the  standard  of
reference. In this way, the strongest currency in the group could set the standard for stability,
and act as the anchor. That decision primarily determined the route taken during the eighties.
Hence an interaction of two developments emerged as early as the beginning of the eighties:
Firstly,  it  became  ever  more  evident  that  the  stability-oriented  approach  yielded  better
economic and social results over the medium term. Not only did inflation remain lower; the
stability-oriented countries as a whole also came off better with respect to employment and
growth.  And  secondly,  the  EMS  exacerbated  the  political  dilemma  faced  by  the  weak
currencies. Either there were domestic policy adjustments, including a possibly uncomfortable
transitional phase (at least as long as the markets were not fully convinced of the sustainability
of the new stance), or frequent devaluations were unavoidable, with corresponding tarnishing
of the political image.
Against this background,  notably  France,  led  by  the  then  Finance  Minister,  Jacques  Delors,
performed  a  dramatic  U-turn  in  anti-inflation  policy  in  1982-3.  The  same  course  was  then
increasingly adopted in the other EMS countries. That cleared the way in the eighties for the
start  of  a  far-reaching  convergence  process.  Monetary  stability  was  then  assigned  higher
priority everywhere. Inflation rates declined. Exchange-rate realignments in the EMS became
less frequent. And the D-Mark increasingly took over the function of the anchor currency in
Europe – a function which it subsequently came to share more and more with the guilder.
Even so, the European Monetary System was, of course, not a monetary union. Parity changes
were  still  possible.  And  they  were  still  necessary  since  monetary,  fiscal  and  economic
convergence remained incomplete. In the financial markets, the reputation of the traditionally
strong currencies and their central banks remained distinctly higher than that of the others, not
least because of the differences in performance during the seventies. That fact was reflected in
the interest-rate differentials, particularly in the longer-term markets. Moreover, a number of
countries – above all, France – found it politically difficult to accept the actual dominance of
the German anchor currency.
Furthermore,  through  the  envisaged  single  market,  European  integration  gathered  new
momentum  during  the  second  half  of  the  eighties.  This  increasing  economic  integration
revived the issue of a common currency under the motto “A single market, a single currency”.
The  summit  meeting  in  Hanover  in  1988  commissioned  a  group  of  experts  chaired  by  the
President of the European Commission, Jacques Delors, to submit new proposals. Then, in the
autumn  of  1989,  the  Berlin  Wall  fell.  The  prospect  of  achieving  German  unification  at  the
same time suggested the question of the even greater political integration of Germany into the
3
BIS Review   35/1999
European  Community.  It  was  these  two  factors,  the  single-market  project  and  German
unification, that formed the political background to the Treaty of Maastricht.
At the beginning of the nineties, two opposing forces were acting on the exchange-rate pattern
in the EMS: On the one hand, since there had not been any central rate changes since 1987,
many people believed that a seamless transition from the existing EMS to monetary union was
possible. Even the UK had joined the exchange-rate mechanism in 1991, after long hesitation.
All this seemed to immunise the prevailing central rates, even though considerable differences
in the  anti-inflation  policy  stance  had  meanwhile  built  up  between  individual  countries.  On
the  other  hand,  in  particular  the  ending  of  the  East-West  divide  in  Germany  engendered  in
economic terms an asymmetrical shock involving a potential revaluation tendency for the D-
Mark.
On balance, however, in the euphoria deriving from the new prospects, the financial markets
were  initially  prepared  to  accept  the  parities  prevailing  in  the  EMS,  despite  the  lack  of
economic  convergence.  Alas,  the  policy  makers  in  those  days  failed  to  adjust  the  exchange
rates in good time in that “window of opportunity”. Thinking in terms of political prestige was
unduly  prevalent.  But  when,  in  Denmark,  the  first  referendum  on  the  Maastricht  Treaty
resulted in a “No”, the financial markets began critically to reconsider the parities in the EMS.
That gave rise to the massive, but avoidable, monetary upheavals of the autumn of 1992. After
prolonged controversy, the fluctuation margins in the EMS were finally widened, on German
insistence, at the beginning of August 1993, although the narrow margins ruling between the
D-Mark  and  the  guilder  were  retained  under  a  special  arrangement.  That  was  the  right
decision.  Not  only  in  order  to  re-establish  calm  in  the  EMS,  but  even  more  to  save  the
“monetary union” project from harm. Like that, the EMS remained intact as a framework for
monetary integration.
III
If one surveys the almost thirty years of monetary history before and around the Maastricht
Treaty, then in my view four main lessons stand out very clearly:
First, in the medium and long run, stable money has distinct economic and social advantages.
Inflation  is  not  worth  while.  It  does  not  solve,  but  rather  causes,  economic  problems.
Monetary stability, by contrast, is a major, albeit on its own no doubt insufficient, basis for
growth and employment.
Second, an independent central bank can safeguard stable money more easily. After all, it is
easier  to  pursue  a  steady,  medium-term-oriented  approach,  apart  from  day-to-day  political
concerns. And a medium-term-oriented approach, in turn, helps one to respond that little bit
earlier  to  threats  to  the  value  of  money,  and  not  to  attach  undue  importance  to  short-term
factors. Moreover, given an independent central bank, political developments do not exercise
a direct impact on confidence in the currency. Consider, for instance, the resignation of the EC
Commission  two  weeks  ago,  which  did  not  really  affect  the  financial  markets.  That  would
very likely have been quite different if the currency had been closer to day-to-day politics.
Third, a durably sound fiscal policy contributes materially to safeguarding stable prices and
the  longer-term  room  for  manœuvre.  In  certain  situations,  it  may  make  sense  to  tolerate
deficits for a while. For instance, as part of built-in flexibility, or in the context of a sustained
tax  reform  that  stimulates  both  effort  and  investment.  But,  judging  by  past  experience,
BIS Review   35/1999
4
demand management via the expenditure side ultimately increases only the  influence  of  the
state and the debt burden.
And fourth, only in the event of sufficient convergence of the economic performance and the
economic  policy  priorities  can  exchange  rates  remain  stable  in  the  long  run.  Quantitative
targets for exchange rates, without adequate convergence in the field of anti-inflation policy,
are counterproductive. That applies above all to exchange rates between major currency areas.
Exchange-rate  targets  are  apt  to  lead  to  conflicts  between  external  stability  and  internal
objectives.  And  the  financial  markets  perceive  the  vulnerability  of  such  arrangements.  That
encourages, rather than curbs, speculation. If the targets then fall, there may easily be more
pronounced overshooting.
Happily, these four lessons are included in the Maastricht Treaty. They form the foundation
for today’s common currency, the euro. First, the Treaty gave European monetary policy the
primary target of ensuring  price  stability.  Second,  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  –
comprising the ECB and the participating national central banks – has been assigned a large
measure  of  independence  for  that  task.  Third,  the  Treaty,  or  more  specifically  the  jointly
agreed  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  commits  national  fiscal  policy  as  well.  The  underlying
orientation is: under normal cyclical conditions, the public sector budget should be close to
balance or in surplus. The fiscal policy makers in all participating countries should take this
precept very much to heart. And fourth, the Treaty stipulates that even general exchange-rate
orientations, which may be formulated by the Council of Ministers in special situations, must
not jeopardise the primary objective of the ECB (namely, ensuring price stability).
The stipulations of the Maastricht Treaty did not just drop from heaven or come from narrow-
minded technocrats. Hence they should not be interpreted merely legalistically as the outcome
of negotiations – an outcome that could not be helped. In important respects, after  all,  they
constitute the lessons of European monetary history over the past few decades.
IV
The euro has been reality for a quarter of a year now. The general public has been following
its  progress  with  interest  and  not  uncritically,  albeit  sometimes  with  a  little  too  much
agitation.  Not  every  movement  in  the  external  value  amounts  to  an  underlying  trend,
particularly  when  the  dollar  value  is  reflecting  unexpectedly  strong  economic  performance
and  special  international  political  developments.  Composure  is  appropriate,  but  disregard  is
not. We in the ECB Governing Council do not pursue an exchange-rate target, but we are, of
course, interested in a lastingly strong and stable euro. The euro must try to gain the strength
of  its  predecessors  and,  above  all,  must  win  confidence  and  a  reputation  of  its  own.  A
confidence-inspiring orientation of monetary policy is important to that end, but insufficient in
itself. Other policy areas, too, must make their due contribution. And there seem to be some
serious deficiencies, especially as far as structural policies are concerned.
That is likewise the common position of all ECB Governing Council members. An underlying
joint sentiment has developed gratifyingly fast among the Governing Council members. We
feel  ourselves  to  be  part  of  a  common  body,  bearing  joint  responsibility  for  the  entire  euro
area. Thinking in, and the decisions of, the Governing Council have so far reflected genuine
supranationality, rather than a mere aggregation of national interests.
5
BIS Review   35/1999
Incidentally, it is of course very good for the ECB Governing Council that two Dutchmen are
sitting  in  the  debating  and  decision-making  chamber,  as  heavyweights  in  the  field  of  anti-
inflation policy; one of them as the President of the ECB and the other as the Governor of the
Dutch central bank. What makes them heavyweights is not their stature or just the fact that
they  are  Dutchmen.  The  crucial  factor  is  their  intellectual  capacity  and,  above  all,  their
unambiguous  orientation  towards  stability.  But  perhaps  these  factors  are  in  some  way
interrelated.
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  which  is  composed  of  the  European  Central  Bank
and the national central banks, has likewise performed its duties pretty smoothly up to now.
After all, the Maastricht Treaty explicitly relies largely on the national central banks for the
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Cross-border  cooperation  has  on  the  whole  functioned  very
efficiently so far. There have of course been a number of minor mishaps. Given the gigantic
size of the task, how could it have been otherwise? But, all things considered, it can be said:
the Eurosystem works.
The most important thing is, of course, that the euro is currently displaying a high degree of
price  stability.  That  applies  all  round  to  a  number  of  other  currencies  in  Europe  and
throughout  the  world.  The  high  domestic  stability  of  the  US  dollar  is  attracting  particular
attention. And that against the backdrop of a tightening labour market and of strong domestic
growth that has now persisted for some years. At any rate, there have been no signs to date of
the  upturn  in  the  inflation  rate  that  used  to  occur  as  the  business  cycle  progressed.  Many
commentators have interpreted that as a new era. Some of them have even gone so far as to
consign the phenomenon of inflation to the archives of economic history for good.
The notion of a secular trend towards stability presupposes a structural break triggered by two
developments:  the  onmarch  of  globalisation,  and  the  surge  in  productivity  due  to  huge
advances in communications and data processing. The consequent increase in competition is
said  to  have  led  not  only  to  substantial  new  cost  pressures  and  possibly  to  a  global  glut  of
goods  and  services.  In  addition,  substantial  changes  in  the  behaviour  of  policy  makers  and
economic agents are said to have occurred. And that, it is claimed, will continue.
True though some of these observations undoubtedly are, the proposition of a structural break,
resulting in the final discontinuance of inflation, appears to me to be over-optimistic. It must
surely be countered by a number of opposing factors:
First, the decline in commodity prices is presumably, at least to some extent, only temporary.
Some  people,  indeed,  are  speaking  of  an  ongoing  inverse  oil-price  shock  –  an  oil-price
implosion, so to speak. Judging by past experience, however, such shocks seldom last long.
The recent rise may suggest that.
Second, it remains to be seen whether the faster pace of productivity growth really turns out to
be a lasting phenomenon. And it is not all that easy to tell whether it is primarily driven by
technological progress. It might also be, at least in part, a reflection; in America, of the long
period  of  relatively  high  capacity  utilisation;  in  Germany,  of  the  steep  rise  in  labour  costs
during the first half of the nineties, and of the shedding of labour thereafter.
Third, even if the surge in productivity were sustained, it could lastingly foster price stability
only  if  it  were  not  fully  exploited  for  distribution  purposes  or  re-distribution  purposes,  let
alone  over-exploited.  That  may  not  be  a  serious  problem  in  America,  because  of  the  great
BIS Review   35/1999
6
flexibility and mobility prevailing on the labour markets there. But in Germany, for instance,
wage-rate policy – backed to some extent by government policy – is today largely geared to
the growth of productivity, even though unemployment is high and labour-market flexibility
and mobility are very far from adequate. But in the event  of  expansionary  wage-rate  policy
and  of  structural  rigidities  on  the  labour  market,  the  academic  argument  that  higher
productivity automatically implies greater price stability does not hold good any longer.
And fourth, even if a tendency towards greater stability were durably to take hold in the non-
monetary field (something we do not know), that would not release monetary policy, for its
part, from its obligation to keep the monetary side in order. For overly expansionary monetary
growth  always  poses  a  threat  –  both  to  price  stability  and  to  the  stability  of  the  financial
markets.
We must not disregard the fact that it was precisely more monetary discipline in a number of
European  countries  –  often  buttressed  by  greater  autonomy  for  the  central  bank  –  which
played  a  major  role  on  the  way  to  price  stability  during  the  eighties  and  nineties.  That
reassured the monetary side. And it helped to engender changes of behaviour in other areas,
too. That effect must not be reversed. It is never appropriate to proclaim the death of inflation.
The seemingly dead may actually live longer.
By saying this, I have no wish to kindle fears of inflation. But I do want to draw attention to
the fact that, in the third millennium, it will remain true that:
In  the  long  run,  there  can  be  stable  money  only  if  monetary  policy  keeps  monetary  growth
under  control,  the  markets  are  sufficiently  flexible,  and  policy  makers  ensure  appropriate
underlying  conditions  and  keep  government  finances  in  check.  That  is  why  the  brave  new
world  in  Europe  –  especially  since  it  is  not  as  brave  as  all  that  in  a  number  of  European
countries  –  will  need  a  durably  stability-oriented  monetary  policy,  even  if  monetary  policy
alone cannot safeguard the stability content of the euro.
V
Unfortunately,  the  first  quarter-year  of  the  euro  has  been  marked  by  a  number  of  political
uncertainties. At the European level, the resignation of the EC Commission highlighted some
unsolved problems. And the economic policy stance of specific countries and its presentation
have apparently given rise to some bewilderment, even if the debate meanwhile seems to have
become less strident again. But that bewilderment is evidently also exerting after-effects. For,
in all the assertions on the Treaty, some presentations have been understood to imply that, in
the final analysis, some major precepts of the Treaty no longer possess the binding force they
used to have.
The question of the appropriate assignment is manifestly of paramount importance for future
anti-inflation  policy  and,  most  probably,  for  monetary  union  as  well.  Hence  I  will  briefly
revert to this topic once again. First, the overriding question is: Should monetary policy have
an  unequivocal  priority  mandate,  such  as  that  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  with  its  primary
orientation towards the target of monetary stability? Or should it rather be an integral part of a
set of political decisions on the correct dosage of all instruments?
On this score, it must be clearly recognised: an unequivocal mandate to the monetary policy
makers  is  an  essential  precondition  for  the  independence  of  the  central  bank.  And  the
7
BIS Review   35/1999
independence of the central bank requires, for its justification, a far-reaching basic consensus.
Just as the independence of the ECB and the ESCB is ensured by, for instance, the approval of
all EU countries for the Maastricht Treaty. But a basic consensus implies extracting one target
from day-to-day political debate and making it inaccessible to political intervention. This is
why  we  have  constitutions.  If  monetary  policy  makers  had  no  priority  target,  but  only
objectives of equal urgency, then they would have to choose between a variety of economic
policy  goals  on  each  occasion,  and  thus  make  value  judgements.  To  do  that,  however,  in  a
democracy one needs a mandate from the electorate.
Hence monetary policy can be independent only in the presence of a clear primary mandate.
Needless to say, that does not imply that monetary policy makers do not have to pay heed to
other  targets,  besides  that  of  monetary  stability,  e.g.  to  growth,  employment  and  external
equilibrium  objectives.  But  the  hierarchy  of  targets  must  be  clear.  And  it  must  likewise  be
clear  that  durable  monetary  stability  is  a  key  contribution  to  the  achievement  of  the  other
targets.
This  brings  us  to  a  second  consideration:  is  the  independence  of  the  central  bank  less
important nowadays than it was, say, in 1991? If anything, the opposite appears to be the case.
For one thing, we have to assume – more so today than in the early nineties – that the euro
area will be determined by nation states for a long time to come. Without a central European
decision-making process that is free from thinking in terms of nation states, a political central
bank would be apt to generate severe conflicts between the participating countries.
For  another,  the  financial  markets  have  become  even  more  emancipated  since  1991.
Credibility has become even more important. And building up confidence in the currency on
the part of citizens and financial markets is without any doubt one of the great strengths of an
independent central bank – but only, of course, if it pursues the right policies. Just look at the
historically low interest rates of the euro – of a new currency without a stability record of its
own, looked after by the European Central Bank, an institution without a success story of its
own. There can be no doubt that the independence of the ECB is already paying off. But it
must remain effective in full. Integration into ex-ante coordination systems with other policy
areas is inappropriate.
There  remains  a  third  aspect:  which  primary  objective  should  the  independent  monetary
policy makers pursue? The Treaty settled that. And this must remain the answer. Not merely
for  legalistic  but  primarily  for  objective  reasons:  In  the  longer  run,  inflation  is  always  a
monetary  phenomenon.  Although  a  sound  monetary  policy,  in  isolation,  cannot  always
altogether  prevent  the  emergence  of  inflationary  trends,  it  can  make  it  very  difficult  for
inflationary trends to persist.
On  the  other  hand,  monetary  policy  can  do  virtually  nothing  to  counter  structural
unemployment, such as mainly prevails today in many countries. For example, it can neither
enhance labour-market flexibility nor  widen  an  unduly  narrow  wage-rate  spread.  Nor  can  it
create a fiscal and wage environment which is conducive to more private investment. At best,
it could, in theory, temporarily lower real labour costs by means of a surprise inflation. Then a
different assignment would simply imply dropping the goal of stability.
There remains the influence of monetary policy on business activity and on the relatively low
proportion  of  cyclical  unemployment  in  Europe  today.  I  have  no  intention  of  denying  that.
But,  particularly  under  the  conditions  prevailing  today,  confidence  and  the  continuity  and
BIS Review   35/1999
8
calculability of policies are more important than feverish activity. Hence a forward-looking,
steady  monetary  policy  such  as  the  ECB  is  aiming  at  is  the  right  approach  in  terms  of
economic  activity  as  well.  Pursued  over  an  entire  business  cycle,  such  a  policy  results  in
relatively low interest rates.
Needless to say, continuity does not signify immobility. But the decisions must be taken on
the basis of thorough and longer-term analysis and detailed monitoring of all the requisite data
and  facts.  Of  course,  monetary  policy  must  also  take  due  account  of  what  is  happening  in
other  policy  areas.  But  it  has  a  clear  responsibility,  and  clear  priority,  of  its  own.  And  it
therefore  cannot  be  a  party  to  negotiations  with  policy  makers  in  alliances  or  pacts  of  any
kind.
VI
Without any doubt, the structural deficits on the labour markets of many countries in the euro
area constitute a serious problem. They must be addressed. Otherwise, significant successes
will  not  be  registered  in  the  field  of  employment.  The  basic  thrust  of  the  adjustments  is
substantially  known.  They  must  be  in  the  direction  of  greater  flexibility,  greater  personal
responsibility and greater differentiation, with policy makers naturally needing to ensure that
the process is socially cushioned and balanced.
To tackle a challenge posed to more than one at the same time, there are, in theory, always
two  possible  approaches:  coordinated  agreements  or  competition.  It  may,  of  course,  make
sense  for  European  countries  to  try  to  find  common  solutions  to  the  labour-market  and
employment  problems  (always  provided  that  they  point  in  the  right  direction).  Such  joint
agreements  might  perhaps  enhance  the  acceptability  of  “unpopular”  measures  in  individual
countries. But one cannot be certain of that. It might alternatively throw an undue strain on
European integration. In particular, it might pose difficulties in the real world: the points of
departure in the various countries often differ distinctly. Moreover, such an approach might
blur the responsibilities. And it might encourage unwelcome centralisation in the direction of
Brussels.
In the final analysis, after all, each country always has to conduct its own employment policy.
It  has  to  tackle  its  own  problems.  But  nowadays,  of  course,  political  solutions  are  always
embedded in global competition. Well, it is a feature of competition that some respond faster
and others more slowly. That is so in this case, too. Enhancing the effectiveness of the labour
markets is no zero-sum game in which one country loses the jobs that another gains. Rather, it
is the only way to achieve durable overall employment gains in Europe. Here, each country
must  go  its  own  way.  The  Netherlands  is  definitely  one  of  those  countries  which  have
addressed their problems more promptly than, say, Germany. But a country that stands still,
loses ground. This is what happens in competition. However, that is not the curse, but rather
the blessing, of competition.
VII
There can be no doubt that the euro opens up many options for Europe’s future, ranging from
less dependence on exchange rates to larger and more effective financial markets and lower
costs. But it is no less true that, following the advent of the euro, the demands being made on
the participating countries, on their economies and policies, have risen. Now that the euro has
arrived,  policy  makers  actually  have  no  choice  but  to  accept  these  demands.  The  monetary
9
BIS Review   35/1999
union  must  not  engender  internal  conflicts  within  the  Community.  That  is  why  it  is  so
important for all countries to continue to meet the obligations of the Maastricht Treaty in full,
and, in particular, for national fiscal policies to be disciplined. The ECB, in its latest Monthly
Bulletin, has therefore rightly called for full compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact.
In  one  respect,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  has  taken  a  different  path  from  that  envisaged  in  the
Werner Report of 1970. Although monetary policy is to be conducted supranationally, fiscal
policy, despite all the monitoring, remains in national hands. This implies a vulnerable flank,
which can only be protected by the actual common orientation of all member states, especially
the  large  ones.  After  the  convergence  criteria  had  already  been  interpreted  generously  for
some countries at the time of entry into monetary union, it is now essential not to slow down,
let alone stop, the fiscal convergence process.
For  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  monetary  union,  too,  will  run  into  stormy  seas
some day. In the long run, those hard times will probably demand more community spirit from
all  the  participating  countries.  And  they  will  demand  a  greater  capacity  to  act  and  to  take
decisions from  the  EU.  This  makes  it  all  the  more  important  to  rectify  the  present  political
deficiencies and to set the stage soon for more political “community spirit”. Not in the sense
of  a  political  super-state,  but  rather  in  the  clear  distribution  of  responsibilities,  and  in  the
capacity to take political action at the European level.
Though  aware  of  these  political  deficiencies  in  procedures  and  rules,  I  fully  appreciate  the
current  capabilities  of  the  existing  European  institutions  and  their  great  support  of  the
integration process. In particular, I welcome the fact that the recent summit of the European
Council in Berlin has reached – besides the financial agenda – agreement on two important
issues: The Council has taken a quick and clear decision on the nomination of the President of
the  next  European  Commission  for  a  full  mandate.  And  the  Council  reaffirmed  its
commitment to include the democratic states in central and eastern Europe in the integration
process. In the Presidency’s Conclusions it is said: “Enlargement remains a historic priority
for  the  European  Union.”  Nevertheless,  this  priority  calls  for  further  reforms  in  the
Community. Otherwise, observers may get the impression that, in some discussions, very little
seems to have changed over the past thirty years.
As  long  ago  as  the  summit  meeting  at  The  Hague  in  1969,  tension  between  enlarging  and
deepening  the  Community  was  perceptible.  At  that  time,  just  like  today,  the  heads  of
government  linked  an  enlargement  of  the  Community  to  reforms  in  the  area  of  agricultural
funding. And, as long ago as that, they didn’t dare to take the step towards a clear definition of
functions, and towards a clear and new decision-making structure, able to respond quickly and
subject  to  unambiguous  parliamentary  control.  It  seems  almost  like  a  miracle  that,  all  the
same,  the  Community  has  since  grown  to  fifteen  member  states,  and  actually  introduced  a
(hitherto  successful)  euro  in  eleven  countries  at  the  beginning  of  this  year.  Given  these
achievements, the Community must not now rest on its laurels.
The common currency has imparted new momentum to European integration. Due advantage
must  be  taken  of  that  stimulus.  I  very  much  hope  that  the  euro  does  not  mark  the  end,  but
rather the beginning, of ongoing European integration which naturally does not shrink from
further  enlargement.  A  clear  basic  orientation  and  an  improved  ability  to  act  and  take
decisions are essential prerequisites of any such development. Europe must not suffer the fate
of the dinosaurs.
BIS Review   35/1999
10
11
BIS Review   35/1999
