Mr  Stals  discusses  the  challenges  to  monetary  policy 
international markets
in 
increasingly  volatile
Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr Chris Stals, at a conference
on ‘The South African Economy in a World of Volatile Financial Markets’, arranged by the
Bureau for Economic Research of the University of Stellenbosch in Johannesburg on 25 May
1999.
The contagion effect
The globalisation or international integration of the world’s financial markets brought with it
new  challenges  for  monetary  and  other  macroeconomic  policies.  The  volatile  conditions  in
world  financial  markets  over  the  past  two  years  created  new  problems  for  macroeconomic
management  in  a  number  of  countries.  It  was  particularly  smaller  economies  with  partly
developed financial markets – the emerging markets – that were more seriously affected by
these adverse developments.
Ex post analyses of the financial crisis of 1997/98 focused attention on purported deficiencies
of  macroeconomic  policies,  and  of  economic  structures  in  many  of  the  afflicted  countries.
From  these  lessons,  programmes  for  a  major  reform  of  existing  structures,  particularly
financial  structures,  and  of  essential  adjustment  in  macroeconomic  policies,  are  now
emerging. At the same time, attention is given to the need for some restructuring of the global
financial  architecture  with  the  objective  to  avoid  a  repetition  of  the  1997/98  crisis.  Crisis
prevention, after all, is better than crisis resolution.
Without going into the details of the many proposals now being discussed at the global and
national level for reforming macroeconomic structures and policies, pragmatism leads to the
conclusion  that  the  present  globalised  financial  market  structure  is  by  its  nature  unstable,
unpredictable and, with all its virtues and advantages, at times very disrupting for domestic
national economic policy objectives.
Easy communication through a worldwide  network,  the  instant  transfer  of  information  on  a
real-time basis to all destinations, economic liberalisation and the transfer of resources such as
surplus saving from more developed to developing countries have changed the environment in
which macroeconomic policies must now be framed.
Recent developments exposed an important aspect of this new global environment and that is
the so-called contagion effect, or the ease with which economic problems that may develop in
one country, region or functional group of countries can be transmitted to others. The conduit
for the transfer of the problem is not in all cases the same. Referring to the East Asian crisis of
1997/98, at least three distinct transmission mechanisms can be distinguished in the contagion
process:
•  First,  there  was  the  group  of  countries  in  East  Asia,  with  many  similarities  and  fairly
intimate  economic  relationships,  where  individual  countries  were  affected  almost
immediately  after  the  Thai  baht  collapsed  in  mid-1997,  partly  because  of  perceptions
and  the  herd-like  reactions  of  international  investors.  In  the  case  of  this  group  of
countries,  contagion  worked  mainly  through  the  withdrawal  of  short-term  foreign
financing to banking institutions, trade financing, and all forms of foreign loan facilities.
1
BIS Review   60/1999
•  Second, there was a further group of countries that were affected only gradually through
a decline in the flows of portfolio investments from industrial to developing countries.
Emerging market economies with fledgling capital markets were mainly affected with
some  time  lags  by  the  change  in  the  attitude  of  the  managers  of  major  institutional
investment funds who at some stage decided to convert high-yielding, high-risk assets
into low-yielding, high-quality assets. South Africa is a good example of such a country
that  suffered  in  the  wake  of  the  East  Asian  crisis,  mainly  as  a  result  of  a  large-scale
withdrawal by nonresidents of portfolio investments previously made in the country.
•  Third,  another  group  of  countries  representing  mainly  exporters  of  primary  products,
metals  and  minerals  were  affected  with  an  even  longer  time  lag  by  depressed  world
economic  conditions  created  by  the  East  Asian  cum  global  financial  market  crisis  of
1997/98.
Not all countries have therefore been affected in the same way by the global financial crisis of
the past two years, and not all countries can therefore rely on the same protective measures to
prevent the same disastrous effects in future.
There are, nevertheless, many commonalties in the challenge for monetary policy, despite the
differences  in  conduits  followed  in  the  transmission  of  contagion  to  the  various  countries.
Whether  a  balance  of  payments  deterioration  takes  place  through  an  outflow  of  short-term
finance and the withdrawal of loan funds, or through the repatriation of previously invested
portfolio funds, or through a decline in exports, the proximate monetary effects are more or
less the same:
•  First, the overall supply and demand conditions in the market for foreign exchange will
change  and  a  short  supply  in  foreign  currency  may  develop.  Some  pressure  for
depreciation will therefore be exerted on the exchange rate.
•  Second, liquidity conditions in the domestic money and capital markets will tighten, and
upward pressure will be exerted on interest rates and yields on financial assets.
•  Third, banking institutions will lose liquidity and their capacity to provide loans to their
domestic clients will be reduced.
•  Fourth,  inflationary  pressures  will  emerge  within  the  economy,  particularly  in  a
relatively  open  economy  where  import  inputs  play  an  important  part  in  the  overall
economic process.
•  Fifth, if not reversed fairly quickly, these adverse developments in the financial markets
will  disperse  throughout  the  economy  and  will  eventually  also  depress  real  economic
activity.
It  should  be  noted  once  again  that,  as  happened  last  year  in  the  case  of  South  Africa,  the
adverse  developments  were  transmitted  into  the  South  African  economy  as  part  of  an
international contagion process, without any special reason or obvious explanation for it in the
domestic environment. It is true that, like a real virus, the international transmission process
seeks  weaknesses  in  the  world  environment  and  exploits  structural  deficiencies  in  the
economies of globalised markets. Weaker economies are therefore affected more severely in
the process, and unacceptable macroeconomic policies are punished with greater venom.
BIS Review   60/1999
2
The contagion effect and the South African economy
It is history now that South Africa was also struck by the global financial crisis of 1997/98
when nonresident investors in May 1998 suddenly started to withdraw large sums of portfolio
investments  previously  made  in  South  African  bonds,  mainly  government  bonds  of  longer
maturity.  In  the  first  four  months  of  1998,  nonresidents  increased  their  holdings  of  South
African bonds by R16 billion; in the subsequent eight months, from May to December 1998,
they reduced their holdings of South African bonds by R26 billion. This sudden switch from a
large net inflow to an even larger net outflow of portfolio foreign investment in South Africa
exposed the country to the East Asian financial crisis and triggered all the predictable adverse
developments in the financial markets referred to above.
The predicament for the South African macroeconomic policymakers in the situation was that
the  adverse  developments  took  place  at  a  very  inconvenient  time  if  account  is  taken  of
prevailing  conditions  in  the  domestic  economy  in  the  first  half  of  1998.  These  adverse
financial developments indeed forced an early abortion of an economic recovery that was in
its infancy during the first quarter of 1998. During the rest of last year, the economy lost its
momentum and is only now beginning to show tentative signs of a resumed recovery.
South  Africa  and  other  emerging  market  countries  learned  a  lot  from  the  experience  of  the
past two years. For those countries, such as South Africa, that are committed to continued and
enhanced  participation  in  the  process  of  financial  globalisation,  there  is  no  escape  from
volatile international capital flows. These countries, including South Africa, are now working
together  in  the  multinational  forums  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  World
Bank, the Bank for International Settlements and many groupings such as the Willard Group
and  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  to  create  a  more  stable  global  financial
environment.  For  the  time  being,  however,  they  have  to  accept  greater  volatility  in  the
financial markets as a fait accompli.
Challenges for monetary policy
The  market  economy  provides  its  own  disciplines  and  its  own  mechanism  for  adjustment
when disequilibrium develops in the system. The foregoing analysis of financial developments
in countries afflicted by the turbulence in world financial markets last year provides a brief
description  of  the  market  mechanism  of  self-adjustment.  The  outflows  of  capital  forced  a
depreciation of the currency, higher interest rates and inflationary pressures in those countries
from where foreign investments were repatriated.
The challenge for monetary policy is to accommodate these adjustments, however unpopular
they  might  be  at  the  time,  and  even  if  they  come  in  direct  conflict  with  the  contemporary
needs of the domestic economy at that stage. Despite the depressed conditions in the South
African  economy  at  the  beginning  of  1998,  we  had  to  accept  a  depreciation  of  the  rand  of
almost 20% last year; we had to adjust to a sharp rise of about 7 full percentage points in the
level of the cost of money; banking institutions were forced to reduce the rate of lending to
their  clients,  and  the  rate  of  inflation  increased  from  5%  in  April  1998  to  9.3%  in  October
1998. Painful adjustments in real economic activity were unavoidable.
Monetary  policy  had  to  flow  with  the  flood.  Reserve  Bank  intervention  in  the  financial
markets became necessary to smooth adjustments, prevent a crisis situation from developing
in  the  foreign  exchange  market  (still  subject  to  many  exchange  controls)  and  facilitate  the
3
BIS Review   60/1999
adjustment process by partly redistributing the cost of adjustment between private and public
sector participants. Monetary policy, however, could not avoid, and should not have tried to
prevent, the painful but essential market adjustment process.
With hindsight, South Africa came out of the global financial crisis of 1997/98 relatively well,
but not without some scars. In three areas, the South African economy showed its strength and
resilience:
•  Unlike in many other countries, South Africa’s financial system managed to survive the
turbulences of 1997/98 without any major failure.
•  South Africa became an exception to the emerging market world by not approaching the
IMF  for  any  special  financial  assistance.  At  this  stage,  South  Africa  has  zero  loans
outstanding by the IMF.
•  Financial stability returned to South Africa relatively quickly after the major disruptions
in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  1998.  The  negative  flow  of  portfolio  investments
turned positive again  towards  the  end  of  last  year;  liquidity  conditions  in  the  banking
sector  eased;  interest  rates  declined  and  are  almost  back  to  levels  that  applied  at  the
beginning of last year; inflation peaked at 9.3% and is now gradually declining again;
and the country’s foreign exchange reserves are on a rising path.
In the heat of the situation, monetary policy, which in the case of South Africa had to carry a
heavy burden in the adjustment process, was criticised a lot and was even blamed by armchair
economists for causing the problems. With hindsight, the policy of letting the markets work
with only smoothing-out intervention operations may not have worked as badly as the critics
of the policy predicted.
Exchange rate policy
One  of  the  elements  of  the  restabilisation  programme  used  by  the  South  African  monetary
authorities  over  the  past  30  years  again  elicited  a  lot  of  criticism  recently,  and  that  is  the
Reserve Bank’s so-called forward book. There is a lot of misunderstanding about this facility,
perhaps  because  ‘forward  books’  were  used  by  many  other  central  banks  for  completely
different  purposes.  In  many  cases,  misuse  of  the  forward  book  contributed  to  the  eventual
downfall of financial markets.
In the case of the Reserve Bank, a hedge facility is made available, mainly to South African
residents,  to  protect  them  against  exchange  rate  changes  over  which  they  have  no  control.
These  hedge  transactions  may  only  be  entered  into  in  respect  of  ‘firm,  ascertained  and
documented’  commitments  to  make  allowable  balance  of  payments  transfers  within  a  12-
month period. The Reserve Bank’s forward book is perhaps a misnomer, and should rather be
referred to as an ‘insurance policy’ available to South African residents with foreign exchange
exposures,  either  because  they  have  to  make  payments  in  foreign  currency  or  because  they
will receive payments in foreign currency within the next 12 months.
The Reserve Bank’s forward book the therefore at any time represents a duplication of part of
the stream of balance of payments transactions that will take place over the next 12 months.
Analysts  often  make  the  mistake  of  adding  a  net  oversold  position  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s
forward  book  to  their  estimates  of  future  balance  of  payments  streams  as  an  additional
BIS Review   60/1999
4
commitment of the country to make foreign payments. This is obviously wrong and must lead
to a distorted assessment of the country’s overall foreign exchange position.
By making use of this hedge facility, South African residents can transfer their exchange rate
risk exposures to the Reserve Bank for account of the government (that is, the taxpayers). The
concerns we have in the Reserve Bank and in the Treasury on the forward book are not linked
to the availability of foreign exchange for the country – that will be determined by the overall
balance of payments position. Our concerns are more about the transfer of the exchange rate
risk  from  certain  sectors  of  the  private  sector  (importers,  exporters,  borrowers  of  foreign
funds)  to  taxpayers  in  general  (the  Budget).  What  we  must  ask  ourselves  is  whether  this
transfer  of  risk  brings  on  a  net  basis  a  macroeconomic  social  advantage  to  the  overall
community,  or  whether  the  final  net  cost  in  the  form  of  losses  on  the  forward  book  will
exceed the overall social advantages of the insurance scheme.
The decision to provide the hedge facility through the Reserve Bank dates back to the early
1960s,  when  South  Africa  introduced  exchange  controls.  These  controls  prevented  private
sector users of foreign exchange from protecting themselves through the market mechanism
for possible exchange rate changes. As long as South Africa still has exchange controls, albeit
substantially relaxed in the meantime, there is some justification for the continued provision
of 
a government-backed insurance policy for the protection of exchange rate risks.
There are many disadvantages to the scheme, most important of which must be the distorted
perception  in  world  financial  markets  of  the  use  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  forward  book.  In  a
crisis situation, such as was experienced last year, there are also indisputable advantages in the
provision  of  a  government-sponsored  hedge  facility  for  exchange  rate  changes.  The
availability of this facility last year, for example:
•  enabled  South  African  importers  and  exporters  and  other  borrowers  of  short-term
foreign exchange funds, to continue to make use of these facilities (note: South Africa
did not experience large outflows of short-term funds as many other countries did);
•  prevented the exchange rate of the rand from depreciating more, and interest rates from
rising to even much higher levels;
•  protected  the  private  sector,  including  financial  institutions,  from  huge  losses  on
outstanding  foreign  commitments  (part  of  the  explanation,  perhaps,  why  our  banking
institutions  survived  the  crisis  so  much  easier  than  their  counterparts  in  many  other
countries).
There is, however, a price to be paid for this protection, and that is huge losses on the forward
book  that  are  now  being  carried  by  the  Reserve  Bank  for  account  of  the  Treasury.  Future
premiums on the insurance policy will, hopefully, go some way towards the recovery of part of
these losses. The cost of financial stabilisation in the case of South Africa has been concentrated
in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  forward  book.  In  the  case  of  many  of  the  other  afflicted  countries,  it
remained vested in the private sector but eventually also came to book in national budgets, that is
after  private  sector  institutions  collapsed  under  the  burden  of  huge  exchange  rate  losses.  Is  the
forward  book  of  the  Reserve  Bank/Treasury  really  such  a  bad  thing  after  all?  How  can  it  be
phased  out  from  future  stabilisation  programmes,  that  is  after  exchange  controls  have
disappeared?  We  South  Africans  should  approach  this  challenge  in  a  more  positive  and
constructive way, and should not only concentrate on the obvious disadvantages of a scheme that
also provides very valuable protection to private sector users of foreign currencies.
5
BIS Review   60/1999
