Statement by Mr Mboweni at his inauguration as new Governor
of the Reserve Bank of South Africa
Statement by Mr Tito Mboweni on the occasion of the retirement of Governor Chris Stals as Governor
of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  and  his  inauguration  as  new  Governor,  held  in  Midrand  on
7 August 1999.
 …
Esteemed guests
Ladies and gentlemen,
It is a privilege and an honour to have you all here as guests of the South African Reserve Bank as we
say goodbye to Dr Chris Stals, who was Governor of the Reserve Bank for ten years, and as we also
mark  the  start  of  my  term  as  Governor.  I  am  particularly  pleased  that  all  of  you  people  with  busy
schedules have come from near and far to be with us on this occasion.
A  special  note  of  thanks  to  the  President  of  the  Republic,  Professor  Stanley  Fischer  from  the
International  Monetary  Fund,  Mr  Bill  McDonough,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New
York, Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of the Central Bank of Sweden and also President of the Bank
for International Settlements, Mr Adriano Maleiane, Governor of the Bank of Mozambique and other
central bank governors who are here tonight. Thank you to those of you who battled to rearrange your
diaries to be with us tonight. Thank you once again.
Tonight we say farewell to Dr Chris Stals, with whom I have worked closely over the past year but
whom  I  have  known  since  1988.  I  have  come  to  know  Dr  Stals  as  a  committed  central  banker  of
international stature, a truly new Voortrekker who did not shy away from contributing his best to the
new  South  Africa.  Thank  you,  Dr  Stals,  for  your  lasting  contribution  and  for  showing  such
commitment during this smooth transition.
We are also bidding a  fond  farewell  to  Dr  Chris  de  Swardt, an  Afrikaner  gentleman  par  excellence
who was Deputy Governor, and whose career at the Bank also spanned some 44 years. This man is an
example of how one should relate to and treat other human beings. Although our association was brief,
I will treasure our association for a long time to come.
We wish both of you well in your retirement.
It is a most interesting and demanding time to be Governor of the South African Reserve Bank. It is a
time when the costs and benefits of globalisation are under scrutiny, not just by policymakers, but also
by ordinary citizens.
Emerging  markets  globally  have  experienced  financial  turmoil  which  plunged  many  into  deep
recession. South Africa, though resilient, has not emerged from this turmoil unscathed. At only 0.5%,
the rate  of  growth  in  gross  domestic  product  last  year  fell  woefully  short  of  the  levels  needed  in  a
country  where  poverty  and  joblessness  remain  widespread  and  where  tackling  these  issues  remain
priorities for all of us.
Against this background, it is hardly surprising that people sometimes hope that the Reserve Bank will
take  action  to  stimulate  economic  growth  by  printing  money.  Some  people  think  that,  as  a  former
Cabinet Minister, my appointment heralds the start of a cheap money era in the Bank. I must say it
here, loud and clear, they are wrong.
Our view has been, and will continue to be, that it is not our role to provide an artificial stimulus for
the  economy.  The  role  of the  Bank  is  to create  a  climate  of  financial  stability  in  which  sustainable
economic growth and wealth creation can be achieved; an environment in which an economic boom
will not be followed by an inevitable bust.
1
BIS Review 88/1999
We are not Icarus; there is no need to fear that we will fly too close to the sun.
Tonight is not the appropriate occasion to spell out our detailed approach to monetary policy or its role
in  the  South  African  economy.  However,  we  are  not  going  to  try  to  rewrite  the  monetary  policy
textbooks or reinvent the wheel. The principles of sound and prudent central banking are the same the
world  over  and  will  not  be  fundamentally  changed  by  any  central  bank  governor,  no  matter  how
energetic or enthusiastic, let alone how young.
The details of our approach will be spelt out in the Governor’s Address at the Annual General Meeting
of the Bank on the 24th of August. However, whatever we say then will  be  in accordance  with the
principles of sound and prudent monetary policy frameworks that have been tested in a global context.
Central banks follow different approaches to their monetary policy frameworks. Some central banks
have adopted currency boards to fix their exchange rates, while others follow exchange rate targeting
or  inflation  targeting.  We  will  design  our  approach  bearing  in  mind  our  particular  experiences  and
history, as well as taking into account international best practice which has delivered financial stability
and acceptable levels of inflation.
South Africa has been exposed to the recent turmoil in  financial  markets  but  has  emerged,  whilst a
little bruised, both stronger and wiser. We, like other countries, have learnt important lessons and will
put our experience to good use.
We know that if we want to benefit from globalisation in the form of sustained foreign capital inflows,
we should constantly think of ourselves as citizens of the global village. The strength of the United
States economy and trends in financial markets in New York, London, Tokyo and elsewhere will be
significant factors in influencing whether or not South Africa realises its economic potential. But we
must not underestimate our own responsibility as South Africans to develop our own potential and to
run our economy responsibly and efficiently.
As citizens of the global village, we must continue to participate actively in the debate on improving
the international financial architecture in the hope that a way can be found to minimise the intensity of
financial shocks to emerging and developed markets alike.
After  a  long,  stimulating  and  challenging  year  which  I  have  spent  navigating  the  transition  from
Cabinet Minister to central banker and getting to know my colleagues in South Africa and other parts
of the world, I am looking forward to starting officially next week with enthusiasm and confidence,
inspired in no small part by many of you present here tonight. We are fortunate that the South African
Reserve Bank is staffed by well qualified, committed and loyal people.
To  the  President,  the  members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank,  my  colleagues  the  Deputy
Governors,  management  and  staff,  and  esteemed  guests:  sweswi  hi  ngene  eka  nkari  wa
mahlambandlopfu (we are now entering the time of the day when the elephants go washing; that is, the
crack of dawn).
