Mr Gjedrem considers challenges to economic policy in Norway
Address  by  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Norway,  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  at  Gausdal  on
28/1/99.
1) Economic policy in Norway
In Norway, fiscal policy has been  an  important  economic  policy  component  for  stabilising  the
demand  for  goods  and  services.  Since  1994,  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  have  been
oriented  towards  maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate  against  European  currencies.  The  social
partners  are  responsible  for  negotiating  wages  and  thereby  have  a  substantial  influence  on
employment.
From  1986  to  December  1992,  Norway  operated  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime.  The  fixed
exchange rate policy introduced in the summer of 1986 served as a nominal anchor for economic
policy,  and  inflation  was  gradually  brought  under  control.  This  process  was  associated  with
considerable real economic costs in the form of idle production capacity in the period 1988-1992.
However,  the  cost  of  stabilising  the  economy  was  hardly  greater  in  Norway  than  in  countries
experiencing a comparable situation. On the contrary, Norway avoided the sustained increase in
structural unemployment and the persistent deterioration in government finances experienced by
many European countries in the 1980s and 1990s, and which they are carrying with them into the
next decade. Norway’s policy laid the foundation for balanced and broad-based economic growth
in the years after 1992.
Following  the  decision  to  allow  the  krone  to  float  on  10  December  1992,  the  guidelines  for
monetary policy were revised. Monetary policy was subsequently oriented towards exchange rate
stability, but without stipulating a central rate with fluctuation margins. This was formalised in
guidelines set out in the Exchange Rate Regulation laid down by Royal Decree of 6 May 1994.
If  stabilisation  policy  is  to  have  the  intended  effect,  all  components  of  policy  must  function
effectively. This has not been the case in the last three years.
For  several  years,  average  annual  growth  rates  and  employment  growth  have  been  markedly
higher in Norway than the average for the rest of Europe. In part fuelled by the sharp expansion
BIS Review   /1998
– 2 –
in  petroleum  investment,  pressures  built  up  in  the  economy,  accompanied  by  growing  labour
shortages.
Following the currency crisis in autumn 1992, Norwegian interest rates rapidly fell to European
levels.  The  interest  rate  level  in  Europe  fell  after  the  turmoil  early  in  the  1990s.  As  growth
gradually picked up in Norway, the economy was stabilised by tightening fiscal policy. In order
to stabilise the krone exchange rate, Norges Bank reduced its key rates at the beginning of 1997
after the krone had appreciated markedly over a period.
Fiscal policy is an important instrument for smoothing fluctuations in the economy. However, it
has  proved  difficult  to  prevent  fiscal  policy  from  being  influenced  by  mood  shifts  that  occur
when the economy approaches a peak and memories of earlier recessions fade. Monetary policy
shall provide a nominal anchor for economic developments. With exchange rate stability as the
anchor,  monetary  policy  may  be  pro-cyclical  in  periods.  This  may  give  rise  to  considerable
challenges in terms of the Government’s and the Storting’s (Norwegian parliament) ability and
will to maintain a firm fiscal stance. Under a system designed to maintain exchange rate stability,
it is important that the authorities actually manage to implement fiscal policy in such a way that
pronounced and undesirable cyclical fluctuations do not occur.
During the last cyclical upturn, fiscal policy has been relatively tight, but the tightening element
became  weaker  as  growth  gained  momentum.  Fiscal  policy  should  have  been  tighter  in  1996,
1997 and 1998. Another lesson from this period is that investment in the petroleum sector should
be managed better in order to avoid fluctuations in the mainland economy. One cannot expect the
central government budget to be able to counter the shocks to the mainland economy originating
from the wide fluctuations in demand from oil companies.
2) Internal instability
Fiscal policy has not had a sufficient stabilising effect on the economy in recent years. This has
given rise to a dilemma for the social partners involved in the income settlements.
Moderate  wage  settlements  made  a  substantial  contribution 
to  achieving  broad-based
employment  growth  from  1992.  In  the  period  1993-1998,  employment  rose  by  more  than  250
000,  while  unemployment  fell  from  about  6.5  per  cent  to  below  3  per  cent,  the  lowest  rate
BIS Review   10/1999
– 3 –
recorded  for  10  years.  Whereas  20  unemployed  were  competing  for  each  vacancy  at  the
employment offices in 1993, the ratio was reduced to a little more than 2 in 1998.
An increasingly tight labour market has led to rising wage growth. Last year’s wage settlements
resulted in nominal wage growth of 6 per cent in 1998. Evidence suggests that wages in Norway
rose  by  more  than  71/2  per  cent  between  the  fourth  quarter  of  1997  and  the  fourth  quarter  of
1998. In the local government sector, wage growth is set to top 9 per cent at the end of the year.
As  pay  increases  became  effective  late  in  the  year,  the  wage  carry-over  into  1999  (3-31/2  per
cent) will be substantial. Assuming normal wage drift - roughly 1-11/2 per cent - and moderate
negotiated pay increases, wage growth may easily near 6 per cent this year. Even if no negotiated
pay increases are awarded, wage growth is not likely to be lower than 41/2-5 per cent in 1999 as
a  result  of  the  substantial  wage  carry-over.  The  wide  wage  growth  differential  against  other
countries will continue. Wage growth in the euro area was about 1.7 per cent last year, and wage
growth is expected to be about 21/2 per cent this year. A wage settlement with no  increase  in
wages in Norway will, however, contribute to curbing annualised wage growth by a substantial
margin in the course of the year.
With sizeable labour shortages, a short-term  interest  of  both  employers  and  employees  is  high
wage  increases,  with  high  wage  growth  as  a  result.  However,  the  economy  has  built-in
stabilisers. High wage growth will reduce employment and thereby the risk of persistently high
wage growth.
3) Wider inflation differential against trading partners
The Asian crisis has resulted in reduced international consumer price inflation.
General pressures in the economy have had only a marginal impact on price inflation in Norway.
Consumer price inflation hovered around 2.5 per cent throughout 1998, which was well below
the  level  anticipated  by  most  observers.  The  fall  in  import  prices  has  been  the  main  factor
restraining  the  rise  in  prices.  The  Asian  crisis  has  probably  had  a  dampening  impact  on
international price inflation. The direct effect of the crisis has been a fall in the prices of goods
produced in Asian countries and the indirect effect has been a slowdown in global demand and
intensified price competition across countries. As a result, commodity and producer prices have
also fallen. The widening of the inflation differential projected by Norges Bank has occurred as
result of reduced inflation in other countries.
Wide sectoral differences in price developments
Although  inflation  has  remained  stable  in  Norway,  there  are  wide  differences  in  price
developments among various sectors. Services prices have shown the sharpest rise, moving up by
BIS Review   10/1999
– 4 –
as much as 7 per cent in 1998. The main explanatory factor is that the high level of wage growth
has a greater impact on this sector as labour costs account for a substantial share of total costs.
The  rise  in  the  consumer  price  index  is  being  restrained  by  subdued  or  zero  import  price
inflation.
4) The Norwegian economy at a turning point
The  Norwegian  economy  continued  to  expand  at  a  relatively  strong  pace  in  1998,  albeit
somewhat more moderately than in previous years. In Norges Bank’s December Inflation Report,
the  central  bank  projected  a  period  of  slower  growth.  Several  years  of  robust  growth  have
contributed  to  high  capacity  utilisation.  Labour  shortages  and  high  wage  growth  will  have  a
dampening impact on growth in the years ahead.
Forecasting is a challenging enterprise at a stage when the economy is nearing a turnaround. It is
difficult  to  pinpoint  the  timing  and  the  amplitude  of  the  turnaround.  However,  evidence  now
suggests  that  Norway  is  entering  a  period  of  slightly  weaker  growth.  The  international
environment has led to slower growth in demand and lower prices on the world market. This is
weakening profitability in the export sector in Norway. In addition, the  wage  settlements  have
increased business costs, which will increase the need for enhancing the efficiency of enterprises.
Reduced earnings and higher interest rates will have a dampening effect on business investment.
The extraordinarily high level of oil investment recorded in recent years has been expected to fall
for  some  time.  The  drop  in  oil  prices  may  lead  to  more  pronounced  cyclical  fluctuations.
Restructuring, streamlining and cost cuts in the oil industry will also affect employment.
The  local  government  sector,  where  employment  has  increased  sharply  during  this  cyclical
upturn, placed itself in a very difficult situation during the last income settlement. It now has to
consolidate  its  financial  position  and  employment  growth  in  this  sector  is  expected  to  show  a
marked slowdown.
There are already signs of a turnaround in the labour market. Unemployment is no longer falling
and  is  expected  to  rise  in  the  period  ahead.  The  labour  market  is  still  tight,  and  Norges  Bank
projects weak growth in employment in 1999. The labour market will be just as tight during this
year’s  wage  negotiations  as  it  was  last  year,  but  the  outlook  for  employment  is  now  less
favourable.  Employment  may  fall  somewhat  from  next  year.  Unemployment  was  projected  to
rise to about 41/2 per cent in 2000 in the December Inflation Report.
BIS Review   10/1999
– 5 –
Norges Bank’s projections indicate that the turnaround will not be as pronounced as the situation
at the end of the 1980s, partly owing to the fact that households and enterprises are much better
equipped to cope with a downturn today than at the end of the 1980s. The financial position of
households  is  much  stronger.  The  enterprise  sector  is  more  solid,  and  the  banks’  core  capital
ratios  are  substantially  higher.  Price  and  wage  inflation  was  much  more  out  of  step  with  the
situation in 1986 and 1987, with double-digit inflation.
I  am  not  saying  this  to  trivialise  the  challenges  at  hand.  It  is  always  a  challenge  to  formulate
economic policy when faced with such a substantial decline in income alongside imbalances in
the labour market. Developments in the 1970s and 1980s showed that a higher rise in costs in
Norway relative to other countries leads to a slacker labour market. This will also be the case this
time.
5) Pressures on the exchange rate of commodity-based economies
There is a correlation between price inflation and the exchange rate. As mentioned, the exchange
rate  has  a  significant  influence  on  prices  and  costs  through  its  effect  on  import  prices.
Furthermore, a precondition for maintaining a stable exchange rate against European countries is
that inflation in Norway is over time on a par with the inflation rate prevailing in these countries.
The  high  rise  in  costs  in  1998  was  probably  the  main  factor  that  weakened  confidence  in  the
krone.
International conditions also played a significant part. In 1998, the world economy was hit by the
financial  crisis  in  Asia,  Russia  and  Brazil,  falling  commodity  prices  and  widespread  unrest  in
international financial markets. The Asian crisis proved to be more serious and prolonged than
envisaged,  and  the  contagion  effects  were  more  severe  than  most  observers  had  anticipated.
Weaker  global  demand  contributed  to  a  sharp  fall  in  commodity  prices,  which  in  turn  had  a
severe  impact  on  commodity-based  economies  such  as  Norway,  Canada,  New  Zealand  and
Australia. For all these countries, the terms of trade worsened and exchange rates depreciated.
The  Asian  crisis  also  made  investors  more  cautious,  with  an  outflow  of  investment  from
countries perceived as risky. After it became clear that Russia would not, in practice, be servicing
its foreign debt, market participants became highly risk-averse. The  unrest  spread  to  European
BIS Review   10/1999
– 6 –
financial markets and Norway. Investors fled to safe-haven countries such as Germany, the US
and  Switzerland,  and  the  currencies  of  countries  with  less  liquid  and  more  volatile  financial
markets depreciated. This included countries such as Norway and Sweden. The Norwegian krone
depreciated sharply from around 101 against the ECU index at the beginning of the year to 115 in
October, or the weakest rate since the objective of exchange rate stability against the ECU was
adopted.
6) Monetary policy in 1998
Norges Bank responded to the sharp depreciation of the krone by raising its key rates in several
steps in 1998. These rates were first raised in March, after the krone weakened in the first three
months of the year from 101 to about 103.5 against the ECU index. The krone then appreciated
slightly and stabilised for a period. Pressure on the krone increased during the summer. Norges
Bank responded by raising its key rates on six further occasions. Following the last increase on
25 August, the deposit rate and the overnight lending rate were 8 and 10 per cent, respectively,
i.e. 4.5 percentage points higher than at the beginning of 1998.
It is difficult to predict the direct short-term effect of changes in interest rates on the exchange
rate. It is particularly difficult in instances where fluctuations in the exchange rate are amplified
as a result of speculation, hedging and portfolio shifts in financial markets.
7) The Exchange Rate Regulation
Norges Bank’s use of instruments in 1998 was in keeping with the Exchange Rate Regulation of
6 May 1994:
“Section 1
The international value of the Norwegian krone is determined on the basis of exchange rates in
the foreign exchange market.
Section 2
The  monetary  policy  to  be  conducted  by  Norges  Bank  shall  be  aimed  at  maintaining  a  stable
krone  exchange  rate  against  European  currencies,  based  on  the  range  of  the  exchange  rate
BIS Review   10/1999
– 7 –
maintained since the krone was floated on 10 December 1992. In the event of significant changes
in the exchange rate, monetary policy instruments will be oriented with a view to returning the
exchange rate over time to its initial range. No fluctuation margins are established, nor is there an
appurtenant  obligation  on  Norges  Bank  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.”  (My
underlining)
Pursuant  to  these  guidelines,  Norges  Bank  raised  the  deposit  and  overnight  lending  rate  by  1
percentage point on 25 August. In connection with the increase in interest rates the Bank stated
that instruments  were  subsequently  to  be  oriented  “with  a  view  to  returning  the  exchange  rate
over time to its initial range”. In the opinion of Norges Bank, the situation in the financial market
was such that it would not be appropriate to make further use of its instruments. The substantial
pressure  on  the  krone  towards  the  end  of  October  hardly  reflected  economic  fundamentals  in
Norway.
8) Interventions
Exchange-market  interventions  are  an  important  instrument  of  monetary  and  exchange  rate
policy. Norges Bank intervened to support the krone for the equivalent of NOK 29 billion in the
period from mid-October to mid-December. Unrest in international financial markets in the wake
of the financial crisis in Russia intensified the speculative pressure on the krone. It is the Bank’s
view  that  this  speculation  was  not  justified  by  economic  fundamentals  in  Norway.  It  was
therefore  necessary  to  defend  the  krone  through  interventions  in  order  to  prevent  a  self-
reinforcing and unnecessary weakening of the krone.
Norges Bank will continue to consider using interventions if market conditions so warrant. For
example,  a  central  bank  may  have  to  intervene  directly  in  order  to  stabilise  the  market,
particularly if international turbulence leads to panic-like market reactions.
From  a  somewhat  longer-term  perspective,  the  experience  of  large-scale  and  persistent
interventions  is  mixed.  When  the  central  bank  intervenes  heavily  to  defend  the  krone,  market
participants may easily move into a game situation and perceive central bank intervention as an
interesting  opportunity  to  make  a  profit.  Market  operators  know  that  a  situation  in  which  the
krone is perceived as “artificially strong” because Norges Bank is buying kroner cannot persist. It
is then tempting to take reverse positions in the foreign exchange market in relation to the central
bank.  This  means  that  heavy  and  prolonged  interventions  may  be  self-reinforcing  over  time,
steadily increasing the necessary volume of intervention purchases required to maintain the krone
exchange rate.
The foremost example of such a game situation in Norway’s exchange rate policy  history  was
Friday, 20 November 1992, when we made intervention purchases for NOK 37 billion from the
time the market opened until the market closed.
Norges Bank does not want to intervene in such a way that this  type  of  game  situation  arises.
However, the Bank will use interventions if the krone moves substantially out of line with what
we  consider  to  be  reasonable  based  on  fundamentals  or  in  the  event  of  exceptional  short-term
volatility. It may also be appropriate to reinforce a desired development in the exchange rate that
has already been observed in the market. In such a situation, it is assumed that the risk of ending
up in a game situation against exchange market players is marginal. However, we must take into
account that the krone exchange rate cannot in the long run deviate substantially from the level
implied by economic fundamentals.
The instrument available to Norges Bank for influencing economic fundamentals is the interest
rate.  Over  time,  therefore,  the  interest  rate  is  the  most  important  instrument  of  monetary  and
BIS Review   10/1999
– 8 –
exchange rate policy. This is also recognised in the formulation of the guidelines for monetary
policy. According to the National Budget for 1999, “Interest rates must be adjusted in order to
avoid persistent and large-scale interventions”.
9) Formulation of monetary policy
Norges Bank reduced its key rates by 0.5 percentage points effective from today. This decision
came in response to developments in money and foreign exchange markets and the prospect of
reduced pressures in the real economy.
The outlook for the Norwegian economy has changed since Norges Bank raised its key rates in
August.  The  forecasts  for  growth  in  the  world  economy  have  been  revised  downwards  and
persistently low oil prices have reduced demand in the oil sector. In addition, a tight government
budget for 1999 and the high interest rate level are having a restraining effect on growth. At the
same time, the krone has appreciated recently. This lays the foundation for slower price and wage
inflation  in  the  years  ahead,  as  estimated  by  Norges  Bank  in  its  December  Inflation  Report.
Developments in recent weeks have confirmed this picture, providing room for a slight reduction
in interest rates.
According  to  the  Exchange  Rate  Regulation,  “...  in  the  event  of  significant  changes  in  the
exchange  rate,  monetary  policy  instruments  shall  be  oriented  with  a  view  to  returning  the
exchange  rate  over  time  to  its  initial  range”.  The  guidelines  provide  considerable  scope  for
discretion in the conduct of monetary policy. It is Norges Bank’s task to exercise this discretion.
Interest  rates  are  set  with  a  view  to  returning  the  krone  exchange  rate  over  time  to  its  initial
range.  Even  with  this  interest  rate  reduction,  the  interest  rate  differential  against  European
countries is substantial.
A  precondition  for  maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate  against  the  euro  is  that  price  and  wage
inflation is on a par with that of euro countries over time. When the krone exchange rate is weak,
Norges Bank therefore sets the interest rate with a view to low price inflation. At the same time,
we must avoid a situation whereby interest rates are so high that monetary policy contributes to a
downturn  that  undermines  confidence  in  the  krone.  Interest  rates  are  set  based  on  these
considerations.
This is not a new policy. In an address to the annual general meeting of Forex Norge in August
last year, Kjell Storvik stated:
BIS Review   10/1999
– 9 –
“I would point to the well-known fact that a lower krone exchange rate may contribute to fuelling
inflation  expectations  and  that  such  expectations  may  in  turn  generate  expectations  of  a
weakening  of  the  krone  exchange  rate,  thereby  reinforcing  depreciation  pressures.  Price
expectations  may  thus  prove  to  be  a  self-fulfilling  prophecy.  The  interest  rate  level  which  has
now  been  established  should,  in  addition  to  directly  contributing  to  stabilising  the  krone
exchange rate, also limit price expectations...”
I should also like to quote the following from the Revised National Budget for 1994:
“A  stable  exchange  rate  can  generate  expectations  of  continued  low  inflation,  which  in  turn
influence  both  price  and  wage  determination.  Moderate  price  and  wage  inflation  is  also  a
necessary condition for a stable exchange rate over time.”
A  prerequisite  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  that  fiscal  policy  generally  contributes  to
stable economic developments. Fiscal policy influences the total level of domestic activity, and
thereby the rise in the prices and costs of goods and services produced in Norway. In a situation
with a high level of economic activity, an expansionary fiscal policy will tend to push up price
and  wage  inflation.  This  in  turn  will  influence  expectations  in  the  foreign  exchange  market
concerning future movements in the exchange rate, fuelling depreciation pressures and therefore
impeding  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy.  A  fiscal  policy  adapted  to  the  economic
situation, on the other hand, will contribute to facilitating the implementation of monetary policy.
In  the  current  economic  situation,  the  pressure  in  the  economy  should  be  dampened.  The
tightening in the National Budget for 1999 of 3/4 per cent of GDP will help to curb price and
wage inflation and alleviate the pressure on monetary policy.
10) Conclusion
We  are  thus  facing  a  period  of  slower  growth.  Given  the  pressure  that  has  built  up  in  the
economy,  particularly  in  the  labour  market,  such  a  correction  is  inevitable  as  a  result  of
production constraints. However, the prospects are much brighter than after the fall in oil prices
and the wage settlement in 1986. The Norwegian economy – including both households and the
business sector – is now in a stronger position to cope with a cyclical turnaround. A few years of
slower  growth  will  also  have  a  favourable  effect  on  price  and  wage  inflation  in  Norway,  and
thereby  on  the  more  long-term  growth  capacity  of  the  economy.  Norges  Bank’s  projections
indicate that price and wage inflation could drop to the level of our trading partners after the turn
of  the  millennium.  Lower  domestic  demand  will  also  contribute  to  curbing  the  strong  import
growth recorded in recent years, thus improving the current account.
As  mentioned,  forecasting  is  a  challenging  task  when  the  economy  is  on  the  verge  of  a
turnaround. It is not easy to predict the exact timing of the turnaround. It will be difficult to avoid
some adjustment through a slackening in the labour market. Even if there  are  already  signs  of
some  slackening,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  the  market  is  still  very  tight.  A  moderate  wage
settlement this spring – with the social partners taking future developments into account – may
contribute to maintaining the level of employment.
Monetary policy instruments are oriented with a view to returning the krone exchange rate over
time to its initial range. The guidelines provide considerable scope for discretion in the conduct
of  monetary  policy.  It  is  Norges  Bank’s  task  to  exercise  this  discretion.  A  precondition  for
maintaining a stable exchange rate against the euro is that price and wage inflation is on a par
with  that  of  euro  countries  over  time.  When  the  krone  exchange  rate  is  weak,  Norges  Bank
therefore sets the interest rate with a view to low price inflation. At the same time, we must avoid
BIS Review   10/1999
– 10 –
a situation whereby interest rates are so high that monetary policy contributes to a downturn that
undermines confidence in the krone. Interest rates are set based on these considerations.
 BIS Review   10/1999
