Mr Heikensten looks at the current economic situation in Sweden
Speech  by  the  First  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  the  Swedish  central  bank,
Mr Lars  Heikensten,  to  Forum  ’99,  the  Swedish  Federation  of  Rental  Property  Owners,  in
Stockholm on 15/02/99.
I  should  like  to  begin  with  a  word  of  thanks  for  the  invitation  to  talk  here  today  about
economic developments, inflation and the interest rate.
Before  taking  a  look  at  the  current  economic  situation  and  saying  something  about  our
deliberations in the Riksbank, however, I feel there may be grounds for adopting a somewhat
broader  perspective  and  even  for  striking  a  slightly  optimistic  note.  Sweden  certainly  has
economic  problems;  further  measures  are  needed,  not  least  to  improve  the  conditions  for
growth. But at times it may also be fitting to recall the things that have turned out well.
Swedish  economic  policy  was  realigned  in  the  early  1990s  with  the  aim  of  establishing  a
regime of low inflation. Previously, Sweden had had a long tradition in this respect but in the
1970s  and  80s  the  accepted  truths  were  discarded,  including  the  idea  that  low  inflation
provides a good foundation for growth and employment. Following the collapse of the Bretton
Woods  system,  stabilisation  policy  no  longer  offered  any  hard  and  fast  rules.  Sweden’s
external debt – both government debt and the total stock – was allowed to grow at a dramatic
rate, accompanied by spiralling prices and wages.
Today, Sweden is in the sixth successive year of good economic growth. Growth since 1993
has averaged almost 3 per cent a year. The deep recession and good investment activity since
then have meant that in this period there has been a supply of unutilised resources. As a result,
inflation has remained low even though growth may have been somewhat above the level that
can  be  regarded  as  sustainable.  Moreover,  Sweden  has  begun  to  repay  external  debt  and
government finances have recovered after the crisis in the wake of the 1980s bubble. In recent
years household earned income has been able to grow strongly in real terms, partly thanks to
the low inflation.
Altered monetary policy process
The laws that regulate the Riksbank were amended with effect from the beginning of this year.
Monetary  policy’s  objective  is  now  explicitly  stated  to  be  to  maintain  price  stability.  The
Riksbank has a new Executive Board, consisting of six full-time members, that independently
decides monetary policy issues.
The new Executive Board entails some changes in the work on monetary policy. The centre of
attention is the Board’s specific monetary policy meetings, which it is envisaged will be held
eight to 10 times a year. Decisions about the repo rate, for example, will normally be taken at
those meetings. A brief account of the Board’s decisions is to be presented in a communiqué
the day after the meeting; a more detailed picture of the discussions will be available in the
minutes of the meetings, which will be published with a time lag of six to eight weeks. As
before,  the  Riksbank  will  be  publishing  an  inflation  report  four  times  a  year,  with  a  more
comprehensive  survey  of  inflationary  pressure  in  the  Swedish  economy  in  the  coming  24
months.
1
BIS Review   18/1999
The  Executive  Board  held  its  first  monetary  policy  meeting  last  Thursday  and  discussed
inflation prospects. The Board then decided to lower the repo rate 0.25 percentage point and
also  lowered  the  corridor  in  which  the  repo  rate  lies  by  0.5  percentage  point.  The  Board’s
decisions and the arguments behind them were published in a communiqué on Friday.
Another feature of the new Riksbank organisation is that each member of the Executive Board
has an individual mandate and one vote. All the members are in a position to make speeches
and give interviews on monetary policy in which they express their own view of the situation.
It  follows  that  the  members  can  hold  different  opinions  and  may  also  express  themselves
somewhat differently about joint positions.
Today I shall base my remarks on the picture that was used for last week’s Executive Board
discussion and summarised in the communiqué. When I elaborate on the communiqué it is my
personal opinion I am expressing, though that does not mean that other Board members were
not of broadly the same mind.
Poorer international prospects
In the course of last year, international economic prospects became a good deal worse. At the
beginning of 1998 it was assumed that a weaker international trend could be offset by other
factors,  of  which  one  was  the  good  domestic  demand.  At  an  early  stage,  actually  when  the
Riksbank raised the interest rate in the late autumn of 1997, it was pointed out, however, that
the international trend could be weaker than assumed in our main scenario and that the crisis
could lead to a slowdown in Sweden as well.
The  signals  of  an  international  slowdown  that  would  also  affect  growth  in  Sweden  became
increasingly  clear.  The  Riksbank  therefore  successively  revised  its  forecasts  in  a  downward
direction  and  eased  the  monetary  stance  in  June.  This  follows  from  our  policy  framework,
which calls for a lower repo rate when inflation in the forecast period is expected to be below
the target and vice versa. The repo rate was cut in two more steps in November, from 4.10 to
3.60 per cent, followed by a further reduction to 3.40 per cent in December when the forecast
was revised downwards again.
Even after the series of downward revisions during the autumn, the December assessment still
carried  a  downside  risk  of  the  international  slowdown  being  even  more  pronounced  and
prolonged than expected.
The  uncertainty  about  international  economic  prospects  has  been  accentuated  somewhat  by
the economic problems  in  Brazil  and  the  real’s  depreciation  since  the  turn  of  the  year.  The
world  economy  may  be  affected  contagiously,  either  via  real  mechanisms  or  via  increased
financial  market  turbulence.  Under  normal  circumstances,  the  real  economic  effects  in  the
industrialised world from decreased trade with Brazil should be relatively limited. There is a
risk, however, of the crisis also becoming more profound among Brazil’s neighbours, leading
in time to somewhat larger repercussions in the industrialised countries as well. The effects
via financial markets could be greater in the short run but developments to date in this respect
have been better than many feared.
The  picture  in  other  parts  of  the  world  economy  at  the  end  of  1998  is  somewhat  varied.
Growth in the U.S. economy is still good, whereas the slowdown in the euro area has become
BIS Review   18/1999
2
slightly more marked than many observers counted on and we have yet to see an economic
recovery in Japan.
The sustained strength of the U.S. economy is mainly due to the unbroken growth of private
consumption – the slowdown that was foreseen in our December Inflation Report has still to
materialise. The stock exchange has recovered from last autumn’s fall and even reached new
all-time highs. Together with a positive development of employment, this has helped improve
the confidence of American consumers.
In time, however, a slowdown in the U.S. economy still seems probable; but the course to date
does suggest that it will not occur as soon as the Riksbank expected earlier, in which case the
trend  in  1999  may  be  stronger.  A  more  dramatic  downturn  could  occur  if  the  U.S.  stock
markets  were  to  fall  markedly.  Even  without  this,  economic  activity  could  slacken  in
connection with decreased investment on account of falling demand and lower profits, as well
as with a lower consumption propensity among households whose debt burden is already very
high.
In  the  euro  area  the  available  statistics  indicate  that  the  slackening  of  activity  in  the  late
autumn  and  winter  was  more  marked  than  expected,  mainly  on  account  of  weaker  exports.
Manufacturers and households differ in their assessments of the future; the former count on a
turn for the worst, whereas consumer confidence has continued to improve. The direction in
which confidence moves for these two groups will be crucial for prospects in the euro area.
The  optimistic  trend  among  households  has  so  far  helped  to  mitigate  the  consequences  of
decreased  external  demand.  The  question  is  whether  this  will  continue  to  be  the  case  if
industrial activity does not take a turn for the better.
The Japanese economy has not shown any clear signs of recovering, though in some respects
it does seem to have stabilised. The future path here is still highly uncertain.
All in all, the statistics point to an international trend in the next two years that is weaker that
in  the  Riksbank’s  main  scenario  last  autumn,  though  the  differences  should  not  be
exaggerated. Together with lower commodity prices, the weaker international activity should
result in lower external price pressure.
The outlook in 2000 and beyond is, however, very difficult to foresee. One uncertainty is the
endurance of U.S. economic growth. Will it be possible to maintain the high growth and low
inflation  despite  the  high  level  of  share  prices  and  the  low  saving  ratio?  Another  question
concerns  Europe:  will  any  slowdown  in  the  United  States  be  offset  by  a  stable  recovery  in
Europe,  underpinned  by  private  consumption?  Finally,  can  the  Japanese  economy  finally
shake  off  the  profound  crisis?  A  clearly  positive  outcome  in  any  of  these  respects  would
provide conditions for a trend that is stronger than the main scenario’s.
Sweden’s currency and interest rate
The lower inflationary pressure that was indicated by international developments last autumn
was accompanied by a weakening of the Swedish krona that could result in higher inflation. A
more  permanently  weak  krona  can  lead  to  higher  inflation  as  a  result  of  higher  resource
utilisation as well as higher import prices.
3
BIS Review   18/1999
In  the  December  forecast  the  Riksbank  envisaged  that  the  krona  would  appreciate  in  the
coming two years. Since then, however, the krona has strengthened more markedly than we
expected: to date in 1999 the exchange rate has appreciated almost 5 per cent in terms of the
TCW index and a little more than 6 per cent against the euro.
A considerable part of the krona’s appreciation and stabilisation should be seen as a return to
a more normal situation after the financial markets’ very turbulent and volatile autumn. At the
height  of  the  unrest,  investors  sold  certain  currencies  in  favour  of  the  safety  of  larger
currencies. Currencies of countries which, like Sweden, have a high foreign debt were most
exposed. The currencies of Australia and Canada, which, like Sweden, target inflation with a
flexible  exchange  rate,  depreciated  markedly  last  autumn;  in  the  calmer  situation  since  the
turn of the year, these currencies have also strengthened and become more stable.
Another factor in the krona’s case is that higher expectations of Sweden joining the euro area
have helped push our currency closer to the value implied by economic fundamentals. In the
run  up  to  Stage  Three  there  was  also  some  apprehension  about  how  the  krona  might  be
affected; after the event, this unrest tended to subside.
The Riksbank’s forecast has thus proved to be on the cautious side to date. Nonetheless, I do
not consider that developments warrant a revision of our long-term assessment last December,
namely a gradual appreciation in terms of the TCW index to about 118 by the end of 2000.
Since the publication of the December Inflation Report, interest rates in Sweden have fallen,
by almost 0.15 percentage point in the case of the three-month rate and 0.4 percentage point
for 10-year bonds.
In that inflation expectations have not moved down as much as the nominal interest rates, the
real  level  of  interest  rates  has  also  fallen  and  is  now  historically  low.  The  pronounced
downward  movement  may  turn  out  to  have  included  some  overshoot  in  the  market,  to  be
followed  by  an  upward  adjustment  of  market  rates.  Signs  of  this  have  been  discernible  in
recent weeks. Even so, the real level of interest rates is expected to remain low and should act
as a stimulus to the Swedish economy, above all in the somewhat longer run.
The domestic economy
In our December Inflation Report, the GDP growth rate was assumed to be between 2.5 and 3
per cent in 1998, between 2 and 2.5 per cent in 1999 and around 2.5 per cent in 2000. The
available statistics suggest that our forecast for 1998 is probably correct. For 1999 and 2000,
however, we consider that the December forecasts are somewhat too optimistic.
One of the items we believe may be weaker is foreign trade. With the poorer outlook for the
international economy, net exports could be lower in the years ahead. Industrial activity may
then  also  continue  to  slacken.  The  expectations  of  Swedish  firms  are  low,  above  all  in
manufacturing, and this could have a downward effect on investment.
On  the  other  hand,  the  statistics  show  that  private  consumption  is  still  strong,  with  a  1998
third-quarter increase that exceeded expectations. House prices and the number of new cars
registered are continuing to rise and retail turnover is also moving upwards. Other signs are
increased  lending  to  households  and  the  growth  of  the  money  supply.  Households  are
optimistic about their own economic situation, one reason being the growth of real disposable
BIS Review   18/1999
4
wage income; a marked increase in 1999 is implied by the low level of inflation and the tax
cuts. Another contributory factor is probably the fall in interest expenditure. The mood among
households will be crucial for private consumption’s future path.
As  I  see  it,  however,  there  are  certain  grounds  for  fearing  that  even  consumption  will  be
somewhat  weaker  than  we  counted  on  in  December,  when  our  forecast  included
comparatively  strong  consumption  activity  in  the  coming  years.  While  households  are
optimistic  about  their  own  economic  situation,  the  view  of  Sweden’s  economy  and
employment’s  future  development  is  more  dismal.  Poorer  international  economic  prospects
and  the  more  pessimistic  expectations  of  firms  are  liable  to  dampen  the  optimism  of
households and thereby private consumption.
The  statistics  on  industrial  capacity  utilisation  continue  to  present  a  varied  picture.  At  total
level, however, we consider that in the coming two years the Swedish economy will still have
some  surplus  capacity  and  this  is  expected  to  be  somewhat  larger  than  we  envisaged  in
December. The crucial question here is the future development of households’ expectations.
Continued optimism could result in sustained domestic demand that tends to offset the more
subdued international trend and the weaker investment activity.
Construction and property market
For  this  Forum  it  may  also  be  appropriate  to  say  something  about  the  situation  in  the
construction sector. Construction activity shows a cyclical pattern, with strongly rising costs
in upward phases. An upswing here may therefore entail risks of inflation.
In  a  historical  perspective,  the  level  of  construction  activity  in  Sweden  in  recent  years  has
been very low. As a result, smaller firms have had to close and construction labour has moved
abroad or gone to other domestic sectors. There are now many indications that construction
activity is picking up again, though the rate of the recovery is difficult to assess. But housing
demand has grown and there is a large need for new housing as well as for renovation. The
Riksbank does not produce independent estimates; the available figures suggest, however, that
in the coming decade between 20,000 and 45,000 new dwelling units need to be built  each
year  and  between  30,000  and  40,000  units  a  year  need  to  be  renovated.  Activity  may  then
grow rapidly in certain regions.
Now  that  construction  is  recovering,  the  increased  concentration  among  construction
companies  and  producers  of  construction  materials,  as  well  as  the  shortages  in  certain
categories  of  skilled  labour,  are  liable  to  push  costs  and  wages  up.  Certain  problems  with
bottlenecks  are  already  discernible;  in  the  business  tendency  surveys  from  the  National
Institute of Economic Research, labour shortages are reported by  7  per  cent  of  construction
firms as against 2 per cent in March 1998. These shortages are accompanied by a high overall
level  of  unemployment  among  construction  workers;  part  of  the  explanation  is  that
unemployment is high in certain regions and those who are unemployed there are reluctant to
move a long way to regions where labour demand is stronger.
Bottleneck  problems  in  the  construction  industry  are  being  studied  on  behalf  of  the
Government  by  industry  representatives.  This  Construction  Sector  Group  has  found  that
approximately  one-third  of  unemployed  construction  workers  lack  occupational  experience
and  around  6  per  cent  also  lack  formal  training.  In  that  the  average  age  of  construction
workers  is  rising  and  young  people  do  not  find  construction  work  attractive,  the  bottleneck
5
BIS Review   18/1999
problems  may  become  even  greater  in  the  future.  In  order  to  prevent  this  from  leading  to
sizeable  problems,  proposals  have  been  put  forward  for  increased  mobility,  improved
competence and marketing of construction courses, for example.
Construction costs are measured by the factor price index (FPI); the largest item is wage costs.
The price of completed dwellings, on the other hand, is measured by the building price index
(BPI), which also includes the construction companies’ productivity and profit margins. These
indexes  do  show  relatively  large  price  increases  but  there  are  no  actual  signs  of  any  direct
risks  of  an  inflationary  development  in  Sweden  in  the  coming  years,  provided  that  the
bottleneck problems do not increase.
The  rising  costs  associated  with  earlier  upswings  in  activity  have  been  connected  with  the
contemporary subsidy systems as well as the high degree of concentration in the construction
market. The revised system for financing residential construction has appreciably reduced one
of these problems: construction companies as well as consumers are exposed more directly to
production  costs.  But  the  problem  of  concentration  in  the  construction  market  still  remains
and may be a future cause for concern.
Future monetary policy
In the main scenario in the December Inflation Report, the 12-month change in the CPI was
projected to be 1.2 per cent in December 1999 and 1.4 per cent in December 2000. Inflation’s
underlying  rate  in  those  months  was  expected  to  be  1.7  and  1.8  per  cent,  respectively.  The
Riksbank  also  noted  that  as  the  slowdown  in  international  activity  could  prove  to  be  more
marked and more prolonged, the downside risk in the assessment was greater than the upside
risk. In recent months the international picture has tended to shift in that direction.
Immediate inflationary pressure in Sweden has been lower than the Riksbank counted on in
December. The outturn for inflation in  December  1998  was  0.3  percentage  point  below  the
figure  in  the  Report’s  main  scenario;  around  0.1  percentage  point  of  the  difference  can  be
attributed to lower interest expenditure and approximately 0.1 percentage point to lower world
market  prices  for  oil.  Moreover,  underlying  inflation  has  been  somewhat  weaker  than
expected.
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  Executive  Board  considered  that  the  prospects  for  international
economic activity and inflation are somewhat more subdued than they were in December and
this will probably lead to economic activity and inflation in Sweden being slightly weaker in
the next two years than the Riksbank counted on earlier.
CPI inflation is accordingly expected to be below the 2 per cent target in one to two years’
time.  To  some  extent  this  is  a  consequence  of  transitory  factors  that  are  judged  to  have  no
permanent effect on either inflation or the inflation process and should therefore not influence
the  formulation  of  monetary  policy.  These  transitory  factors  –  altered  indirect  taxes  and
subsidies as well as lower interest expenditure – are projected to lower the CPI by between 0.5
and 1 percentage point in the coming two years. But even excluding the transitory factors, it is
considered that inflation will be below the target in 1999 and 2000.
In the light of its assessment, last Thursday the Executive Board decided to ease the monetary
stance.  The  future  formulation  of  policy  is  something  that  will  also  be  discussed  in  the
Inflation Report, which will be published on March 25th.
BIS Review   18/1999
6
