Mr George elucidates the new monetary policy arrangement in the United Kingdom and in
the euro-zone
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of England, Mr E A J George, at The Chartered Institute of
Bankers in Glasgow on 18/1/99.
Mr President, Secretary of State, Lord Provost, my Lords, Ladies and Gentlemen.
It would be a masterly understatement to describe the past two years, since the last CIB Scotland
Dinner, as eventful.
Here  in  Scotland,  following  the  referendum  and  last  year’s  legislation,  you  are  now  actively
preparing for the elections to the Scottish Parliament in May.
In my own neck of the woods, we have seen responsibility for the implementation of monetary
policy devolved upon the Bank’s new Monetary Policy Committee.
And  elsewhere  in  Europe,  11  countries  have  merged  their  separate  currencies  into  the  single
euro,  thereby  passing  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  from  national  authorities  to  the  new
European Central Bank.
These are truly historic events.
I have no wish to become embroiled in the matters of Scottish politics this evening – I’m more
than happy to leave that to the Secretary of State. I simply wish you all well, and look forward to
developing  a  constructive  dialogue  with  the  new  Parliament  as  we  have  with  the  Scottish
banking and business communities. But let me say a few words about the new monetary policy
arrangements here in the United Kingdom and in the euro-zone.
The  real  significance  of  those  arrangements  –  in  both  cases  –  is  that  in  introducing  them  the
respective  governments  confirmed  their  common  commitment  to  achieving  and  maintaining
effective  price  stability  in  their  respective  currency  areas.  That  role  for  monetary  policy  is  not
simply  an  end  in  itself,  in  some  abstract,  doctrinaire  way.  On  the  contrary  it  recognises  that
consistently and reliably low inflation, into the medium and longer term, is a necessary means to
the end of sustainable growth of  output  and  employment,  which  are,  of  course,  the  truly  good
things of economic life that we are all seeking to achieve.
Our own new legislation defines the MPC’s objective as to maintain price stability and, subject
to  that,  to  support  the  Government’s  economic  policy,  including  its  objectives  for  growth  and
employment. The Maastricht Treaty defines the primary objective of the European Central Bank
as  to  maintain  price  stability,  and  without  prejudice  to  that  objective  to  support  the  general
economic policies of the European Union.
There are significant differences between the two statutory frameworks. In our case, for example,
the precise definition of the stability objective is determined by the Government; and there are
much more rigorous requirements for transparency of the MPC process and public accountability
for  MPC  decisions.  I  am  convinced  that  our  arrangements  are  wholly  appropriate  to  our
particular  circumstances.  But  the  essence  of  what  we  and  the  ECB  Governing  Council  are
mandated to do is very much the same.
It involves in effect aiming to keep overall, aggregate demand in the economy (as a whole) more
or less continuously in line with the underlying overall capacity of the economy (as a whole) to
BIS Review   7/1999
– 2 –
meet that demand. Effective price stability is essentially a measure of our success in achieving
economic stability in that much broader sense.
It is a limited role. Neither we nor the ECB can do very much directly to affect the underlying
supply side of the economy which depends upon its structural characteristics, and above all, in
today’s world, on the efficiency and flexibility of goods, capital and labour markets. Monetary
policy  cannot  substitute  for  supply-side  reform,  but  by  maintaining  price  stability  we  can,
indirectly, help markets to function more effectively.
Nor  can  either  the  MPC  or  the  ECB  do  much  directly  to  influence  the  pressures  on  particular
firms  or  particular  sectors  or  regions  of  the  economy;  we  and  they  can  only  influence  the
monetary  situation  in  the  economy  of  our  respective  currency  areas,  as  a  whole.  We  have
essentially  one  instrument:  the  short-term  interest  rate.  But,  again,  if  we  are  successful  in
achieving  overall  stability,  that  will  also  contribute  over  time  to  a  more  rather  than  less
favourable operating environment for the different component parts of the economy. But that is
the most that either we in the MPC or the Governing Council of the ECB can hope to do.
The  fact  that  we  both  have  essentially  the  same  objective  –  and  are  subject  to  the  same
limitations – does not, of course, mean that we can adopt the same policy stance – the same level
of  short-term  interest  rates,  as  some  commentators  have  recently,  and  oversimplistically,
suggested. We start from different positions, and our respective economies are subject to many
different, as well as many of the same, influences. That was an important economic reason why
the  Government  decided,  rightly  in  my  view,  not  to  participate  in  the  first  wave  of  monetary
union  –  despite  the  attraction,  in  the  right  circumstances,  of  nominal  exchange  rate  certainty
across  the  European  continent.  It  was,  I  know,  a  matter  of  regret  to  many  of  our  European
partners; but there was also a sense of relief, because many of them recognised that our different
economic  situation  would  have  complicated  European  monetary  management  had  we  joined
from the outset, as it would have complicated monetary management in this country.
In our case, the UK economy has grown at an average annual rate of around 3% now for the past
six and a half years (to the third quarter of last year). That is well above any plausible estimate of
the  underlying  rate  of  growth  of  capacity  in  the  economy  as  a  whole  –  which  is  typically
estimated  at  some  2–2½%.  So  what  we  were  in  fact  doing  over  this  period  was  steadily
reabsorbing the economic slack created by the recession of the early 1990s. In the labour market
this was reflected in a rise in employment of some 1.65 million to an all-time high on the latest
figures (for the three months to last November) of 26.6 million. It was reflected, too, in a fall in
the rate of unemployment from a peak of 10.6% (on LFS figures)  to  the  current  rate  of  6.1%,
which is the lowest rate for almost 20 years. As far as the regional impact is concerned, I would
note that over this period unemployment in Scotland – though still higher than in the UK as a
whole – has also declined – to 7.6% on the latest LFS data, compared with a peak of 10.8%; and
on a claimant count basis it, too, is currently lower than for 22 years.
These  developments  in  the  labour  market  produced  only  a  fairly  gradual  pick  up  in  pay
settlements  and  earnings  growth  compared  with  past  periods  of  labour  market  tightening  –
though  we  have,  of  course,  been  unsighted  on  what  has  happened  to  earnings  growth  more
recently.  And  underlying  retail  price  inflation  –  on  the  Government’s  inflation  target  measure
(RPIX) – averaged some 2¾% a year through the expansion, and is currently exactly on target at
2½%.
By the time of your last dinner it was already becoming clear that overall output growth needed
to moderate if we were not to run into overall capacity constraints and a pick-up in inflation. The
BIS Review   7/1999
– 3 –
exaggeratedly strong exchange  rate  against  the  core  European  currencies  –  reflecting  inter  alia
market misperceptions about the prospective strength, or rather weakness, of the euro – was itself
moderating  external  demand,  especially  for  manufacturing  output,  while  at  the  same  time
exerting  a  restraining  price  effect  on  domestic  inflation.  But  domestic  demand  growth  –
including  demand  for  services  –  continued  to  accelerate  through  1997,  and  that  was  the
background  to  the  tightening  of  monetary  policy  in  1997.  We  could  not  avoid  that  tightening,
despite the uncomfortable sectoral imbalance within the economy. To have done so would, as I
have said elsewhere, have put the whole of the economy – including the internationally exposed
sectors we would have been trying to shelter – at risk of accelerating inflation, so it would not
have helped even those sectors in anything other than the short term.
Meanwhile, in the euro-zone things were very different. Demand and output growth in the major
continental  economies  remained  generally  fairly  sluggish  for  much  of  the  period,  only  really
starting to pick up towards the end – helped by relatively weak exchange rates. Unemployment,
which is much the most urgent and important issue confronting Europe, actually increased; and,
despite some improvement over the past year or so, it remains at or close to double digit rates in
all the largest euro-zone countries. Inflation against this background remained low, tending lower
– as did interest rates. The position is complicated in the euro-zone by a reviving political debate
about just how much of the unemployment reflects supply-side weaknesses requiring structural
reforms, and how much it reflects inadequate overall demand. The outcome of that debate will be
crucial  to  the  future  evolution  of  the  euro-zone.  But  in  the  immediate  situation  there  was  no
reason to suppose that continued growth of demand and output was inconsistent with effective
price stability in the zone as a whole.
So  much  for  our  different  starting  points.  But  over  the  past  year,  the  world  –  and  I  mean  the
world – has changed quite dramatically for both of us in that we have both been affected by the
international economic slowdown.
This started, in fact, with the financial disturbances in Asia in the latter half of 1997, but even as
late  as  the  beginning  of  last  summer  it  seemed  as  if  it  might  have  only  limited  impact  on  the
overall world economy. The IMF, for example, was still then projecting 3–3¾% world growth in
1998 and 1999 respectively – which was certainly a setback compared with their forecast of over
4% just six months before – but it was hardly catastrophic.
Since last summer it has become increasingly clear that things are likely to be significantly worse
than that. The financial collapse in Russia, deepening recession in Japan, the long battle – then
sudden defeat last week – in Brazil’s attempt to hold its exchange rate, and fluctuating fears of
possible  knock-on  effects  on  the  major  countries’  financial  markets  all  contributed  to  an
increased sense of financial fragility, which has not been easy to contain. We can, I believe, still
avert a more general international financial upheaval (and the financial markets’ response to the
latest developments in Brazil, as well as the beginnings of a recovery in capital flows to some
countries in Asia, are reasonably encouraging in this respect). But, we are nevertheless bound to
see a pronounced slowdown of world economic activity. The IMF has cut its latest (December)
forecast for world growth to less than 2¼% in 1998/1999. And the risks almost certainly remain
on the downside. That’s still not global slump or recession. But large parts of the world economy
are  in  fact  in  recession  and  the  prospect  for  the  world  as  a  whole  turns  very  much  on  what
happens in the major industrial countries.
In essence, what we are seeing is a sharp cutback in capital flows to much of the emerging world
and to some of the transition economies, enforcing on those countries a corresponding cutback in
domestic demand and creating the need for an urgent improvement in their current accounts. The
BIS Review   7/1999
– 4 –
counterpart is a sharp decline in net external demand in the industrial countries, which, if it is not
offset by action to stimulate domestic demand in those countries, could lead to weakening global
activity and price deflation.
In fact to varying degrees – reflecting differing assessments of how far their particular currency
area is expected to be affected by the slowdown in external demand, and different starting points
in their  assessment  of  trends  in  domestic  demand,  and  of  how  close  they  were  initially  to  full
capacity, in their respective overall economies – both the UK and the euro-zone, as well as the
US, have acted fairly aggressively to reduce interest rates since the autumn; and Japan has moved
to more active fiscal stimulus. And if the global economic prospect, and net external demand in
the industrial countries, were to deteriorate further, then it would be right to contemplate further
moves in the same direction – consistently with our aim of effective price stability. What we are
trying to do, as I said earlier, is to keep aggregate demand in line with the supply capacity of our
economies. We have no interest in the creation of unnecessary spare capacity in our economies
as a whole or in a fall in the underlying general price level.
But what this will inevitably mean is a worsening of the balance of payments on current accounts
of  the  industrial  countries,  individually  and  collectively,  reflecting  the  imbalance  between
external and domestic demand growth in our economies. That imbalance clearly will need to be
reversed at some point as the flow of international capital is restored to a more sustainable level.
The pressures can in the meantime be mitigated by official international financing,  but  private
flows  may  take  a  while  to  settle  down.  For  the  time  being,  though,  the  directly  and  indirectly
internationally exposed sectors, not just of the UK economy but throughout the industrial world,
will continue to operate in a highly competitive environment.
All in all this is an uncertain and difficult prospect. It will be an exceptionally challenging period
for both international and domestic monetary policy management in both the UK and the euro-
zone as well as in the rest of the industrial world. And it will, I know, be a challenging period for
many of you – even though the excessive strength of the exchange rate has now started to ease.
But our economy as a whole starts from a position of relative strength compared with the past,
and  our  own  financial  underpinnings,  including  both  corporate  and  personal  sector  balance
sheets, are relatively robust. We are currently seeing an overall slowdown – as we needed to do.
That slowdown could go further. But I would frankly be surprised if it developed into a steep or
protracted  recession  –  that  certainly  is  not  the  most  probable  outcome;  it  is  not  a  necessary
outcome; and it is one which the MPC will certainly seek to avoid – always  consistently  with
achieving our inflation target.
Mr President, I can promise you that the next two years will be eventful. The only other certainty
is that we will be confronted by the millennium. But I would hope that by the time we meet at
this Dinner again the situation will be both clearer and calmer.
In the meantime, I thank you once again for your excellent hospitality and I ask you all to rise
and to join me in a toast to the health and prosperity of the CIB in Scotland.
 BIS Review   7/1999
