Mr Stals addresses the subject of inflation targeting as an anchor for monetary policy in
South Africa
Address by the Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, Dr Chris Stals, at a breakfast
meeting of the Johannesburg Branch of the Institute of Bankers in South Africa on 17 March
1999.
1. Introduction
The debate on whether South Africa should formally introduce an inflation target as an anchor
for monetary policy recently revived again. Such targets were introduced by a number of other
countries over the past twenty years, in most cases with relatively good results. Amongst these
countries  can  be  mentioned  New  Zealand,  Canada,  Australia,  Israel,  Sweden,  the  Czech
Republic, Turkey and the United Kingdom. The new European Central Bank recently decided
to  follow  a  more  eclectic  approach  in  which  both  the  money  supply  and  inflation  will  be
targeted, with due recognition of an important role for a number of other monetary/financial
aggregates in the process of inflation creation.
In the case of South Africa, formal targeting of the M3 money supply was introduced in the
mid-1980’s to serve as an anchor for monetary policy. Like in many other countries, this base
for  monetary  policy  served  South  Africa  well  for  some  years  and  made  an  important
contribution  towards  the  gradual  reduction  in  the  level  of  the  rate  of  inflation  from  a  well-
embedded double-digit figure of between 12 and 20 per cent over a twenty-year period from
1972 to 1993 to an average of well below 10 per cent over the past five years.  The use of the
money supply as an anchor for monetary policy is based on the assumption that there is some
stable  relationship  over  time  between  changes  in  the  money  supply  and  total  spending  on
goods and services and prices, that is inflation. Monetary policy is therefore directed towards
controlling the rate of expansion in the total money supply as an intermediate objective, with
the  ultimate  goal  of  protecting  the  value  of  the  currency.  To  achieve  the  intermediate
objective,  the  central  bank  uses  various  operational  instruments  such  as  open  market
operations,  variable  minimum  cash  reserve  requirements  and  changes  in  the  conditions  of
discount window facilities to influence the amount of liquidity in the banking sector (supply
of money) and the level of short-term interest rates (demand for money).
In this monetary policy model, the central bank therefore has an ultimate objective (to protect
the  value  of  the  currency),  an  intermediate  objective  (to  control  the  money  supply),  a
supportive  objective  (to  influence  the  amount  of  bank  credit  extension)  and  a  number  of
operational instruments that can be used to achieve the goals of monetary policy. It must be
pointed out that, apart from the fairly generally accepted ultimate goal of protecting the value
of  the  currency,  central  banks  can  choose  any  one  of  the  more  important  elements  of  the
model as an intermediate target for guiding their shorter-term decisions on monetary policy.
Some central banks may prefer a target for total domestic bank credit extension (DCE); others
may prefer more direct controls over the amount of liquidity in the banking sector; others may
set a more direct objective for the level of interest rates. Be that as it may, the monetary policy
model  as  described  above  is  a  consistent  model  in  which  fairly  stable  relationships  exist
between the various components of the model. Whatever element may be chosen as an anchor
for monetary policy, the other components of the model cannot and should not be ignored.
1
BIS Review   31/1999
2. Moving from an intermediate objective to the ultimate objective of monetary policy
In  South  Africa,  like  in  many  other  countries  with  a  comparable  experience  of  economic
development, changes in the money supply in recent years lost some of their usefulness as an
anchor for monetary policy, and as an intermediate objective for achieving the ultimate goal of
protecting the value of the currency. This has happened, as in many other countries, mainly
because of a major liberalisation of the financial markets, a huge increase in the volume of
transactions  in  the  money  and  capital  markets,  and  an  opening-up  of  the  country  for
international participation, not only in respect of trade, but also for the inward and the outward
movement of capital across international borders.
In the process, huge increases in the money supply occurred that were not related directly (or
indirectly)  to  total  spending  on  real  goods  and  services.  In  technical  terms,  the  additional
money  supply  remained  in  financial  circulation  and  was  reflected  in  a  large  decline  in  the
income velocity of circulation of the money supply. More money became available for every
one unit of goods and services produced in the country. And yet, these increases in the money
supply  did  not  lead  to  increases  in  the  rate  of  inflation.  On  the  contrary,  inflation  in  South
Africa  remained  on  a  steady  downward  path,  interrupted  only  by  the  adverse  effects  of  the
exchange rate depreciations of 1996 and 1998.
Reserve Bank guidelines for an acceptable rate of increase in the money supply, based on the
objective  of  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  rate  of  inflation  and  providing  for  a  desirable  but
realistic rate of growth in real economic activity, were overshot by a substantial margin during
each of the past four years. Taking account of developments in the financial markets, and the
acknowledgement  of  a  growing  need  for  more  money  to  service  the  growing  volumes  of
financial market transactions, the Reserve Bank remained indulgent about these “excessive”
increases in the money supply, as long as inflation continued to decline gradually.
These developments, however, impinged on the credibility of the continued use of M3 as the
intermediate  target  of  monetary  policy  in  South  Africa,  and  opened  up  the  way  for
unreasonable criticism of monetary policy decisions taken by the Reserve Bank. After more
than  four  years  of  a  persistent  “excessive”  growth  in  M3,  with  a  clear  downward  trend  in
inflation at the same time, the question has arisen whether the time has not come for South
Africa to follow the example set by many other countries and to switch from a money supply
anchor for monetary policy to a more direct targeting of the ultimate goal, that is, inflation in
its own right.
In  many  statements  made  since  1997,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  expressed  its  support  for
gradually moving towards this new approach. In the annual monetary policy statements issued
by  the  Bank  in  March  1998  and  again  in  March  1999,  the  Bank  indeed  distinctly  moved
towards what it referred to as “informal” inflation targets. The view was expressed that this
new approach was indeed more clearly linked to the directive contained in the Constitution of
the Republic of South Africa in terms of which the Reserve Bank has been tasked with the
responsibility of protecting the South African rand in the interest of economic development in
the country.
The Bank has always held the view that, in the case of South Africa, it is essential that the
Government  through  the  Minister  of  Finance  should  endorse  Reserve  Bank  targets  or
alternatively set quantitative inflation targets together with the Reserve Bank for the Bank to
pursue.  Inflation  expectations  play  a  major  part  in  the  ongoing  inflation  process,  and  a
BIS Review   31/1999
2
commitment by not only the Reserve Bank but also Government to lower inflation will add
credibility to a resolute and collective objective of bringing inflation in South Africa in line
with the relatively low levels that now apply in most other countries of the world.
A  recent  view  expressed  by  the  Minister  of  Finance  that  South  Africa  should  consider  the
possibility of introducing inflation targeting, fuelled renewed speculation on the possibility of
such  a  move  in  the  near  future.  The  ignorance  revealed  about  inflation  targeting  in  the
subsequent  public  debate  exposed  once  again  the  need  for  a  better  understanding  of  the
intricate process of inflation in a modern economy. It is often overlooked, for example, that
inflationary pressures can be created in many sectors of the economy and, if not depressed at
source, can require draconian monetary policy measures to avoid monetary accommodation,
with a continuing process of vicious inflationary circles that can harm the country for a long
time.
It is also a fallacy to believe that a switch from money supply to inflation targeting will enable
South Africa to have lower interest rates almost instantaneously. Taking account once again of
the intimate relationships that exist between the various components of the monetary policy
model, there is but little difference between inflation targeting and money supply guidelines
(or for that matter a DCE, liquidity or interest rate anchor for monetary policy). Interest rates
will only decline to a lower level once inflation has been reduced on a sustainable basis to a
lower  level,  and  expectations  about  higher  inflation  in  future  have  been  eliminated  with
success from the minds of the majority of economic agents.
3. Introducing inflation targets
The introduction of inflation targeting is no easy task. Apart from the question of who should
be  responsible  for  the  establishment  of  the  target,  the  following  questions  must  also  be
answered:
How should inflation be measured?
Although it is widely accepted that some form of a cost-of-living index or a consumer price
index should be used for this purpose, there is no consensus on how exactly inflation should
be  measured  ideally  for  the  purpose  of  implementing  monetary  policy.  One  of  the  major
deficiencies of any kind of price index for this purpose is that the statistics are based on past
consumption expenditure, and do not take account of possible future purchases – a deficiency
that does not apply to money supply targeting, where accumulated money balances form part
of the base aggregate.
At what level or range should the target be set?
“The  purpose  of  an  inflation  target  is  to  provide  the  central  bank  with  a  rule  for  making
monetary  policy  decisions.  For  that  purpose,  a  target  band  is  not  necessary:  a  single  point
target is sufficient” (William A. Allen: Inflation Targeting: The British Experience, a Bank of
England  publication).  A  fixed  point,  however,  is  much  more  difficult  to  hit  than  staying
within a range. Moving within a band also leaves some discretion to the central bank and can
also provide more flexibility in the case of unforeseeable future price shocks.
What models should be used for forecasting inflation?
3
BIS Review   31/1999
It  must  be  understood  that  inflation  targeting  is  about  the  future.  Any  monetary  policy
decision implemented today, for example a decision to raise interest rates, will normally only
affect actual measured inflation with a time lag of, say, twelve to eighteen months (or even
longer  in  some  countries).  Inflation  targets  can  therefore  only  be  set  in  a  forward-looking
model  that  takes  account  of  long-delayed  effects.  A  reliable  system  for  forecasting  future
inflation therefore becomes an essential precondition for any monetary policy model based on
inflation targeting.
To what extent should inflation targeting be concerned with asset price inflation?
It  is  well-known  that  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  in  the  United
States of America is always concerned about the dangers of financial and property asset price
inflation, and of the risk of a “bursting bubble”. The experience of Japan in the late 1980’s
can  be  quoted,  where  measured  consumer  price  inflation  never  exceeded  4  per  cent  per
annum,  and  yet  excessive  increases  in  bank  credit  extension  and  the  money  supply  created
unrealistic  asset  prices.  Eventually,  when  the  bubble  burst,  the  total  Japanese  economy
collapsed.
4. Conclusion
It is mainly for these reasons that many countries still prefer to stick to a more controllable
intermediate target such as M3 or DCE, rather than the more complex and difficult inflation
targets. South Africa’s expressed intentions to move towards inflation targeting therefore need
careful  preparation.  The  Reserve  Bank  is  in  the  process  of  improving  its  techniques  of
forecasting  inflation,  and  continues  to  analyse  the  changing  relationships  that  are  now
emerging in the new situation between the various components of the monetary policy model.
Reference  should,  in  conclusion,  be  made  to  a  third  alternative  in  addition  to  intermediate
targets,  such  as  the  money  supply  and  inflation  targeting,  that  can  also  be  considered  by
countries as an anchor for monetary policy, and that is explicit targeting of the exchange rate
of the currency. Countries such as Argentina, Hong Kong and the People’s Republic of China
have  opted  for  this  alternative  with  a  reasonable  measure  of  success.  There  are,  however,
many  reasons  why  this  option  is  not  regarded  as  appropriate  for  the  present  South  African
situation.  Suffice  it  to  say  that,  in  the  macroeconomic  monetary  policy  model  used  by  the
Reserve Bank, the exchange  rate  is  included  as  an  important  element  in  the  comprehensive
model, but it comes out as a result of the policy process, and not as an independent objective.
BIS Review   31/1999
4
