Mr Heikensten speaks on monetary policy with a focus on exchange rate
Speech by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Sweden, Mr Lars Heikensten, to Riksbank’s primary
dealers in Stockholm on 19 April 1999.
Since November 1992, when the defence of the krona’s fixed exchange rate was abandoned, much of
the discussion concerning monetary policy has involved the exchange rate. At this traditional meeting
with the Riksbank’s primary dealers, I should like to consider four issues connected with Sweden’s
currency.
One of these issues is the function of the krona in a monetary policy regime that targets inflation with
a flexible exchange rate. Another issue is the actual path of the exchange rate in recent years and the
conclusions it warrants. The euro’s introduction at the beginning of January has revived the question
of Sweden’s participation in EMU; this raises the other two issues, namely the process towards ERM
membership, if this is envisaged, and aspects of setting the future ERM rate that would then ensue.
Monetary policy significance of the exchange rate
The floating exchange rate regime that was introduced for the Swedish krona in November 1992 was
regarded by many people as a fairly temporary arrangement. They considered that for Sweden, as a
small  country  dependent  on  foreign  trade,  a  fixed  exchange  rate  was  most  advantageous,  so  the
Riksbank ought to try to reintroduce a fixed rate regime as soon as possible.
Since  its  introduction  in  1993,  however,  the  inflation  target  has  proved  to  be  a  good  compass  for
achieving  and  maintaining  price  stability.  Confidence  in  the  monetary  policy  regime  has  gradually
grown  and  now  seems  to  be  firm.  Inflation  and  inflation  expectations  are  low.  Since  the  cyclical
upturn  in  the  summer  of  1993,  annual  GDP  growth  has  averaged  almost  3  per  cent,  government
finances have been rapidly consolidated and Sweden has begun to repay external debt.
Important forecasting variable
During lengthy periods of financial unrest and problems with confidence in Sweden’s economy the
Riksbank judged that the krona was undervalued. At times, moreover, the exchange rate fluctuations
have  been  relatively  marked,  even  after  it  seemed  that  economic  policy’s  credibility  had  been
established.
In the period since the fixed exchange rate was abandoned the Riksbank has not targeted the exchange
rate.  For  monetary  policy,  the  primary  consideration  since  1992  has  been  the  picture  of  inflation
prospects in relation  to  the  targeted  rate  of  2  per  cent.  But  the  exchange  rate  is  still  one  important
factor in the Riksbank’s assessment of inflation. An exchange rate movement that is judged to have
consequences  for  inflation  prospects  will  accordingly  influence  the  formation  of  monetary  policy,
ultimately the level at which the Riksbank sets the repo rate.
The exchange rate normally affects inflation through import prices as well as via foreign trade and
resource utilisation. All else equal, a weak exchange rate will lead in theory to higher import prices
and thereby to higher consumer prices. In practice, however, the weak krona has not affected either
import  or  consumer  prices  as  much  as  the  Riksbank  had  anticipated.  There  may  be  a  number  of
explanations for this.
•  One may be that the Riksbank has overestimated resource utilisation and hence demand pressure
in the economy. A weaker demand situation probably makes it less possible for firms to let the
weak exchange rate pass through to consumer prices.
•  Another  factor  may  be  downward  price  pressure  from  the  increased  international  competition.
Although the price effects of this are presumably of a one-off nature in principle, they may affect
inflation over a long period in that it takes time for them to work through the economy.
1
BIS Review   48/1999
•  A  further  explanation  may  be  that  the  move  to  a  flexible  exchange  rate  has  altered  pricing
behaviour. When the krona was  devalued  in  the  Seventies  and  Eighties,  the  new  exchange  rate
was perceived as permanent and prices were set in relation to its weaker level. Since 1992, many
of the krona’s depreciations have probably been perceived as transient and therefore resulted in
more limited price adjustments.
Not a mechanical relationship
The relationship between the exchange rate and inflation prospects has evidently changed over time.
No straightforward mechanical link can be said to exist between the exchange rate, inflation prospects
and  the  repo  rate.  The  monetary  policy  response  to  an  exchange  rate  shift  also  depends  on  the
underlying cause, the perceived duration of the shift and the economic situation in other respects.
  If the krona weakens on account of portfolio shifts that stem in turn from fears of rising inflation,
for  example,  it  is  natural  for  this  to  elicit  a  tighter  monetary  stance.  That  was  in  fact  a  major
argument for the Riksbank’s policy from 1993 to 1995.
If, on the other hand, the exchange rate weakens at a time when overall inflationary pressure is
low,  for  example  in  connection  with  declining  international  demand,  this  does  not  necessarily
imply a threat from inflation. The weaker exchange rate is then rather a part of a real economic
adjustment. Such mechanisms were presumably involved last autumn.
Monetary  policy  therefore  has  to  be  based  on  an  assessment  of  inflation  prospects  that  is  as
comprehensive as circumstances permit. The exchange rate is one important factor in this assessment
but normally it should not play an isolated role. That is why the Riksbank has  chosen  not  to  use  a
monetary index—a weighted combination of interest rates and the exchange rate—as an intermediate
target.
The  Riksbank’s  view  of  the  exchange  rate  has  altered  a  good  deal  since  1992.  We  have  gradually
placed  more  emphasis  on  the  krona’s  forecast  path  and  been  less  concerned  about  its  occasional
fluctuations. As I see it, a number of things have contributed to this. It has proved difficult to show
that attempts at short-run exchange rate stabilisation, using either the repo rate or interventions, have
been particularly successful. Neither does experience from other countries with a flexible exchange
rate provide all that much support for such a policy. At the same time, increased credibility has made
the gradual modification of the Riksbank’s view easier. The Riksbank has accordingly chosen to be
comparatively  inactive  in  the  currency  market.  At  the  same  time,  an  exchange  rate  that  is  highly
volatile  and  displays  pronounced  fluctuations  clearly  has  drawbacks;  the  uncertainty  it  generates  is
liable  to  spread  to  other  financial  markets,  besides  complicating  corporate  and  personal  decisions
about  investment,  production  and  consumption.  In  recent  years  the  Riksbank  has  therefore
occasionally chosen to intervene in the foreign exchange market in order to underscore its appraisal of
the  situation.  It  need  hardly  be  said  that  if  such  interventions  had  been  judged  to  conflict  with  the
inflation target, they would never have been considered.
As long as the Riksbank targets inflation directly, I see no reason to change the current principles for
our behaviour in the currency market. But I also want to underscore that the approach to the exchange
rate  in  an  inflation  targeting  strategy  is  by  no  means  self-evident.  Some  central  banks  that  target
inflation—the Bank of Canada is one example—seem to react to short-run exchange rate fluctuations
more frequently, sometimes guided by a monetary index, partly with the aim of  stabilising  markets
and expectations. Their behaviour in this respect is more reminiscent of how the Riksbank acted in the
early stage of the flexible exchange rate regime. The operations of other central banks, in the UK and
Australia, for instance, are more  akin  to  the  Riksbank’s  current  practice.  Comparisons  of  exchange
rate  fluctuations  in  different  countries  with  a  flexible  exchange  rate  provide  little  evidence  of  any
clear  effects  from  differences  in  the  monetary  policy  strategies.  The  Canadian  dollar,  for  example,
does not seem to have been more stable even though the Bank of Canada has focused more on the
monetary conditions and made greater use of interventions.
BIS Review   48/1999
2
Forces behind the flexibles exchange rate
At the time of the departure from the krona’s fixed exchange rate in November 1992, the real trade-
weighted  exchange  rate  was  overvalued.  Inflation  in  Sweden  had  been  higher  than  elsewhere  for  a
considerable period and this had successively eroded competitiveness.
When the flexible regime was introduced, the krona depreciated markedly; in the first six months the
nominal  TCW  index  weakened  about  20  per  cent.  In  that  inflation  in  Sweden  had  already  been
brought more or less into line with the rest of the world and there were signs of expectations that it
would  remain  relatively  low,  such  a  marked  nominal  depreciation  exceeded  what  was  needed  to
restore a reasonable competitive situation. Having previously been overvalued, the real exchange rate
accordingly swung abruptly to an undervalued level and remained there for a long time.
Other  currencies  that  had  been  obliged  to  float  in  connection  with  the  crisis  in  1992—the  Finnish
markka and the Italian lira—also weakened more than was motivated by long-term considerations.
Gradual stabilisation
A  major  factor  behind  the  krona’s  initial  depreciation  was  no  doubt  uncertainty  about  the  Swedish
economy  and  economic  policy.  The  grave  problems  with  government  finances,  together  with
uncertainty about inflation’s future path, contributed to this.
In the early years with the flexible exchange rate the path of the krona was less susceptible to current
inflation  or  demand.  A  simple  regression  analysis  shows  that  the  confidence  of  market  agents  in
Swedish economic policy and price stability—measured as the long-term interest rate differential with
Germany—can  explain  almost  a  third  of  the  nominal  exchange  rate’s  variability  since  1992.  In  the
period from 1994 to 1996 the swings in credibility, measured in this way, actually explain almost two-
thirds of the exchange rate movements.
In  this  uncertain  environment,  with  a  lack  of  credibility,  the  impact  of  international  turbulence  on
Swedish  interest  rates  and  the  exchange  rate  was  accentuated.  The  nervous  mood  in  international
financial markets in connection with the Federal Reserve’s monetary tightening in 1994 and the crisis
in  Mexico  at  the  end  of  that  year  added  to  the  krona’s  depreciation  and  widened  interest  rate
differentials. A similar pattern was observed in  other  countries  with  a  history  of  high  inflation  and
problems  with  government  finances—all  the  high-interest  countries  were  treated  in  much  the  same
way.
The  situation  in  Sweden’s  financial  markets  then  improved  as  the  measures  for  consolidating
government  finances  began  to  bite,  prospects  for  Sweden’s  economy  brightened  and  international
developments  became  more  stable.  During  1995  the  Swedish  krona  became  markedly  stronger  and
long-term  interest  rates  declined.  This  trend  continued  during  1996,  when  the  Riksbank  rapidly
lowered the repo rate. At the end of 1996 the level of the TCW exchange rate index was 114, which
was inside the Riksbank’s estimated interval for long-term equilibrium.
For  about  two  years,  from  the  summer  of  1996  to  the  summer  of  1998,  the  krona  stayed  inside  a
relatively narrow interval in relation to the German mark, about 3  per  cent  around  a  mean  level  of
4,40. In effective TCW terms, however, the krona weakened. There are good reasons for supposing
that  this  was  due  to  other  factors  than  problems  with  credibility.  The  link  between  exchange  rate
movements and the long-term interest rate differential was no longer discernible, which indicates that
the krona’s path now had less to do with aspects of credibility. The main explanation for the weaker
exchange rate in this period lay rather in cyclical differences. Stronger economic growth in the UK
and the United States caused the dollar and sterling to appreciate against the krona.
Turbulent autumn
In the autumn of 1998 the krona weakened again, mainly, in the Riksbank’s opinion, on account of
international  turbulence.  Growing  financial  problems  during  1998,  culminating  after  Russia’s
3
BIS Review   48/1999
suspension  of  debt  payments  and  the  near  failure  of  an  American  hedge  fund,  increased  the  risk
aversion of international investors and prompted a flight to more secure assets. This hit the krona even
though the economic fundamentals in Sweden were mostly good. One reason why the general increase
in risk premia weakened the  krona  was  probably  the  persistently  high  level  of  external  debt.  Other
countries with large foreign debts were similarly affected. In Sweden’s case, however, some part was
also played by domestic factors; the krona tended to weaken, for example, at the time of the general
election in September.
When  the  financial  market  turbulence  then  subsided  around  the  turn  of  last  year,  the  krona
strengthened once more. This suggested that low inflation and the rapid consolidation of government
finances were again playing a relatively larger part in exchange rate movements. The stronger krona
also  had  to  do  with  political  signals  early  this  year  of  Sweden’s  adherence  to  the  monetary  union.
Market players believed that the euro conversion rate for the krona would be stronger than the current
market rate and that reinforced the krona’s appreciation.
During the discussion about the krona’s depreciation during 1998 there were two arguments that call
for some comments.
One  argument  was  that  the  krona  weakened  relative  to  the  German  mark  on  account  of  structural
problems  in  Sweden.  The  Swedish  economy  is  unquestionably  beset  by  problems  of  a  structural
nature  and  it  is  not  inconceivable  that  a  link  exists  between  the  exchange  rate  and  some  of  these
problems, for example the structure of taxation. If it is true that the lack of industrial renewal which
seems to be discernible in the statistics from the Seventies and Eighties still applies, this is another
factor that can affect the exchange rate. The discussion would benefit, however, from more specific
arguments and a thorough analysis. For one thing, it is by no means clear that the structural problems
in Sweden are so much greater than those in Germany, for example, that this could account for the
krona’s  depreciation  against  the  German  mark.  For  another,  it  seems  remarkable  that  long-term
problems of this kind would affect the exchange rate so suddenly.
Another argument ascribes the weakening of the krona to discrepancies between Sweden’s inflation
target and the monetary policy strategy of the ECB. This, too, seems unlikely. The monetary policy
differences seem to be slight. Since the beginning of the Nineties, moreover, inflation in Sweden has
been below the EU average; in recent years this situation has been accentuated, with Sweden as one
of the countries with the lowest inflation in Europe.
In conclusion, it can be noted that for much of the period with a flexible exchange rate the krona has
been  weaker  than  was  considered  desirable.  In  the  early  years  this  was  mainly  due  to  a  lack  of
confidence in economic policy. In the period since the krona’s recovery in 1995 to ‘96, however, the
exchange rate has been comparatively stable, except during the widespread turbulence in connection
with last autumn’s international financial crisis. But even with today’s relatively strong government
finances and low inflation, a flexible exchange rate does seem to entail exchange rate fluctuations that
are greater than many of us believed when the krona fell in the autumn of 1992. This is an experience
we share with other countries that target inflation in a flexible exchange rate regime, for example the
UK, Canada and Australia.
Sweden’s participation in ERM2
The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  revived  the  question  of  Sweden’s  adherence  to  the  economic  and
monetary union. Political statements and a more positive opinion at times have led some observers to
talk of the possibility of Sweden joining the euro area as early as from 1 January 2002, after a Social
Democrat Congress next spring followed by a referendum later in the year.
This in turn has led to talk of Sweden joining the new European exchange rate mechanism ERM2.
The matter is being increasingly discussed in market letters and the media and that is why I want to
consider some of its aspects with you this evening.
BIS Review   48/1999
4
The Riksdag (Sweden’s parliament) has already stated that membership of ERM2 can be regarded as
a direct preparatory step before entry into the monetary union. The Government may therefore raise
the question of membership of the fixed exchange rate mechanism when  future  participation  in  the
monetary union is judged to be imminent.
Government decides exchange rate system, the Riksbank its application
As  regards  ERM2,  what  are  the  Government  and  the  Riksbank,  respectively,  responsible  for?  The
Riksbank Act, amended as of 1999, states that the exchange rate system is decided by the Government
and applied by the Riksbank. This is the same arrangement as in virtually the whole of Europe. The
decision  as  to  whether  and  when  the  krona  is  to  be  linked  to  ERM2  is  thus  a  matter  for  the
Government.  The  Riksbank  in  turn  determines  how  the  exchange  rate  system  chosen  by  the
Government  is  to  be  applied,  which  involves  setting  the  central  rate  and  band  width  in  a  fixed
exchange rate system and deciding any interventions.
In  practice,  if  Sweden  is  to  participate  in  ERM2,  the  law  requires  the  involvement  of  both  the
Government  and  the  Riksbank.  They  must  also  agree  on  the  conditions.  Moreover,  ERM2
membership would not be decided unilaterally by Sweden; it is something that has to be negotiated
with the other EU countries.
n the event of Sweden wishing to join ERM2, what would be the procedure? The negotiations would
be  conducted  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Committee,  which  has  succeeded  the  Monetary
Committee. Each country is represented there at the level of under-secretary in the Finance Ministry
and central bank deputy governor.
Experience  shows  that  in  the  process  of  arriving  at  a  reasonable  central  rate,  the  factors  which  are
considered  include  the  country’s  macroeconomic  situation,  various  indicators  of  its  competitive
position,  the  exchange  rate’s  historical  path  and  its  average  levels  in  recent  years.  When  other
currencies have been linked to the exchange rate mechanism, this has usually been done either at or
fairly close to the prevailing market rate.
ERM membership could stabilise exchange rate expectations
A  factor  of  importance  for  participation  in  the  euro  area  is  the  krona’s  stability.  Membership  of
ERM2 could also facilitate Sweden’s entrance to the monetary union.
It may therefore be appropriate to say something about the timing of an adherence to ERM2. This, as I
mentioned,  is  a  matter  for  the  Government  to  decide.  In  the  Spring  Budget  the  Government  has
declared that participation in ERM2 is not being considered at present.
The  choice  of  an  entry  date  presumably  depends  in  part  on  the  duration  of  ERM  membership  that
other  countries  expect  from  Sweden  before  qualifying  for  participation  in  the  euro  area.  Another
central consideration is whether ERM membership as such can contribute to exchange rate stability
and  smooth  the  path  to  the  euro  area.  In  my  opinion,  ERM2  membership  could  help  to  stabilise
exchange rate expectations if and when it is clear that Sweden does intend to join the euro area. That
in  turn  would  simplify  the  krona’s  conversion  into  euro.  At  the  same  time,  I  believe  this  would
presuppose a reasonably balanced economic situation in Sweden, with strong confidence in economic
policy, as well as broad political support for ERM2 membership.
While there may be some cause for concern about conflicts between an exchange rate target in ERM2
and the direct inflation target, this risk should not be exaggerated. The broad bands for the exchange
rate mechanism, together with experience in other countries in the run-up to the monetary union, show
that no serious conflicts need arise.
If market players are confident that the central rate in ERM2 will be chosen as the conversion rate for
participation in the euro area—as they have every reason to be in that this was the case for each of the
5
BIS Review   48/1999
eleven countries that currently make up the monetary union—then the krona’s market rate is unlikely
to deviate all that much from its central rate. This was clearly the case for the currencies that have
already been converted into euro. Once it was clear, for example, that Finland would be joining the
euro area, the markka remained stable and very close to its central rate.
In practice this would mean that during ERM membership, Swedish interest rates with relatively long
maturities would converge on the levels that apply in the euro area. As the date for joining the union
approaches,  the  very  short  market  rates  would  be  increasingly  affected.  This  would  successively
reduce the Riksbank’s possibilities of influencing domestic inflation prospects with the repo rate.
The SEK/EUR exchange rate
Another item in the discussion in financial markets is the rate at which the krona would be converted
if Sweden were to join the euro area. There may therefore be reason to also say something about this.
Arriving at an appropriate conversion rate is not a simple matter. It involves trying to pin down many
complex economic relationships and assessing the future long-term paths of various central variables.
Estimates of the long-term equilibrium exchange rate
For several years now we have been engaged at the Riksbank in analysing the krona’s fundamental
value  and  the  likely  path  of  the  exchange  rate  in  the  somewhat  longer  term.  This  work  has  been
needed  quite  apart  from  the  question  of  future  ERM  membership,  for  instance  as  a  contribution  to
assessments  of  the  exchange  rate’s  importance  for  inflation  prospects.  The  study  results  provide
information about the direction and approximate strength of the krona’s future trend.
An assessment of the appropriate value for the krona in the event of ERM membership can start by
considering  what  the  exchange  rate  would  be  if  the  Swedish  economy  were  in  macroeconomic
equilibrium. This is a situation were resources are fully utilised without generating  higher  inflation
and the level of external debt is such that the economy can cope with it in the longer run. Some years
ago we published estimates of the exchange rate in this equilibrium; we also indicated an interval for
the real TCW exchange rate index that has subsequently been cited by many journalists and market
players. Estimates of that type are not, however, a direct guide to the krona exchange rate that would
be appropriate for ERM2 membership. Other factors that have to be considered include the economic
situation in Sweden and the rest of the world. Moreover, the estimates are expressed in terms of the
TCW  index,  which  covers  all  the  rates  for  Sweden’s  foreign  trade,  not  just  the  euro  area.  The
assessment must also allow for the fact that, at least in the coming years, the Swedish economy will
not be in long-term equilibrium, which implies both internal and external balance. It should also be
borne in mind that however sophisticated, calculations of this type do not yield precise results.
In  recent  months  the  TCW  index  has  fluctuated  between  124  and  125.  This  is  some  way  from  the
estimated  long-term  equilibrium  range.  The  main  conclusion  from  our  earlier  studies—that  in  the
longer run it is reasonable to expect the krona to strengthen—still holds. But it does seem reasonable
to count on this being a gradual process that emerges as the economy approaches a situation with both
internal  and  external  balance.  On  various  occasions  in  recent  years  it  has  turned  out  that  we  were
over-optimistic about the adjustment’s future rate. Perhaps we have also made less than full allowance
for the imbalances that remain even though the economy is developing well in the right direction. The
Swedish economy still has unutilised resources and external debt is both high and above the level in
many other countries.
The major part of Sweden’s external debt accumulated in  the  Seventies  and  Eighties  in  connection
with  large  and  continuous  current-account  deficits.  Such  deficits  need  not  be  a  problem  if,  for
example, they stem from high investment. In those decades, however, they were mainly generated by
unduly high consumption. As a result, a proportion of our gross domestic product has to be reserved
today for servicing foreign debt. The economy’s capital stock and production capacity are not larger
than they would have been without the debt burden. Neither can the current-account deficits and low
saving be attributed to demographic factors.
BIS Review   48/1999
6
Since the krona’s depreciation in 1992, the current account has shown sizeable surpluses. They reflect
the  combination  of  good  export  growth  and  a  markedly  subdued  increase  in  domestic  demand;  the
latter  came  in  turn  from  a  series  of  years  with  high  interest  rates  and  the  extensive  measures  to
consolidate government finances. The financial surpluses are reasonable in view of the large interest
burden  from  high  external  debt  and  the  circumstance  that  some  way  into  the  next  century  the
economically active proportion of Sweden’s population will be shrinking. The adjustment of external
debt will no doubt require continued current-account surpluses in the years ahead, which presupposes
that the krona is weaker than its long-term equilibrium level. Moreover, the domestic demand trend
needs to be balanced to prevent it from generating unduly high inflation. As central government debt
is sizeable, it is also important that fiscal restraint continues, with the focus on debt repayment.
However, a continuation of current-account surpluses of the magnitude we have seen in recent years
is  not  to  be  expected.  As  domestic  demand  strengthens,  the  economy  approaches  full  capacity
utilisation  and  the  monetary  stance  accordingly  becomes  less  expansionary,  the  krona  should
appreciate, accompanied by diminishing surpluses on the current account.
You would, of course, like to know the rate at which the krona would be  linked  to  the  euro  in  the
event of Sweden opting to join the monetary union. Unfortunately it is still too early to answer that
question.  The  rate  will  depend,  for  example,  on  Sweden’s  competitive  position  relative  to  the
countries that have already adopted the euro. We would also have reason to aim for a central rate that
puts  the  Swedish  economy  on  the  right  track  and  promotes  a  continued  adjustment  to  internal  and
external  balance.  The  optimum  central  rate  might  differ  somewhat—though  probably  not  all  that
much—from  the  market  rate  in  the  event  of  Sweden  joining  ERM2  if,  for  instance,  Sweden’s
monetary  policy  and  cyclical  position  were  to  deviate  from  the  euro  countries’  prior  to  Swedish
actually  joining  the  monetary  union.  Such  a  difference  would  also  be  motivated  if  the  market  rate
were to be affected by short-term shocks in financial markets.
In  the  light  of  what  we  know  today,  however,  the  direction  of  the  krona’s  path  seems  to  be  clear:
ERM2 membership, if it occurs, will be arranged at an exchange rate that is stronger than the recent
level.
7
BIS Review   48/1999
