Mr  Hayami  reports  on  recent  monetary  and  economic  conditions  in  Japan  and  elucidates
progress toward the reconstruction of Japan’s financial system
Speech by the Governor of the Bank of Japan, Mr Masaru Hayami, at the Research Institute of Japan
in Tokyo on 18 March 1999.
I.  Introduction1
It is a great honor to be invited to the Research Institute of Japan and have the opportunity to speak to
you.
I will begin with a brief outline of recent monetary policy management and then give my thoughts on
today’s topic, the progress toward the revitalization of Japan’s financial system.
II.  Recent Monetary Policy Management
Monetary Easing in February 1999
On February 12, the Bank of Japan decided to conduct a further monetary easing. The new guideline
for the Bank’s money market operations is to “encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to
move  as  low  as  possible”  while  giving  due  consideration  to  avoiding  excessive  volatility  in  the
markets.
Let me review the economic situation at the time of the decision. The pace of economic deterioration
had  been  moderating  since  last  autumn,  supported  by  the  increase  in  public  investment.  However,
economic activities in the private sector remained sluggish, and business and consumer sentiment was
persistently  weak.  Moreover,  the  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates  and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen
against the U.S. dollar since the end of last year had added to the downside risk to the economy. There
was  concern  that,  if  these  trends  continued,  the  economic  deterioration  would  not  come  to  a  halt,
possibly accelerating once again in the future. In light of these developments, the Bank judged that it
would be appropriate to give maximum support to economic activity through monetary policy.
There have been some changes in the financial market since the monetary easing. The overnight call
rate has fallen, recently to close to zero percent, reflecting the Bank’s provision of ample funds to the
market. Money market interest rates on instruments with relatively long maturities, such as one month
and three months, have also declined considerably. In addition, long-term interest rates have marked a
clear decline, although the monetary easing was probably not the only factor involved. The yen has
generally followed a downward trend. Stock prices, as measured by the Nikkei 225 Stock Average,
have recovered to around \16,000. We believe that, if these trends in the financial markets continue,
they  will  influence  the  economy  positively  through  an  improvement  in  returns  on  investment,  a
further alleviation of the fund-raising conditions of financial institutions and firms, and a recovery in
business and household confidence.
Concurrently,  measures  such  as  the  injection  of  public  funds  into  major  banks  are  likely  to  further
advance the reconstruction of Japan’s financial system. Also, the effects of the emergency economic
package are expected to come out more fully. I strongly hope that the Bank’s latest monetary easing,
combined with these policy measures, will give substantial support to economic activity.
Given the recent drop in the overnight call rate to close to zero, some market participants have come
to think that the Bank of Japan has decided to employ an approach different from past easings, a so-
called  quantitative  monetary  expansion.  What  I  would  like  to  emphasize  is  that  interest  rates  and
quantity of money are like two sides of the same coin. It is only natural for the Bank to expect the
                                                     
1 This article is excerpted and translated from the speech given in Japanese.
1
BIS Review   46/1999
latest monetary easing to lead to an increase in money stock and other monetary aggregates through
changes in the behavior of financial institutions and in demand for funds. And this is nothing more
than the normal transmission that the Bank expected with any interest rate cut in the past.
The Bank’s intention has merely been to carry out money market operations in accordance with the
current  monetary  policy  guideline  decided  by  the  Policy  Board,  which  states  that  the  Bank  should
encourage the uncollateralized overnight call rate to “move as low as possible.” Of course, the Bank
will  continue  to  closely  study  other  possible  ways  of  managing  monetary  policy.  I  would  like  to
emphasize,  however,  that  at  present  the  target  of  policy  management  is,  as  it  has  always  been,  the
overnight  call  rate,  and  that  the  Bank’s  aim  now  is  to  bring  this  rate  down  to  as  low  a  level  as
possible.
In  inducing  declines  in  the  overnight  call  rate,  the  Bank  is  giving,  and  will  continue  to  give,  due
consideration to the maintenance of market functions. The recent decline in the overnight call rate has
encouraged  institutional  investors  to  shift  part  of  their  funds  to  ordinary  deposits  at  banks,  thereby
causing an approximately 20 percent decrease in the outstanding transaction volume of the call money
market. Fortunately, this contraction of the call money market has not hindered smooth settlement of
funds. However, considering the recent big changes in the flow of funds, it will be necessary for the
Bank  to  carefully  monitor  market  developments  to  make  sure  that  they  do  not  impair  the  proper
functioning of the money market.
Problems  Associated  with  Government  Bond  Operations  by  a  Central  Bank  —  Underwriting
and Increasing of Outright Purchases
A number of people have suggested that the Bank underwrite Japanese government bonds (JGBs) or
increase  its  outright  purchase  of  JGBs  in  easing  monetary  policy.  As  I  have  repeatedly  stated,
however, it is totally unacceptable for a central bank to adopt measures that could lead to unlimited
financing of the fiscal deficit or ones that could be interpreted as such.
As  you  know,  the  Bank’s  basic  stance  on  the  outright  purchase  of  JGBs  is  to  keep  the  amount  of
operations  roughly  in  line  with  the  long-term  trend  in  increase  in  banknotes.  At  present,  such
operations are carried out twice a month, each in the amount of \200 billion.
If the Bank were to change its stance and expand the outright purchase of JGBs without limit, it could
very well result in the loss of fiscal discipline, just as could happen with the Bank’s underwriting of
JGBs.
If  a  central  bank  made  unlimited  purchases  of  JGBs,  the  government  would  of  course  have  no
difficulty in funding its fiscal deficit no matter how massive. This would encourage both the public
and private sectors to rely on greater-than-necessary stimulative measures financed by a large-scale
issuance of JGBs even at the slightest sign of weakness in the economic outlook. Should such massive
JGB issuance continue, Japan’s economy would only end up having a massive fiscal deficit and an
extremely weak supply side in the private sector.
Various shocks are inherent in an economy. Even though there is no need at the moment to consider
the risk of inflation, we cannot rule out the possibility of some kind of a “demand shock” occurring
over the longer term, such as a plunge of the yen and a tightening of global market conditions. If such
a shock hits the economy when the supply side of the economy is feeble, firms will be apt to seek
desperately the few skilled workers capable of handling new technology, rush to secure rare materials,
or race to invest in plants and equipment in order to seize suddenly appearing business opportunities.
Supply  shortage,  by  fueling  such  a  nervous  psychology,  might  intensify  inflationary  pressure  even
before  economic  conditions  improve  noticeably.  To  contain  such  inflationary  pressure,  it  would  be
necessary  to  drastically  tighten  monetary  policy.  As  a  result,  the  economy  would  be  forced  to  go
through severe adjustments.
BIS Review   46/1999
2
The risk of inflation causing a wide swing of the economy can only materialize in the distant future,
but the Bank of Japan, being responsible for maintaining price stability, must always be fully alert to
such a risk. It is this strong commitment to maintaining price stability over time that makes monetary
policy that could lead to the loss of fiscal discipline unacceptable.
It may be argued that the Bank should disregard the possibility of future inflation at such a time when
Japan’s economy is plagued by the risk of deflation. On this point, I would like to stress that the Bank
of Japan shares the view that inflation is not at all an immediate threat. We are fully aware that the top
priority for Japan’s economy at present is to dispel the deflationary psychology. It is precisely for this
purpose that the Bank further relaxed its monetary policy in February, and the Bank believes that as of
now it has taken all necessary measures. The Bank is also determined to maintain an easy monetary
policy stance until the economy gets back on a steady recovery path.
In doing so, the Bank of Japan will avoid employing monetary policy measures that might encourage
unwarranted  expansion  of  the  fiscal  deficit,  with  unwelcome  results  of  some  kind  in  the  future.
Instead,  the  Bank  will  underpin  economic  activity  on  the  monetary  front  while  maintaining  the
discipline of a central bank at all times. The reason independence is essential to a central bank is that
it is expected to act constantly with a view to stabilizing even the future value of money, not being
swayed  by  short-sighted  concerns.  The  Bank  believes  that  what  it  should  do  now  is  to  provide  the
market with ample funds and, at the same time, take great care to avoid the risk of future inflation.
The Importance of Structural Reform
What needs to be done for Japan’s economy today is to strengthen the supply side of the economy by
restoring the productivity of the private sector, which declined after the collapse of the “bubble.” This
should be achieved while monetary and fiscal policies are underpinning the economy, which means
that the time limit may not be so far away. If policies to stimulate aggregate demand continued to be
implemented without any progress in structural reforms that should renew the private sector, Japan’s
economy would become increasingly inefficient and its productivity would decline further. Such an
economy  would  be  vulnerable  to  shocks  that  could  lead  to  vicious  inflation.  In  order  to  achieve
sustainable  economic  growth  without  people  anticipating  inflation,  the  private  sector  should  be
continually revitalized through innovations and expansion of business frontiers. One obvious example
of this is the U.S. economy, which has enjoyed eight years of uninterrupted expansion.
Firms in various industries are becoming increasingly decisive in disposing of the “negative legacies”
inherited from the “bubble” economy in their accounting-year-end settlement in March 1999. These
moves can be taken as indicating firms’ determination to launch drastic restructuring, and the Bank
considers them as a necessary step for reviving the economy. If these efforts to part from the past are
accompanied by moves to enhance future activity, it should lead to the ideal picture, in which both
structural adjustment of industry and an overall economic recovery are achieved smoothly.
The problem, as things stand today, is the persistence of the risk that the rapid disposal of “negative
legacies” will proceed in the absence of sufficient constructive moves, strengthening the deflationary
tone of the economy. However, various efforts are starting to be made by firms and the government
toward structural reform, and I hope such efforts will gradually bear fruit.
The  dynamic  process  of  divesting  the  economy  of  its  old  systems  and  giving  birth  to  new  ones
unavoidably involves great uncertainties. Therefore, it is also essential to reconstruct Japan’s financial
system as promptly as possible to support the activities of firms facing this dynamic process.
Bearing in mind the significance of financial system reconstruction, I would now like to talk about the
Bank’s thoughts on this issue.
3
BIS Review   46/1999
III. Progress Toward the Reconstruction of Japan’s Financial System
A.  The Current Condition of Japan’s Financial System
It  has  been  approximately  nine  years  since  Japanese  stock  prices  peaked  in  late  1989  and
approximately seven years since land prices began to fall. Meanwhile, a vast amount of money has
been used to tackle the nonperforming-loan problem of financial institutions. It is truly regrettable that
this problem has not been completely resolved as yet.
Today, the linkage between financial markets in Japan and abroad has strengthened significantly due
to the unprecedentedly rapid globalization and computerization of financial services. Therefore, once
a  shock  arises  in  one  market,  there  is  very  serious  risk  that  it  will  infect  other  markets.  This  is
precisely  why  not  only  Japan  but  also  other  countries  desire  an  early  solution  of  Japan’s
nonperforming-loan problem and the restoration of the credibility of Japan’s financial system.
Needless to say, the parties concerned have made very great efforts to resolve the problem. In fact,
with the enactment of the Financial Function Reconstruction Law and the Financial Function Early
Strengthening Law of 1998, great progress has been made in establishing an institutional framework.
The stage is now set for the actual task of unflinchingly cleaning up the nonperforming loans.
I have repeatedly stressed the need for enhancing the capital base of Japanese financial institutions,
based  on  my  thinking  that  the  fundamental  issue  behind  the  deterioration  in  the  credibility  of
individual institutions and the financial system as a whole is insufficient capital. In this regard, I truly
appreciate the government’s decision to inject large amounts of public funds into major banks as a
significant step toward restoring the credibility of financial institutions. This alone, however, is not
enough  to  solve  the  problem.  The  Bank  strongly  hopes  and  expects  that  financial  institutions  will
continue  to  do  their  utmost  to  remove  nonperforming  loans  from  their  balance  sheets  and  also  to
restructure their businesses within the context of the restructuring of the entire financial sector.
In  the  past  several  years,  the  United  States  and  Europe  have  witnessed  large-scale  mergers  and
business  tie-ups  of  financial  institutions,  which  illustrate  the  dynamic  competition  in  the  global
financial market. There have been mergers and alliances across business and national boundaries in
efforts to respond to European unification or to enter new business areas. Meanwhile, similar moves
in  Japan  have  been  limited.  However,  the  very  recent  trend  toward  diverse  alliances  and
reorganizations,  which  was  in  part  triggered  by  the  injection  of  public  funds,  merits  attention.  It  is
clear that financial services are becoming greatly diversified driven by deregulation and innovation in
information  technology.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  management  of  financial  institutions  is
required more than ever to establish effective strategies for selection of areas in which they can find
comparative advantage and invest management resources, and for efficient supplementation of their
weak  business  areas.  In  order  to  achieve  corporate  objectives,  it  may  be  more  effective  in  certain
instances  not  to  limit  alliance  partners  to  Japanese  institutions.  These  considerations,  in  my  view,
should lead to still greater reorganization of the global financial community.
B.  Lessons Learned from Experience
One of the most important issues for Japan today is how to establish an efficient and stable financial
system that can fully perform financial intermediation as well as other functions required in the 21st
century.  Japan  is  still  in  the  process  of  resolving  the  nonperforming-loan  problem.  Therefore,  the
lessons  that  will  ultimately  be  learned  from  it  is  not  yet  known.  Nevertheless,  I  believe  it  is
meaningful  to  go  over  the  lessons  we  have  learned  to  date  from  our  experiences  in  order  to
successfully build a new financial system.
BIS Review   46/1999
4
In my view, we have learned that Japan should have reviewed its principles to place emphasis on risk
management  and  should  have  utilized  the  market  mechanism  much  sooner  than  it  actually  did,  in
response to the changes in the conditions surrounding financial industry. Now, in order to catch up
with the rest of the world, Japan needs to accelerate this review of principles.
The first concrete factor behind the delay in the review of principles was the inadequacy of the risk
management  systems  of  Japanese  financial  institutions.  During  the  “bubble”  economy  in  the  late
1980s,  Japanese  financial  institutions  expanded  their  lending  in  pursuit  of  larger  profits  without
satisfactory risk management systems. In retrospect, the insufficient scrutiny of the possibility of land
price  declines  and  concentration  of  loan  exposure  to  the  real  estate-related  industry  were
manifestations  of  the  absence  of  basic  credit  risk  management.  During  this  period,  major  financial
institutions overseas were in fierce competition to improve their risk management techniques not only
for credit risk but also for market risk. The great damage Japanese financial institutions suffered after
the collapse of the “bubble” economy merely exposed their inadequate risk management.
The second factor was the ineffectiveness of the market’s checks and balances, or put another way,
the deficiency of a system that should encourage the working of this mechanism. One reason for this
was  the  extremely  cautious  stance  of  the  parties  concerned  toward  disclosure.  For  example,  the
prevalent view until not so long ago was that disclosing the amount of nonperforming loans required
careful  consideration  because  it  might  destabilize  the  financial  system.  The  accounting  system  and
accounting  practices  have  also  tended  to  obscure  the  actual  business  condition  of  financial
institutions. These increased the opaqueness of management of financial institutions and, contrary to
the  expectations  of  the  parties  concerned,  spurred  the  deterioration  in  the  credibility  of  Japan’s
financial system as a whole.
The  third  factor  was  the  monetary  authorities’  insufficient  response  to  the  changes  in  the  financial
markets.  We  had  historically  relied  on  detailed  regulations  and  one-on-one  guidance  to  financial
institutions  in  maintaining  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  It  is  true  that  these  methods  had
worked for a long time. However, it also seems that they allowed Japanese financial institutions to be
indifferent  to  risk  management  and  to  their  own  responsibilities,  and  encouraged  their  “do-as-
everyone-else-does” philosophy.
Under  this  so-called  “convoy  system,”  Japanese  financial  institutions  offered  very  similar  financial
services. It is a fact that there was little incentive to differentiate themselves from their rivals. There
was no competition, and even if a financial institution developed a new product, the regulatory system
tended to prevent the innovator profiting as he deserved.
The conventional principles might have remained viable, had the financial industry remained
static. However, innovation in financial technologies has been dramatic. It is no longer possible for a
fine-meshed  net  of  regulations  to  keep  up  with  the  rapidly  evolving  financial  transactions  and
markets, and to ensure unaided the soundness of financial institutions. This is why it is necessary to
establish new principles based on self-responsibility and on the market mechanism.
C.  Establishment of New Principles
1.  Issues toward April 2001
At  present,  the  Japanese  government  provides  a  comprehensive  safety  net  to  the  financial  system
effective  until  March  31,  2001.  The  safely  net  is  composed  of  (1)  a  framework  to  recapitalize
financial institutions with public funds; (2) full protection of deposits and other financial institution
liabilities; and (3) a scheme to establish bridge banks or temporarily nationalize troubled banks. These
5
BIS Review   46/1999
measures are essential given the current severe situation of the Japanese financial system. However,
we believe that unnecessary prolongation of these measures will be inappropriate, because they have
the potential of causing (1) an increase in social cost, including the amount of public funds used; (2)
moral hazard on the part of depositors and financial institutions; and (3) further delays in solving the
nonperforming-loan problem. Moreover, they are totally incompatible with the principles of Japan’s
financial “Big Bang,” which are “free, fair, and global.”
I do not mean to say that from April 1, 2001 onward resolution of financial institution failures should
in  every  case  involve  execution  of  the  so-called  “payoff,”  that  is,  payment  of  deposit  insurance
benefits. What is important as we move toward April 2001 is for individual financial institutions to
improve the quality  of  their  balance  sheets  and  strengthen  their  capital  base.  At  the  same  time,  we
must  design  and  build  a  safety  net  based  on  the  new  principles  of  financial  business,  which  I  will
discuss in more detail later, and also on the lessons learned from past examples of financial institution
failures. The scheme should incur the minimum social and economic costs, be able to promptly solve
problems, and fit the financial system of the 21st century.
2.  Emphasis on risk management
The foremost among the new principles is to place emphasis on risk management. As suggested by the
expansion  of  derivatives  transactions,  financial  transactions  are  sure  to  continue  to  undergo  rapid
changes. Especially for major banks that are exposed  to  keen  competition  in  international  financial
markets, adequate risk management will require constant efforts to keep up with financial innovation.
Needless to say, the management of financial institutions needs to fully understand the substance and
nature  of  the  information  derived  from  the  risk  management  system,  and  effectively  use  the
information in making its management decisions.
3. Utilization of the market mechanism
The second is to utilize the checks and balances of the market and to build into the financial system a
mechanism  that  ensures  the  system’s  stability.  A  prerequisite  for  this  is  disclosure  of  more
information to the market, which means more transparent financial institution management.
In  this  regard,  it  is  most  important  to  revise  the  accounting  system.  Assessment  criteria  for
nonperforming  loans  and  standards  for  loan  write-offs  and  loan-loss  provisioning  are  now  under
review. At the same time, vigorous preparations must also be made for mark-to-market  accounting,
which is soon to be introduced. The new accounting system is expected to increase the transparency
of the balance sheet of financial institutions. Furthermore, it is expected to make financial institutions
aware of the risks they are taking by helping them better understand their own financial condition.
For greater transparency of financial institution management, as the Bank has been stressing for some
time now, voluntary expansion of the scope of disclosure of an institution’s financial condition is also
important.  Enhanced  disclosure  may  at  times  mean  forcing  financial  institutions  to  reveal  their
unsolved problems. Even so, past experiences teach us that it is more effective in securing the trust of
the market to honestly admit the existence of problems and declare how such problems will be solved
than to conceal such information. It is also important for the management to explain in its own words
the management policy in order to win the trust of the market. Financial institutions should consider
disclosure not as a duty but as an opportunity to earn a  good  reputation  with  the  public,  and  make
active use of such opportunities. Once a pioneering financial institution makes such disclosure, others
will  follow  suit  or  even  improve  the  content  of  the  disclosure.  This  will  unleash  a  dynamic
competitive process.
Utilization of the market mechanism and increased sophistication of risk management will provide a
means  of  detecting  a  deterioration  in  the  health  of  financial  institutions.  It  will  therefore  not  only
BIS Review   46/1999
6
reduce the cost of regulating and supervising financial institutions but should also lessen the burden
on the safety net by preventing failures.
D.  Response of the Bank of Japan
The Bank of Japan believes that it has done its best to counter financial institutions’ nonperforming-
loan problem within the existing institutional frameworks by, among other things, fulfilling its role as
the  lender  of  last  resort.  However,  the  Bank  needs  to  continue  to  examine  unceasingly  the  role  a
central bank should play based on its experiences in battling the present financial crisis.
1.  The failure of Nippon Credit Bank
From this perspective, the first incident we should examine carefully, I believe, is the case of Nippon
Credit Bank. The temporary nationalization of this failed bank is likely to cause the Bank of Japan to
lose the \80 billion it subscribed to the bank’s capital through the New Financial Stabilization Fund.
In April 1997, when Nippon Credit Bank drew up its restructuring plan, there was no safety net with
which to deal with its management problems. Nor was there a consensus that bank debentures could
be  protected  by  the  deposit  insurance  system.  Accordingly,  there  was  a  strong  concern  that,  if  the
bank failed, it would seriously disrupt the financial system at home and abroad. The Bank of Japan
therefore made a difficult decision to use the New Financial Stabilization Fund. I believe that this was
the  only  choice  the  Bank  had  to  safeguard  the  financial  system.  Unfortunately,  subsequent
developments have made it quite probable that the money subscribed by the Bank of Japan could be
lost. The Bank regards this as a grave situation.
Based on this experience, the Bank believes that it has to further clarify its policy on the provision of
funds for the purpose of maintaining an orderly financial system. Specifically, the Bank will have to
define in more detail the criteria for assessing the fulfilment of the existing four conditions for funds
provision:  (1)  there  is  a  threat  of  systemic  risk  materializing;  (2)  there  is  no  alternative  to  the
provision of central bank funds; (3) appropriate measures will be taken to prevent moral hazard; and
(4) the financial soundness of the Bank of Japan will not be impaired. Now that a safety net, including
a scheme to enhance the capital base of institutions with public funds, is in place, the Bank of Japan
should be even more discreet in its capital subscription, or the provision of risk capital. The Bank has
learned valuable lessons from the disturbances in the financial system associated with the birth and
collapse  of  the  “bubble”  economy  and  from  its  own  responses  to  the  disturbances,  including  the
failure of Nippon Credit Bank. These lessons will always be remembered by the Bank of Japan and
referred to in making decisions in the future. I believe this is a responsibility assigned to us by the
new Bank of Japan Law, which came into effect in April 1998.
2.  Review of the Bank’s on-site examination and off-site monitoring of financial institutions
Given  the  changing  environment  surrounding  the  financial  industry  and  the  Bank’s  experiences  in
dealing  with  financial  institution  failures,  the  Bank  recognizes  the  need  to  review  its  on-site
examination  and  off-site  monitoring  of  financial  institutions  from  a  broad  perspective.  It  cannot  be
denied  that  examinations  and  monitoring  by  the  Bank  during  the  “bubble”  period  were  not  fully
successful  in  accurately  grasping  the  financial  condition  of  financial  institutions  or,  based  on  their
findings, in prompting the Bank to take necessary steps to warn other parties of the situation.
A  central  bank  implements  its  policy  through  banking  transactions.  Therefore,  its  on-site
examinations and off-site monitoring, which are designed to accurately grasp the financial condition
of individual transaction counterparties, are important starting points for execution of its policy. They
are also essential in order for the Bank to accurately identify the risks in the overall financial system
and the possibility of their materialization, and thereby prevent disruptions in the financial system.
7
BIS Review   46/1999
In  conducting  on-site  examinations,  we  will  continue  to  place  emphasis  on  the  assessment  of  the
financial strength and risk management systems of institutions. In addition, with a view to adapting to
the changing environment surrounding financial institution management, the Bank will become more
flexible  in  determining  the  frequency  of  examinations  and  will  carry  out  “targeted  examination,”
which  focuses  on  specific  areas  of  business  and  management.  The  Bank  also  intends  to  follow  the
condition  of  financial  institutions  on  a  continuous  basis  through  a  closer  integration  of  on-site
examinations and daily off-site monitoring. The Bank believes that the integration should also reduce
the regulatory burden on financial institutions.
The  Bank  will  also  make  public  as  far  as  possible  the  findings  of  its  research  and  studies  on  the
overall  financial  system  based  on  the  information  obtained  through  examinations  and  daily
monitoring. By doing so, we hope to assist the advancement of financial institutions’ risk management
techniques.
3.  Loans to the Deposit Insurance Corporation
Now, I would like to add a word on the Bank of Japan’s lending to the Deposit Insurance Corporation
(DIC). The Bank’s lending to the DIC has increased significantly reflecting the massive funding needs
of  the  DIC  in  proceeding  with  the  resolution  of  the  nonperforming-loan  problem  of  financial
institutions. Moreover, it has become very likely that this loan exposure will be fixed for an extended
period  of  time.  The  very  function  of  a  central  bank  is  to  implement  monetary  policy  through  the
purchase and sale of short-term, liquid financial assets. A sizable increase in fixed assets might not
only  cause  concern  about  a  deterioration  in  the  central  bank’s  assets  but  also  become  a  great
impediment to the execution of monetary policy and money market operations. The Bank therefore
regards the problem to be a very serious one. It is extremely unusual by international standards for a
central bank to provide funds to facilitate the operation of the deposit insurance system. In fact, there
has been no such case in the major industrialized countries. Therefore, the Bank of Japan believes that
the DIC, in raising funds, should first turn to the private sector and, for example, issue bonds, limiting
its borrowing from the Bank of Japan to a bare minimum.
Needless to say, given the present condition of the Japanese financial system, the Bank of Japan will
not hesitate to provide short-term funds necessary for the smooth operation of the DIC. However, for
the reasons I have just described, I wish to stress that the DIC should first seek to raise funds through
means other than Bank of Japan loans, and make it clear that central bank money can be used only as
temporary  bridge  funds.  In  order  to  avoid  taking  on  long-term  fixed  assets,  the  Bank  of  Japan  is
deliberating whether to review the lending rate applied to the DIC, which to date has been the same as
the official discount rate, to reflect the lending rates charged by private financial institutions.
Conclusion
The Japanese financial system has been in an unprecedented crisis. This can be viewed as a painful
process of transformation of the financial sector from a heavily protected to a  competitive  industry
that generates new know-how and income.
The path of this transformation will not be smooth. However, emerging moves on the part of financial
institutions to undertake decisive restructuring and reorganization, and the fact that these institutions
still possess sufficient potential in terms of management resources, including human resources, firmly
convince me that it will not be too long before they revive as a fully competitive industry, in terms of
quality rather than quantity, and driven by foresight rather than hindsight.
BIS Review   46/1999
8
