Mr Clementi comments on UK financial services following the launch of the euro
Speech  by  Mr  David  Clementi,  a  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  Economist
Conference in London on 23 April 1999.
It is a great pleasure to be here this morning. My announced topic – UK financial services following
the launch of the euro - is obviously a large one. But ambition is a fine thing, and so not content with
just that, I want also to say a little about the wider forces – especially technological change – which
are shaping changes in financial services markets and institutions everywhere, not just in Europe.
The importance of financial services to the UK economy is enormous, and I do not need to devote
much  time  to  underlining  it.  Financial  services  are  a  major  invisible  export  and  contribute  a
substantial proportion of GDP. The UK does more foreign exchange business, more OTC derivatives
business, more international bank lending, more bond origination and trading, and more equity fund
management  than  any  other  country.  Personally,  I  have  no  doubt  that  –  provided  we  are  not
complacent  -  the  UK  will  retain  its  dominant  position  for  the  foreseeable  future.  But  that  said,  the
nature  of  the  financial  markets  in  which  UK–based  practitioners  have  to  operate  will  certainly
continue to change.
The plan for my march through this difficult terrority is as follows. First, by way  of  background,  I
want to say a bit about the “new” Bank’s role in relation to the financial services sector. Following
the  arrival  of  monetary  independence,  and  the  departure  of  banking  supervision  and  debt
management,  what  exactly  is  our  interest,  as  central  bankers,  in  the  way  financial  services  evolve?
After that I will talk a bit about some of the forces which are working to produce fairly rapid change
in the financial services landscape.
One of these forces – and certainly one of the most prominent just at this moment - is the advent of
the euro. So I will undertake a spot of crystal ball gazing, and try to assess how financial markets in
Europe may develop over the next ten to fifteen years, and what this means in terms of opportunities
and challenges for UK financial services. It is in the nature of an assessment of this kind that a good
deal of it may turn out to be wrong. But making judgements about an uncertain future is part of any
business, and there is no reason why central bankers should shy away from it more than anyone else,
so long as the uncertainties involved are acknowledged from the start.
Another, almost certainly more persistent, factor is the pace of technological change. Related to that,
we  are  seeing  a  trend  towards  consolidation  –  at  first  nationally,  but  now  also  internationally  –
amongst financial services providers. So I also want to make a few remarks about these factors.
Before I go into these issues in more detail, I just want to sketch out how the Bank stands in relation
to UK financial services. Obviously the changes in the Bank’s remit announced in May 1997 by the
incoming  Labour  Government,  and  largely  enshrined  in  the  1998  Bank  of  England  Act,  were
profound ones. The arrival of monetary independence meant that the work of the MPC – of which I
am one of the nine members – has scarcely been out of the news. Less obtrusively, the departure of
banking supervision to the new FSA meant the end of one substantial – though actually comparatively
recently acquired – function; and the shift of debt management to the DMO brought to an end another,
much older one.
So does the “new” Bank have a new relationship with the financial services sector?
Let me first say that, though the Bank has been through a period of profound change, its core purposes
remain  the  same.  One  is  obviously  to  promote  monetary  stability;  and  there  our  role  is  now  much
more substantial and overt. But the Bank has two more core purposes, and both relate directly to the
financial services sector.
1
BIS Review   43/1999
The first is to promote the overall stability of the UK financial system. This role is not new, though it
has recently been set out explicitly in the Memorandum of Understanding between the Bank, HMT
and the FSA. Broadly, promoting systemic stability means working to ensure that the financial system
continues to perform its key roles in support of the wider economy – settling transactions, providing
liquidity  and  allocating  savings.  In  pursuit  of  this  we  look  at  factors  affecting  the  underlying
robustness  of  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  potential  “triggers”  which,  especially  at  times  of
structural  weakness,  could  bring  on  a  crisis.  Our  remit  is  of  course  in  relation  to  the  UK  financial
system  –  but  this  work  has  a  substantial  international  dimension,  given  the  openness  of  the  UK
economy, and the international character of much of the City.
What  does  this  mean  in  practice?  The  Bank’s  financial  stability  work  include  such  things  as
overseeing the UK payments systems; analysing broader developments in the banking, securities and
insurance  sectors,  and  the  evolving  strategies  of  London’s  securities  exchanges;  looking  at
developments  in  emerging  market  economies;  and  contributing  to  the  debate  on  the  reform  of  the
international financial system. In short, the Bank’s financial stability team has to analyse and respond
to any developments – market or institutional; structural or temporary – that could threaten financial
stability.
Our  second  relevant  core  purpose  is  to  promote  the  competitiveness  of  the  UK  financial  services
sector.  This  is  not  a  lobbying  function;  we  are  concerned  with  the  promotion  of  effectiveness  and
efficiency, not the acquisition of favours. Nor is it a responsibility exercised only in respect of UK
owned  firms.  The  UK  financial  services  sector  is  more  truly  international  than  that  in  any  other
country  in  the  world.  The  Bank,  and  the  other  authorities  in  the  City,  have  an  unwavering
commitment  to  openness,  and  the  provision  of  a  level  playing  field  to  all  firms  regardless  of
nationality.
Finally, it is worth underlining that the Bank of England has an interest in the evolving structure of
financial  markets  because,  as  well  as  being  a  policy  body,  it  is  also  a  bank.  We  have  a  fairly
substantial and diverse balance sheet to manage, and that balance sheet is the basis for our financial
market operations in support of our policy responsibilities.
The  Bank  is  banker  to  the  government,  and  to  the  banking  system  as  a  whole,  and  maintains  an
operational  presence  in  various  key  financial  markets.  In  the  sterling  markets,  the  Bank  obviously
stands at the centre of the short term money markets, providing liquidity to the banking system and
thus  maintaining  control  over  short  term  interest  rates.  We  are  also,  as  managers  of  the  nation’s
foreign exchange reserves as well as various currency assets and liabilities on the Bank’s own balance
sheet,  active  in  the  foreign  exchange  and  some  foreign  bond  markets.  Finally,  although  no  longer
responsible  for  debt  management,  we  retain  an  operational  capability  in  the  gilts  market,  again
primarily  to  manage  our  balance  sheet  and  provide  services  to  customers.  Being  close  to
developments  in  these  markets  provides  a  vital  source  of  information  used  in  the  pursuit  of  our
financial stability, as well as monetary policy, objectives. And any operations that were, in a crisis,
needed in support of our financial stability objectives could take place in any of these markets.
Now I will turn to some of the various forces for change in the financial services industry.
First, the euro. The arrival of the euro marks a profound and almost certainly irrevocable change to
the financial landscape – perhaps the most important event in the international monetary system since
Bretton  Woods  in  1944.  Instantly,  a  major  new  reserve  currency  has  appeared;  indeed  the  euro  is
already  being  used  in  international  transactions  more  extensively  than  any  currency  other  than  the
dollar.
As the most international financial centre anywhere in the world, London’s business has already been
profoundly  affected  by  the  euro.  This  is  because,  although  the  UK  is  ‘out’,  London  is  ‘in’.  The
conversion weekend – the changeover from participating national currencies to the euro in wholesale
BIS Review   43/1999
2
markets at the beginning of this year – was one of the biggest logistical operations that the London
market has ever undertaken. It was also arguably more complex in London than in some countries in
the euro area, because London traded in all the euro area national markets, and they all changed over
to  the  euro  in  slightly  different  ways.  And,  though  hard  numbers  are  difficult  to  come  by,  we  are
confident  that  London  is  maintaining  its  market  share.  In  exchange  traded  short-term  interest  rate
derivatives – one of the few areas where we have precise figures – LIFFE has around 80% of euro
business. On the London Stock Exchange, over 40% of turnover in the first two months of this year
was in stocks of firms in the euro area. Similarly, in other markets, London’s dominance in foreign
exchange trading, OTC derivatives, fund management and bond origination means that London is the
financial centre for euro wholesale financial services. Even in the area of payment systems the UK
accounts for a significant proportion of the euro payments flowing through TARGET, even though for
us the euro is a foreign currency.
But these are just the immediate, first round effects of the euro. The more substantial challenges are
posed by the more uncertain outlook as to just how the euro markets will develop in the medium term.
So I want now just to say a little about how the euro markets may develop over the next ten to fifteen
years.
One thing to keep in mind here is that some of what may happen, though driven by events in the EU,
will  reflect  factors  beside  the  single  currency.  I  think  we  may  well  see  more  privatisation,  greater
reliance on private provision of pensions, and other structural reforms. If we do, it will significantly
affect  European,  and  hence,  euro  financial  markets.  But  such  trends  have  their  roots  in  the  more
general process of creating a single market, rather than EMU itself. Considerable progress towards a
single EU market for financial services had been made long before the euro. A considerable number
of directives are already in place, perhaps most significantly the Investment Services Directive, which
was  implemented  in  1996  and  gave  regulated  firms  and  exchanges  from  one  Member  State  a
‘passport’  to  do  business  in  another  Member  State.  I  will  now  turn  to  possible  developments  in
particular markets.
First  the  market  for  euro  area  bonds.  In  aggregate,  the  euro  area  government  bond  market  is  of  a
broadly similar size to the US Treasuries market. So it is one of the largest securities markets in the
world. It is of course not yet as fully integrated as the Treasuries market. Substantial further progress
in that direction probably depends on how quickly the various initiatives to link together Europe-wide
trading  and  settlement  systems  come  to  fruition.  And  there  are,  and  will  remain,  credit  differences
between  particular  issuers.  But  I  would  nevertheless  expect  the  market  to  become  increasingly
integrated and, with other bond markets, more sophisticated over time.
This ‘cash’ market is of course important in its own right; and London based market participants will
remain  very  big  players  in  it.  But  as  far  as  the  development  of  UK  financial  services  business  is
concerned, the other interest rate markets which spin off the government bond market may be the ones
where we see the most rapid growth, and the greatest scope for innovation. Good examples would be
the markets for repo, swaps, and other interest rate derivatives.
I  think  that  in  terms  of  new  market  opportunities,  one  of  the  most  important  areas  in  the  evolving
euro-denominated markets could be that for corporate bonds. At the moment, although the European
and US government bond markets are of comparable size, the non-government bond market in Europe
is ‘only’ a third to half the size of that in the US; and much of that is bank issued debt.
I would expect the euro corporate bond market to develop significantly in the medium term. And with
it,  I  would  expect  to  see  other  product  markets  develop,  as  they  have  elsewhere  (in  the  UK,  but
especially in the US) – for instance markets for asset backed securities and commercial paper. As part
of this I think we will see a trend to greater issuance at the lower credit end of the market (or ‘high
yield’, as it is politely named). In the euro area around 70% or corporate bond issuance is by issuers
3
BIS Review   43/1999
rated Aa2 and above. In the US, it is around 30%. I would expect that gap to close a bit, and I think
there are already signs of life in the European high yield market.
While I am on the subject of European bond markets, I would like to make just a few remarks about
the  proposed  EU  withholding  tax.  The  stated  objectives  of  the  scheme  –  reducing  tax  evasion  and
reducing  structural  unemployment  –  are  clearly  desirable  ones.  But  in  thinking  about  any  kind  of
withholding  tax  a  judgement  has  to  be  made  about  the  trade  off  between  the  efficiency  of  tax
collection and the efficiency of capital markets. In this particular case, I think the open nature of the
EU economy sets very serious limits on the proposal’s potential impact on the collection of tax, since
the same scope for avoiding tax would continue to exist outside the EU as it does at present; and it
seems unlikely that countries outside the EU area would voluntarily follow the same policy. So I think
there  is  a  very  real  danger  that  legitimate  business  would  relocate,  not  just  outside  London,  but
outside the EU, thus further undermining any economic rationale for the proposal. This does not mean
that work should not continue to see whether there are amendments to the scheme that could satisfy
the interests of all the parties involved. But the Bank continues to believe that it is important to avoid
any scheme that would damage EU financial markets.
Turning  to  equities,  I  expect  to  see  growing  emphasis  on  analysis  and  investment  according  to
European  sectors,  not  countries.  Thus  you  would  expect  to  see  investment  banks’  research
departments  focusing  more  on  pan-European  sectors,  rather  than  dividing  their  teams  on  national
lines. In many firms this is happening already.
More generally, I think we can expect to see greater “equification” in continental Europe. In the UK,
the  equity  market’s  capitalisation  is  around  165%  of  GDP.  Among  the  “ins”  it  is  generally  much
lower:  in  Germany  and  Spain  it  is  perhaps  35%,  in  France  40%  and  in  Italy  25%.  Only  the
Netherlands really stands out, at around 130%.
This is partly a reflection of cultural investment differences; greater reliance on bank finance; greater
state and family ownership (still equity of course, but not easily marketable); and reliance on public
rather than private pensions. As a result equities form rather less than 20 % of institutional portfolios
in France, Germany and Italy. In the UK they represent more than 70% of portfolios.
In  the  medium  term,  I  would  expect  to  see  more  equity  issuance;  and  much  greater  institutional
holdings, especially cross border. The latter is one area where the euro may have a fairly rapid impact
on  institutional  portfolios,  since  many  institutions  remain  unable  to  diversify  into  foreign  currency
assets. This process of equification will of course take time – but there are signs that it is under way,
especially in the relatively strong growth in the market for continental high technology stocks.
What about the traditional banking market? I leave this to last because some of the likely changes are
just the counterpart of factors I have already mentioned. But for instance, greater reliance by capital
users  on  equity  as  opposed  to  debt  capital,  and  bond  as  against  bank  finance,  would,  other  things
being equal,  be  expected  to  lead  to  some  shrinkage  in  banks’  balance  sheets  in  relative  terms.  The
extent to which this may happen is of course uncertain. It will depend on many factors, including the
impact of any changes to the Basle Accord. But even if there is substantial disintermediation, it does
not mean that banks will cease to be dominant players. My point is just that as euro securities markets
develop and deepen, more of the finance banks arrange will be off balance sheet. I’m inclined to think
also that we will see further consolidation within the European (and indeed global) banking sectors,
though I think that will not primarily be a function of the euro, and is something I will touch on in a
minute.
Now, all these developments offer opportunities for financial services firms globally.  This is not a
zero sum game. I expect to see financial centres within the euro zone growing in size over the next
few  years.  But  London  will  grow  too,  and  I  think  it  is  significant  that  many  of  these  potential
developments depend on market practices and techniques pioneered in London.
BIS Review   43/1999
4
I see London as the engine for growth and innovation in the European capital markets. This is not a
narrow  parochial  point.  As  I  have  already  emphasised,  UK  financial  services  are  highly
internationalised and many of the UK–based beneficiaries of this process are owned elsewhere – in
the  US,  Europe,  Asia  and  elsewhere.  Nor  does  it  reflect  complacency.  Although  London  has
tremendous critical mass – especially in the crucial area of human capital – one major implication of
what I will say in a minute about technological innovation is that certain aspects of financial services
– especially trading and settlement – are potentially more geographically mobile now than in the past.
We are already in a market where it is possible for a trader in London to deal on a German exchange,
call for delivery in Luxembourg and make payment in Paris.
So,  the  advent  of  the  euro  is  just  one  factor  transforming  the  environment  in  which  UK  based
financial services firms must operate. I would now like to talk about a few others.
First  and  foremost,  technological  advances.  Even  from  just  a  few  years’  perspective  it  is  clear  that
financial services have been transformed by technological innovation. Arguably we are moving to a
world  in  which  more  and  more  trading  and  settlement  processes  will  use  automated,  electronic
systems. And the pace of change is probably increasing. The LSE moved away from a trading floor in
1986. It has since moved to electronic and largely dematerialised share settlement in CREST in 1996,
and  to  the  electronic  order  book  SETS  for  its  largest  100  or  so  stocks  in  1997.  Last  year  LIFFE
decided to switch from floor trading to its new electronic CONNECT system.
More  broadly,  electronic  trading  systems  have  been,  or  are  being,  introduced  in  a  whole  range  of
government  bond,  repo,  Eurobond  and  foreign  exchange  markets.  Initiatives  are  well  advanced  to
introduce electronic ‘straight-through-processing’ in various markets, allowing the transaction process
to be automated from the initial trade right through to settlement.
On top of all this there is the as yet unknown potential of the internet. In the US, there has been an
explosion of retail investment activity through the internet; in Europe we are still way behind. Much
of the internet business that is already taking place – here or in the US – is essentially substituting for
speaking to a broker, and the brokers that have adjusted most quickly to this change in the US have
benefited accordingly. But use of the internet has already led to a change in retail investor behaviour
in  the  US.  And  if  the  internet  is  eventually  to  have  a  really  profound  impact  on  the  investment
landscape – wholesale as well as retail – it may come through its capacity, as an almost completely
open system, to link investors of all types directly into order and execution systems. But that is much
easier  said  than  done.  There  are  a  whole  range  of  factors  –  technological  limitations,  regulatory
issues, settlement and the like – which mean that the eventual impact of the internet is very uncertain.
What are the implications of all this?
First, electronic trading widens access to markets. It removes any need for geographical proximity to
an exchange and relaxes any limit on the number of firms that can participate directly (subject to any
credit or regulatory constraints). Greater participation in a market increases liquidity and makes that
market more attractive still.
Second, since firms can switch from one electronic trading platform to another, and since they  can
also often access exchanges cross border, broadly speaking any exchange can potentially compete for
the  business  of  any  firm.  This  creates  greater  competition  between  exchanges  to  maximise  their
trading volumes and realise economies of scale. It also means that an exchange which offers a more
advanced  trading  system  can  win  business,  even  from  established  rivals,  provided  it  can  reach  a
critical  level  of  liquidity.  So  electronic  trading  makes  markets  more  contestable  and  puts  greater
pressure on exchanges to update their technology and offer an attractive overall ‘package’ to users.
Third, technological change means that distinctions between exchange traded and OTC markets are
becoming  more  blurred.  As  exchanges  adopt  electronic  trading  platforms,  and  in  some  cases
5
BIS Review   43/1999
demutualise,  they  become  less  akin  to  associations  of  particular  types  of  firm  and  closer  to  being
competing providers of trading, and perhaps even clearing and settlement services. At the same time,
many traditional OTC markets are moving away from pure, decentralised bilateral trading to establish
some common market infrastructure. So for  example,  in  the  foreign  exchange  market,  most  trading
now  occurs  over  electronic  platforms  provided  by  Reuters  or  EBS.  Another  example  is  that  the
London Clearing House is establishing Swapclear as a central counterparty clearing house for OTC
derivatives.
Another  factor  transforming  the  financial  services  landscape,  and  quite  closely  related  to  the
technological factors I have just mentioned, is the globalisation and consolidation of the main market
participants. The last decade has seen a global consolidation of the main intermediaries in the world’s
capital  markets  to  leave  a  relatively  small  number  of  large  players,  with  large  balance  sheets  and
operations spanning each of the world’s major markets. Since these firms are the major users and, in
some cases, owners of the market infrastructure in each country, their interests have a strong influence
on market structure. Now I think that big is not always best, and actually smaller niche players have
more  of  a  future  than  is  sometimes  imagined.  But  that  said,  in  twenty  years  I  think  that  it  is  quite
possible that the financial world will be dominated by perhaps twenty truly international wholesale
banks, including a few genuinely pan-European ones.
Now it is possible that these large banks will want to use their own balance sheets to offer a full range
of services to their customers, so that they rather than an exchange-based central market become the
focus  for  liquidity.  If  so,  such  firms  would  be  in  competition  with  infrastructure  providers:  for
example, when offering in-house trading or custody services to their clients. On the other hand, such
firms  will  also  want  to  continue  to  trade  with  each  other,  in  order  to  manage  their  own  risks  and
inventory.  For  that  purpose,  they  will  still  want  low  cost  trading  and  settlement  mechanisms  that
minimise their exposure to counterparty risk and the impact on their balance sheets.
So there are perhaps some tensions between the various forces at work here. To take another example,
economies  of  scale  in  trading,  clearing  and  settlement  suggest  that  to  minimise  costs  firms  should
encourage consolidation and integration of these activities within a market. Yet the major firms have,
understandably, been very reluctant to allow the dominance of a single supplier. For example, EBS
(Electronic Broking System) was set up by the major banks to offer an alternative system for foreign
exchange trading.
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me finish by saying that it is difficult to draw firm conclusions about the
future structure of the financial services industry. If it was, strategic decision making would be easier
than it seems to be. But financial service businesses based in the UK start from a strong position, and
are well placed to thrive in an environment that will evolve at an increasing pace, become even more
competitive, and place an even greater premium on innovation. The Bank of England will monitor and
analyse the developments very carefully – both because we want UK financial services to thrive, and
because in the pursuit of our financial stability responsibilities we need to be able to spot potential
problems as quickly as possible.
BIS Review   43/1999
6
