Mr Duisenberg reports on the outcome
of the latest meeting of the ECB Governing Council
Introductory statement given by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, to
the Press Conference, held in Frankfurt on 4 November 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
The Vice-President and I are here to report on today’s meeting of the Governing Council of the ECB.
The  outcome  of  today’s  meeting  was  that  the  Governing  Council  has  decided  to  increase  the  ECB
interest rates. The forthcoming main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem  will  be  conducted  as
fixed rate tenders at an interest rate of 3.0%, starting with the operation to be settled on 10 November
1999. This increase implies an upward adjustment of 50 basis points from the rate of 2.5% applied to
previous  such  operations.  In  addition,  the  interest  rate  on  the  marginal  lending  facility  will  be
increased from 3.5% to 4.0% and that on the deposit facility from 1.5% to 2.0%, both with effect from
5 November 1999.
Overall,  on  the  basis  of  prospective  developments,  the  Governing  Council  considers  that  today’s
decision  will  counter  the  upward  trend  of  the  balance  of  risks  to  price  stability.  This  decision  will
therefore contribute to sustaining non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area over the medium
term.
The main argument for raising the interest rates was the fact that since around the beginning of the
summer the balance of risks to future price stability has gradually been moving towards the upside. In
fact, the economic situation in spring 1999 had given rise to concern about downward risks and had
led to a precautionary interest rate reduction by 50 basis points on 8 April 1999. However, the current
economic  environment  is  far  more  favourable.  Moreover,  several  indicators,  including  monetary
growth, suggest that there is ample liquidity in the euro area. Inflation rates are expected to increase
gradually  in  the  months  ahead,  mainly  as  a  result  of  the  increase  in  energy  prices  earlier  this  year
working its way through to consumer prices. The latest data on industrial producer prices confirm this
pattern. Over the medium term, however, it is important to prevent the availability of ample liquidity
from translating into upward pressure on prices. In particular, an increase in interest rates now should
help  to  counteract  further  liquidity  growth  over  the  medium  term  and  contribute  to  maintaining
inflation expectations safely below 2%.
With regard to the perception that an increase in interest rates now would endanger the resumption of
economic growth, the Governing Council is of the opposite opinion. A timely rise in interest rates will
avoid the need for a larger increase in interest rates later and, hence, will contribute to stronger growth
over an extended period of time.
Concerning  the  size  of  an  increase  in  interest  rates,  against  the  background  of  a  fundamentally
changed situation, the precautionary interest rate reduction made in April 1999 is no longer justified.
Furthermore,  today’s  move  by  50 basis  points  appeared  to  be  the  best  way  in  which  to  avoid
uncertainties regarding the future course of monetary policy. In addition, such a move is expected to
contribute to reducing  any  uncertainty  premia  potentially  prevalent  in  financial  markets  and  also  to
help to contain a possible increase in volatility in money markets towards the end of the year. Under
these  circumstances,  the  alternative  of  moving  by  less  than  50 basis  points  now  and  examining  the
need for an additional step later on could potentially introduce unwarranted uncertainty for the period
ahead.
Let me now provide you with more detailed information on monetary, financial and other economic
developments, and thereby further explain the decisions taken today.
1
BIS Review 123/1999
With  regard  to  monetary  developments  in  the  euro  area,  the  monetary  data  up  to  September  1999
reinforced the view that M3 growth is on a rising trend. The three-month average of the annual growth
rates  of  M3,  covering  the  period  from  July  to  September  1999,  was  5.9%,  which  is  almost
1½ percentage points above the reference value of 4½%. This deviation from the reference value has
steadily increased during 1999. The strong growth of the most liquid components of M3 is particularly
noteworthy, suggesting that the very low level of interest rates favoured the strong growth of monetary
aggregates. The pick-up in economic activity is likely to have further stimulated M3 growth. Credit to
the private sector also continued to expand rapidly in September 1999, at a rate in excess of 10%. The
demand for loans remained strong throughout the first three quarters of 1999, supported in particular
by  the  low  level  of  bank  lending  rates  and  the  ongoing  economic  recovery.  Overall,  these
developments indicate a generous liquidity situation in the euro area.
Euro  area  financial  market  developments  over  the  past  few  months  confirm  the  general  change  in
economic  conditions  and  perspectives  for  the  euro  area  by  also  anticipating  an  acceleration  of
economic  growth.  This  is  reflected  in  the  rise  in  government  bond  yields  and  the  associated
pronounced  steepening  of  the  yield  curve  since  spring  1999.  Today’s  decision  should  contribute  to
firming financial market expectations of stronger growth without increasing inflationary pressures.
With regard to economic activity itself, current information indeed continues to support the view that
there  is  an  ongoing  strengthening  in  the  euro  area.  The  outlook  for  the  world  economy  remains
positive;  this  mainly  relates  to  the  sustained  growth  of  the  US economy,  but  also  to  the  apparent
strengthening of the recoveries in South-East Asia and Japan. Most recent data releases for the euro
area suggest an acceleration of real GDP growth rates in the second half of this year. This is indicated
by confidence and survey data, as well as by production data for the industrial sector extending into
the third quarter of the year. Therefore, the prospects for a continued improvement in output growth
remain good.
Concerning consumer prices, in September 1999 the annual rate of change in the Harmonised Index of
Consumer  Prices (HICP)  was  1.2%,  that  is  to  say  unchanged  from  August  1999.  On  the  one  hand,
upward pressures related to the surge in oil prices in recent months and to the rate of change in prices
for seasonal food. On the other hand, in September the increases in both services prices and prices for
non-energy industrial goods were more moderate than in August. Countervailing price movements of
such a kind may possibly continue in the coming months, while expectations remain that there will be
some overall upward movement  in  the  HICP  rate in  the  short  term,  which  will  mainly  be linked  to
energy prices.
In conclusion, the downside risks to price stability have disappeared. Instead, monetary developments,
together  with  the  accumulating  evidence  of  improved  economic  prospects,  confirmed  the  view
expressed  earlier  by  the  Governing  Council  that  the  balance  of  risks  to  future  price  stability  has
gradually moved towards the upside. This assessment argued in favour of adjusting the interest rates
within the context of a monetary policy stance which is conducive to maintaining price stability over
the medium term.
Containing inflationary expectations in a forward-looking manner is decisive for ensuring sustainable
growth  in  GDP  and  employment.  This  would  be  greatly  facilitated  if  individual  member  countries
were to make convincing progress in the structural reform of the labour and product markets, which,
over the medium term, would enhance the euro area’s production potential and thereby curb upward
pressure on prices as the recovery proceeds. Together with fiscal consolidation in the context of the
Stability and Growth Pact and the necessary moderate wage developments, such reforms could make a
crucial contribution towards transforming the current cyclical upswing into a process of longer-term
non-inflationary growth.
Other business
In  a  press  release  dated  1 July  1999,  the  ECB  indicated  that  an  announcement  would  be  made  in
November with regard to the decision on the public relations agency selected to prepare and execute a
Europe-wide  information  campaign  for  the  introduction  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  on
BIS Review 123/1999
2
1 January 2002. In this regard, I am now pleased to announce that the Governing Council has decided
to negotiate the contract with Publicis. Further information on this matter can be found in a separate
press release which will be issued this afternoon.
Finally,  I  should  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  second  meeting  of  the  Governing
Council to be held in December has been rescheduled. As announced yesterday, the meeting has been
brought  forward  from  Thursday  16 December  1999,  to  Wednesday  15 December  1999,  in  order  to
enable several Governing Council members to attend a first gathering of a new forum consisting of
ministers of finance and central bank governors (the so-called “G20”), which is to be held in Berlin on
16 December 1999.
3
BIS Review 123/1999
