Mr Mboweni addresses the topic “signals from the markets:
does the yield curve contain useful information for the Reserve Bank?”
Address  by  Mr Tito Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  the  Annual
Convention of the Actuarial Society of South Africa, held in Midrand on 2 November 1999.
 Introduction
Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan once famously told a congressman that if what he had said
was clear, the congressman must have misunderstood him. Central bankers are always looking into an
uncertain future; that is why they are sometimes less direct than the public might want them to be.
As the Governor of the Reserve Bank, it is my job to worry about the future  even  while things  are
going well in the present. It is the same for central bankers all over the world; the Bank of England
and  the  United  States  Federal  Reserve  recently  reminded  us  of  the  need  for  pre-emptive  action  by
tightening policy before the actual inflation numbers started to gain momentum.
It is this  preoccupation  with  an  uncertain  future  which  explains  why  the  word  “signal”  crops  up  so
often in the language of monetary policy. One only has to read the financial papers to be struck by
how often the word is used in the context of central banking. Monetary policymakers are constantly
watching for early-warning signals on the economy, and from time to time we, in turn, give signals to
the markets and the public on monetary policy.
What, then, are the signals that the Reserve Bank watches for from the markets and the economy? The
answer to that question would fill quite a few dissertations,  and,  therefore,  cannot  be spelled  out  in
detail. Central bankers cannot be too direct, as I have already said. We also have to bear in mind that,
because the South African Reserve  Bank  is  still in  the  process  of  establishing  an  inflation-targeting
framework, the importance attached to various signals is under serious review.
The inflation-targeting framework will not really simplify the range of variables and events deemed to
be  relevant  that  much.  In  the  new  framework,  we  would  be  able  to  analyse  variables  and  events
incorporated  in  the  inflation-targeting  models  as  well  as  variables  and  events  not  explicitly
incorporated in the inflation-targeting models, such as bad debts in the banking industry, but which are
also important for the  maintenance  of  financial stability.  In  this  regard,  we  have  been  watching  the
effects of the liquidation of Macmed with interest.
For today, given that my audience is concerned with long-term investment portfolios, I shall discuss
an issue which appears to be something of a favourite topic among South Africa’s investment analysts
- the term structure of interest rates, or the yield curve.
The  market  determines  different  yields  on  investments  of  different  maturities;  of  considerable
importance  is  the  gap  between  interest  rates  on  short-dated  investments  and  those  with  longer
maturities. If these interest rates are plotted against unexpired maturity, the result is the yield curve,
and of importance is its slope.
Does the slope of the yield curve provide the Reserve Bank and the investment community with useful
information?
Before discussing the issue, it is worth noting that there are many good reasons to take into account
signals from the financial markets in reaching monetary policy decisions. For one thing, market prices
are up to date, and policymakers therefore do not face the problem that they do with other economic
data. Information on the real economy only becomes available after a time lag, and it is possible that
by the time enough information has been acquired on, say, trends in capacity utilisation or unit labour
costs to make it clear what course of action is necessary, it might be very late in the day. In addition, it
1
BIS Review 122/1999
seems  that  some  indicators  that  are  relatively  current,  such  as  the  monetary  aggregates,  are  not
sufficient by themselves as early-warning signals of inflation.
The  most  obvious  way  in  which  the  yield  curve  can  assist  the  Reserve  Bank  is  in  providing
information on inflation expectations. But, as I shall argue, the message from the yield curve is not
unambiguous in this respect. I shall discuss the issue in general terms first, before mentioning recent
developments  in  the  South  African  capital  market  and  the  issues  raised  by  some  of  the  local
investment analysts.
The yield curve and inflation expectations
One of the greatest difficulties which all central banks face is getting a reliable measure of inflation
expectations. Difficult though it is, it is nonetheless important to try to monitor inflation expectations,
as they play an important role in price and wage setting behaviour. One way of monitoring inflationary
expectations is to conduct a survey among the public (which the Reserve Bank intends to do); another
way would be to monitor the behaviour of market-determined interest rates, or the yield curve.
As  you  know,  the  yield  curve  is  upward  sloping,  or  positive,  when  nominal  interest  rates  on
longer-dated bonds are higher than those on shorter-dated securities. It can also be downward sloping,
or inverted, if the short-term interest rates exceed the rates on bonds with long-dated maturities.
To  begin  our  discussion  of  the  yield  curve,  it  is  worth  revisiting  the  Fisher  equation,  named  after
American economist Irving Fisher. The textbook equation states that nominal interest rates are equal
to the required real rate of return on the funds invested, plus the expected inflation rate over the period
of the investment. So it is clear that expected inflation plays an important role.
The Fisher equation can be modified to include a risk margin in the calculation of the nominal interest
rate. The risk margin can reflect variability in the inflation rate; it will in practice also take account of
factors such as political and exchange rate risk.
What  will  happen  to  capital  market  interest  rates  if  investors  decide  they  have  to  revise  their
expectations  of  future  inflation  upwards?  Investors  in  long-term  assets  who  believe  future  inflation
will  be  higher  than  initially  expected  will  want  to  protect  their  real  returns.  As  a  result,  they  will
demand higher nominal interest rates on longer-term bonds. In such a situation, one would expect the
yield curve to steepen.
Can we say that if the yield curve steepens, it should necessarily be taken as a sign that the expected
inflation rate in the future has risen? The answer to that is clearly no; expected inflation is only one
factor determining nominal interest rates. An increase in expected inflation should lead to a steepening
in the yield curve, but - and this is a crucial point - a steeper yield curve does not necessarily signal a
rise in expected inflation.
The effect on the yield curve of factors other than expected inflation
The  yield  curve  is  normally  positively  sloped;  in  other  words,  the  longer  the  duration  of  the
investment, the higher the yields. The positive slope is explained, among others, by the premium on
long-term  bonds  which  is  required  to  compensate  for  the  greater  risk  in  keeping  paper  with  longer
maturities.  So,  a  positively  sloping  yield  curve  does  not  in  itself  tell  us  anything  about  inflation
expectations or the economy.
A  crucial  point  in  an  analysis  of  the  shape  of  the  yield  curve  is  that  long  bond  yields  are  entirely
market-determined while short-term interest rates are influenced by the monetary policy decisions of
the central bank - which should, of course, also respect market forces.
It follows that a steepening in the yield curve can be caused by monetary easing. Such a steepening
will  happen  when  a  reduction  in  short-term  interest  rates  is  not  accompanied  by  a  commensurate
decline in long bond yields.
Why would long bond yields not follow short-term interest rates lower to the same extent?
BIS Review 122/1999
2
The answer to that question is the key to our dilemma in interpreting signals from the markets. It could
be that investors in long bonds are looking ahead to an economic upswing and that they are already
beginning to anticipate the point in time when the monetary authorities will begin tightening policy
again. In such a scenario, it makes sense for longer-term yields to remain relatively high and not to
match the declines in short-term interest rates. Then the steepening in the yield curve signals that an
economic acceleration is on the cards.
Although heightened economic activity obviously increases the risk of inflation, investors who expect
the  central  bank  to  act  pre-emptively  will  not  necessarily  modify  their  inflation  expectations.  They
will, however, expect short-term interest rates to rise in future to nip inflation in the bud. As long-term
interest rates can be viewed as reflecting expectations of future short-term interest rates, a steepening
in the yield curve can be seen as a sign that short-term interest rates are expected to play catch-up once
the economy is in danger of overheating.
If the central bank’s policy is in danger of erring on the side of being too loose, the slope of the curve
could  become  abnormally  steep.  Long  bond  yields  could  rise  even  as  short-term  interest  rates  are
falling. But an abnormally steep yield curve is not necessarily conclusive evidence of loose monetary
policy.  It  could  be  a  sign  of  an  increased  risk  premium,  which  is  also  part  of  the  calculation  of
market-determined yields.
The risk premium takes into account the danger that inflation expectations might turn out to be wrong.
Perhaps more importantly, the risk premium catches all uncertainties; it also relates to exchange rate
concerns and even political uncertainty. If the risk premium rises during a period of monetary easing
and declining short-term interest rates, it follows that the yield curve will tend to steepen.
As I have already mentioned, heightened economic activity increases the risk of inflation. As a result,
investors  might  demand  a  higher  risk  premium  as  economic  activity  starts  gaining  momentum,
especially  if  there  is  any  uncertainty  over  policy.  Obviously,  policy  uncertainty  might  be  entirely
misplaced, in which case the market should correct when participants realise their fears over policy are
unfounded.
I have mentioned that a steepening in the yield curve is probably a sign that economic activity is set to
accelerate. Obviously, the argument also works the other way round - an inverted yield curve can be
seen  as  a  sign  of  an  impending  slowdown  in  the  economy,  which  could  be  accompanied  by
disinflation.
The shape of the yield curve can also be affected by financial factors that are not directly related to
expectations about inflation or the real economy. One such factor is the relative supplies of different
financial assets. If there is an oversupply of long-dated maturities, the result could be higher yields at
the longer end of the curve. Known as the market segmentation theory, this approach suggests there is
not much movement by investors between different maturity segments in the capital market.
The difficulty in reading messages on inflation from the shape of the yield curve was mentioned in a
speech to the New Zealand Society of Actuaries in 1995 by the Governor of the Reserve Bank of New
Zealand, Donald Brash:
“Many  central  banks  monitor  the  yields  on  long-term  conventional  bonds  in  an  attempt  to  get  a
reading  on  inflationary  expectations.  But  there  are  significant  problems  in  interpreting  these  yields:
how much of the increase ... reflected an increase in concerns about future inflation and how much an
increase in real interest rates, a response to the increased  demand  for capital  as  the  world  economy
emerged from recession?”
In that speech, Mr Brash noted one possible solution to the problem of interpreting the behaviour of
long bond yields - the introduction of inflation-adjusted bonds. These securities provide investors with
a guaranteed real return on their investments.
The  South  African  Department  of  Finance  has  said  it  is  seriously  considering  the  introduction  of
inflation-linked bonds, and it is worth our reflecting on whether their introduction in this country could
help the Reserve Bank in its efforts to gauge inflationary expectations.
3
BIS Review 122/1999
Inflation-linked government bonds
Inflation-adjusted bonds, also known as index-linked bonds, systematically compensate investors for
the loss of purchasing power as a result of inflation. In a typical inflation-linked bond, both capital and
interest, or coupon, payments rise with inflation. In most countries, the consumer price index forms
the basis for such indexation.
Inflation-linked  government  bonds  used  to  be  associated  with  financially  unstable  countries
experiencing  hyperinflation.  However,  in  recent  years,  financially  stable  countries  have  issued
inflation-linked  government  bonds,  including  Canada,  the  United  States,  the  United  Kingdom  and
France.
The idea of indexation is most relevant for bonds with longer maturities, as there is more uncertainty
with respect to inflation, rather than for shorter-dated securities. There are arguments for and against
introducing index-linked bonds.
It could be argued that the mere existence of inflation-linked securities is testimony to the fact that the
monetary  authorities  cannot  deliver  complete  price  stability.  Their  introduction  could  also  signify
government’s acceptance of inflation as a fact of life which merely needs symptomatic treatment. By
guaranteeing investors protection against inflation,  government  is, in  effect,  making  it  easier to live
with inflation.
But there are many counter-arguments. The taxpayer can save on interest costs if inflation is as low as
government expects it to be, because these bonds do not have an inflation risk premium built into their
pricing. In addition, these bonds eliminate the incentive for the state to inflate, as its borrowing costs
would increase.
Other arguments in favour of issuing index-linked bonds include the following: they can protect the
purchasing  power  of  accumulated  savings;  other  financial  assets  do  not  provide  as  good  a  hedge
against inflation; they encourage savings; they expand the range of investment opportunities; and they
could enable the monetary authorities to obtain useful information on real interest rates and inflation
expectations.
How can inflation-indexed bonds help the central bank? This new form of bond will, like conventional
bonds, also trade in the secondary market. The yield at which it trades is a real yield, as investors are
guaranteed  compensation  for  inflation.  Therefore  the  difference  between  the  real  yield  on  the
inflation-indexed bond of a certain maturity, and the nominal yield of a conventional bond of the same
maturity, can be viewed as the expected inflation rate over the period. In other words, if the nominal
yield  on  a  10-year  bond  is  15%  and  the  real  yield  on  an  inflation-linked  10-year  bond  is  4%,  the
expected annual inflation rate over the period is 11%.
But this is only true at first glance. Remember, there is a risk premium element in the calculation of
the  nominal  yield  on  a  conventional  bond.  The  risk  premium - and  not  expected  inflation - could
account for part of the difference between the real yield on the inflation-linked bond and the nominal
yield  on  a  conventional  bond  of  the  same  maturity.  It  might  be  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the
expected inflation component and the risk premium element.
Another factor is that indexed bonds, at least initially, might not be traded frequently in the secondary
market. There could be an illiquidity premium built into the yield of the index-linked bond.
Nevertheless,  the  fact  remains  that  the  introduction  of  inflation-linked  bonds  could  improve  the
Reserve Bank’s information on inflation expectations.
Recent changes in the shape of the South African yield curve
Over a period of about 18 months, the shape of the South African yield curve has been subject to fairly
significant changes.
From mid-April to August last year, when South Africa was affected by the global emerging markets
crisis, the slope of the yield curve was negative; it changed from a slight to a fairly steep inversion.
BIS Review 122/1999
4
Tight monetary conditions caused yields on short-dated bonds to rise more than yields on long-dated
bonds.  The  overall  level  of  the  curve  rose,  reflecting  heightened  uncertainties  about  the  future
direction  of  financial  policies,  nervousness  about  investment  in  emerging  markets  and  an  upward
adjustment of expectations about future inflation.
The  financial  markets  settled  down  gradually  in  the  last  three  months  of  1998  and  yields  declined
when monetary conditions became easier as the exchange rate of the rand improved. From March this
year, short-term yields declined to levels below those of long-term yields and the yield curve assumed
a positive slope which subsequently steepened.
As I have indicated above, it is difficult to read unambiguous signals from these changes in the shape
of  the  yield  curve.  Nevertheless,  these  shifts  have  been  noted  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  as  have  the
frequent comments on the topic of the yield curve by the South African investment community.
Last year, when the slope of the yield curve was inverted, some analysts argued that the  curve  was
signalling a sharp slowdown in economic activity. Now that the yield curve is positive and steep, some
economists are predicting a significant acceleration in economic activity.
Conclusion
Empirical  studies  have  found  that  the  yield  curve  is  a  good  predictor  of  growth  in  non-agricultural
gross domestic product. So, the recent shifts in the shape of the yield curve appear to confirm what we
all sense - the economy has been in a downswing, but the turning point seems to have been reached
with the recovery set to gain momentum.
The Reserve Bank does not release its forecasts on the economy, but I can mention that forecasts that
we have seen of economic growth of the order of magnitude of 3% or so in the millenium year are not
out of line.
It would be difficult to read more into the signals coming from the financial markets at the moment.
As a general rule, we also have to bear in mind that financial markets are not always right, and that
rapid adjustments sometimes have to take place when expectations turn out to be wrong.
Be that as it may, the signals from the financial markets form part of the mix of factors to which the
central bank pays regular attention. But not only does the Reserve Bank look to the markets for signals
and for an assessment of monetary policy; the markets also look to the Bank for signals. This two-way
communication  is  an  essential  element  in  meeting  the  Bank’s  main  objective,  which  is  the
maintenance of financial stability.
5
BIS Review 122/1999
