Mr Duisenberg reviews the first year of experience
with the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, at the joint congress of
the Federations, EUROFINAS and LEASEUROPE, held in Paris on 11 October 1999.
 Almost  exactly  one  year  ago,  on  13 October  1998,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central
Bank  (ECB)  announced the  main  elements of its  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy.  As  we
reach  the  first  anniversary  of this  announcement,  it  seems  appropriate  to  reflect  on  our  experiences
over  the  last  year  and  review  the  lessons  that  we  have  learnt.  I  am  particularly  grateful  for  your
invitation to speak here today because of the opportunity it provides to present such a review.
Let  me  begin  by  clarifying  some  of  our  terminology,  which  still  may  not  be  familiar  to  everyone.
“Eurosystem”  is  the  name  we  use  to  describe  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the  eleven  national
central banks of those countries that introduced the euro on 1 January 1999. We call the geographical
area  defined  by  these  eleven  countries  the  “euro  area”.  The  monetary  policy  implemented  by  the
Eurosystem is sometimes simply called “the single monetary policy”.
The design of the Eurosystem’s monetary policy strategy required an appreciation of the environment
in  which  the  Eurosystem  operates.  This  environment  imposes  certain  constraints  on  the  single
monetary policy. It is useful to distinguish three categories of constraints: economic, institutional and
practical. First, the Eurosystem must acknowledge the capabilities and limitations of monetary policy
implied both by general economic principles and by the structure of the euro area economy. Second,
the Eurosystem must act in accordance with the mandate, tasks and powers assigned to it by the EC
Treaty.  Finally,  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem  has  to  reflect  practical  constraints,
many  of  which  arise  because  of  the  uncertainties  created  by  the  regime  shift  associated  with  the
transition to Monetary Union.
I should like to address each form of constraint in turn, starting with general economic issues. Among
central  bankers  and  economists,  overwhelming  agreement  exists  that  there  is  no  long-run  trade-off
between real activity and inflation. Attempting to use monetary policy to raise real economic activity
above  its  sustainable  level  will,  in  the  long  run,  simply  lead  to  ever  higher  inflation,  not  faster
economic  growth.  The  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  sustainable  growth  and
employment in the euro area is to maintain price stability in a credible and lasting manner, allowing
the considerable benefits of price stability to be reaped.
When  price  stability  prevails  over  the  medium  term,  the  relative  price  signals  on  which  the  market
mechanism relies are not obscured by changes in the general price level. The market is therefore able
to allocate scarce resources more efficiently to their most productive uses. The costs inflation would
otherwise impose by exacerbating the distortions in tax and welfare systems are avoided. As inflation
risk  premia  are  reduced,  long-term  real  interest  rates  decline,  thereby  improving  the  financing
conditions for investment. Through these and other channels, the current environment of stable prices
is contributing to the growth and employment potential of the euro area.
This discussion sheds light on what is surely the greatest economic challenge facing the euro area at
present, namely the need to reduce the current unacceptably high level of unemployment. There is a
broad consensus that unemployment in the euro area is overwhelmingly structural in nature. Monetary
policy cannot solve this problem, although by maintaining an environment of price stability it certainly
helps. The level of structural unemployment depends on the flexibility and efficiency of labour  and
product markets, not on the stance of monetary policy.
National governments bear the main responsibility for structural economic reform designed to enhance
market  flexibility  and  improve  the  allocation  of  resources.  Wage  moderation  can  also  have  a
significant  beneficial  impact.  The  ECB  will  continue  to  cajole  governments  into  implementing
1
BIS Review 112/1999
necessary structural reforms, but the final hard decisions – and I recognise that they are hard decisions,
since  the  considerable  benefits  of  structural  reform  only  become  apparent  with  time  –  lie  with  the
national authorities.
The  success  of  past  structural  reform  is,  however,  already  visible  in  the  European  Union.  In  those
countries  where  appropriate  structural  reform  has  been  implemented  and  wage  growth  has  been
moderate,  unemployment  is  either  low  by  euro  area standards  or  is  falling  relatively  rapidly.  These
experiences offer important lessons for other countries in the euro area.
The  institutional  framework  for  European  monetary  policy  created  by  the  EC  Treaty  reflects  these
economic  realities.  Most  importantly,  the  Treaty  clearly  assigns  the  single  monetary  policy  the
primary objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area. To facilitate achievement of this goal,
the ECB and the national central banks and their decision-making bodies have been accorded a high
degree of institutional independence in order to protect monetary policy decisions from undue external
interference.
The  mandate  to  maintain  price  stability  should  not  be  seen  in  isolation.  The  Treaty  assigns  several
other duties and tasks to the ECB. This notwithstanding, there is no doubt of the overriding importance
attached to the primary objective of price stability. To illustrate this point, the Treaty requires – if I
may  quote  from  Article 105 –  that  the  Eurosystem  “without  prejudice  to  the  objective  of  price
stability, … shall support the general economic policies in the Community, with a view to contributing
to  the  achievement  of  the  objectives  of  the  Community”.  These  Community  objectives  include
“sustainable  and  non-inflationary  growth”  and  “a  high  level  of  employment”.  The  qualification
“without prejudice” leaves no room for ambiguity about the status of price stability as the overriding
objective of the Eurosystem and the single monetary policy.
The  Treaty  also  clarifies  that  the  primary  objective  of  exchange  rate  policy  shall  be  price  stability
(Article 3). This is an important feature that will help the ECB achieve its mandate. In many respects,
monetary  and  exchange  rate  policy  can  be  regarded  as  two  sides  of  the  same  medal.  A  different
objective for exchange rate policy would not have been compatible with the overriding commitment to
maintain price stability, which the Treaty has placed upon monetary policy.
Finally, let me address a number of more practical issues associated with the transition to Monetary
Union itself. In designing the Eurosystem’s strategy, the Governing Council of the ECB  recognised
the new circumstances faced by monetary policy in the euro area. Where there were previously eleven
open, generally small economies, there is now one large, relatively closed single currency area. The
challenges implied by this transformation in the landscape of monetary policy are profound.
Given  that  the  euro  area  did  not  exist  as  a  single  currency  area  before  January  1999,  one  obvious
problem was the need to establish a statistical data set. Much has been achieved, particularly in the
areas of money and banking and balance-of-payments statistics. Nevertheless, compared with national
central banks in the past, we still do not always have at our disposal the long historical time series of
economic  indicators,  based  on  harmonised  statistical  concepts,  which  are  required  for  detailed
analytical  studies.  However,  the  quality  and  availability  of  current  statistics  on  the  euro  area  has
increased  significantly  over  the  last  few  quarters.  This  process  of  improving  the  quality  and  the
availability of statistical data covering the euro area will continue.
These economic, institutional and practical constraints were important elements that led to the specific
design  of  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  strategy.  The  strategy  is  intended  to  fulfil  two
important  roles.  First, it  structures the  monetary  policy  making  process so that  the  ECB  Governing
Council,  the  decision-making  body  on  monetary  policy,  is  presented  with  all  the  information  and
analysis it requires to take  appropriate  decisions.  Second,  the  strategy  ensures that  policy  decisions,
including the economic rationale on which they are based, can be presented in a clear, coherent and
consistent way to the public. By providing a stable framework for making and explaining monetary
policy decisions, the strategy bolsters the credibility and effectiveness of the single monetary policy.
Given the practical constraints I have just outlined, at this early stage it would clearly be unwise for
the ECB to rely mechanically on the signals offered by a single indicator or forecast in order to take
monetary policy decisions. Indeed, such a simplistic approach to monetary policy making is unwise in
BIS Review 112/1999
2
all  circumstances.  Our  knowledge  of  the  structure  of  the  euro  area  economy  and  the  indicator
properties of specific variables – although rapidly improving – is simply too sparse. In this respect, it
has to be acknowledged that the introduction of the euro constitutes a structural break. Such a break
may  have  an  impact  on  the  behaviour  of  economic  agents,  thus  impacting  on  macroeconomic
relationships. This potential impact concerns money as well as all other variables.
The monetary policy strategy selected by the Governing Council therefore embodies a different and
more robust approach, consisting of three main elements which were announced a year ago.
First, the primary objective of monetary policy has been quantified with the publication of a definition
of price stability, which serves as a guide for inflation expectations and provide a framework against
which the Eurosystem can be held accountable. This definition illustrates our aversion to both inflation
and deflation, since it defines price stability as annual increases of below 2% in the Harmonised Index
of  Consumer  Prices  (HICP)  for  the  euro  area.  It  was  also  announced  that  price  stability  is  to  be
maintained over the medium term, imparting a medium-term orientation to the strategy as a whole.
Second,  to  maintain  price  stability  according  to  this  definition,  monetary  developments  are  closely
monitored in relation to a quantitative reference value for monetary growth. The first reference value
has  been  set  as  an  annual  growth  rate  of  4½%  for  the  broad  aggregate,  M3.  Consistent  with  the
medium-term orientation of the strategy, this reference value was derived so as to be consistent with
price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  using  assumptions  concerning  medium-term  developments  in
real GDP and the velocity of circulation of money.
Third,  in  parallel  with  this  monetary  analysis,  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments in the euro area is undertaken. This assessment encompasses a wide range of indicator
variables, including inflation projections produced both inside and outside the Eurosystem.
Using the information revealed by this analysis, every two weeks the Governing Council assesses the
level of short-term interest rates that best serves the maintenance of price stability over the medium
term. On the basis of this strategy, I am confident that the Governing Council has so far taken – and
will continue  to  take  –  the  necessary  monetary  policy  decisions  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the
medium term.
I believe that my confidence is well founded. Our announcement of the strategy was generally well
received  by  the  public  and  the  financial  markets  reacted  favourably.  Nevertheless,  I  am  aware  that
some criticisms of the Eurosystem’s strategy have been made. One year after our first announcement
of the strategy, it seems appropriate to address a number of these criticisms.
Some  observers  have  criticised  the  strategy  as  “asymmetric”.  In  other  words,  they  argue  that  the
Eurosystem is more concerned about inflation than it is about deflation. In their view, such asymmetry
will impose a drag on the overall performance of the euro area economy as a whole because monetary
policy  will  be  overly  restrictive  on  average,  and  risks  triggering  a  damaging  deflationary  spiral  in
some  circumstances. These  assertions are often  based  on  the  perceived  lack  of  a  quantitative  lower
bound to the definition of price stability, which is contrasted with a clear upper bound of 2%.
I reject this criticism. The use of the word “increases” in the definition imposes a floor of at least zero
for the lower bound. The absence of a specific numerical value for the lower bound honestly reflects
the  uncertainties  we  face,  for  example  concerning  the  existence  and  magnitude  of  a  so-called
measurement bias in the HICP. At present, there are no reliable indications about the size of this bias
which relates, inter alia, to the fact that the quality of goods improves over time and the composition
of the basket underlying the HICP is not immediately adjusted to reflect different spending patterns as
relative  prices  of  different  products  change.  Against  this  background  of  uncertainty,  it  would  have
been arbitrary to announce a specific figure for the lower boundary. Rather, in view of the existence of
potential measurement bias, we take the view that we should get more concerned as the outlook for
price developments approaches zero, but not to limit our concern to a specific figure.
Even  though  the  measurement  bias  is  uncertain  and  does  not  allow  us  to  specify  an  exact  lower
boundary for price stability, I should stress that the upper limit of the definition of price stability is
clearly above all plausible estimates of such measurement bias. This clearly demonstrates that we are
certainly not asymmetric in the sense that we would be more concerned about inflation than deflation.
3
BIS Review 112/1999
These are largely  technical  issues.  Let  me  state categorically,  as  I  have  often  done  in  the  past,  that
neither  prolonged  inflation  nor  prolonged  deflation  in  the  euro  area  would  be  deemed  by  the
Governing  Council  to  be  consistent  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability.  I  cannot  see  how  our
commitment to symmetry could be stated more clearly. Our decision to lower interest rates in April
1999, so as to address downside risks to price stability that had emerged during the first quarter, was a
clear practical demonstration of this commitment.
Others  criticise  the  “prominent  role  for  money”  in  our  strategy,  which  is  reflected  by  the
announcement  of  a  reference  value  for  M3  growth  and  our  thorough  analysis  of  the  monetary
aggregates. Critics argue that M3 growth should not play a prominent role in our strategy and should
not influence monetary policy decisions in a meaningful way.
I  do  not  agree  with  these  criticisms  of  the  role  of  money  in  our  strategy.  There  is  little  doubt  that
monetary aggregates in the euro area exhibit a close relationship with inflation. Last month, the ECB
published an empirical study which demonstrates that M3 has a stable relationship with the price level
in the euro area over the medium term. No other single non-monetary indicator variable has  such  a
stable relationship  with  price developments at this  horizon. Therefore  monetary  growth  needs to  be
analysed  very  closely  by  the  Governing  Council  and  we  believe  that  monetary  developments
constitute  an  invaluable  compass  for  monetary  policy  decisions  aimed  at  price  stability  over  the
medium term.
However, it is well known that the short-run relationship between money and prices is more complex.
Consequently,  monetary  policy  cannot  react  mechanically  to  every  deviation  of  actual  monetary
growth from the reference value. Nor should monetary policy makers be held accountable for keeping
monetary growth close to the reference value at a specific point in time. The reference value is not a
target – interest rate decisions do not attempt to return M3 growth to 4½% in the short term. Rather
deviations of monetary growth from the reference value need to be carefully analysed, in parallel with
a thorough assessment of other indicators. The implications of the deviations for price developments
over  the  medium  term  should  be  extracted.  Monetary  policy  should  then  act  on  the  basis  of  the
information revealed so as to maintain price stability at the medium-term horizon.
Our  interest  rate  decisions,  our  internal  analysis  of  monetary  developments  and  our  presentation  of
monetary  developments  to  the  public  are  all  consistent  with  this  explanation  of  the  role  of  the
reference value in the overall monetary policy strategy. I would simply add – as I have done on several
occasions  in  the  past  –  that  our  interpretation  of  monetary  developments  is  currently  further
complicated by the uncertainties surrounding the data itself that I alluded to a moment ago. However, I
would like to take this opportunity to remind you that the uncertainties surrounding the monetary data
are no greater than those surrounding other economic variables.
In this respect, it is of interest to note that the ECB has even been criticised by some observers for not
paying sufficient attention to money!
The  Eurosystem  has  also  been  criticised  for  being  a  secretive  institution  that  does  not  meet  the
required standards of transparency and clarity in its conduct of monetary policy. Some criticise our
strategy for not being sufficiently simple, arguing that we  should focus  only  on  one  indicator,  be  it
money  or  an  inflation forecast. To  these critics,  I  can  say  that our strategy  is  honest.  It  reflects  the
complex environment we are living in – an environment in which policy decisions cannot be simply
related to one information variable.
Others argue that we do not release sufficient information about our analysis. These critics claim that
the  credibility  of  the  single  monetary  policy  has  suffered  as  a  result.  I  would  agree  that  the
effectiveness of the Eurosystem’s  policy  actions  will  depend,  in large  part,  on the credibility  of  the
single monetary policy. Transparent and accountable policy making can help to build reputation and
hence credibility. In turn, transparency and accountability rely on clear and effective communication
between the Eurosystem and the public.
In this regard, the Eurosystem faces an especially formidable task. With each policy announcement or
Monthly  Bulletin,  the  Eurosystem  must  speak  to  eleven  audiences  in  all  the  different  official
languages of the European Union. Such a situation is unprecedented. Moreover, each of the countries
BIS Review 112/1999
4
in the euro area has its own distinct monetary history and heritage. This diversity of language, history
and culture across the euro area raises further communication challenges for the ECB.
In contrast to the assertions of our critics, we think that we have risen well to this challenge. A key
feature of the Eurosystem’s communication policy is the monthly press conference given by the ECB
Vice-President  and  myself,  usually  immediately  following  the  first  Governing  Council  meeting  of
each  month.  During  these  press  conferences,  I  make  an  introductory  statement  summarising  the
Council’s discussions and conclusions before answering questions from journalists. In substance, this
statement is similar to what other central banks call “minutes”. As far as I am aware, no other central
bank regularly communicates in such a prompt and open manner with the public immediately after its
monetary policy meetings. Giving these press conferences immediately after the Governing Council
meetings  also  ensures  that  decisions  and  information  are  disseminated  rapidly  and  even-handedly
across the entire euro area and beyond.
These  press  conferences  are  a  tangible  expression  of  the  Eurosystem’s  commitment  to  be  open,
transparent  and  accountable  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  They  are  supplemented  by  our
appearances before the European Parliament, by our Monthly Bulletin, Annual Report, working paper
series  and  numerous  speeches  and  presentations  such  as  my  remarks  here  today.  In  my  view,  the
Eurosystem’s commitment to openness should not be in doubt.
Turning to another point, critics of the Eurosystem have argued that the single monetary policy has
focused  too  closely  on  cyclical  developments,  in  contrast  to  the  public  commitment  made  to  a
medium-term orientation. These criticisms are supported by the claim that the interest rate cut in April
1999 was made so as to support employment and growth prospects in the short term.
Let  me  be  clear.  The  single  monetary  policy  has  had,  and  will  continue  to  have,  an  appropriate
medium-term orientation, in line with the strategy I described a moment ago. In this respect, monetary
policy  must  always  remain  focused  on the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  In
April  1999,  downward  risks  to  price  stability  were  appearing,  which  stemmed  from  the  cyclical
slowdown  that  occurred  in  the  aftermath  of  the  financial  turmoil  in  emerging  markets  during
mid-1998.  These  downside  risks  made  it  necessary  for  the  Governing  Council  to  act.  Interest  rates
were cut. The focus on the primary objective of price stability driving this decision does not exclude,
however, that – given risks to price stability are very often related to cyclical developments – in many
cases  the  policy  action  required  to  maintain  price  stability  may  also  help  sustain  real  activity.  The
Governing Council’s decision to lower interest rates in April 1999 clearly helped to sustain confidence
and  thereby  real  activity  in  the  short  term.  Nevertheless,  this  decision  was  made  to  ensure  the
maintenance of price stability over the medium term.
Of course, central bankers should and do welcome the opportunity to help sustain the real economy
and  employment  –  even  if  the  sustenance  provided  is  only  temporary.  However,  we  must  not  raise
expectations  that  the  short-term  impact  of  necessary  monetary  policy  actions  on  real  activity  will
always  be  favourable.  Situations  will  certainly  arise  when  monetary  policy  does  face  a  short-term
trade-off  between  adverse  developments  in  real  activity  on  the  one  hand  and  deviations  from  price
stability on the other. In such a situation, the overriding priority accorded to maintaining price stability
must be made absolutely clear. Any ambiguity on this point will simply endanger the credibility, and
therefore the effectiveness, of the monetary policy response.
This  leads  naturally  to  a  discussion  of  whether  the  Eurosystem  does  and  will  pursue  an  “activist”
monetary  policy,  where interest rates are  changed  frequently  in response  to  the  “news”  revealed  by
new data releases. We have a medium-term outlook and, in contrast to some other central banks, we
do not have a point target for inflation rates. We therefore do not think it is useful to be overly activist
and  to  react  immediately  to  any  “news”  that  comes  in.  Monetary  policy  affects  the  economy  with
“long and variable lags” and is therefore particularly ill suited to “fine-tuning” cyclical developments
in the short run. However, we will not hesitate to act promptly should this be necessary to maintain
price stability over the medium term.
Before concluding, I would briefly like  to  address another topical issue,  namely  the implications  of
asset  price  developments  for  the  determination  of  monetary  policy.  In  our  view,  asset  prices  are
important indicators for the conduct of monetary policy, but they should not be seen as an objective in
5
BIS Review 112/1999
themselves. Asset prices are determined in part by real economic factors, which cannot be affected by
monetary policy over the medium term. Stock prices will depend on current and expected corporate
profits.  Real  estate  prices depend  on current  and  expected  demographic  trends,  tax  regimes,  zoning
laws and so forth. The Eurosystem does not know better than the market how these factors will evolve
in the future and therefore what level of asset prices is appropriate.
Furthermore, attempts by a central bank to influence asset prices raise the danger that “moral hazard”
is introduced into asset markets. It would not be desirable if the public were to believe that the central
bank  would  act  to  prevent  dramatic  falls  in  asset  prices,  thereby  underwriting  accumulated  capital
gains.  On  the  contrary,  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  asset  markets  it  is  important  that  proper
incentives are given to investors to assess the values and risks inherent in the underlying assets.
Of  course,  that  is  not  to  say  that  central  banks  should  ignore  asset  price  developments  in  their
assessment  of  economic  conditions.  Within  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy,  asset  prices
are thoroughly and carefully monitored. Asset prices are important indicators as they offer an insight
into  private  expectations  of  future  price  and  economic  developments.  They  also  have  important
macroeconomic effects, for example on wealth, consumption, the demand for credit and the strength
and stability of the financial sector in the euro area. Through each of these channels, asset prices can
affect the outlook for price developments in the euro area.
While the  ECB  does  not  target asset  prices,  let  me  emphasise that,  if  the  single  monetary  policy  is
successful  in  achieving  its  primary  objective  so  that  price  stability  is  maintained  over  the  medium
term, other things equal one would expect asset prices to be more stable than would otherwise be the
case. In fact, reducing the volatility of asset prices might be considered one of the many beneficial side
effects  of  maintaining  price stability  over  the  medium  term.  However,  beyond  this  possibly  limited
contribution,  monetary  policy  cannot  prevent  potentially  large  swings  in  asset  prices.  Asset  price
stability is not an objective of the single monetary policy in and of itself.
Let me conclude. I believe we have made a successful start to Monetary Union, and that the strategy
announced by the Governing Council 12 months ago has played an important part in this success. At
the  same  time,  we  should  recognise  that  monetary  policy  alone  cannot  address  all  of  the  economic
challenges facing the euro area. In particular, it cannot reduce the euro area’s unacceptably high level
of  structural  unemployment.  However,  by  focusing  on  the  maintenance  of  price  stability,  monetary
policy  makes  its  best  contribution  to  area-wide  growth  and  employment  prospects.  After  the
experience  of  the  last  year,  I  am  confident  that  the  monetary  policy  strategy  adopted  by  the  ECB
Governing Council a year ago – and the monetary policy decisions that have been based on it during
the last nine and a half months – serve the fulfilment of this objective.
BIS Review 112/1999
6
