Mr I J Macfarlane lectures on monetary policy in economic expansions
Speech by Mr I J Macfarlane, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the Chris Higgins
Memorial Lecture, held in Canberra on 27 October 1999.
 Introduction
1.
It is an honour to be invited to deliver the fifth Chris Higgins Memorial Lecture. I knew Chris from
1970 till his death in 1990. He was, in my opinion, the best Australian applied macroeconomist of his
era and a policymaker of distinction. His views on economics would place him amongst those whom
Alan  Blinder1  identified  as  having  hard  heads  but  soft  hearts.  He  could  have  held  a  Chair  at  any
Australian university and many overseas ones of note if that had been his objective; instead, he had an
outstanding career at the OECD and the Australian Treasury, where he rose to become Secretary in
1989. Chris was also an excellent companion - a man of taste, wide reading and wit. It is good to see
so many of his friends in the audience tonight.
Chris’ death in 1990 robbed us of a good friend, and Australia of an outstanding public servant and
economist. I also cannot help but think it was a great shame that Chris did not live to see the 1990s
unfold.  His  professional  life  was  concentrated  in  the  1970s  and  1980s - two  periods  of  relative
turmoil - and he did not see many of the things he stood for bear fruit in the 1990s. I would like to take
this observation as the theme for my lecture tonight.
Growth over five decades
2.
I would like to start by looking at economic growth in Australia over the past half-century in terms of
decade averages (Table 1). If we do this, the variation in growth rates is not nearly as great as when we
compare  different  phases  of  the  cycle.  This  is  largely  because  each  of  the  decades  contained  a
recession (or more than one by some estimates2) as well as periods of growth. The 1950s and 1960s
showed  the  strongest  average  growth  at  4.2%  and  5.4%  per  annum  respectively,  while  the  1970s,
1980s and 1990s showed very similar growth rates in the 3.3% to 3.4% range.
It is disappointing that we could not keep up the 1950s and 1960s performance into the later decades,
but nor could other countries. There was a trend slowdown in growth around the world as the period of
postwar  reconstruction  passed  into  history.  In  fact,  the  fall-off  in  growth  for  OECD  countries  was
considerably  more  pronounced  than  for  Australia,  so  Australia’s  relative  performance  improved
towards the end of this 50-year period. While economic growth in Australia was lower than for the
OECD on average over the 1950s and 1960s, it was higher in the 1980s and 1990s, with the biggest
advantage in Australia’s favour occurring in the 1990s.
1 Alan Blinder, “Hard Heads, Soft Hearts: Tough-Minded Economics for a Just Society”, Addison-Wesley, 1987.
2 E A Boehm identified two recessions in the 1970s, the first in 1974 and the second from August 1976 to October 1977.
See  “The  Usefulness  and  Applications  of  Economic  Indicator  Analysis”,  Institute  for  Applied  Economic  and  Social
Research Working Paper No. 9, 1989.
1
BIS Review 119/1999
Table 1
Real GDP growth - Average annual rate
Australia
OECD
1950s
4.2
5.3
1960s
5.4
5.2
1970s
3.4
3.5
1980s
3.3
2.6
1990s
3.3
2.1
This  is  a  surprise  to  some  people  and  one  response  is  to  query  it  on  the  grounds  that  our  recent
relatively buoyant economic growth could have been mainly the result of our faster population growth.
Table 2 examines this issue by taking out the effect of population growth and looking at real GDP per
capita  over  the  same  five  decades.  On  this  basis,  the  recent  relative  improvement  is  now  more
pronounced than in the earlier Table. The 1990s not only shows a pick-up in Australia’s growth of real
GDP per capita compared with the two previous decades, but it is the only decade in which Australian
GDP per capita has grown faster than the OECD area, and by an appreciable amount.
Real GDP growth per capita - Average annual rate
Table 2
Australia
OECD
1950s
1.8
3.5
1960s
3.3
3.9
1970s
1.7
2.4
1980s
1.7
1.8
1990s
2.1
1.3
I  do  not  want  to  suggest  that  our  recent  economic  performance  means  that  we  have  returned  to  a
golden age such as we had in the immediate postwar period. Nor do I wish to deny that there is still a
backlog of remedial work to be done - our unemployment rate being an obvious example. But, on the
other  hand,  we  must  be  doing  something  right.  Our  expansion  so  far  in  the  1990s  has  outlasted  its
predecessors in the 1970s and 1980s, and it is still going strong. We have withstood a difficult external
shock, and should be able to sustain the expansion a good deal longer.
Why the improvement?
3.
The fact that the annual growth in GDP per capita has increased in the 1990s, and that it is now faster
than in OECD countries, is a welcome development. The major reason for improvement in GDP per
capita  is  that  a  closely-related  variable,  namely  labour  productivity,  has  also  shown  a  clear
improvement  in  the  1990s.  In  addition,  multi-factor  productivity - which  is  a  little  further  removed
from  GDP  per  capita - has  also  shown  a  clear  lift  compared  with  earlier  decades.  Table 3  shows  a
comparison of these measures of productivity over the three most recent expansions.
Productivity growth in expansion - per cent per annum
Table 3
Labour productivity
Multi-factor productivity
1970s
2.2
1.0
1980s
0.9
0.8
1990s
2.3
1.8
Note: The expansion periods are: March 1975-June 1982, March 1983-June 1990 and June 1991-June 1999.
 The reason for the pronounced rise in productivity is essentially microeconomic. It is because labour
is  being  used  more  efficiently,  capital  is  being  allocated  to  areas  of  the  highest  productivity  and
innovation  is  occurring  more  rapidly  than  before.  Partly  this  may  be  due  to  increased  managerial
efficiency, but a more likely explanation is to be found in the policy changes designed to make the
BIS Review 119/1999
2
economy more flexible and competitive - in other words, policies designed to affect the supply side of
the  economy.  Among  these  I  include  financial  market  deregulation,  tariff  reductions,  privatisations,
competition policy and decentralisation of the labour market. These have all made a contribution, but
it is probably the interaction between them that is more important; in this sense, the total effect is more
than the sum of the parts. I have talked on this subject on earlier occasions,3 so I will not repeat myself
tonight, other than to observe that these have brought tangible benefits that are often overlooked by the
beneficiaries.
The other distinguishing feature of the 1990s is that the expansion has continued for longer. National
accounts data up to the June quarter of 1999 show eight years of expansion at an average rate of 4%
per annum, already exceeding the length of the previous two expansions. All forecasters are expecting
significant growth in the current financial year, so that, even on the most pessimistic assumptions, the
present economic expansion will be a lot longer than its predecessors in the 1970s and 1980s.
More importantly, in earlier expansions, serious imbalances had built up by this stage. In the early to
mid-1970s and the early 1980s, inflation was in double digits, partly as a result of a surge in wages. In
the late 1980s, asset prices and credit growth were rising to unsustainably high levels, and consumer
price  inflation  was  still  excessive.  Both  the  dynamics  of  the  business  cycle  itself,  and  the  need  for
tough anti-inflationary monetary policy, pointed to an abrupt end of the expansion. On this occasion,
the picture is different and no one is expecting an abrupt end.
Why has the expansion been steadier and longer this time?
4.
I would now like to make a few comments on why the expansion of the 1990s has been steadier and
longer  than  its  two  predecessors.  Here  I  think  we  have  to  look  for  essentially  macroeconomic
explanations.
The first explanation is to be found in a comparison of the rates of inflation this time compared with
the two previous expansions. It is curious now to look back to some of the economic debates of the
1960s and 1970s. In those times, there were many people who thought that you had to tolerate “a little
bit of extra inflation” to make sure the economy would grow. Many, if not the majority, thought that
getting  inflation  down  again  would  not  be  worth  the  price,  because  it  would  result  in  permanently
lower  growth.  The  short-term  trade-off  (the  Phillips  Curve)  was  incorrectly  interpreted  as  being  a
summary of our medium-term choices.
Now  when  we  look  back  (Table  4),  nothing  could  be  further  from  the  truth.  The  low  inflation
decades - 1950s,  1960s  and  now  the  1990s - are  the  ones  where  we  did  well  on  growth  in  absolute
terms, or in relative terms. The high inflation decades - the 1970s and 1980s - were the ones where our
growth performance was at its poorest.
Consumer prices - Average annual rate of increase
Table 4
1950s*
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
Australia
OECD
*   If the short-lived Korean War boom is excluded, the average inflation rates in the 1950s would be 2.5% for Australia and
1.7% for OECD.
10.1
8.0
2.5
3.2
6.1
2.9
8.3
5.1
2.2
2.7
The most reasonable explanation for the lower inflation and hence steadier and longer expansion in the
1990s is the improvement in macroeconomic policies. By this I mean monetary and fiscal policies, or
what used to be known as demand management policies.
3
I J Macfarlane, Statement to Parliamentary Committee, 15 December 1998 and 17 June 1999.
3
BIS Review 119/1999
I will not say very much about fiscal policy, other than to note that medium-term considerations now
play a much larger role, something that Chris Higgins consistently argued for. The improvement has
occurred in two stages after the disaster of the 1970s. In the late 1980s, and again in the mid-1990s,
the  Budget  was  brought  back  into  surplus  where  it  remains  at  present.  As  a  result  of  this  fiscal
consolidation,  the  medium-term  health  of  the  Government’s  accounts  has  improved  greatly.  One
important indicator of this is the stock of government debt to GDP, which is now lower for Australia
than for virtually any other OECD country.
On monetary policy, I will say a little more. A similar realignment towards a medium-term approach
has certainly occurred in the case of monetary policy. The centrepiece of this has been the inflation
target and the Government’s reaffirmation of the independence of the Reserve Bank as outlined in our
Act.  A  similar  realignment  has  occurred  in  a  number  of  other  countries,  and  a  model  of  this  type,
whether explicit or implicit, is now the mainstream international approach to monetary policy.
This approach has been a major factor behind the low inflation of the 1990s, both here and in most
other OECD countries. A central channel through which this approach operates is through maintaining
low  inflationary  expectations.  Wage  and  price  setters  no  longer  need  to  engage  in  the  defensive
behaviour  they  formerly  used  to  protect  themselves  against  future  rises  in  inflation.  Similarly,
opportunistic  tactics  aimed  at  profiting  from  inflation  no  longer  make  sense  as  a  business  strategy.
And finally, the assumption by businesses that there is no need to resist increasing costs because they
can simply be passed on to consumers by raising prices has had to be discarded.
While the inflation target has played an important part in maintaining low inflation, there is more to
monetary policy than just setting the target - there also has to be a willingness to act in a timely way.
This is best illustrated by events in the period from 1994 to 1996 (Diagram 1). Around mid-1994, the
economy was growing strongly and there were signs that inflation and wages would soon pick up (this
expectation  was  reflected  in  a  number  of  places  including  the  yield  curve).  The  first  tightening  of
monetary  policy  occurred  in  August  1994  and  was  followed  by  two  others  before  the  end  of  the
calendar year. It is important to note that at the time the tightening occurred, the current inflation rate
was 2% (four-quarter-ended underlying inflation). Thus the tightening was pre-emptive - it was based
on an assessment of the outlook rather than current experience. In time, inflation did rise and peaked at
3.3% per annum in the year to March 1996.
Diagram 1
Underlying Inflation
Year-ended
CPI excluding interest
and health rebate
July 1996
Treasury
underlying CPI
August 1994
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
 5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
0
 5
5
4
4
3
3
2
2
1
1
0
0
Pressures soon abated as the economy slowed and wage claims moderated. By July 1996, the first of a
series of monetary policy easings occurred. Again this was pre-emptive because the inflation rate at
BIS Review 119/1999
4
the time was still above 3%. But, because inflation was forecast to return to the middle of the band, the
period  of  tighter  monetary  policy  that  had  prevailed  since  end-1994  was  no  longer  needed,  and  so
interest rates could be taken back to more appropriate levels.
The  pre-emptive  nature  of  these  policy  changes,  plus  the  Government’s  affirmation  of  the  inflation
target  and  the  independence  of  the  Reserve  Bank  contained  in  the  Statement  on  the  Conduct  of
Monetary Policy in August 1996, significantly increased the effectiveness of monetary policy and the
credibility  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  This  put  us  in  a  good  position  later  to  handle  the  contractionary
effects of the Asian crisis and the associated period of turbulence in financial markets.
The textbook response to a contractionary external shock such as the Asian crisis is not, in our view, to
tighten monetary policy. But the turmoil in financial markets, such as a plunging exchange rate and
widening bond spreads (both indications of capital  flight),  can  sometimes  only  be  settled  by  such a
show of forceful action. Most countries in the region, whether developed or emerging markets, chose
to,  or  were  forced  to,  raise  interest  rates  at  some  stage  during  the  Asian  crisis,  with  subsequent
detrimental effects on their economic growth and employment. The fact that we were able to withstand
the pressures without doing so (in fact, reducing rates slightly in December last year) is a testimony to
the  increased  credibility  of  monetary  policy  in  Australia,  and  to  the  higher  reputation  that  the
Australian economy overall commands in the international market place.  It  is  also  an  illustration  of
how timely action, such as in 1994, can ultimately contribute to a longer and more robust expansion.
Before concluding, I would like to make a couple of other observations on this subject. The first is that
pre-emptive monetary policy action only refers to being pre-emptive vis-à-vis actual developments in
the  economy;  it  does  not  mean  being  pre-emptive  vis-à-vis  the  financial  markets’  assessments.
Financial  markets  are  looking  at  the  same  data  as  the  Reserve  Bank,  are  making  forecasts  and
calculating the probabilities of monetary policy action. Interest rates on bills and bonds always move
in anticipation of monetary policy action. To be pre-emptive vis-à-vis the market would be the same as
taking the market by surprise. No one should regard this as a worthwhile objective, although it will
occur  from  time  to  time.  In  the  modern  world  of  greater  transparency  and  accountability,  such
surprises should be rarer and rarer as the market becomes more aware of the central bank’s objectives
and modus operandi.
The other implication of this new world of monetary policy is that policy changes will probably be a
good  deal  smaller  than  in  the  past.  Just  as  the  tightening  of  1994  was  much  smaller  than  its
predecessors in the 1980s, it is reasonable to assume that this trend will continue. The past three years
have hardly been a placid period for the world economy, yet in successful economies the movements
in interest rates have been relatively small (for example, in the United States they have moved through
a range of ¾ of a per cent).
The other thing we are seeing is that financial factors are playing a larger role than before. The biggest
move  in  US  rates  over the second  half of the  decade  was the  easing  in late  1998  as  a  result  of  the
“credit  crunch”  which  followed  the  Russian  default  and  the  demise  of  the  hedge  fund  LTCM.  At
present, US monetary policy is, of necessity, partly operating through the medium of the stock market
as that market moves in anticipation of Fed tightenings. Fortunately in Australia we do not have  as
highly valued a stock market to contend with, but we cannot ignore these considerations entirely. Our
household  sector  is  now  a  much  larger  holder  of  equities  and,  at  the  same  time,  is  more  highly
leveraged than in the past. This is bound to affect the transmission mechanism for monetary policy.
My final comment is that whatever monetary policy does, there will be those who disagree with the
decision. This is inevitable and probably healthy. Everyone is entitled to their own  view,  and  has  a
right to express it. That will always be the case. What has changed over recent years is that, by and
large, those who disagree with a decision no longer reach for the ready excuse of claiming that it was
“only  done for political reasons”. This  change  has  been a  long  time  in  coming,  but  now  that  it  has
arrived, it is a huge advance.  It makes it easier for monetary policy to do what it judges to be right and
not be inhibited by fears of public misperception - whether that means temporarily higher interest rates
or temporarily lower interest rates - than formerly. In the long run, however, it almost certainly means
on average lower and less variable interest rates for the reasons I have outlined above.
5
BIS Review 119/1999
