Mr Desario discusses new approaches to the
international regulation of credit risk
Address by Dott. Vincenzo Desario, Director General of the Bank of Italy at the 5th ABI Convention
on the Development and Management of Loan Portfolios held in Cernobbio on 15 October 1999.
 Introduction
My thanks, first of all, to the Italian Banking Association for the invitation to give the opening address
at this conference on new methods for developing and managing loan portfolios.
The subject is highly topical. Today, as interest rates converge on the lowest levels since the Second
World War, banks’ competitiveness depends more than ever on their ability to select customers and
offer the most appropriate forms of credit, so as to curb credit risk and generate yields above the cost
of funds.
Analysis  of  the  crises that  have  shaken  many  credit systems  in  recent  years  confirms  that  the  main
source of bank instability lies in their lending business; cyclical swings in the economy, sharp changes
in  asset  values,  high  credit  concentration,  and  inadequate  procedures  for  evaluating  and  managing
loans have been the main factors in most bank failures.
Inquiry into the causes of instability has been followed by action to reinforce safeguards against crises,
strengthen  banks’  credit  risk  management  systems,  make  market  discipline  more  effective,  and
improve supervisory authorities’ prudential rules and analytical methods.
The Italian banking system’s bad debts rose rapidly in the nineties, although in the last two years loan
quality has Improved thanks to companies 1 better profit performance and financial restructuring.
Innovative  market  techniques  for  credit  risk  management  have  recently  been  introduced  and  some
banks have begun to use advanced statistical methods of risk measurement.
Bank credit and the market
1.
In 1999 the ratio of new bad debts to total lending has fallen to its  lowest level in  the  decade. The
improvement, which had already been perceptible for some time in industrial lending, has spread to
construction and services.
In August the stock of bad loans held by banks was 5 per cent lower than a year earlier. The reduction
was  achieved  by  means  of  substantial  writeoffs  and  the  disposal  of  uncollectible  claims  through
securitization.
Selling credit assets to the market allows banks to turn their portfolios over faster and broaden their
borrower  base,  thereby  using  capital  more  efficiently  and  diversifying  their  sources  of  income  to
include fees for the services related to the complex procedures of securitization.
In the United States the volume of credit securitization business has grown enormously. In 1998 net
issues  of  such  securities  amounted to  more  than  $300  billion,  or  35  per  cent  of  total  issues  of  debt
instruments. Their share of outstanding debt is now more than 20 per cent.
In the US market, securitization has centred on loan assets of better-than-average quality, which has
led to the issue of highly rated securities. In Italy, it has been used mainly to reduce the incidence of
doubtful credits and thus improve the average quality of banks’ assets. Since 1994 some 8 trillion lire
of bank loans have been securitized, of which only 400 billion consisted of performing loans.
1
BIS Review 134/1999
The passage in April of a law on securitization opens up business possibilities previously foreclosed
by uncertainty about the legal framework. The prospects for growth depend strictly on banks’ ability
and willingness to offer the market good quality claims and to develop the entire gamut of services
and specializations required. Bank managements will have to acquire the specific know-how needed
for the evaluation of the complex risk-return combinations involved.
There is also growing recourse by some leading Italian banks to credit derivatives, which allow credit
risk to be transferred while maintaining title to the underlying credit relationship.
The  possibility  of  isolating  one  or  more  aspects  of  the  risk  associated  with  credit  business  and
transferring them to other parties via derivative contracts enables banks to keep only the components
of risk that they consider they are best equipped to handle. This trend towards specialization explains
the high degree of concentration  in  credit  derivatives  business.  In  June  1999  the top  five  US  banks
accounted for 80 per cent of the American market with positions totaling $258 billion.
Italian banks’ credit derivatives business is mostly channeled through their foreign branches; not only
does  it  respond  to  the  need  to  diversify  risk  but  it  also  allows  them  to  penetrate  new  markets  by
acquiring  positions  with  customers that  it  would  otherwise  have  been  difficult  to  establish  business
relations with. At the end of the second quarter of 1999 the notional value of Italian banks’ contracts
in the United States amounted to $15.3 billion, or 6 per cent of the total market.
The development of credit derivatives in the  Italian  market  is likely  to  make  it  easier  to implement
policies aimed at correcting situations of excessively concentrated sectoral and geographical lending.
The experience with solvency ratios
2.
The capital adequacy rules introduced by the Basel Capital Accord of 1988 constitute the main point
of reference for supervisory authorities everywhere. The basic elements of the Accord are still fully
valid today: capital resources as the safeguard of banks’ stability, risk-weighted capital ratios, capital
requirements  for  off-balance-sheet  assets.  Since  the  publication  of  the  Core  Principles  of  the  Basel
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  to  which  supervisory  authorities  everywhere  were  asked  to
adhere, at least 140 countries have adopted the Committee’s approach in their regulation of banking.
The Capital Accord was intended to raise banks’ level of capitalization, following decades of decline
in the main banking systems. It also aimed to enhance the entrepreneurial initiative of bankers within a
framework of close correlation between risks and capital resources and, through common prudential
rules, to promote conditions of competitive equality among internationally active banks.
Drawing a balance sheet today, the results have been very largely positive.
The degree of capitalization has risen almost everywhere, making banking systems more resilient. The
average solvency ratio of international banks located in the G10 countries rose from 9.3 per cent in
1989 to 11.6 per cent in 1998.
Over the same decade the average solvency ratio for individual banks in Italy rose from 11.7 to 13.4
per cent.
The  improvement  in  capital  adequacy  has  been  fostered  by  the  forceful  action  of  the  supervisory
authorities, which has led banks to expand their capital resources in parallel with the rapid growth in
higher-risk assets.
Uniform capital requirements have also attenuated competitive handicaps stemming from disparities in
the  strictness  of  national  banking  regulations.  They  do  not  appear  to  have  resulted  in  significant
changes  in  the  competitive  position  of  banks  compared  with  other,  less  strictly  regulated  financial
intermediaries.  In  some  countries,  including  Italy,  many  non-bank  intermediaries  have  been
transformed into banks.
Studies on the impact of capital ratios, conducted mainly in the United States, have found temporary
slowdowns in some markets but not contractions in the supply of credit affecting the aggregate level of
economic activity.
BIS Review 134/1999
2
Ten years of rapid financial innovation and progress in developing statistical methods for measuring
banking  risk  have  highlighted  some  of  the  limitations  inherent  in  the  specification  of  the  capital
requirements. The rigidity of the standards has not encouraged the adoption of techniques to reduce
credit risk; it has induced practices for circumventing the rules.
The current definition of the capital requirements cannot capture the variation in credit risk stemming
from cyclical developments; nor does it take account of the correlation between the risks associated
with various assets and hence of the benefits implicit in well diversified portfolios.
The  benefit  accorded  to  financial  techniques  of  risk-shifting,  in  terms  of  reduced  capital  ratios,  is
insufficient, while banks are increasingly taking  measures to lessen capital requirements that do not
actually diminish risk.
The limited diversification of the risk weights applicable to assets makes it possible for banks to select
higher risk-return combinations.
The evolution of prudential rules on credit risk
3.
The Basel Committee has focused on the need to strengthen the set of legal rules safeguarding bank
stability  by  defining  capital  adequacy  requirements  in  greater  detail,  improving  the  structures  and
methods for the management of credit risk, reinforcing the discipline exerted on banking enterprises
by the financial markets.
In June the Committee released a set of proposed revisions of the capital adequacy rules, asking for the
comments of the banking industry with a view to their definitive formulation in the second half of next
year. During the summer it distributed documents setting out best practices in credit risk management,
disclosure requirements and supervisory activity.
For the time the idea of determining the capital needed to face credit risk by means of internal models
devised  by  banks  themselves  has  been  shelved,  pending  resolution  of  the  problems  with  existing
methods and in view of the costs associated with producing such models. For the future, such models
represent an opportunity to be pursued, in view of the possibility they offer of measuring credit risk
more exactly and more analytically and of factoring in the correlation between different risks. They
generate estimates that gauge the capital needed to cover the largest loss that could occur in any given
period of time and with any given probability.
For  lending  to  firms,  the  Committee’s  proposed  changes  provide  for  two  distinct  methods  of
determining risk weights: the ratings of specialized agencies, which  are  only  available  for  a limited
number of borrowers, and internal ratings, which the banks can assign to all their customers.
For the standard method, the Committee has established the requirements that agencies must meet for
their ratings  to be  used in  determining  capital  ratios  for  banks.  The  requirements  refer  to  agencies’
credibility and independence as well as to the objectivity and transparency of their judgments.
The criteria for supervisory authorities’ validation of internal rating systems have not yet been fixed.
They will certainly include the completeness of the data, the methodological rigour of the procedures
and provision for verification of the results.
There remains the complicated problem of defining a common yardstick to which to relate the results
of  the  various  banks’  internal  rating  systems,  in  order  to  make  sure  that  capital  requirements  are
uniform. Another problem to be faced concerns the comparability of the criteria for weighting the risk
on loans to companies with agency ratings and those with internal ratings.
Credit risk management and banks’ internal organization
4.
The  adoption  of  internal  ratings  as  the  basis  for  calculating  risk  coefficients  creates  a  direct  link
between the regulation of capital requirements and banks’ internal structures for formulating lending
policies and for assessing, pricing and monitoring the risks involved in individual operations.
3
BIS Review 134/1999
The Basel Committee has established the guidelines banks are to follow when making arrangements
for credit risk management.
Banks’  directors  play  a  fundamental  role  in  ensuring  both  that  lending  policies  are  consistent  with
banks’ ability to handle credit risks and that periodic cheeks are carried out on the results achieved.
Clear information on policy choices must be given to all bank structures involved in lending.
To ensure that objectives are attained, banks’ top managers must ensure that precise instructions are
circulated setting out the various levels of responsibility, establish operational limits and extend credit
risk management systems to the whole range of bank assets.
When  granting  loans,  banks  should  evaluate  all  the  information  available  in  order  to  acquire  a
complete  profile  of  borrowers,  including  their  exposure  to  cyclical  or  sectoral  events,  group
relationships, if any, the use to which loans are to be put and the sources of the funds that will permit
repayment.
The monitoring of loans should be assigned to qualified personnel working independently of the units
responsible for granting credit.
Internal  rating  systems  call  for  close  liaison  with  the  crucial  aspects  of  risk  management,  such  as
pricing, provisioning and deciding to review loans or ask for their repayment.
Exhaustive and continually updated information on borrowers’ financial positions and on the value of
collateral is fundamental.
The flow of information provided to financial markets is essential to ensure that the discipline they can
impose on banks’ managements is effective. The guidelines established by the Basel Committee for
periodic  reports  to  the  market  cover  all  aspects  of  credit  risk  management:  accounting  practices,
provisioning policies, organization, customer assessment procedures, breakdown of the loan portfolio
by  class  of  borrower,  doubtful  debts,  collateral,  volumes  of  derivatives  and  securitized  loans,
commitments, expected and actual rates of return on loans.
The measures to address credit risk are completed by the activities of supervisory authorities directed
at ensuring the adequacy of each bank’s capital resources in relation to its risk profile and corporate
strategies.  It  is  up  to  supervisory  authorities  to  evaluate  whether  banks’  internal  procedures  can
perform the tasks of identifying, measuring and managing credit risk, to set higher capital ratios for
banks with particularly high risk profiles, to ensure compliance with capital requirements and to take
prompt action to prevent banks’ capital from falling below acceptable levels.
The attention of the Bank of Italy has been directed towards banks’ organizational arrangements for
some time; in 1988 banks were asked to complete a questionnaire on their internal structures, which
provided additional information on their organizations and served as a useful reminder to the banking
system of these issues.
The  importance  of  banks’  organizational  arrangements  is  reflected  in  the  regulatory  framework.
Exactly  one  year  ago  the  Bank  of  Italy’s  instructions  to  banks  and  banking  groups  introduced  a
comprehensive set of provisions aimed at encouraging effective and efficient internal control systems
in proportion to each entity’s size and operational complexity. Banks were also asked to report on the
systems  they  had  adopted,  their  level  of  compliance  with  the  new  provisions,  any  critical  factors
brought to light and the remedial measures required.
While respecting banks’ entrepreneurial independence, general principles have been established that
are  consistent  with  international  guidelines;  these  include  the  separation  between  operational  and
control  functions,  a  clear  definition  of  the  responsibilities  of  banks’  various  units  and  special
regulations to ensure prompt corrective measures.
Particular attention has been dedicated to internal auditing, with a view to ensuring continuous cheeks
on the effectiveness of controls and the preparation of proposals to improve risk management policies,
instruments and procedures.
BIS Review 134/1999
4
The thrust of current action
5.
Briefly, an internal rating system embraces all the elements needed to measure the probability that a
borrower  will  become  insolvent  and  the  share  of  the  loan  that,  in  such  case,  will  no  longer  be
recoverable; together, these two factors give the expected loss for each borrower.
While the probability of failure can be assessed in terms of the borrower’s specific features such as
economic  sector,  financial  structure  and  income  prospects,  the  recovery  rate  for  any  credit  line
depends on factors such as the technical form of the loan, the collateral and the lender’s position in
relation to the borrower’s other creditors.
Statistical methods of calculating these two components of expected losses require  sufficiently  long
time series on the frequencies of failures corresponding to each risk bucket and on the losses sustained
for the various categories of loans and collateral. The issue is made even more complicated by the fact
that both the probabilities of failure and recovery rates are affected by economic trends.
A survey carried out by the Basel Committee of about thirty leading international banks showed that
the problem is being addressed in ways that differ in many respects.
Internal  assessment  procedures  evaluate the quality  of  either  borrowers or  credit  lines,  and  in  some
cases the two profiles are combined.
Evaluations  may  be  based  entirely  on  statistical  models,  or  be  supplemented  with  the  opinions  of
sectoral analysts and lending experts; in some cases limits are set on the scope for altering the results
of statistical calculations by adding qualitative considerations.
The various systems differ in terms of the variables used to approximate the probability of failure for
individual borrowers, the time horizons considered and the use of sectoral analyses. For many banks
the  reliability  of  the  procedures  adopted  is  closely  linked  to  their  ability  to  capture  promptly  any
changes  in  a  borrower’s  solvency  position.  Others,  adopting  a  similar  approach  to  that  of  rating
agencies, prefer so-called “across-the-cycle” evaluations, which consider the borrower’s position in a
hypothetical unfavourable phase of the economic cycle.
A specific probability of failure can be assigned to each internal rating class either on the basis of the
bank’s  own  experience  or  by  using  information  published  by  rating  agencies  on  the  frequency  of
failures.
Evaluations based on internal rating systems can be used by banks’ directors and top management in
formulating lending strategies and setting limits to the autonomous granting of loans; they can also be
used in loan pricing procedures and to ensure the prompt reporting of any deterioration in borrowers’
positions.
The survey carried out in the G-10 countries included a number of Italian banks, mostly major ones,
and  revealed  some  characteristic  features  of  the  approaches  adopted  in  constructing  a  borrower
classification system.
The  business  sector  is  broken  down  by  size;  for  small  and  medium-sized  firms  the  first  level  of
screening for creditworthiness consists mainly of a statistical classification of borrowers based on data
culled from balance sheets and the Central Credit Register. The results of these automatic procedures
are  generally  modified,  within  set  limits,  by  information  concerning  corporate  management  and
organization. In assessing larger firms the statistically-based elements carry less weight.
The recent start made on the systematic observation of the insolvency rates within each risk  bucket
and the losses sustained in connection with secondary lending conditions means that the accuracy of
these procedures cannot be guaranteed, it is still too early to assess the ability of systems to capture
changes in the quality of credit linked to trends in economic activity.
Assessments of individual borrowers usually refer to a time horizon of one year, a practice that most
foreign banks also follow. The models in use are not able to take systematic account of the different
maturities of operations, while economic theory and experience both indicate that the maturity of loans
can have a marked impact on the related credit risks.
5
BIS Review 134/1999
In their risk management procedures, Italian banks are increasingly resorting to models that measure
expected losses; they use the results in deciding whether to grant loans and in reviewing credit lines.
The distinction between the units that calculate ratings, those that are involved in marketing and those
that  perform  control  functions  appears  to  be  well  drawn.  Nonetheless,  the  integration  of  the
customer-classification  systems  of  the  different  components  of  banking  groups  is  not  entirely
satisfactory.
Medium-sized  banks,  of  which  one  of  the  strengths  has  always  been  their  specialized  territorial
knowledge and entrenchment in the local economic tissue, are also making important changes in their
credit risk management procedures. By opening new  branches and  acquiring  local  banks, they  have
rapidly extended their activities to be present on an inter-regional or national basis.
These  banks  have  responded  to  the  need  for  more  effective  and  efficient  loan  selection  procedures
mainly  by  reviewing  their  organizational  arrangements,  improving  their  information  systems  and
tightening their internal controls.
Specialized operational units have been created according to types of customer, with the granting of
large  loans  often  being  referred  to  “Committees”  composed  of  particularly  experienced  head  office
personnel;  procedures  for  assessing  creditworthiness  have  been  improved  through  the  use  of
information technology to coordinate and accelerate the use of available information.
The  enlargement  of  distribution  networks  has  proved  a  strong  incentive  to  decentralizing
decision-making for smaller loans.
To  meet  the  requirements  of  control,  special  organizational  units  have  been  created  to  provide
centralized  monitoring  of  loan  positions;  these  maintain  continuous  contact  with  the  central  and
branch  units  engaged  in  granting  loans,  mostly  through  the  use  of  computerized  procedures  that
identify possible anomalies in positions.
The  most  dynamic  banks  have  supplemented  these  procedures  with  profitability  indicators  for
individual borrowers in order to improve their overall risk-return profiles.
Some of the more progressive medium-sized banks use internal rating procedures to support their loan
portfolio  diversification  policies  and  to  establish  consistent  writedown  and  provisioning  criteria.
Personnel training and specialization programmes need to be intensified in order to foster the spread
and acceptance of new methods.
Specialization profiles of Italian banks
6.
With  the  spread  of  innovative  techniques  of  credit  risk  mitigation,  loan  portfolios  will  tend  to  be
managed  in  more  dynamic  ways  than traditionally,  when  the  focus  was  on  selecting  borrowers  and
maintaining positions until their natural maturity.
The forms of lending specialization that emerge clearly today in the Italian banking system are related
primarily  to  the  type  of  borrower,  defined  in  terms  of  size  and  product  sector.  There  are  important
changes under way in the composition of loan portfolios: one aspect common to the entire system is
the  rapid  growth  in  loans  to  households,  while  the  pattern  of  lending  to  the  corporate  sector  is
diversified.
In the  nineties  loans to  households  have  grown  at an  average  annual  rate  of around  11  per cent,  or
about twice as fast as total lending, and they have risen from 13.8 to 18 per cent of total loans. With
interest  rates  declining  and  productive  activity  growing  only  modestly,  banks  have  grasped  the
opportunities offered by households’ increased demand for credit; at the end of 1998 more than 95 per
cent  of  loans  to  households  were  held  by  the  banking  system,  either  directly  or  through  subsidiary
financial companies.
Indicators such as shifts in the market shares of individual banks and the correlation with their interest
rates show that competition is intense and growing, partly owing to the entrance into the Italian market
of foreign intermediaries specialized in mortgage lending.
BIS Review 134/1999
6
The expansion in the volume of business with households has been helped by the spread of technical
forms of lending whereby intermediaries rely to a great extent on credit scoring techniques to select
borrowers.
In the consumer credit field, which is characterized by a large number of small transactions, the need
to make decisions rapidly and minimize costs encourage the use of automated procedures. In the case
of  loans  for  the  purchase  of  consumer  durable  goods,  the  results  of  credit  scoring  models  are
frequently decisive in deciding whether to lend; in that of personal loans, which are usually for larger
sums,  branch  personnel  are  allowed  greater  discretion;  and,  lastly,  special  agreements  covering
specific groups of borrowers or particular categories of goods are often important.
In the case of mortgage loans, the assessment of the desirability of granting a loan hinges both on the
current and future ability of the borrower to pay and on the effective value of the collateral.
Improvements  to  the  procedures  for  selecting  and  monitoring  loans  to  households  are  possible  and
necessary.  The  proportion  of  bad  debts  is  high;  the  impact  on  banks’  financial  situations  must  be
evaluated  in  the  light  of  the  growing  share  of  such  lending  in  their  portfolios.  Last  June  -  despite
frequent  writeoffs  of  small  positions,  out-of-court  settlements  and  disposals  without  recourse  to
non-bank companies - 9.4 per cent of household loans were classified as bad debts, as against 8 per
cent for other loans.
As regards loans to enterprises, there has been a shift in their composition: in the eighties the share of
lending  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  grew  continuously  throughout  the  banking  system.
Since the early nineties the share of the economic sectors in which small companies predominate, i.e.
those for which the average loan was less than 500 million lire at the end of 1997, has fallen at banks
involved in mergers and acquisitions but has continued to increase for the rest of the system.
A similar pattern has already been analyzed in the US banking system, which has seen far-reaching
consolidation in recent years; it merits special attention in view of the importance of small firms in
Italy’s  industrial  fabric.  The  recent  consolidation  of  the  Italian  banking  system  does  not  allow  a
definitive judgment to be passed on the process: the shift in the composition of loan portfolios could
be the result both of differences in lending policies and of the need to reorganize lending at banks that
are still being integrated; it undoubtedly reflects the need to reduce the riskiness of the loan portfolios
of banks with poor records that have been taken over.
The share of long-term credit to enterprises has not changed significantly. Repeated calls have been
made for enterprises to make more use of medium and long-term financing, which requires banks to
develop  more  detailed  knowledge  of  borrowers,  to  make  accurate  assessments  of  their  earnings
prospects, and consider the shocks that they could be exposed to as a result of adverse developments in
the economy or the financial market.
In  practice  lending  has  continued  to  be  primarily  in  the  form  of  short-term  loans.  Last  June  such
transactions accounted for 35 per cent of the total credit granted to non-financial companies, basically
unchanged  compared  with  the  preceding  years.  With  reference  to  the  companies  surveyed  by  the
Company  Accounts  Data  Service,  lengthening  of  maturities  is  restricted  mainly  to  companies  in
critical conditions that require their debt to be restructured.
The  tendency  of  credit  to  be short-term  has  often  been  seen as  related  to the  practice  of  borrowing
from  several  banks,  which  undermines  the  discipline  the  banking  system  can  impose  on  borrowers
compared with what is possible with relationship banking.
The consolidation of the Italian banking system is leading to less fragmented credit relationships; it
requires  banks  to  adjust  their  policies  and  organizational  arrangements  with  a  view  to  establishing
relationships  with  customers  in  which  more  attention  is  paid  to  their  long-term  needs  and  the
development of suitable forms of corporate finance.
7
BIS Review 134/1999
Conclusions
International experience clearly shows that the stability of banking systems depends above all on the
solidity of the real economy and its ability to follow a path of sustained and balanced growth.
International financial integration offers major opportunities to improve the allocation of savings on a
world scale, accompanied, however, by the risk of unprecedentedly large and sudden systemic crises.
Without  detracting  from  the  importance  of  economic  and  monetary  policies  or  of  the  action  of  the
bodies  entrusted  with  safeguarding  macrofinancial  stability,  the  fundamental  aspect  consists  in  the
steps  banks  take  to  strengthen  their  risk-management  policies  and  procedures  and  to  counter  the
pressure on their margins arising from the growth in competition in national and international markets.
In Europe the presence of many large global firms of  high  standing,  the  dismantling  of the  barriers
inherent in the denomination of securities in different currencies and the possibility of referring to a
single yield curve will foster the development of the market for private sector securities.
For  large  companies,  whose  operations  cover  several  national  markets  and  whose  financial
management  involves  several  different  currencies,  the  new  single  currency  regime  will  reduce  the
need  to  do  business  with  a  plurality  of  banks.  A  reduction  in  the  demand  for  credit  from  prime
companies  appears  possible,  the  spread  of  private  sector  securities  may  cause  problems  for
fund-raising.  Though  marked  by  national  traits  in  legal  and  fiscal  matters,  the  configuration  of  the
financial system of the European Union will becorne more similar to that of the Anglo-Saxon systems.
The  profitability  of  traditional  lending  to  enterprises  is  likely  to  come  under  pressure;  the  need  to
develop business with different categories of customers and to look for profit opportunities in foreign
markets will involve both old and new credit risks.
The  changes  under  way  make  it  necessary  to  grasp  the  growth  opportunities  offered  by  corporate
finance  services;  this  will  give  further  impetus  to  the  spread  of  financial  techniques  for  the
management of risk and to the growth of the securitization market.
The ability to manage risks, above all credit risk, efficiently, will be a competitive strength of crucial
importance;  it  requires  intermediaries  to  adopt  the  innovations  made  possible  by  today’s  statistical
models and financial techniques, to integrate them into their internal organizations, and to develop the
necessary professional skills.
Active management of the loan portfolio, frequently indicated as the new frontier in lending, cannot be
independent of the effectiveness of the traditional procedures, from the assessment of creditworthiness
to the constant monitoring of loan performance.
In  a  market  such  as  Italy’s,  in  which  very  little  recourse  has  been  made  to  rating  by  specialized
agencies,  banks  lacking  an  internal  rating  system  sound  enough  to  be  approved  by  the  supervisory
authorities would find themselves at a competitive disadvantage. Businesses of high standing would
stand to obtain better conditions from other banks able to apply capital charges more consistent with
the riskiness of the financing.
The revision of the capital adequacy framework is a major challenge for Italian banks. The decisions
regarding the formulation of the systems for classifying credit risk will have to be taken according to
the internationally agreed timetable, in the knowledge that the trend is towards greater use of internal
models.
The Italian banking system has a good knowledge of the world of small and medium-sized enterprises
deriving from its close contact with local economies. In constructing systems for the management of
credit risk, it can count on statistical sources that are not always available in other countries, such as
the Company Accounts Data Service and the Central Credit Register.
Banks are becoming increasingly aware of the challenge; they have the necessary capital, know-how
and organizational ability.
On the other side the limited availability of external ratings and the small size of the private capital
market  could  prove  a  serious  obstacle  to  Italian  enterprises’  efforts  to  diversify  their  sources  of
financing and reduce their average cost of borrowing. One is struck, once again, by the competitive
BIS Review 134/1999
8
disadvantage  at  which  the  Italian  economy  stands  owing  to  the  smallness  of  the  share  and  bond
markets.
The  Bank  of  Italy  is  stimulating  and  supporting  the  efforts  of  the  banking  system  to  modernize  its
techniques  for  managing  credit  risk.  It  has  taken  steps  to  ensure  the  proposed  new  regulations  are
widely  disseminated  and  has  launched  consultations  with  bankers  aimed  at  jointly  assessing  the
characteristics that internal ratings will need to have for prudential purposes.
Discussions  will  also  be  held  with  banks  as  part  of  normal  supervisory  activity  and  the  Bank  will
participate in the ad hoc working group set up by ABI, the Italian Bankers’ Association. In addition,
the Bank of Italy will be making information available from its archives, above all those of the Central
Credit  Register,  that  will  be  of  help  in  constructing  systems  for  measuring  expected  losses  on  loan
portfolios.
The  Supervision  Department  is  doing  research  into  techniques  for  measuring  capital  at  risk  on  the
basis of indicators for the companies surveyed by the Company Accounts Data Service or by  using
measures  of  sectoral  and  locational  riskiness  to  approximate  that  of  borrowers.  The  estimates  of
riskiness obtained in this way have been used in determining the share of bad debts deemed not to be
recoverable.
These studies are the natural follow-on of the work begun in the early nineties to establish statistical
methods  for  measuring  the  fragility  of  non-financial  companies  on  the  basis  of  balance-sheet  data;
further  improvements  have  been  made  recently  by  combining  the  estimates  with  indicators  of
difficulties  in  serving  loans  taken  from  the  Central  Credit  Register  and  extending  the  analysis  to  a
sample of rnore than 400,000 companies.
The research under way is expected to produce results that will be of help in the analyses and tests that
will have to be carried out for the validation of the internal rating systems banks adopt.
Increasing the competitiveness of the Italian banking system, and of the economy as a whole, requires
continuous improvements in the methods used for granting and managing credit, and the development
of the corporate finance services needed to foster small and medium-sized enterprises’ access to the
capital market.
It  is  necessary  to  capitalize  on  Italian  banks’  greatest  strength:  the  wealth  of  information  and
relationships accumulated over the years in doing business with their customers and turn it to account
in creating effective internal rating systems.
I am sure that Italian banks, faced with this new challenge in the most typical of all banking activities,
the  management  of  credit,  will  succeed  in  developing  the  instruments  and  mind-set  needed  by
companies operating in markets that have been opened up to competition by the efforts over the last
ten years of Parliament, the regulatory authorities and intermediaries themselves.
9
BIS Review 134/1999
