Mr Noyer briefly outlines the historic evolution of EMU
and summarises the experience gained with the euro
Speech delivered by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the London
School of Economics and Political Science on 6 December 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a pleasure and an honour for me to speak here at the London School of Economics and Political
Science today. Since the introduction of the euro, this distinguished university has attracted numerous
speakers from the European Central Bank (ECB). In my remarks I should like to briefly outline the
historic evolution of Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) and to summarise the experience gained
with the euro in this first year. By subsequently addressing forthcoming challenges, I should then like
to span the bridge towards the future.
The single currency offers a great opportunity to achieve the objective  of  sustained  and  widespread
price stability in Europe. For the euro to become a “success story” as the single currency for around
300 million people, the confidence of the population in the stability of the new currency and in the
Eurosystem, i.e. the ECB and the national central banks (NCBs) of the 11 participating Member States
of the European Union (EU), plays a crucial role. The Eurosystem has already made a great deal of
progress  in  building  up  its  credibility  and  gaining  a  sound  reputation  in  financial  markets  for  its
monetary policy in its short history.
The establishment of a “stability culture” throughout the euro area will contribute to the stability of the
euro. The foundations of this stability culture are to be found in a broad consensus among Europeans
that the maintenance of price stability is of utmost importance. A stability culture also facilitates the
achievement of other objectives, such as high employment.
Let  me  emphasise  that  the  establishment  of  Monetary  Union  marks  an  outstanding  historical
achievement. With the introduction of the euro, integration in Europe has gained a new quality both
from an economic and from a political perspective.
Launching the euro - historic evolution
The “short past of the euro” was preceded by a long period of preparation and discussion about closer
monetary integration. Let me briefly recall the major milestones in this process. First steps towards the
introduction  of  a  single  European  currency  were  taken  almost  30  years  ago  when  the  six  initial
Member  States  of  the  European  Economic  Community  proposed  a  plan  for  the  creation  of  an
economic and monetary union. This culminated in the so-called Werner report which was named after
the former Prime Minister of Luxembourg who chaired the group in charge of the study.
Following the collapse of the Bretton-Woods system of quasi-fixed exchange rates, with the US dollar
as a “gold-convertible” anchor currency, most countries in Europe switched to flexible exchange rates.
For many observers, this world-wide retreat from fixed exchange rate systems came close to an early
knock-out for the idea of monetary union in Europe. However, in reaction, the  European  Economic
Community adopted a new resolution which established a fluctuation band of 2.25% within which the
currencies of Member States were permitted to float. This so-called “snake in the tunnel” lasted only a
few  years.  It  demonstrated  the  difficulties  in  maintaining  fixed  exchange  rates  in  Europe  among
countries with diverging inflation rates and a lack of co-ordinated economic policies.
European  monetary  integration  received  a  fresh  impetus  with  the  establishment  of  the  European
Monetary System (EMS) 20 years ago. The EMS was designed as a symmetric system of fixed but
adjustable  rates.  It  allowed  member  currencies  to  float  within  bands  of  2.25%  above  and  below
bilaterally  fixed  central  exchange  rates.  Symmetric  intervention  obligations  aimed  at  stabilising  the
1
BIS Review 133/1999
exchange rates of members within the bands were part of this exchange rate mechanism. In cases of
misalignments, the possibility of realigning parities was foreseen.
In  June  1988,  under  the  chairmanship  of  Jacques  Delors,  a  former  President  of  the  European
Commission,  a  report  regarding  the  introduction  of  a  single  currency  was  initiated.  This  report
concluded  with  the  recommendation  to  achieve  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  a  three-stage
process.  The  first  stage  already  started  on  1  July  1990  and  focused  mainly  on  the  increased
co-ordination  of  economic  and  monetary  policies  between  the  Member  States.  With  a  view  to
increasing  the  integration  of  financial  and  capital  markets  during  this  stage,  existing  barriers  were
gradually removed. In November 1993 the Maastricht Treaty was ratified, thereby creating the legal
foundations for a supranational monetary union in Europe.
In  1994,  only  5  years  ago,  the  second  stage  of  EMU  began.  At  that  time  the  European  Monetary
Institute (EMI) was created as the precursor to the European Central Bank. Its task was to carry out
preparatory work and to contribute to the realisation of the conditions necessary for the transition to
the third  stage  of  EMU.  In  that  phase,  Member  States increased their efforts to  conduct  disciplined
economic and monetary policies so as to fulfil the necessary conditions for the adoption of a single
currency,  in  particular  the  so-called  convergence  criteria  which  concerned  inflation  rates,  budget
deficits,  government  debt  ratios, exchange  rates and interest rates. Member  States  were  expected  to
make  further  efforts  so  as  to  ensure  a  smooth  transition  to  Stage  Three.  For  example,  they  had  to
amend national laws so as  to  make  them  compatible  with  the Treaty  and  to  make  their  NCBs  fully
independent before the start of Stage Three. In 1995, three new Member States - Austria, Finland and
Sweden - joined the European Union.
Finally, on 1 January 1999, the European Union reached a new and unprecedented stage of economic
integration.  With  the  launch  of  the  euro,  11  countries  gave  up  their  monetary  sovereignty  and
transferred  the  task  of  conducting  the  single  monetary  policy  to  a  supranational  institution.  This
historic step marked the culmination of a long period of successful preparatory work, the magnitude of
which can hardly be overestimated. As a result of these efforts, the introduction of the euro took place
in an environment of price stability that only a few observers would have predicted some years ago.
The  start  of  Monetary  Union  proved  to  be  a  formidable  undertaking.  In  spite  of  huge  operational
challenges, the changeover took place without any incidents affecting the orderly functioning of the
monetary  system,  not  least  as  a  result  of  the  successful  preparatory  work  of  the  EMI  and,  since
mid-1998, the Eurosystem.
The introduction of the euro had important implications for the international capital markets. This was
due  to  the  fact  that  a  number  of  the  currencies  replaced  by  the  euro  had  played  an  important
international  role  in  the  past.  It  also  holds  true  because  the  euro  has  become  the  currency  of  an
economic area which roughly equals the United States in terms of economic size and external trade,
and which has the world’s second largest capital market.
First experience gained with the euro
Let  me  describe  the  first  experience  gained  with  the  euro  from  the  ECB’s  point  of  view.  The
Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  provides financial  markets  and the  public  with an  important
framework  on  the  basis  of  which  monetary  policy  decisions  can  be  explained  in  a  consistent  and
predictable manner. In our view, the monetary policy strategy has passed its first tests successfully.
At the core of the strategy is  a  clear  primary  objective  for  price  stability.  A  clear  definition for the
overriding  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  contributes  to  stabilising  market
expectations. The  Eurosystem  defines  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year  increase  of  below  2%  in  the
Harmonised  Index  of  Consumer  Prices (HICP)  for  the  euro  area. The  Eurosystem  aims  to  maintain
price stability in line with this definition over the medium term.
Let  me  briefly  outline  how  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  helps  the  ECB  Governing
Council to fulfil its task of maintaining price stability in the euro area. The first pillar of that monetary
policy strategy assigns a prominent role to money. There is a broad consensus that inflation is actually
BIS Review 133/1999
2
a monetary phenomenon in the medium term. Therefore, monetary developments provide an important
benchmark  for  any  monetary  policy  that  is  aimed  at  safeguarding  price  stability.  To  emphasise  the
prominent  role  assigned  to  money,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  announced  a  quantitative
reference value for monetary growth in terms of the broad definition of M3 in October 1998. The first
reference  value  was  set  at  a  rate  of  4½%  per  annum.  At  its  last  meeting,  the  Governing  Council
reviewed  this  reference  value  and  concluded  that  the  assumptions  underlying  its  derivation  remain
valid. Thus, there was no reason to change the reference value of 4½% M3 growth per annum. The
Governing  Council  has  decided  henceforth  to  review  the  reference  value  on  a  regular  annual  basis,
with the next review to take place in December 2000.
I should like to emphasise in this connection that the reference value is not an annual target. First, it is
based on medium-term assumptions and serves as a guide for developments over the  medium  term.
Second,  the  ECB  is  not  committed  to  ensure  that  M3  grows  in  line  with  the  reference  value  at  a
particular point in time.
The  ECB  does not focus  solely  on  money.  The  problem  with looking  only  at  money  is  that,  in  the
short  run,  the  relationship  between  money  and  prices  can  be  distorted  by  portfolio  shifts  and
institutional factors. Short-term developments in money therefore need to be analysed very carefully.
Against this background, the Governing Council of the ECB has always communicated to the public
that  it  cannot  and  will  not  react  mechanically  to  deviations  of  actual  monetary  growth  from  the
reference  value.  In  this  sense,  the  concept  underlying  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  is  different  from
monetary targeting in the traditional sense. Monetary policy should always react to all the information
available  with  a  view  to  maintaining  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  For  this  reason,  the
Eurosystem’s strategy is based on two pillars.
The  second  pillar  of  the  monetary  policy  strategy  is  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for
price  developments  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  This  assessment  encompasses  a  wide  range  of
indicator  variables,  including  macroeconomic  projections  produced  both  within  and  outside  the
Eurosystem.
Within the stability-oriented monetary policy strategy, the exchange rate is an important variable for
the  Eurosystem  as  it  is  one  of  the  determinants  of  the  outlook  for  price  stability.  If  exchange  rate
developments  pose  a threat  to  price stability  in  the  euro  area,  this  threat  will  be  taken  into  account
together with the information on price developments revealed by all other indicators.
The chosen strategy is forward-looking in nature and oriented to the medium term. It is sufficiently
flexible to allow for appropriate responses to specific shocks. The monetary policy strategy eschews
mechanistic reactions to any single indicator, including monetary aggregates or inflation forecasts.
There have been some suggestions that the ECB should abandon  its two-pillar  strategy  over  time.  I
clearly do not share this view. I am convinced that our strategy has worked very well and will continue
to  be appropriate  for the euro  area.  There  is  broad  consensus  that  the  uncertainties  surrounding  the
start of Stage Three were unprecedented in European history and continue to require special attention.
The Eurosystem has a framework which truly reflects the complexity of the economy. It also allows
account to be taken of the possibility of a regime shift at the start of Stage Three which could impact
on  the  stability  of  important  economic  relationships.  It  would  be  impossible  for  the  Eurosystem  to
conduct  a  successful  monetary  policy  by  mechanistically  following  a  simple  rule  whereby  policy
decisions are closely linked to a single indicator.
The  ECB  has  committed  itself  to  be  open,  transparent  and  accountable.  For  this  reason,  the  ECB
provides  the  general  public  with  detailed  background  information  on  its  monetary  policy  and  the
Governing  Council’s  interest  rate  decisions.  For  example,  immediately  after  the  first  Governing
Council meeting each month, the introductory statement of the President is released. This practice is
similar to the publication of minutes, and has the advantage of presenting the Council’s assessment of
the  economic  situation  almost  instantaneously  after  the  meeting.  Each  month  the  ECB  publishes  a
bulletin providing additional  background  information  to explain  its  current  assessment  of  monetary,
financial and other economic developments in more detail. Once a year, the ECB releases an annual
report on its activities to the European Community institutions.
3
BIS Review 133/1999
As mentioned earlier, the Governing Council regularly carries out an independent assessment of the
monetary,  economic  and  financial  conditions  prevailing  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  These
deliberations of the Governing Council provide the basis for monetary policy decision-making at the
euro area level. Let me now very briefly recall the most important factors influencing the interest rate
decisions taken by the Eurosystem in the course of 1999.
In the first few months of this year, there were increasing indications that the negative effects of the
crises in Asia and Russia on growth and employment in the euro area might be more serious than had
initially been expected. With the apparent cyclical slowdown in economic growth in the euro area, the
balance of risks to future price stability moved significantly to the downside. This assessment was also
reflected  in  the  downward  revisions  to  the  inflation  forecasts  of  international  organisations.  At  that
point in time, growth was slightly above the reference value, but there were several indications - also
against  the  background  of  historically  low  interest  rates  -  that  M3  was  temporarily  being  distorted
upwards in early 1999 as a result of the changeover to Stage Three of EMU. Thus, in early 1999, it did
not  appear  that  M3  growth  revealed  upside  risks  to  price  stability,  in  particular  as  non-monetary
indicators pointed to increased downside risks for future price developments. All in all, the forward-
looking  and  medium-term  orientation  of  the  single  monetary  policy  made  it  necessary  for  the
Governing Council to take action. With a view to maintaining price stability in the euro area over the
medium  term,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  thus  decided  at  the  beginning  of  April  1999  to
reduce the interest rates on the main refinancing operations by 50 basis points to 2.5%.
At around the beginning of the summer, it appeared that prospects for economic growth in the euro
area had improved. During the summer months both pillars of the Eurosystem’s strategy concurred in
indicating  that  the  balance  of  risks  to  future  price  stability  had  gradually  been  moving  towards  the
upside. Monetary growth had increased considerably in the course of 1999. The three-month average
stood at 5.9% for the period from July to September 1999. Even when the data was adjusted for the
somewhat specific movements of M3 in January and February, we could see that the annualised figure
for M3  growth from  March  to  September  was  6.1%.  All  this  took  place  in  a  significantly  different
economic  environment  than  in  April.  For  this  reason,  the  Governing  Council  had  to  react.  On
4 November  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  raise  the  interest  rates  on  the  main  refinancing
operations by 50 basis points to 3.0%.
The increase in interest rates at that point in time was aimed at helping to counter the upward pressure
on future prices and  at contributing  to  keeping  inflation expectations safely  below  2%. The interest
rate decision was thus taken in a forward-looking manner which focused on maintaining price stability
and would thus contribute to sustaining non-inflationary economic growth in the  euro  area over  the
medium term.
I  think  that  this  comparison  between  the  two  decisions  to  change  ECB  interest  rates  in  April  and
November  is instructive.  It  shows  that  we  do  not  react  mechanistically  to  individual  indicators,  but
always  interpret  the  movements  and  signals  in  all  of  the  indicators  evident  in  both  pillars  in
conjunction  with  each  other.  As  we  can  see,  this  is  a  more  reasonable  approach  than  relying  on  a
simple indicator, given that we are living in a complex world.
After having discussed our strategy and the rationale behind our monetary policy decisions against the
background of that strategy, I should like to say a few words about the Eurosystem’s monetary policy
instruments. The single monetary policy of the Eurosystem is based on an operational framework that
is  common  for  all  euro  area  countries.  This  operational  framework  turned  out  to  be  an  effective
instrument  for  steering  money  market  interest  rates  and  for  limiting  fluctuations  in  overnight  rates.
The  Eurosystem  influences  money  market  conditions  mainly  through  its  regular  open  market
operations.  The  weekly  main  refinancing  operations  provide  the  banking  system  with  short-term
liquidity  and  the  interest  rate  on  this  instrument  gives  an  indication  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary
policy stance. In addition, the “standing facilities” effectively limit fluctuations in the money market
interest  rate.  Finally,  the  averaging  provisions  of  the  minimum  reserve  system  have  contributed
towards smoothing daily fluctuations in the money market.
The success of this operational framework can be demonstrated by the fact that the Eurosystem has not
yet  found  it  necessary  to  recourse  to  any  fine-tuning  operations.  Moreover,  since  January,  active
BIS Review 133/1999
4
market participants have typically and quickly eliminated cross-country interest rate differentials in the
money  market  through  arbitrage.  Overall,  developments  in  short-term  money  market  interest  rates
have  thus far  been  very  stable  and  money  market  rates  have,  on  average,  been  close  to  the  interest
rates at which the ECB has provided liquidity through its weekly main refinancing operations.
For an efficient conduct of monetary policy operations, it is essential to have the support of a powerful
payment  system.  Since  its  establishment,  TARGET  has  become  one  of  the  largest  real-time  gross
settlement  payment  systems  in  the  world.  The  system  has  increased  the  use  of  real-time  gross
settlement in the EU by roughly 20% since the introduction of the euro. According to available data
for  September,  the  system  now  processes  approximately  3.5  million  domestic  and  cross-border
payments,  which  have  a  total  value  of  about  EUR  20  trillion,  per  month.  Moreover,  cross-border
payments represent 40% of the value of all TARGET payments.
The long future of the euro
Let me now try to look ahead towards the “long future of the euro” and the challenges which the ECB
and  the  Eurosystem  will  have  to  address.  The  experience  with  the  short  past  of  the  euro  justifies
expectations  that  we  will  gradually  see  further  advances  towards  a  broadening  of  economic  and
monetary integration in the future. With the establishment of the Eurosystem, solid foundations for a
stable currency were laid. Maintaining price stability in the euro area helps to gain credibility and the
confidence of European citizens in the stability of the euro. This will also contribute to the increased
use of the euro outside the euro area.
Expectations  of  a  long  future  for  the  euro  seem  warranted  in  light  of  the  increasing  confidence  of
European citizens and international investors in the single currency. The international interest in the
euro  is  indeed  evident,  for  example,  from  international  new  bond  issues.  According  to  information
from the Bank for International Settlements, the volume of new issues in euro almost doubled in gross
terms in the first half of 1999, compared with the same period last year.
An  important  challenge  for  both  monetary  policy  and  economic  policies  is  to  maintain  non-
inflationary growth in the euro area. In the forthcoming years - I am confident - we will see that the
current  recovery  has  extended  to  become  a  period  of  price  stability  contributing  to  prolonged
employment  and  output  growth.  However,  there  are  important  conditions  to  be  met  to  achieve  a
substantial  and  sustained  increase  in  output  growth  and  lower  unemployment.  First  of  all,  decisive
measures to address the structural problems in Europe, in particular in the area of labour markets, are
needed.  Second,  the  consolidation  of  public  finances,  which  has  made  considerable  progress  in  the
past few years, has to be continued and, where necessary, strengthened.
Sound fiscal policies make monetary policy’s task of maintaining price stability easier. In this context,
the Stability and Growth Pact is a crucial element. Its aim is to encourage the pursuit of disciplined
and sustainable fiscal policies by both the participating EU Member States and prospective members.
In so doing, it can contribute significantly to the establishment of favourable conditions for sustained
economic growth and high employment in the medium term.
In  the  coming  years,  the  success  of  EMU  demands  that  the  clear  distribution  of  responsibilities
between the Eurosystem and government authorities, as set out in the Maastricht Treaty, is followed.
This  clear  separation  of  responsibilities  is  efficient,  transparent  and  conducive  to  accountability.  It
takes account of the substantial empirical evidence and practical experience of the fact that monetary
policy  makes  its  best  possible  contribution  to  the  achievement  of  other  goals  by  focusing  on  the
primary  objective  of  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  enhancing  the
credibility of both monetary and economic policies in Europe.
The high degree of implicit co-ordination between economic policies and the single monetary policy
which can be achieved if policy-makers each focus individually on their overriding objectives supports
the view that the Eurosystem should not engage in ex ante policy co-ordination which could be falsely
interpreted  as  negotiations  with  other  policy-makers  on  its  monetary  policy  stance.  By  agreeing  to
condition monetary policy actions to certain fiscal and structural policies or wage developments, such
co-ordination might hinder the Eurosystem’s prompt response to threats to price stability arising from
other sources. If market expectations were to reflect a belief that the effectiveness and success of the
5
BIS Review 133/1999
single  monetary  policy  would  be  constrained  by  any  kind  of  co-ordination,  this  could  threaten  the
maintenance of price stability.
In the course of the next decade, we will also see the accession of a number of new Member States to
the European Union and possibly to the euro area. It is clear that the envisaged extension of the EU to
include new members and, ultimately, the enlargement of the euro area represent important challenges
both  for  Member  States  and  for  the  Eurosystem.  Any  enlargement  of  the  euro  area  is  subject  to
political decisions, and not automatic. I should like to recall that the Maastricht Treaty provides for a
clear  and  transparent  procedure,  which lays  down  the  conditions  for  EU  Member  States  wishing  to
join the euro area. The basic prerequisite is that the convergence criteria must be complied with. This
should ensure that Member States provide evidence of sufficient economic convergence with the euro
area before adopting the euro.
The introduction of the euro in other countries will require not only compliance with the convergence
criteria, but also further preparatory work in various areas. For example, new members have to ensure
that the harmonised framework in which the single monetary policy operates is fully in place prior to
their  participation  in  the  euro  area.  Statistics  need  further  adaptation  so  as  to  comply  with  the
Eurosystem’s reporting requirements. Some changes in national legislation are needed to formally lay
the foundations for the introduction of the euro. Finally, all procedures that involve the Eurosystem
and  the  prospective  member  country  will  have  to  pass  a  number  of  real-time  tests  in  order  to
demonstrate that the infrastructure is operational.
Conclusions
In  summary,  the  first  year  of  operation  of  the  ECB  has  been  successful  and  the  monetary  policy
strategy of the ECB has proved to be a valuable tool both in supporting monetary policy decisions and
in explaining these decisions to the general public in a transparent manner. As to the time ahead, the
ECB  will  do  its  utmost  to  maintain  price  stability  in  the  euro  area.  In  our  view,  this  is  the  best
contribution  the  ECB  can  make  to  sustained  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area.  Maintaining  price
stability  in  the  euro  area  will  contribute  to  the  credibility  of  the  single  monetary  policy  and  to  the
stability of the single currency. It will pave the way for the long future of the euro.
BIS Review 133/1999
6
