Mr Chon speaks on the topic of
restructuring and monetary policy in Korea
Speech  given  by  Mr Chol-Hwan Chon,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  to  the  European  Union
Chamber of Commerce in Korea, in Seoul on 12 October 1999.
 It is a great pleasure for me to speak on the topic of “Restructuring and Monetary Policy” to embassy
staff  and  businessmen  from  the  EU,  who  are  contributing  so  greatly  to  furthering  the  economic
cooperation between Europe and Korea.
The European Union opened up a new chapter in the history of the world economy this year with its
successful launch of a common currency, thereby creating a true single market and becoming a single
economic entity. Economic exchanges between Europe and Korea will become more dynamic thanks
to the integration. In particular, more and more European companies are expected to enter Korea since
it  is  opening  up  for  foreign  inward  investment.  Such  investment  will  serve  as  a  basis  for  further
strengthening the relationship between Europe and Korea.
Prospects for the Korean economy
Before I launch myself into the topic, I would first like to give you a brief introduction to the Korean
economy and its prospects.
The Korean economy, which recorded negative 5.8% growth last year due to the ramifications of the
foreign  exchange  crisis,  is  now  recovering  at  a  considerable  speed.  The  GDP  growth  rate  stood  at
7.3%  for  the  first  half  of  this  year  and  when  the  continuous  increase  of  manufacturing  and
consumption related indexes are taken into consideration, the growth rate for the whole of this year is
forecast to be as high as 8.8%. Imports have increased but thanks to strong exports, Korea’s current
account is seen to continue in surplus this year, reaching about US$21 billion . The annual average rise
in the CPI is expected to be around the 1% level despite destabilizing factors such as the rapid growth
of the economy and the international oil price hike.
As  is  clearly  illustrated  by  the  GDP  growth  numbers,  the  Korean  economy  has  rediscovered  its
vitality. This is due to hard efforts by all participants in the Korean economy.
The foreign currency crisis erupted in part because of  some  fault  lines  in  the  international financial
architecture, but in retrospect, the structural problems of the Korean economy were the major cause.
Based on this recognition, the Korean government is strongly pushing for  restructuring  measures to
overcome  fundamentally  the frailties of the Korean  economy  that  have  surfaced  in  the  wake  of  the
financial crisis. The topic of my speech has been selected with this in mind.
The role of the central bank in the restructuring process
Rather than explaining in great detail about Korea’s restructuring measures or their outcomes, I would
like to focus on how the central bank is contributing to the process through its monetary policy.
The restructuring process requires both a micro and an administrative approach since it aims to reform
individual companies and financial institutions. Therefore government ministries in a position to draft
and  revise  legislation,  or  those  government  agencies  which  oversee  or  monitor  the  detailed
management  of  financial  institutions,  should  be  in  charge  of  the  process.  The  central  bank,  on  the
other hand, faces natural limits on the extent to which it can share actively in the restructuring process.
It  conducts  monetary  policy  based  on  the  efficient  workings  of  the  market  rather  than  on
administrative  devices  or  legislation.  Moreover,  monetary  policy  influences  economic  entities  as  a
whole rather than acting on individual institutions or businesses.
1
BIS Review 120/1999
Despite  these  limitations,  a  central  bank  can  contribute  to  the  restructuring  process  within  the
monetary policy framework. There are four ways in which it may do so.
Create a macroeconomic environment conducive to the restructuring process
1.
First, the central bank creates an economic environment which helps the successful implementation of
restructuring measures.
The  economy  needs  some  degree  of  dynamism  if  restructuring  measures  are  to  be  implemented
smoothly.
Looking back,  most restructuring was carried out when the real economy had  contracted  due to the
ripple effects of a crisis. Korea is not the only country  to  experience  negative  growth  after  a crisis.
Several countries which suffered a crisis in the 1990s including three Scandinavian countries, Mexico,
Thailand and Malaysia all went through a period of negative growth lasting for one or two years.
However,  a  deep  economic  downturn is  likely  to  act as  an  obstacle  to  successful  restructuring.  If  a
company or a financial institution is to improve its financial structure, it should pay back its debt by
realizing profits or increasing its capital through a public offering. During a recession, such attempts
do not yield the desired outcomes.  Moreover, since job mobility decreases significantly in a recession,
bold management rationalization which inevitably entails large-scale job shedding, is difficult to carry
out.
Another reason why a certain degree of economic vitality is necessary for successful rescheduling is
related with the problem of the “black sheep” of the economy. When a specific sector clearly needs
emergency surgery, but it is feared that there  would  be  a  heavy  toll  in terms  of  unemployment  and
financial market disturbance, then the government will be tempted to put off the operation, especially
when the economy is depressed. This sector will remain the “black sheep” of the economy for as long
as  the  economy  does  not  pull  itself  out  of  recession,  gradually  turning  into  a  time-bomb  for  the
economy  as  a  whole.  For  example,  if  the  Korean  economy  had  not  recovered  this  year,  the
restructuring of the Daewoo Group (a large chaebol some of whose interlinked companies have been
placed under a workout program) and the problems involving investment trust companies - two major
issues  which  have  come  to  the  fore  since  July - might  have  remained  under  the  surface  with  the
potential to cause even greater trouble in the future.
This  all  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  economic  recovery  is  vital  for  the  smooth  implementation  of
restructuring  measures.  Having  said  this,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  if  the  economy  recovers  too
quickly  and  exuberantly,  causing  overheating,  economic  units  may  not  feel  the  need  to  restructure
themselves.
Too low interest rates choke off companies’ incentives to reduce their debt. With the improved cash
flow,  companies  are  lured  into  expanding  their  business.  Also,  financial  institutions  become  less
interested in clearing bad debt from their books since the opportunity cost of holding it decreases with
lower interest rates.
Another problem can spring up in the choice of monetary policy stance when inflationary pressures
begin  to  rise  due  to  an  over-accommodating  policy.  In  most  cases,  the  period  of  restructuring
corresponds  to  a  deflationary  phase  so  that  the  central  bank  can  ease  monetary  policy  without
worrying about inflation. However, if inflation raises its head before the restructuring has proceeded
very far, the central bank may be in a position where it has to choose between price stabilization and
maintaining an environment favorable to the restructuring process. This is a dilemma for the central
bank  because  either  choice  will  have  negative  effects.  If  the  central  bank,  for  example,  adopts  a
monetary-tightening  stance  to  fight  inflation,  then  the  short-term  profitability  of  companies  and
financial institutions will deteriorate, which may blunt the momentum for restructuring. On the other
hand, if a relaxed monetary policy stance is maintained to keep restructuring on the road, prices rise
and companies may once again turn to their debt-dependent, expansionary management style, which
ran riot in the past. As a result, people will come to lose faith in restructuring itself.
BIS Review 120/1999
2
For successful restructuring, therefore, the economy must not be allowed to overheat nor should the
recovery  be  less  than  adequate.  Achieving  a  well-balanced,  unbiased  economic  environment  for
sustainable growth creates the best condition for reform measures. In other words, the central bank has
to  conduct  monetary  policy  supportive  of  economic  recovery,  but  subject  to  the  constraint  that
adequate  discipline  is  exercised  over  economic  entities  so  that  they  have  their  own  incentives  for
change. Such a policy, by its nature, does not attract the spotlights, but it is quite important in that it
may affect the final outcome of the restructuring measures.
In this regard, the Bank of Korea has been steadily lowering interest rates since the second quarter of
1998. As a result, the Korean economy is showing clear signs of recovery and on the basis of these
trends, the restructuring process is well under way. However, in May 1999, the Bank decided against a
further lowering of the overnight call rate, which is its policy rate, taking the view that the economic
recovery was proceeding at a faster pace than expected, and that asset prices had risen sharply within a
short period.
Recently, even though the economic recovery has been gaining greater momentum, the Bank of Korea
has maintained call rate unchanged, which implies that it takes a neutral position. The reasons behind
this decision are that no signs of imminent inflation are visible, and that the financial  markets  have
been unsettled by the restructuring of the Daewoo Group.
Supply liquidity to ensure financial market stability
2.
Second, the central bank should supply liquidity flexibly in response to the financial market turmoil
which may arise in the course of restructuring.
It  is  quite  common  for  the  financial  market  to  become  destabilized  during  the  process  of  structural
adjustment due to high credit risks and reduced trust among market participants. As a result, a credit
crunch may occur, which brings about a prolonged economic recession because financial institutions
and  corporations  may  not  be  able  to  raise  sufficient  money  for  their  normal  operation.  In  addition,
market participants favor the short-term end of the market. The consequent large pool of short-term
funds  makes  the  movements  of  interest  rates  and  stock  prices  extremely  volatile,  while  financial
institutions may become illiquid because of the short-term nature of their liabilities and the long-term
nature of their assets.
Admittedly,  financial  market  unrest  is  unavoidable  in  the  process  of  restructuring.  However,  if  the
degree of unrest becomes so acute as to be insupportable, it may threaten to cut short reform itself.
Therefore, the central bank, which is supposed to be responsible for stabilizing financial markets, can
take an active role by providing liquidity through open market operations.
At  the  outset  of  the  crisis,  the  Bank  of  Korea  provided  funds  to  stabilize  the  financial  markets  in
response  to  market  turbulence,  and  it  induced  banks  to  expand  lending  to  small  and  medium
enterprises in order to ease the credit crunch whose effects were concentrated on them.
A central bank can play a role as a lender of last resort in order to maintain financial market stability.
However, the role of the lender of last resort must be carried out following strict rules, since a central
bank’s right to issue paper money can be easily abused and invite moral hazard on the part of financial
institutions.  First,  the  central  bank  must  maintain  “constructive  ambiguity”  to  prevent  individual
financial institutions from becoming too dependent on it. This phrase means that although the central
bank is able to intervene in the market to insure financial stability, it must not give any assurance of a
bailout  to  individual  financial  institutions,  whether  covertly  or  overtly.  Second,  even  if  support  is
given to individual financial institutions, punitive rates or at least market interest rates must be applied
in order to avoid the exploitation of the interest rates differential. Lastly, an element of conditionality
including a resolute self-rescue plan must be clearly imposed and its performance closely monitored
by the central bank.
3
BIS Review 120/1999
Mediate structural adjustment
3.
Third, the central bank may play the role of a mediator in the process of restructuring.
There have been examples of some central banks mediating in debt rescheduling negotiation among
interested  parties.  The  Bank  of  England,  for  instance,  was  actively  involved  in  corporate  sector
restructuring  from  the  1970s  until  quite  recently  upon  the  voluntary  request  of  creditor  banks.  The
Federal  Reserve  System  of  the  United  States  has  also  served  as  a  mediator  when  cash-strapped
financial institutions were on the brink of failure.
There  are  many  reasons  why  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  were  able  to
mediate in the restructuring process. One of them, I believe, is that at that time they both undertook the
responsibilities of financial supervision. If a central bank supervises banks, it can accurately analyze
their current business conditions and status. Moreover, it can also get easy access to information on
individual companies which borrow money from them. The central bank, therefore, can be an effective
mediator.  In  addition,  the  strong  credibility  arising  from  their  carefully  cultivated  reputation  for
neutrality  and  fairness,  may  well  have  helped  in  reconciling  the  conflicting  interests  of  the  groups
involved.
In  the  case  of  Korea,  the  relationships  between  financial  institutions  and  enterprises,  and  those
between individual enterprises are closely intertwined. Therefore, structural reform in Korea cannot be
restricted to one or the other specific sectors: rather, it should be very broadly based. This implies that
in  Korea,  perhaps  more  than  in  any  other  country,  accurate  analysis  of  financial  institutions  and
enterprises  is  badly  needed  for  successful  restructuring.    However,  since  the  revision  of  the  related
legislation in April last year, the Bank of Korea can no longer supervise banks directly. Consequently,
it  is  not  easy  for  it  to  monitor  and  scrutinize  the  business  conditions  of  individual  banks  and
enterprises, making it hard for the Bank to serve as a mediator.
Foster international cooperation to improve overseas confidence
4.
Lastly,  the  central  bank  can  contribute  to  brightening  the  country’s  external  credibility  by  closely
cooperating with international financial circles.
Restructuring  entails  extensive  friction  and  conflict  on  the  domestic  front.  So  if  the  process  is  to
proceed  smoothly,  it  is  imperative  to  avoid  extra  turbulence  stemming  from  international  investors
who  have  large  claims  on  Korea.  This  requires  that  international  confidence  in  the  country  be
maintained at the existing level or, if possible, improved. To be sure, international credit ratings will
be  upgraded  with  substantial  progress  in  the  reform  drive,  but  it  is  also  very  important  to  reassure
foreign investors and to keep them well posted as to the domestic economic situation. Towards this
end, international cooperation is necessary, and the central bank, I believe, is well suited for this job,
in particular, on financial matters.
A  number  of  cooperative  groupings  linking  central  banks  like  BIS  (Bank  for  International
Settlements),  EMEAP (Executives’ Meeting  of  East  Asia  and  Pacific  Central  Banks)  and  SEACEN
(South East Asian Central Banks) have already been set up. They allow governors and working level
officials  of  the  central  banks  ample  opportunities  to  discuss  current  issues  and  build  up
mutually-cooperative  relationships.  In  an  emergency,  central  bank  governors  are  thus  able  to  tackle
issues very promptly thanks to their close contacts and cooperation. By the influence they hold over
their domestic financial institutions, the central banks are well-placed to persuade them to prolong the
maturities of overseas credits and provide fresh loans at the request of a fellow central bank, and to
promote a better understanding of the economic situation of the debtor countries.
Closing remarks
The  Bank  of  Korea  has  supported  the  smooth  implementation  of  structural  reform  through  open
market operations and financial market stabilization policy. In the future, the Bank intends to conduct
a  balanced  monetary  policy  both  to  ensure  the  success  of  restructuring  and  to  support  economic
BIS Review 120/1999
4
recovery. It is also supporting structural adjustment indirectly through the strengthening of cooperative
links among central banks worldwide.
I  am  fully  aware  that  there  are  critics  overseas  who  rate  Korea’s  structural  reform  as  far  from
satisfactory. However, as the experience of other countries attests, it is difficult to achieve satisfactory
outcomes  in  a  short  time  because  restructuring  by  definition  entails  conflict  and  pain.  Considering
these points, I venture to ask for your continued warm interest and support for Korea’s restructuring
efforts. I hope the Korean economy will become more advanced thanks to its restructuring and also
wish that its practical cooperative relationship with the EU may continue to deepen in the future.
5
BIS Review 120/1999
