Mr Crockett asks whether the international
financial system needs mending
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Crockett,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  and
Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, at the Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung in Frankfurt on 8 December
1999.
 The collapse of the Bretton Woods system in the early 1970s marked an important turning point in the
post-war evolution of the financial system. Until about  that time,  the  international  monetary  system
was  a  heavily  managed  and  administered  one,  based  on  fixed  exchange  rates,  regulated  domestic
markets and restrictions on the cross-border flow of financial capital. As these arrangements crumbled
under the weight of widening payment imbalances and the growing internationalisation of finance, a
market-led system emerged. The process of equilibrium-seeking and adjustment was progressively left
to the forces of competition. Exchange rates were allowed to float, domestic financial intermediation
was liberalised and capital accounts were gradually opened. Some labelled these new arrangements a
“non-system” - although there is nothing inherently unsystematic about an economic system based on
competitive forces and decentralised decision taking.
For the last quarter century or so, domestic as well as international financial arrangements have thus
relied on  increasingly  open  and integrated  markets  as  the  main  engines  of  adjustment  and  stability.
Spurred by the freedom to innovate, technological progress and the appeal of investment opportunities
in  an  increasingly  global  economy,  financial  activity  has  expanded  enormously.  The  role  of  the
financial  sector  in  mobilising  and  allocating  resources,  both  within  national  economies  and  across
geographic  boundaries,  has  expanded  commensurately.  For  the  most  part,  an  open  international
financial  system  has  operated  to  the  benefit  of  economic  activity  and  wider  social  welfare.  It  has
channelled savings to countries with productive investment opportunities, it has been a vehicle for the
transfer  of  managerial  and  technological  know-how,  and  it  has  served  as  a  source  of  discipline  on
unsustainable  and  harmful  macroeconomic  policies.  An  open  trading  and  financial  environment
enabled many Asian countries to lift their peoples out of poverty in the space of a single generation.
Recent  years,  however,  have  witnessed  events  that  show  the  darker  side  of  these  market  forces.  A
particularly virulent crisis enveloped several Asian economies in 1997. Only shortly thereafter, Russia
and Brazil succumbed to financial turmoil. And even financial markets in the more mature economies
took fright as the globalisation of markets allowed contagion to spread beyond the emerging market
economies. The social costs, while not wiping out earlier gains, were severe.
Do  these  crises  demonstrate  that  the  post-Bretton  Woods  model  of  financial  arrangements  has
outlasted its useful life? Do financial markets show an inherent and damaging instability which argues
for a return to administrative control? Is now the time to consider a fundamental change in the way
financial activity is organised, in the way it is monitored and managed, and in the way losses and gains
are shared? Many indeed are calling for a “new financial architecture”, though concrete proposals of
what this new construction could look like have yet to be formulated.
My own view is that the basic components of today’s system of financial intermediation continue to be
the  only  reliable  and  efficient  ones,  but  that  the  rough  edges  of  the  market-led  system  need  better
monitoring and in some cases repair. In other words, the architecture or design of the financial system
– the basic rule of decentralised, market-led decision-making – remains sound, but its internal wiring
and plumbing – the preconditions which ensure that markets can indeed operate efficiently and stably
– may require upgrading.
 1
BIS Review 135/1999
Which are the areas of vulnerability or failure  which  cause  markets to  display  excessive instability,
and lead to such severe costs? And why are financial markets particularly prone to such failures? At
the risk of over simplification, I propose to focus on three sources of market failure which have been
particularly prevalent in the recent episode of worldwide financial turbulence. They are: first, the lack
of  relevant  information  and  its  asymmetric  distribution  across  market  participants;  second,  the
presence of externalities that can give rise to undesired and unintended market outcomes; and third,
the difficulty of establishing an adequate infrastructure in financial markets. Note that I make hardly
any distinction between the domestic and the international financial system. With the globalisation of
finance and the lifting of controls, the two have basically merged. As I will argue, however, dealing
with market failures at the international level may be much more complex than in a domestic setting.
Information and financial activity
Let me start with the first area of financial market vulnerability, that of information deficits. Financial
activity  is  particularly  information-intensive.  More  than  any  other  sector  perhaps,  financial  markets
have to cope with a high degree of uncertainty. This is a reflection of the fact that by nature finance is
an  intertemporal  activity:  services to  which  counterparties  commit  themselves  in  financial  contracts
are delivered over sometimes very long periods during which circumstances can change in unforeseen
ways.  Moreover,  with  finance  having  become  increasingly  borderless,  exposures  have  grown  to
counterparties and markets much less familiar than those at home. The global and the intertemporal
character  of  financial  intermediation  therefore  puts  a  premium  on  ensuring  that  clear  and
comprehensive information is at the disposal of market participants.
Yet  such  information  is  often  not  readily  available.  It  may  be  expensive,  or  it  may  be  distributed
unevenly  across  market  players.  Not  all  participants  are  willing  to  bear  the  cost  of  collecting  the
necessary information, in particular when it is easy for others to free-ride on their efforts. Decisions
may then be taken on the basis of a less-than-complete information set and risks may be run which in a
more informed environment would have been avoided.
Another  frequent  occurrence  in  financial  markets  is  that  participants  have  unequal  access  to
information.  Borrowers  typically  are  several  steps  ahead  of  lenders  in  knowing  the  probabilities  of
success of their projects and how gains and losses might be shared. Lenders may be unaware that the
funds they provide flow to the most risky investments, or are wasted on less productive activities. To
protect themselves against this information deficit, lenders may ration their finance or even withdraw
from participation altogether. In the economic literature, these problems, known as adverse selection
and  moral  hazard,  have  been  shown  to  have  a  negative  impact  on  financial  market  efficiency,
especially in a cross-border setting.
The recent Asian crisis is a good example of how lending and borrowing decisions can be biased by
lack or uneven distribution of information. Few investors realised to what extent the massive flow of
foreign-currency  funds  into  several  Asian  economies  was  diverted  into  activities  with  little  or  no
prospects of generating foreign-currency resources, or, should the economy turn down, of yielding any
returns at all. Confidence in official reserve data was greatly shaken as it became clear to what extent
foreign  exchange  assets  were  mortgaged  by  massive  short  forward  positions  in  Thailand  or  by
placements  in  overseas  branches  of  Korean  banks  facing  problems  themselves  in  meeting  foreign
currency obligations.
Moral  hazard  was  also  a  problem.  Given  that  they  believed  that  their  liabilities  were  implicitly
guaranteed,  Korean  chaebol  embarked  on  a  largely  unfettered  investment  spree.  At  the  same  time,
domestic banks and foreign investors in South East Asian countries took unwarranted comfort from
governments’  commitments  to  maintain  fixed  exchange  rates,  or  from  expectations  that  the
international community would help safeguard private investment. These expectations prolonged the
period of excessive capital inflow; and thus rendered more costly its eventual reversal.
BIS Review 135/1999
2
Market outcomes: the sum of its parts or somewhat less?
A second problem in financial markets is that the sum of individual decisions which on their own are
perfectly  rational  may  not  always  lead  to  a  stable  equilibrium  or  a  socially  desirable  outcome.  A
sudden loss of confidence in one particular bank can sometimes lead to an indiscriminate run on the
entire  banking  system.  Similarly,  evidence  of  an  isolated  foreign  debt  servicing  problem  can  be
magnified into  a  generalised  “rush  for  the  exits”.  The  crisis  which  follows  almost  always  seems  to
push the domestic currency beyond an equilibrium level with damaging social consequences. In both
of  these  examples,  attempts  by  individual  agents  to  protect  their  financial  positions  generate
externalities which precipitate the very consequence against which these actions are designed to guard.
Many  other  examples  of  similar  problems  of  aggregation  in  financial  markets  can  be  given.  Herd
instinct  is  often  identified  as  one  of  the  main  factors  behind  the  surges  in  capital  flows  and  their
sudden shifts in recent years. Such herd behaviour may be rational in the context in which it occurs.
Fear of under performance runs deep in the highly competitive financial industry and induces portfolio
managers  to  mirror  each  other’s  investment  strategies  or  to  stick  close  to  benchmarks.  Often,  too,
attitudes  are  more  lenient  towards  those  who  are  wrong  in  good  company,  than  to  those  making  a
wrong  bet  on  their  own.  Whether  understandable  or  not,  herd  behaviour  nevertheless  adds  to  an
unacceptable degree of volatility in financial markets.
In the East Asian case, herd instinct undoubtedly played a part in the over-lending that preceded the
crisis. Western banks and fund managers were fearful of being left behind in the rush to participate in
the  Asian  “miracle”.  Then,  when  sentiment  turned,  investors  wanted  to  reduce  their  exposure  as
rapidly  as  possible,  fearing  a  currency  and  banking  collapse  that  would  threaten  their  investments.
With limited reserves and borrowing possibilities, the countries in the region all saw their currencies
overshoot.  The  succeeding  interaction  of  banking  and  currency  problems  imposed  costs  out  of  all
proportion to the original policy mistakes.
At  times,  these  aggregation  problems  are  in  part  self-inflicted.  If  short-term  lending  enjoys  more
favourable  risk  weights  than  longer-term  credit  exposures,  as  is  the  case  in  the  1988  Basel  Capital
Accord,  creditors  may  want  to  shorten  the  maturity  of  their  cross-border  claims  even  further,  in
particular when the economic climate becomes more gloomy. However, if all lending becomes short
term, the vulnerability of borrowers will rise substantially and the intrinsic liquidity of their liabilities
may be much lower than if the maturity of their exposures had been kept more medium term.
In  sum,  instead  of  helping  to  build  a  stable  equilibrium  for  a  diversified  set  of  profit-maximising
agents, the market mechanism may at times fall prey to one-dimensional views and become one-sided,
producing highly volatile outcomes and price overshooting. It would be too much to say this was the
cause of the Asian crisis, but it may have contributed to its unexpected virulence.
Inadequate infrastructure
A final major area of fragility in financial markets is that of an insufficiently developed infrastructure.
Financial market infrastructure covers a very broad range of elements. It includes modern contract law
and efficient law enforcement procedures. It deals with accounting rules and valuation standards, with
prudential regulations, effective supervision and appropriate disclosure requirements. It also covers the
creation of well-functioning payments and settlement systems and the design of safety net provisions.
In many respects, this infrastructure is a public good. It is of benefit to all, but market participants will
not be able or willing to supply or fund it fully. It will therefore be left to the relevant authorities to
ensure  that  the  necessary  infrastructure  is  put  in  place  and  ways  are  found  to  share  its  cost  among
participants.
Financial  history  if  replete  with  cases  of  crisis  which  were  caused  by  poor  supervision,  inadequate
legal  frameworks  or  deficient  payment  and  settlement  arrangements.  This  shows  how  complex  and
expensive a well-performing infrastructure is, in particular in an international context. It also explains
why  so  often  these  public  goods  are  being  undersupplied  and  markets  often  remain  immature.
3
BIS Review 135/1999
Moreover,  the  financial  infrastructure  may  propagate  biased  incentives  and  excessively  risky
behaviour as long as its design is faulty and pricing inappropriate.
In the case of countries affected by the recent crises, financial supervisory arrangements were almost
always deficient in some respects. Accounting conventions were applied insufficiently rigorously, and
financial  institutions  were  allowed  to  become  excessively  exposed.  In  some  countries,  bankruptcy
arrangements were virtually non-existent, and in those where they existed, they were often subject to
delays. Hence the process of recovering value from impaired financial claims (an essential part of a
well-functioning  financial  system)  was  burdened  by  major  uncertainties.  In  Russia,  the  costs  of  the
absence of reliable contract law and law enforcement are at their most evident.
 It  is  now  time  for  me  to  move  from  problems  to  solutions.  But first,  let  me  briefly  recapitulate  the
argument  so  far.  Open  markets  continue  to  be  the  most  appropriate  and  efficient  arrangement  for
allocating resources and bringing about adjustment. From this perspective, there is no real alternative
to the present basis for financial intermediation, both domestic and cross-border. However, this firm
belief  should  not  blind  us  to  the  inherent  vulnerabilities  which  characterise  financial  markets.  I
therefore now propose to explore for a few minutes the approaches we may take to find solutions to
these market failures.
Information
First, how to ensure that market participants have adequate access to the information they need? An
impressive list of recent initiatives in this area can be put together. The efforts have moved in three
distinct directions. Some have been aimed at improving participants’ appreciation of the risks in the
macroeconomic environment. The IMF’s Special Data Dissemination Standard is an example of this
kind of initiative, as are efforts to improve the consistency of international reserve data. Others have
sought to increase our understanding of the potential implications of the build-up of market positions
and  price  trends  in  particular  markets;  examples  of  this  effort  are  the  more  timely  international
banking  statistics  provided  by  the  BIS.  Still  others  aim  at  sharpening  awareness  of  the
creditworthiness of counterparties; the work of private sector groupings in laying down more rigorous
counterparty credit guidelines should improve disclosure practices in this area.
But rather than elaborate on specific initiatives, I would prefer to make two more general observations.
First, unlike what financial news services would like us to believe, the main issue that confronts us is
not so much to generate more information, but better information. Relevant, clear and comprehensive
information, and its efficient disclosure and dissemination, are what is called for. From the point of
view of the authorities, the challenging task here will be to transmit the correct guidance to financial
markets  and  participants.  Blanket  guarantees  and  time-inconsistent  commitments  to  exchange  rate
targets have all too often been part of the messages which the authorities have conveyed to financial
markets. The recent crises in much of the emerging world have shown how counterproductive, if not
disastrous, this market guidance can be.
My second point is that not only do we need to consider carefully what the right information is, we
also have to put in place the appropriate incentives for participants to use and disclose it. Awareness of
this incentive issue can be found in the proposed revision of the Basel Capital Accord. For instance,
sovereign risk weights are expected to be lower for those countries which have reached internationally
accepted  standards  with  respect  to  data  dissemination.  More  importantly  perhaps,  the  new  accord’s
call  for  more  comprehensive  qualitative  supervision,  rather  than  the  mechanical  checking  of
quantitative  ratios,  is  likely  to  induce  banks  to  focus  on  their  risk  management  and  monitoring
capabilities,  and  thus  on  their  ability  to  incorporate  all  information  that  is  relevant  to  risk  control.
There  is  little  doubt  in  my  mind  that  the  encouragement  of  a  credit  culture  which  requires  lending
officers to realistically appraise the credit and market risks of their portfolio or investment decisions
will generate many incentives to use and disclose market-relevant information.
BIS Review 135/1999
4
Externalities
I come now to the second area of market vulnerability, that of undesired externalities and aggregation
problems.  This  may  be  even  more  complex.  In  theory  it  is  course  possible  to  consider  the  radical
solution  of  forcing  financial  institutions  to  reduce  their  leverage  and  increase  the  degree  of  their
liquidity so much that a run on them becomes highly unlikely. Similarly, one could consider pushing
countries  into  holding  a  sufficiently  large  stock  of  international  reserves  which  would  reduce  the
likelihood of currency runs to a minimum. However, the costs of such measures in terms of efficiency
and  economic  growth  would  be  large.  The  financial  sector  makes  its  contribution  to  the  wider
economy by adding to the liquidity of intersectoral claims. This depends on leverage. To reduce  its
capacity  to  this  would  involve  economic  costs.  We  therefore  need  to  strike  a  balance  between
efficiency and stability objectives.
Much more constructive, I feel, would be to improve our understanding of how financial regulation
can give rise to aggregation issues and generate externalities. Greater awareness of the link between
individual behaviour and market outcomes can contribute to better rules and more appropriate market
guidance. As a result, the incidence of capital flow volatility would be less. More discriminating and
critical behaviour on the part of market participants may be promoted, and a bunching of particular
types of lending and investment might be more easily avoided.
No doubt, many controversial issues will have to be dealt with in this area, and solutions which seem
adequate  from  one  point  of  view  may  be  questionable  when  looked  at  from  a  different  angle.  For
instance,  the  pressure  to  maintain  prescribed  capital  ratios  is  sometimes  argued  to  have  undesirable
macroeconomic  consequences.  The  need  to  satisfy  capital  requirements  can  aggravate  economic
recessions, if banks feel forced to curtail their lending beyond what the underlying economic situation
would  warrant.  Similarly,  a  comfortable  capital  cushion  in  economic  booms  may  induce  banks  to
engage  in  lending  sprees.  To  the  extent  they  have  pro-cyclical  effects,  capital  requirements  may
generate externalities and aggregation effects.
Some have accordingly argued that institutions should be allowed to run down capital in recessions
and  rebuild  it  in  periods  of  greater  economic  buoyancy.  Whatever  the  appeal  of  this  argument,
however, it ignores the fact that a capital cushion is needed precisely when economic conditions are
adverse and confidence is shaky. A policy which appears beneficial to the macroeconomy could then
be harmful to the soundness of the financial system and, through this channel, put economic stability
in even greater danger. If, therefore, banks’ capital is to serve its purpose as a cushion in bad times, it
follows that banks should hold additional capital reserves when times are good.
Infrastructure and public goods
Finally,  what  could  be  done  to  ensure  that  sufficient  public  goods  are  supplied  for  an  efficient
functioning  of  financial  markets?  Governments  have  generally  accepted  the  responsibility  at  the
domestic  level  to  provide  the  main  elements  of  the  infrastructure  which  financial  markets  need.
Unfortunately,  most  of  these  domestic  initiatives  cannot  be  simply  transposed  to  the  international
level. Insolvency arrangements may be effective within national boundaries, but remain complicated,
even  non-existent,  when  the  insolvency  involves  sovereign  states  or  relates  to  cross-border  claims.
Supervision  remains  in  the  hands  of  national  regulatory  authorities,  creating  difficulties  of
communication and coordination once financial activity becomes more global. The problem is further
compounded by the fact that different types of financial institution are often supervised separately and
according to differentiated rules. To a certain extent, the “Core Principles” for effective supervision
developed by  the  various regulatory  bodies, address  these  problems;  however,  their  implementation
still has to proceed much further.
Safety net provisions promote the stability of the domestic financial system, but are discussed at best
in  a  conceptual  or  abstract  manner  at  the  international  level.  Even  in  areas  which  seem  more
manageable,  such  as  the  definition  of  appropriate  accounting  standards  and  valuation  principles,
international acceptance and uniformity are still a long way from being realised. Most of these issues
5
BIS Review 135/1999
are being addressed in various expert groupings, but the complexities of the issues at hand limit the
speed at which progress can be made.
 If  we  are  to  make  significant  progress  in  proposing  solutions  to  and  correcting  the  main  financial
market failures, strategy will be an important consideration. By this I mean, how does the international
community go about reaching agreement on how market  failures  are  tackled, then ensuring  that the
necessary measures are implemented.
The first thing to say is this is not an area that lends itself to international treaties. Prudent financial
behaviour  is  not  something  that  can  easily  be  reduced  to  legislative  provisions.  For  a  variety  of
reasons,  the  most  promising  approach  appears  to  be  the  development  of  standards  of  best  practice,
whose  implementation  is  encouraged  by  market  forces,  and  effectively  monitored  by  impartial
assessment.  For  this  approach  to  gain  broad  acceptance,  it  should,  first  of  all,  be  the  outcome  of  a
legitimate  process  of  standard  setting.  By  this,  I  mean  that  the  task  should  be  carried  forward  by
national  experts  who from  their  own  direct  experience  are  familiar  with  the  practical  issues  of  best
practice  and  how  to  promote  it.  Legitimacy  also  implies  that  a  representative  sample  of  countries
should be involved or consulted.
Second, discussions need to focus on the many ways in which measures in one area impact on other
areas. Supervisors of banks, for example, need to be aware of how their activities impact on the choice
between bank finance and other forms of intermediation. More generally, there needs to be  a better
appreciation  of  how  “environmental”  factors  such  as  corporate  governance  practices,  accountancy
conventions and  bankruptcy  arrangements  affect the balance  of risks  and  incentives in the financial
sector. And third, the general purpose of the exercise should be to promote a better understanding and
pricing of risks, not so much by administrative directives and regulation, as through the reinforcement
of appropriate incentives and behaviour.
In  much  of  the  committee  work  done  at  the  BIS,  attention  is  given  as  much  as  possible  to  these
principles  of  strategy.  By  focussing  on  the  soundness  of  institutions  (via  the  Basel  Committee  on
Banking Supervision), the functioning of financial markets (via the Committee on the Global Financial
System)  and  the  development  of  the  market  infrastructure  (via  the  Committee  on  Payment  and
Settlement  Systems)  committees  have  sought  to  address  the  multifaceted  nature  of  financial
intermediation.  By  relying  on  consensus  building  among  national  experts  and  by  encouraging  the
active involvement of major emerging market economies, the legitimacy of the “Basel process” has
become more widely accepted. And increasingly, the propagation of appropriate incentives have come
to dominate committee recommendations.
However, financial stability is not the preserve of a few committees or institutions. It is the combined
responsibility of central banks, supervisory agencies, ministries of finance, international organisations
and standard-setting bodies that have been created within the various segments of the financial market.
The  G7,  in  a  report  by  Hans  Tietmeyer,  recognised  the  need  to  establish  an  institutional  setting  in
which all these agencies charged with financial stability could be brought together. The proposal led to
the establishment earlier this year of the Financial Stability Forum, which I have the honour to chair.
Its agenda focuses on increasing the awareness of the inter-relationships between the various aspects
of  financial  stability,  promoting  the  exchange  of  information  and  the  identification  of  gaps,  and
enhancing the efficiency of standard setting. In other words, the Forum seeks to address the three areas
identified as major sources of vulnerability in financial markets.
Its  composition  reflects  the  diversity  of  interests  in  financial  stability,  and  could  so  help  to  foster
greater understanding of the  macro/microprudential interface  among  those  charged  with  supervision
and standard setting and those concerned with macroeconomic stability. Finally, it may also help to
deal with what is to be considered the four-letter word in financial stability, namely the issue of “turf”
or  the  unproductive  competition  or  lack  of  cooperation  between  agencies  charged  with  overlapping
responsibilities.
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  brings  together  a  wide  cross-section  of  individuals  and  institutions
involved  in  the  promotion  of  financial  stability.  The  G7  countries  are  represented  by  their  Deputy
BIS Review 135/1999
6
Finance  Ministers,  Deputy  Central  Bank  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  (in  the  case  of
Germany,  this  means  Caio  Koch-Weser,  Jürgen  Stark  and  Wolfgang  Artopoeus).  In  addition,  four
other  countries  with  systematically  important  financial  markets  are  represented.  The  major
international  institutions  (the  IMF,  World  Bank,  OECD  and  BIS)  also  participate,  as  do  the  main
standard-setting  bodies  –  the  Banking,  Insurance  and  Securities  Regulators  and  the  international
Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems.
As you see, therefore, the Forum is well constituted to take a comprehensive view of financial stability
issues. It has also incorporated the views of a wide range of countries not directly represented in the
Forum through their participation in Working Groups. At its inaugural meeting, the Forum decided to
set up three working groups covering, respectively, Highly Leveraged Institutions, Offshore Financial
Centres and Capital Flows. I expect these working groups to deliver their final reports in March. The
reports  themselves  will  contain  a  number  of  concrete,  implementable  recommendations  that,  when
adopted, will have the effect of making the financial system safer.
I  mentioned a moment  ago  the  role  of  standards  of  best  practice  as a  means  of focussing  efforts to
improve financial system stability. Of course the drawing up of standards has to be accompanied by a
means to encourage their implementation. The Forum is addressing this issue in a newly-established
working  group  chaired  by  Andrew  Sheng  of  the  Hong  Kong  Securities  Commission.  Effective
implementation  requires  incentives  to  put  standards  into  effect,  prioritisation  to  ensure  that  the  key
weaknesses are tackled first, monitoring to assess compliance, and often technical assistance, to give
supervisory authorities access to relevant knowledge and expertise. I believe the Forum can play a key
role in bringing together the resources in its various members to help bring all this about.
Lastly, let me note briefly the role of the Financial Stability Forum as a source for information. The
Forum’s website contains a compendium of the standards (43 in all) that have been developed in the
financial area. It also contains an inventory of training availability. We will be building up this facility
in the future to provide, we hope, a genuine focal point for sharing information on initiatives in the
field in financial stability.
 In conclusion, the market-led system of financial intermediation has served the world very well, most
of  the  time.  By  lifting  the  liquidity  constraints  inherent  in  administrative  controls  and  excessive
regulation,  today’s  financial  arrangements  have  contributed  to  output  and  income  growth  of
enterprises  and  households  alike.  The  most  vivid  illustrations  of  the  potential  of  open  financial
markets  to  raise  efficiency  and  improve  resource  allocation  are  the  spectacular  growth  rates  which
several emerging market economies realised over the last two decades.
But  recurrent  bouts  of  financial  turmoil,  not  least  in  those  high-performing  economies,  also
demonstrate that financial markets do not always work efficiently and produce competitive outcomes.
I have concentrated here on three types of market failure which can cause major financial shocks and
damaging  instability.  For  some  these  failures  are  sufficient  ground  for  advocating  a  return  to
administrative  control  of  financial  activity.  I  do  not  share  this  view.  But  I  am  honest  enough  to
recognise  that  much  still  needs  to  be  done  to  mitigate  the  vulnerabilities  in  financial  markets.  And
modest enough to admit that this will be a protracted process, heavily dependent on the political will to
succeed.
7
BIS Review 135/1999
