Mr Noyer reports on monetary policy-making in Europe
Speech presented by Mr Christian Noyer, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, to the Spanish
Association of Corporate Treasurers (ASSET), held in Barcelona, on 19 November 1999.
 Ladies and gentlemen,
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Barcelona  today.  I  should  like  to  thank  the  organisers  of  this
congress  very  much  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  on  the  subject  of  “Monetary
policy-making in Europe”.
It is now nearly 11 months since the Eurosystem, consisting of the European Central Bank (ECB) and
the  11  national  central  banks  (NCBs)  of  those  EU  Member  States  that  introduced  the  euro  on
1 January 1999, assumed its tasks, i.e. deciding and conducting the single European monetary policy.
11 months of practical experience is, of course, not long enough for a conclusive stocktaking exercise,
but it certainly seems appropriate, at this stage, to review some of the lessons we have learned.
Let me start by recalling what, in essence, monetary policy-making in Europe is about.
The Maastricht Treaty (formally the Treaty on European Union, which has now become part of the
Treaty  establishing  the  European  Community)  assigns  to  the  single  monetary  policy  the  primary
objective of maintaining price stability in the euro area. In order to achieve this goal successfully, both
a  high  degree  of  central  bank  independence  and  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  by  the
government are tenets of the monetary policy framework enshrined in the Treaty.
There  is  no  doubt  concerning  the  overriding  importance  attached  to  the  primary  objective  of  price
stability. By safeguarding price stability in the euro area over the medium term, the single monetary
policy is supposed to make the best possible and most lasting contribution to the achievement of other
Community objectives, such as high employment and sustainable non-inflationary growth.
Among  central  bankers  and  economists,  the  predominant  view  is  that  a  long-run  trade-off  between
inflation  and  output  growth  does  not  exist.  Attempting  to  use  monetary  policy  to  increase  real
economic activity above its sustainable level will, in the long run, simply lead to higher inflation and
will not foster economic growth. Moreover, theoretical considerations as well as empirical evidence
over several decades suggest that high rates of inflation are clearly unhelpful - indeed detrimental - to
growth and employment in the long term. A large number of economic arguments point to the benefits
of price stability for economic growth and employment prospects. Stable  prices  eliminate  or  reduce
economic  costs such  as those  arising  from  inflation  as a  result  of  uncertainty  about  the  outcome  of
investment  decisions,  the  distortionary  effects  on  the  tax  system,  rising  risk  premia  in  long-term
interest rates and reduced allocative efficiency of the relative price mechanism and market systems.
Monetary policy must take into account the fact that the horizon for decisions by economic agents is
rather  long-term  in  nature.  By  guaranteeing  price  stability,  monetary  policy  provides  an  anchor  for
economic  decision-making.  This  clearly  supports  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  price  mechanism,
which  is  conducive  to  the  best  allocation  of  scarce  resources.  Price  stability  is  hence  a  means  of
promoting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  the  creation  of  employment,  and  of  improving
productivity levels and living standards.
This discussion also sheds light on what is certainly the greatest economic challenge facing the euro
area at present, namely, the need to reduce the current unacceptably high level of unemployment in
Europe. In the light of this problem, we have to realise that even in an ideal situation where monetary
policy is very successful in maintaining price stability, the contribution of monetary policy to reducing
unemployment  in  Europe  can  only  be  a  limited  one.  Many  empirical  studies  show  that  the  high
1
BIS Review 128/1999
unemployment rate is mostly the consequence of structural rigidities within the European labour and
goods  markets.  The  European  unemployment  rate  has,  indeed,  been  high  or  even  rising  over  the
business cycles in the past decade. Only structural reforms, preferably of a comprehensive nature, can
therefore tackle the underlying impediments to employment growth.
When deciding on monetary policy, the Eurosystem must acknowledge the capabilities and limitations
of monetary policy implied both by general economic principles and by the structure of the euro area
economy.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  formulation  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy,
which is designed to maintain price stability in the euro area.
The strategy was announced by the Governing Council on 13 October 1998. It is designed to fulfil two
important  functions.  First,  it  structures  the  monetary  policy-making  process  so  that  the  Governing
Council of the ECB is provided with all the information and analysis it requires to take appropriate
monetary policy decisions. Second, the strategy ensures that policy decisions, including the economic
rationale  on  which  they  are  based,  can  be  presented  in  a  clear,  coherent  and  consistent  way  to  the
public.  By  providing  a  stable  framework  for  making  and  explaining  monetary  policy  decisions,  the
strategy bolsters the credibility and effectiveness of the single monetary policy.
In  designing  the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  Governing  Council  also  had  to
respect a number of practical issues and difficulties which arose because of the uncertainties created
by the so-called shift of regime associated with the transition to Monetary Union. Where there were
previously  11  open,  generally  small  economies,  there  is  now  one  large,  relatively  closed  single
currency area. The challenges implied by this transformation in the landscape of monetary policy are
profound.
For the time being, relatively little is known about the details of the transmission of monetary policy
measures to the real economy in the euro area. It is possible that the shift of regime has changed the
behaviour  of  economic  agents,  and  hence,  the  structure  and  functioning  of  the  euro  area  economy.
Consequently, together with experts at the NCBs, the ECB has embarked on an intensive programme
of analysis and research on these issues.
One obvious impediment in this respect is the limited availability of harmonised statistical data for the
euro area. This is only natural, given that the euro area did not exist as a single currency area before
January 1999. In the last couple of  years the  European  Monetary  Institute  (EMI)  and  the  Statistical
Office of the European Commission (EUROSTAT) together with central banks and statistical offices
in  EU  Member  States  have  put  a  lot  of  effort  into  developing  harmonised  statistical  concepts  for
monetary and economic indicators. By the beginning of this year, when Stage III of EMU started, a lot
had already been achieved in this respect. The quality and availability of statistics on the euro area has
increased significantly over the past few quarters, particularly in the areas of money and banking and
balance-of-payments  statistics,  but  also  across  a  wide  range  of  economic  statistics.  This  process  of
improving the quality and the availability of statistical data covering the euro area will continue.
Against the background I have just described, the Governing Council has selected a monetary policy
strategy  that  embodies  a  new  and  distinct  approach,  which  reflects  the  unique  circumstances  and
institutional  environments  faced  by  the  Eurosystem.  The  design  of  a  clear,  credible  and  effective
monetary policy strategy for the Eurosystem required an appreciation of the environment in which the
Eurosystem  operates.  This  environment  imposes  certain  constraints  on  monetary  policy  in  the  euro
area, which the Eurosystem’s strategy must acknowledge and respect. The stability-oriented monetary
policy strategy therefore avoids “mechanistic” monetary policy responses to only a few indicators or
forecasts. As the environment of monetary policy is complex and the interpretation of the indicators
difficult, there is no simple rule for monetary policy.
The Eurosystem’s strategy consists of three main elements that were announced a year ago.
First, the primary objective of monetary policy has been quantified with the publication of a definition
of price stability, which serves as a guide for inflation expectations and against which the Eurosystem
can  be  held  accountable.  Price  stability  is  hence  defined  as  annual  increases  of  below  2%  in  the
Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) for the euro area. This definition illustrates that both
inflation and deflation are regarded as being incompatible with price stability. It was also announced
BIS Review 128/1999
2
that price stability is to be maintained over the medium term, imparting a forward-looking orientation
to the strategy as a whole.
Second, in order to maintain price stability according to this definition, money is accorded a prominent
role.  Monetary  developments  are  closely  monitored  and  analysed,  in  particular  in  relation  to  a
quantitative reference value for monetary growth. In December 1998, the reference value was set at an
annual  growth  rate  of  4½%  for  the  broad  monetary  aggregate  M3.  In  line  with  the  medium-term
orientation  of  the  strategy,  this  reference  value  was  based  on  assumptions  concerning  the
medium-term developments in prices, real GDP and the velocity of circulation.
Third,  in  parallel  with  this  monetary  analysis,  a  broadly  based  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  price
developments  in  the  euro  area  is  being  undertaken.  This  assessment  encompasses  a  wide  range  of
indicator  variables,  including  macroeconomic  projections  produced  both  within  and  outside  the
Eurosystem.
Using  the  information  obtained  from  this  analysis,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  comes  to  a
decision on the level of short-term interest rates that will best serve the maintenance of price stability
in the euro area as a whole in the future.
The  decision  of  4  November  to  raise  the  ECB  interest  rates  demonstrates  the  forward-looking
character of our strategy. Owing to the lags in the transmission mechanism, our monetary policy could
not wait until inflation stood at 2% or above. The Eurosystem raised interest rates in order to counter
the  upward  trend  of  the  balance  of  risks  to  future  price  stability,  which  was  observed  during  the
summer.  This  policy  move  should  help  to  stabilise  inflation  expectations  safely  at  below  2%.  By
maintaining a favourable outlook for price stability, this decision also contributed to making economic
growth in the euro area sustainable over the medium term. In fact, a monetary policy that reacts too
late to emerging inflationary pressures runs the risk of being forced to take much stronger measures at
a later stage. Eventually, such a policy would only exacerbate cyclical fluctuations without enhancing
the long-term potential of the economy.
Let  me  now  turn  to  a  number  of  criticisms  of  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  which  have  been
raised since the strategy was first announced. I should like to address some of these concerns in the
remaining part of my presentation.
Some observers have argued that the strategy is “asymmetric” and that the Eurosystem will be more
concerned about inflation than it is about deflation. These assertions are often based on the perceived
lack of a precise lower bound to the definition of price stability, which is contrasted with a clear upper
bound of 2%. Critics point out that such asymmetry will impose a drag on the overall performance of
the euro area economy and risks, under certain circumstances, triggering a deflationary spiral.
Let me put it bluntly: I do not share this view. First, I should like to draw your attention to the fact that
the use of the word “increases” in the definition sets the floor at zero for the lower bound. The absence
of a specific numerical value for the lower bound reflects, in the first place, the uncertainties we face
concerning  the  existence  and  magnitude  of  the  so-called  measurement  bias  in  the  HICP.  This  bias
arises mainly from changes in spending patterns and quality improvements in those goods and services
that are included in the basket used to define a specific price index. Such biases cannot always be fully
corrected in the construction of price indices. The measurement bias typically causes CPIs to overstate
the “true” rate of inflation. Although the HICP is based on a concept that puts considerable emphasis
on reducing or eliminating the measurement bias, some overstatement cannot be excluded. Second, we
need to keep in mind the fact that the ceiling of 2% leaves sufficient room for small increases in the
price index, thereby minimising the risk of falls in the price index. I should like to emphasise the fact
that the Governing Council of the ECB has already demonstrated that it would deem neither inflation
nor deflation in the euro area to be consistent with the maintenance of price stability. The two interest
rate  decisions  taken  on  the  basis  of  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  in  April  and  November  are  clear
examples of this commitment.
Another criticism of our strategy that is sometimes voiced concerns the “prominent role for money”,
reflected, in part, by the announcement of a reference value for M3 growth. Here we can differentiate
between two camps. Some of these critics argue that M3 growth should not influence monetary policy
3
BIS Review 128/1999
decisions by the Governing Council. However, others criticise the Eurosystem for not basing monetary
policy decisions almost exclusively on deviations of M3 growth from the reference value, as they are
convinced that money is the best indicator for monetary policy.
I reject the criticisms of both camps. Let me explain why. First, I disagree with the view that money
should play no or only a small role in the ECB’s strategy. Empirical studies show that M3 for the euro
area has a  stable  relationship  with the price level  over the  medium  term.  Such  a  stable  relationship
with  price  developments  has  not  been  found  for  any  other  indicator  variable  at  this  place  in  time.
Moreover,  there  is  evidence  that  monetary  aggregates  contain  useful  information  for  future
macroeconomic developments. This is the reason why monetary growth is analysed very closely by
the Governing Council.
At the same time, I  do  not  think  that  the  ECB  should focus  uniquely  on  money.  The  problem  with
doing  this  is  that  in  the  short  run,  the  relationship  between  money  and  prices  can  be  distorted  by
portfolio  shifts  and  institutional  factors.  Short-term  developments  in  money  therefore  need  to  be
analysed  very  carefully.  Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  always
communicated  to  the  public  that  it  cannot  and  will  not  react  mechanically  to  deviations  of  actual
monetary growth from the reference value. Let me also point out that the Governing Council has, from
the very beginning, rejected the idea of being held accountable for failing to keep monetary growth
close  to  the  reference  value  every  year.  In  this  sense,  the  concept  of  the  Eurosystem’s  strategy  is
different from monetary targeting in the traditional sense. For this reason, the Eurosystem’s strategy is
based on two pillars. Monetary policy should always react to all the information available with a view
to maintaining price stability in the medium term.
This is also the answer to those critics who argue that the ECB disregarded high money growth when
it lowered interest rates in April, but put much emphasis on high money growth when it raised interest
rates in November. In fact, in both situations we based our decision on both pillars of the strategy and
also  assessed  the  prevailing  monetary  developments  at  the  time  in  the  light  of  other  information
available. When  we  cut  interest rates  on 8  April, only  two  months  of  monetary  data for 1999  were
available. At that point in time, the three-month moving average for M3 stood at 5.1%. Let me recall
that  we  had  always  emphasised  that  “substantial  or  prolonged  deviations  from  the  reference  value
under  normal  circumstances  signal  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  term”.  However,  the  data
showed  that  M3  growth  was  only  slightly  above  the  reference  value  then  and  that  there  was  not
evidence  as  yet  of  a  prolonged  deviation.  By  contrast,  there  were  several  indications  that  M3  was
temporarily distorted upwards in early-1999 as a result of the changeover to Stage Three of Economic
and Monetary Union (EMU), also against the background of historically low long-term rates. Thus, at
that point in time it was difficult to see whether M3 growth in early-1999 would reveal upside risks to
price stability. At the same time, the information from the second pillar of our strategy showed clear
downside risks to future price developments in April. The situation was different in November. Here it
was clear that monetary growth had increased considerably over the course of 1999. The three-month
average stood at 5.9% for the period from July to September 1999. Even when we corrected the data in
accordance with the somewhat specific movements of M3 in January and February, we could see that
the  annualised  figure  for  M3  growth  from  March  to  September  was  6.1%.  All  this  took  place  in  a
significantly  different  economic  environment  compared  with  April.  I  think  that  this  comparison
between the two decisions to change ECB interest rates in April and November is very useful. It shows
that we do not react mechanistically to individual indicators, but always interpret the movements and
signals in all of the indicators evident in both pillars in conjunction with each other. As we can see,
this is a more reasonable approach than relying on a simple indicator,  given  that  we  are  living  in  a
complex world.
There is another line  of  argument  which  is  that the  monetary  policy  of  the  Eurosystem  focuses  too
closely  on  cyclical  developments.  This  would  be  inconsistent  with  the  public  commitment  to  a
medium-term  orientation.  This  body  of  opinion  often  refers  to  the  explanations  delivered  on  the
occasion of the interest rate cut in April 1999. These critics claim that this move was mainly intended
to support employment and growth prospects in the short term.
BIS Review 128/1999
4
This is, in my view, an unfortunate miscomprehension of the facts and I shall try to be clear on this
point.  Our  monetary  policy  has  had,  and  will  continue  to  have,  a  forward-looking  medium-term
orientation,  with  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  in  the  euro  area  as  our  focus.  As  mentioned,  in
April  1999  our  thorough  review  of  monetary,  financial  and  economic  developments  revealed
downward risks to price stability stemming basically from the cyclical slowdown that occurred in the
aftermath of the financial turmoil in emerging markets during mid-1998. Both the forward-looking and
medium-term orientation of the single monetary policy made it necessary for the Governing Council to
take action: interest rates were cut.
The focus on the primary objective of price stability driving the decision in April does not exclude the
fact  that  in  many  cases  the  policy  action  required  to  maintain  price  stability  helps  to  stabilise  real
activity in the short term. Risks to price stability are very often related to cyclical developments and
these policy aims are therefore complementary rather than conflicting. At the same time, I should like
to  point  out  that  we  must  not  give  the  false  impression  that  the  short-term  impact  of  necessary
monetary policy actions on real activity will always be favourable. Situations may occur, for example
when  wage  settlements  jeopardise  price  stability,  or  when  there  is  a  short-term  trade-off  between
adverse  developments  in  real  activity,  on  the  one  hand,  and  deviations  from  price  stability  on  the
other. In this case, it is important that the overriding priority of maintaining price stability is absolutely
clear.  Any  ambiguity  on  this  point  would  simply  endanger  the  credibility,  and  therefore  the
effectiveness of monetary policy.
Last but not least, I should like to make a few remarks with regard to the most frequently expressed
criticism,  namely  that  the  Eurosystem  is  a  secretive  institution  that  does  not  meet  the  required
standards of transparency and clarity.
Key  features  of the  ECB’s  communication  policy  are  our  Monthly  Bulletins  and  the  monthly  press
conferences  given  by  the  President  of  the  ECB  and  myself.  The  press  conferences  usually  directly
follow  the  first  Governing  Council  meeting  of  each  month.  During  these  press  conferences,  the
President  makes  an  introductory  statement  summarising  the  Governing  Council’s  discussions  and
conclusions  before  answering  questions  from  journalists.  As  the  statement  is  agreed  beforehand,  in
substance,  with  all  the  Governing  Council  members,  it  is  similar  to  what  other  central  banks  call
minutes. I am convinced that informing the public of such a united position in the Governing Council
is more valuable for establishing credibility and reducing uncertainties in the markets than publishing
details of a Governing Council discussion, which would naturally be difficult to assess for those not
present at the meeting.
Moreover, the press conference provides prompt information in an even-handed way, and it offers the
opportunity  for  immediate  two-way  communication.  As  far  as  I  am  aware,  no  other  central  bank
regularly  communicates  with  the  public  in  such  a  prompt  and  open  manner  immediately  after  its
monetary  policy  meetings.  We  are  convinced  that  this  contributes  to  transparency  and  thus  gives
important and clear guidance.
These  press  conferences  are  a  tangible  expression  of  the  Eurosystem’s  commitment  to  being  open,
transparent  and  accountable  in  its  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Obviously,  journalists,  financial
markets and the public are still learning about the new monetary policy strategy in the euro area and,
over time, the Eurosystem will further improve its communication.
In this respect, it has also been argued that we do not release sufficient information about our analysis.
More  specifically  criticism  has  been  expressed  to  the  effect  that  the  Eurosystem  is  currently  not
publishing its inflation forecasts. May I remind you, therefore, that the inflation forecast is not a key
element of our strategy? An inflation forecast is just one of the many pieces of information which we
use. Its importance should not be exaggerated. Our quantitative definition of price stability is not an
inflation  target  in  the  same  way  as  those  of  other  central  banks,  nor  are  we  targeting  an  inflation
forecast. In our view, a single forecast is not a sufficient statistic given the complexity of economic
relationships and the existing uncertainties about the future. We are living in a complex environment
in which policy decisions cannot be simply related to a few or even one information variable. There is
also the risk that we are chasing our own tail. In fact, our monetary policy always aims to respect the
definition of price stability. The advantage of publishing a forecast would be that it would make one
5
BIS Review 128/1999
more piece of information, which plays a role in the decision-making process, transparent. That being
said, the Governing Council will have to reconsider the issue once our macroeconometric models are
deemed to be sufficiently reliable. This may still take some time. Let me now conclude by saying that
I am happy to contribute to a project of such historical dimension and so are my colleagues in the ECB
and those at the NCBs belonging to the Eurosystem. Monetary Union has had a successful start and
the  monetary  policy  strategy  of  the  Eurosystem,  on  the  basis  of  which  the  Governing  Council  has
taken and will continue to take its monetary policy decisions, has contributed to this success. At the
same time, we should recognise the fact that monetary policy alone cannot tackle all of the economic
challenges facing the euro area. In particular, it cannot reduce the euro area’s unacceptably high level
of  structural  unemployment.  The  main  contribution  the  single  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the
welfare of the people in the euro area will be the maintenance of price stability in the medium term.
Although monetary policy-making in Europe is not an easy task, I am confident after the experience of
the first 11 months that the Eurosystem is both determined to assume this task and is well equipped to
do so.
BIS Review 128/1999
6
