Ms Hessius comments on the inflation
target and the state of the economy in Sweden
Speech given by Ms Kerstin Hessius, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, before the Swedish
Economic Association, in Stockholm on 12 December 1999.
 I  would  like  to  begin  by  thanking  you  for  inviting  me  to  come  and  speak  at  this  meeting  of  the
Swedish Economic Association. I am looking forward to this evening’s discussion. Sweden is now in
its seventh year with an inflation target since it was announced at the beginning of 1993. A number of
other OECD countries have also been pursuing inflation target policies for several years, so by now
there is a rich fund of experience to draw on.
This evening I intend to take up some of the challenges for monetary policy under an inflation target
regime,  bearing  in  mind  in  particular  the  position  of  Sweden.  How  active  should  an  independent
central  bank  be  in  stabilising  economic  conditions?  What  form  of  interplay  between  monetary  and
fiscal policy leads to favourable economic development when monetary policy is directed towards an
inflation target? Naturally this is a big question, so I intend here to confine myself to a few key points.
In conclusion, I thought I would make a few remarks on the “new economy”.
Stable conditions rather than stabilisation policy
Stable conditions in the form of less variability in the real economy mean enhanced welfare for society
as a whole.
One essential question is whether, in general terms, short-term stabilisation policies should be pursued
in  an  attempt  to  bring  about  high  real  growth  in  the  long  term.  It  is  worth  emphasising  here  that
monetary and fiscal policy differ in how promptly they react to changes in economic circumstances.
In principle, the Riksbank can adjust its instrumental rate at any time whatever so as to stimulate or
curtail demand. At the same time, however, the impact of such measures can be expected to peak only
after  1  to  2  years.  This  means  that  monetary  policy  should  be  framed  primarily  with  a  view  to  its
long-term effects.
Fiscal  policy,  in  contrast,  can  have  a  major  direct  impact  on  the  economy,  but  its  most  important
components resist rapid change. There are administrative costs associated, e.g. with changing tax rates,
and changes in regulations take time to implement. This means that fiscal policy is difficult to adapt
quickly to meet changed economic prospects.
This  leads  to  the  conclusion  that  even  if  monetary  policy  can  react  immediately  to  changes  in  the
economic situation, neither monetary nor fiscal policy should aim to influence economic conditions in
the  short  term,  i.e.  to  function  as  instruments  of  “fine  tuning”  stabilisation  policy.  Instead,  both
monetary and fiscal policy should be designed so as to create stable long-term conditions.
The  contribution  made  by  monetary  policy  to  welfare  is  precisely  to  create  as  stable  conditions  as
possible  in  the  economy  by  means  of  the  inflation  target  policy.  As  this  task  is  formulated  in  the
Riksbank  Act,  the  objective  of  the  Riksbank’s  operations  shall  be  to  pursue  price  stability  and  to
promote a secure and efficient system of payments.
The role of fiscal policy should include shaping the tax system so as to create the best conditions for
the  highest  possible  potential  output.  Changes  in  the  Government’s  financial  savings  and  the
requirement that there should be a surplus in the public finances over the course of a business cycle
both work to create greater confidence in economic policy. The orientation of the budget policy, like
that of monetary policy, is of great significance for the way the economy develops. If the fundamental
rules of the game are stable, the actors in an economy will dare to make long-term decisions.
1
BIS Review 132/1999
Of course, it would also be desirable for monetary policy and fiscal policy to work together in such a
way  as  to  moderate  major  variations  in  employment  and  growth,  i.e.  so  as  to  reduce  cyclical
fluctuations around potential growth.
Since this may be difficult to achieve in practice, one question that arises is what is the optimal mode
of  interaction  for  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy  within  the  framework  of  the  inflation  target
regime.
What  happens  in  an  inflation  target  economy  if  fiscal  policy  completely  disregards  the  state  of  the
economy?
What  happens, e.g.  when  the  economy  is  in  a  boom  if  fiscal  policy  is  conducted  along  excessively
expansive lines? In the absence of a credible nominal anchor in the economy, e.g. in the form of an
inflation target, demand increases further. This in turn leads to a tendency on the part of firms to raise
their  prices,  particularly  in  a  situation  where  production  is  constrained  by  bottlenecks.  In  addition,
employees will demand higher wages, and the combined effect will be to create a spiral with rising
inflationary pressure, such as we experienced, for example, in the 1980s.
Adjustments towards a higher price level can occur over an extended period but will gradually set in
motion processes that put a brake on growth. This is a manifestation of the established theory that it is
not  possible  to  raise  the  long-run  productive  capacity  of  the  economy  with  short-term  stimulation
policies.
What happens in this scenario if the central bank has an inflation target? When inflationary pressure in
the  economy  increases,  the  central  bank  will  tighten  monetary  policy  so  as  to  prevent  the  inflation
target from being exceeded.
Such  a  course  of  events  would  result  in  an  unfavourable  policy  mix.  The  stimulation  provided  by
fiscal policy would be counteracted by the monetary policy, which would mean that even the positive
short-term  effects  of  the  stimulation  would  decrease  or  even  become  negative.  Moreover,  if  the
stimulation provided by fiscal policy is very powerful, this could lead to expectations of an increased
risk that the inflation target cannot be upheld, which would then lead to rising inflation expectations
and  higher  risk  premiums  on  Swedish  interest-bearing  papers.  Households  and  companies  may  feel
growing  uncertainty  both  about  developments  in  public  revenues  and  expenditure,  and  about  the
formulation of monetary policy. This can be costly for the economy if it leads to a failure to carry out
investments  and  to  unnecessarily  cautious  decisions  about  the  allocation  of  resources.  To  sum  up,
then, it becomes more costly to pursue an excessively expansive fiscal policy when monetary policy is
guided by an explicit inflation target.
A good policy mix makes for better conditions
A  better  policy  mix  arises if the  orientation  of  fiscal policy  does  not  make  for  higher  inflation  risk
premiums. It can avoid this if the orientation of fiscal policy appears to be sustainable in the long run.
The surplus-target in the public finances is a good example of this.
One means by which the confidence felt by the general public in economic policy can be monitored
consists of inflation expectations, which should not diverge substantially from the Riksbank’s inflation
target. When expectations of inflation diverge from this target in the longer term - whether upwards or
downwards  -  it  implies  that  monetary  policy  should  be  adjusted  so  as  to  steer  expectations  back
towards the target.
In this connection it is important to observe that a central bank whose inflation target commands high
credibility often has more scope for acting than one that has little credibility. Assume, for example,
that an economy where the credibility of the inflation target is high experiences a positive disturbance
to the business cycle, leading to higher demand. Since the inflation risk premiums are low, employees
will  not  need  to  demand  extra  high  nominal  wages  to  insure  themselves  against  unexpectedly  high
inflation. This is because it can be anticipated that the central bank will tighten monetary policy. This
in turn will mean that less stringent measures will probably be required than would be needed by a
central bank that had not yet established its credibility.
BIS Review 132/1999
2
Turning more specifically to the situation in Sweden, it can be said that the macroeconomic conditions
today  are  favourable: inflation  is  low,  budget  deficits  have  been transformed  into  surpluses  and  the
prospects  for  growth are  good.  However,  economic  policy  is  a  continuous  learning  process  and  the
successes  of  recent  years  should  not  be  taken  as  evidence  that  the  structural  problems  have  been
solved. On the labour market, for example, structural rigidities remain; also, the tax-pressure is still
high, which inevitably distorts incentives to work and save. As far as monetary policy is concerned,
the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  regime  has  as  yet  hardly  been  tested  in  a  period  of  economic
upturn.
What  does  this  mean  for  how  much  and  how  often  monetary  policy  should  react  to  changes  in  the
economic outlook? This, of course, is a question that the Executive Board of the Riksbank addresses
on  an  ongoing  basis,  communicating  its  views  in  inflation  reports,  the  minutes  of  its  meetings  and
speeches. In general terms, it can be said that the need for action should be based on the outlook for
domestic  demand,  the  stringency  of  fiscal  policy  and  international  trends.  In  addition,  inflation
expectations  play  a  key  role  as  an  overall  indicator  of  inflationary  pressures.  In  a  situation  where
inflation  risk  premiums  are  low,  an  independent  central  bank  with  a  price  stability  target  can  also
contribute to stabilising the economy around its potential growth.
How far does this responsibility extend? According to the way the Riksbank has explained the target,
annual inflation measured by the CPI is normally to be restricted to 2% with a tolerance interval of
±1 percentage point. In the event of a deviation from this target, inflation is normally to be brought
back  on  target  within  1-2  years.  In  the  event  of  a  major  deviation,  caused  for  example  by  a  major
external disturbance, there may, however, be reason to extend the horizon of the target so as to limit
fluctuations  in  production  and  employment.  In  other  words,  in  these  circumstances  it  may  be  too
difficult or too costly for monetary policy to quickly bring inflation back on target.
The “new economy”
Let me now take up another question that is the subject of much discussion both in the media and in
academic circles: the existence of a “new economy”. When people talk about this, their eyes are turned
primarily  towards  the  American  economy.  The  concept  seems  to  be  capable  of  covering  many
phenomena. In this context I define the “new economy” as an increase in the potential growth of the
economy.
In the last few years, the growth of the American economy has surpassed most forecasts. Not only has
the rate of growth been high in historic terms during the present upswing - around 3.5% per year on
average since the end of 1991 - it has besides been very stable and unusually long lasting. At the same
time, unemployment has fallen to near 4%; levels this low have not been witnessed since the 1960s.
However, in distinction to previous booms, there has been no increase in the rate of inflation and the
underlying  rate  of  inflation  has  been  more  than  halved  since  1991,  from  over  4%  to  2%.  Public
finances have improved considerably, from a deficit of 5% of GNP in 1991 to an expected surplus of
around 1% this year.
Looking at productivity per hour worked in American business, which is perhaps the best measure of
how good a country’s growth potential is in the longer term, this has risen sharply, by over 2.5% on
average  since  1997; this  figure  can  be  compared  with  an  average  growth  of  productivity  of  around
1.5%  over  the  period  1974-96.  A  substantial  part  of  the  improved  productivity  of  labour  can  be
explained by very high investments - so-called “capital deepening” - not least in computer equipment.
In  spite  of  the  fact  that  unemployment  has  continued  to  fall  throughout  the  period,  the  growth  of
productivity  has  been  impressively  high.  This  is  remarkable  considering  the  fact  that  the  new  jobs
have principally been created in the service sector, where productivity generally increases at a lesser
rate than in manufacturing.
Three principal groups of reasons for the positive trend in America can be distinguished.
One important reason behind the upswing appears to be good economic policies. Since the beginning
of the 1990s, fiscal policy has been directed towards achieving a balanced budget, and for a year or so
now  the  budget  has  been  balanced.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  taxes  have  been  raised,  expenditure
3
BIS Review 132/1999
diminished  and  budgetary  procedures  made  more  stringent.  Monetary  policy  has  been  directed
towards  keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  and  has  succeeded  in  warding  off  both  destabilising
inflationary and deflationary pressures at an early stage. The policy mix of monetary and fiscal policy
therefore appears to have been favourable.
A  number  of  structural  factors  seem  to  have  been  important.  Deregulations  in  many  sectors  and
increased globalisation have intensified already tough competition and increased the pressure on the
partners on the labour market, leading to greater flexibility in the labour market and enhancing labour
mobility. The increased and more effective use of new technology (IT) has raised productivity, and the
use  of  JIT  (Just-In-Time  Inventory  Management)  has  meant  that  the  match  between  supply  and
demand in the economy has improved. The increased openness in the economy that has resulted from
among other things the NAFTA and GATT agreements, has meant that foreign trade has functioned as
a “shock absorber” for fluctuations in domestic demand.
Finally,  fortunate  circumstances  seem  to  have  played  a  part.  With  the  end  of  the  Cold  War  at  the
beginning of the 1990s, resources were freed up, principally in the military sector, which could be put
to more productive use in the private sector. Further, both the Mexican crisis and the Asian crisis have
been  shocks  that  have  checked  certain  tendencies  towards  overheating  and  thus  also  inflation,  yet
without leading the economy into recession. During the crises, a “flight to quality” appears to have led
to falling long interest rates, which has benefited stock exchange prices and strengthened the dollar.
Foreign  investors  have  been  willing  to  finance  the  deficit  in  America’s  current  account,  which  at
present comes to about 4% of GNP.
To sum up, it seems likely that a certain rise in the growth potential has taken place in the USA during
the 1990s and that inflationary tendencies have declined. Just how much nevertheless remains an open
question. The OECD, for example, has raised its estimate of the potential growth rate to just over 3%.
However, in the past three years growth has amounted to more than 4% on average, which means that
the OECD regards some of the factors discussed above as temporary in nature and expects growth to
slacken as these factors die away.
In the course of the very powerful upturn in the American economy, significant imbalances have built
up at the same time. Among other things, the deficit in the current account has never been as great as it
is now, and recently consumption has been increasing more rapidly than household incomes,  which
means that the savings ratio has been at a record low. Sooner or later these imbalances will need to be
corrected.  However,  a  discussion  of  how  this  might  come  about  lies  beyond  the  bounds  of  what  I
intended to talk about this evening.
Are there traces of a “new economy” in Sweden?
  Since Sweden switched from  a  fixed exchange  rate to  an inflation  target,  monetary  policy
has been designed so as to reach this target and thereby create credibility. Monetary policy
has succeeded in stabilising prices and at the present time long-term inflation expectations
approach  the  Riksbank’s  target  of  2%.  The  changes  in  fiscal  policy,  which  have  entailed
among  other  things  a  reform  of  budgetary  procedures  and  the  imposition  of  a  ceiling  on
public expenditure, have had positive effects. This is manifested, for example, in the budget
surpluses  now  being  produced.  Overall,  we  have  made  good  progress  towards  achieving
macroeconomic stability and therefore appear to fulfil the requirements for “good economic
policy”, even if we have fulfilled these for a considerably shorter time than the USA.
If, on the other hand, we look at structural factors,  our  problems  were  perhaps  also  worse
from  the  start.  The  Swedish  economy  is  less  open  to  competition  than  the  American.  For
example, even adjusted for differences in value added taxes, the level of prices in Sweden is
on average 15-20% higher than in the USA. Many deregulations that were carried out long
ago  in  the  USA,  such  as  the  deregulation  of  the  transport  sector,  for  example,  have  been
carried through more recently in Sweden and there are many indications that we have not yet
seen  their  full  impact.  However,  competition  in  many  markets  is  expected  to  increase  in
Sweden in the future, in part as a result of increased globalisation and European integration.
One  area  in  which  very  little  has  been  done  is  the  labour  market,  which  is  very  rigid  and
regulated compared with the American.
BIS Review 132/1999
4
   Where the introduction of new technology is concerned, Sweden has gone further in this than
many other OECD countries. For example, we have the highest number of Internet users per
capita in the whole world.
Like the American economy, the Swedish economy is very open to the world around it and
Sweden  has  a  long  tradition  of  free  trade.  To  some  extent  this  counteracts  the  tendencies
towards limited competition on the Swedish market.
But on the other hand, as yet we have seen no clear indications in the statistics of the impact
of  the  new  economy.  For  example,  Sweden  shows  no  signs  of  the  strong  growth  of
investment that has been seen in the USA in the last four to six years. Further, there are no
indications that the productivity of labour has increased very much, which appears to have
been an important element of the strong growth in America.
In the opinion of the Executive Board of the Riksbank, as stated in the Inflation Report (1999:3), the
trade-off  between  inflation  and  growth  has  improved  to  some  extent,  even  if  there  is  considerable
uncertainty  about  how  much.  In  conclusion,  the  Swedish  economy  appears  to  have  undergone  only
some  of  the structural changes that  the  American  economy  has  implemented.  It  remains  to  be  seen
whether the “new economy” can have any further impact in Sweden.
5
BIS Review 132/1999
