Mr Lee comments on what Singapore and
other Asian countries are doing in post-crisis Asia
Speech by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Chairman of the Board of Directors of The Monetary Authority of
Singapore and Deputy Prime Minister, at the Credit Suisse First Boston Investment seminar, held in
Singapore on 26 October 1999.
 Pre-crisis Asia: a mirage?
The  Asian  crisis  swept  through  the  regional  economies  like  a  huge  tidal  wave.  The  euphoria  from
more than a decade of boom in East Asian economies was abruptly punctured. Overnight, headlines
switched  from  the  “Asian  century”  to  the  “Asian  disease”.  Some  analysts  questioned  if  the  earlier
prosperity had been real, or just a bubble. Others attributed the crisis to fatal flaws in the Asian model,
which was masked by a classic asset bubble. Asia would not recover, and investors would not return,
until these deep flaws were corrected.
This pessimism was exaggerated. The transformation of Asia in the last few decades was no mirage. It
had  sound  fundamental  underpinnings.  Countries  maintained  high  savings  and  investment  rates.
Education levels were rising. Economic policies generally became more liberal, outward oriented, and
welcoming to foreign investments. Asia had all the ingredients for the takeoff that we witnessed. True,
the crisis was a major  setback  but,  compared  to a  decade  ago,  the regional  economies  are still  way
ahead in terms of development and already, most of them are beginning to bounce back.
Undoubtedly,  the  economies  did  have  serious  problems  that  contributed  to  the  crisis.  Domestic
institutional  and  regulatory  frameworks  were  weak.  Banking  systems  were  poorly  operated  or
supervised.  Transparency  and  the  rule  of  law  were  lacking.  What  the  Indonesians  termed  KKN  –
corruption, collusion and nepotism – was accepted as the way business was done, rather than seen as a
serious flaw to be put right.
But  the  crisis  cannot  be  blamed  solely  on  its  victims.  It  was  also  aggravated  by  weaknesses  in  the
international financial structure. Unsound loans required imprudent lenders, or at least over-confident
ones.  The  sustained  Asian  boom  caused  investors  and  lenders  to  over-reach  themselves.  When
problems surfaced in Thailand, they stampeded for the exits across the board, creating a self-fulfilling
panic.  Non-Asian  emerging  markets,  and  even  some  developed  world  markets,  also  came  under
pressure. The problem was not just Asia.
Recovery of the region
Now, two years later, the Asian economies are stabilising. Macro-indicators show that the worst has
past, much sooner than many expected, and the near term prospects are quite good.
Throughout  the  region,  exchange  rates  have  stabilised.  Inflation  has  subsided.  Governments  have
eased monetary policy and lowered interest rates. Financial systems are flush with liquidity.
Consumer  sentiment  has  improved,  and  private  consumption  has  recovered  to  pre-crisis  levels.
Exports are recovering, underpinned by the belated revival in Japan’s economy, and continued strong
demand from the US. Electronics and semiconductor exports are doing particularly well, helped by an
upturn in the global electronics cycle.
Strong  domestic  consumption  and  export  performance  have  stimulated  industrial  production.
Inventories  and  over-capacity  have  fallen  throughout  the  region.  In  South  Korea  and  Malaysia,
capacity utilisation has returned to pre-crisis levels in many industries.
Countries across the region have revised their growth forecasts upwards. For example, South Korea is
expecting strong growth this year – 8%, while Singapore has forecast growth between 4 and 5%. Even
1
BIS Review 117/1999
Indonesia’s economy is stabilising, and its prospects have brightened now that Presidential elections
have turned out well.
This recovery has given the Asian economies breathing space to address structural weaknesses. But
the problems have not vanished. Countries must still press on, to deal progressively with hard issues of
corporate  and  financial  restructuring,  and  lay  the  basis  for  long-term  growth.  Otherwise  their
recoveries will remain incomplete and vulnerable.
The  sustainability  of  each  country’s  recovery  will  therefore  depend  on  how  it  tackles  its  own
problems. Countries differ significantly in the problems they face, and their strategies for overcoming
these problems. Some will recover faster than others.
South East Asia
In South East Asia, the situation has stabilised. The mood has totally changed over the last 12 months.
Thailand has made some progress in cleaning up and consolidating its financial sector.1 NPLs peaked
in  May  1999  and  are  expected  to  decline  steadily  by  next  year,  provided  debt  restructuring  and
recapitalization progresses. But significant problems remain, and analysts and rating agencies remain
concerned about the state of the banking sector in Thailand.
Malaysia’s  economy  has  also  stabilised,  with  strong  balance-of-payments  surpluses  and  growing
foreign reserves. As PM Mahathir has pointed out, Malaysia’s exchange controls have not harmed its
economy.  The  Malaysian  government  has  been  working  out  bad  loans  in  the  banking  sector,  and
getting banks to consolidate into core-banking groups. It is not clear how much corporate restructuring
has taken place. But Malaysia’s external debt is relatively low and it can afford a certain amount of
very long-term infrastructure projects which may not offer attractive financial returns.
In  Indonesia,  Abdurrahman  Wahid  has  just  been  elected  as  the  fourth  President,  with  Megawati  as
Vice-President, in Indonesia’s first truly democratic presidential election in over thirty  years.  It  is a
good outcome, after two traumatic years of upheaval and chaos. But the road ahead for Indonesia is
not easy. The new government faces many urgent priorities. It must work out a new political balance,
redefine the role of the military, lay the basis of a civil society, and strengthen the rule of law. Then
confidence will return and the economy will revive. In this arduous task of national reconstruction and
reconciliation, Indonesia has the good wishes and support of its neighbours, including Singapore.
North East Asia
In North East Asia, Japan is finally recovering from its prolonged recession. Public investment, private
consumption and housing investments are all improving. We are also starting to see real financial and
corporate restructuring in Japan. Sony, Nissan and NTT have recently announced sizeable cuts in their
workforces2  –  a  significant departure from  the  lifetime  employment  system.  And  following  the  Big
Bang measures, Japanese banks are merging, even across different keiretsu groups, forming two of the
world’s largest banking groups.3 There has also been a wave of strategic alliances between Japanese
and foreign financial institutions.4
1 The  government  has  nationalised  three  commercial  banks  and  absorbed  three  others  into  the  state-owned  Krung  Thai
Bank. Four commercial banks have been sold to foreign investors thus far.
2
Sony, Nissan and NTT have planned to slash 17,000, 21,000 and 20,000 jobs, respectively. Other Japanese corporations
such as NEC and Hitachi have also announced large layoff plans.
3 The Daiichi-Kangyo, Fuji and IBJ group, and the Sumitomo-Sakura group.
4
Including  Travellers  Group  and  Nikko  Securities,  Daiichi  Kangyo  Bank  and  J P  Morgan,  and  Goldman  Sachs  and
SocGen with IBJ and Nomura.
BIS Review 117/1999
2
In  Korea,  financial sector  restructuring  is  generally  on  track.  Korea  took  a  hands-on  approach.  The
government aggressively bought and disposed of the non-performing loans in the financial system. It
pushed for bank recapitalisation. Forced closures, mergers and acquisitions have removed many weak
institutions from the financial sector.
Korea  is  also  pressing  for  reform  and  restructuring  of  the  chaebols.  This  will  take  time,  effort  and
political will, as the difficulties with Daewoo show. Restructuring the chaebols involves a wholesale
conversion  of  entrenched  social  norms  and  practices.  The  initial  impact  is  painful  for  those  who
depend on the distortions that reforms seek to remove. Benefits are on the other hand more dispersed,
less apparent and longer term.
China
One country which will have a major impact on East Asia’s fortunes is China. China’s reforms and
opening  up  contributed  to  the  excitement  and  optimism  of  the  Asian  boom.  A  stable  China  will
contribute to confidence in Asia, and encourage investments and growth throughout the region.
The  Chinese  economy  does  face  daunting  problems.  Non-performing  loans  of  the  bank  sector  are
huge.  The  state-owned  enterprises  urgently  need  reform,  which  will  put  millions  out  of  work  and
cause difficult social problems. Foreign investments have slowed down, the economy is experiencing
deflation, and the Government is resorting to fiscal pump-priming to boost growth.
But there are important positive factors. China’s policies of liberalisation will continue. These market
reforms  have  benefited  wide  segments  of  the  Chinese  population,  at  all  levels  of  society  and
government.  They  are  far  too  entrenched  to  be  reversed.  The  Chinese  people  are  ambitious,  and
forward looking, and have high aspirations to improve their lives and strengthen their country. Their
dynamism will propel and sustain China’s economic development and modernisation.
Singapore: tapping new opportunities
In  Singapore,  we  are  making  fundamental  changes  to  keep  ourselves  competitive,  to  tap  emerging
opportunities and attract foreign investments.
When  the  crisis  struck,  our  immediate  priority  was  to  reduce  business  costs  and  strengthen  our
competitiveness.  Last  November  the  government  implemented  a  major  package  to  do  this.  We
lowered government taxes, rentals and charges. We also cut wage costs by 15%, by cutting variable
bonuses,  as  well  as  employer  contributions  to  the  CPF  –  the  government-run  compulsory  savings
scheme.
These  were  urgently  needed  measures,  but  their  focus  was  on  cost-cutting  rather  than  capability
building. For the long term, cost cutting alone is not an adequate strategy. So we are also making basic
changes  to  strengthen  our  economy.  We  are  emphasising  worker  training  and  education,  to  help  us
become  a  knowledge-based  economy.  Many  of  our  workers  are  still  unskilled  or  semi-skilled,
particularly the older ones. With the help of the unions, we are getting them to undergo retraining and
skills upgrading, so that they can do higher skilled, higher value-added jobs.
Besides investing in our own people, we are seeking all the talent we can from around the world. To
build  a  first  class  economy,  with  first  class  banks,  companies,  and  government,  we  need  top  notch
people.  There  are  many  talented  Singaporeans,  but  not  enough.  We  must  find  and  deploy  talent,
whether Singaporean or foreign, to become a vibrant and dynamic city and outperform competitors.
We  are  getting  our  organisations  to  emulate  the  best  US  MNCs,  which  induct  talent  from  many
cultures and countries, and meld them into a single cohesive management team. Singapore will be a
place where opportunities abound, where able and enterprising people want to live, work and enjoy
themselves, and where foreigners are welcomed and treated as part of our extended family.
Besides  upgrading  the  skills  of  our  workforce  and  attracting  foreign  talent  to  Singapore,  we  are
promoting entrepreneurship, particularly technology startups. We have launched a Technopreneurship
3
BIS Review 117/1999
21 programme. Under this, we are changing the education system to lighten the curriculum, encourage
creativity, risk-taking and a spirit of life-long learning among our young. Second, we are setting up a
US$1  billion  venture  fund  to  coinvest  with  the  private  sector  in  startups,  whether  by  local
entrepreneurs  or  foreign  talent  attracted  to  Singapore.  Third,  we  are  improving  the  physical
infrastructure for start-ups, such as technology park facilities. And finally, we are reviewing existing
laws and regulations, for example those governing taxation of stock options.
A fourth area of change is the liberalisation of the financial sector. Our goal is to make Singapore a
leading financial centre in our time zone, linked to other major financial centres of the world.
Over  the  last  two  years,  we  have  progressively  shifted  our  philosophy  on  financial  regulation  to  a
lighter, more market oriented approach. We have given fund management companies greater access to
domestic funds, including personal savings in the compulsory pensions scheme, and the government’s
reserves hitherto managed by GIC and MAS. We are promoting the debt market, demutualising and
merging the stock and futures exchanges, bringing corporate governance up to date, and introducing
risk-focussed supervision and inspection of financial institutions.
We are also allowing more foreign competition in the domestic banking sector. We have just issued
new  banking  licences  to  foreign  banks.  Keener  competition  will  mean  better  banking  services  and
stronger local banks that can hold their own in a rapidly changing industry.
While pursuing major economic priorities, we have not neglected to strengthen our social cohesion.
Singaporeans today are more educated, better informed, and keen to take part in the national debate.
The  government  is  adapting  its  style  and  approach  to  fit  these  aspirations  of  a  new  generation  of
citizens.
Our strategic challenges have not fundamentally changed. We still have to make a living for ourselves,
ensure the security of our homes and families, and build a better future for our children in an uncertain
world. But the way Singaporeans mobilise  themselves  to respond creatively  to  these challenges  has
changed.  The  government  will  still  play  an  active  role,  defining  the  issues,  setting  the  agenda,  and
influencing opinions. But we also actively solicit opinions and proposals from outside the government.
We  are  involving  people  much  more  in  discussing  and  tackling  national  and  community  issues,
whether  it  is  managing  their  housing  estates  or  reforming  the  financial  industry.  This  will  help
strengthen Singaporeans’ sense of ownership and commitment to Singapore.
Conclusion
I have focussed on what Singapore and the other Asian countries are doing to get themselves back on
track.  But  the  region’s  prospects  also  depend  on  the  strategic  backdrop  –  the  relations  among  the
major powers, namely the US, China and Japan, and particularly the role of the US. We have reasons
to hope that US-China relations will remain stable. The US will not want a new version of the Cold
War against China. And China’s over-riding priority for some decades to come will be to modernise
and develop its economy and society, for which it needs peace and the cooperation of other countries.
In  the  region  as  a  whole,  the  US  plays  a  vital,  constructive  role,  moderating  tensions  and  keeping
potential flash points from boiling over.
 “Can Asia make it?” A year ago, many analysts and investors would have said no. The Asian miracle
appeared to have been an illusion, built on flimsy foundations. Today, in light of the rapid economic
rebound, the rank of the sceptics is thinning rapidly. My own  view  has been an  unequivocal “yes”.
Asia will recover its former dynamism. Not automatically, and not all at once; but as countries rebuild
and  put  things  right,  recovery  will  come.  The  fundamentals  which  supported  two  decades  of  high
growth  in  Asia  have  not  disappeared  –  a  sturdy  work  ethic  and  high  savings  rates,  skilled  and
disciplined  workforces,  and  an  entrepreneurial  culture.  In  time,  these  strengths  will  enable  the
countries to grow and progress again.
The recovery will create new investment opportunities. Asian governments have recognised the need
for foreign equity, and relaxed restrictions on foreign investments. Prices are down, and fundamentally
BIS Review 117/1999
4
sound companies facing difficulties are looking for strategic alliances. Investors should keep their eyes
open, invest discriminately, and ride on the region as it picks up.
At the height of the crisis, I asked one European banker what his bank would do. He said that the bank
had been in Asia for over a century. It had seen far worse upheavals. It would take the latest problems
in its stride, and wait the storm out. It would not opt out of the region. Other investors may not have
such a long history in Asia, but for you too, taking a long and informed view will be worth your while.
5
BIS Review 117/1999
