Mr Liebscher wonders whether financial crises are really here to stay
Luncheon speech delivered by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, at
the Ost-West Konferenz of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank on the theme of “Financial crisis - a
never ending story?”, held in Wien on 23 November 1999.
 Ladies and Gentlemen,
I have my doubts whether financial crisis is a topic that lends itself well to a luncheon speech, since
part of what I am going to say may sound like the analysis of a nutrition expert who warns about bad
eating  and  drinking  habits  which  are  not  conducive  to  health  and  fitness.  So  when  I  talk  about  too
much  appetite  for  risk  and  unsound  financial  systems  and  so  on,  this  will  hopefully  not  spoil  your
appetite for lunch. If it does, I apologize in advance.
What I am going to serve you is not a light dessert but a rather heavy main dish with the following
ingredients:
• 
First, a reminder of some features of the financial market trends, including the lessons to be
drawn for economic policy;
 second, a brief note on recent work in official international fora on financial stability;
third, an assessment of the relationship between public policy and markets;
fourth, an outlook on the course policymakers should pursue in the future;
and fifth, some reasons why financial stability issues are of concern to central bankers.
1.
With the new millenium approaching, we clearly have not reached the end of history as  one  author
suggested several years ago. We are rather in the process of transforming our economies, and financial
markets have become a driving force behind this transformation, mostly supporting it, but capable of
seriously  disrupting  it  at  times.  Global  finance,  driven  itself  by  technology  and  liberalization,  has
brought  continents  closer  to  each  other  and  thus  increased  spillover  effects.  The  trend  towards
disintermediated finance is going on and financial instruments are becoming yet more sophisticated.
Financial capital is becoming less complacent vis-à-vis policy errors and more demanding as far as the
required return is concerned. The recent crises have shown that policy mistakes tend to be sanctioned
drastically by financial markets, and the longer the sanction is delayed the harder it turns out to be.
What has further become clear is that stability is a prerequisite for long-term efficiency and sustainable
growth - a lesson that appears to be easily forgotten as long as everything goes well. But when things
take a bad turn, it becomes obvious that financial crises tend to be costly not only for creditors and
banks but also for the economy as a whole. This is not to say, though, that stability is an excuse for
financial  repression  which  distorts  economic  decisions.  If  the  financial  market  doesn’t  work  like  a
market any more, the backlash can be strong. After the crumbling of central planning, stability was in
a way discredited, and financial speculation developed against the backdrop of insufficiently regulated
and  supervised  financial  institutions  with  only  a  limited  capacity  to  serve  the  needs  of  the  real
economy.
Public policy is actively addressing the issues posed by the trends and changes I have just mentioned.
During the last months a lot has been achieved: IMF and World Bank have increased the transparency
of their policies and thus helped financial markets to make better decisions.
2.
1
BIS Review 129/1999
At the BIS the Basle Committee worked out a consultative paper on capital requirements, whose main
thrust  is  a  pronounced  individualization  of  supervision,  designed  to  give  banks  a  more  adequate
supervisory treatment. Generally, awareness has been created and agreement  on principles  has  been
achieved. These principles must now be implemented, which will be the most arduous part.
In response to the recurrent crises in recent years the Financial Stability Forum has been set up. It is a
platform  of  collaboration  between  international  supervisory  authorities  and  the  Bretton  Woods
institutions; a platform that opens up the opportunity to detect crises at an early stage and to strengthen
global cooperation.
Finally, the European System of Central Banks has specified its role in financial supervision on the
basis of the allocation of competencies set out in the Treaty.
3.
The  process  of  change  in  the  financial  landscape  -  with  change  sometimes  evolving  smoothly,  and
sometimes  less  so  -  is  also  a  process  of  interaction  between  public  policy  and  financial  markets:
financial markets influence policy, but policy influences financial markets as well. It is fair that market
participants should be informed well in advance about the framework conditions for doing business.
Policymakers,  likewise,  need  to  know  the  views  of  financial  market  participants.  The  dialogue
between policy and markets is therefore important. It must be clear, however, that policy has to fulfil
its role  by  setting  the rules for efficiently  functioning  markets.  Adequate  prudential regulations  and
oversight mechanisms are essential in this respect. One crucial question we must tackle in the future
is: how far can we go in letting the  markets regulate  themselves?  How  far  can  private  entities  be a
substitute for public commitment? As we saw during the Asian crisis, rating agencies can get it wrong,
in  some  instances confirming  only  the  new  direction  the  market  itself  has  already  taken.  While  the
primary responsibility for the overall soundness of the financial system lies with policy, market forces
should be used as an indispensible complementary tool to exert discipline. This requires policymakers
to  be  aware  of  the  mechanisms  according  to  which  markets  work,  and  sometimes  fail  to  work.
Eventually, behind the seemingly anonymous markets there are human beings trying to maximize their
individual  well-being  according  to  the  incentives  which  they  are  given.  By  contrast,  public  policy
needs to have in mind what is optimal for society as a whole.
4.
I would like to point out three broad avenues that public policy should take in the future.
First,  make  the  market  function  more  efficiently  so  that  risk  is  priced  correctly.  If  market  failures
occur  and  consequently  the  price  mechanism  doesn’t  work,  public  policy  should  look  into  the
incentives existing for financial market participants and - if need may be - adapt the framework. Too
big an appetite for risk is at the heart of subsequent financial  crises.  It  is encouraged  by  explicit or
implicit guarantees which weaken the hard budget constraint that ought to characterize any efficient
economic  system.  To  avoid  moral  hazard,  public  policy  should  dissipate  a  false  sense  of  security
which might arise because financial markets feel the “too big to fail” doctrine or the “too complex to
fail” doctrine will be applied anyway. Constructive ambiguity - based on knowledge of the facts and
the risks - might help to make operators more cautious. What we have learned during the Asian crisis
is that “ambiguity” sometimes is not only appropriate when dealing with possible financial support but
also in exchange rate policies. When there is a lack of fundamental convergence in the medium term,
exchange rate pegs can invite short-term speculative capital movements and unsustainable investment
and consumption patterns.
This brings me to macroeconomic policies in general, the second big avenue, the importance of which
I  would  like  to  stress.  The  globalization  of  finance  has  put  a  premium  on  good  policies.  Public
authorities are thus well advised to pursue policies which do not lead to macroeconomic imbalances
that threaten price stability and long-term growth. Furthermore, if such imbalances arise policies must
adjust quickly. Finally, countries need to be transparent so that there will be an additional incentive to
BIS Review 129/1999
2
identify the build-up of macroeconomic imbalances at an early stage and to take adequate action. The
highly valuable ongoing efforts to increase the functioning of the international financial system would
be wasted if they cannot build on the preparedness of any country in the world to keep its own house
in order. If this effort is pursued collectively, for example on a regional level, a higher leverage can be
achieved. Monetary and fiscal discipline in the euro area and structural reforms making the economy
more flexible will both make the euro area less prone to originate shocks but also less vulnerable to
outside shocks.
The  third  avenue  public  policy  should  take  is  to  give  more  attention  to  the  legal  infrastructure  of
financial  markets,  covering  both  bankruptcy  procedures  and  effective  corporate  governance.  This
could  also  be  a  standard  feature  of  international  surveillance.  “Ordnungspolitik”  thus  has  to  get
prominence in the design of worldwide integration and liberalization strategies. The liberalization of
capital movements, as desirable as it is, must go hand in hand  with  the  establishment  of  sound  and
efficiently supervised financial systems; otherwise not only the countries which liberalize prematurely
would  suffer  from  a  potential  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  and  the  ensuing  exchange  rate  and
economic crisis, but also the world economy as a whole would be hit. Let me just mention that - due to
the  Asian  and  Russian  crises  -  some  regions  of  the  euro  area  will  experience  substantially  lower
growth  this  year  than  last  year,  and  for  the  same  reasons  real  growth  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole
dropped from around 3% in 1998 to an estimated 2.1% this year.
To sum up, public policy in general and financial supervision in particular thus have an important role
to  play.  They  have  to  keep  the  long-term  stability  and  health  of  the  financial  system  in  mind,
correcting  for  the  -  very  often  -  rather  short-term  orientation  of  financial  markets.  Public  policies
should be designed to avoid the headache after the party, by moderating exuberance and exaggeration.
This is certainly more easily said than done and probably not always popular. But are watchdogs there
to be popular?
5.
Let me now turn to the question of why financial stability issues are of concern to central banks.
First,  central  banks  must  nowadays  even  more  than  in  the  past  know  what  is  going  on  in  financial
markets.  They  need  to be in  a  position  to  assess  how  the  transmission  mechanism  is  influenced  by
changing financial market conditions. Moreover, monetary policy must have an interest in the smooth
functioning  of the financial  system.  As  the  Japanese  example  shows,  monetary  policy  may  become
ineffective  when  there  is  a  liquidity  trap  or  when  bank  lending  is  restrained  by  the  need  to  rebuild
capital in the aftermath of a financial crisis. A lowering of the policy interest rate would - under such
conditions - provide no stimulus to the economy.
Second, as one of the classical functions of a central bank is to extend emergency liquidity assistance,
central  banks  need  adequate  information  not  only  on  financial  markets  in  general  but  also  on
individual institutions. As monetary stability might be affected when a big player gets into difficulties,
central banks should be in a position to form a view if a certain institution is illiquid or insolvent, and
if  the  latter  is  the  case,  whether  this  institution  is  of  systemic  importance  or  not.  An  additional
challenge  here  is  that  institutions  outside  the  supervisory  umbrella  -  such  as  hedge  funds  -  tend  to
grow significantly. Moreover, the growth of financial markets in general and the growing importance
of  financial  conglomerates  in  particular  go  hand  in  hand  with  a  greater  opaqueness  of  the  size  and
distribution of risks. This puts additional demands on the analytical capacity of those concerned with
financial stability.
Third,  with  financial liberalization,  asset  price  and  credit  cycles  may  have  become  more  prominent
and suggestions have been made that monetary authorities should react to this cycle, for instance by
raising  interest  rates  when  stock  markets  are  clearly  overvalued.  Central  banks  may  thus  have  an
interest to contribute to the discussion of prudential rules, which could contribute to a dampening of
the asset cycle. Prudential rules, and not interest rate changes, are there to safeguard financial stability.
This is not to deny a role for asset prices in the monetary policy strategy. In the context of the ECB’s
monetary strategy they are monitored to draw conclusions about future price developments, but there
3
BIS Review 129/1999
is no reaction to movements on financial markets as such. As the priorities within the Eurosystem are
clear there is no risk that the central bank loses sight of its primary goal of price stability for fear of a
negative reaction of the stock market.
Ladies and Gentlemen,
To shield the real economy as far as possible from financial instability and prevent instability in the
first place, continued adaptation of public policy to the changing financial landscape is required. To
keep monetary policy effective, a smooth functioning of a diversified financial system is also in the
interest of central banks. Monetary policy can contribute to financial stability by keeping expectations
about future inflation as low as possible and thus reducing inflation risk premia to a minimum. Even
when  monetary  policy  cannot  eliminate  excessive  risk-taking  and  speculation  it  can  at  least  try  to
avoid  fueling  it.  Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  why  we  need  both
monetary and financial stability. They are not an end in themselves but contribute to long-term growth
and raising of living standards.
BIS Review 129/1999
4
