Mr Stark discusses how the euro will change the world of finance
Opening Speech by Dr Jürgen Stark, Deputy Governor of the Deutsche Bundesbank, to the FERMA’s
Risk Management Forum, held in Berlin on 25 October 1999.
 I.
Ladies and gentlemen,
It gives me great pleasure to address this Forum of European risk managers here in Berlin today. With
the introduction of the euro at the beginning of this year European financial markets have entered into
a new era of rapid and profound change. The single currency will affect every segment of the financial
services industry in the euro area in one way or another, although this impact and the pace of change
will be different in various market sectors.
The most rapid change has already taken place in the euro money market, which, within a matter of
weeks after the launch of the single currency, developed into a wholly integrated transnational market,
providing the very basis for the money market operations of the European System of Central Banks,
the Eurosystem. This was made possible by TARGET, a system which allows large-volume payments
on a real-time basis throughout the euro area and which, after a few technical difficulties at the start, is
in full and smooth operation now. Transnational payments within TARGET reached a daily average of
350  billion  euro  in  July  this  year.  TARGET  thus  ensures  that  cross-border  arbitrage  will  eliminate
short-term  interest  rate  differentials.  As  a  result,  the  EONIA  rate  and  national  overnight  rates  have
entirely converged. Money markets have also adopted EURIBOR as the single short-term benchmark
in euro, to which the short-term futures market and the long term swap market are linked.
Transnational integration is a much more gradual process in capital markets. Nevertheless, this process
has already, within the first months of the new currency, acquired considerable momentum. In fact, the
development of broad, deep and liquid capital markets covering the whole of the euro area is one of
the great potentials of European Monetary Union.
It is the elimination of exchange rate risk that is driving this process of market integration, the major
feature of which has been a far-reaching convergence of long-term interest rates. This process started
well  before  the  launch  of  the  euro,  when  markets  gradually  began  to  anticipate  that  EMU  would
become  a  reality.  As  a  result,  interest  rate  differentials  between  10-year  government  bonds  of  euro
member states have narrowed to a range that, usually, does not exceed 40 basis points these days. This
is a dramatic development if we recall that only at the beginning of 1996 this yield spread amounted to
as much as 500 basis points in the case of some countries that are taking part in the Eurosystem today.
In the absence of exchange rate risk, spreads nowadays only reflect perceived differences in credit risk
and liquidity. Increasingly, it is the latter prevailing over the former. I want to illustrate this point with
an example: it would be very hard – if not absurd – to argue that it is a higher credit risk which is
forcing the Netherlands to regularly pay about 15 basis points more on its long-term government debt
than Germany. Clearly, it is the lower liquidity of the market for Dutch government bonds which is
causing this spread.
It has been suggested recently that national governments in the euro area should pool their debt issuing
in  one central agency,  acting  on  behalf  of  borrowing  governments.  This  suggestion  was  made  with
reference  to  the  greater  liquidity  that  such  a  procedure  would  create  for  the  euro-denominated
government bond market and the savings in borrowing costs it would allow.
You will be hardly surprised that I do not agree with this proposal. Admittedly, there may be a few
basis  points  that  could  be  saved  in  the  debt  management  of  some  governments  of  small  countries
and/or countries with low debt levels over the short run. However, by pooling debt issuing one would
also pool risks and liabilities of the debtors. This would be a violation of Article 103 of the European
1
BIS Review 115/1999
Union  Treaty  (ex-article  104b  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty),  the  so-called  “no-bail-out  clause”,  which
prevents  governments  from  assuming  any  liability  for  other  governments’  debt.  Such  sharing  of
liabilities,  in  my  view,  could  create  moral  hazard  that  would  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  new
currency.  The  result  would  be  higher  rather  than  lower  long-term  interest  rates,  leading  to  higher
borrowing costs for member states.
The  upshot  of  this  is  that  for  the  time  being  we  will  not  be  able  to  create  a  euro-denominated
government debt market of the same liquidity and homogeneity as the market for Treasury bonds in
the  US,  unless  we  were  to  get  a  fully  fledged  political  union  with  a  supranational  European
government issuing substantial amounts of debt. I cannot see that happening in any foreseeable time
span,  although  it  could  be  the  long-term  result  of  a  sustained  evolutionary  process  of  political
integration.
II.
Let me return from the future to the present. We have seen that the euro is providing major impulses
for  capital  market  integration  within the currency  area.  Given  the  greater  market  size,  there  has  for
instance been a strong trend towards bringing larger issues to the market. For example, issues of a size
of 1 billion euro or more have more than doubled between the first quarter of 1998 and the first quarter
of 1999 in terms of overall volumes.
Especially the market for corporate bonds is growing dynamically, albeit from rather low levels (due
to the traditional dominance of bank credit in corporate finance in most countries of the euro area). In
terms of overall volumes, the corporate bond market more than doubled between the first half of 1998
and the first half of this year. Overall private-sector issuing was 124% higher in the second quarter of
this year than it had been in the same period a year before. Here too, the trend is towards bigger issues.
Of the overall volume of corporate bonds issued 50% accounted for issues of a size of 1 billion euro or
more.
There are mutually reinforcing factors at play here. Part of the recent dynamics in euro-denominated
corporate bond markets has been driven by merger and acquisition activity that has greatly increased
due to the restructuring needs of the corporate sector in the internal market of the European Union.
Increases in the overall size of the euro-denominated capital market and in the size of individual issues
have in many cases facilitated M&A activity.
The  euro  is  also  becoming  an  important  international  bond currency.  In  the  first  half  of  1999  a  net
volume in bonds and notes of 75.5 billion euro was issued by non-residents of the euro area. This is an
increase of almost 50% over the volume of international issues in the first half of 1998 (in the legacy
currencies of the euro). In the same period net issues of Eurodollar bonds and notes decreased from
109 to 69.8 billion euro.
The  integrative  forces  of  the  euro  are  also  affecting  equity  markets  in  the  euro  area.  By  forming
alliances,  stock  exchanges  are  facilitating  access  of  their  members  to  one  another’s  markets,  thus
simplifying  cross-border  trading.  Such  an  alliance  was  formed  in  1998  between  the  London  Stock
Exchange and Deutsche Börse AG. In May this year this bilateral alliance was extended to exchanges
in  Paris,  Amsterdam,  Brussels,  Madrid,  Milan  and  Zurich.  In  parallel  (and  in  competition)  to  this
alliance of exchanges, a consortium of major international investment banks has recently announced it
intends to take over the UK-based electronic share-trading system Tradepoint.
Whatever the outcome of these alliances and ventures on the infrastructure of equity markets will be,
equity  portfolios  of  private  and  institutional  investors  in  EMU  member  countries  will  diversify
internationally,  due to  the  elimination  of  exchange  rate  risk.  This  trend  can  already  be  seen  among
German  mutual  funds  that  invest  in  equities.  Those  funds  focusing  on  German  equities  suffered  a
reduction in their overall amount of funds under management of 1 billion euro in the first half of 1999,
whereas funds investing in shares representing the whole of the euro area raised additional capital of
2.4 billion euro in the same period. This trend is quite likely to continue and, possibly, accelerate.
BIS Review 115/1999
2
III.
The euro will also act as a catalyst on the banking sector of the new currency area. Increases in capital
market  activities  facilitated  by  greater  market  size  are  likely  to  foster  securitisation  and
disintermediation. Classical bank lending is likely to suffer from this trend, which has already run its
full course in the Anglo-Saxon countries. This kind of structural change in the banking industry will
have winners and losers. This will certainly be so among corporate bank customers in Germany. As a
general rule, small companies will find it harder to get access to bank credit than in the past, whereas
larger companies may see their credit conditions improved including the possibility of direct access to
capital markets. Whether such a system, on  balance, is superior to the traditional relationship banking,
which is still dominant in Germany, is hard to say.
One of the problematic aspects of the capital market system versus traditional bank lending could be
studied in the US a year ago, when spreads for many medium-sized American companies (in the wake
of  the  LTCM  crisis)  widened  to  such  an  extent  that  these  companies  were  virtually  cut  off  from
external finance for several months. In systems with a strong and diversified basis of classical bank
lending, “Mittelstand” companies, in general, will at all times find access to bank credit. To be sure, I
do not believe that bank  lending  will  be seriously  threatened  as a  consequence  of structural change
driven by global trends and facilitated by the common currency. However, I feel that we need to watch
this process of change carefully with a view to making sure that a banking structure that is ready to
provide long-term finance to the many small and medium-sized companies remains intact.
The  enlargement  of  financial  markets  due  to  the  bigger  currency  area  is  likely  to  increase
concentration in the banking industry. At the moment mergers are taking place mainly at the national
level. The reason is that, especially, retail banking is still rather segmented due to legal and cultural
differences  in  member  countries.  Cross-border  mergers  in  retail  banking  look  much  less  likely  at
present than in wholesale banking. However, new forms of retail banking, such as direct banking and
discount broking, favoured by technological change, are winning market share. These new activities
may be a playing field which lends itself more readily to cross-border activities than the classic branch
retail banking.
Wholesale banking activities are likely to become increasingly concentrated in a few major financial
centres of the European Union, with a small number of big investment banks that can take advantage
of the economies of scale inherent in this business. At the same time smaller investment banks will,
probably, retain strong positions in market niches. This process of restructuring and concentration will
be  accompanied  by  enhanced  competition.  As  a  consequence,  the  efficiency  of  the  whole  financial
industry in Europe is likely to increase. Anti-trust authorities at the national and the European level, as
I am sure, will carefully monitor this process to make sure that the intensity of competition does not
diminish over the long run. In any case, the euro will considerably change the landscape of banking in
Europe.  There  will  be  some  degree  of  polarisation  between  a  few  big  players  in  global  investment
banking and a bigger number of smaller credit institutions active in retail banking.
IV.
These  internal  changes  in  the  financial  services  industry  in  Europe  will  also  enhance  the  external
significance  of  the  euro.  In  general,  the  international  role  of  a  currency  depends  on  three  factors:
firstly, the size and the openness of the currency area which it represents, secondly, the breadth and
depth  of  financial  markets  in  that  currency  and,  last  but  not  least,  its  stability  record  and  stability
prospects. It is obvious that the euro has a vast potential both as an international portfolio currency and
as  a  major  reserve  currency.  It  is  the  task  of  economic  policymakers  in  Europe  to  ensure  that  the
economic benefits arising from the international role of the euro can be realised in full.
The benefits that accrue from the status of an international reserve currency have been demonstrated
for  decades  by  the  United  States.  The  US  has  not  only  received  a  steady  stream  of  revenues  from
seignorage. They have also greatly benefited from the ability to finance large current account deficits
over an extended period.
3
BIS Review 115/1999
All  this  is  due  to  the  dominant  international  position  of  the  (US)  dollar.  If  the  euro  is  to  gain  an
enhanced significance in this area – and I repeat it has every potential to do so – it will be largely at
the cost of the (US) dollar. Of course, the dollar will remain the most important international reserve
currency for any foreseeable time. But the euro has the opportunity of winning a greater share in the
reserve portfolios of central banks around the world.
V.
During  the  first  half  of  1999  the  euro  depreciated  steadily  against  the  dollar.  The  decline  in  the
bilateral exchange rate accounted for about 10.8% between January and July 1999 (based on monthly
averages).  In  the  meantime  the  euro  has,  partly,  recovered  from  these  previous  losses.  The  public
debate  about  this  depreciation,  in  my  view,  was  sometimes  ill-informed  and  mostly  superficial.  A
central  bank  must  primarily  pursue  internal  price-stability.  That  doesn’t  mean  that  it  should  be
indifferent to large fluctuations in the external value of its currency.
However,  in  the  case of the  euro it  is essential  to  declare  an  unambiguous  commitment  to  a  strong
currency policy, be it internally or externally. In this respect there was no lack of clarity on the part of
the ECB. However, some European governments did, at least temporarily, create the impression that
they had a preference for a low external value of the euro, believing this would stimulate economic
activity  at  a  moment  when  growth  looked  feeble  and  vulnerable  with  respect  to  the  international
financial  crises  around  the  end  of  last  year.  In  the  meantime,  most  European  governments  have
become  more  sensitive  in  their  public  statements  with  respect  to  the  external  value  of  the  euro.
Awareness has grown, as one finance minister recently put it, that “we are all sitting in one boat”.
A lot has been said and written about the underlying factors that may have caused the euro’s initial
depreciation, which should not be over-dramatised. Often cited were the cyclical divergences between
the European and the US economies, with a continuing boom over there and a temporary weakening
of activity here. Sometimes, part of the weakening of the euro was attributed to the crisis in Kosovo.
Although  cyclical  and  political  factors  are  important,  the  external  value  of  the  euro  should,  in  a
long-term  perspective,  be  viewed  as  a  general  judgement  of  the  markets  on  the  attractiveness  of
investment in the euro area. Thus, markets assess very carefully, on a continuous basis, the internal
economic and fiscal policies of the member countries of the euro, especially of the big economies. A
failure to implement the necessary structural reform, especially in labour markets, and/or a backsliding
on fiscal consolidation would present a serious risk for the prospects of the new currency, especially in
foreign exchange markets.
VI.
On the other hand, the hope is justified that the euro will function as a catalyst for fiscal consolidation
and  structural  reform.  The  euro  could  create  peer  pressure  for  best  practice  in  economic  policies
among  European  governments.  In  this  perspective,  the  increase  in  competition  in  markets,  which  I
described  earlier  in  the  case  of  financial  markets,  would  be  reflected  by  an  increase  of  competition
between governments. If this catalytic role of the euro would become a reality – and to some extent it
does already – this would also enhance the international stature of the euro.
In  this  scenario  the  euro  would  be  likely  to  serve  as  a  model  for  other  regions.  We  are  already
beginning to see signs in other European countries of what might be termed “euroisation”, albeit not
yet on the same  scale  as  what  is  involved  in  the  issue  of “dollarisation”  that  was  recently  raised  in
Argentina.  However,  following  the  introduction  of  euro  notes  and  coins  in  2002,  the  euro  can  be
expected to be widely used as a parallel currency, most prominently in the transformation economies
of Central and Eastern Europe. Many of these countries may choose to link their own currencies in one
way  or  the  other  to  the  euro  or  are  already  doing  so.  This  will  enhance  the  role  of  the  euro  as  an
international transaction and invoicing currency in addition to the strengthening of its role as a reserve
currency.
BIS Review 115/1999
4
VII.
Let me conclude on the observation that the introduction of the euro will have profound effects on the
world of finance, be it inside or outside the new currency area. In order to exploit the huge economic
benefits  of  monetary  union  in  terms  of  greater  transparency,  competition  and  efficiency,  economic
policies need to be soundly based.
As far as monetary policy is concerned, it is working on excellent institutional conditions: firstly, an
independent  central  bank,  secondly,  a  convincing  monetary  strategy  (which  faces  transitional
difficulties by working in an environment of rapid change in financial markets brought about by the
euro itself) and, thirdly, a comprehensive range of monetary policy instruments.
Monetary policy, however, in order to be successful in the long run,  needs the support of the other
sectors  of  economic  policy-making,  namely  fiscal  policy,  structural  policy  and  wage  policy.  These
policies  remain  largely  within  the  responsibility  of  national  governments  and  national  wage
bargainers.  One  of  the  crucial  issues  of  the  future  will  be  the  relationship  between  these  national
policies and the independent monetary policy of the supranational European  Central  Bank.  Will  the
ECB  be  supported  by  continuing  fiscal  consolidation  and  structural  reform  or  will  there  be  conflict
between monetary policy and the other economic policies, resulting in an uneven policy-mix? There is
a lot at stake. It is crucial that the sense of responsibility of national governments and wage bargainers
will grow and reflect the new reality, the new policy regime, we are in now.
5
BIS Review 115/1999
