Mr Brash gives an address on the
development of international standards
Opening address given by Dr Donald T Brash, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the
SEANZA Forum of Banking Supervisors’ conference, held in Auckland on 11 November 1999.
 It’s  a  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  New  Zealand  and  to  the  SEANZA  Forum  of  Banking
Supervisors’ Conference.
I  would  especially  like  to  welcome  our  guest  speakers:  William  Coen  from  the  Basel  Committee
Secretariat, Roland Raskopf from the Financial Stability Institute, and Clive Briault from the Financial
Services Authority. We very much appreciate their giving up valuable time to be with us, particularly
given  the  long  distances  they  have  had  to  travel  to  get  here.  I  am  sure  that  they  will  make  a  very
valuable contribution to our discussions over the next two days.
I would also like to extend a special welcome to the delegate from Macau. In the past, Macau has been
an observer at these conferences. However, since the last meeting of the Forum it has become a full
member of SEANZA.
As some of you will know, the SEANZA Group has a long history. It originally grew out of a 1956
meeting of central bank governors from British Commonwealth countries in the Asia Pacific region.
The governors decided that the central banks in the region should pool their resources to provide an
intensive and systematic training  course  for  promising  central  bank  staff. The  first  such  course  was
held in Australia in 1957. These courses continue to be held once every two years. The last course was
held in New Zealand last year, while the next one will be held next year in Sri Lanka.
The  SEANZA  Forum  of  Banking  Supervisors  was  established  in  1984  as  an  offshoot  of  the  main
SEANZA  group.  The  objective  was  to  provide  a  means  for  banking  supervisors  from  the  region  to
establish contact with each other, in order to exchange information on issues and problems of common
interest.  Initially  only  central  banks  were  represented  at  the  Forum.  More  recently,  special  purpose
regulatory bodies like the Korean Financial Supervisory Service and APRA in Australia have joined.
Since SEANZA was first established, the number of countries in the SEANZA group  has  gradually
expanded, to the extent that each country now gets the opportunity to host these conferences only once
every 40 years. That probably means I won’t get the chance to give the opening address at one of these
conferences again, and that none of us here today will attend the next New Zealand conference! No
doubt  the  issues  under  discussion  at  that  conference  will  be  quite  a  bit  different  from  those  being
considered here, and the financial system will look radically different from the way it does today.
Already we are seeing rapid change in the financial sector. Over recent years, advances in computer
and  communications  technology,  and  financial  market  liberalisation,  have  led  to  increasing
globalisation  of  financial  markets.  At  the  same  time,  banks  are  under  pressure  to  keep  their  costs
down.  As  a  result,  many  banks  that  operate  in  a  number  of  different  countries  are  choosing  to
centralise  activities  in  one  regional  centre  rather  than  duplicate  services  in  each  country.  We  are
particularly aware of this trend in New Zealand as all of our banks except one are foreign owned. We
are increasingly  finding  that these  banks  are  using  computer  systems  located  in another  country,  or
that parts of their New Zealand business are not in fact being conducted here at all. For example, a
phone  call  to  a  bank’s  treasury  may  be  answered  by  someone  located  in  Sydney  rather  than  in
Wellington  or  Auckland.  Or  we  find  that  particular  types  of  transactions  entered  into  with  New
Zealand-based customers are being booked through another jurisdiction and do not appear on the New
Zealand balance sheet.
These trends make it more important than ever for supervisors in the region to get together and talk
about matters of common interest, both in groups like this and on a one-to-one basis.
1
BIS Review 124/1999
At  the  same  time,  boundaries  between  different  types  of  financial  institution  are  becoming
increasingly blurred. Financial conglomerates offering a wide range of financial services are becoming
increasingly common.
These developments are reflected in the three main themes of this conference: international standards,
supervisory  structures  (and  by  that  I  mean  the  question  of  whether  supervision  is  best  conducted
through  a  so-called  “mega  regulator”  or  through  more  traditional,  functionally-based,  supervisory
structures), and the supervision of conglomerates. These are all very important and topical issues.
I  would like to talk a little about one of these themes – the  development  of  international standards.
There are two main points I would like to make. First, while there is a definite role for international
standards, it is very important that they are implemented in a way that takes into account the individual
circumstances of each country. Secondly, it is possible to have too much of a good thing in this area.
We  will  not  necessarily  be  able  to  achieve  our  overall  objective  –  a  sound  and  efficient  financial
system – by adding further layers of complexity to our supervisory rule books. In fact we may weaken
rather than strengthen the financial infrastructure if we go down this route.
The  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  has  been  instrumental  in  producing  a  number  of
important  international  standards  on  the  supervision  of  banks,  including  the  Capital  Accord  and
minimum standards governing the supervision of banks’ cross-border establishments. Similarly, other
supervisors such as IOSCO and the International Association of Insurance Supervisors have pursued
co-operation in their areas of responsibility. And in the early 1990s, in recognition of the emergence
and  growth  of  financial  conglomerates,  banking,  securities  and  insurance  supervisors  from  G10
countries  began  to  work  together  to  identify  the  problems  that  conglomerates  can  cause,  and  to
consider ways to overcome them.
The  Mexican  crisis  in  1995,  in  particular,  and  the  widespread  incidence  and  high  cost  of  banking
problems recently in this region have prompted calls for concerted international action to promote the
soundness of financial systems. These calls have strengthened over the last couple of years, with the
G7  countries  calling  for  the  adoption  of  strong  prudential  standards  in  emerging  countries  and
encouraging  the  international  financial  institutions  to  increase  their  efforts  to  promote  effective
supervisory structures in those countries. The Basel Committee has been at the forefront of this effort
with the release of the Core Principles. The IMF and the World Bank are also involved. The IMF is
making evaluation of financial supervision and regulation part of its annual country reviews, and the
World  Bank  is  emphasising  the  strengthening  of  financial  infrastructure  as  an  important  part  of  its
structural assistance programmes.
These initiatives  have  many  positive  aspects.  International  harmonisation  and  co-operation  are  very
important in what is rapidly becoming a “borderless” global financial system. Also, it is important that
the  risks  that  supervisors  should  take  into  account  in  their  supervision  are  identified,  and  that
benchmarks are established whereby countries can measure their progress in establishing appropriate
supervisory  regimes.  As  supervisors,  we  can  derive  a  great  deal  of  benefit  from  such  an  approach.
Bank customers and banks themselves also benefit from the international comparability made possible
by the use of common measurement and disclosure frameworks.
Nevertheless, I believe it is important not to assume that supervisory arrangements should be, or can
be, the same in every country. In my view, they must be tailored to the individual circumstances of
each country. What is appropriate for a small country like New Zealand may be totally inappropriate
for a large country like the United States, and vice versa. To give just one example, non-bank financial
institutions need not be licensed or supervised in order to take deposits in New Zealand. Here that does
not cause any problems because the non-bank sector is tiny relative to the bank sector, and people are
generally aware of the differences between banks and non-banks, and of the fact that non-banks may
be more risky than banks. However, I would be the first to acknowledge that such an approach would
not  necessarily  be  the best  for  all other  countries.  In  many  countries,  retail  depositors  typically  use
non-bank  financial  institutions  rather  than  banks  and  it  may  therefore  be  important  that  those
institutions  are  licensed  and  supervised.  Similarly,  in  some  countries  where  there  are  perhaps
thousands  of  licensed  financial  institutions  and  a  very  large  population  –  and  generous  deposit
insurance or a strong implicit government guarantee of bank deposits – it may well be desirable for the
BIS Review 124/1999
2
supervisor  to  check  the  bona  fides  of  bank  management.  In  New  Zealand,  with  its  relatively  small
population and absence of deposit insurance, we are satisfied that the public is well able to make its
own  assessment  of  the  quality  of  bank  management  and  has  an  incentive  to  do  so,  and  in  these
circumstances there is no need for the supervisor to take on this role. Thus, while we strongly support
the introduction of international standards in principle, we would not like to see a one-size-fits-all or
checklist, tick-the-boxes, approach. International standards need to be interpreted with an appropriate
degree of flexibility in order to adequately cater for the individual circumstances of each country.
Further,  when  devising  supervisory  policies  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  not  only  the  individual
circumstances of our own countries but also the need to ensure that policies harness market forces to
the extent possible, rather than undermine them. As Alan Greenspan said in 1997:
“As financial transactions become increasingly rapid and complex, I believe we have no choice but to
harness  market  forces,  as  best  we  can,  to  reinforce  our  supervisory  objectives.  The  appeal  of
market-led  discipline  lies  not  only  in  its  cost  effectiveness  and  flexibility  but  also  in  its  limited
intrusiveness  and  its  greater  adaptability  to  changing  financial  environments.  Measures  to  enhance
market  discipline  involve  providing  private  investors  the  incentives  and  the  means  to  reward  good
bank performance and penalise poor performance. Expanded risk management disclosures by financial
institutions is a significant step in this direction.”1
Indeed,  Mr  Greenspan  made  the  same  point  again  exactly  one  month  ago,  when  addressing  the
American Bankers Association in Phoenix, Arizona. In that speech he said:
“A one-size-fits-all approach to regulation and supervision is inefficient and, frankly, untenable in a
world  in  which  banks  vary  dramatically  in  terms  of  size,  business  mix,  and  appetite  for  risk
… Policymakers must be sensitive to the tradeoffs between more detailed supervision and regulation,
on the one hand, and moral hazard and the smothering of innovation and competitive response, on the
other.  Heavier  supervision  and  regulation  designed  to reduce  systemic  risk  would  likely  lead  to  the
virtual abdication of risk evaluation by creditors of such entities, who could – in such an environment
– rely almost totally on the authorities to discipline and protect the bank. The resultant reduction in
market discipline would, in turn, increase the risks in the banking system, quite the opposite of what is
intended …  Supervisors  have little  choice  but  to  try  to  rely  more  –  not  less  –  on  market  discipline
–  augmented  by  more  effective  public  disclosures  –  to  carry  an  increasing  share  of  the  oversight
load … The potential for oversight through market discipline is significant, and success  in this  area
may well reduce the need to rely on more stringent governmental supervision and regulation.”2
I  am  pleased  that  the  profound  truth  of  this  view  is  being  recognised  more  widely  and  that
international  standards  are  increasingly  reflective  of  this.  The  use  of  banks’  own  models  in  the
measurement of market risk is one example. Increased emphasis on the role of disclosure is another.
These  developments  recognise  that,  as  banks’  activities  become  increasingly  complex  and  change
occurs  with  ever  greater  rapidity,  it  becomes  more  and  more  difficult  to  place  reliance  on  detailed
rules.  Often  supervisors  are  dealing  with  yesterday’s  problem  rather  than  the  one  that  is  emerging
today. What we should aim to do is to harness and reinforce market disciplines to achieve the outcome
we  are  seeking  –  a  sound  and  efficient  financial  system.  Bank  directors  and  management  have  a
detailed knowledge of their bank’s business. We need to make sure that this knowledge is used in the
measurement and management of risk. We also need to make sure that supervision is not carried out in
a way that will reduce incentives for bank customers to monitor the performance and risk profile of
their  bank.  To  the  extent  that  supervisors  ensure  that  these  things  happen,  we  can  expect  banks  to
operate more prudently.
As supervisors, we need to be realistic about what supervision can achieve. It is certainly clear from
the record that there have been significant weaknesses in some countries’ banking systems, and that
1
2
Speaking  at  the  Conference  on  Bank  Structure  and  Competition  hosted  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,
1 May 1997.
Speaking at the American Bankers Association conference in Phoenix, Arizona, 11 October 1999.
3
BIS Review 124/1999
these  weaknesses  have  both  contributed  to  the  emergence  and  severity  of  financial  crises  and
complicated  the  task  of  resolving  them.  However,  I  am  myself  somewhat  dubious  about  the
proposition  that  “poor  supervision”  was  the  primary  cause  of  these  weaknesses.  There  has  been  a
tendency  to  give  supervision  the  blame  for  problems  that  have  originated  elsewhere,  or  to  seek
supervisory remedies for problems that might be better solved in other ways. I would also note that
supervision can sometimes be part of the “problem” rather than part of the solution – particularly when
there has been excessive regulatory forbearance and/or excessive reliance on the public safety net.
I  believe  that  supervision  should  be  seen  as  only  one  of  the  factors  influencing  the  health  of  the
financial system. In this regard I am pleased to note that the Basel Core Principles recognise this by
identifying  the  preconditions  for  effective  banking  supervision,  including  sound  and  sustainable
macro-economic  policies,  a  well  developed  public  infrastructure,  and  effective  market  disciplines.  I
am sure that we can all agree that all of these factors are vital to the development of a sound financial
system.
In  conclusion,  as  financial  markets  become  increasingly  globalised,  supervisory  co-operation  and
harmonisation  become  increasingly  important.  Groups  such  as  SEANZA  play  an  important  role  in
achieving these objectives, as do international supervisory standards. But I believe it is important that
we don’t assume that international standards are the holy grail and that their adoption will necessarily
lead to a sounder financial system. Supervision is only one of a number of factors impacting on the
performance of the financial sector. It is important that we have good supervision, but we should not
over-emphasise its importance.
I  hope  that  you  will  find  this  conference  stimulating  and  that  you  will  enjoy  your  time  in  New
Zealand.
BIS Review 124/1999
4
