Pentti Hakkarainen: Minimise the use of public money through the 
Banking Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Pentti  Hakkarainen,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Finland,  at  the  
15th Integrated Financial Supervisors Conference, Copenhagen, 25 June 2013. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me today to this conference here in Copenhagen. It is a 
pleasure to speak on such an extremely timely topic like the Banking Union. 
As we all know, finance ministers did not reach a political compromise on the bank recovery 
and resolution directive yet on Friday/Saturday. We should hear positive news on the bank 
recovery  and  resolution  directive  (BRRD),  which  is  an  important  milestone  in  the  road 
towards the Banking Union. Moreover, we are waiting also for the final vote on the Single 
Supervisory Mechanism by the European Parliament in early July. I hope this timetable will 
hold  so  that  we  can  proceed  well  with  the  preparations  to  kick-off  the  single  supervisory 
system in 2014. 
Why a Banking Union? 
Let me start with the question why it has been necessary to establish the Banking Union and 
the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) as its key component? 
The crisis since 2008 has made it clear that a highly interconnected and integrated euro area 
requires a stronger institutional framework than what we  currently have. A problem at one 
bank  can  quickly  spread  to  other  banks  both  at  home  and  beyond  national  borders  with 
devastating  effects  on  the  real  economy  and  taxpayers.  Furthermore,  this  crisis  led  to  a 
sudden stop of capital flows within Europe, as banks withdrew within national borders and 
financial integration took serious setbacks.  
An important element to strengthen the financial institutional framework is the creation of the 
Banking Union. The agreement to establish the SSM has been reached at a record pace. A 
strong and independent supranational supervisor is needed to ensure the smooth functioning 
of the monetary union and to restore confidence in the banking sector. The key element in 
confidence rebuilding is the balance sheet assessment of banks to be conducted before the 
SSM is up and running and timely action, if necessary, on potential weaknesses in banks’ 
balance  sheets.  The  idea  is  that  legacy  asset  problems  should  be  detected  and  potential 
capital  shortages  corrected  before  the  operational  start  of  the  SSM  and  shifting  of  the 
supervisory responsibility to the European Central Bank (ECB). 
Credibility  of  national  supervision  has  suffered  because  of  three  reasons.  First,  national 
mandates of the supervisors lead to inability to handle cross-border challenges. Second, the 
so called regulatory capture i.e. close relationships between banks and the supervisor led at 
instances  to  slow  reactions  or  unwillingness  to  react  at  all  to  noticed  problems  in  banks. 
Third,  a  suspicion  of  political  influences  in  supervision  has  weakened  the  standing  and 
credibility of supervisors. Moreover, in 2010 it became desperately evident that the bank and 
sovereign risks are tightly interconnected and with two-way causality. The establishment of 
the SSM will be a major step forward and can help to address these shortcomings but, alone, 
will not be sufficient. Single supervision needs to be accompanied with a system and powers 
to  restructure  and  wind  down  failing  banks  while  minimizing  the  cost  to  taxpayers.  This  is 
also the main thrust in the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) key attributes of resolution. This 
is more or less what the Banking Union is about. The regaining of confidence in the banking 
sector is the key to reverse recent developments towards financial fragmentation and help 
re-establish  a  well-functioning  interbank  market  and  capital  flows.  These  are  of  key 
importance also for restoring economic growth and the single market programme.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The overall Banking Union framework – key elements 
SLIDE: Key elements of the Banking Union 
The first element is the Single Rule Book. The EU has the objective of developing a Single 
Rule  Book,  which  is  based  on  the  idea  of  maximum  harmonization  of  basic  regulatory 
requirements (such as capital adequacy rules) while leaving leeway for national authorities to 
impose stricter requirements nationally for systemic stability and macro-prudential reasons. 
The Single Rule Book for banking is based on CRR/CRD4/deposit guarantee directive and 
the  upcoming  bank  recovery  and  resolution  directive  and  is  complemented  by  the  binding 
standards  issued  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA).  The  EBA  has  the  legal 
competence to develop and monitor the implementation of the Single Rule Book.  
The EBA also has the task in moving ahead with the harmonization of supervisory practices. 
The  SSM  will  have  to  develop  strongly  harmonized  supervisory  practices  (“Supervisory 
Manual”) in order to create a single system – also extended to smaller banks. It is expected 
that the SSM Manual will be significantly more detailed than the EBA’s Handbook, but the 
two  will  need  to  be  consistent  and  therefore  close  cooperation  has  been  already  started 
between the SSM and the EBA. 
The establishment of the SSM is the second element of the Banking Union. The SSM will be 
a  unitary  supervisory  system,  composed  of  national  competent  authorities  and  the  ECB  – 
and  close  cooperation  between  them  –  and  with  the  possibility  of  non-euro  area  Member 
States  to  participate.  The  ECB  will  assume  direct  supervisory  responsibility  and  major 
decision making powers for significant banks meeting certain criteria. We expect the number 
of such banks to reach some 130–140.  
I will discuss the SSM more in detail in a while. Before that, let me go to the third element of 
the  Banking  Union  which  should  be  the  establishment  of  a  Single  Resolution  Mechanism 
(SRM). An important pre-condition for this would be a swift adoption of the Bank Recovery 
and  Resolution  Directive  (BRR),  as  it  lays  out  a  harmonised  toolbox  of  resolution  powers. 
The Single Resolution Mechanism would build on the measures and tools laid down in the 
Directive, particularly by providing a robust framework that allows for prompt and coordinated 
resolution  action,  specifically  where  cross-border  banks  are  concerned.  An  efficient 
resolution mechanism including the possibility to bail-in bank debt-holders is a key element in 
the new policy objective to have bail-in as the predominant tool in resolution and limit the use 
of bail-outs as far as possible. In the new regime, bail-in should be the rule, bail-out the rare 
exception. 
As we all know, the swift and orderly resolution of cross-border banks is the Achilles heel that 
needs to be addressed. For this purpose, one needs to move from national to supranational 
arrangements  for  significant  banks.  I  do  not  need  to  remind  that  this  would  be  particularly 
important for the highly integrated Nordic banking market.  
The draft BRR requires that national resolution authorities cooperate with each other and that 
resolution colleges are established from all the resolution authorities of the countries where 
the  bank  has  business  operations.  However,  the  draft  BRR  or  any  other  existing 
arrangements  do  not  contain  compulsory  coordination  of  resolution  measures  before  they 
are  taken by  home  and  host  authorities.  Hence,  there  is  no  explicit  and  binding  resolution 
mechanism for cross-border banks. Conflicts of interest and incentives for geographical ring-
fencing  that  have  plagued  cross-border  crisis  management  in  previous  cases  will  still  be 
embedded  in  the  current  framework.  Both  home  and  host  authorities  can  exercise  ring-
fencing at their own discretion.  
It  is  doubtful  that  a  resolution  college  could  effectively  coordinate  in  time  the  necessary 
decisions involved in the resolution of a cross-border banking group and resolve the conflicts 
of  interest.  We  will  need  the  establishment  of  the  SRM  with  good  decision  making 
procedures and – hopefully in the longer run – a European Resolution Authority to implement 
successfully  the  resolution  process  across  the  countries  participating  in  the  SSM.  In  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
absence  of  the  SRM,  the  ECB  would  have  to  hand  problem  banks  back  to  national 
authorities that could also create conflicts of interest as national authorities could disagree 
with the measures taken on the supervisory side and deviate from a desired course when 
exercising resolution.  
The SRM should have the same institutional and geographical scope as the SSM. Ideally, 
and in the longer run, there should be the Single Resolution Authority, which would be at the 
centre  of  the  SRM,  govern  the  resolution  of  banks  and  coordinate  the  application  of 
resolution  tools.  It  should  have  a  comprehensive  set  of  enforceable  tools,  powers  and 
authority to resolve all banks in the SSM. In particular it would ensure that failing banks are 
resolved swiftly, through impartial decision-making focused on the European dimension. The 
timely resolution of banks should avoid the cascading of problems from one bank to other 
banks, thereby affecting European financial stability.  
In  my  view,  the  banking  union  can  be  established  without  simultaneous  creation  of  the  
pan-European deposit guarantee scheme (DGS). Harmonisation of national DGS and their 
use could already be sufficient step forward, including the ex ante collection of funds from 
banks into the deposit guarantee funds. 
Key features of the planned supervisory mechanism 
SLIDE: Timeline for the establishment of the SSM 
If all goes well, the European Parliament should vote on 7 July and the SSM regulation could 
enter into force in the beginning of August this year – meaning that the actual operation of 
the SSM could start in August 2014, and then the ECB could assume its direct supervisory 
duties.  
The SSM will operate as a system, catering for all expertise of national supervisors and at 
the  same  time  possessing  a  strong  decision-making  centre.  Appropriate  decentralisation 
procedures  are  being  planned,  while  preserving  the  unity  of  the  supervisory  system  and 
avoiding duplication. The SSM, with the ECB at its centre, is entrusted with an extensive set 
of  micro-  and  macro-  prudential  powers,  covering  all  key  tasks  relating  to  the  prudential 
supervision of credit institutions. This broad array of tasks and powers is crucial, as it is the 
foundation for the SSM to effectively supervise banks. 
The SSM also possesses early intervention powers as they are foreseen in the draft BRR. 
These  early  intervention  powers  are  significant  relating  the  governance  and  scope  of 
activities of institutions that start to have serious problems that can lead them to a point of 
non-viability. 
To ensure a strong centre, the ECB’s overall responsibility for supervision within the SSM is 
matched by control powers over the system as a whole, as well as by very close cooperation 
arrangements  with  national  authorities.  What  makes  the  SSM  work  truly  as  one  system, 
besides the legal competence over all the banks, are the following main features: 
 
First, all the components of the system will have to act in accordance with a system 
of guidelines, ECB specific regulations and manuals of supervisory practices.  
Second, the ECB supervisory function, at the centre, will receive all the supervisory 
data, regarding all the banks.  
Third, the bodies at the center of the system, at the ECB supervisory function, have 
the power to overtake the direct supervision of any bank or group of banks that may 
be considered relevant and may be the origin of systemic risk.  
Fourth,  the  center  supervises  and  monitors  that  overall  supervisory  quality  is 
followed by national competent authorities. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In practice, a risk-based approach to supervision will be adopted. Joint Supervisory Teams 
will be established that will integrate ECB and national competent authority (NCA) staff into 
single supervisory units responsible for the conduct of the on-going supervisory activities and 
for preparing supervisory decisions. The Teams will be established and coordinated by ECB; 
there will likely be one Team for each significant banking group, but tailored to the needs of 
each banking group (proportionality).  
A common SSM Risk Assessment System is being developed, which relies on an integrated 
and harmonized information base. The System will be used for addressing the capital and 
liquidity  needs  of  banks 
to  direct  supervisory  resources 
(e.g. inspections’ planning) on the basis of the risk- and impact assessment.  
The supervision of Nordic banking groups – such as Nordea or Danske Bank – is interesting 
from our perspective and in particular should the home-country authorities of these groups 
remain outside of the SSM. In this situation, the ECB will assume the responsibility of a host 
supervisor of the major subsidiaries in the Euro Area which also are significant banks on their 
own and will enter into the SSM supervision.  
SLIDE: Supervision of Nordea in the Banking Union 
the  SSM  and  also 
in 
Take Nordea as example. The supervisory college will continue to operate under Swedish 
leadership as before to coordinate the overall supervisory activities and form the picture of 
risks, capital and liquidity at the group level. As a new element the ECB will participate in the 
supervisory  college  as  the  responsible  authority  for  the  Euro  Area  subsidiaries,  while  the 
present  host  authorities  from  Finland  and  Estonia  will  still  join  supervisory  cooperation  on 
their  behalf;  which  is  important  also  to  maintain  full  picture  of  financial  stability  in  their 
respective  countries.  Should  differences  in opinion  emerge;  the  EBA  will  mediate  between 
the home authority and the ECB. The picture would become different, should Sweden and 
Denmark decide to join the SSM. It would simplify the supervisory structure if all our Nordic 
authorities would operate under the SSM roof.  
The SSM also has powers in the macro-prudential area, which is a shared competence with 
national macro-prudential authorities. The ECB will comment on national measures and has 
the  possibility  to  tighten  the  national  measures  if  they  are  deemed  inadequate.  Macro-
prudential instruments could also be applied to the euro-area financial system as a whole, in 
addition  to  individual  countries.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  supervising  the  micro-prudential 
risks  at  individual  banks  separately  is  not  sufficient  and  that  macro-  and  micro-  risks  can 
actually be mutually reinforcing. There has to be very close cooperation between the macro-
and micro-prudential functions.  
The  shared  competence  is  important  for  two  reasons.  First,  the  system  needs  to  be 
established  in  a  way  that  creates  incentives  for  action,  ie  the  pre-crises  prevailed  national 
inaction  bias  needs  to  be  broken.  Second,  the  credit  cycles  differ  nationally  and  the 
associated potential problems need to be mitigated through nationally diverging ways. This is 
a  different  approach  compared  with  monetary  policy  in  monetary  union  or  banking 
supervision, in which the aim is maximum harmonization of national practices. 
Key milestones in the preparation of the SSM 
SLIDE: Key milestones in the preparation of the SSM 
The  practical  preparation  of  the  SSM  has  been  well  underway  since  last  autumn.  In  this 
summer the main elements of the supervisory model and the supervisory manual should be 
rather  developed.  The  same  goes  for  the  ECB  Framework  Regulation,  which  is  an  own 
regulation  by  the  ECB  setting  out  the  main  responsibilities  of  the  ECB  and  national 
authorities and the main requirements set for banks in the SSM. Also during this summer the 
main features of the SSM Risk Assessment System (RAS) should be available as well as the 
finalized list of significant banks entering into SSM direct supervision.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
During this autumn 2013 and spring 2014 the newly established SSM Supervisory Board first 
consults on and then adopts all the basic documents setting out the operation of the SSM, 
which would then start in the summer of 2014. I would like to emphasize that the Supervisory 
Board is the main body responsible for the supervisory functions of the SSM and the main 
decision  making  body,  even  decisions  are  formally  and  finally  adopted  by  the  Governing 
Council of the European Central Bank. When it comes to the role of the Governing Council, it 
cannot alter the decisions of the Supervisory Board, but only prevent their entry into force if 
such a veto power is exercised, and only if strongly justified e.g. by monetary policy reasons. 
Hence, in the decision making as well as in the internal ECB organization, separation of the 
monetary policy and supervisory functions will be realized. During 2013 and 2014 also the 
ECB supervisory organization will be staffed and start their operation.  
Of  particular  relevance  for  the  credible  start  of  the  SSM  will  be  the  Balance  Sheet 
Assessment (BSA) –project, making sure that all major problems in asset quality are well-
known and sufficiently addressed before the operational start of the SSM. The BSA will also 
link with pan-European stress tests conducted in close cooperation between the EBA and the 
SSM during spring 2014. I believe it is in the interest of the countries which are not joining 
the SSM from the beginning, to follow the same level of standards in their own asset quality 
reviews as applied within the SSM.  
Non-Euro area countries joining the SSM (Member States in close cooperation)  
SLIDE: Member States in close cooperation 
National competent authorities of non-euro area Member States have an option to participate 
in the SSM. They can participate through establishing a close cooperation agreement with 
the ECB. By giving non-euro area Member States full membership and voting rights in the 
Supervisory  Body,  the  body  responsible  for  the  preparation  of  decisions  on  supervisory 
matters, they are placed on an equal footing with euro-area Member States.  
While the ECB Governing Council is the ultimate decision-making body of the ECB, its role in 
the  SSM  is  reduced  to  the  possibility  of  accepting  or  rejecting  the  decisions  of  the 
Supervisory  Board.  This  was  accepted  at  the  level  of  the  European  Council  by  all 
governments which seem to indicate that we might see an extension of the SSM well beyond 
the euro area.  
Joining the SSM would mean that the supervisory processes of the SSM would be applied 
also  to  non-euro  area  banks.  This  would  give  the  benefit  of  streamlining  and  unifying 
supervisory processes for major cross-border banks. 
The  special  status  of  the  non-Euro  Area  countries  is  taken  into  account  in  the  decision-
making  mechanism.  As  I  noted,  the  Governing  Council  enforces  the  decisions  by  the 
Supervisory  Board.  If  the  Council  prevents  the  entry  into  force  of  a  decision,  which  e.g. 
results  in  a modification  of  the  decision,  a  non-EA  country  may  announce  non-satisfaction 
with such a decision. If the Council decision prevails, the non-EA country can choose not to 
adopt the decision. On its side then, the ECB could consider breaking-up the agreement for 
close cooperation 
Closing 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by saying that we are taking significant steps in our 
road  towards  the  Banking  Union.  However,  there  are  many  steps  ahead  before  we  have 
reached  the  goal  of  a  high  quality  and  comprehensive  pan-European  supervision  and 
resolution  system.  Creation  of  the  SSM  is  steadily  on  track  and  we  will  soon  see  the 
Commission’s proposal on the SRM. It is worth to mention that the nature of supervision and 
resolution  tasks  are  such  that  those  should  be  kept  in  the  hands  of  independent  officials 
without political involvement. Such a system, with clear rules established for all participants, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
would  greatly  reduce  the  contingent  liability  placed  on  tax  payers  and  reduce  the 
presumption  of  bail-outs.  I  am  convinced  that  these  steps  are  worth  taking  and  lead  us 
towards an efficient and credible European framework. 
If the financial crisis has taught us something, it is that that the sooner we identify potential 
problems and solve them, the less likely is the involvement of public money. A well defined 
and well functioning supervisory and resolution system is just about it! 
Slides 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
