Benoît Cœuré and Jörg Asmussen: Interview with Süddeutsche Zeitung 
and Le Figaro 
Joint interview with Benoît Cœuré and Jörg Asmussen, Members of the Executive Board of 
the European Central Bank, conducted by Andrea Rexer (Süddeutsche Zeitung) and Jean-
Pierre Robin (Le Figaro) on 23 July 2013 and published on 29 July 2013. 
 Mr  Cœuré,  your  colleague  Jörg  Asmussen  has  criticised  the  French  Government 
various times, asking them to speed up their reforms. The French Government wasn’t 
amused. Were you, as a French citizen, amused? 
Cœuré: I am not here to support the French Government, neither is Jörg here to support the 
German Government. As central bankers, we have to say what is good for the stability of the 
euro area, irrespective of our nationalities. 
Does being German or French make a difference when working for the ECB? 
Asmussen: No, in day-to-day business, nationalities do not play a role. 
I  understand  that  this  is  the  theory.  But  in  real  life,  can  you  really  be  free  of  your 
national background? Once you go to your home towns, you are facing criticism – and 
that differs from country to country. 
Asmussen: As an Executive Board member you have to be independent and you will not see 
any  flags  on  the  table  at  Governing  Council  meetings,  only  name  tags,  because  the 
members do not represent a state. It is true that what a central bank is expected to do, or not 
to do, differs enormously in the euro area. In some countries they ask, “Why don’t you do 
more?”  And  in  other  countries  they  say,  “Why  do  you  do  so  much?  You  are  overstepping 
your mandate.” The answer is always the same: our task is to guarantee price stability in the 
whole euro area. 
Mr  Asmussen,  you  say  that  nationality  doesn’t  matter.  Not  long  ago,  there  were 
reports that you had voted against lower interest rates, what would be expected from a 
German  hawk.  Some  people  say  that  you  seem  to  be  becoming  more  German  the 
longer you are in office. 
Asmussen: That is perhaps what some people say, but I am not sure whether it is correct. I 
doubt that the assessment that too low interest rates for too long may give rise to risks is a 
specific  German  view  as  it  is  shared  by  others, for  example,  by  the  Bank for International 
Settlement. 
Cœuré: We all come to the ECB with our national history, shaped by our national politics. We 
come here with our own DNA. But once we are here, we work for all euro area countries. 
Both  of  us  have  travelled  extensively  around  Europe  in  order  to  learn  about  the  different 
views, and to explain the European view to the general public. 
That is right, you communicate a great deal – but on the other hand, what was said at 
the meetings of the governing council is still a big secret. How does that fit together? 
Cœuré: Transparency is important for the effectiveness of monetary policy and for trust in the 
central bank. There was a time when the ECB was ahead of the curve in its communications 
and transparency as first central bank with regular press conferences by its president. Now 
the ECB is the only large central bank that does not publish its minutes of meetings. There is 
a  demand  in  society  for  transparency  and  accountability.  Therefore,  I  personally  think  that 
the ECB should start publishing its meeting minutes soon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Into how much detail would these published minutes go? 
Asmussen: The minutes should include who voted for what, and the reasoning behind that 
vote. Publishing the minutes will sharpen the European mandate, because the ECB will then 
have to explain why its decisions are in line with the European mandate. 
If you publish who voted for what, the Board and the governors of the national central 
banks might face enormous pressure from the financial industry. 
Cœuré: The  other  side of  the  coin  is,  as Jörg  has  said,  that  the Governing  Council  has  a 
European  mandate.  The  governors  of  the  national  central  banks  come  here  in  a  personal 
capacity  –  they  do  not  represent  their  institutions  or  their  countries  –  and  should  be 
accountable for what they do. 
You said that change might come soon. Is there a majority for it in the Council? 
Asmussen: Every majority starts as minority. It is an ongoing discussion in the Council. 
One  field  where  central  banks  are  not  very  transparent  is  the  Emergency  Liquidity 
Assistance (ELA) that is given to banks in trouble. Although this entails huge risks, 
you  never  publish  any  details.  Don’t  you  think  that  the  European  public  should  be 
informed about that? 
Cœuré: It is the national central banks that provide that liquidity assistance, so that they have 
to  decide  on  this  issue.  To  give  you  another  example,  the  so-called  TARGET2  balances 
measure how money created by the ECB is distributed across the euro area. They are useful 
indicators and there is no reason why they should not be published regularly. 
Asmussen: I would prefer national central banks to be more transparent about the ELA, but, 
as Benoît has said, that is not for the ECB to decide. 
The ECB will take over banking supervision next year. How transparent will you have 
to be once the new system is in force? 
Asmussen: At the national level, banking supervision bodies are fully accountable vis-à-vis 
the national parliament. When supervision shifts to a European level, it is in the interests of 
the ECB to have the highest possible accountability vis-à-vis, and democratic control by, the 
European Parliament. That is the logical counterpart to this task. 
Cœuré: Banking supervision can lead to fiscal costs if a bank has to be restructured. That is 
why we need even more accountability in banking supervision than in monetary policy. 
The ECB said recently that interest rates will stay low for an extended period of time. 
Is that also part of the plan to be more transparent? 
Cœuré:  Yes,  of  course.  Forward  guidance  discloses  more  information  on  our  view  of  the 
economy and the conclusions we draw. And  it not only concerns interest rates – it is also 
concerns our liquidity policy. We have been clear that banks can have as much liquidity as 
they want for an extended period of time. 
Even  though  you  are  providing  banks  with  that  much  liquidity,  in  southern  Europe, 
they  seem  to  be  unwilling  or  unable  to  handle  it  through  to  real  economy.  Some 
countries are facing a credit crunch. 
Cœuré:  I  would  not  speak  of  a  credit  crunch,  but  some  countries  are  indeed  facing  tight 
credit conditions, and this has not improved much recently. That is one reason for keeping 
interest rates low. 
But that is obviously not enough. Can a banking union perhaps help to stabilise the 
banks in southern Europe, so that they can reassume their task of financing the real 
economy? 
Asmussen: Yes, in particular the asset quality review that the ECB will undertake, together 
with  national  supervisors  and  external  controllers,  next  year  is  crucial.  The  United  States 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have been earlier and faster in cleaning banks’ balance sheets than Europe. This is one of 
the main factors that hold back lending. This review will start at the beginning of next year. 
And,  as  market  participants  usually  anticipate  developments,  that  will  have  an  immediate 
effect. 
Do you think that banks will have to recapitalise? 
Asmussen: This is precisely what we do not know as yet. Every figure that is floating around 
is mere guesswork. But we need to have sufficient back-stops in place. There are several 
layers:  The  first  is  private  capital,  the  second  are  national  budgets  and  the  third  layer  is 
formed  by  the  ESM  that  recapitalises  banks  as  part  of  a  banking  sector  programme  with 
attached  conditionality,  as  it  was  done  in  Spain.  As  a  last  layer  and  only  in  very  rare 
occasions, there can be a direct recapitalisation of banks through the ESM. 
A  credit  crunch  is  a  problem  for  growth. What  other impediments can  you  see with 
respect to a recovery in the euro area? 
Asmussen:  Fragmentation  has  decreased  since  last  year,  but  it  is  indeed  still  a  matter  of 
concern. 
Cœuré: Trust in the euro has now been restored and it is an important basis for confidence 
and an economic recovery in Europe. What is now needed is further economic reform in all 
countries. 
But isn’t the exchange rate of the euro itself too high, vis-à-vis the US dollar or the 
Japanese yen? 
Asmussen: We do not have a target exchange rate and we have to say that again and again. 
In any case, it is a sign of confidence that capital flows from outside have returned to the 
euro area. 
Cœuré: When you look at the export performance of various countries, you can see many 
differences,  so  that  the  exchange  rate  of  the  currency  as  such  cannot  be  considered  an 
impediment to growth. That said, it is one of the indicators that we follow closely. 
However, it is a common complaint in France… 
Cœuré: Here, I can speak from past experience. There is a particular fascination for currency 
matters in France that is not shared by other countries. It cannot be used as an excuse not to 
address the issues of structural competitiveness that French companies are facing. 
In France, there are fears that the risk of deflation might be very high... 
Asmussen: We cannot see any risk of deflation. We see inflation expectations as being well 
anchored below, but close to, 2% for a longer period of time. 
Cœuré:  And  that  is  a  major  difference  to  the  situation  in  Japan.  There  have  been 
comparisons, but whereas in Japan, low growth has led to deflation expectations, this has 
never  been  the  case  in  the  euro  area  and,  as  Jörg  has  said,  expectations  there  have 
remained very well anchored. 
But as in Japan, people in Europe are talking about a lost decade. 
Cœuré: There is a risk of a lost decade in Europe, if the right reforms are not undertaken. But 
the challenges and answers are very different from those in Japan. It is true that the crisis 
has  been  a  step  backwards  [a  setback]  for  the  European  economy,  but  the  underlying 
problems,  such  as  declining  trend  growth  and  unsustainable  social  promises,  were  there 
before.  The  crisis  has  only  uncovered  them  and  has  shown  the  need  for  answers  more 
clearly and more urgently. 
But the high level of unemployment is certainly worrying … 
Asmussen: Yes, the level of unemployment is unacceptable. But the question is what we can 
do about it. We have a strategy in Europe that is based on stable prices, sound fiscal policies 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and growth and employment-enhancing structural reforms. It will take some time to see the 
positive effects, but I don’t see any viable alternative. 
Cœuré:  The  high  level  of  unemployment,  particularly  youth  unemployment,  shows  the 
urgency of taking forward-looking reforms at the national level and, collectively, at the euro 
area level. 
With the crisis, differences between countries are becoming clearer and larger. Is it a 
challenge for friendship between European nations? 
Asmussen: We must acknowledge the resurgence of national stereotypes. That is worrying. 
The cliché that the Greek people are lazy, whereas all Germans are hard-working, is simply 
false … Reality is more differentiated. 
Cœuré: We see the risk of nationalism in European discussions as well, with the temptation 
to defend narrow national interests. But politicians can overcome this temptation and make 
progress. Take the banking union, for example. It is the most important step to be taken in 
European integration since the inception of the euro, perhaps more important than the single 
currency  itself.  It  will  have  far-reaching  consequences  for  national  economic  models  and 
national legislation. So there is room for optimism if we succeed in taking that quantum leap 
forward. 
Isn’t  that  overly  optimistic?  What  can  Germany  and  France  do  to  overcome  these 
challenges? 
Asmussen: You have described the challenges rightly, but the answer to them can only be 
more integration. France and Germany have a leading role to play, because they stand at the 
core of European integration. They jointly, but only jointly, fulfil the definition of a superpower: 
if  you  take  action,  everybody  criticises  you  for  acting.  If  you  don’t  take  action,  every  one 
criticises you for not doing so. There are certain projects in which the two countries can take 
the lead. A joint seat of France and Germany in the IMF Board would be a good idea. But it is 
vital that this newly formed constituency is open to others and forms the starting point for a 
European seat at the IMF. 
So, if France and Germany are the core of Europe, that is where you will also spend 
your holidays? 
Asmussen:  Yes, for  my  part  and,  as  always  in  the  summer,  in  a  renovated farm  house  in 
Normandy. 
Cœuré: I will also spend my holidays in France – and enjoy living in Frankfurt the rest of the 
year! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
