Benoît Coeuré: Monetary policy and banking supervision 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  symposium  on  “Central  banking  –  Where  are  we  headed?”,  in  honor  of  Stefan 
Gerlach’s contributions to the Institute for Monetary and Financial Stability (IMFS), organized 
by the IMFS and the House of Finance, Frankfurt am Main, 7 February 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Philipp  Hartmann  for  his  key  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions contained herein. 
The history of central banks and the European banking union 
When  we  look  at  the  history  of  central  banks,  contributing  to financial  stability  was  one  of 
their roles in most countries, although to varying degrees.1 Even  when central banks were 
assigned a relatively narrow mandate, such as that of inflation targeting in recent years, they 
often played a decisive part as soon as financial instability struck. In particular, their ability to 
act as lender of last resort in the financial system and to manage liquidity in the interbank 
market typically made them a key player in crisis management. Even in normal times, the 
central role of bank deposits in the stock of money makes monetary stability dependent on 
the soundness of the banking sector. In sum, in the late Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s words, 
financial stability has been part of the “genetic code” of central banks.2  
There have been many cases of lender-of-last-resort interventions by central banks during 
the present crisis. For example, when we compare the total emergency liquidity assistance 
(ELA)  that  euro  area  national  central  banks  granted  to  individual  credit  institutions  last 
summer with the overall amount of liquidity provided at the same time by the Eurosystem, we 
can see that the total ELA amounts to almost one-seventh. Just to quote an example from 
here in Germany: the Bundesbank granted €35 billion of emergency liquidity assistance to 
the ailing bank Hypo Real Estate.3  
More generally, the experience of the last five years has underlined the importance of central 
banks in financial stability, a task which they have historically performed. But central banks 
were  not  always  and  everywhere  tasked  with  financial  supervision,  which  aims  to  prevent 
crises from happening in the first place. For example, before the present crisis the institutions 
responsible for banking supervision differed from country to country.4 In fact, in the late 1990s 
there was a trend for financial supervision to be placed outside central banks and entrusted 
to cross-sectoral authorities in charge of banks, insurance and securities markets. The crisis 
                                                
1  See,  for  example,  M.  Bordo  (2007),  A  Brief  History  of  Central  Banks,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland 
Economic Commentary, December; C. Goodhart (2011), The changing role of central banks, Financial History 
Review,  18(2),  135–154;  and  C.  Reinhart  and  K.  Rogoff  (2012),  Shifting  Mandates:  The  Federal  Reserve’s 
First  Centennial,  paper  presented  at  the  2013  American  Economic  Association  Meetings,  San  Diego, 
5 January 2013. 
2  T.  Padoa-Schioppa,  T.  (2003),  Central  Banks  and  Financial  Stability:  Exploring  a  Land  in  Between,  in  V. 
Gaspar,  P.  Hartmann  and  O.  Sleijpen  (eds.),  The  Transformation  of  the  European  Financial  System, 
Proceedings of the Second ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, May, 269–310. 
3  Hypo Real Estate (2008), Press release: Hypo Real Estate Group publishing interim financial statements as of 
30 September 2008, Munich, 17 November. 
4  See,  for  example,  C.  Goodhart  and  D.  Schoenmaker  (1995),  Should  the  functions  of  monetary  policy  and 
banking supervision be separated?, Oxford Economic Papers 47(4), 539–560; G. Di Giorgio and C. Di Noia 
(1999), Should Banking Supervision and Monetary Policy Tasks Be Given to Different Agencies?, International 
Finance  2(3),  361–378;  and  M.  Horáková  (ed.,  2012),  How  Countries  Supervise  their  Banks,  Insurers  and 
Securities Markets 2012, Risk Books, May. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
seems to have reversed this trend, as recent reforms in the US and Europe show. Today, 
most Eurosystem governors are banking supervisors. 
In  December  2012  euro  area  finance  ministers  reached  an  agreement  to  create  a  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM).  This  is  currently  under  discussion  with  the  European 
Parliament and it will give the ECB a bank supervisory role.5 As a result of the crisis, there is 
a consensus that a European banking union involving the ECB is an important component to 
complete the Single Market for financial services and for a genuine Economic and Monetary 
Union (EMU). Together with the other banking union components – common resolution and 
harmonised  deposit 
the 
fragmentation  of  money  markets  and  break  the  vicious  circle  between  financial  and 
sovereign instability in Europe.  
Since  the  ECB  has  not  been  a  bank  supervisor  and  since  its  primary  mandate  is  and  will 
remain  to  conduct  monetary  policy  and  maintain  price  stability,  it  is  time  to  consider  how 
monetary  policy  and  banking  supervision  are  related.  I  will  do  so  in  this  speech,  by  first 
discussing the benefits a bank supervisory role could offer monetary policy – particularly in 
terms of informational advantages – and then by considering some design features, which 
are  important  when  tackling  the  challenges  of  putting  monetary  policy  and  banking 
supervision under one roof.  
insurance  arrangements  – 
this  should  help 
to  overcome 
How monetary policy can benefit from integrating banking supervision in a central 
bank 
The banking union will strengthen the governance framework supporting the Single Market 
and EMU. Obviously, its primary purpose is not to support monetary policy. In fact, as the 
short  history  of  EMU  suggests,  price  stability  can  be  maintained  without  the  ECB  being 
responsible for banking supervision. 
But integrating the SSM in the ECB also creates some new opportunities for the conduct of 
monetary policy and other functions closely related to it. I particularly see four areas in this 
respect:  the  state  of  the  macroeconomy;  monetary  policy  options;  interactions  with 
supervisory policies; and the management of the central bank balance sheet. I will argue that 
these opportunities are greater in turbulent times than in quiet times. 
Additional information about the financial sector and the state of the economy 
Data  collected  and  analyses  conducted  as  part  of  banking  supervision  provide  valuable 
additional  information  about  the  banking  sector  and  may  feed  into  the  assessment  of  the 
macroeconomic situation. According to the proposed SSM regulation6 it has been estimated 
that  the  SSM  would  directly  supervise  approximately  130  to  140  banks  in  the  euro  area 
countries,  constituting  more  than  80%  of  total  euro  area  bank  assets,  and  well  cover  the 
banking sector in all these countries. 
This information could complement the data collected for the ECB’s monetary analysis. The 
ECB’s monetary policy  strategy is based on two pillars, an economic one and a monetary 
one, and thereby assigns an important role to money and credit. The broad range of tools 
regularly  used  in  our  monetary  analysis  already  provides  valuable  information  about  the 
build-up and unravelling of widespread financial imbalances. Additional supervisory data and 
                                                
5 
Interestingly, Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa (1999), in a lecture entitled “EMU and banking supervision” at the 
London School of Economics, Financial Markets Group, 24 February, regarded it as “absolutely necessary” 
even at the start of EMU that cooperation among bank supervisors would over time lead to a type of “collective 
supervisor” that would act as effectively as if there were a single supervisor. This would also desirable, he 
added, because it would “assist the Eurosystem in the performance of its basic tasks”. 
6  Document  number  17812/12,  as  published  on 
http://register.consilium.europa.eu. 
the  Council  of 
the  European  Union’s  website, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
analyses, be they micro-prudential or macro-prudential, would further enhance the breadth, 
depth and granularity of information about the functioning of the banking sector. 
The  value  added  of  this  information  will  become  even  more  critical  in  a  crisis,  given  the 
important  role  of  banks  in  severe  financial  crises  and  the  nature  of  the  data  concerned. 
Moreover, analytical supervisory assessment indicators and early-warning tools can put the 
new data to work in assessing credit developments.7 Additional information on the banking 
sector is likely to be more important in the euro area than in the US, because in the euro 
area  bank  lending  accounts  for  almost  two-thirds  of  the  total  financing  of  non-financial 
corporations,  whereas  in  the  US  bank  lending  is  only  just  above  one-quarter  of  total  firm 
financing.  
Broader information basis for assessing monetary policy options 
Given Europe’s bank-based financial structure, monetary transmission channels through the 
banking  sector  are  particularly  important  in  understanding  the  effects  of  monetary  policy 
actions, standard and non-standard. For example, a key feature of the present crisis is the 
impairment  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  in  which  fragilities  in  banks’  funding 
models  and  their  exposure  to  government  debt  have  played  a  significant  role.  A  thorough 
understanding of banks’ behaviour and health across jurisdictions facilitates the design and 
implementation  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures  and  will  also  facilitate  the  exit 
from these measures when the time is right. 
Better consideration of the interactions between monetary, supervisory and regulatory 
policies 
Monetary policy interacts with supervisory and regulatory policies, be they micro-prudential 
or macro-prudential in nature. If the monetary policy objective and the supervisory objective 
are distinctly defined and separate instruments are assigned to each of them, then a single 
institution  could  take  the  interdependencies  better  into  account  than  separate  authorities. 
Interactions  can  be  expected  to  occur  in  particular  with  macro-prudential  policies,  which 
increase  in  importance  due  to  the  lessons  from  the  crisis,  and  operate  through  channels 
closely related to monetary policy transmission. The allocation of macro-prudential regulatory 
instruments under the SSM is therefore an important design feature of the draft legislation. 
Research  confirms  that  it  is  advisable  for  monetary  policy  to  focus  on  price  stability  and 
prudential policy on financial stability.8 Against this background, as an institution with a clear 
price  stability  mandate,  compliance  with  which  can  be  easily  verified,  the  ECB  will  have 
incentives  to  intensify  the  prudential  policies  seeking  to  counteract  emerging  financial 
imbalances  and  risks.  In  turn,  and  importantly,  this  would  reduce  pressures  on  monetary 
policy to do so. It will also have incentives to conduct supervisory policies in a way that would 
reduce the likelihood of crises and therefore of lender-of-last-resort interventions. This would 
also  diminish  the  possibility  of  generating  adverse  incentives  for  banks,  i.e.  moral  hazard 
involved with emergency assistance. 
                                                
7  J.  Peek,  E.  Rosengren  and  G.  Tootell  (1999),  Is  Bank  Supervision  Central  To  Central  Banking?,  Quarterly 
Journal  of  Economics,  114(2),  629–653,  argued,  using  US  data  from  the  1990s,  that  the  incorporation  of 
supervisory CAMEL ratings may improve macroeconomic forecasts. CAMEL is an abbreviation for a system of 
supervisory  indicators  used  in  the  US  describing  the  conditions  of  banks  aggregating  information  about 
capital, asset quality, management, earnings and asset-liability management. 
8  See, for example, I. Angeloni and E. Faia (2009), A Tale of Two Policies: Prudential Regulation and Monetary 
Policy with Fragile Banks, Kiel Working Papers, No 1569, Kiel Institute for the World Economy, forthcoming 
Journal of Monetary Economics, or D. Beau, L. Clerc and B. Mojon (2011), Macro-Prudential Policy and the 
Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy,  Banque  de  France  Occasional  Paper,  No  8.  A  summary  of  the  literature  is 
provided in European Central Bank (2012a), Report on the First Two Years of the Macro-prudential Research 
Network, Frankfurt, October. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
A  single  institution  could  also  avoid  conflicts  and  coordination  problems  between  separate 
policy authorities, which might be particularly pronounced in a crisis and in a multi-country 
setting. 
Better management of the creditworthiness of counterparties in monetary policy 
operations 
Monetary  policy  operations  expose  the  central  bank  to  credit  (and  other)  risks,  which  are 
controlled through adequate collateral and other risk management techniques. Good banking 
supervision  and  prompt  corrective  action  ensure  the  soundness  of  counterparties  in  these 
transactions  and  a  central  bank  therefore  has  particular  incentives  to  make  sure  its 
supervision  is  rigorous.  Rigorous  supervision,  in  turn,  protects  the  central  bank’s  balance 
sheet and gives it greater control over it, also safeguarding the central bank’s independence 
and credibility. 
This is an important point. As the central bank has a direct interest in strong supervision, the 
risk  of  financial  dominance  over  monetary  policy  becomes  less  likely,  i.e.  the  risk  that 
monetary  policy  operations  could  be  increasingly  dominated  by  the  state  of  the  banking 
sector. This, in turn, reduces also the risk of fiscal dominance over monetary policy, which 
means the risk that fiscal behaviour forces monetary policy to react in ways that it otherwise 
would not do. As governments are always reluctant to fund unpopular bailouts or incur the 
social costs of bank insolvencies, they may prefer to rely on prolonged central bank liquidity 
provision to keep banks alive. What is crucial for adequate supervisory rigour is of course the 
independence of the supervisory function in the central bank, a point I will come back to later 
in  this  speech.  In  order to  protect  a  central  bank from regulatory forbearance,  supervisory 
rigour is necessary on an ongoing basis, as is the determination to wind up failed banks.9 In 
turn, this requires the existence of orderly resolution mechanisms with an adequate financial 
backstop. I will also come back to that point. 
Moreover,  a  central  bank  has  an  incentive  to  establish  rigorous  supervision  since  it  would 
diminish the trade-offs between the need for tightening collateral requirements in downturns 
to  protect  its  balance  sheet  and  the  need  for  relaxing  these  collateral  requirements  to 
stabilise  banks.  The  tightening  of  collateral  requirements  in  downturns  amplifies  the 
pro-cyclicality  of  financial  systems,  while  relaxing  those  requirements  increases  balance-
sheet risks and distorts financial sector behaviour. 
When  implementing  the  SSM  in  the  ECB,  we  will  make  every  effort  to  use  these 
opportunities  to  the  full.  However,  we  will  seize  these  opportunities  only  to  the  extent  that 
they do not create conflicts of interest, reputational risks or risks to the independence of the 
monetary policy authority, a point I’ll consider next.10 
How to design monetary policy and banking supervision under one roof 
At  least  three  types  of  challenges  and  risks  need  to  be  managed  when  integrating 
supervision in a central bank alongside monetary policy. They relate to potential conflicts of 
interest, reputational risks and central bank independence. 
In the US, 469 banks were closed by the FDIC between September 2007 and December 2012. 
                                                
9 
10  There are also advantages for banking supervision if it is combined with monetary policy within one institution. 
For example, because of its role in monetary policy a central bank needs to assess the macroeconomy and its 
linkages  to  the  financial  sector,  which  implies  a  natural  systemic/macro-prudential  orientation.  Such  an 
orientation has been largely absent from traditional supervisory practices. Central banks also have a culture of 
using economic analysis and research, which typically does not exist or barely exists in supervisory authorities 
(see  e.g.  P.  Dasgupta,  C.  Goodhart  and  D.  Schoenmaker  (2002),  The  Skill  Profile  of  Central  Bankers  and 
Supervisors,  European  Finance  Review  6,  397–427).  Moreover,  the  role  of  central  banks  in  payment  and 
settlement systems and their frequent contacts with banks through their market operations provides them with 
additional sources of information relevant to financial stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Avoiding conflicts of interest 
The literature on whether adding banking supervision to monetary policy creates conflicts of 
interest is not well developed.11 The concern is that a central bank which is also in charge of 
supervision  would  turn  into  a  supervisor  with  access  to  central  bank  liquidity.  As  recently 
pointed  out  by  Stefan  Gerlach,12  it  could  then  occasionally  relax  its  monetary  policy, 
potentially generating an inflationary bias impairing its credibility, and also contribute to more 
risk-taking by banks (moral hazard), and in turn breed future financial instability. The central 
bank could in particular be inclined to continue lending to weak banks for fear that winding 
them  up  would  trigger  losses.13  Although  this  literature  is  not  conclusive,  we  take  such 
concerns extremely seriously. 
To protect against such effects both the regulation proposed by the European Commission 
and  the  ECB’s  Opinion  on  this  regulation  call  for  a  governance  structure  that  strictly 
separates  the  monetary  functions  from  the  supervisory  functions.14  This  should  entail  a 
separation  of  the  decision-making  bodies,  including  procedures  to  strictly  limit  the  ECB 
Governing  Council’s  involvement  in  supervisory  decisions.  It  should  also  include  distinct 
objectives  for  the  decision-making  bodies  and  different  policy  instruments.  Eijffinger  and 
Nijskens, for example, recently pointed out that the assignment of separate instruments to 
the two policy branches would solve potential conflicts.15 
There  is  one  situation  in  which  the  distinction  between  supervisory  and  some  monetary 
policy  instruments  is  less  clear  cut,  namely,  in  the  case  of  certain  non-standard  monetary 
policy actions in the midst of a financial crisis. However, in such a situation, the outlook for 
the  economy  and  prices  has  considerable  downside  risks,  so  the  direction  of  financial 
stability  and  price  stability  actions  (e.g.  to  repair  a  broken  monetary  transmission 
mechanism) typically go in the same direction and a conflict between both policy branches is 
rather unlikely. 
The draft legislation also confirms that the other statutory tasks and objectives of the ECB 
remain unaffected by the SSM, implying that monetary policy will continue to be conducted 
by the Governing Council in full independence, with the primary objective of maintaining price 
stability over the medium term. With our quantitative definition of price stability, it will be easy 
to verify every month that inflation expectations remain well anchored, as they are today. It is 
hard  to  see  how  financial  stability  dominance  over  monetary  policy  could  occur  if  such 
precautions are taken. 
                                                
11  Examples from this literature are Heller (1991), Prudential supervision and monetary policy, in Frenkel, J., and 
M.  Goldstein  (eds.),  Essays  in  honor  of  Jacques  J.  Polak,  International  Monetary  Fund;  C.  Goodhart  and 
D. Schoenmaker (1992), Institutional Separation Between Supervisory and Monetary Agencies, Giorn. Econ. 
9;  C.  Goodhart  and  D.  Schoenmaker  (1995),  Should  the  Functions  of  Monetary  Policy  and  Banking 
Supervision  Be  Separated?,  Oxford  Economic  Papers  47(4),  539–560;  and  Di  Giorgio  and  Di  Noia  (1999), 
Should  Banking  Supervision  and  Monetary  Policy  Tasks  Be  Given  to  Different  Agencies?,  International 
Finance 2(3), 361–378. 
12  S. Gerlach (2013), Banking and Fiscal Union, Introductory remarks at a panel session at the EUI conference 
on “The State of Play in the Euro Area – Fixing the EMU for the Long Term”, Florence, 21 January. 
13  This argument is put forward by M. Brunnermeier and H. Gersbach (2012), True independence for the ECB: 
Triggering power – no more, no less, VoxEU, 20 December. 
14  European Central Bank (2012b), Opinion of the European Central Bank of 27 November 2012 on a proposal 
for a Council regulation conferring specific tasks on the European Central Bank concerning policies relating to 
the prudential supervision of credit institutions and a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and 
of  the  Council  amending  Regulation  (EU)  No  1093/2010  establishing  a  European  Supervisory  Authority 
(European Banking Authority), CON/2012/96, and European Central Bank (2012c), Towards a banking union, 
Financial Stability Review, December. 
15  S. Eijffinger and R. Nijskens (2012), Monetary policy and banking supervision, VoxEU, 19 December. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
At  the  same  time,  in  order  to  exploit  the  advantages  that  I  was  discussing  before,  it  is 
necessary  to  put  in  place  mechanisms  that  allow  an  adequate  flow  of  data  and 
(independently  executed)  analyses  between  the  two  functions.  Of  course,  this  flow  of 
information  should  not  weaken  in  any  form  the  necessary  separation  in  decision-making, 
objectives and instruments. In short, separation does not mean isolation. 
Managing reputational risks 
In order to ensure the success of banking supervision, competencies and policy instruments 
need  to  be  assigned  to the  new  SSM  which  would  allow  it  to  perform  its  tasks  effectively. 
Otherwise,  reputational  risks  could  arise  that  might  negatively  affect  the  institution  as  a 
whole.  The  current  draft  legislation  would  grant  the  SSM  an  appropriate  mixture  of  micro- 
and macro-prudential instruments for it to conduct supervision effectively. For example, on 
the  micro-prudential  side  it  would  have  all  the  relevant  powers,  ranging  from  bank 
authorisation to administrative sanctions, from the control of capital levels to compensation 
issues, through to structural issues such as business models and mergers. 
But even if bank supervisors use their powers effectively, this does not imply that there will 
never be any bank failures, fraud or other highly visible negative events, which could affect 
the  decision-makers’  reputation.  This  is  another  challenge  in  the  business  of  banking 
supervision. This residual reputational risk should also be managed through an appropriate 
separation  of  responsibilities.  Beyond  the  internal  functional  separation  this  should  be 
fostered through a corresponding separation in external communication. The Chair and Vice-
Chair of the envisaged ECB Supervisory Board will play an important role in communicating 
publicly  and  reporting  to  the  European  Parliament,  as  will  the  heads  of  the  national 
supervisory agencies belonging to the SSM in their respective jurisdictions. 
to 
the 
lead 
Ensuring central bank independence 
Bank  failures  and  financial  fraud  often  affect  small  savers  or  have  an  impact  on  public 
budgets,  and 
involvement  of  democratically  elected  governments  and 
Parliaments.  While  indeed,  the  highest  standard  of  democratic  accountability  needs  to  be 
ensured,  history  shows  that  political  interference  can  also  constrain  the  effectiveness  of 
banking  supervision.  In  particular,  if  there  is  political  interference  to  avoid  costly  bank 
restructurings or closures and it undermines supervisory rigour, then the beneficial effects in 
terms of control over the central bank’s balance sheet and the avoidance of financial or fiscal 
dominance risks might not accrue. There should therefore be a strict separation between the 
supervisor and a resolution authority. 
Against this background it is reassuring that the transfer of supervisory responsibilities to the 
SSM  will  not  have  any  implications  for  the  independence  of  the  ECB  in  performing  all  its 
tasks.  By  implication,  the  necessary  internal  precautions  against  political  interference  in 
supervisory  matters  adversely  affecting  the  ECB’s  independence  in  conducting  monetary 
policy have been taken. 
But  further  external  precautions  need  to  be  taken  to  ensure  that  financial  and  fiscal 
dominance risks do not threaten the independence of the ECB. A crucial point in this context 
is the existence of a well-functioning European bank resolution mechanism. Such an outside 
mechanism provides further protection for the central bank’s balance sheet and its monetary 
policy  independence,  and  has  a  twofold  objective:  first,  it  aims  to  limit  the  residual  risk  to 
governments’  balance  sheets,  in  particular  through  the  timely  implementation  of  bail-in 
instruments,  so  that  the  risk  of  financial  dominance  is  not  compounded  by  a  risk  of  fiscal 
dominance. Second, it aims to ensure a strict separation between supervision and resolution. 
2013  will  be  a  key  year  for  Europe  to  make  progress  with  this  second  leg  of  the  banking 
union. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Concluding remarks 
Let  me  now  conclude.  It  is  essential  for  Europe  to  introduce  the  different  elements  of  the 
banking union as soon as possible, starting with the SSM involving the ECB, and promptly 
continuing  with  a  separate  bank resolution  mechanism. This  will  not  only  contribute  to  the 
integrity  of  the  euro  area  and  the  completion  of  EMU,  but  also  has  some  benefits  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy. 
The  current  draft  legislative  framework  proposed  by  the  European  Commission  and  the 
preparatory  work  done  by  the  ECB,  the  national  central  banks  and  competent  supervisory 
authorities on implementing the SSM also takes a forward-looking approach to handling the 
challenges of integrating banking supervision in a central bank. This will make sure that the 
SSM achieves its objectives; that the desirable synergies between banking supervision and 
monetary  policy  (and  other  central  bank  functions)  are  realised;  and  that  the  primary 
objective  of  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price  stability  is  fully  respected.  To  achieve  this 
objective, three conditions should be met: the internal governance of the ECB should strictly 
separate  the  two  functions;  the  architecture  of  the  banking  union  should  provide  for  a 
separate, common resolution mechanism as soon as possible; and the ECB as a supervisor 
should  not  hesitate  to  enforce  capital  and  liquidity  regulations,  recognise  losses  in  the 
banking system and identify failed banks. 
Price stability will remain the only needle of our compass for conducting monetary policy in 
the Governing Council. If we implement the SSM well, taking advantage of the opportunities 
and  carefully  addressing  the  challenges,  we  have  a  good  chance  of  further  improving  our 
ability to conduct a stability-oriented monetary policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
