Gill Marcus: The implications of the crisis for monetary policy 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Bureau for 
Economic Research Annual Conference, Sandton, 6 June 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, thank you for inviting me to be part of this important conference.  
At a recent IMF conference, the managing director Christine Lagarde suggested that central 
banks have emerged as the heroes of the crisis. In her view, one which is also widely held, 
the  extraordinary  actions  undertaken  by  central  banks,  particularly  in  the  advanced 
economies, probably saved the global economy from a far worse fate than we are currently 
experiencing.  But  this  view  of  central  banks  as  the  heroes  places  inordinate  pressures  on 
them,  not  least  because  it leads  to unrealistic  expectations or  a  perception  that  they  have 
become too powerful. In either instance this could ultimately lead to a backlash. What is clear 
is that the crisis has changed expectations of what central banks should do, and mandates 
have generally been broadened markedly. While price stability remains a core objective of 
central banks, the persistence of the global crisis has raised expectations about what central 
bank  can  and  should  do  and,  in  particular,  how  their  expanding  mandates  regarding 
economic growth and financial stability should interact with their price stability objective.  
The  SARB  faces  similar  challenges  in  South  Africa,  which  have  become  all  the  more 
pressing given recent domestic developments that have focused increasing attention on the 
Bank.  While  the  global  crisis  continues,  the  challenges  have  been  compounded  by  recent 
South African idiosyncratic developments. I will address these issues today, and make a few 
comments about the current stance of monetary policy.  
The global crisis continues to mutate and it is still not clear what direction it is going to take 
next.  Systemic  banking  issues,  liquidity,  fiscal  deficits,  unsustainable  sovereign  debt, 
recession and extremely low growth, fiscal austerity and rising unemployment, particularly in 
the  Eurozone,  as  well  as  the  danger  in  some  countries  of  deflation,  remain  the  key 
challenges  facing  many  of  the  advanced  economies.  It  is  also  evident  that  there  is  no 
decoupling of the emerging market economies, many of whom have seen slowing growth, 
upside inflation risks and capital outflows.  
The one bright spot appears to be the United States where private sector investment and the 
housing market are showing signs of sustained recovery. However, the big risk facing the US 
economy is the nature of the fiscal contraction. The fiscal policy political gridlocks have led to 
what  is  in  effect  haphazard  fiscal  contraction.  The  possible  headwinds  from  this  could  be 
quite significant and pose a risk to the sustainability of the recovery. Ironically, a rapid US 
recovery  poses  other  risks,  as  we  have  seen  in  the  past  few  weeks  arising  from  the 
possibility  of  an  earlier-than-expected  reduction  in  quantitative  easing.  There  is  not  only 
uncertainty about the timing of this reversal, but also of the implications for capital flows and 
bond markets in emerging markets.  
Global  factors  are  again  coming  to  the  fore,  particularly  in  the  market  overreaction  to  the 
Federal  Reserve’s  possible  tapering  off  of  QE,  which  it  has  clearly  stated  that  should  this 
commence, will be done very slowly and would be highly conditional. This is affecting many 
emerging markets. For instance, since late April both the Brazilian real and the Mexican peso 
have depreciated by between 6 and 7 per cent against the US dollar. So part of what we 
have seen in the rand depreciation can be attributed to the question of QE expectations.  
At the same time, although the risks of a break-up of the Eurozone have receded significantly 
following the announcement of support measures by the ECB in the form of the (still unused) 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  the  growth  outlook  has  deteriorated  further.  The  recent 
OECD  report  suggests  that  the  Eurozone  will  contract  by  0,6  per  cent  this  year,  and  only 
grow by 1,1 per cent next year. Although the UK shows tentative signs of recovery, it is still 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
very weak. A big question mark hangs over Japan, as it remains unclear how the recently 
implemented stimulus packages will impact on the real sector.  
Systemically  important  emerging  markets  such as  Brazil,  India  and  China  have  slowed.  In 
particular,  the  slowdown  in  China  and  the  shift  from  fixed  investment  towards  domestic 
consumption  has  contributed  to  lower  global  commodity  prices,  negatively  affecting  South 
Africa’s  export  earnings.  There  has  been  increasing  attention  paid  to  many  parts  of  the 
African continent, which is expected to maintain a growth rate in excess of 5 per cent for the 
next few years. But all in all, there is a very difficult export environment for South Africa.  
This  difficult  trading  backdrop  is  only  part  of  the  challenge  facing  the  domestic  economy. 
Although  the  economy  recovered  relatively  quickly  from  the  2009  recession  and  grew  by 
3,1 per cent 3,5 per cent in 2010 and 2011 respectively, growth moderated to 2,5 per cent in 
2012 and since the crisis has lagged that of our emerging market peers, as has our export 
growth. Growth moderated further in the first quarter of 2013 when it measured 0,9 per cent, 
the  lowest  growth  rate  since  the  2009  recession.  Furthermore,  employment  is  still  below 
levels  attained  before  the  crisis.  The  combination  of  lower  competitiveness  and  declining 
terms of trade led to a widening of the current account of the balance of payments. This was 
exacerbated last year by the widespread wildcat labour disputes and high wage demands in 
the  mining  sector  in  particular,  while  the  related  work  stoppages  negatively  impacted  on 
exports.  
South  Africa  has  to  contend  with  these  issues  at  a  time  of  heightened  vulnerability.  The 
current account deficit needs to be financed, particularly at a time of uncertainty with respect 
to  global  capital  flows.  This  is  compounded  by  a  threat  of  downgrades  from  the  ratings 
agencies,  while  non-residents  already  hold  a  sizeable  proportion  of  both  domestic 
government  bond  (around  38  per  cent)  and  domestic  equities  (around  42  per  cent).  The 
country also has a relatively low level of foreign exchange reserves. Household debt ratios 
remain  high,  while  the  fiscal  deficit  leaves  limited  fiscal  room  to  respond  to  a  further 
deterioration in the economy. Electricity supply constraints have also emerged as a risk to 
the growth outlook.  
These  developments  and  vulnerabilities  have  adversely  affected  both  domestic  and 
international  business  confidence  and  investor  sentiment  towards  South  Africa.  This  has 
been  reflected  in  the  currency,  which  has  depreciated  by  about  12  per  cent  on  a  trade 
weighted basis since the beginning of this year. Although the rand is part of the adjustment 
mechanism,  the  disorderly  nature  of  the  movements  and  the  risks  to  inflation  are  a  major 
cause for concern.  
It is against this difficult global and domestic backdrop that monetary policy has to operate, 
while at the same time learning the lessons from the crisis for macroeconomic policy. There 
are a number of aspects worth noting. First, while there is no doubt that fiscal expansion was 
called for at the onset of the crisis, an important lesson was just how quickly that fiscal space 
can run out. Many believe, erroneously, that the current problems of the Eurozone were due 
to profligate spending by governments. But many countries entered the crisis with low fiscal 
deficits and low debt ratios. For example, in 2007, government debt to GDP ratios in Ireland 
and  Spain  were  25  per  cent  and  36  per  cent  respectively,  and  by  2012  these  ratios  were 
118 per cent and 91 per cent. Similarly the respective US and the UK ratios were 62 per cent 
and 44 per cent and by 2012 they had increased to 107 per cent and 89 per cent. The speed 
with which countries ran into fiscal constraints and the need to rein in these deficits focused 
increasing attention on monetary policy to provide a stimulus to growth and employment.  
Second, monetary policy has still got some traction when it is at the zero bound, as seen in 
the  unprecedented  quantitative  easing  in  a  number  of  the  advanced  economies.  But  it  is 
clear that these interventions are more of a holding operation, and we still do not know what, 
if any, the unintended consequences of these policies will be. In particular it is uncertain what 
the impact will be when this liquidity is withdrawn. There are increasing concerns about the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
risks  that  this  could  pose,  especially  if  such  withdrawal  is  disorderly,  as  well  as  about  the 
ability of the monetary authorities to fine-tune these exit strategies.  
Third,  and  perhaps  most  significantly,  the  crisis  taught  us  the  importance  of  focusing  on 
financial stability, as an overly narrow focus on price stability can lead to imbalances in the 
financial sector, with potentially disastrous consequences. This is where much of the debate 
around macroeconomic policy currently revolves, and is creating challenges for central banks 
generally.  
The crisis focused attention on two particular issues: firstly the role of monetary policy with 
respect  to  output  stabilisation  or  economic  growth,  and  the  second  on  the  objective  of 
financial  stability.  For  some  time  it  has  been  widely  accepted  that  the  core  objective  of 
monetary  policy  is  price  stability.  During  the  1990s  inflation  targeting  was  increasingly 
accepted as the preferred monetary policy framework, and during the 2000s, in the lead up 
to  the  crisis,  the  world  experienced  what  became  known  as  the  great  moderation,  with 
inflation seeming to have been tamed in almost all countries.  
The  continuing  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  in  many  countries  has  raised  the 
question of whether growth is now a new objective for monetary policy with a retreat from the 
price stability objective. There are countries such as the United States where monetary policy 
has an explicit dual mandate. But in a flexible inflation targeting framework a concern about 
output  growth  is  in  reality  an  implicit  target  of  monetary  policy.  In  effect,  monetary  policy 
places some weight on the output objective in addition to the primary price stability objective, 
but  these  relative  weights  may  differ  over  time  depending  on  circumstances.  In  situations 
where inflation diverges from the target, the speed with which monetary policy aims to bring 
inflation back in line with the target is dependent on the concern about what is happening in 
the real sector of the economy. So when output is significantly below potential, and inflation 
exceeds the upper end of the target range, the policy horizon can be lengthened in order to 
reduce possible adverse impacts of tighter monetary policy on economic growth. This also 
implies that even if inflation is within the target, but uncomfortably close the top of the target 
range, monetary policy may be more accommodative than in the event of a zero or positive 
output  gap.  In  other  words,  a  relatively  higher  weight  is  placed  on  the  output  stabilisation 
objective under such circumstances.  
Monetary policy actions in the wake of the crisis can be seen in this context. In the immediate 
aftermath, monetary policy also focused on trying to ease liquidity in dysfunctional segments 
of  the  financial  markets,  although  such  interventions  were  not  required  in  South  Africa. 
Monetary policy has been focused on growth in a number of the advanced economies, but 
not necessarily because they have become “soft on inflation”. In many instances the absence 
of inflationary pressures gave policy makers the space to focus more on stimulating growth. 
In other instances there was a risk of deflation, and expansionary monetary policy responses 
are appropriate under such circumstances. But there have been cases, for example in the 
UK,  where  above-target  inflation  has  been  tolerated  for  extended  periods  against  the 
backdrop of low growth and a tight fiscal policy stance.  
There are three important issues here: one is the behaviour of inflation expectations. When 
inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  monetary  policy  has  a  much  wider  scope  to 
tolerate these deviations. It is significant that despite the abnormally low interest rates and 
the  enormous  amounts  of  liquidity  that  have  been  injected  into  various  of  the  advanced 
economies,  inflation  expectations  have  remained  remarkably  well  contained.  Second, 
monetary policy may be effective in affecting cyclical growth, or the deviation of actual output 
from potential output, but it is not very effective in determining the path of potential output 
itself. This is the task of structural policies, including those related to infrastructure provision, 
education and skills, the quality and quantity of capital etc. Finally, the fiscal-monetary policy 
mix is important. The tighter fiscal policy is, the greater the room for looser monetary policy. 
However, an accommodative fiscal policy stance constrains the room for monetary policy to 
act as the main countercyclical policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Our  own  monetary  policy  reactions  have  been  very  much  in  line  with  this  approach.  The 
current stance of monetary policy is accommodative in the sense that the real policy rate is 
negative, around minus one percent, compared with a positive pre-crisis average of around 
3,5  per  cent.  At  the  same  time,  notwithstanding  an  appropriate  consolidation  path,  fiscal 
policy is also relatively accommodative, and the inflation outlook is very close to the upper 
end  of  the  target  range,  with  upside  risks.  Our  tolerance  of  this  uncomfortable  position, 
however,  is  recognition  of  the  weak  state  of  the  economy  which  justifies  this  stance.  The 
output  gap  is  negative  and  growth  is  below  potential  and  expected  to  remain  so  for  some 
time. But the monetary policy stance is also dependent on the fact that our inflation forecast 
does  not  suggest  that  inflation  will  accelerate  significantly  away  from  the  target,  and  that 
inflation  expectations  remain  more  or  less  anchored,  albeit  at  the  upper  end  of  the  target 
range. In addition, inflation appears to be driven primarily by exogenous factors, while core 
inflation appears to be relatively contained.  
The  question  that  can  reasonably  be  asked  is  whether  there  is  room  for  further 
accommodation.  Our  view  is  that  risks  have  increased  in  both  directions.  We  have  limited 
room for manoeuvre, despite the lower-than-expected first quarter GDP growth outcome and 
further  downside  risk  to  our  growth  forecast  of  2,4  per  cent.  Apart  from  the  weak  global 
environment, the longer term structural constraints and other shorter term domestic issues 
outlined  above  have  undermined  confidence,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  which  make  the 
outlook for growth extremely precarious. These  interrelated issues are likely to continue to 
negatively impact on near-term growth prospects, directly and indirectly through the impact 
on investor confidence. These are not issues that monetary policy can solve.  
At the same time, there are significant upside risks to the inflation outlook coming from the 
exchange  rate  and  possibly  from  wage  settlements  in  excess  of  inflation  and  productivity 
increases.  The  Bank’s  estimate  of  the  pass-through  coefficient  from  the  exchange  rate  to 
consumer prices is around 0,2 i.e a 10 per cent depreciation results in a 2 percentage point 
increase  in  the  inflation  rate.  However,  this  happens  with  a  lag,  and  is  dependent  on 
perceptions of how permanent the move is and the state of the business cycle. To date, the 
pass-through from the exchange rate to inflation has been relatively constrained, particularly 
compared to previous periods of high volatility and currency weakness. This is probably due 
to low growth and relative lack of pricing power in a number of sectors of the economy. Also, 
it could be that the recent sharp moves in the exchange rate are seen to be excessive and a 
sign of overshooting. However, the longer these weaker levels persist, the greater the risk 
that  the  relatively  benign  impact  on  inflation  will  end.  Some  prices  are  also  impacted  far 
quicker than others: for example petrol prices where the pass-through is very quick. We have 
been fortunate that the impact on petrol prices has been moderated to some extent by the 
weaker international oil price. Nevertheless, should current levels of both product prices and 
the exchange rate persist, we can expect a sizeable increase in the petrol price in July.  
In essence, while monetary policy remains tolerant of inflation at the upper end of the target 
range or of temporary breaches, the increasingly risky outlook for inflation, and its possible 
impact  on  inflation  expectations,  does  constrain  further  accommodation.  More  importantly, 
monetary policy cannot deal with structural constraints. All too often it seems easier to place 
expectations  on  monetary  policy  to  respond  and  thereby  avoid  the  more  difficult  task  of 
dealing with these constraints.  
While  the  trade-offs  between  output  and  growth  are  well-understood,  the  bigger  challenge 
comes from the expanding financial stability mandates. Prior to the crisis, in many countries 
financial  stability  was  an  implicit  objective  of  central  banks,  and  in  many  instances  was 
conflated  with  the  health  of  individual  banks  and  the  stability  of  the  banking  system.  In 
retrospect  this  is  quite  surprising,  given  that  monetary  policy  is  intermediated  through  the 
financial system, and therefore a dysfunctional financial system would effectively block the 
transmission mechanism of monetary policy.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In the early part of the 2000s there was disquiet about emerging asset price bubbles with 
some  voices,  most  notably  at  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  arguing  that 
central banks should lean against these developments. The standard central bank response 
at  the  time  was  that,  with  inflation  generally  under  control,  low  interest  rates  were 
appropriate.  Furthermore,  it  was  argued,  central  banks  were  not  well  placed  to  recognise 
bubbles,  let  alone  prick  them,  but  were  best  placed  to  clean  up  in  the  event  of  a  bubble 
popping. Unfortunately, central banks are still cleaning up from the on-going global crisis.  
Having recognised that price stability is not sufficient for financial stability, the need to focus 
on financial stability is clear, given that the fall-out of the crisis has been so protracted and 
costly.  Cleaning  up  is  no  longer  the  only  option.  The  focus  is  now  on  macroprudential 
oversight, which focuses on the financial sector as a whole, rather than on individual banking 
institutions, which is the domain of the microprudential regulator. However, despite a broad 
agreement on the need for macroprudential oversight, there is still much thinking and work to 
be  done.  At  the  IMF  conference  that  I  referred  to  above,  Andrew  Haldane  of  the  Bank  of 
England  argued  that  the  thinking  about  macroprudential  policy  is  more  or  less  where  the 
thinking of monetary policy was in the 1940s. In other words, still a long way to go!  
He further argued that the design features are still rudimentary, not clearly defined and poorly 
articulated.  First,  there  is  still  no  general  agreement  on  the  objective  of  macroprudential 
policy  -  are  we  concerned  about  protecting  the  financial  sector  from  swings  in  the  real 
economy or protecting the real economy from cycles and swings in the financial sector?  
Secondly,  we  have  an  idea  of  what  some  of  the  macroprudential  instruments  should  look 
like, but these are not well developed, and as yet untested in many instances. Furthermore, 
because the efficacy of these instruments is dependent on the nature and structure of the 
financial system,  their  usefulness may  differ  from  country  to  country  and  therefore  are  not 
necessarily  generally  applicable.  Should  we  be  using  price-based  or  quantity-based 
instruments?  
Monetary policy is generally conducted through a short-term policy interest rate. At this point 
there is no single policy instrument that is associated with macroprudential policy in the way 
that the policy interest rate is closely identified with monetary policy in most countries. This is 
not surprising, given that financial instability could emerge in different parts of the financial 
system,  and  therefore  may  require  different  and  more  focused  policy  instruments.  In  fact, 
many of these “new” instruments are tools that were previously used as anti-inflation policies, 
but  ultimately  fell  into  disuse  because  they  were  too  narrow  in  focus  to  deal  with  broader 
inflation. The proposed tools are largely implemented through microeconomic policies, and 
include regulators setting maximum loan-to-value ratios, imposing countercyclical buffers or 
additional capital requirements, as well as determining margin and/or reserve requirements.  
Thirdly,  there  is  no  general  agreement  on  the  most  appropriate  governance,  or  its 
relationship to monetary policy. There are two broad views on this issue and their differences 
have  their  roots  in  the  differing  views  of  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  the  lead-up  to  the 
crisis. One view, for example that of Claudio Borio of the BIS, argues that an overly narrow 
focus of monetary policy on price stability and a disregard for financial sector imbalances led 
to low interest rates and excessive leverage, contributing to high consumption expenditure 
and  asset  price  bubbles.  This  view  suggests  that  the  financial  cycle  is  at  the  core  of 
understanding  the  macroeconomy,  and  that  because  the  financial  cycle  has  a  lower 
frequency than the business cycle, a focus on inflation and the business cycle results in too 
short  a  time  horizon  for  monetary  policy.  Monetary  policy  should  explicitly  take  financial 
stability issues into consideration, either as a secondary objective or as an objective with an 
equal footing. This implies that the policy interest rates should be part of the macroprudential 
tool-kit and is likely to result in tighter monetary policy in a low inflation environment when 
asset prices are seen to be rising. It also creates the possibility of conflict between monetary 
and macroprudential policy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
to 
The alternative view, and one that appears to be evolving into the current “wisdom” or “best 
practice”, is that the crisis did not represent a failure of monetary policy, but rather a failure of 
regulation, both at the micro and macroprudential levels. Furthermore, the interest rate is a 
blunt instrument to deal with financial crises, and the collateral damage of excessively high 
interest  rates  could  be  quite  high.  According 
this  view,  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential  policies  have  different  objectives  and  therefore  require  different  tools  and 
different  committees.  Under  such  circumstances,  there  are  possibly  fewer  implications  for 
monetary  policy,  but  clearly  coordination  will  be  required,  and  the  potential  for  conflict 
between the two still exists. But this is true of conflicts between monetary policy and other 
policies such as fiscal policy. This approach does not necessarily imply that macroprudential 
policy  should  be  conducted  by  the  central  bank.  However,  having  monetary  policy  and 
macroprudential  policy  under  one  roof,  (and  indeed  microprudential  policy),  facilitates 
coordination, but implies more responsibilities for the central bank.  
The approach that we have adopted in South Africa is in line with this second approach. In 
terms of the Twin Peaks regulatory architecture, the responsibility for financial stability and 
macroprudential  policy  has  been  given  explicitly  to  the  Bank.  At  present,  this  function  is 
undertaken by the Bank’s Financial Stability Committee (FSC) which includes all members of 
the Monetary Policy Committee. It is envisaged that once legislation has been enacted, the 
current FSC will be replaced by a Financial Stability Oversight Committee (FSOC) which will 
have both coordination and policy formulation responsibility with regards to financial stability 
and  the  implementation  of  macroprudential  instruments  or  tools.  The  proposed  legislation 
envisages  that  the  Governor  will  chair  the  FSOC,  which  will  include  the  market  conduct 
regulator  as  a  member  and  the  National  Treasury  as  an  observer.  This  additional 
responsibility creates both intellectual and resource challenges for the Bank.  
The  responsibility  for  financial  stability  may  have  possible  implications  for  central  bank 
independence. As Mervyn King, the retiring Governor of the Bank of England has argued, the 
expansion of mandates to include financial stability makes independence harder to define. 
Financial  stability  oversight  is  essentially  a  shared  responsibility  with  other  organs  of 
government. Furthermore, it could at times involve the use of tax payers’ money to bail out 
institutions  in  difficulty.  But  more  generally,  macroprudential  policies  could  have  highly 
distributive impacts.  
In conclusion, central banks are facing a difficult environment as the weight of expectations 
on  them  increases.  The  crisis  has  led  to  extraordinary  measures  being  taken  by  central 
banks. There is little doubt that current levels of real interest rates, both abroad and in South 
Africa, are not the long run “new normal”. However, it is still unclear where the new long run 
level  will  be,  or  when  the  normalisation  will  take  place,  or  indeed  how  the  process  of 
normalisation will unfold. Despite what some would like us to believe, monetary policy is not 
the panacea for growth. Had low interest rates been all that is needed, the global economy 
would be in over-drive. Monetary policy has prevented the global economy from going into 
free-fall,  but  it  is  no  substitute  for  structural  reforms  that  are  needed.  The  new  focus  on 
financial stability will endeavor to prevent a recurrence of global financial crises, but much of 
this  is  unchartered  territory  –  all  the  more  so  given  that  the  crisis  continues  to  mutate, 
wreaking on-going devastation and enormous hardship.  
This in South Africa we now have an explicit financial stability mandate, which imposes new 
and  arduous  responsibilities  on  the  Bank.  Domestically,  we  are  facing  challenges  of  crisis 
proportions  that  require  a  coordinated  and  coherent  range  of  policy  responses,  which  are 
largely beyond the scope of monetary and macroprudential policies alone to deal with.  
Since  the  advent  of  democracy,  South  Africa  has  had  a  growth  rate  that  averaged  almost 
3,5 per cent. According to the IMF, the policies that have been implemented have resulted in 
a  40  per  cent  increase  in  real  per  capita  GDP,  and  a  drop  in  the  poverty  rate  of  around 
10 per cent. These are significant, meaningful achievements. Notwithstanding this the recent 
dismal  growth  performance  and  the  vulnerabilities  referred  to  earlier  mask  layers  of 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
deep-rooted  structural  problems  that  manifest  themselves  in  high  levels  of  unemployment 
and massive inequalities. These in turn are caused by weak competitiveness, a poor skills 
profile and an educational system that, in parts, is dysfunctional, low domestic savings, low 
investment, uncompetitive product and labour markets and spatial distortions.  
South Africa’s response should be focused on three strands. Firstly, as a country, we require 
clear actions to stabilise the labour relations environment. Secondly, the country has to take 
steps to address some of the areas of short term vulnerability. Thirdly, a clear programme of 
reform  is  required  to  boost  medium  to  longer  term  growth.  Much  more  important  than  the 
precise elements of a strategy is for government to be decisive, act coherently and exhibit 
strong and focused leadership from the top. There is clear recognition that South Africa faces 
significant  challenges;  what  is  required  is  decisive  leadership  from  all  role  players  that 
consistently demonstrates a coordinated plan of action to address them. This will go a long 
way to restoring confidence, credibility and trust.  
The Bank will continue to focus on its expanded mandate and stands ready to play its part in 
such a coordinated national effort.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
