Paul Fisher: The outlook for the UK economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the 
Cardiff Breakfast Club, Cardiff, 24 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
It’s nice to be back in Cardiff again. As always, I will be taking the time while here to visit a 
number of local businesses in an effort to find out what is happening “on the ground” in the 
Welsh  economy.  Our  network  of  agents  across  the  UK  provide  the  MPC  with  valuable 
intelligence on a continuous basis, but there’s nothing quite like hearing it at first hand for 
oneself. 
Recent changes at the Bank of England 
I’d like to start this morning by outlining some of the recent institutional changes at the Bank 
of England, which will help shape the policy environment for a generation. 
First of all, supervision is back! The new Prudential Regulation Authority, a subsidiary and 
therefore part of the Bank of England, has moved into its new offices at 20 Moorgate, just a 
two  minute  walk  from  the  back  of  Threadneedle  Street  (or  faster  on  a  cold  morning!)  The 
move  back  to  the  Bank  will  help  us  to  exploit  the  synergies  between  microprudential 
supervision on the one hand and the markets, economics and financial stability expertise of 
the wider Bank on the other. But most importantly this is an opportunity to change the way in 
which  banks  (and  building  societies,  credit  unions,  insurers  and  major  investment 
companies) are supervised. There will always be financial firms that fail through making bad 
judgements and taking risks which crystallise; or because unforeseeable events crop up. We 
have to allow that to happen in an orderly manner and without the use of public money. But 
good supervision should make sure that financial firms are focussed on the big issues, are 
appropriately  capitalised,  sufficiently  liquid  and  not  excessively  leveraged.  The  PRA  will 
focus  on  those  institutions  and  issues  which  pose  the  greatest  risk  to  the  stability  of  the 
financial  system.  And  their  approach  to  supervision  will  be  to  make  forward-looking 
judgements  about  the  risks  posed  by  firms,  based  on  evidence  and  analysis  (and  not 
constrained by a narrow interpretation of either domestic or EU rules). 
Second, the Financial Policy Committee is now established with statutory powers. Its primary 
objective  is  to  identify,  monitor  and  take  action  to  remove  or  reduce  systemic  risks  with  a 
view  to  protecting  and  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  UK  financial  system  whilst  having  a 
secondary  objective  –  like  the  MPC  –  to  support  the  economic  policy  of  Her  Majesty’s 
Government,  including  its  objectives  for  growth  and  employment.  Much  of  the  work  of  the 
interim  Committee  on  which  I  served  for  the  past  two  years  was  geared  towards  trying  to 
ensure that banks have enough capital. Frankly, the banks did not like this very much, since 
raising capital in the current environment would appear to reduce the return on equity in the 
short  term.  But  banks  and  building  societies  need  to  be  seen  as  safe  and  sound  to  fund 
themselves and to secure other business. When banks are under-capitalised, raising capital 
can improve the market’s perception of their creditworthiness and so make it easier for them 
to  borrow  more  cheaply.  If  we  are  to  have  a  set  of  banks  fit  to  provide  credit  and  offer 
payments services to the UK economy, they must be better capitalised and less leveraged 
than  they  have  been  in the  past. I  want  to  make  one  point  about this  debate  which  bears 
repeating: if a bank becomes better capitalised that need not be at the expense of lending to 
the real economy – capital is actually a source of funding which supports lending. And an 
improved capital position, for most of the large lenders, need not come about by reducing 
real economy lending but by a number of actions such as restricting distributions (salaries, 
bonuses or dividends), by raising new capital or by running down other parts of their balance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
sheets.  The  FPC  has  always  been  explicit  that  banks  should  not  meet  the  need  for  more 
capital by reducing lending to the real economy. 
The  new  FPC  is  one  of  a  small  number  of  macroprudential  committees  in  existence.  Few 
other  advanced  economies  have  delegated  such  macroprudential  powers  to  a  technical 
committee. Will it work to make the UK financial system more robust? I hope so. We have 
already seen positive benefits just from the supervisors working more closely with the Bank 
over  the  past  couple  of  years.  And  last  summer,  when  the  Bank  and  HMT  launched  the 
Funding for Lending Scheme (the FLS) it received policy support not just from the MPC, but 
from the FPC, the FSA and the DMO. I think it may have been a world first for such a wide 
group of policy acronyms to be working together to implement a single initiative! 
I  should  also  mention  the  creation  of  the  Financial  Conduct  Authority,  a  new  institution 
formed out of the old Financial Services Authority (and not part of the Bank), which will be 
responsible  for  ensuring  that  relevant  markets  function  well.  In  doing  so,  it  will  aim  to 
advance the protection of consumers, the integrity of the UK financial system and promote 
effective competition. It will be responsible for the conduct regulation of all financial services 
firms, and the microprudential regulation of those financial services firms not supervised by 
the PRA, for example, asset managers, hedge funds, many broker-dealers and independent 
financial advisers. 
Developments in the real economy 
Whereas  those  institutional  arrangements  are  new  and  exciting,  the  economic  data  have 
been  disappointing  for  some  time,  notwithstanding  some  improvement  in  the  most  recent 
indicators. Since the trough in output in mid-2009, GDP has averaged just 0.3% per quarter. 
This “recovery” has been much weaker than previous cyclical upswings – and according to 
the  recently  published  May  Inflation  Report  projections,  output  is  more  likely  than  not  to 
remain  below  its  pre-crisis  level  for  another  year  or  so.  There  has  recently  been  a  lot  of 
discussion about whether the UK has suffered a double-dip recession or not. But to focus on 
whether growth is a bit negative or a bit positive is to use the wrong reference point. Trend 
growth should be more like 0.6% a quarter and we have only had five quarters of growth at 
that rate or higher in the 21 quarters since the start of 2008. There had been no such weak 
period in the UK since quarterly GDP data were first published in 1955. Even compared with 
previous examples of financial crisis – whether at home or abroad – the UK economy has 
been puzzlingly weak for a long time. 
I want to take the opportunity today to offer a possible explanation that at least fits some of 
the data. Much of what follows has been used as a narrative in recent Inflation Reports. 
It  is  as  if  the  different groups  within  our  society  –  households,  businesses,  banks  and  the 
Government – have all decided that their future financial positions, on average, will be worse 
than they thought before the crisis. As economists, we would say “a reduction in estimated 
permanent income”. I will come back to reasons why, but, given that premise, we can explain 
much of what is happening. 
The household sector, of course, has people in many different circumstances, so one can’t 
tell a single story. But, subject to the vagaries of data revisions, it appears that people on 
average are saving much more than they were pre-crisis. Some may be trying to reduce debt 
levels; some saving to fill holes in expected pensions; some for university tuition fees and 
some in response to heightened uncertainty about future employment. Meanwhile, many of 
those who want to leverage up – such as first-time house buyers – are having to save for a 
larger  deposit  than  they  would  have  done  pre-crisis.  Consumption  growth  has  been  very 
muted:  in  2012  it grew  at  less  than  half  its  average  rate  in  the  pre-crisis  decade.  And  the 
level of consumption remains about 4% below its pre-crisis peak. 
One  possible  household  reaction  to  lower  expected  incomes  is  for  people  to  try  and  work 
harder, and certainly to  avoid unemployment if at all possible. This means being willing to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
stay in (or find) work even though the benefits from that – real wages – are being squeezed. 
Labour market participation – the number of people in work or actively seeking employment – 
has held up well since the 2008/09 recession; this contrasts with previous recessions when 
workers were discouraged from the labour market and the participation rate fell sharply. The 
acquiescence of the UK labour force in accepting lower real wages is quite remarkable for 
those of us who grew up during the wage-price spirals of the 1970s and 80s. It explains in 
part  why  unemployment  has  stayed  much  lower  than  we  would  have  expected,  given  the 
weakness of output growth. Much of the labour force has priced itself into work. 
The  public  sector  has  also  been  addressing  its  finances.  There  was  clearly  a  greater 
structural deficit in the fiscal position than anyone thought pre-crisis and the Government are 
trying to reduce public expenditure and raise income to get back onto a sustainable footing. I 
should note that no consolidation at all  would have been unsustainable and was never an 
option. Nevertheless, as the May Inflation Report noted, it is likely that the consolidation has 
weighed on output over the past three years and will continue to do so. 
The financial sector also has its balance sheet problems. The major banks in particular have 
been re-structuring, reducing wholesale market borrowing, improving their liquidity positions 
and building up capital. I believe every large UK lender has at least one non-core portfolio 
they are running down, and commercial property lending is typically a common factor. 
Finally,  the  corporate  sector.  In  aggregate,  UK  businesses  continue  to  save  rather  than 
invest,  running  up  a  significant  and  on-going  corporate  surplus.  But  like  the  household 
sector, there are different sub-groups. Some, especially large companies, are cash rich and 
profitable  but  not  investing  as  much  as  they  perhaps  could.  Some  companies  have  long-
standing pension fund deficits that need to be fed, if not eliminated. Others, particularly some 
SMEs, ought to be leveraging up as they grow but may be struggling to get sufficient credit 
(at  least  in  aggregate).  And  many  firms  borrow  to fund  activity  in  the  commercial  property 
sector which remains relatively weak. 
Collectively the economy as a whole also needs to rebalance. The significant external trade 
deficit built up pre-crisis needs to close up further to be sustainable in the medium term. 
If this description of the changing economy is correct, why has it happened and how does 
that affect the outlook? Until 2008 it did not appear that the UK economy was growing faster 
than the very long established trend. Maybe that trend had shifted without anyone noticing? 
Perhaps  the  growth  of  the  financial  sector  crowded  out  other  industries  and  the  financial 
crisis  has  left  a  hole  that  needs  to  be  filled  by  other  sectors?  Perhaps  globalisation  has 
shifted  activity  from  developed  to  emerging  economies?  The  rise  in  global  energy  prices 
clearly makes us all worse off and is likely to be an important factor. Or maybe it is just that 
the crisis in Europe has turned out to be such a big drag on the UK – not just through trade 
but through financial markets and through general household and business confidence? The 
source  –  or  sources  –  of  the revision  to  income  expectations  will  matter  in  the  medium  to 
long  term.  If  the  downward  revision  to  income  expectations  proves  to  have  been  justified 
then the level of output is unlikely to return to its previous path. We don’t know yet – it will 
depend in part on how persistent these shocks turn out to be – but this is clearly important to 
the longer-term outlook for both growth and inflation. 
In the near term, whatever the source of the changes in perceptions of permanent income, it 
is  likely  that  growth  will  continue  to  be  below  the  previous  trend  until  more  of  the  real 
adjustments  to  balance  sheets  across  the  economy  have  been  made.  That  includes 
households, the public sector, banks and other businesses. In my view we are maybe two 
thirds  to  three  quarters  of  the  way  through  in  each  case,  varying  both  across  and  within 
sectors. There is nothing scientific or “official” in that assessment! It’s just a personal best 
guess  on  the  back  of  how  the  economy  is  behaving  plus  some  direct  knowledge  of  the 
progress of the banks with their deleveraging plans. To be clear, we do not need to be 100% 
finished before growth strengthens at all, and we may be beginning to see some signs of a 
pick-up. And I think this prognosis is consistent with our Inflation Report central projection of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
a gentle, albeit sustained, recovery over the next three years. That is a somewhat sobering, 
but not calamitous, outlook for real growth. Most of the economic problems we face will be 
eased as growth recovers but, in my view, a return to boom conditions is unlikely in the UK 
anytime soon. 
If that is the outlook for growth, then what about inflation? That has been above target now 
for most of the past five years. But it would be hard for anyone to argue that inflation has 
been high because of excess demand growth in the UK. And because monetary policy works 
in large part by boosting or restraining nominal demand that would not seem to be the root 
cause of such high inflation either. Rather we have been subject to a range of cost or supply-
side  shocks  including  high  energy  prices  internationally,  compounded  by  the  large 
depreciation of sterling during the financial crisis, and tax changes and other “administered” 
or regulated price rises reflecting difficult policy choices (such as producing cleaner energy). 
As a relatively small open economy, overly dependent on financial services, the UK has been 
more exposed than most countries to externally-driven cost pressures. 
It may sound perverse, but my concern for much of the past five years has been the risk of 
eventual deflation: that once the temporary effects of the various price level shocks work off, 
weak demand growth would leave us with a Japanese-style economic malaise which would 
have  been  very  difficult  to  escape  from.  The  asset  purchase  programme  –  or  QE  as  it  is 
generally called – has been crucial in avoiding that outcome. During the recession we have 
been  trying  very  hard  to  stimulate  the  economy  –  but  always  with  an  eye  on  inflation 
returning to the 2% target in the medium run, as we are required to do. If QE has contributed 
to inflation still being somewhat over-target at around 2 ½% now, that seems to me a much 
better outcome than the alternative of a deeper recession and a greater risk of deflation. We 
have had our critics over the past few years and an open debate on monetary policy is to be 
welcomed.  But  I  have  not  heard  anyone  suggest  a  more  convincing  or  attractive  policy 
stance for monetary policy than that which we have pursued. 
The question now is what we should do with monetary policy as these shocks work their way 
out of the system. It feels as if monetary policy has done well to underpin the economy and 
to  stop  recessionary  forces  from  gaining  the  upper  hand.  But  it  hasn’t  been  sufficient  to 
generate a return to trend growth yet, let alone any catch up. The reason may be in the real 
balance  sheet  adjustments  that  I  have  described.  Low  interest  rates  and  increases  in  the 
money base make the economy very liquid. Those with excessive debt levels can take their 
time to adjust in an orderly fashion. Tighter monetary conditions would have risked forcing 
the  adjustments  to  take  place  in  a  more  disorderly  way,  with  negative  spillovers  driving  a 
much  weaker  path  for  output,  higher  unemployment  and  the  possibility  of  more  persistent 
damage to economic potential. But loose monetary conditions can’t force the adjustment to 
be made at any particular pace – the problem is asymmetric. If we push too much money into 
the system, the risk would be that it does nothing for real output, which is being driven by real 
adjustments,  instead  it  could  just  end  up  in  higher  inflation.  We  cannot  guarantee  that  a 
specific monetary boost will split into real and inflationary outcomes in the way that we might 
all wish. 
We may like to think that low interest rates are the result of MPC decisions. That may be true 
of nominal rates. But real interest rates are low in large part because there has been so little 
real growth in the economy. One can’t expect to earn low-risk but high real rates of return in 
financial markets if the underlying real economy is not growing sufficiently to generate those 
returns – the two are inextricably linked. That is why savers have been having such a hard 
time. To improve the position for those with net savings we really need to see stronger real 
growth  so  that  nominal  interest  rates  can  start  to  normalise.  So  pursuing  a  strategy  of 
monetary  accommodation  will  be  in  the  interests  of  savers  in  the  medium-term,  even  if  it 
feels like the opposite in the short-run. We should all want to see sufficient growth such that 
interest rates can start to rise. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Taking all that together, my policy vote has been driven by the need to continue supporting 
the required real adjustments – which still have much to work through – but cautiously, so as 
not  to  risk  inflation  expectations  becoming  de-anchored.  My  personal  view  is  that  faster 
growth  in  the  near-term  might  actually  help  keep  inflation  down  for  a  while  as  productivity 
growth  picks  up.  Eventually,  however,  reductions  in  the  degree  of  spare  capacity  in  the 
economy should bring domestic inflationary pressures back to normal, so it will be important 
that  other  factors  influencing  inflation  do  not  remain  elevated.  The  MPC  is  committed  to 
getting inflation back to around the 2% target – which it will in due course, in the absence of 
further shocks and if we are careful with policy. 
Monetary accommodation should generally be helpful to balance sheet rebuilding, but there 
are limits. For example, I am not convinced that a further reduction in interest rates would 
stimulate demand at this stage. Cuts in interest rates work in part by encouraging spending 
(or investment) at the expense of saving. Working from such a low level of interest rates, we 
do not know for sure whether those effects remain the same, given pressure on the incomes 
of  savers  and  high  debt  levels  of  borrowers: further  cuts  in  rates may  not feed  through  to 
higher consumption in the normal way and some of the effects could even be perverse. We 
may well find that getting rates back to normal is part of re-establishing economic activity at 
potential in due course. 
If monetary policy is limited in terms of its ability to generate growth, what else could we do to 
support the real adjustment of the economy? In the banking sector we have been particularly 
active.  The  Funding  for  Lending  Scheme  has  been  extended  until  the  end  of  2014,  and 
amended to provide additional incentives to lend to SMEs and to non-bank providers of credit 
to the real economy. The FPC’s capital recommendation should be seen as complementary 
– seeking to spur the increased capitalisation of the banks’ balance sheets so they are seen 
as safe and sound and hence have market access to reasonably priced funding in the future, 
while  using  our  facilities  to  make  sure  they  have  access  to  sufficient  reasonably  priced 
funding  in  the  meantime.  The  banks  are  responding,  quite  rightly,  by  not  adjusting  their 
strategic  balance  sheet  aims  of  running  off  weak  portfolios,  often  commercial  property 
related,  but  they  are  maintaining  or  increasing  lending  to  their  core  customers.  Some  are 
consciously  rebalancing  their  books  between  retail  and  corporate  lending.  Much  has  been 
done  even  in  the  weakest  institutions.  But  there  is  more  to  do  to  complete  the  task  of 
ensuring that the banking system is fit for purpose. 
My main message today is that you should expect the Bank of England to continue to play its 
part in supporting the recovery towards genuine real growth, whilst being careful not to let 
domestic inflationary pressures build, consistent with our remit. But monetary policy can only 
take  us  so  far  and  the  necessary  real  adjustments  will  need  real  changes  and,  most 
importantly, real time to work through. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
