Andrew G Haldane: Constraining discretion in bank regulation 
Paper  by  Mr  Andrew  G  Haldane,  Executive  Director,  Financial  Stability,  Bank  of  England, 
given at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Conference on “Maintaining financial stability: 
holding a tiger by the tail(s)”, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, 9 April 2013. 
 Marking your own exams is a perilous pursuit. Stephen Levitt of Freakonomics fame looked 
at abnormalities in tests scores in Chicago Public Schools, when these tests were marked by 
the  schools’  own  teachers  (Jacob  and  Levitt  (2003)).  He  found  systematic  evidence  of 
upgrading of scores in elementary schools by teachers marking, in effect, their own exams.   
More recently, the LIBOR scandal has exposed many of the same self-regulatory problems. 
The  incentives  to  shade  their  self-assessed  LIBOR  exam  grades  proved  too  much  for  too 
many  for  too  long.  As  we  now  know,  systematic  misreporting  resulted.  The  self-regulatory 
model was again found wanting.  
Yet there is one area of finance where self-regulation continues to stage a last stand – bank 
capital standards. Since the mid-1990s, banking regulators globally have allowed banks the 
discretion to use their own models to calculate  capital needs. Most  large banks today use 
these models to scale their regulatory capital. In doing so they are, in essence, marking their 
own exams. 
This  self-regulatory  shift  was  made  with  the  best  of  intentions.  Yet  its  consequences  have 
been  predictable.  Self-assessment  has  created incentives  to  shade  reported  capital  ratios. 
As elsewhere, a regulatory regime of constrained discretion has given way to one with too 
much unconstrained indiscretion. 
This calls for regulatory repair. Without change, the current regulatory system risks suffering, 
like the Chicago teachers and the LIBOR fixers, reputational damage. Fortunately, there are 
early signs that regulatory change is afoot to place tighter constraints on this (in)discretion. 
The emergence of self-regulation 
To understand how we ended up here, it is useful to explore the historical contours of the 
regulatory debate. This is a history in roughly four chapters. 
Chapter 1 covers the period prior to the agreement of the first Basel Accord in 1988. Until 
then,  a  patchwork  of  national  regulatory  frameworks  for  capital  adequacy  operated.  Some 
countries set capital adequacy standards based on simple measures of bank equity to assets 
– a leverage ratio. Others, including in the US, used risk-based standards with risk weights 
set by regulators for a small set of asset categories. 
Chapter 2 begins with the introduction of the Basel Accord. This was a landmark agreement: 
the first-ever genuinely international banking accord, based around an 8% bank capital ratio, 
with internationally-set risk-weights applied to a small set of banks’ assets. The Accord was 
explicitly designed to lean against an international “race to the bottom” in capital adequacy 
standards (Goodhart (2011)). It also helped ensure a level international playing field.   
Chapter 3 commences with the Market Risk Amendment to Basel I in 1996 and continues 
through to the Basel II agreement of 2004. These were a direct response to the perceived 
failings of Basel I. In particular, the lack of granularity in risk weights under Basel I was felt to 
have  created  arbitrage  possibilities,  with  risk  migrating  to  lower  risk-weighted  asset 
categories. 
Permitting  use  of  banks’  own  internal  models  to  calculate  risk  weights  provided  such 
granularity. It also aligned regulatory capital with banks’ own economic capital calculations, 
thereby prospectively reducing arbitrage incentives. By setting internal model-based capital 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
charges  below  those  from  simple  standardised  approaches,  Basel  lI  provided  banks  with 
strong incentives to upgrade their risk management technology. 
The  move  from  regulator-set  to  model-set  capital  charges  had  two  significant  side-effects. 
First, it added materially to complexity. For a large, complex bank, the numbers of calculated 
risk weights rose from five to hundreds of thousands, perhaps millions. Second, the use of 
models moved decision-making on risk weights from regulators to banks. Once a model was 
admitted, the system was essentially self-regulatory. 
The  final  Chapter,  Basel  III,  commences  in  2010.  Experience  during  the  financial  crisis 
demonstrated both that capital had been set too low and that it had been defined too broadly. 
Basel III raised the level, and narrowed the definition, of bank capital. In those respects, it 
was a very significant improvement over its predecessors. At the same time, the complexity 
and self-regulatory aspects of Basel II remained in Basel III. 
Each of these historical chapters was a logical response to the perceived problems of the 
day. Even  with the benefit of hindsight, these steps seem like sensible ones. In particular, 
there  appear  to  have  been  three  key  objectives  behind  the  evolution  of  international  bank 
regulation over the period. 
• 
First,  to  level  the  international  playing  field  and  prevent  a  race  to  the  bottom  in 
capital adequacy standards, in particular under Basel I. 
Second, to align regulatory capital with risk by improving the risk-sensitivity of capital 
standards, in particular under Basel II and III.  
And  third,  to  reduce  incentives  to  engage  in  regulatory  arbitrage  and  create 
incentives to upgrade risk management, in particular under Basel II and III.  
  All  of  these  responses  were  understandable  and,  in  concept,  laudable.  The  question  is 
whether, with the benefit of hindsight, they have been successful.  
Unfulfilled ambitions 
(a) Levelling the Playing Field 
The rationale for the original Basel Accord is that it would effectively defuse an international 
race to the bottom by setting a common, internationally-set capital standard. But the use of 
risk weights, in particular those based on internal models, in calculating banks’ capital ratios 
has  provided  an  alternative  avenue  through  which  this  race  can  be  run.  And  empirical 
evidence suggests this race may have continued apace. 
Chart 1 plots the average risk weight applied to the assets of 17 major international banks 
over the period 1993 to 2011, together with a trend line. The trend is steeply and strikingly 
downward-sloped, falling on average by 2 percentage points each year. Banks’ average risk 
weight (risk-weighted assets per unit of assets) has almost halved, falling from over 70% in 
1993 to below 40% at end 2011 (see, also, Blundell-Wignall and Atkinson (2011)). 
There are three possible interpretations of this trend. One is that banks’ assets, in aggregate, 
are around half as risky today as they were 20 years ago. A second is that banks are twice 
as good at managing these risks as they were 20 years ago. In the light of the crisis, which 
unearthed  huge  risks  on  banks’  balance  sheets  accumulated  over  this  period,  neither 
proposition rings especially true.  
To see why, consider the evolution of an alternative measure of risk – simple bank leverage. 
In  the  pre-crisis  boom,  bank  leverage  rose  steadily  to  reach  historically  unprecedented 
levels. This signalled high and rising bank risk (Chart 2). Indeed, bank leverage and bank risk 
weights moved in opposite directions over this period, with a correlation coefficient of minus 
0.6. While  the  risk  traffic  lights  were  flashing  bright  red  for  leverage,  for  risk  weights  they 
were signalling ever-deeper green. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  subsequent  financial  crisis  has  made  clear  which  traffic  light  signal  was  at  fault.1  The 
boom  was  leverage-fuelled  and  so  too  has  been  the  subsequent  bust.  At  least  at  an 
aggregate level, bank risk weights appear to have borne, at best, a tenuous relationship with 
risk. At worst, they were a contrarian indicator.  
That  takes  us  to  a  third  potential  explanation  for  the  downward  trend  in  risk  weights,  one 
familiar from every other field of self-regulation – the system has been gamed or arbitraged 
(Blum  (2008),  Masera  (2012)).  Under  a  self-assessed  standard,  banks may  have  both  the 
incentive and the ability to shade downwards risk weights, or to switch to lower risk-weighted 
asset  categories,  thereby  boosting  reported  capital  ratios.  The  aggregate  evidence  is 
consistent with this having occurred secularly and on a significant scale.  
Firm-specific evidence is also consistent with this hypothesis. A survey by McKinsey in 2012 
found  that  65%  of  firms  were  engaged  in  “RWA  optimisation”  of  some  form  (Babel  et  al 
(2012)). And the recent US Senate investigation of the J P Morgan “whale” incident is the 
latest  in  a  long  line  of  identified  misdemeanours  sourced  in  model  manipulation.  In  short, 
while one of the original aims of the Basel Accord was to prevent a race to the bottom, the 
move to risk-based capital adequacy standards may in fact have accelerated it. What, then, 
of the second objective of the original Basel Accord - levelling the international playing field?  
From an economic perspective, a level playing field would imply that banks with equivalent 
portfolios should hold a broadly equivalent amount of capital. The most compelling test of this 
hypothesis comes from the hypothetical portfolio exercises (HPE) recently conducted in the 
UK  and  internationally.  These  take  a  set  of  common  portfolios  and  ask  how  much  capital 
banks’ internal models would set against them.  
Three UK exercises have been undertaken, in 2007, 2009 and 2011, for a subset of banking 
assets  –  corporate  exposures,  sovereign  exposures  and  banking  exposures.  Chart  3 
demonstrates  the  range  of  variation  in  default  probabilities  for  these  three  sets  of  asset 
across UK banks, while Chart 4 shows differences in risk weights across these portfolios in 
2011, the most recent estimates. 
The  range  of  cross-bank  variation  is  enormous.  Default  probabilities  differ  by  factors  of 
between five and ten. Risk weights differ by a factor of between three and five. There is no 
sign  of  this  range  having  shrunk  over  time.  The  Basel  III  reforms  will  raise  banks’  capital 
standards  by  a  factor  of  between  three  and  four.  These  cross-bank  differences  would  be 
sufficient to absorb fully those reforms.  
The Basel Committee has recently undertaken its own HPE on a wider range of international 
banks,  focussing  on  the  trading  book  (BCBS  (2013)).  Chart  5  summarises  the  range  of 
variability in capital requirements for certain of the trading book metrics (VaR, stressed VaR 
(sVaR) and the Incremental Risk Charge (IRC)), while Chart 6 focuses on the IRC charges 
for a set of particularly complex models.2 
The  variation  is  again  enormous.  Calculated  trading  book  risk  weights  differ  by  factors  of 
three to five, even for simple metrics such as VaR. For some of the more complex, such as 
IRC, the range of variation needs to be shown on a log scale. For some portfolios, it runs to 
three  figures.  For  one,  it  runs  to  four,  with  one  bank’s  model  suggesting  $1  of  capital, 
another’s over $1000, for an identical exposure.  
These inconsistencies are likely to be an under-statement of the true problem. Because they 
cover  only  a  sub-set  of the  banks  using  internal  models,  these  exercises  may  significantly 
under-estimate variability across the bank population. The portfolios covered by existing HPE 
                                                
1    Market-based  measures  of  bank  riskiness,  such  as  CDS  spreads  or  credit  ratings,  are  also  consistent  with  this 
interpretation. If anything, these suggest the panel of banks is as risky or riskier today than 20 years ago. 
2    The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  has  also  looked  at  the  degree  of  consistency  of  European  banks’  risk  weights, 
though not using a HPE methodology. It too found large cross-bank discrepancies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
exercises have also tended to be relatively simple. More complex portfolios would probably 
result  in  wider  cross-bank  variability.  The  Basel Committee  is  currently  undertaking  an 
equivalent exercise for banking book assets.  
There is a delicate line to tread between useful diversity in model outputs on the one hand 
and useless inconsistency on the other. It is clear we are currently on the wrong side of this 
line. If a regulatory regime can generate capital ratios of 5%, 10% and 20% for three identical 
banks, it is not a robust basis for assessing capital adequacy. In short, the objectives of the 
original Basel Accord are at risk. Complex, self-regulation has added speed to the race to the 
bottom and incline to the international playing field.   
(b) Complexity and risk-sensitivity 
One of the conceptual lynchpins of the model-based, self-regulatory approach was the desire 
for risk-sensitivity. As a matter of principle, it is difficult to question risk-based regulation. The 
practical question is whether that has been achieved. 
On the face of it, the very act of risk-weighting assets would appear to guarantee a greater 
degree of risk-sensitivity than, say, using a risk un-weighted leverage ratio. Yet this intuition 
is  wrong  on  two  counts.  Wrong  empirically  because  it  ignores  the  risks  which  come  from 
modelling. And wrong theoretically because risk across banks’ whole portfolio may bear little 
relationship to the aggregated risk of each of its parts. 
Take model risk. This pollutes the signals from a risk-based capital ratio. In work at the Bank, 
we  have  explored  this  trade-off  between  model  risk  and  risk-sensitivity.  If  model  risk  is 
sufficiently  large,  a  risk-based  capital  ratio  may  in  fact  perform  worse  in  predicting  bank 
default  than  a  leverage  ratio.  That  is  because  the  noise  associated  with  imprecise  risk 
weights can drown out the signal. A leverage ratio, unpolluted by model risk, may provide 
clearer risk signals. 
While slightly counter-intuitive, this result is well-understood in many fields outside of finance 
(Gigerenzer (2007)). It is why complex, risk-weighted algorithms have been found to perform 
poorly  out-of-sample  when  predicting  everything  from  sports  events  to  medical  diagnoses, 
from  shopping  habits  to  portfolio  choices  (Haldane  and  Madouros  (2012)).  Over-fitting  the 
past  makes  for  fragile  predictions  about  the  future.  Unweighted  measures,  without  noise 
pollution, have often been shown to do better. 
Whether they do so in bank regulation is, ultimately, an empirical question. The noise around 
estimated risk weights cannot be observed directly, but empirical evidence is illustrative. For 
example, if estimated risk weights can differ across banks by factors ranging from three to a 
thousand,  this  suggests  a  high,  sometimes  deafening,  amount  of  model  noise.    Historical 
errors in estimated risk weights are also illuminating. For example, trading book risk weights 
during the crisis were found to be mis-calibrated by factors of up to 50.  
A  common  driver  behind  these  fragilities  may  be  the  shortness  of  the  samples  used  for 
model estimation. It is well-known that small sample problems are especially acute when the 
underlying  distribution  of  outcomes  is  tail-heavy,  as  with  financial  time-series.  The  Basel 
regime  imposes  constraints  on  so-called  “look  back”  periods.  For  example,  the  minimum 
sample  period  for  VaR  models  in  the  trading  book  is  one  year,  though  most  models  in 
practice  use  between  one  and  two  years.  For  the  banking  book,  the  minimum  look-back 
period is between five and seven years, with actual samples lying between five and twenty 
years. 
From a robustness perspective, samples this short are, quite literally, a recipe for disaster. At 
most,  they  would  encompass  one  cycle  or  extreme  event.  Some  would  fail  to  cover  even 
that.  This  would  leave  the  tail  of  the  risk  distribution  empirically  under-fitted  and  the  body 
over-fitted.  In  other  words,  estimated  risk  weights  are  very  likely  to  be  least  reliable  when 
regulators are most reliant on them. By construction, when it matters most, risk weights are 
likely to be long noise and short signal.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Theoretical  objections  to  risk  weighting  are  no  less  deep-seated.  One  key  issue  is 
aggregation  (Masera (2012)).  Regulation  has  focussed  on  ever-more  granular  and  precise 
risk estimates for individual assets. Fewer attempts have been made to consider correlations 
across  broad  asset  classes,  other  than  in  parts  of  the  trading  book.  Yet  it  is  these 
correlations  which  fundamentally  determine  risk  across  a  banking  portfolio.  Indeed,  this  is 
perhaps the key lesson finance theory has taught us over the past half-century.  
There is a cruel irony here.  One of the great pre-crisis mistakes was to look at risk in the 
financial  system  institution  by  institution,  atom  by  atom.  Doing  so  resulted  in  regulators 
missing the systemic crisis of a lifetime. Yet an asset by asset, atom by atom approach to 
risk measurement still lies at the heart of the post-crisis regulatory framework.    
A second conceptual problem with risk-weighting is that it takes no account of the collective 
consequences of banks’ asset allocation decisions. For example, no account is taken of the 
externalities,  positive  or  negative,  that  banks’  portfolio  choices  may  give  rise  to.  This  may 
lead to risk weights being mis-calibrated from the perspective of the financial system as a 
whole and the wider economy.  
As  an  example,  take  lending  to  the  real  economy  –  for  example,  to  finance  infrastructure, 
SMEs  or  trade. These  asset  choices  are  likely  to  be  positive  for  medium-term growth  and 
hence, indirectly, for credit risk in the financial system. In other words, this portfolio allocation 
is likely to deliver positive externalities for the wider economy.  
By  contrast,  lending  within  the  financial  system  may  have  the  opposite  effect.  It  raises 
interconnectivity in the system, thereby amplifying systemic risk (Haldane (2009)). In other 
words, this portfolio choice may drive negative externalities for the financial system and wider 
economy. 
In an ideal world, these risk externalities would  be taken into account in the setting of risk 
weights – for example, by raising risk weights on intra-financial system lending and lowering 
it  on growth-positive  lending.  In  practice,  there  is  scant  evidence  of this  having  happened. 
Indeed, if anything the current risk-weighting system appears to generate the opposite set of 
incentives.  
Chart 7 looks at the average risk weight assigned by UK banks to different counter-parties, 
some  in  the  financial  system,  others  in  the  wider  economy.  The  differences  are  stark. 
Mortgage  risk  weights  are  double  those  on  lending  to  financial  institutions.  For  large 
companies, risk weights are treble those on lending within the financial system. For SMEs, 
they are quadruple. Those are probably not the risk weights a benevolent dictator, charged 
with supporting the economy and armed with a PhD in welfare economics, would choose. 
The acid test of whether these empirical and theoretical concerns about risk-weighting have 
merit  comes from  assessing  the  evidence.  Do  risk  weights  help  in  signalling  bank failure? 
There have been a number of recent studies comparing the predictive performance of Basel 
risk-based  capital  ratios  and  simple  leverage  ratios  for  bank  failure.  The  results  are  both 
striking and surprising. 
Studies by IMF (2009), Demirguc-Kunt et al (2010), Haldane and Madouros (2012), Mayes 
and Stremmel (2012), Brealey et al (2011), Berger and Bouwman (2013), Blundell-Wignall 
and  Roulet  (2013)  and  Hogan  et al  (2013)  perform  a  horse-race  between  different  bank 
solvency  measures,  using  a  variety  of  techniques,  samples  and  controls.  Despite  these 
differences, the conclusion they draw is broadly consistent: leverage ratios perform as well, 
and in most cases better, than risk-weighted alternatives in predicting bank failure.  
These  results  appear  to  be  stronger  for  large  banks,  often  using  internal  models,  than  for 
smaller banks typically using standardised approaches (Haldane and Madouros (2012)). This 
is not altogether surprising given that model risk is largest among banks making greatest use 
of models and with the largest portfolios. It is also the case that no measure of bank capital 
adequacy,  by  itself,  provides  a  full-proof  forecast  of  impending  bank  failure:  the  predictive 
power of all solvency metrics, leverage or otherwise, is fairly low. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Nonetheless, these results send a sobering message. Even on risk-sensitivity grounds, risk-
based capital measures may often be trumped by risk-insensitive alternatives. The noise in 
risk weights may be drowning-out the signal. Granularity may not improve risk-sensitivity; it 
could  even  worsen  it  by  amplifying model  risk. And  given  that  uncertainty,  simpler  metrics 
may often provide a more robust signal of solvency. 
(c) Risk-shifting and robustness 
A third argument used to justify risk-based frameworks is that they help defuse incentives to 
engage  in  “risk-shifting”  or  other  types  of  regulatory  arbitrage  (Kahane  (1977),  Kim  and 
Santomero  (1988)).  Risk-shifting  refers  to  incentives  to  shift  portfolios  towards  higher-risk, 
higher-return assets. These incentives are likely to be strongest when risk is not well aligned 
with  return  –  for  example,  under  an  equally-weighted  leverage  ratio.  Indeed,  this  powerful 
logic justified moving to risk-based capital standards in the first place. 
Historically,  there  have  certainly  been  episodes  when  risk-shifting  appears  to  have  been 
important. For example, the movement by banks into Latin American debt in the 1980s; the 
loading-up on zero risk-weighted OECD sovereign debt in the 1990s; and the extension of 
zero-weighted 364-day lines of credit in the 2000s. Yet in these cases, the problems seem to 
have been generic - mis-calibration of risk weights.  
A few studies have looked at the evidence on risk-shifting more systematically. For example, 
Furlong (1988) looked at the behaviour of around 100 US bank holding companies after the 
introduction  of the  leverage  ratio  in  1981. While  banks’  average riskiness  increased,  there 
was  no  difference  in  behaviour  between  regulatory-constrained  and  unconstrained  banks. 
This  suggests  risk-shifting  was  not  too  potent  a  factor.  Sheldon  (1996)  reaches  the  same 
conclusion when considering the move by international banks to Basel I. 
One  possible  reason  why  risk-shifting  may  have  been  difficult  to  detect  is  that  risk-based 
capital  standards  coincided  with  the  shift  to  a  much  more  complex  regulatory  framework. 
Complexity has an important impact on risk-shifting incentives - and not in the ways some 
have suggested. For example, some have argued that simpler rules are easier to arbitrage. 
The evidence suggests the exact opposite.  
Take  the tax  system.  Simple  linear  tax  schedules  are typically  found  to  be  more robust  to 
problems  of  tax  arbitrage  than  complex  rules  (Hindriks,  Keen  and  Muthoo  (1999)).  Why? 
Because  complexity  increases  the  number  of  loopholes  through  which  the  tax-avoider  can 
slip. Indeed, evidence suggests that complexity of the tax system may be the single largest 
determinant of tax avoidance across countries (Richardson (2006)).   
The  same  logic  carries  across  to  financial  regulation.  Regulatory  complexity  creates 
wormholes.  At  a  macro  level,  cross-country  studies  suggest  that  regulatory  complexity,  in 
particular  the  use  of  internal  models,  appears  to  have  had  an  important  bearing  on  bank 
failure (Cihak et al (2012)). At a micro level, the parts of the regulatory framework which have 
been most prone to arbitrage are those where complexity and opacity has been greatest – 
for example, the trading book.  
Incentives will always exist to shift risk to where it is cheapest. No tax or regulatory system 
can  fully  avoid  those  incentives.  But  some  regimes  may  be  better  at  constraining  those 
incentives than others. The current mix of complexity and self-regulation may provide too few 
constraints. Complexity has meant that avoidance and arbitrage can flourish behind a curtain 
of opacity. And self-regulation has meant that even as one wormhole is closed, others can be 
created in their place.  
Taken together, this evidence does not paint an especially encouraging picture. Many of the 
intended aims and purported advantages of a complex, risk-based regulatory approach may 
not have materialised in practice. Worse, some of the assets of the risk-based approach may 
even have become liabilities.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Unintended consequences  
So much for the intended consequences of the shift to self-regulatory standards. What of the 
unintended consequences? Three are worth noting. 
(a) Cost and compliance 
First, regulatory complexity comes at a cost – the cost of compliance. These costs are borne, 
in the first instance, by the regulator and regulated firms. The costs of moving to Basel II, and 
the emergence of internal models, are difficult to calculate. But external estimates put it at 
tens of billions of dollars. 
For European banks, the costs of implementing Basel III are estimated at over 70,000 jobs 
per year (Harle et al (2010)). For US banks, the costs of Dodd-Frank are also estimated to be 
tens of thousands of jobs. The costs of Solvency II, the new capital standard for European 
insurance  companies,  have  been  put  at  tens  of  billions  of  euros  –  and  it  is  unclear  even 
whether this standard will be implemented. At the same time, regulators have continued to 
bulk-up their own resources in the face of a rising tide of regulatory rules.  
Ultimately,  these  costs  are  borne  not  by  regulators  or  regulated  firms,  but  by  general 
taxpayers and bank customers. These come in the form of higher taxes, lower savings rates 
and  higher  lending  rates.  If  system  stability  can  be  achieved  in  simpler  ways,  these  are 
deadweight costs to society. 
(b) The unlevel playing field 
A second unintended consequence of the move to a model-based regulatory framework is 
that  it  has  tended  to  work  in  quasi-discriminatory  ways.  In  particular,  it  has  tended  to 
discriminate  both  between  small  and  large  banks  and  between  new  entrants  and  existing 
incumbents  in  the  amounts  of  capital  they  are  required  to  hold  even  against  identical 
exposures. 
The  reason  for  this  is  that  small  or  new  entrant  banks  will  generally  adhere  to  Basel  I  or 
simple  standardised  approaches  for  measuring  risk.  In  general,  they  will  have  neither  the 
data  nor  the  technology  to  support  internal  model  approaches.  But  simpler,  standardised 
approaches tend to require much higher amounts of capital than internal model approaches. 
Indeed, this was a design feature of Basel II.  
Chart  8  demonstrates  those  differences  among  the  major  UK  banks  for  a  selection  of 
portfolios.  For  an  identical  corporate  exposure,  a  small  bank  on  Basel  I  or  a  standardised 
Basel II approach holds, on average, twice as much capital as a large bank using models. 
For  retail  mortgages,  these  differences  are  larger  still.  Some  internal  model-based  banks 
attach  a  risk  weight to  mortgages  of  as  little  as  5%.  A  standardised-approach  bank  would 
need to hold at least nine times that amount in capital.  
These design features of Basel II were intended to provide incentives to banks to move to 
internal models and thereby improve their risk management. The link from use of models to 
improved risk management is at best tenuous. But more fundamentally, this design feature 
may also have potentially perverse consequences for systemic risk and competition. 
Under the existing approach, capital charges will tend to be highest for those small, simple 
banks  posing  least  risk  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  The  systemic  risk  tax  is 
regressive.  This  regressivity  will  tend  to  worsen  the  too-big-to-fail  problem,  by  providing 
regulatory  incentives  for  the  large  to  become  larger  still.  The  capital  surcharges  recently 
agreed for systemically important institutions, while helpful, are unlikely to retilt this balance. 
Capital regulation may also have acted as a barrier to banking entry, raising the bar for new 
entrants. Neither outcome (higher risk and lower competition) are desirable from a societal 
perspective.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
(c) Transparency and market discipline 
A  final  unintended  consequence  is  lack  of  transparency.  A  large  bank  may  have  literally 
thousands  of  models,  hundreds  of  thousands  of  outputs  and  several  million  inputs.  The 
height  of  this  information  mountain  makes  scrutiny  and  aggregation  of  regulatory  capital 
calculations near-impossible for either investors or regulators. 
The  combination  of  complexity  and  manipulation  has  led  to  a  loss  of  faith  by  investors  in 
model outputs, and in particular risk weights, over the past few years. Surveys of investors 
suggest  a  fairly  deep-seated  scepticism  about  risk  weights,  with  only  a  small  fraction 
believing them trustworthy (Chart 9). From a low base, investor faith in these risk weights has 
continued to fall fast (Chart 10). 
These concerns appear to be reflected in the pricing of bank risk. Bank investors appear to 
have moved towards using simpler metrics, such as leverage ratios, when assessing capital 
adequacy.  There  is  a  positive  correlation  between  banks’  leverage  ratios  and  their  market 
price-to-book ratios (Hoenig (2013)). No such correlation exists for banks’ regulatory capital 
ratios. Investors seem to have begun pricing the solvency risk they best understand.  
The lack of transparency about, and investor trust in, risk weights has important implications. 
For  regulators,  a  lack  of  transparency  can  damage  the  power  of  market  discipline  in 
constraining  risk-taking  –  so-called  Pillar  III  of  Basel.  Or,  put  differently,  the  complexity  of 
Pillar I of the Basel Tower (regulatory rules) risks emasculating Pillar III (market discipline). 
Pillar I has become Popeye’s forearm, Pillar III his bicep.3  
For  investors,  uncertainty  about  banks’  true  capital  adequacy  is  priced.  Where  there  is 
uncertainty, they  will  factor  a  premium  into  banks’  cost  of  capital. That may  be  one  of the 
reasons  many  of  the  world’s  largest  banks  have  continued  to  trade  at  a  discount  to  their 
equity  book  value.  Until  the  fog  around  banks’  capital  adequacy  is  reduced,  including 
regulatory-induced fog, banks’ cost of capital may remain high.  
Where next? 
Taken  together,  it  is  difficult  to  escape  the  conclusion  that  the  current  regulatory  system, 
however  well-intentioned,  needs  root-and-branch  repair.  The  good  news  is  that  regulators 
internationally  are  increasingly  coming  to  recognise  that  fact  and  have  slowly  begun  the 
process  of  repair.  In  the  past  year,  the  Basel  Committee  has  begun  work  to  improve  the 
“Simplicity  and  Comparability”  of  the  regulatory  framework.  And  earlier  this  year,  the  G20 
Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors  committed  the  regulatory  authorities  to 
improve comparability of regulatory standards. 
The practical question is what might be done to improve the credibility of the framework? In 
the spirit of moving forward the debate, some possible practical ingredients include: 
(a) Greater transparency  
One  simple  way  of  alleviating  some  of  the  uncertainty  around  the  existing  regulatory 
framework  would  be  through  improved  transparency,  in  particular  around  models  and  risk 
weights.  Some  encouraging  progress  has  been  made  on  this  front  recently.  In  2012,  the 
Enhanced Disclosure Task Force (EDTF) of the Financial Stability Board produced a set of 
recommendations for improved bank transparency. This included greater disclosure around 
the models used to calculate risk weights. 
At  present,  banks  are  at  various  stages  of  progress  in  implementing  these  EDTF 
recommendations.  For  example,  a  number  of  UK  banks  made  good  progress  towards 
compliance in their end-2012 accounts. A firm future commitment by global banks to meet 
                                                
3 With thanks to Jason Kravitt. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  EDTF  recommendations  would  be  a  material  step  in  the  direction  of  improving 
transparency about regulatory capital ratios.  
What  the  EDTF  recommendations,  by  themselves,  cannot  achieve  is  an  assurance  of 
prudence  in  risk  weights.  This  would  require  disclosure  of  alternative  capital  adequacy 
benchmarks.  For  example,  last  year  the  Swiss  National  Bank  requested  that  Swiss  banks 
publish  standardised  measures  of  credit  risk  as  a  benchmark  alongside  model-based 
measures. This would provide information on how prudent different banks were being in their 
model-based estimates. This, too, might usefully be thought through globally.  
A more valuable set of disclosures still would come from conducting HPE on a systematic 
and  comprehensive  basis  internationally  -  systematic  in  the  coverage  of  different  assets, 
comprehensive  in  the  coverage  of  institutions.  Making  the  results  of  those  exercises 
available  to  bank  supervisors  would  enable  actions  to  be  targeted  at  banks  deviating 
materially  from  the  pack.  Going  one  step  further,  making  those  HPE  results  available  to 
investors would enable them better to price (im)prudence.  
Any  or  all  of  these  disclosure  initiatives  would  help  reduce  uncertainty.  At  the  same  time, 
disclosure  can  only  ever  be  a  partial  solution.  For  example,  by  itself  it  can  do  nothing  to 
streamline regulatory complexities. In some instances, disclosure could even accelerate the 
race to the bottom – for example, if naming resulted not in shaming but cloning.  
(b) Imposing floors 
A  second,  more  intrusive,  regulatory  intervention  would  be  to  place  greater  regulatory 
constraints on banks’ internal models. Tightening up the process around supervisory model 
approval might be one element of that. One practical step would be to impose much longer 
look-back periods than the current minima. Another would be to require an extended period 
of out-of-sample testing prior to model approval. 
A third would be imposing direct restrictions on models - for example, by introducing floors on 
risk  weights.  Prompted  by  concerns  about  imprudently-low  risk  weights,  a  number  of 
regulators internationally have imposed floors in the past year – for example, in the UK, Hong 
Kong,  Sweden,  Norway  and  Switzerland.  In  the  US,  the  Collins  Amendment  to  the  Dodd-
Frank  Act  requires  banks  using  internal  models  to  meet  a  100%  floor  based  on  a  simple, 
standardised approach.  
The imposition of floors can usefully help cut off the tail of firms, or portfolios, where low risk 
weights are being set. In that way, it can help prevent capital falling to imprudently low levels. 
But setting floors also poses some difficult calibration questions. At what level, and level of 
granularity, should floors be set? And based on what benchmark?  
Answers to those questions can fundamentally reshape incentives. For example, if a floor is 
set at 100% of the standardised approach, this will effectively remove incentives to move to 
models in the first place. Anything short of a 100% floor, while improving prudence, would not 
curtail complexity and inconsistency in capital adequacy standards. 
(c) Prioritising leverage ratios 
One,  more  radical,  way  of  doing  so  would  be  to  place  a  greater  emphasis  on  measures 
which rely neither on models nor on risk weights – for example, through a simple leverage 
ratio. Basel III made significant headway in this regard. Once implemented, it will introduce 
for  the  first  time  an  internationally-agreed  3%  leverage  ratio  as  a  backstop  to  risk-based 
capital measures. 
The  question  is  whether  this  formulation  goes  sufficiently  far  in  tackling  the  consistency, 
incentives and uncertainty problems affecting risk-based standards. Is 3% inadequate? And, 
relatedly,  should  the  backstop  instead  be  a  front  stop?  A  widening  array  of  officials  and 
academics have recently opined on both questions, often answering yes to both (Admati and 
Hellwig 
(2012), 
(2012),  Johnson  (2013),  Haldane 
(2013),  Systemic  Risk  Council 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
Hoenig (2013),  Fisher  (2013),  Norton  (2013),  King  (2013),  Stein  (2013),  Brown  and 
Vitter (2013)).  
The recent legislative proposal by US Senators Sherrod Brown and David Vitter is one of the 
most radical proposals to date. It advocates a tiered set of leverage ratio standards, rising to 
15%  for  banks  with  assets  in  excess  of  $500  billion.  Risk-based  standards  would  be 
jettisoned entirely. From a simplicity and robustness perspective, it has attractions.  
At the same time, the Brown-Vitter proposals clearly raise a host of practical questions. They 
are sufficiently far north of existing capital standards that they are perhaps at best seen as a 
(possibly distant) long-term resting place, not a practical near-term objective. There is also a 
question  of  whether  removing  risk-based  standards  is  necessary  or  desirable.  Placing 
leverage and risk-based standards on a more equal footing might give us the best of both 
worlds, with them acting jointly as regulatory bookends. 
Whatever the merits of particular proposals, it is entirely right that the official sector should 
continuously  assess  whether  the  financial  system  has  adequate  capital  insurance  to  deal 
with  too-big-to-fail  problems.  The  emerging  consensus,  within  academia,  officialdom  and 
among market participants, is that it has not. Despite enormous progress in developing policy 
proposals, too big to fail is an itch that remains unscratched. 
Were this debate to conclude that greater capital insurance was necessary, this would pose 
challenges to the world’s largest banks – but also opportunities. A more prudent capital rule 
could,  over  time,  give  regulators  greater  assurance.  Too-big-to-fail  could,  over  time,  be 
removed from our lexicon. Over-complex regulation could, over time, be streamlined from our 
legislatures. Supervisors and compliance officers could, over time, be reemployed as brain 
surgeons.  And  banks,  over  time,  could  be  left  to  run  themselves,  albeit  within  pre-defined 
constraints. This is a deal a foresighted CEO, or indeed official, might wish to strike. 
Conclusion 
Over  the  course  of  the  past  20  years,  banking  regulation  has  edged  in  a  self-regulatory 
direction  for  understandable,  but  self-defeating,  reasons.  The  regulatory  regime  has  tilted 
from constrained discretion to unconstrained indiscretion. It will be a long journey home, but 
that  journey  has  started.  Making  greater  use  of  simple,  prudent  regulatory  metrics  could 
restore faith, hope and clarity to the financial system to the benefit of banks, investors and 
regulators alike.  
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Chart 1: Average risk weights(a) 
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Per cent 
94 96 98 00 02 04 06 08 10
Source: The Banker and Bank calculations. 
(a) Weighted average risk weights of Deutsche Bank, 
HSBC, BNP Paribas, Barclays, Citigroup, UBS, BAML, 
BONY, Commerzbank, ING, JPM, LBG, RBS, 
Santander, State Street, UniCredit, Wells Fargo. Data 
are not available for the remaining G-SIBs.  
 
 
 
Chart 3: Variability of default probability 
estimates(a)(b)(c)(d)(e) 
PD 2007 PD 2009 PD 2011
Mean PD = 100 
7.1 
4.9 
8.9 
Sovereigns Banks Corporates
250
200
150
100
50
0
Source: FSA, and Bank calculations 
(a)  Based on the results of the FSA’s hypothetical 
portfolio exercises for 2007, 2009 and 2011. 
(b)  Results are based on portfolios comprising assets 
rated by all respondents in the sample (co-rated). 
(c)  Portfolios differ between the exercises in 2007, 
2009 and 2011. Results have been normalised by 
the mean.  
(d)  Sample sizes differ: six to twelve in 2007 and 
seven to thirteen in 2009, depending on portfolio; 
and eight in 2011. 
(e)  The bars show the maximum – minimum ranges. 
The values on top of the 2011 results indicate the 
maximum – minimum ratio. 
    35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Chart 2: Average risk weights and 
leverage(a)(b) 
Per Cent 
80
Leverage ratio 
Weighted average RW
Weighted average leverage (RHS)
 10
08
04
02
00
98
96
94
06
Source: The Banker and Bank calculations 
(a) Sample consists of Deutsche Bank, HSBC, BNP Paribas, 
Barclays, Citigroup, UBS, BAML, BONY, Commerzbank, ING, 
JPM, LBG, RBS, Santander, State Street, UniCredit, Wells 
Fargo. Data are not available for the remaining G-SIBs. 
(b) Leverage ratio is defined as Total assets / Tier 1 capital. 
 
 
Chart 4: Risk Weight variability in 
2011(a)(b)(c)(d) 
3.4 
4.3 
Mean RW = 100 
250
3.3 
200
150
100
50
0
 Sovereigns
 
Source: FSA, and Bank calculations 
(a)  Based in the results of the FSA’s hypothetical portfolio 
 Corporates
 Banks
exercise for 2011. 
(b)  Results are based on portfolios comprising assets rated by 
all respondents in the sample (co-rated). 
(c)  The sample includes six banks. 
(d)  The bars show the maximum – minimum ranges. The 
values on top of the 2011 results indicate the maximum – 
minimum ratio. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
   Chart 5: Risk weight variability in the 
trading book(a)(b)(c)(d) 
 1,000
66.2 
Max-min range
Median
5.3 
3.9 
2.3 
 100
 10
VaR
 
Source: BCBS 
(a)  From the BCBS hypothetical portfolio exercise for the 
All-in
sVaR
IRC
trading book. 
(b)  Sample consists of 15 banks. 
(c)  Values have been normalised by the median. For each 
model, the ranges represent the simple average of the 
normalised minima and maxima for all portfolios the 
model was applied to. For the all-in portfolio, the 
supervisory multiplier was held constant. 
(d)  Numbers on bars indicate maximum - minimum ratios. 
Chart 6: Risk weight variability in the IRC 
model(a) 
1100 
Max-min
Median
1,000
30  78 
12 
100 88 
183 127 
129 
21 
100
10
1
 8  12  13  18  19  20  21  22  23  24
 
Source: BCBS 
(a)  From the BCBS hypothetical portfolio exercise for the 
trading book. 
(b)  Sample consists of 15 banks. 
(c)  Values have been normalised by the median. 
(d)  Numbers on bars indicate maximum-minimum ratios. 
Chart 7: Average risk weights for major 
UK banks by counterparty(a)(b) 
Chart 8: Average risk weights for major UK 
banks under different approaches (a)  
Per cent 
100
Per cent 
120
Basel II IRB Approach
Basel II Standardised Approach
80
60
40
20
0
 (c) 
Financial
institutions
Households
Other
corporates
(d) 
SMEs
Sources: Bank of England, FSA regulatory returns and 
Bank calculations. 
(a) Based on June 2011 data for Barclays, HSBC, LBG, 
Nationwide, RBS and Santander UK. 
(b) Cover credit and counterparty credit exposures. 
(c) Financial firms other than regulated banks and 
investment firms are included within ‘Other corporates’. 
(d) Only includes data on SME credit exposures from 
internal ratings based portfolios.  
 Basel I
100
80
60
40
20
0
Sovereigns
Banks
Corporates
 
Source: Pillar 3 disclosures, Bank calculations 
(a) As of end-2011. Weighted average.  
 
Retail
mortgage
Other retail
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Chart 9: Survey responses to “How much 
do you trust risk weights?”(a) 
Chart 10: Survey responses to “Has your 
confidence in risk-weighted assets gone up 
or down?”(a) 
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
1 - not
3
5 - completely
trustworthy
trustworthy at all
Source: Barclays Capital. 
(a) Based on survey responses of over 130 investors 
carried out in H1 2012, of perceptions over the previous 
year. 
Per cent 
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Up
Not changed
Down
Source: Barclays Capital. 
(a) Based on survey responses of over 130 investors 
carried out in H1 2012, of perceptions over the previous 
year. 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
References 
Admati,  A  and  Hellwig, M  (2013),  The  Bankers'  New  Clothes: What's Wrong with  Banking 
and What to Do about It, Princeton University Press, Princeton, USA. 
Aikman,  D,  Deb,  P,  Farag,  F,  Madouros,  V,  Neumann,  T,  Saporta,  V  and  Wagman,  K 
(Forthcoming), ‘Has the Quest for Risk Sensitive Capital Requirements Achieved its Aims?’. 
Babel, B, Gius, D, Gräwert, A, Lüders, E, Natale, A, Nilsson, B, Schneider, S (2012), ‘Capital 
Management: Banking’s New Imperative’, McKinsey Working Papers on Risk, No 38. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2013),  ‘Regulatory  Consistency  Assessment 
Programme:  Analysis  of  Risk-Weighted  Assets 
for  Market  Risk’,  available  on: 
http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs240.pdf. 
Berger,  A  and  Bouwman,  C  (2013)  ‘How  does  capital  affect  bank  performance  during 
financial crises?’, Journal of Financial Economics.  
Blum, J (2008), ‘Why Basel II may need a leverage ratio restriction’, Journal of Banking and 
Finance, 2008, Vol 32, Issue 8, pp 1699–1707. 
Blundell-Wignall, A and Atkinson, P (2011), ‘Global SIFIs, Derivatives and Financial Stability’, 
OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends, Vol. 2011, Issue 1. 
Blundell-Wignall,  A  and  Roulet,  C  (2013),  ‘Business  models  of  banks,  leverage  and  the 
distance-to-default’, OECD Journal: Financial Market Trends, Vol. 2012, Issue 2. 
Brealey, R, Cooper, I and Kaplanis, E (2011), ‘International Propagation of the Credit Crisis: 
Lessons for Bank Regulation’, Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, Vol 24, No 4, pp36-45.  
Brown, S and Vitter, D, “Ending Too Big To Fail: Terminating Bailouts for Taxpayer Fairness 
Act”, http://www.brown.senate.gov/download/tbtf-bill-summary  
Cihak, M, Demirguc-Kunt, A, Martinez Peria, MS and Mohseni-Cherghlou, A (2012), ‘Bank 
Regulation and Supervision around the World: A Crisis Update’, World Bank Policy Research 
Working Paper Series, No 6286. 
Demirguc-Kunt, A, Detragiache, E and Merrouche, O (2010), ‘Bank capital: lessons from the 
financial crisis’, Policy Research Working Paper Series, No 5473. 
Fisher,  R  (2013),  “Ending  'Too  Big  to  Fail':  A  Proposal  for  Reform  Before  It's  Too  Late”, 
Remarks  before 
the  Republic,  Washington  D.C.,  available  on: 
http://www.dallasfed.org/news/speeches/fisher/2013/fs130116.cfm  
Furlong, F (1988), ‘Changes in Bank Risk-Taking, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Economic Review, Spring, pp 45-56. 
Gigerenzer,  G  (2007),  Gut  Feelings:  The  Intelligence  of  the  Unconscious,  Penguin/Allen 
Lane. 
Goodhart,  C  (2011),  The  Basel  Committee  on Banking  Supervision:  A History  of the  Early 
Years, 1974-1997, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK. 
Haldane,  A  (2009),  ‘Rethinking  the  Financial  Network’,  Speech  delivered  at  the  Financial 
Student Association, Amsterdam. 
Haldane, A (2012), ‘On being the right size’, speech delivered at the Institute of Economic 
Affairs’ 22nd Annual Series, The 2012 Beesley Lectures, London 
Haldane,  A  and  Madouros,  V  (2012),  “The  Dog  and  the  Frisbee”,  given  at  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City’s  36th  economic  policy  symposium,  “The  Changing  Policy 
Landscape”, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
Härle et al (2010), ‘Basel III and European banking: Its impact, how banks might respond, 
and the challenges of implementation’, McKinsey & Company. 
the  Committee 
for 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
is 
in 
interest”, 
the  public 
for  example, 
Hindriks, J, Keen, M and Muthoo, A (1999), ‘Corruption, Extortion and Evasion’, Journal of 
Public Economics, Vol 74, pp 395-430. 
Hoenig,  T  (2013),  ‘Basel  III  Capital:  A  Well-Intended  Illusion’,  speech  delivered  to  the 
International Association of Deposit Insurers 2013 Research Conference, Basel. 
Hogan,  T,  Meredith,  N  and  Pan,  C  (2013),  ‘Evaluating  Risk-Based  Capital  Regulation’, 
Mercatus Center Working Paper Series, No 13-02.  
International Monetary Fund (2009), ‘Global Financial Stability Report’, Chapter 3, available 
at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/gfsr/2009/01/pdf/chap3.pdf. 
Jacob,  B  and  Levitt,  S  (2003),  ‘Rotten  Apples:  An  Investigation  of  the  Prevalence  and 
Predictors of Teacher Cheating’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol 118, pp 843-878. 
Johnson,  S  (2013),  “Higher  Bank  Equity 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-03/why-higher-bank-equity-is-in-the-public-
interest.html  
Kahane, Y (1977), ‘Capital Adequacy and the Regulation of Financial Intermediaries’, Journal 
of Banking and Finance, Vol 1, Issue 2, pp 207-18. 
Kim,  D,  and  Santomero,  A  (1988),  ‘Risk  in  Banking  and  Capital  Regulation’,  Journal  of 
Finance, Issue 43, Vol 5, pp 1219-33. 
King, M (2013), Evidence given before the Parliamentary Commission on Banking 
Standards, March 2013, available on: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt201213/jtselect/jtpcbs/c606-xl/c60601.pdf  
Masera, R (2012), ‘Bank Capital Standards: A Critical Review’, LSE Financial Markets Group 
Paper Series, Special Paper No. 215. 
Mayes,  D  and  Stremmel,  H  (2012),  ‘The  Effectiveness  of  Capital  Adequacy  Measures  in 
Predicting  Bank  Distress’,  paper  presented  at  2013  Financial  Markets  &  Corporate 
Governance Conference. 
Norton, J (2013), ‘A More Prominent Role for the Leverage Ratio in the Capital Framework’, 
remarks delivered to the Florida Bankers Association, Orlando. 
Richardson, G (2006), ‘Determinants of tax evasion: A cross-country investigation’, Journal 
of International Accounting, Auditing and Taxation, Vol 15, pp 150–169. 
Sheldon,  G  (1996),  ’Capital  Adequacy  Rules  and  the  Risk-Seeking  Behaviour  of  Banks: A 
Firm-Level Analysis’, Swiss Journal of Economics and Statistics, Vol 132, pp 709-734. 
Stein,  J  (2013),  “Regulating  Large  Financial  Institutions”,  Remarks  delivered  at  the  IMF 
Conference, 
II”,  Washington,  D.C.,  available  on: 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/stein20130417a.pdf  
Systemic Risk Council (2012), ‘Comment Letter re: Regulatory Capital Rules’.  
US  Senate  Permanent  Subcommittee  on  Investigations  (2013),  JP  Morgan  Chase  Whale 
Trades: A Case History of Derivatives Risks and Abuses. 
 
“Rethinking  Macro  Policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
