Ardian Fullani: EU integration – key challenges for CESEE countries 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  conference 
“Interlinkages  with  the  euro  area  and  long-term  convergence  dynamics”,  hosted  by  the 
European Central Bank, Frankfurt, 17 June 2013. 
 Mr. Chairman, 
Ladies and Gentleman, 
Dear Colleagues, 
The topic of this Conference is of crucial importance for the economic and financial prospects 
of Western Balkan countries. These countries are fully integrated with the EU economy and 
the  EU  financial  system.  The  European  Union  represents  their  main  trading  partner  and 
banks  originating  in  the  EU  dominate  the  financial  system  in  our  region.  As  amply 
demonstrated by our experience, prior to and during the recent crisis, developments in the 
EU  affect  immediately  both  the  real  and  the  financial  system  in  the  region.  The  EU  and 
Western Balkans can be considered partners and, as such, they have a legitimate interest in 
the  policies  and  actions  of  the  other.  I  trust  this  conference  will  try  to  explore  the  best 
mechanisms for mutual consultation and coordination. 
CESEE  countries  have  chosen  integration  with  the  EU  as  the  main  vehicle  to  deliver 
sustainable and long-term economic prosperity to their citizens. I would like to point out that 
our  countries  have  consciously  chosen  the  path  of  EU  integration:  we  have  undertaken 
painful structural reforms; we have made legal and regulatory reforms around this process; 
we have opened our markets to goods, services and capital from the EU. I think it is only fair 
for us to expect long-term commitment and solidarity from our partners. 
This integration and convergence process has certainly delivered in the past two decades. 
GDP growth has outpaced that of the EU and financial intermediation has rapidly improved. 
Common economic wisdom based on indicators such as GDP per capita, relative financial 
intermediation, relative cost of labour and technology indicate that this process will continue 
in  the  future.  CESEE  countries  still  offer  attractive  investment  opportunities:  they  have,  in 
general,  better  demographic  dynamics  and  are geographically  closer  to  Europe  than  other 
emerging  markets.  This  political  and  economic  integration  has  naturally  led  to  financial 
integration. 
However,  I  would  like  to  make  three  remarks  regarding  the  economic  and  financial 
integration path we are pursuing. 
• 
First,  the  main  focus  of  national  authorities  in  SEE  should  be  to  facilitate  the 
allocation  of  capital  to  more  productive  sectors,  by  providing  the  right  incentives, 
structural  reforms,  legal  environment,  tax  policies,  and  economic  stability.  This 
requires  a  common  understanding  with  banks  operating  in  the  region.  Banks  are 
and  will  remain  profit-maximizing  entities.  Nevertheless,  they  should  be  more 
attentive  to  long-term  trends,  because  they  have  a  stake  in  the  sustainable 
development of the economy. 
Second, we have developed a financial system and pursued a financial integration 
strategy  based  on  the  banks,  which  account  for  more  than  90%  of  the  financial 
system  throughout  the  region.  Therefore,  recent  suggestions  about  developing 
domestic  capital  markets  as  an  alternative  to  a  bank-based  financial  system  are 
useful, but perhaps unfeasible in the short to medium term. 
Third,  the  SEE  is  and  will  remain  a  capital-hungry  region,  which  should  be  partly 
intermediated through international banks. This fact should be recognized by both 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
EU  regulators  and  EU  parent  banks.  A  new  business  model  relying  purely  on 
domestically-generated  deposits  is  a  wrong  answer  to  the  previous  extremes  of 
huge capital inflows. 
Currently,  key  challenges  to  financial  stability  in  the  SEE  area  comprise  non-performing 
loans, slow growth of credit to the economy, the problem of fiscal finances, and the exchange 
rate stability. Their nature and magnitude are directly related to the growth problem and the 
private  sector  approach  to  consumption,  savings  and  expectations.  These  problems  were 
either created or exposed by the crisis and have exacerbated due to financial stability-related 
issues of our partner countries and their approach to the solution of such challenges. More 
directly,  the  banking  sector  has  seen  deleveraging  due  to  required  financial  stability 
measures  of  the  European  banking  authorities.  Does  this  have  an  impact  on  credit  and 
growth?  The  obvious  answer  is  yes. Whether  directly  or  indirectly  and  despite  their  origin, 
current financial stability problems are related to slow economic growth, which, in turn, is the 
result of shrinking financial intermediation. In principal, these developments have combined 
in a vicious circle, which is leading the economy in a slow downward spiral. 
There  are  certain  important  lessons  learned  by  the  crisis.  Above  all,  there  is  a  substantial 
change in the perception of policy design and policy implementation by authorities with two 
defining trends. First, we are observing a new paradigm – the rethinking of the central bank 
policy design and policy implementation. The new model consists first in the idea that CPI-
based  inflation  targeting  might  not  be  enough  to  preserve  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability, and second, in the use of macroprudential regulation in combination with traditional 
monetary  policy  measures.  To  be  effective,  these  measures  require  a  strong  coordination 
with  traditional  monetary  policy  and  banking  regulation  and  supervision  measures.  Unless 
coordinated,  they  can  do  more  harm  than  good.  Moreover,  given  the  strong  cross-border 
financial  links  between  the  EU  and  the  SEE,  they  have  over  reaching  effects  across  the 
borders. In this respect, coordination becomes a multi dimensional effort. 
Due  to  these  strong  financial  and  economic  linkages  of  the  CESEE  with  the  euro  area, 
European policies and regulations, macroeconomic and macro prudential intervention have 
authentic real-time impact on our economies giving way to new challenges. The coordination 
of macroeconomic and macroprudential measures within the euro area will continue to exert 
macro stability pressures on the CESEE. Therefore, it is important for the economies of the 
CESEE  to  know,  in  advance,  and  understand  the  EU’s  legal,  institutional  and  regulatory 
developments in the financial system and possibly have an opinion on the potential impact 
and unintended consequences that such developments may have on their economies. 
I would invite the EU monetary and supervisory authorities to focus on the overall picture and 
think about long-term solutions rather than short-term adjustments, which, instead of solving 
the problems, recycle the old ones (problems) into new challenges, transforming the nature 
and the subject without really addressing the overall stability issue. 
The EU Banking Union, in our view, is a very important step towards further integration and 
coordination  between  home  and  host  authorities.  We  appreciate  the  fact  that  the 
establishment of the centralized supervisory authority will facilitate the information exchange 
between  supervisors,  creating  a  more  efficient  communication  between  home  and  host 
regulators  by  reducing  the  complexity  of  dealing  with  multiple  national  supervisors  and 
regulatory  bodies.  The  Bank  of  Albania,  as  a  member  of  the  Vienna  Initiative  Steering 
Committee,  advocates 
to  comprehensively  assess 
interconnectedness issues between EU/euro area and non-EU/non-euro economies in order 
to design balanced and sustainable policies. In particular, macro prudential measures in the 
euro  area  should  also  consider  the  situation  and  the  potential  impact  on  non-EU  host 
countries.  We  expect  that  the  ECB,  as  a  leading  authority  within  the  SSM,  to  play  an 
important  and  constructive  role,  whereas  non-EU  supervisors  must  be  granted  the 
opportunity to express their views on EU financial policy decisions affecting their domestic 
financial  stability,  before  the  actual  decisions  are  taken.  The  effective  functioning  of 
for  EU  authorities 
the  need 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
supervisory  colleges  is  also  considered  a  very  important  issue,  where  countries  with 
systemic EU subsidiaries may address their supervisory concerns. 
On the other hand, it would help if small countries of the region outside the Banking Union 
had a unified view and approach towards EU authorities and expressed their concerns as a 
single voice. In this regard, the Bank of Albania, assuming a coordinating role, has invited 
other non-EU countries to contribute in formulating a common regional approach towards the 
Banking Union and its effects on these countries. 
We  also  argue  that  it  is  at  the  benefit  of  the  ECB,  and  other  monetary  and  supervisory 
authorities and EU authorities to bring the CESEE countries on board of discussions, like a 
responsible  doctor,  who,  while  providing  a  strong  remedy  for  his  patient,  tries  to  minimize 
potential side effects. The ECB must consider the potential side effects of its policies in our 
region. This consideration concerns five important issues: 
First, the ECB has a large theoretic and empiric expertise on financial stability, monetary and 
economic analysis; however, the CESEE countries may have a more precise and direct view 
of potential side effects on their economies; 
Second,  this  discussion  among  the  ECB  and  the  CESEE  must  start  early,  possibly  in  the 
design  process  rather  than  after  the  implementation  of  legislation  and  regulation.  This  will 
allow enough time for CESEE authorities to implement legal and regulative amendments to 
complement EU regulation and adapt its institutional structures in timely manner. 
The reforming EU deposit insurance and banking resolution mechanisms, for example, will 
have legislative and regulative implications for economies of the CESEE due to dominance 
of  European  banking  groups  in  our  financial  sectors.  However,  until  the  ECB  and  the  EU 
decide  on  a  solution  and  legislation  is  eventually  approved,  we  would  not  know  what  the 
potential  implications  (like  regulatory  arbitrage  opportunities),  the  required  legal  changes, 
and the financial costs are for our banking system and our economies. Information is clearly 
in the interest of the CESEE countries as it would remove uncertainty and risk among host 
supervisors (non-EU and non-euro area) regarding the effective resolution (including burden-
sharing) of multinational European banks; 
Third,  establishing  “Resolution  colleges”,  similar  to  “colleges  of  supervisors”,  might  be  an 
intelligent  and  efficient  way  to  prepare  for  extreme  situations.  These  colleges  would  allow 
home and host supervisors to discuss ex-ante regarding possible resolution of multinational 
European banks, with the purpose of bridging differences in the process and burden sharing 
as much as possible. In principle, some form of supervision could be designed to allow the 
ECB  to  share  the  responsibility  of  supervising  multinational  European  banks  with  the  host 
supervisors (particularly in case of their systemic importance in host countries). 
Fourth, establishing swap lines of liquidity in euro, between the ECB and the host countries’ 
central  banks  (or  supervisory  authorities)  –  non-EU  countries,  managing  and  overcoming 
unexpected  liquidity  risk  and  other  potential  constrains  faced  by  multinational  European 
banks,  which  might  rise  directly  or  as  unintended  consequences  in  response  to  decisions 
taken  by  supervision  and  financial  stability  authorities  in  the  euro  area.  This  could  be  the 
case only for those (non-euro area, non-EU) host countries, where the European banks have 
a systemic importance. In return, the host countries’ supervisors will provide the ECB  with 
information  on  the  financial  situation  of  the  systemic  subsidiaries  and  their  respective 
supervisory policies; 
Fifth,  it  is  about  the role  of  international financial  organizations. The IMF,  the World  Bank, 
and  the  Basel  Committee  have  had  and  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  shaping  the 
financial  system  and  building  its  resilience  in  our  economies.  The  EFSAP  is  an  excellent 
example to illustrate this point, and they have vast expertise in dealing with related issues in 
developed and emerging countries. Therefore, I believe that involvement of these institutions 
in the discussion process would benefit both EU and CESEE economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  euro  area  and  the  CESEE  economies  will  be  ultimately  part  of  the  same  political 
economic  and  monetary  union.  Despite  current  hardships,  the  EU  political  and  economic 
integration agenda remains committed in this goal. One might even say that despite potential 
political, social setbacks caused by the crisis, it (the crisis) is pushing the integration agenda 
faster and stronger than before. In this respect, it is necessary to connect the political and 
economic integration process together and continue developing both processes at the same 
speed.  Under  current  circumstances,  regional  cooperation  and  communication  becomes  a 
necessary objective of the CESEE integration process, at least for the banking and financial 
market  reform.  It  would  be  much  easier  for  the  EU  authorities  to  adopt  and  address  the 
concerns of the CESEE as a single group rather than individually. 
In  conclusion,  it  is  so  important  to  establish  a  significant  level  of  communication  and 
coordination  among  the  central  banks  and  EU  institutions,  their  legal  and  regulative 
framework. Finally, I would recommend complementing it with a similar level of coordination 
among  other  institutions,  which  play  a  significant  role  in  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability  in  our  economies.  In  particular,  there  is  more  need  for  communication  and 
coordination among the ministers of finance in the region because fiscal policy is essential 
for the macrofinancial stability of the economy and plays a significant role in the successful 
implementation of the macroprudential tools. The coordination is not an easy task, especially 
when  benefits  come  at  the  cost  of  one’s  partners,  but,  if  we  aspire  to  have  far-reaching 
results, this is the right manner and the appropriate moment to react. 
Thank you! 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
