Vítor Constâncio: The role of Europe in global rebalancing 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Expert 
Seminar “Asia’s role in the global economy forum”, organised by the Official Monetary and 
Financial Institutions Forum (OMFIF), Singapore, 12 July 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  want  to  thank  OMFIF,  particularly  David  Marsh,  as  well  as  all  the  organisers  of  this 
Conference for inviting me to address you today.  
In discussions on global economic imbalances, the euro area often played a secondary role. 
Academic  debates  about  global  imbalances  prior  to  the  crisis  typically  involved  the  United 
States and Asia, with the euro area largely excluded as its aggregate current account was 
broadly in balance.  
And looking ahead, on the face of it, the same story is largely true. 
The policy debate is focused on how the global situation will develop in the presence of two 
counter-veiling  forces:  the  United  States  likely  moving  away  from  its  traditional  role  as  the 
global “spender of last resort”; and external surplus economies, notably in Asia, still largely 
relying on an export-based growth model. The euro area, running a non-significant current 
account surplus, is seen as a largely neutral force.  
But this does not mean that what happens in the euro area is irrelevant for other regions. 
Naturally, the euro area banking and sovereign debt crises have been a cause of concern for 
the  world  economy  from  the  perspective  of  growth  prospects  and  as  a  possible  source  of 
financial  turbulence.  And  the  international  cooperation  that  is  so  vital  for  the  health  of  the 
world  economy  implies  that  the  three  regions  should  achieve  their  internal  balance  with 
growth and low unemployment, maintaining at the same time a long term situation close to 
external  balance.  In  the  present  globalized  economy  this  cannot  be  achieved  without 
cooperation  on  their  macroeconomic  policies.  Any  set  of  policies  implemented  by  the  US, 
Europe and Asia that does not consistently corrects global macroeconomic imbalances is not 
sustainable and could lead to new crises.  
What I would like to do in my remarks today is to emphasise two specific channels where 
developments in the euro area could have an important impact on the global economy. 
Channel one: rebalancing towards sustainable growth 
The  first  channel  is  related  to  the  structural  adjustment  taking  place  within  euro  area 
economies  which  could,  in  time,  correct  the  imbalances  internal  to  the  euro  area  thus 
overcoming a major European vulnerability allowing Europe to make a contribution to global 
demand and hence global rebalancing. 
Euro area countries are currently taking a series of policy measures both to raise their growth 
potential and to make growth more sustainable.  
They are achieving greater sustainability by moving towards an economic model based less 
on  external  borrowing  and  more  on  internal  competitiveness.  Indeed,  according  to 
harmonised  competitiveness  indicators  based  on  unit  labour  costs  have  all  registered 
significant  improvements  since  1999,  Ireland  (–19%  since  1999),  Spain  (–9.5%),  Greece  
(–9%), and Portugal (–6.6%). The loss of competitiveness accumulated until 2007 has been 
totally  offset  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis.  As  a  consequence,  the  EU  Commission 
forecast for this year is that all stressed countries will show a surplus on current account with 
the exception of Greece with a deficit of just 1.1 % of GDP.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
And euro area countries are increasing their growth-potential by implementing wide-ranging 
structural  reforms.  These  include  product  and  labour  market  measures,  but  also  deeper 
reforms to tax systems, public administration and the judicial system.  
Our  monetary  policy  has  been  helping  this  process  by  improving  our  transmission 
mechanism  and  stabilizing  markets.  The  decision  taken  last  year  on  the  programme  of 
Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) has been decisive in this respect. Our recent decision 
to provide forward guidance regarding our main policy rate was also successful in stabilizing 
financial markets unduly affected be spillovers from the recent FED announcement of future 
tapering  of  Quantitative  Easing  (QE).  Europe  is  behind  the  US  in  economic  recovery  and 
inflation  risks  which  implies  that  monetary  policy  has  to  stay  accommodative  for  a  longer 
period of time.  
Our forward guidance is in line with our policy framework as it does not refer to any date or 
period of time but is instead totally conditional on developments in inflation prospects, in the 
economy and in money and credit aggregates – the pillars of out monetary strategy. 
At  the  same  time,  policy  measures  are  underway  at  the  European  level  that  could  help 
expedite  this  rebalancing  process.  These  include  initiatives  by  the  European  Investment 
Bank to boost lending to SMEs, and the possible introduction of contractual programmes with 
financial  incentives  to  underpin  structural  reform  implementation  in  stressed  countries.  A 
proposal by the European Commission on the latter is expected before the end of the year. 
Channel two: a stable financial system through Banking Union 
The second channel through which euro area developments can have a global impact is the 
process of building a genuine Banking Union in order to ensure a robust banking sector. 
As  research  by  for  example  Borio  and  Distayat1  and  Hyun  Song  Shin2  has  shown, 
developments in Europe were very relevant to global capital flow constellations. Looking at 
gross rather than net capital flows, financial intermediaries in Europe were by far the most 
important source of capital flows into the US, not emerging markets as the “global savings 
glut” theory suggests. 
Even today, the total stock of euro area bonds and equities currently held by US investors is 
worth  around  1  trillion  euro,  while  euro  area  investors  hold  US  bonds  and  equities  worth 
more than 2 trillion dollars.  
All this means that the situation of the financial sector in Europe has major spillovers for the 
global  economy.  And  therefore  the  process  of  stabilising  and  strengthening  the  European 
banking  sector,  which  Banking  Union  represents,  has  very 
international 
implications. 
Let me now speak about this in more detail. 
important 
The situation of the euro area banking sector 
It  has  become  fashionable  for  commentators  to  paint  a  picture  of  the  euro  area  banking 
sector  as  a  source  of  persistent  financial  instability.  The  common  theme  is  that  euro  area 
banks  are  undercapitalised  with  potential  losses  still  to  be  recognized.  I  do  not  deny  that 
there still problems to be addressed as I will explain later in my remarks but looking at the 
more recent data, the situation of European banks is better than present market perceptions 
and better than what many observers acknowledge.  
                                                
1  C. Borio and P. Distayat, “Global imbalances and the financial crisis: Link or no link?”, BIS Working papers 
No 346. 
2  Hyun Song Shin, “Global Banking Glut and Loan Risk Premium” 2011 Mundell-Fleming Lecture. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First, there have been steady improvements in solvency positions of many euro area banks. 
For large and complex  banking groups in the euro area, covering about two thirds of total 
assets, the median core Tier 1 capital ratio reached 11.1% in the first quarter of this year – 
up from 9.6% at the end of 2011 and 8.3% at end-2009.  
Second, euro area large banks have become less leveraged, from a level of 3,3 % of tier 1 
equity to 5% now. This was achieved mainly through capital increases.  
This  point  is  well  illustrated  in  a recent  speech by  Thomas  Hoenig3,  FDIC  Vice  Chairman. 
Indeed,  he  reports  that the  bigger  US  banks  show  a  leverage ratio  of tangible  equity  over 
tangible total assets of 6.2%, using US accounting standards (US GAAP), whereas the main 
European  Banks  have  a  level  of  3.7%  when  using  IFRS  accounting  standards.  However, 
according to FDIC calculations, if the US banks ratio would be calculated according to IFRS, 
the  same  as  in  Europe,  the  ratio  comes  down  to  3.8%  very  similar  to the  European  level. 
When  calculated  with  the  same  accounting  standards  the  average  leverage  ratios  of  the 
large American and European banks are quite similar. The explanation for this has to do with 
netting rules: under the US GAAP the American banks have total assets of 10 trillion dollars 
but applying IFRS that is changed into 16 trillion dollars. This huge difference explains the 
difference in the leverage ratios but, importantly, has necessarily to impact also the published 
risk-weighted  capital  ratios  of  European  and  American  banks.  This  means  that  the  capital 
ratios  are  then  not  comparable  although  that  is  many  times  ignored  by  market  and  media 
perceptions, clearly to the detriment of European banks.  
Third,  the  restructuring  efforts  in  the  stressed  countries  to  strengthen  their  banks  with  the 
help  of  the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  funds  have  led  to  improved  funding 
conditions  for  euro  area  banks.  With  the  financing  provided  by  the  ESM,  banks  in  Spain, 
Portugal, Greece and Ireland have been recapitalized. Bank deposits in these countries have 
risen by around 200 bn since September last year, and the cost of both deposit and bond 
funding for  banks  has fallen  significantly.  Euro  area  banks’  issuance  of  medium  and  long-
term debt has increased and we have also seen a noticeable pick-up in repo market activity. 
All these changes have led to lower use of central bank liquidity. Hundreds of banks have 
made use of the option to repay the liquidity provided through the ECB’s three-year longer-
term refinancing operations. These repayments amount to some €300 billion, more than half 
of the net liquidity injection of 500 bn, provided by our two big LTRO operations. Our lending 
to bank counterparties has declined from 14% of the Euro Area GDP at the peak to around 
8% today.  
Despite  these  positive  trends,  there  is  still  a  negative  perception  in  the  market  about 
European banks and more measures are indeed necessary.  
The fact that improved bank fundamentals have not been translated into higher price-to-book 
ratios tells us that there is a confidence problem as regards euro area banks. And if this is 
left unaddressed, it risks creating a vicious circle as a low price-to-book ratio means that it is 
expensive  for  banks  to  issue  equity,  which  might  impinge  on  their  ability  to  raise  capital 
through financial market channels in a cost-effective way.  
Towards Banking Union 
This is where Banking Union comes in. The transposition to the European level of financial 
sector policies through building a strong Banking Union can play a pivotal role in rebuilding 
trust in the euro area banking sector.  
                                                
3  Hoenig, Thomas (2013) “Basel III, a well-intended illusion” remarks at the International Association of Deposit 
Insurers, (available in the FDIC site) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Banking Union has for now two key components: the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) 
and  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM).  The  creation  of  a  European  Deposit 
Guarantee Scheme which the third component has been postponed for the medium term. 
The  creation  of  the  SSM,  which  we  expect  to  be  operational  next  year,  should  increase 
confidence in the euro area banking sector through two main channels. 
First,  the  SSM  will  provide  reassurance  to  investors  that  supervision  is  consistent  and 
effective across all participating countries.  
The SSM will operate as a single system, with a common supervisory manual applying to all 
participating banks. The ECB will directly supervise large, systemically relevant banks. While 
it would be inefficient for the ECB to supervise directly the thousands of remaining smaller 
banks,  we  will  have  the  authority  to  take  over  supervision  of  any  small  bank  or  group  of 
banks at any moment if deemed necessary. This means there will be no “blind spots” from 
which financial instability could emerge. 
Second,  the  implementation  of  the  SSM  should  reduce  concerns  about  hidden  losses  on 
banks’ balance sheets.  
In accordance with the SSM regulation, the ECB will conduct a “comprehensive assessment, 
including  a  balance-sheet  assessment”  of  all  banks  supervised  directly.  This  will  apply  to 
around  130  banking  groups  operating  in  the  euro  area,  which  account  for  around  85%  of 
euro area banking assets. 
The assessment will involve a Balance Sheet Assessment including an Asset Quality Review 
to be conducted by the ECB. This will then feed into the overall stress test to be conducted 
by EBA, in cooperation with the ECB. The results of both exercises should be ready before 
we start actually supervising the banks next year.  
We want this assessment to be as rigorous as possible. Consequently, we are prepared for 
the  fact  that  it  may  reveal  capital  needs.  If  so,  the  first  responsibility  is  for  banks  to  raise 
capital themselves. But there may be a public dimension as well, which is why the European 
Council on 27–28 June addressed the need for backstops to be in place before the exercise 
is completed. Without these financial backstops being in place the ECB does not advice to 
complete the whole set of balance sheet assessment and stress tests.  
However, investors will not be fully confident in the euro area unless they believe that banks 
can  fail  without  causing  financial  instability.  Otherwise,  they  will  expect  supervisors  to 
practice forbearance.  
This is why the SSM needs to be accompanied by a Single Resolution Mechanism.  
The European Commission announced last Wednesday a proposal for a Single Resolution 
Mechanism  based  on  the  concept  of  a  an  agency  with  wide  of  autonomy  and  ultimately 
dependent  on  the  Commission  for  the  crucial  decision  of  putting  a  bank  into  resolution. 
Different alternative institutional setups could be conceived but the existence of a SRM is a 
key  priority  for  Europe  and  I  am  very  pleased  to  see  in  the  proposal  that  the  envisaged 
timeline  takes  this  into  account,  with  the  entry  into  force  foreseen  for  mid-2014  and 
operations commencing in January 2015. This aligns with the entry into force in 2015 of the 
new legal framework for resolution in Europe, the Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive 
(BRRD), which will provide a harmonised framework of resolution powers and tools. 
While it is still too early to provide an in-depth assessment of the Commission proposal and a 
more  detailed  assessment  will  be  published  in  our  ECB  legal  opinion,  I  would  like  to 
welcome,  from  a  personal  point  of  view,  some  important  points  contained  in  the 
Commission’s  proposal.  First,  the  Authority  will  have  the  capacity  for  truly  European 
decision-making  with  no  veto  powers  for  national  authorities.  In  my  view  this  is  key  for 
dealing  swiftly  and  impartially  with  large  cross-border  banks,  although  the  proposal 
appropriately  applies  to  all  banks  of  the  participating  countries  in  the  Single  Supervisory 
Mechanism, thus ensuring a cohesive system. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Second, the Authority would own a Single Resolution Fund which would be financed by ex 
ante risk based contributions to be complemented by ex post contributions both paid inby the 
industry.  Although  not  specified,  the  proposal  stipulates  that  the  Fund  would  be  able  to 
borrow  from  both  private  and  public  alternative  funding  means.  These  borrowings  would 
subsequently recouped from the industry, thus ensuring fiscal neutrality in the medium-term. 
I would have preferred, however, that the proposal would have considered explicitly the issue 
of a public backstop for the resolution fund in the form of a credit line that would have to be 
repaid afterwards, as it is the case with the US FDIC. 
The ECB has strongly advocated for an SRM comprising of these three elements: a single 
system,  a  single  authority,  and  a  single fund. The  proposal  contains these  three  elements 
and consequently reduces the harmful effects of sovereign-bank interactions by diminishing 
the importance of implicit sovereign guarantees. 
The SRM will operate in the legal framework established by the Bank Recovery and Resolution 
Directive (BRRD), which was recently agreed by Member States’ Governments. This Directive 
foresees that bail-in becomes the first line of defence in dealing with banking crisis – indeed, 
8% of liabilities will have to be bailed-in before resolution funds or other public funds can be 
used, with depositors of persons and SME being given the highest preference. Nevertheless, 
the full bail-in tools that includes the possibility of burning senior bank bonds and uninsured 
deposits will entry into force only at the end of 2018. Before that date only shareholders capital 
and subordinated debt can be used to resolve a bank. Insured deposits, secured borrowing 
(including repos and covered bonds) are exempt from bail-in. I think that the bail-in principles 
approved by the Member States and the respective timeline until 2018 are appropriate to allow 
a transition period that is helpful to ensure stability in the bank bond market.  
This  new  rules  should  support  the  work  of  the  SSM  by  strengthening  incentives  in  the 
financial sector to exercise market discipline on problematic banks.  
To sum up, the euro area banking sector is becoming more stable overall, and given the euro 
area’s  central  role  in  global  financial  intermediation,  this  creates  positive  spillovers  for  the 
global  economy.  Banking  Union  will  take  this  process  forward  by  increasing  confidence  in 
supervision and ensuring that banks that need to be wound down, can be. To the extent that 
this supports credit growth to the private sector, this will also generate higher growth in the 
euro area and help the global economy through that channel, too. 
Conclusion  
Let me now conclude.  
Advanced economies, Europe in particular, face a long period of slow growth that will test the 
quality of our institutions. The European social compact will have to prove its adaptability and 
resilience. The Euro Area is still facing a painful crisis of imbalances, financial fragmentation 
and  low  growth.  Questions  of  excess  inequalities  and  high  unemployment  will  have  to  be 
addressed.  
Meanwhile  the  world  will  continue  to  march  towards  the  Great  Convergence  cogently 
described by Kishore Mahbubani in his latest book.  
To fulfil its role in the process, Europe is addressing its structural problems which have been 
holding back growth and at the same time it is ensuring that its banking sector contributes to 
global  stability  and  growth.  Europe  is  undertaking  a  process  of  wide  and  deep  reforms,  of 
which the Banking Union project is a major example, that will ensure a future healthier path 
of economic progress.  
As someone said, “a crisis is a terrible thing to waste” – and we are using this crisis to build a 
stronger  and  more  stable  monetary  union  that  will  play  a  constructive  part  in  global 
rebalancing. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
