Patrick Honohan: Addressing the impact of the distressed property 
market 
Introductory remark by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, at the 
Central  Bank  Conference  “How  to  Fix  Distressed  Property  Markets?”,  Dublin,  13  February 
2013. 
 I can think of few themes that are more topical for the Central Bank, not only in Ireland, but in 
many  other  countries  as  well.  Household  financial  distress  is  at  unprecedented  levels  in 
Ireland as can be seen, for example, from the extraordinary rates of arrears on the servicing 
even of mortgages secured on owner-occupied homes. 
It  is  sixteen  months  since  the  previous  economic  research  conference  organised  by  the 
Financial Stability Division of the Central Bank on the problem of mortgage indebtedness and 
mortgage  arrears.  Before  then,  alert  to  the  danger  that  some  creditors  might  pursue 
distressed mortgage debtors in an aggressive and unfair manner we had already moved to 
insist on fair and proportionate treatment through the Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears. 
Following the two PCAR reviews (March 2010 and March 2011), we had ensured that the 
banks secure sufficient capital to enable them to absorb the both expected and unexpected 
losses on distressed mortgages. And we were ramping up our engagement with the banks in 
recognition of the fact that they seemed to be behind the curve in addressing the problem of 
mortgage arrears on a sustainable basis. 
Many  people’s  view  on  what  the  priority  should  be  in  dealing  with  the  mortgage  arrears 
situation is coloured by their direct experience of friends or family. 
Most  borrowers  continue  to  service  their  loans.  Indeed,  I  suppose  that,  despite  the 
challenging  times  and  widespread  over-indebtedness,  most  people  in  Ireland  subscribe  to 
the  general  proposition  that  –  to  quote  a  recent  authority  on  the  need  for  debtor-friendly 
insolvency  arrangements  –  “debtors  should  fulfil  their  obligations  if  at  all  possible,  and 
freedom from legitimately incurred obligations is a privilege, potentially subject to abuse, that 
should therefore be a carefully guarded last resort” Hence, while long-term debt modification 
involving  permanent  debt  relief  is  a  necessary  ingredient  in  the  resolution  of  arrears,  it  is 
relevant chiefly for cases of over-indebtedness involving or bordering on insolvency. 
To date, the banks have dealt with the emerging situation largely by means of two devices: 
capitalisation of arrears and a temporary move to an interest-only payment schedule. Such 
temporary forbearance measures do provide cash-flow relief to the borrower and have the 
considerable merit of bringing their payments back onto a schedule and avoiding the arrears 
spiral. But they do not deal with situations where the actual and prospective circumstances of 
the borrower, combined with the existence of the new insolvency framework, mean that full 
recovery of the loan cannot realistically be assumed. 
Of course, permanent debt relief is not something that will be offered to all of those who have 
suffered a loss of wealth, but has to be limited to those who are truly over-indebted and close 
to insolvency. In particular negative equity is not in itself a rationale for debt relief. 
On the other hand that, while repossession may be inevitable for many investment properties 
(BTLs), it should be avoidable for the majority of owner-occupier cases where the distressed 
over-indebted borrowers – often suffering from unemployment – are doing their best; a debt 
modification that enables them to stay in their home will often be the best solution all around. 
Repossessions  of  course  have  huge  consequences  for  the  affected  family,  and  besides, 
there are typically financial costs that erode the amount than can be recovered by the lender. 
Still,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  most  would  agree  that  there  must  be  consequences  for  an 
uncooperative borrower refusing to make a reasonable effort. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  new  Personal  Insolvency  Act  offers  new  avenues  of  recourse  for  insolvent  persons, 
including,  importantly,  the  Personal  Insolvency  Arrangement  (PIA)  which  could  allow 
insolvent  mortgage  debtors  to  earn  a  “fresh  start”  through  being  subject  to  an  onerous 
payment  plan,  but  without  necessarily  having  to  surrender  an  owner-occupied  home.  This 
avenue, as well as a streamlined bankruptcy procedure (in which the debtor’s property would 
be seized by creditors), means that banks will have to act more pro-actively and liberally in 
respect of those who cannot realistically pay, if they are to avoid the costs and inefficiencies 
of  having  to  respond  to  PIA  proposals  or  bankruptcy  cases.  Given  how  little  is  often 
recovered by creditors from payment plans, in many if not most cases, a well-designed loan 
modification  bilaterally  arranged  between  borrower  and  insolvent  debtor  can  be  better  for 
both than the net outcome of a PIA or bankruptcy. 
Still, complications arise where there is multiple indebtedness. Credit unions are unsecured 
creditors  of  many  distressed  mortgage  borrowers.  Utility  arrears  are  also  commonly 
observed. A mortgage modification which leaves borrowers with insufficient resources to deal 
with  their  arrears  with  credit  unions  and  on  utilities  is  unlikely  to  remain  fully  serviced. 
Therefore  deals  with  other  creditors  are  likely  to  be  an  essential  part  of  any  effective  and 
sustainable  modification.  Ideally,  this  can  be  done  by  a  standing  agreement  between  the 
main  creditors,  and  there  have  been  moves  in  this  direction.  Failing  that,  the  PIA  is  the 
fall-back route to this when it proves impossible for the main mortgage creditor to ensure (in 
cooperation  with  the  other  creditors)  that,  taking  a  holistic  view  of  the  borrower’s  position 
including other indebtedness, the entire debt is sufficiently restructured. 
Even before the emergence of arrears, there are usually warning signs for problem loans. A 
long understood maxim in retail banking is that early engagement with distressed borrowers 
is a valuable tool for improving ultimate recoverability. In particular, emerging to inability to 
pay instalments in full can induce a borrower to pay nothing at all, thereby risking a spiral into 
an unsustainable level of indebtedness. Identifying pre-arrears situations and engaging with 
them,  as  with  early  arrears  cases,  can  be  very  cost  effective  in  arresting  this  spiral  in  the 
level of indebtedness. 
Quantifying the consequences of evolving policy in this area is the subject of much research. 
If more investment properties are repossessed, or surrendered voluntarily to lenders, will this 
improve or hinder the functioning of the property market? Will a release of repossessed or 
surrendered  property  into  the  market  depress  prices  further,  or  will  instead  the  increased 
number of transactions relieve uncertainty and help the market to finally find a price floor? 
Can  we  improve  on  current  estimates  of  the  ultimate  loan  losses  likely  to  be  experienced 
from residential mortgages and will faster resolution of unsustainable mortgages increase or 
reduce that ultimate cost? What is the best way of operationalising better decision rules for 
banks enabling and impelling them to triage the loans that are unsustainable from those that 
can come back on track? 
These research questions are not simple, and Ireland is far from being the only country in 
which  there  is  general  dissatisfaction  with  the  way  in  which  the  crisis  of  mortgage  arrears 
(which exists in many other countries, albeit not quite as severe as here) is being handled. 
Indeed, if we had a really successful model from somewhere else that could be implemented 
here, we would have done so. 
We continue to scrutinise and seek to learn from research analysis of Irish data, and from the 
research findings about the experiences of other countries. Drawing on what we have learnt, 
we  will  continue  to  make  more  precise  our  thinking  about  when  debt  modifications  are 
needed and how best sustainable modifications should be designed. Having ensured that the 
banks are much better staffed and organised for dealing with arrears, we will be setting out 
our quantitative expectations for their effectiveness in achieving lasting solutions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
