Benoît Cœuré: Monetary policy in a fragmented world 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 41st Economics Conference of the Central Bank of the Republic of Austria, Vienna, 
10 June 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  A.  Saint-Guilhem  and  O.  Vergote  for  their  contributions  to  this  speech,  and  Frank  Smets  and 
Oreste Tristiani for their comments. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here today at the Oesterreichische Nationalbank. In my 
remarks, I would like to address an issue that central bankers don’t consider as central to 
their  role  even  though  it  attracts  much  public  attention:  the  distributional  consequences  of 
central bank action. 
More than five years have passed since the financial crisis started. This period has been a 
time  of  particular  economic  hardship.  The  recession  and  the  subsequent  sovereign  debt 
crisis in the euro area have been accompanied by rising unemployment, lower incomes and 
reduced  household  wealth  as  house  prices  have  dropped  in  some  countries.  But  the  pain 
was not evenly shared. Between 2007 and 2010 the distribution of income widened in OECD 
countries  and  poorer  households  have  been  hit  harder,  especially  in  several  euro  area 
countries.1  Taken  together,  these  developments  are  a  source  of  great  concern  to  all 
Europeans. 
To be clear, the central bank’s mandate is not to address rising inequalities or to steer the 
distribution of income. In fact, the use of explicit redistributive monetary policy tools, such as 
credit controls, was abandoned decades ago. Since then, central banks have been granted 
goal  independence  and  assigned  a  clear  mandate  to  keep  inflation  low.  To  borrow  from 
T. Padoa-Schioppa, monetary policy is mandated to focus on stability rather than equity or 
efficiency.2 In the given framework, the distributional consequences of monetary policy are 
temporary, unintended, with a view to safeguarding price stability. Ensuring a fair distribution 
of income and consumption, or promoting economic justice for society as a whole are issues 
that  lie  outside  the  realm  of  monetary  policy.  They  are  the  tasks  of  other  economic  and 
financial policies.3  
Since the beginning of the crisis, monetary policy has been acting, however, in a fragmented 
world. And the fragmentations were along different fault lines.  
In the euro area, fragmentations had a horizontal dimension (among individuals), a vertical 
dimension  (over  time)  and  a  spatial  dimension  (across  participating  countries).  And  they 
                                                 
1   See OECD, 2013. “Crisis squeezes income and puts pressure on inequality and poverty”, New Results from 
the OECD Income Distribution Database, 15 May 2013. It includes the comment: “In Spain and Italy, while the 
income of the top 10% remained broadly stable, the average income of the poorest 10% in 2010 was much 
lower than in 2007”. 
2   See T. Padoa-Schioppa: “Efficiency, Stability, and Equity: Strategy for the Evolution of the Economic System 
of the European Community”, Oxford University Press, 1987. 
3   There are two main reasons why central banks should be shielded from distributive politics. The first one is 
legitimacy: the degree of fairness in society should be decided by society itself through the mechanisms of 
representative  democracy.  Although  it  is  generally  not  the  case,  distributive  policies  can,  however,  be 
delegated  to  unelected  bureaucrats  if  they  can  be  instructed  to  be  fair  behind  the  veil  of  ignorance.  The 
second  reason  is  efficiency.  Central  banks'  limited  number  of  instruments  should  be  directed  at  a  limited 
number  of  objectives,  with  a  clear  priority.  For  an  assessment  of  why  distributive  policies  are  usually  not 
delegated to bureaucrats, see A. Alesina and G. Tabellini, 2007. “Bureaucrats or Politicians? Part I: A Single 
Policy Task”, American Economic Review, March, p. 169–179. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
have significantly impaired the potency of our standard monetary policy actions. The crisis 
measures  of  the  ECB  have  accordingly  acted  on  the  horizontal,  vertical  and  spatial 
transmission  impairments  of  monetary  policy.  Most  importantly,  our  measures  have 
prevented  catastrophic  outcomes  for  the  euro  area  economy.  And  these  outcomes  would 
have had the biggest impact on the weakest in society. 
Does  all  this  –  as  the  conference  title  asks  –  imply  a  changing  role  for  central  banks  in 
macroeconomic  stabilisation?  The  answer  is  no.  Monetary  policy  should  aim  at  preserving 
price  stability,  the  primary  mandate  given  to  us  by  the  EU  Treaty.  With  regard  to  the 
objective, there are no differences between monetary policy in normal and crisis times. Only 
the intensity and the choice of instruments might require an adjustment. 
Affecting 
the  responsibility  of 
governments  and  other  authorities.  Rather  than  being  redistributive,  central  banks  in  a 
fragmented  world  should  aim  at  repairing  monetary  policy  transmission,  and  restoring 
thereby the distributional neutrality of monetary policy.  
I  will  structure  my  remarks  along  three  lines.  First,  I  will  describe  the  distributional 
consequences of monetary policy and the channels through which monetary policy can affect 
the distribution of income in normal times. Second, I will consider the crisis period and the 
role  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures.  And  finally,  I  will  look  at  the  role  of  other 
economic and financial policies.  
intra-temporal  and  spatial  allocations  should  remain 
Distributional consequences of monetary policy in normal times  
Back in the 1960s, monetary policy in western European economies had explicit and legal 
redistributive  functions.  For  example,  central  banks  used  credit  control  measures  to 
complement more traditional instruments consisting of quantitative ceilings on lending rates 
or controls over the volume of bank lending to the private sector. Direct control over credit 
was thought at that time to better stabilise economic cycles and inflation. Yet credit controls 
were  also  used  for  other  policy  purposes,  such  as  to  finance  government  debt  at  lower 
interest  rates  than  markets  would  allow,  and  to  foster  the  allocation  of  credit  to  specific 
sectors considered as priority activities – in short, to pursue an industrial policy.  
Central banks came to realise that credit controls were not the best way to fulfil their stability 
objective.  What’s  more,  they  came  with  undesired  side  effects.  In  particular,  quantitative 
credit ceilings were negatively affecting competition, innovation and efficiency in the banking 
sector.4 In some countries, the use of credit controls as one of the main instruments of policy 
led  to  a  rapid  expansion  in  the  money  supply,  persistent  inflation  and  frequent  balance  of 
payment crises.  
Today, central banks conduct monetary policy by altering the short-term interest rate to affect 
inter-temporal  decisions  on  consumption  and  savings.  This  inter-temporal  –  or  vertical  – 
redistribution is at the heart of the monetary policy, which aims at price stability. A change in 
the  policy  rate  is  transmitted  to  other  interest  rates  at  various  maturities  through  a  long 
sequence of inter-temporal arbitrages. Ultimately, any change in interest rates for consumers 
and  firms  affects  saving,  investment  and  spending  decisions  through  an  inter-temporal 
substitution effect.  
Monetary policy also affects the distribution of income on the intra-temporal – or horizontal – 
dimension. Changes in short-term interest rates impact on consumption, savings and wealth 
in  different  ways,  depending  on  the  characteristics  of  individual  households.  But  all  these 
                                                 
4   For  a  detailed  account  of  these  experiments  with  credit  controls,  see:  D.  R.  Hodgman,  “Credit  Controls  in 
Western Europe: An Evaluative Review”, paper presented at the conference on “Credit Allocation Techniques 
and Monetary Policy”, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, September 1973. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
effects can be considered as temporary, indirect and unintended, that is, a side effect of a 
strategy which aims at ensuring price stability in the economy. 
So  let  me  briefly  describe  how  monetary  policy  can,  in  principle,  affect  the  distribution  of 
income.  Let  me  start  with  the  impact  over  the  short  term  before  taking  a  longer-term 
perspective. 
Over the short term, we can see three main channels through which monetary policy may 
have distributional consequences.  
First, monetary policy may act upon the cyclical component of the distribution of income. In 
fact,  income  distribution  may  narrow  during  an  economic  expansion  and  widen  during  an 
economic contraction, especially if labour markets are not functioning well and the burden of 
adjustment is disproportionately felt by outsiders. Just think of the case where, for example, 
an  increase  in  unemployment  and  a  decline  in  the  labour  force  participation  are  felt 
excessively  by  low-skilled  workers.5  Hence,  this  cyclical  pattern  of  the  income  distribution 
would  imply  that  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  shock  would  also  contribute  to  a 
narrowing of the income distribution.  
Second, an unanticipated surge in inflation will lower the real value of nominal assets and 
liabilities.  This  tends  to  redistribute  wealth  from  lenders  to  borrowers.  As  a  majority  of  net 
borrowers are in the lowest part of the income distribution, an expansionary monetary policy 
shock would help to narrow the income distribution.6 
Third,  a  monetary  policy  shock  may  impact  on  the  price  of  financial  and  real  assets  by 
affecting interest rates and expectations. The distributional consequences depend on asset 
ownership  patterns.  In  general,  households  in  the  highest  percentiles  of  the  income 
distribution tend to have greater financial wealth and a larger share of income derived from 
financial assets. If an expansionary monetary policy has positive wealth effects, it would lead 
to  a  widening  of  the  income  distribution.  In  the  same  vein,  if  financial  markets  are 
fragmented,  an  expansionary  monetary  policy  may  contribute  to  widening  the  income 
distribution by redistributing wealth from individuals who do not trade in financial markets to 
those  who  trade  frequently  in  financial  markets  and  tend  to  have  higher  incomes.7  On  the 
other hand, however, a decline in house prices is hurting low and middle-income households 
disproportionately, as their wealth tends to be concentrated in housing.8  
So what about the empirical relevance of these various channels? Most studies9 find that the 
impact of monetary policy on the income distribution via lower unemployment of low-skilled 
                                                 
5   See S. Carpenter and W. Rodgers III, 2004. “The disparate labor market impacts of monetary policy”, Journal 
of Policy Analysis and Management 23(4), p. 813–830. 
6   For  an  estimation  of  this  effect  in  the  US,  see  M.  Doepke,  and  M.  Schneider,  2006.  “Inflation  and  the 
Redistribution of Nominal Wealth”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 114(6), p. 1069–1097. 
7   For a description of the underlying theoretical model, see Stephen D. Williamson, 2009. “Monetary policy and 
distribution”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 55(6), p. 1038–1053. 
8   See  S.  Bloom  Raskin:  “Aspects  of  Inequality  in  the  Recent  Business  Cycle”,  Speech  at  the  22nd  Annual 
Hyman P. Minsky Conference on the State of the U.S. and World Economies, New York, NY, 18 April 2013. 
9   See,  for  example,  R.  Ahrend,  J.  Arnold  and  C.  Moeser,  2011.  “The  Sharing  of  Macroeconomic  Risk:  Who 
Loses (and Gains) from Macroeconomic Shocks”, OECD Economics Department Working Papers 877; Blank 
R.  and  A.  Blinder,  1986.  “Macroeconomics,  Income  Distribution,  and  Poverty.”  In  Fighting  poverty:  What 
Works  and  What  Doesn’t,  Cambridge,  Harvard  University  press;  Blinder  A.  and  H.  Esaki,  1978. 
“Macroeconomic  Activity  and  Income  Distribution  in  the  Postwar  United  States”.  Review  of  Economics  and 
Statistics 60 (November); Castañeda A., Díaz-Giménez J. And J.-V. Ríos-Rull, 1998. “Exploring the income 
distribution  business  cycle  dynamics”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  42  (August),  93–130.  Cutler  D.  and 
Katz L., 1991. “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged”, Brooking Papers on Economic Activity 
(2);  Romer  C.  D  and  D.  H.  Romer,  1998.  “Monetary  Policy  and  the  Well-Being  of  the  Poor”,  in  Income 
Inequalities: Issues and Policy Options (Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City), 159–201, and also: Coibon 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
workers  is  more  important  than  the  redistributive  effects  from  unanticipated  inflation.  This 
means  that  monetary  policy,  by  stabilising  economic  fluctuations,  indirectly  affects  the 
cyclical variation of the distribution of income. A recent study based on the new Eurosystem 
Household  Finance  and  Consumption  Survey  indicates  that  monetary  easing  during  the 
crisis allowed a substantial decline in the debt burden of mortgage-holding households. This 
was particularly so in euro area countries under stress, as well as for some disadvantaged 
groups  of  households,  such  as  the  unemployed  and  those  with  low  income  or  temporary 
labour contracts.10 
Still,  these  effects  are  all  temporary.  It  was  Knut  Wicksell  who,  in  his  pioneering  work 
“Interest and Prices”, illustrated the inability of monetary policy to permanently affect output 
and  employment.  His  concept  of  the  “natural  rate  of  interest”  distinguishes  between  the 
market  rate  of  interest,  set  by  the central  bank,  and  the  natural  rate of  interest  that  would 
balance investment and saving. As long as the market rate is less than the natural rate, firms 
and households want to invest and spend more, causing prices to rise. Such a cumulative 
inflation  would  continue  until  the  central  bank  raises  the  market  rate  to  match  it  to  the 
changing natural rate. Wicksell’s analysis ultimately suggests that the real forces driving the 
underlying natural rate of interest are outside the control of the monetary authority.  
What  does  that  imply  at  the  current  juncture?  Since  monetary  policy  cannot  permanently 
affect the inter-temporal price of saving, savers who are concerned by the low level of long-
term real interest rates should worry less about accommodative monetary policy than about 
the development of structural factors, such as productivity, which are beyond the control of 
central banks.  
Does this imply that monetary policy has no long-run or permanent effect on the distribution 
of income? Certainly not. In fact, in the long run, monetary policy can control inflation, both its 
level  and  variability,  as  well  as  the  variability  of  aggregate  demand.  In  this  regard,  price 
stability can foster a more even distribution of income through several channels.  
First,  high  inflation  generates  uncertainty  and  discourages  investment.11  The  associated 
reduction in wages relative to the return on capital would contribute to widening the income 
distribution. Second, the uncertainty and reduced effectiveness of financial markets caused 
by  inflation  and  macroeconomic  instability  reduces  investment  in  human  capital.  Third, 
inflation and macroeconomic instability may harm poorer households disproportionately. This 
is because poorer households, which have limited or no access to the financial system, are 
unable to smooth consumption in response to adverse income shocks.12 In addition, poorer 
households tend to hold a larger fraction of their financial wealth in cash, implying that they 
are particularly vulnerable to higher inflation.  Finally, inflation and macroeconomic volatility 
may harm some sectors of the economy disproportionately, such as manufacturing or export-
oriented industries, in which wages tend to be relatively lower.  
Overall,  monetary  policy  aimed  at  low  inflation  and  economic  stability  is  the  most  likely  to 
lead to greater social equality over the longer term. In this sense, “compassionate monetary 
policy is, most likely, simply sound monetary policy”.13 
                                                                                                                                                      
et al., 2012. “Innocent Bystanders? Monetary Policy and Inequality in the U.S”, NBER Working Papers 18170, 
National Bureau of Economic Research. 
10   See M. Ehrmann, and M. Ziegelmeyer: “Household risk management and actual mortgage choice in the euro 
area”, forthcoming. 
11   On the role of uncertainty shocks, see N. Bloom, 2009. “The Impact of Uncertainty Shocks”, Econometrica, 
vol. 77 (3), p. 623–685, May. 
12   See S. Albanesi, 2007. “Inflation and Inequality”, Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54(4), p. 1088–1114, 
May. 
13   C. Romer and D. Romer, 1998, op. cit. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In  addition,  young  people  are 
Monetary policy during the crisis 
Over the past five years we have experienced the deepest recession in euro area countries 
since  the  end  of  World  War  II.  The  associated  fall  in  activity  was  unprecedented:  at  the 
trough  reached  in  June  2009,  euro  area  nominal  GDP  had  declined  by  almost  5%  on  an 
annual basis. The recovery has been sluggish for the euro area, which is now experiencing a 
double-dip  recession,  with  growth  expected  to  recover  only  gradually.  The  implications  for 
the  distribution  of  income  cover  the  three  dimensions  which  characterise  the  allocation  of 
resources.  
On the vertical (or inter-temporal) dimension, the income and wealth losses of the existing 
generation  are  severe.14 
those  most  affected  by 
unemployment.  To  take  two  examples,  youth  unemployment  in  Spain  was  at  55%  and  in 
Greece  at  57%  at  the  end  of  2012.  This  seriously  affects  the  lifetime  income  and  wealth 
prospects  of  this  group  and  may  cause  a  “lost  generation”  to  emerge.  Not  only  is 
unemployment an immediate social loss, but it is a stressful life event that reduces individual 
well-being in many persistent ways.15 
On the horizontal (or intra-temporal) dimension, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) 
and low-income households were hit hardest by the crisis. Wage cuts and income losses, for 
example, have been the largest for low-skilled, low-wage workers. According to Eurostat, the 
dispersion  of  disposable  income  in  the  euro  area  as  measured  by  its  Gini  coefficient  has 
risen by more than 3% between 2005 and 2011. Recent ECB surveys show how SMEs and 
households  reported  increasing  financing  obstacles,  with  bank  loans  becoming  harder  to 
obtain.16 In addition, recent data suggest that SMEs, if they can obtain a loan, face higher 
costs  of  bank  lending  than  large  companies.  In  fact,  interest  rate  spreads  on  SME  loans 
compared  with  those  for  large  non-financial  companies  have  widened  to  an  average  of 
40 basis points since 2010. 
Finally, the crisis has brought to the fore the spatial (or geographical) dimension. Euro area 
countries  suffered  different  fates  during  the  crisis.  We  have  observed  sharp  cross-country 
dispersion in the cumulated changes in real GDP since the start of the crisis. In 2012, real 
GDP was around 20% lower than in 2007 in the country most affected, while it was around 
10%  higher  in  the  country  least  affected  by  the  crisis.  The  cross-country  dispersion  of 
unemployment  has  also  widened,  with  latest  unemployment  rates  ranging  from  4.8%  in 
Austria to 27% in Greece. 
Spatial inequality has been magnified by the adverse feedback loop arising from the close 
association  between  banks  and  their  sovereign,  which  has  led  to  fragmented  financial 
conditions across countries and, at the height of the crisis, to fears of a euro break-up. In 
particular,  banks’  funding  costs  have  remained  persistently high  in  some  countries despite 
cuts in the ECB policy rate, implying heterogeneous financing conditions for households and 
firms across countries. This was also shown by the increasing reliance of banks in stressed 
countries  on  Eurosystem  funding.  Widening  TARGET2  imbalances  –  that  is,  large  intra-
central bank positions – is a well-known symptom of these developments.  
So what did the crisis mean for monetary policy? First, we saw impairments to the traditional 
inter-temporal  arbitrage  mechanism,  which  has  curtailed  the  effectiveness  of  our  standard 
                                                 
14   In addition, recent research suggests that the cost of job loss in terms of income loss is significant over the 
entire life cycle, especially when the job loss occurs during a recession. See Davis S.J. and T. Von Wachter, 
2011.  “Recessions  and  the  Costs  of  Job  Loss”,  Brooking  Papers  on  Economic  Activity,  September  2011,  
p. 1–72. 
15   See D. Bell and D. Blanchflower, 2011. “Young people and the Great Recession”, Oxford Review of Economic 
Policy, 27(2), p. 241–267. 
16   See European Central Bank: “The Euro Area Bank Lending Survey”, April 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
monetary policy. Second, horizontal and spatial fragmentation – that is, impairments across 
banks,  markets  and  countries  resulting  from  structural  impairments  and  from  the  adverse 
feedback loop described above – have challenged monetary policy operating with a single 
instrument. Furthermore, we observed a self-reinforcing relationship between the spatial- and 
inter-temporal dimensions of fragmentation. For example, the lack of liquidity in the interbank 
market impaired the price-finding mechanism along the yield curve. As a result, our monetary 
policy impulses were not evenly transmitted across countries or adequately along the yield 
curve.  
How should monetary policy be conducted in such a fragmented world? First and foremost, 
monetary policy should aim at repairing the transmission of monetary policy by reducing the 
fragmentations  in  the  economy  and  restoring  distributional  neutrality.  Does  this  imply 
fundamental differences between monetary policy in normal and crisis times? The answer is 
no.  Monetary  policy  acts  within  the  same  stability  mandate,  following  the  same  long-term 
objectives as in normal times.  
It is only the choice of instruments and the intensity of monetary policy action that differ. In 
this respect, it has been argued that reducing fragmentation can imply a redistribution of risk 
in  times  of  crisis.17  For  example,  by  relaxing  collateral  requirements  for  their  lending 
programmes,  central  banks  can  insure  against  a  tail  event  in  which  the  borrower  and  the 
collateral fail to cover the borrowed amount. The main insight here is that redistribution of risk 
is not a zero-sum game, but that the overall risk in the economy, in our case in the monetary 
union, can be reduced. I agree with this view, but I would also like to stress that any such 
insurance provided by the central bank should come with appropriate safeguards to mitigate 
moral hazard.18 
Let me explain how the ECB acted in the crisis and how monetary policy in particular has 
alleviated the fragmentations in the euro area following the principles outlined above.  
First,  in  the  wake  of  a  widespread  confidence  crisis  following  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers  which  threatened  to  produce  very  adverse  economic  outcomes  with  strong 
reductions in output, deflationary spirals and high unemployment, we made a series of policy 
rate cuts. These limited the consequences the downturn could have had on the income of 
households and firms across the euro area.  
Our more recent rate cuts have narrowed the interest rate corridor between the deposit rate 
and our main policy rate to 50 basis points. These rate cuts have further eased the financing 
conditions of borrowers in the euro area and they have contributed to a decline in the cross-
country heterogeneity in funding costs. Banks from stressed countries which participate most 
in Eurosystem liquidity-providing operations will benefit from the lower interest rate charged 
for these operations. This will, over time, translate into reduced financing costs and improved 
access to credit for households and firms in stressed countries.  
Second, apart from standard monetary policy, the ECB has also resorted to a number of non-
standard measures. By re-directing credit to those segments where financial intermediation 
ceased  to  function,  the  non-standard  measures  supported  those  areas  most  in  need  and 
thereby  countered  the  increasing  heterogeneity.  The  announcement  of  outright  monetary 
transactions (OMTs) in particular has played a crucial role: it has improved the transmission 
of monetary policy by removing the “tail risk” arising from redenomination concerns in certain 
euro area countries.  
                                                 
17   See M. Brunnermeier, and Y. Sannikov, 2012. “Redistributive Monetary Policy”, paper prepared for the 2012 
Jackson Hole Symposium, Princeton University. 
18   See B. Coeuré, 2012. “Central banking, insurance and incentives”, speech at the ECB conference on “Debt, 
Growth and Macroeconomic Policies” Frankfurt, 6 December. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Overall, while our non-standard measures were designed for the euro area as a whole, their 
use has varied among counterparties and across countries. In this regard, our non-standard 
measures restored the distributional neutrality of our monetary policy by mitigating distortions 
in  certain  stressed  asset  classes  or  sectors.  Their  impact  has  prevented  very  adverse 
economic outcomes for certain sectors and countries, and because of the effect this would 
have  had  on  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  it  has  thereby  also  supported  medium-term  price 
stability in the euro area as a whole.  
Today  we  are  clearly  seeing  signs  of  improvement  in  financial  conditions.  Spreads  in 
sovereign and corporate debt markets have fallen substantially. Deposits placed by the euro 
area  money-holding  sector  with  banks  in  stressed  countries  have  increased  by  about 
€200 billion  since  August  2012.  As  a  consequence,  borrowing  from  the  Eurosystem  has 
declined. TARGET2 balances of the national central banks in these countries have fallen by 
more than €250 billion since their peak of around €1.09 trillion in August last year. And these 
improvements  largely  reflect  the  removal  of  fears  of  a  systemic  collapse  of  the  monetary 
union that were previously being priced in by markets. They also reflect the reintegration of 
euro  area  funding  markets,  against  the  backdrop  of  a  continuing  adjustment  effort  by 
participating countries. Falling TARGET2 balances are the best proof that the distributional 
consequences of non-standard monetary policy measures are unintended and temporary. 
The role of other economic and financial policies 
Economic  divergences  and  heterogeneity  remain  high  in  the  euro  area.  This  concerns  in 
particular  the  fragmentation  in  some  markets  and  diverse  and  weak  loan  growth  across 
participating countries. While monetary policy in this situation has alleviated the severity of 
the downturn, let’s not forget Wicksell’s insights. Monetary policy cannot alter the level and 
distribution of income in a durable way.  
The distortions at the heart of the current vertical, horizontal and spatial fragmentation can 
finally  only  be  addressed  by  adequate  economic  policies  outside  the  realm  of  monetary 
policy. Indeed, other stakeholders have to take the leading role by continuing to address the 
underlying structural weaknesses that are affecting our economies. 
Let me mention three policy areas that I consider fundamental in this regard.  
The  first  policy  realm  relates  to  policies  aimed  at  the  financial  sector.  Governments  and 
financial  sector  authorities  need  to  further  encourage  the  repair  of  banks’  balance  sheets. 
Banks in the euro area finance the backbone of our economic system: households and small 
and medium-sized companies.  
The decision to establish a European Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is an essential 
institutional  step  overseeing  such  a  process.  The  SSM  will  contribute  to  greater  financial 
integration, a level playing field and greater financial stability. It should be complemented by 
a unified European framework for bank resolution and recovery, and with a Single Resolution 
Mechanism  with  the  authority  to  wind  up  banks  in  a  timely  and  impartial  manner.  To 
complement this, further efforts are essential for banks to build up sufficient capital, remove 
legacy  risks  from  their  balance  sheets  and  to  make  these  balance  sheets  fit  for  lending. 
Repairing the financial sector is the best way to ensure that the debt crisis does not bear a 
permanent  impact  on  income  distribution,  and  hence  that  it does  not  impose  a  permanent 
constraint on monetary policy. 
The second policy area that I would like to mention is fiscal policy.  
It is normally the role of fiscal policy (including in its tax dimension) to deliver any income 
distribution that society would like to implement based on a normative prior. It is normally the 
role  of  fiscal  automatic  stabilisers  to  cushion  the  economic  and  distributional  impact  of  a 
deep economic recession of the sort we are experiencing. I say “normally” because we are 
not in normal times. Fiscal imbalances and weak sovereign balance sheets have prevented 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
fiscal policies from cushioning the large and protracted financial and economic shocks of the 
past five years. 
The  lesson  from  this  is  clear.  Running  excessive  fiscal  deficits  at  the  expense  of  future 
generations  can  be  very  costly  in  times  of  crisis.  Therefore,  maintaining  sustainable  fiscal 
budgets is a necessary condition to achieve distributional equality, both inter-temporally and 
intra-temporally.  
Let me finally mention the structural economic policy domain. Structural policies are key to 
making  an  economy  more  flexible  so  that  it  can  optimally  and  rapidly  respond  to  negative 
economic  shocks  and  avoid  the  higher  costs  in  terms  of  lost  output  and  higher 
unemployment  associated  with  the slower  and more  protracted  adjustments  made  by  rigid 
economies.  
It is designed in such a way that it curtails rent-seeking behaviours in labour, product and 
capital markets, structural reform will not only unleash competition and innovation but it will 
also temper the distributional and social consequences of the needed adjustments. Structural 
labour  market  policies  are  a  case  in  point.  They  can  help  to  prevent  labour  market 
adjustments from falling disproportionately on outsiders, including the younger generation. 
Conclusions 
Let me conclude by listing the main arguments put forward in my remarks: 
 
First, the role of monetary policy is clearly defined in the EU Treaty. The ECB has 
been mandated by the people of Europe to maintain price stability over the medium 
term.  Fulfilling  this  mandate  means  preserving  the  value  of  money  over  time  and 
contributing to overall economic stability. This has the effect of shielding the lowest-
income groups and maintaining living standards for the entire population. Therefore, 
monetary  policy  is  neutral  with  regard  to  fairness  and  the  allocation  of  resources. 
But  this  neutrality  can  only  be  ensured  if  monetary  policy  transmission  is  not 
impaired. 
Second,  and  as  a  result,  monetary  policy  in  crisis  times  should  aim  at  repairing 
monetary  policy  transmission  by  reducing  fragmentations  in  the  economy  and 
restoring  thereby  distributional  neutrality.  There  is,  however,  no  fundamental 
difference between monetary policy in normal and crisis times. The intensity and the 
choice  of  instruments  in  a  crisis  might  need  to  be  adjusted,  but  monetary  policy 
should  continue  to  act  within  the  same  stability  mandate  and  following  the  same 
long-term objectives as in normal times. 
Third,  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  actions  have  offset  market  dislocations  and 
thereby  contributed  to  restoring  distributional  neutrality  during  the  crisis.  In 
particular, non-standard measures have helped to eliminate tail-risks and, together 
with  the  standard  measures,  have  prevented  very  adverse  outcomes  for  the  euro 
area that would have hit in a disproportionate way the weakest in society, and put at 
risk price stability.  
And finally, despite the temporary relief brought by our policies, there are limits to 
what monetary policy can do. Steering income allocation within countries and across 
countries  is  the  responsibility  of  elected  governments  and  other  authorities. 
Important  work  has  been  done,  but  in  the  current  environment  it  is  essential  that 
euro area governments continue their reform efforts, individually and jointly, keeping 
in  mind  the  need  to  curtail  rent-seeking  behaviour  and  protect  the  weakest  in 
society. 
   Thank you for your attention. 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
