Ardian Fullani: Strengthening linkages in South East Europe. Policy 
anchors and business perspectives 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the joint conference of the 
Bank of Albania and the University of Oxford “Strengthening linkages in South East Europe. 
Policy anchors and business perspectives”, Tirana, 19 September 2013. 
 the  market  economy  and  alternative  philosophies  of 
Your Excellency Prime Minister of Albania, 
Honourable guests from the University of Oxford,  
Dear representatives of the diplomatic corps and academia, dear participants,  
I have the pleasure and honour to open this joint conference of the Bank of Albania and the 
University  of  Oxford,  on  strengthening  the  linkages  between  the  economies  in  our  region. 
Three  years  ago,  in  September  2010,  we  invited  the  University  of  Oxford  to  support  the 
academic discussion of the Bank of Albania on the economic growth model and its regional 
character.  At  that  moment,  this  debate  was  misinterpreted  as  a  discussion  on  the 
advantages  of 
the  economic 
organisation of a society. Nonetheless, after three years, we all find that the economic growth 
model has become the main topic of academic, economic and political debate. 
For a number of years, our economy has been under the grip of the global crisis, reflected 
mainly  in  a  decelerated  economic  activity.  Consequently,  investments  and  lending  to  the 
economy  slowed  down,  deteriorating,  at  the  same  time,  the  private  and  public  sector 
balances. 
In  spite  of  these  developments,  the  Albanian  economy  has  managed  to  maintain  price 
stability  and  the  overall  macroeconomic  and  financial  balances.  The  Albanian  financial 
system  has  proven  highly  immune.  Despite  the  economic  growth  slowdown,  overall,  this 
system remains liquid, well capitalised and profitable, reflecting the prudent work of the Bank 
of Albania over the pre-crisis years. 
Bank of Albania’s prudent policies and the reaction of the banking sector enabled the system 
to avoid extreme problems, which would require the use of public funds. We should bear in 
mind  that  various  banking  groups  from  EU  countries,  heavily  hit  by  the  crisis,  operate  in 
Albania.  
The  stability  of  the  banking  sector  has  been  at  the  heart  of  work  of  the  Bank  of  Albania, 
focusing  on  both  financial  stability  and  banking  supervision,  and  on  monetary  policy  and 
liquidity management. 
The Bank of Albania has been proactive and has anticipated problems, aligning itself and the 
role of its policies with global developments and the domestic market state of affairs.  
The dim global financial and economic situation has dictated the need to redefine the role of 
institutions,  including  the  central  bank.  Presently,  the  central  banks  have  turned  to 
macroprudential  measures,  because 
traditional  mechanisms  of  monetary  policy 
transmission are suffering from burdened balance sheets of the private and public economic 
agents.  To  better  coordinate  this  role  and  monitor  the  economy,  central  banks  around  the 
world  are  supporting  their  monetary  policy  with  the  necessary  macroprudential  measures. 
These  global  developments  find  the  Bank  of  Albania  well  prepared  and  equipped  with  the 
required  experience.  Its  structure  is  similar  to  the  one  being  adopted  by  the  European 
Central Bank and other central banks in developed countries. Moreover, the Bank of Albania 
has  now  several  years  of  successful  experience  in  employing  countercyclical  measures  to 
manage the country’s macroeconomic and financial equilibrium. 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I  would  like  to  underscore  the  change  of  risk  coefficients  for  controlling  the  expansion  of 
lending  in  foreign  currency,  and  the  introduction  of  limits  of  credit  to  collateral  ratio  for 
controlling the size of debt in the economy…. to mention just a few. 
One  of  the  most  important  lessons  from  the  global  crisis  is  that  addressing  the  monetary 
stability (i.e. price stability) and financial stability issues independently does not provide an 
optimal solution and is crisis-prone. The economy functions as a complex mechanism with 
often  fragile  and  interdependent  equilibria,  which  do  not  respect  boundaries  of institutional 
responsibilities. For each economy, there is only one interest rate, only one critical mass of 
financial intermediation and a fragile equilibrium of financial sector balances that guarantee 
sustainable and long-term development for the country. Harmonising these three objectives 
is  a  prerequisite  for  maintaining  the  financial  equilibrium  of  the  economy.  Therefore,  their 
identification  and  harmonisation  under  one  roof  is  considered  as  the  optimum  solution  to 
guarantee  the  country’s  economic  and  financial  stability.  For  that  reason,  one  of  the  most 
pursued practices for post crisis institutional regulation is not only unification of supervisors of 
the financial system, but also their institutional integration with other functions of the central 
bank.  
 Your Excellency Prime Minister of Albania, 
Dear participants, 
Unquestionably, in the long term, economic growth of a country is determined by the labour 
force and its qualification, productivity, technology and innovation capacities; as well as the 
capital accumulation scale, which in itself, reflects both social preferences and fiscal stimuli 
and  the  development  level  of  the  financial  system.  These  three  sets  of  factors  are 
conditioned by the economic structure of a country and they are encouraged and stimulated 
through structural reforms. Again, in the long term, economic growth is determined only by 
the structural reforms and the degree of competitiveness of our economy vis-à-vis our trading 
partners  and  the  global  market.  On  the  other  hand,  the  duty  of  the  fiscal  and  monetary 
policies is to avoid short-term deviations of the economy from this long-term trend and create 
a sustainable environment for the country’s economic and financial development.  
The Albanian economy has already started its journey towards integration with the European 
Union. The ultimate goal of this process is to improve the economic welfare. It also implies to 
fully  integrate  with  the  trading,  industrial  and  financial  chains;  adopt  a  unique  economic 
management philosophy, a unique regulatory and institutional practice; and acknowledge the 
harmonised rules of the game applied throughout the European area.  
In this context, I would like to highlight two key moments: 
 
First,  the  European  integration  process  should  be  our  strongest  anchor  for 
structural reforms:  legal,  regulatory,  institutional,  infrastructural,  or  political  ones. 
Albania has still a long way to go and the peculiarities of our economy provide the 
necessary  space  to  calibrate  these  models  in  accordance  with  the  comparative 
advantages and primary needs of the country. However, I believe it would be useful 
to have all the reforms integrated in a unique vision of integration.  
Second,  the  Albanian  businesses  should  do  a  lot  more  to  hasten  the 
integration process. It should be more active to adopt advanced technologies, and 
production and management processes.  
Likewise, the Albanian financial sector should be more visionary in its policies and 
priorities  about  the  distribution  of  financial  resources,  and  work  harder  to  attract 
more foreign investments and build bridges of cooperation with local businesses.  
  We  have  rightly  underlined  that  regional  cooperation  is  a  necessary  move  that  should 
precede the European integration process. The economies of the region are small compared 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  our  trading  partners,  but  the  establishment of  unified  zones  in  terms  of  customs  duties, 
legal  systems  and  practices,  integration  of  financial  practices  and  development  policies 
provides  the  right  incentives  to  attract  foreign  investments  and  empower  our  negotiation 
capacities with international partners.  
 Concluding,  I  would  like  to  reiterate  that  the  Bank  of  Albania  considers  the  economic  and 
financial stability of the country as a prerequisite for sustainable and long-term development. 
Now, this is no longer a theoretical matter of disciplining the behaviour of politics towards the 
economy, nor is it a discussion on respecting the equality of generations. It is a bitter lesson 
learned from the latest crisis and a tangible reality for many countries of the euro area. We 
have persistently invited policymakers and economic agents in the country to partake in this 
vision. 
As the country’s monetary authority mandated to guarantee price stability, we have worked 
and will continue to do so to ensure a low-inflation environment. This environment boosts the 
guarantees  for  savers  and  investors  for  their  long-term  plans  and  provides  for  financial 
system development. The Bank of Albania implements a modern monetary policy based on 
the  most  advanced  principles  of  central  banking,  and  employs 
instruments  and 
communication approach in line with ECB practices. The commitment of the Bank of Albania 
to  maintain  price  stability  is  the  polar  star  of  our  work.  Drafting  and  implementing  the 
monetary policy independently, exclusively in the function of price stability, is one of 
the  domestic  anchors  of  the  Albanian  economy,  which  should  be  preserved  and 
strengthened. 
In  parallel,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  Albanian  economy  needs  two  additional 
anchors: financial stability and fiscal stability. 
Our regulatory and supervisory function over the banking system, which accounts for 95% of 
the financial system in Albania, has proven successful in guaranteeing the country’s financial 
stability. This function has been carried out and is discharged in line with the international 
best practices, in constant cooperation with homologous institutions and other international 
partners.  
The possibility to have an integrated vision of economic and financial developments, and to 
combine but not mix the monetary policy with macroprudential measures, has enhanced the 
effectiveness of Bank of Albania’s actions, and has contributed to better achieving the two 
individual  objectives:  financial  stability  and  price  stability.  The  institutional  regulation, 
which has proven effective and is in line with the latest global trends, should continue 
to function as a second anchor of domestic economic anchors.  
Finally, the Bank of Albania deems that Albania should immediately establish not only a clear 
and  transparent  fiscal  rule,  but  also  an  effective  one  to  discipline  the  fiscal  policy  and 
maintain the trust of financial markets in public finance soundness. 
This  third  anchor  would  complete  the  framework  of  domestic  anchors  of  economic 
policy. Together with the close cooperation with international financial institutions, it would 
provide a consistent and transparent framework for the country’s development. Provision of 
liquidity and solvency of the Albanian economy through bilateral and multilateral partnerships 
is a priority for central bank policies. This vision and partnership should become the axis of 
cooperation between national institutions.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
