Barry Whiteside: Update of the global and Fijian economy 
Address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Fiji Economic 
Update, Suva, 20 August 2013. 
 Mr Ikbal Jannif, Pro Chancellor & Chair of the USP Council 
Dr Esther Williams, Deputy Vice Chancellor, USP 
Excellencies and Members of the Diplomatic Corps 
Permanent Secretaries 
Professor Jafarey, Head of the School of Economics, USP 
Distinguished Guests 
Students 
Ladies and Gentleman 
Bula vinaka and a very good morning to you all. 
Introductory comments 
First of all, let me thank Professor Jafarey for his kind invitation for me to speak to you this 
morning.  It  is  always  pleasing  to  address  a  forum  such  as  this,  where  academics,  policy 
makers,  NGO’s  and  the  general  public  can  put  our  heads  together  and  discuss  Fiji’s 
economic issues. 
Economists, as we all know, will have differing opinions on economic performance and it is 
no  different  here  in  Fiji.  However,  the  discussions  today  will  help  identify  economic 
challenges and constraints and enable us to debate solutions so that we may achieve our full 
potential.  Let  me  therefore  applaud  the  University  of  the  South  Pacific  for  organising  this 
important forum every year. 
I  see  my  role  this  morning  as  helping  to  prepare  the  ground  for  further  deliberations  later 
today. My address will cover what we at the Reserve Bank deem to be the current state of 
the  economy  and  some  of  the  challenges  we  are  facing.  In  discussing  our  general 
macroeconomic environment I will also point out areas where we have excelled and one or 
two where we have not, and some of the key risks we face as we set ourselves up to move 
ahead. 
The global economy 
On all occasions when we make such reviews we first touch on what is happening around 
us. As a small open economy it is very likely that developments offshore will work their way 
back to Fiji in one form or another. Hence we need to assess the risks and opportunities in 
this area. 
The  recovery  after  the Global  Financial  Crisis  (GFC),  unfortunately,  has  been  uneven  and 
rather  short-lived.  Advanced  economies  remain 
jolted  with  poor  confidence,  high 
unemployment and unsustainable public debt. Some are also grappling with weak financial 
sectors. The emerging & developing economies, while performing relatively better, have now 
also succumbed to the latest slowdown. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has revised 
global  economic  growth  downwards  three  times  already  this  year.  We  see  that  the  world 
economy  is  now  poised  to  grow  by  3.1  percent.  While  growth  for  2014  has  also  been 
downgraded, the good thing is that it is expected to higher than this year, at 3.8 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Fiji’s  major  trading  partners,  those  economies  with  which  we  have  important  trade  and 
investment  links,  have  also  not  been  spared  and  are  facing  numerous  challenges  of  their 
own. 
The US economy is quite fragile after facing fiscal challenges and poor confidence. Across 
the  Atlantic,  the  Euro  zone  is  mired  in  a  prolonged  recession  and  is  facing  record  high 
unemployment. We  are talking  here  of  numbers  in  excess  of  25  percent,  or  1  in  4  people 
without a job. It is worse for the youth of these countries where up to 2 out of every 3 young 
people between the ages of 18 to 25 years, or 66 percent, are without jobs. Many member 
countries have needed bailouts and are struggling to contain debt in the midst of a growing 
backlash  from  the  public  over  harsh  austerity  measures  which  are  part  of  deals  struck  by 
their respective Governments for the bailouts. 
Closer to home, economic activity in Australia and New Zealand remains patchy as growth 
remains  uneven  across  sectors.  However,  both  these  economies  are  expected  to  have 
growth in excess of 2.5 percent. The Reserve Bank of Australia lowered its policy  interest 
rate this month to a new record low to assist growth. In Japan, there are spurts of optimism 
following massive fiscal and monetary stimulus, although it is yet to be seen  how this can 
spur sustained growth in light of the weak demand across the globe. 
As I alluded to earlier, the emerging economies, the main source of global growth in recent 
times,  are  losing  steam  as  well.  China’s  heavy  reliance  on  investment  and  credit  to  spur 
growth in the past decade has resulted in vulnerabilities in the financial sector, government 
finances and real estate, while India faces its own challenges, including high inflation. These, 
coupled  with  a  slowing  global  demand  have  brought  down  their  growth  prospects  to  the 
lowest in a decade. 
The Fijian economy 
Let me now turn to the Fijian economy. 
In spite of my earlier comment, we have been fortunate in that our economy has so far been 
somewhat shielded from the global slowdown. Our GDP expanded by 2.2 percent last year 
following a 1.9 percent expansion in 2011. 
Growth prospects are expected to improve further to around 3.2 percent this year and, with 
the exception of the mining & quarrying sector, all sectors will contribute to this growth. The 
projection  for  2013,  if  achieved,  will  be  the  highest  since  2004  and  is  a  culmination  of 
detailed  re-assessment  of  the  relevant  data  and  information  available,  as  well  as  direct 
feedback from a wide cross section of industries and sectors. 
As  you  may  be  aware,  over  the  past  two  weeks  we  have  had  an  IMF  Article  IV  Mission 
visiting  the  country  on  their  regular  annual  survey  to  assess  how  we  are  doing.  We  had 
numerous  discussions  with  them  on  the  economy  and,  as  we  are  closer  to  the  ground  or 
“coal face”, we shared with them the latest numbers and business sentiments. While we did 
not  agree  on  every  issue  (again  this  is  not  uncommon  amongst  economists),  there  was  a 
general consensus on two fundamental issues with regard to economic growth. 
Firstly, the IMF team agreed that economic growth for 2013 would be  higher than in 2012 
(they have a forecast of 3 percent) and secondly, Fiji has the potential to do even better! 
The Fijian economy’s improved outlook is validated by a host of indicators. 
Consumption activity has been upbeat from last year and is a reflection of the lower personal 
income taxes, higher inward remittances, improved employment prospects and cheaper and 
easier  access  to  credit.  New  lending  for  consumption  purposes  more  than  doubled  to 
$247 million in the first half of the year when compared with the same period last year. Other 
indicators such as VAT collections, imports of consumption goods and new vehicle sales are 
also registering significant annual gains. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The improved consumer confidence has translated well to business and investor confidence. 
Investment is forecast to be around 28 percent of GDP this year, compared to an estimated 
18 percent of GDP last year and above the Government target of 25 percent. We last only 
briefly touched on these levels back in 1998 and 1981! 
Recently, significant new investments have been noted in the aviation, tourism, mining and 
financial  services  sectors  while  the  Government  has  embarked  on  massive  public 
infrastructure projects in roads, ports and bridges. Our garments and manufacturing sectors 
are  also  showing  much  greater  confidence  with  higher  investments  this  year  and  more 
envisaged. 
The surge in investment is well reflected in new bank lending for investment purposes, which 
rose by 154 percent in the first half of this year. 
Our labour market has been improving in line with the improved investor confidence, though 
unfortunately we do not have any recent official numbers from the Bureau of Statistics. The 
Reserve Bank’s latest Job Advertisements Survey shows that the number of vacant positions 
advertised rose nearly 14 percent in the first half of this year. 
On the production side there has been mixed results. Gold production has been declining 
significantly over last year. This year again there are no expectations of a significant pick up 
in gold output and this is quite unfortunate as this means we are unable to capitalize on the 
existing high world market price. 
Cane and sugar production are expected to improve this year after declining last year due to 
the two major floods. Data from the Fiji Sugar Corporation reveals that cane crushed so far 
this year is around 10 percent higher than last year and more sugar has been produced with 
a further improvement in the TCTS ratio. It is especially heartening to see the improvements 
of the Sugar Reforms now slowly coming to fruition and there is still more work being done in 
this critical industry of ours. 
The  tourism  industry  continues  to  be  robust  despite  some  declines  in  visitor  arrivals  last 
year and the early part of this year due to natural disasters. 
Gross earnings for 2012 were $1.3 billion and this momentum is expected to continue over 
the medium term. Right now we are in the peak tourism season and data on room occupancy 
and visitors from our major markets, such as Australia and New Zealand, are favourable. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  has  maintained  an  accommodative 
monetary  policy  stance  since  November  2011  and  the  banking  system  is  awash  with 
liquidity, which has put consistent downward pressure on market interest rates. Lending rates 
in the financial system are now hovering at historically low levels  while  capital and money 
market rates also continue to trend downwards. Against this background, domestic credit has 
continued to gain momentum with private sector credit growth expanding by 9.6 percent in 
June, further signaling the improved confidence in the economy. 
Our challenges 
Whilst  we  may  applaud  ourselves  for  the  progress  we  have  made  in  raising  our  growth 
prospects and revitalising some of our sectors on the backdrop of a weak global economy 
and  other  domestic  challenges  –  many  other  hurdles  face  us  and  could  restrict  us  from 
forging ahead on a path to sustainable growth. We totally agree with the IMF comment that 
we can do more. 
While  it  is  encouraging  that  investment  has  picked  up  and  is  poised  to  even  surpass  the 
Government’s  target  of  25  percent  this  year,  maintaining  it  at  such  levels  remains  an 
important challenge moving ahead. This requires that we continue with the current monetary 
and fiscal incentives and at the same time improve our ease of doing business. Sentiments 
from the business community suggest that there are still a number of hurdles in registering 
and  conducting  business  which  can  be  streamlined  and  better  managed  by  the  relevant 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
agencies. Improving our ease of doing business will not only encourage local investors but 
also help attract the much desired foreign investors. 
We also must be mindful that consumption and investment led growth cannot be sustained 
for too long as they have heavy import content. This can be counterproductive if not matched 
by gains in our export and service sectors and negatively impact our fragile external balance. 
Our export sector is small and highly vulnerable to changes in global demand and domestic 
supply  constraints  and  shocks.  In  this  regard,  policies  aimed  at  export  diversification  and 
promotion and import substitution remain as paramount as they were before. 
Restoring  the  sugar  industry  back  to  its  glory  is  also  necessary  given  its  importance  as  a 
major foreign  exchange earner  and the  indirect spin-off  activities  it  creates  in  the Western 
and Northern Divisions. The Government’s grants to the sugar mills to improve efficiency and 
the  Sugar  Action  Group’s  strategies  to  improve  cane  yield  and  farm  productivity  are 
welcomed.  While  the  Government’s  commitment  to  revitalizing  the  sugar  industry  is 
encouraging, it is imperative that these plans are brought to fruition sooner rather than later, 
so that the industry is able to sustain itself without grants, subsidies or preferential prices. 
However,  it  is  well  understood  this  can  be  a  daunting  and  difficult  task  and  cannot  be 
achieved overnight. 
Ladies and gentlemen, poor and inadequate infrastructure has been for many years, not only 
a deterrent to growth, but also a frustrating experience for all Fijians. Improved infrastructure 
can  go  a  long  way  towards  boosting  agriculture as  well  as  boosting  the economies  in  our 
rural  and  maritime  areas.  Again  the  Government’s  planned  reforms  in  road  and  port 
maintenance and upgrade is welcomed and we hope the constraints of poor infrastructure no 
longer  remain  constraints  moving  ahead.  I  note  that  the  $420  million  earmarked  for  roads 
and  other  infrastructure  projects  this  year  appears  to  have  already  generated  a  lot  of 
confidence and activity in the business community, not the least being the large investments 
in new trucks, utility vans and buses. 
Keeping  Government  debt  low  is  another  challenge,  not  only  for  Fiji,  but  the  world  over. 
Public  debt  has  become  a  topical  issue  these  days  given  the  awful  experience  in  Europe 
which  has  required  many  countries  to  seek  bailouts  and  adopt  harsh  and  extremely 
unpopular  austerity  measures.  Small  developing  economies  like  Fiji  are  even  more 
disadvantaged as we cannot sustain high public debt for too long due to limited and volatile 
revenue streams of Government and the need to maintain adequate fiscal buffers to mitigate 
future crises. 
Fiji’s Government debt is currently estimated to be just under 50 percent of GDP. While we 
are  a  bit  fortunate  that  we  have  relatively  low  external  Government  debt,  of  around 
15 percent  of  GDP,  which  shields  us  from  exchange  rate  risks,  Government  must  remain 
committed  to  reduce  our  total  debt  further.  Appropriate  fiscal  consolidation,  effective  tax 
collection, civil and public sector reforms and the creation of new high taxed industries, such 
as mining, can provide the necessary avenues to reduce our debt to more sustainable levels 
and perhaps later to the IMF benchmark of 40 percent of GDP. 
Ladies  and  gentleman,  while  I  have  elaborated  on  the  major  macroeconomic  challenges, 
there  are  a  few  others  worth  mentioning  which  can  also  provide  the  necessary  base  for 
sustained  economic growth  moving  ahead. These  include  well  known  issues  such  as  land 
reform,  raising  agricultural  productivity,  solid  and  clear  progress  towards  parliamentary 
democracy and ensuring inclusive growth for all. For many of these, great strides have been 
made and some are still work-in-progress and I wish the very best to the relevant agencies 
involved in spearheading these initiatives. 
Concluding remarks 
Let me conclude by highlighting to you what we at the Reserve Bank sees as some of our 
current macroeconomic strengths. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
We  have  made  a  significant  turnaround  from  a  contraction  in  2009  to  three  years  of 
consecutive  economic  growth.  In  addition, growth  in  each  succeeding  year from  2010  has 
been higher. Growth this year is forecast to be higher still, while growth in 2014 and 2015 is 
expected to be above our historical average. 
Consumption and investment – both important indicators for growth and job creation, have 
surged,  boosting  business  and  investor  confidence.  This  has  been  supported  by  reforms 
undertaken  in  a  number  of  areas  to  improve  efficiency  and  reduce  dependence  on 
Government hand-outs, resulting in the privatization of a number of state owned enterprises. 
In  addition,  apart  from  maintaining  fiscal  discipline,  the  Government  has  channeled  more 
funds to productive sectors and infrastructure investments. Incentives given by Government 
have been targeted and transparent and the reduction in corporate and personal taxes has 
not had an adverse impact on Government revenue. 
The Reserve Bank’s monetary policy objectives remain intact. The weak global demand and 
absence of major natural disasters so far this year has helped us contain inflation which was 
registered at 1.9 percent in July. In the absence of any major price shocks we expect inflation 
to be around 3.0 percent by year-end. 
Foreign reserves have increased annually since 2009 and have helped boost confidence in 
our  financial  system.  As  of  yesterday,  reserves  held  with  the  Reserve  Bank  were  above 
$1.84 billion, a historical high and sufficient to cover 5.2 months of retained imports of goods 
and non-factor services. 
Ladies and gentleman, the numbers are coming together for us and I have not seen them 
this good for a long time. The Government has played its part in recent years and continues 
to do so, but we are also now seeing the Private sector, the often quoted “engine” of growth, 
stepping up to the plate in a serious way. On our recent road trips in the central and western 
divisions and in discussions with captains of Fijian industry we have noted a general buzz of 
confidence.  A  confidence  and  optimism that  has  this  sector  spending  money  to  grow  their 
businesses, and in their doing so, they grow Fiji. 
On that note let me thank you all for your kind attention. I wish you all the 
best in today’s presentations and deliberations and hope that we can together come up with 
innovative ideas in further addressing our economy’s challenges. 
Before I finish, please allow me to relate a brief story to you. 
Many years ago I used to play in the Suva Cricket Competition for a team made up of players 
of different ages varying from school boys to near senior citizens, both locals and foreigners 
and of many different ethnic backgrounds. We were truly a mixed bag of people who loved 
the game. We did not come from the well known traditional cricketing strongholds of Lau or 
QVS, and were not part of the expatriate players who grew up representing their schools in 
Australia or New Zealand and who opted to join the top teams here. We were just your bunch 
of keen cricketers bent on succeeding as a unit. We committed ourselves and played smart 
and moved from the “C” Grade to the “A” Grade competition in 3 seasons, playing at the top 
level and holding our own for a number of years after that (there were of course many more 
teams back in the 1980s and cricket actually had exclusive use of Albert Park from October 
to April each year!). We had achieved much of what we set out to do through great teamwork 
and much enthusiasm for what we were doing. I can still remember those days quite vividly 
and it was a great experience in togetherness. We actually called ourselves Tovata Heads, 
which for us literally meant “heads together”. 
Vinaka vakalevu and thank you all for listening. 
END 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
