Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 30 January 2013. 
 Today,  on  30 January  2013,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  reviewed  and 
approved  the  biannual  Monetary  Policy  Statement.  Based  on  the  latest  monetary  and 
economic developments in Albania, and following the discussions on their future outlook, the 
Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  lower  the  key  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage points. After this decision, the one-week repurchase agreement rate drops 
to  new  record-low  level  of  3.75%.  The  Supervisory  Council  deems  that  further  easing  of 
monetary conditions will help in meeting the inflation target in the medium term.  
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  and  monetary  developments,  and  key 
issues discussed at today’s meeting.  
 The Albanian economy improved slightly in the seconds half of 2012. This performance was 
driven  by  a  fuller  reflection  of  monetary  stimulus  and  improved  external  economic  and 
financial  environment.  However,  the  economic  activity  remains  below  potential  and  the 
growth  resources  appear  unstable.  Production  growth  is  not  reflected  in  decreasing  the 
overall  uncertainties,  which  contain  private  investments  and  consumption,  and  lead  to 
downward  credit  demand  and  supply.  The  banking  system  has  sound  and  liquid  balance 
sheets  but  it  remains  highly  prudent  in  terms  of  financing  long-term  investments.  These 
tendencies will condition the economic developments over the period ahead. 
Inflationary pressures were low during the last quarters. Reflecting also the Bank of Albania’s 
prudential monetary policy, inflation settled within its target in 2012. The increase in annual 
consumer prices was 2.4% at year-end, while the annual average inflation rate was 2%. The 
inflation rate increased progressively during the first three quarters and fell slightly during the 
fourth quarter.  
Inflation volatility was mainly driven by food prices, which were affected by the international 
market  and  domestic  production. The  effect  of other  basket goods’  prices  on  inflation  was 
low  and  slightly  volatile.  Regulated  or  administered  price  inflation  was  insignificant,  while 
higher prices for consumer goods, oil and primary commodities in the global market did not 
cause any higher inflation in the Albanian economy. 
From the macroeconomic viewpoint, all determinants of inflation contributed to keeping it at 
low levels. The incomplete utilization of productive capacity was associated with businesses’ 
low demand for labour, hence no pressures for increase in wages and labour costs. Also, the 
weak  demand  for  goods  and  services  reduced  businesses’  ability  to  dictate  final  product 
prices and affected low levels of profit margins. On the other hand, low increase in the global 
market  prices  and  the  exchange  rate  stability  helped  in  keeping  import  prices  in  check. 
Finally,  expectations  for  a  low  inflation  in  the  medium  term  were  reflected  in  stable  costs, 
prices  and  interest  rate  in  medium-term  and  long-term  contracts  concluded  in  the  labour 
market, in consumer goods and financial instruments. 
According to data from INSTAT, the Albanian economy grew by 2.7% in the third quarter of 
2012, and similar growth rates are expected for the fourth quarter as well. Services, industry 
and  agriculture  sectors  supported  the  economic  growth,  while  the  construction  sector 
continued to contract. 
Assessment of third-quarter and fourth-quarter aggregate demand components confirms, to 
a  great  extent,  the  expectations  noticed from  previous  periods.  Foreign demand  has  been 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the main driver of economic growth in the country. Net export deficit narrowed in the third 
quarter of the year, mainly due to growth in exports of goods and services. Third-quarter data 
attest to continuation of this trend. During October-November, exports grew by 14.3%, while 
imports fell by 5% on a year earlier. As a consequence, trade deficit has dropped by 15.5%, 
y-o-y. On the other hand, the domestic demand has remained sluggish due to lack of fiscal 
stimulus and slow performance of consumption and private investments.  
Indirect available data for the third quarter of the year depict improved consumption but low 
private investments due to incomplete capacity utilization on production, uncertainties about 
the  future  and  tighter  financing  conditions.  Fiscal  indicators  have  reflected  the  overall 
performance  of  the  economy  and  the  fiscal  consolidating  policy  pursued  in  2012.  Slow 
growth in budget revenue and expenditure, and budget deficit contraction characterise fiscal 
developments. Fiscal revenue for the first 11 months of the year increased by 2.0%, y-o-y, 
reflecting the low contribution of related taxable component. Public expenditure increased by 
0.9%, y-o-y, mostly reflecting the negative growth rates of capital spending. As a result, the 
budget deficit of this period marked 8% annual decline. 
The  fourth  quarter  highlighted  a  better  pass-through  of  monetary  stimulus  in  financial 
markets. It was also characterised by a better anchoring of interbank market rates and their 
decreasing volatility. The Bank of Albania has pursued an easing monetary policy during the 
last  three  years.  The  monetary  stimulus  has  increased  progressively  during  this  period, 
bringing the key interest rate to record low levels and mitigating the liquidity pressures on the 
interbank market.  
However,  the  pass-through  of  easing  monetary  policy  effects  on  the  economy  has  been 
contained  due  to  higher  perceived  risk  premia  and  changed  stance  by  financial  market 
agents  and the real  economy.  Over the first  half  of the  year,  the  domestic  primary  market 
faced structural changes arising from implementation of new tight measures by the European 
Supervisory  Authorities.  This  development  impacted  on  maintaining  relatively  high  yield 
rates, despite the easing monetary policy and lowering short-term interest rates in the money 
market. Normalisation of the primary market in the second half of the year was reflected in 
progressively  falling  yields  over  this  period.  This  tendency  might  have  been  passed  on  to 
ALL-denominated private sector credit costs, though with lower intensity as a consequence 
of risk premia reflected in private agents’ credit price. Overall, controlling the borrowing in the 
domestic  money  market,  expanding  the  Government  securities  investment  base  and 
stabilising  the  risk  premia  in  the  economy  create  grounds  for  a  better  functioning  of 
transmission channels in the future. Therefore, the Bank of Albania believes that the long-
term public debt sustainability and public borrowing constraint in the domestic money market 
help enhance the monetary policy effectiveness and increase the space for the private sector 
credit of the economy. 
Monetary  indicators  were  characterised  by  slowing  growth  rates  in  the  second  half  of  the 
year.  They  signal  low  monetary  inflation  pressures  on  the  economy. The  annual  monetary 
supply  growth  averaged  5.9% 
in  October  and  November,  supported  primarily  by 
developments in the external sector of the economy. Money demand by the domestic agents 
of the economy was low. The increase in households’ participation in public debt securities 
was  reflected  in  lower  financing  of  this  sector  by  the  banking  system.  Businesses’  and 
households’  demand  for  funding  decelerated  significantly,  reflecting  the  low  demand  for 
consumption and investments. Also, banks continued to pursue a more prudential approach 
in lending, applying tight standards in response to uncertainties perceived at sector level and 
the  economy.  Responding  to  them,  annual  growth  of  credit  to  economy  reached  4%  in 
November. Credit to economy was based on the 18% increase in ALL-denominated loans, 
against  the  3.2%  decline  in  foreign  currency-denominated  loans.  Also,  credit  growth 
continued to be driven by increase in business loans, while consumer loans and home loans 
appeared rather low. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  so-far  economic  activity  performance  and  projections for  2013  support  the  outlook for 
positive economic growth close to the previous year’s figure. Foreign demand is expected to 
contribute  positively  to  Albania’s  economic  growth,  but  this  contribution  is  expected  to  be 
lower  due  to  unfavourable  developments  in  trading  partner  countries  and  relatively  low 
diversification  of  Albanian  exports.  Private  demand  is  also  expected  to  be  positive,  taking 
advantage of monetary stimulus growth and domestic savings utilization. Finally, the public 
sector  is  also  expected  to  provide  a  positive  stimulus.  Despite  the  positive  growth,  the 
economic activity in Albania is expected to remain below its potential during the current year 
and  the  demand-side  inflationary  pressures  are  expected  to  remain  low  during  this  time 
horizon. The Bank of Albania deems that with a 90% probability, the annual inflation as to 
four  quarters  ahead  is  forecasted  to  fluctuate  within  the  0.8  –  3.8%  band.  Low  annual 
inflation rates and forecast for their continuation over the monetary policy time horizon dictate 
the  maintaining  and  strengthening  of  the  stimulating  monetary  policy  over  the  next  four 
quarters. 
 Considering  the  information  summarised  above,  the  Supervisory  Council  deems  that 
consumer  price  pressures  in  Albania  remain  weak  along  the  monetary  policy  time  horizon 
and have shifted downward during the last months. Concluding, the Supervisory Council 
decided to lower the key interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 3.75%. This decision 
aims to create appropriate monetary conditions to meet the medium-term inflation target. The 
easing  of  monetary  conditions  keeps  the  short-term  financial  market  interest  rates  low, 
encouraging the activity and decreasing the related liquidity trading premia. By lowering the 
financing costs, the Bank of Albania aims to increase consumer loans and investments in the 
economy. This transmission mechanism promotes the aggregate demand, and under current 
circumstances, creates appropriate conditions for meeting the medium-term inflation target. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
