Duvvuri Subbarao: Responsible innovation and regulation in the 
financial sector 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
IDRBT  (Institute  for  Development  and  Reasearch  in  Banking  Technology)  Banking 
Technology Excellence Awards Function, Hyderabad, 2 August 2013. 
 1. 
Once  again,  it  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  be  here  at  IDRBT  for  the  annual 
awards for IT excellence in banking. Every time I come here, I am impressed by the passion 
and energy with which IDRBT pursues its mission of improving banking technology. Over the 
last  five  years,  under  the  leadership  of  Director  Sambamurthy,  the  Institute  has  made 
impressive progress in several areas. Apart from training junior and middle level officers, the 
Institute also engages Directors on the boards of banks on IT strategy so as to get buy-in at 
the leadership level for IT as a management tool. That, you would expect from an Institute of 
this  type.  But  IDRBT  performs  beyond  expectations.  It  goes  beyond  training  in  banking 
technology to evangelizing frontier aspects of technology that could bring efficiency gains to 
banks and safety to bank customers.  
IDRBT 
2. 
• 
 I want to recognize here some of the many achievement of IDRBT.  
IDRBT has pioneered the development of common standards for various aspects of 
IT in banking – the latest being standards for smart cards and micro-ATMs which will 
go a long way in scaling up financial inclusion.  
IDRBT  has  established  a  unique  CISO  Forum  which,  among  other  things,  is 
developing as a platform for sharing common concerns among banks.  
IDRBT  has  established  a  formidable  reputation  for  the  quality  of  its  teaching 
programmes as evidenced by the placement record of its students.  
3. 
In acknowledgement of this impressive performance along several tracks, I want to 
place  on  record  the  Reserve  Bank’s  appreciation  for  the  achievements  of  IDRBT  and  the 
earnest and enlightened leadership of Shri Sambamurthy. 
 Innovation and regulation 
4. 
At  IDRBT  here  today,  we  are  recognizing  and  celebrating  financial  innovation  – 
innovations that we believe will contribute to making the financial sector more efficient and 
user friendly, and thereby, contribute to growth and welfare in the real sector. There cannot 
be a more appropriate platform for me than this one to share some perspectives on financial 
innovation and financial regulation.  
5. 
From  the  discovery  of  fire  to  the  invention  of  the  I-Pad,  innovation  has  been  the 
wellspring of human progress. We all acknowledge instinctively that innovation best prospers 
in  a  laissez  faire  regime  where  innovators  can  expect  to  appropriate  the  benefits  of  their 
efforts. Equally, we all also recognize the need for regulation of innovation in order to correct 
for  market  failure  which  could  occur  for  a  variety  of  reasons  –  externalities,  information 
asymmetries, moral hazard, adverse selection etc. For example, we all understand that new 
drugs should be tested before they are put on the market and that new models of aircrafts 
and automobiles should be regulated for safety standards. The case for financial regulation 
rests on the same logic although it is not as well appreciated.  
6. 
Even as the logic for regulation is quite robust, the frequent criticism against it is that 
inappropriate  or  injudicious  regulation  would  stifle  innovation.  The  challenge  for  regulators 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Against  that  background,  in  my  address  today,  I  want  to  focus  on  the  following 
therefore is to protect public interest while at the same time ensuring that innovation that will 
potentially add value is not stifled. This is what I would call responsible regulation. The world 
view today is that it is this failure on the part of the regulators to check innovation and keep it 
socially responsible that resulted in the excesses that led to the crisis. 
7. 
questions relating to innovation and regulation in the financial sector: 
i. 
ii. 
In what ways are financial markets different from other markets? 
What  do  these  differences  imply  for  responsible  innovation  and  regulation  in  the 
financial sector? 
Is financial innovation good or bad? 
What is the Reserve Bank’s approach to responsible financial regulation? 
Does financial regulation have a role in promoting equity? 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
My first question: how are financial markets different from other markets? I want to 
In what ways are financial markets different from other markets? 
8. 
cite four important ways in which financial markets differ from other markets. 
9. 
First, financial markets are different because they are not self-correcting. One of the 
fundamental assumptions of capitalism, drawing intellectual origins from Adam Smith, is that 
in  a  competitive  market,  prices  adjust  to  equate  demand  with  supply.  Even  if  there  is 
disequilibrium,  it  will  quickly  and  automatically  adjust  to  equilibrium.  It  is  argued  that  this 
competitive market dictum does not work in financial markets because financial bubbles can 
build up to dangerous levels before a price correction kicks in. Indeed one of the lessons of 
the on-going global financial crisis is that the financial system can contain pressure for longer 
than expected; so when an implosion happens, it can be disastrous, even catastrophic. 
10. 
Second,  uniquely  financial  firms  are  highly  leveraged  and  interconnected.  If  a 
non-financial firm fails, only the stakeholders in that firm bear the damage; the externalities 
are limited. In contrast, financial firms are all interconnected; any pressure in one institution 
or  one  market  rapidly  transmits  to  the  entire  financial  sector  gathering  momentum  as  the 
contagion  spreads.  The  most  vivid  demonstration  of  this  is  the  way  a  bubble  in  the 
US sub-prime housing market snowballed into the biggest financial crisis of our generation. 
Third,  a  defining  characteristic  of  financial  markets  is  their  procyclicality;  financial 
11. 
firms exhibit a strong collective tendency to overexpose themselves to the same type of risk 
during an upturn, and become overly risk averse during a downturn. This is, of course, the 
familiar  fallacy  of  composition.  A  particular  business  model  may  be  profitable  for  a  given 
bank;  but  if  all  banks follow  the  same  business  model,  the  build-up  of  procyclical  risk  can 
make  the  model  collectively  disastrous.  In  other  words,  a  collection  of  healthy  financial 
institutions does not necessarily make a healthy financial system. 
12. 
Finally, financial markets are different because they are reflexive in the sense that 
our  beliefs  about  what  may  happen  often  influence  what  does  happen.  As  the  Economist 
magazine  asked  some  time  ago,  is  a  hurricane  more  likely  to  hit  because  more  hurricane 
insurance has been written. Common sense says no. but in the financial world, that common 
sense does not hold. The more financial insurance is written, the more likely that the insured 
event will occur because people who benefit from the contingency can make it happen.  
13. 
I have gone at length on these arguments to emphasize that financial markets are 
different from  other markets  in  some fundamental  ways  warranting  a  different  approach  to 
innovation and regulation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
What do these differences imply for responsible innovation and regulation in the 
financial sector? 
14. 
That takes me to my second question: what do these differences that distinguish the 
financial sector mean for responsible innovation and regulation? Let me try and address that. 
15. 
One  of  the  fundamental  assumptions  of  economics  is  that  human  beings  are 
rational. This concept of a “rational human being” provides the intellectual foundation for the 
libertarian  philosophy  of  political  economy  which  believes  that  it  is  unnecessary,  even 
improper, to protect people against their choices. Rational people should be free, and they 
should  be  responsible  for  the  choices  they  make.  The  State  should  not  interfere  with  the 
individual’s right to choose unless those choices have a spillover impact and harm others. 
16. 
The libertarian political philosophy has, of course, been challenged in both academic 
and  public  policy  domains.  The  essence  of  the  criticism  is  that  the  concept  of  a  rational 
human  being  is  a  myth.  A  rational  human  being,  “Econ”  in  text  book  terminology  is,  by 
definition, calculating, unemotional, selfish and fully informed. On the other hand, people are 
“Humans”; their decisions and actions are driven by emotions, biases, judgements, and they 
are handicapped by both lack of full information and inability or disinclination to process even 
available information into their decisions. The State, as a welfare maximiser, has to step in to 
nudge people towards making responsible choices. 
17. 
It is these lessons from behavioural economics that provide the basis for consumer 
protection as an objective of financial regulation. As we discussed earlier, financial markets 
are  different  in  several  important  ways.  Financial  products  are complex  and  often  opaque. 
Savers  and  investors  are  handicapped  by  information  asymmetries;  they  make  choices 
based  on  inadequate  information  and  are  driven  by  irrational  emotions.  Also,  bubbles  in 
financial markets are difficult to see in real time. When bubbles burst, savers and investors 
not only lose out because of their saving and investment going sour but also because, as tax 
payers, they have to bear the huge costs of financial instability.  
18. 
The world learnt these lessons the hard way. The global financial crisis has taken a 
devastating toll by way of lost growth and foregone welfare. Among the important responses 
to the crises has been renewed focus on consumer protection which will be pursued through 
both prescriptive regulations as well as an obligatory code of conduct for financial institutions. 
This, in a broad sense, should lay the foundations and framework for responsible financial 
innovation and regulation.  
Is financial innovation good or bad? 
Let me move on to the third question: is financial innovation good or bad?  
19. 
20. 
This  is  admittedly  a  clichéd  question  and  the  boiler  plate  answer  is  that:  “All 
innovation is good. It is not innovation per se, but how that innovation is used that makes it 
good or bad”. This is true everywhere, including in the financial sector. Innovations can be 
misapplied or carried to excesses for a variety of reasons – greed, wrong beliefs or sheer 
inability to anticipate consequences. 
21. 
Let me illustrate this with an example from the financial sector. Use of quantitative 
techniques in finance has been a game changing innovation. It contributed enormously to the 
growth  of  the  financial  sector.  The  Black-Scholes  options  pricing  model,  for  example,  was 
more  than  a  piece  of  geeky  mathematics;  it  was  transformational.  It  ended  the  anti-
intellectualism  of  American  finance,  demonstrated  that  a  more  scientific  approach  to 
speculation is possible and converted financial markets from bull rings to quantitative power 
houses. 
22. 
But  there  were  obviously  limitations  to  the  applicability  of  quantitative  techniques. 
They  all  involved  some  simplification  of  the  real  world  and  they  were  all  based  on  some 
assumptions. When the abstraction of the model does not capture the essential aspects of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the  real  world  or  when  the  assumptions  do  not  hold,  the  quantitative  model  fails.  The  big 
failure in using quantitative techniques was not so much that the techniques per se were bad 
innovations, but that we had misused them by forgetting to ask: “Does my model represent 
the real world? Do the assumptions underlying the model still hold?”  
23. 
is good only as long as it adds value to economic growth and societal welfare. 
So, my simple answer to the question, “is financial innovation good or bad?” is that it 
What is the Reserve Bank’s approach to responsible financial regulation? 
24. 
The Reserve Bank is the regulator for banks, non-bank finance companies (NBFCs) 
and  large  segments  of  the  financial  markets.  Our  approach  to  regulation  has  been  to 
preserve financial stability and promote consumer protection.  
25. 
It is the obligation to balance these objectives that has cast a responsibility on the 
Reserve  Bank  to  take  a  measured  but  constructive  approach  to  financial  innovation.  It  is 
possible,  for  example,  to  tighten  regulation  so  much  that  financial  stability  and  consumer 
protection are tightly secured, but that will entail a heavy cost in terms of growth. It will also 
stifle innovation that could promote economic activity. At the other extreme, it is also possible 
to be nonchalant and adopt a completely laissez  faire approach to innovation, but that will 
lead to excesses, systemic pressures and an eventual implosion of the financial system. In 
my  view,  what  responsible  regulation  entails  is  to  draw  the  right  balance  between  these 
objectives  on  a  dynamic  basis,  and  to  do  so  with  an  open  mind  free  of  any  ideological 
dogma.  
26. 
responsible regulation in practice in several areas. 
I  now  want  to  illustrate  how  the  Reserve  Bank  has  applied  this  approach  to 
RBI’s responsible regulation – proactive macroprudential policy  
27. 
One of the primary causes of the crisis, as we now well know, was the excess in the 
US sub-prime housing market. If I were to give a stylized description of the “excess”, it was 
that banks lent irresponsibly for housing to borrowers whose repayment capacity depended 
entirely on the value of the house increasing on a perpetual basis. Inevitably, there was a 
bubble  which  burst  when  house  prices  slumped  characterizing  a  classic  Minsky  
moment – euphoria leading to panic and then to collapse.  
28. 
Here  in  India,  the  Reserve  Bank,  under  the  leadership  of  my  predecessor  
Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  behaved  responsibly.  It  took  measures  to  prevent  such  excesses  in  the 
Indian 
instituting  countercyclical  
measures – by raising risk weights and provisioning norms for bank lending to the real estate 
sector.  
real  estate  and  housing  sectors  by  proactively 
RBI’s responsible regulation – Basel III  
29. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  taken  a  responsible  approach  to  the  implementation  of 
Basel III. People have questioned the adoption of Basel III in India on two arguments. First, 
that Basel III is only required for advanced economy banks which have resorted to excesses, 
and not for Indian banks which have remained within prudent limits. The second argument is 
that Basel III standards will raise the cost of credit in India at a time when the credit intensity 
of our economic growth is going to increase. 
30. 
My response to these arguments is that it would have been irresponsible on the part 
of  the  Reserve  Bank  to  not  implement  Basel  III.  As  a  country  rapidly  integrating  with  the 
world,  we  cannot  have  a  regulatory  regime  that  deviates  from  the  global  model.  After  all, 
going forward, Indian banks will increase their foreign operations and foreign banks will come 
here to operate in India. This integration will be in India’s long term economic interest. That 
interest can be hurt if our regulatory regime does not conform to the global standards. To the 
argument  that  implementation  of  Basel  III  will  hurt  growth,  my  response  is  only  to  cite 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
research by BIS economists which shows that even if Basel III imposes some costs in the 
short term, it will secure our medium term growth prospects.  
RBI’s responsible regulation – new bank licences 
31. 
An important characteristic of responsible regulation is not to be dogmatic but to be 
pragmatic,  open minded  and  willing  to  change  regulations to  suit  changing  circumstances, 
provided larger public interest so demanded. Let me illustrate this. 
A few months ago, the Reserve Bank released guidelines on licensing of new banks 
32. 
in the private sector. In contrast to previous rounds of bank licensing, in this round, we have 
decided  to  make  corporates  eligible  for  bank  licences.  We  did  so  after  extensive  debate, 
consultation and deliberation. 
33. 
The main arguments against admitting corporates into banking were the following. 
First, banks are entrusted with large public deposits; corporates would misuse this large and 
cheap money for private gain by connected lending to their own units or to customers and 
suppliers.  Second,  the  ownership  structure  of  large  corporates  will  open  opportunities  for 
regulatory  arbitrage  in  case  the  promoter  of  the  bank  at  the  apex  level  is  an  unregulated 
entity.  That  could  potentially  lead  to  gaps  in  risk  assessment  and  heighten  the  risk  of 
contagion from the corporate to the bank and from there to the wider financial system. The 
third argument against corporates has been that banking in the hands of corporates would 
lead to concentration of economic power and political influence. Fourth, people asked why 
we need to take unnecessary risk by opening banking to corporates since there are enough 
potentially strong applicants outside of the corporate sector.  
34. 
Indeed the criticism has been much more varied and nuanced than the way I have 
put it. My idea was just to give you the broad picture. At several stages over the last three 
years, we have responded to this criticism. Let me briefly summarize that. 
The  main  reason  we  have  allowed  corporates  is  to  leverage  on  their  proven 
35. 
entrepreneurial talent and management expertise. Indian corporates have been innovative in 
penetrating into the hinterland, and the expectation is that the same spirit of enterprise will 
lead to innovation of new business models for financial inclusion. Large corporates will also 
bring vast pools of capital that will go into strengthening financial intermediation and making 
our  banking  sector  more  competitive.  Moreover,  corporates  have  been  operating  in  other 
regulated  sectors  such  as  telecom,  airports,  power  etc.  They  have  also  been  allowed  into 
other  segments  of  regulated  financial  activities  such  as  mutual  funds,  asset  management, 
insurance etc.  
36. 
In  short,  over  time,  the  balance  of  arguments  for  and  against  corporates  in  the 
banking  sector  has  changed.  It  is  in  response  to  this  changed  situation  that  the  Reserve 
Bank took a pragmatic view and determined that allowing corporates into the banking sector 
would be net positive. 
37. 
I want to acknowledge though that the arguments of the critics were non-trivial and 
we have been sensitive to that. That is the reason we have built several safeguards into the 
licensing regime by prescribing demanding criteria for the corporate structure, fit and proper 
criteria,  corporate  governance  norms,  exposure  norms  etc.  There  are  requirements  for 
dilution of the promoter group’s shareholding over time. There is also the in-built safeguard 
that corporates have large business interests at stake, and will be loathe to compromise their 
business  reputation  by  mishandling  the  banking  segment  of  the  business.  Finally,  the 
Banking Regulation Act has since been amended to vest powers with the Reserve Bank to 
take  action  against  the  bank  management  should  the  Reserve  Bank  determine  that  the 
management  of  the  bank  has  been  detrimental  to  public  interest  or  to  the  interest  of 
depositors.  
38. 
Reserve Bank’s approach to responsible regulation. 
Again,  I  have  gone  at  length  on  this  issue  of  new  bank  licences  to  illustrate  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
RBI’s responsible regulation – financial markets 
39. 
Reserve Bank’s approach to regulation of financial markets is informed by the same 
sense  of  responsibility.  In  regulating  financial  markets,  we  have  followed  three  broad 
principles. First, the menu of financial products available to hedge emergent risks should be 
widened.  Second,  the  introduction  of  new  products  should  follow  a  graduated  process 
dictated by the acceptance of the product by market participants. Lastly, the robustness of 
the  market  infrastructure  for  trading,  settlement  and  reporting  of  existing  as  well  as  new 
financial products should be improved.  
40. 
Let me illustrate this by our approach to the regulation of currency markets. We first 
introduced OTC derivatives (currency forwards) in order to meet the hedging needs of the 
real sector by requiring that participants have an underlying exposure. At the same time, we 
imposed limits on positions to prevent excessive risk taking. 
41. 
After the currency forwards market had stabilized, we focused on the development 
of  the  currency  futures  market  to  deepen  the  market.  Being  exchange  traded,  the  futures 
market was meant to enhance the efficiency of price discovery and also to provide access to 
retail  customers.  We  started  with  USD-INR  futures  and  extended  that  gradually  to  other 
currency pairs with the rupee – the euro, pound and yen.  
42. 
In  recent  weeks,  RBI  and  SEBI  have  together  imposed  some  restrictions  on  the 
futures  market  by  way  of  raising  the  margins  and  limiting  the  positions  that  market 
participants can take. Also, proprietary trading by banks was prohibited. As we explained in 
the  relevant  circular,  these  measures  were  instituted  to  curb  undue  speculation  that  was 
resulting  in  the  volatility  of  the  exchange  rate.  As  indicated  in  our  quarterly  policy  review 
earlier this week, we will roll back these measures only after we determine that stability has 
been restored to the foreign exchange market. In the Reserve Bank’s view, undue volatility of 
the exchange rate is harmful for growth and stability and such volatility should be curbed.  
RBI’s responsible regulation – benchmark rates 
43. 
Let  me  give  you  another  illustration  of  how  we  implement  responsible  financial 
regulation. You are all aware of the LIBOR rate fixing scandal that surfaced last year. The 
charge against some London banks was that they were reporting wrong data on the money 
market  interest  rate  in  order  to  cover  up  their  weakening  position  and  deteriorating 
creditworthiness and to protect their balance sheets. The aftermath of the scandal led to a 
vigorous debate internationally on what went wrong, how it might be fixed and what role, if 
any,  might  central  banks  and  regulators  have  in  ensuring  the  data  reported  by  banks  is 
accurate and that the process of estimation of the benchmark rate is robust.  
44. 
A  parallel  in  our  system  is  the  foreign  exchange  reference  rate  that  the  Reserve 
Bank  puts  out  every  day.  Can  we  have  problem  similar  to  LIBOR  here  in  India?  The 
counterpart  of  LIBOR  in  India  is  the  less  used  MIBOR  which  is  set  by  FIMMDA-NSE. 
Although,  this  rate  is  set  through  polling,  the  transparent  system  of  execution  and 
dissemination of more than 90% of trades through electronic order matching system acts as 
an important safeguard.  
45. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  on  its  part,  compiles  and  publishes  every  day  the  reference 
exchange rates following a robust statistical method. Earlier on, we used to set the rate by 
averaging the mean of the bid/offer rates polled from a few select banks as at 12 noon on 
every working day. A few months ago, we changed the method. Now we poll a few banks 
from  an  expanded  list  at  a  randomly  chosen  five  minute  window  between  11.45  am  and 
12.15  pm  and  then  put  out  the  reference  rate.  We  periodically  review  the  procedure  for 
selecting the banks and the methodology of polling so as to ensure that the reference rate 
remains a true reflection of market activity.  
46. 
Recently,  we  constituted  a  committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  Vijaya  Bhaskar, 
one  of  our  Executive  Directors,  to  comprehensively  study  the  process  of  computation  and 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
dissemination of major financial benchmarks in India with a view to assessing the integrity of 
the process and the governance standards in the institution responsible for the benchmark. 
After the Committee gives its report, we will take further action as may be necessary.  
Having  explained  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  responsible  regulation,  let  me 
Does financial regulation have a role in promoting equity? 
47. 
now turn to the final question on my list: does regulation have a role in promoting equity? 
48. 
The  dichotomy  between  growth  and  equity  is  standard  stuff  of  development 
economics. For a long time, the orthodoxy was that if we took care of growth, equity followed 
automatically a la a high tide raising all boats. Experience has taught us that reality is more 
complex.  Received  wisdom  today  is  that  growth  is  a  necessary,  although  not  a  sufficient, 
condition  for  equity.  To  achieve  equity,  we  need  growth  that  is  poverty  sensitive  –  that  is 
growth to which the poor contribute and growth from which the poor benefit. 
49. 
How  does  this  standard  question  translate  in  the  context  of  financial  sector 
regulation?  This  is  a  question  that  we,  as  a  regulator,  struggle  with.  Should  stability  and 
consumer  protection  be  the  sole  objectives  of  our  regulation,  with  other  instruments  being 
deployed  to  achieve  equity?  Or  should  equity  be  a  variable  in  the  objective  function  of 
regulation?  
50. 
To  seek  answers,  we  must  ask  a  variant  of  the  above  questions.  Is  the  financial 
sector inherently equity promoting, or at least equity neutral? Our experience has been that 
left to itself, the financial sector does not have a pro-equity bias. Indeed, it is even possible to 
argue that the financial sector does not necessarily reach out to the bottom of the pyramid. 
51. 
Our response to counter this bias has been to use regulation to encourage socially 
optimal business behaviour by financial institutions. Let me just list a few of our affirmative 
action  regulations.  We  have  a  directed  credit  scheme,  priority  sector  lending,  whereby  all 
banks are required to ensure that at least 40 per cent of their credit goes to identified priority 
sectors  like  agriculture  and  allied  activities,  micro,  small  and  medium  industries,  low  cost 
housing and education. We have a “Lead Bank” scheme under which there is a designated 
commercial bank identified for each of the over 600 districts in the country with responsibility 
for ensuring implementation of a district credit plan that contains indicative targets for flow of 
credit  to  sectors  of  the  economy  that  banks  may  neglect.  We  have  largely  deregulated 
licensing of bank branches; banks are now free to open branches freely in population centres 
of less than 100,000 – with two stipulations: first at least a quarter of the branches should be 
located  in  unbanked  villages  with  a  maximum  population  of  10,000;  and  second,  their 
performance  in  financial  penetration  will  be  a  criterion  for  giving  banks  branch  licences  in 
metro and large urban centres.  
By far our most high profile development campaign of the Reserve Bank in recent 
52. 
years  has  been  our  aggressive  pursuit  of  financial  inclusion.  Why  is  financial  inclusion 
important? It is important because it is a necessary condition for sustaining equitable growth. 
There are few, if any, instances of an economy transiting from an agrarian system to a post-
industrial  modern  society  without  broad-based  financial  inclusion.  As  people  having 
comfortable  access  to  financial  services,  we  all  know  from  personal  experience  that 
economic opportunity is strongly intertwined with financial access. Such access is especially 
powerful for the poor as it provides them opportunities to build savings, make investments 
and  avail  credit.  Importantly,  access  to  financial  services  also  helps  the  poor  insure 
themselves against income shocks and equips them to meet emergencies such as illness, 
death in the family or loss of employment. Needless to add, financial inclusion protects the 
poor from the clutches of the usurious money lenders. 
53. 
The  extent  of  financial  exclusion  is  staggering.  Out  of  the  600,000  habitations  in 
India,  less  than  100,000  have  a  commercial  bank  branch.  Just  about  40  per  cent  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
population across the country have bank accounts, and this ratio is much lower in the north-
east of the country.  
54. 
These statistics, distressing as they are, do not convey the true extent of financial 
exclusion.  Even  where  bank  accounts  are  claimed  to  have  been  opened,  verification  has 
often shown that the accounts are dormant. Few conduct any banking transactions and even 
fewer receive any credit. Millions of households across the country are thereby denied the 
opportunity to harness their earning capacity and entrepreneurial talent, and are condemned 
to marginalization and poverty. 
55. 
Over  the  last  few  years,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  launched  several  initiatives  to 
deepen  financial  inclusion.  Our  goal  is  not  just  that  poor  households  must  have  a  bank 
account, but that the account must be effectively used by them for savings, remittances and 
credit.  
56. 
Even as much of the development mandate of the Reserve Bank is driven by moral 
suasion, we have not shied away, where necessary, from using our regulatory authority to 
drive development objectives. Even though purists might question this, in the Reserve Bank, 
we believe this is “responsible financial regulation”.  
Conclusion 
57. 
Let me now conclude by summarizing what I’ve said so far. I started with explaining 
the  logic  for  regulation  in  general  and  then  explaining  how  the  financial  sector  is  unique, 
requiring a different and more careful balance between regulating for stability and safety and 
encouraging  innovation.  I  then  spoke  about  good  and  bad  financial  innovations;  and  how 
good innovations are those which add value to the real sectors of the economy. After that, I 
explained  the  Reserve  Bank’s  approach  to  responsible  regulation  and  illustrated  this  with 
examples  from  several  activities  of  the  Reserve  Bank.  Finally,  I  posed  a  question  –  “does 
regulation have a role in achieving equity?”, explained the Reserve Bank’s approach to that 
question even as I may have raised some new questions in the process.  
58. 
Last  year,  the  Reserve  Bank  was  awarded  the  Dufrenoy  Prize  for  Responsible 
Innovation by the Observatory for Responsible Innovation in Paris. The Dufrénoy Prize was 
instituted  jointly  by  the  Observatory  for  Responsible  Financial  Innovation  and  Mines  Paris 
Tech, a well-known education and research institution set up in Paris in 1783 to recognize 
remarkable and outstanding initiatives in the area of responsible innovation in finance.  
59. 
the introduction and regulation of financial products. Let me quote from the citation: 
The Dufrenoy Prize was awarded to the Reserve Bank for its calibrated approach to 
“The  responsible  character  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India’s  commitment  in  the 
financial services industry lies in an original and innovative regulatory approach 
of  financial  products.  One  of  the  Bank’s  priorities  has  been  to  calibrate  the 
introduction of specific financial innovations in order to assess their behaviour 
before larger scale diffusion, a pioneering approach at a time when the idea of 
considering markets as real scale testing sites for financial innovation with the 
necessity of implementing specific protocols is not yet prevalent in the financial 
area.  The  RBI’s  calibrated  approach  introduces  elements  ....a  series  of 
precautions, and pre-marketing and post-marketing surveillance that can stand 
as exceptional benchmarks for other countries.” 
60. 
The award of the Dufrenoy Prize pleased us immensely. But it also reminded us of 
our  responsibility  –  of  ensuring  that  we  continue  to  encourage  innovation  in  the  financial 
sector  without  compromising  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection.  In  the  Reserve 
Bank, we are aware that we are not yet the “best practice” in this regard, but will spare no 
effort to get there. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
61. 
Regulation and innovation must go hand in hand. Regulation is the responsibility of 
the Reserve Bank. Innovation should be the driving force of IDRBT and all the banks present 
here. Together, we can make our financial sector resilient and make it an aid to the growth of 
our economy and welfare of our people.  
62. 
to IDRBT for its efforts to recognize excellence in innovation by banks. 
Once again, hearty congratulations to all the award winners today and compliments 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
