Njuguna Ndung’u: The future of sharia compliant banking and finance in 
Kenya 
Address  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  official 
launch  of  the  National  Bank  of  Kenya’s  sharia  compliant  banking  “The  National  Amanah”, 
Nairobi, 29 April 2013. 
 Board of Directors of National Bank of Kenya Limited here present, 
Mr. Mohamed A. Hassan, Chairman, National Bank of Kenya 
Mr. Munir Ahmed, Managing Director, National Bank of Kenya, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  and  honored  to  have  been  invited  to  preside  over  the official  launch  of the 
rebranded  sharia  compliant  banking  window  of  National  Bank.  Allow  me  at  the  onset  to 
congratulate  National  Bank  for  this  relaunch  of  the  two  sharia  compliant  products  to  be 
offered under the new brand name of “National Amanah”. This will no doubt enable the bank 
reach out to more of the unbanked in our country. This will not only grow the deposit base 
but also enhance the Government’s goal of financial inclusion for all Kenyans. 
Ladies and gentlemen:  sharia  compliant  banking  and finance  has  evolved  to  become  an 
integral part of global financial system transcending geographical boundaries from Asia, to 
the Middle East, to Europe, Americas and Africa. The assets worldwide have expanded from 
some  US$150  billion  in  the  1990s  to  US$  1.3  trillion  by  2011.  This  was  expected  to  have 
reached US$ 1.6 trillion by end of last year. 
Although sharia compliant banking industry currently only constitutes 1.6% of the total assets 
of the top 50 largest banks in the world, it remains one of the fastest growing segments in the 
global financial services sector. The sharia compliant banking industry is expected to witness 
further development particularly in terms of development of new products as well as opening 
up  of  new  markets,  in  light  of  the  industry’s  resilience  during  the  global  financial  crisis  of 
2007/2008.  There  must  be  important  characteristics  of  sharia  compliant  products  that  we 
should learn. 
At  the  local  level  too,  Sharia  compliant  banking  is  notably  beginning  to  take  root.  Kenya 
currently has two fully fledged shariah compliant banks and a number of conventional banks 
have been granted approval to roll out Shariah Compliant Products. 
Kenya has also pioneered in the sharia compliant insurance and re-insurance segments. The 
Government,  through  Finance  Act  2010,  amended  section  45  of  the  Central  Bank  Act,  to 
allow  for  CBK  to  recognize  the  payment  of  a  return  rather  than  interest  on  government 
securities  with  the  aim  of  opening  up  a  spectrum  of  shariah  compliant  investment  in  the 
country.  Similarly,  Section  16  of  the  Banking  Act  was  amended  to  allow  for  payment  of  a 
return rather than interest on savings products in the Banking Industry. I therefore urge all 
the  players  in  this sector  to  come  up  with  innovative  products  and  services  so that  Kenya 
may  achieve  her  ambition  of  becoming  a  financial  hub  in  the  region.  The  Central  Bank  of 
Kenya will work with all the players in facilitating the achievement of this dream. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Sharia Compliant Banking, although still in its infancy in our country, 
has  a  lot  of  opportunity  for  growth.  The  two  fully  sharia  compliant  banks  as  at  the  end  of 
February 2013 had a total of kshs.15.4 billion in loans and advances and kshs.19.5 billion in 
total deposits. Furthermore, these two banks together with other conventional banks offering 
total  deposits  of  Sha.27.8  billion  as  at 
Sharia  Compliant  Banking  Window  had 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
31st December 2012. These numbers just show how Sharia Compliant Banking is gradually 
becoming a major player in the banking sector. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  The  introduction  of  these  specialized  products  in  the  Kenyan 
banking  industry  no  doubt  comes  with  its  challenges.  These  include  limited  short  term 
liquidity  management  products,  lack  of  experienced  human  resources  in  this  specialized 
Banking & Finance area, lack of product standardization which can be a cause of ambiguity 
and source of disputes to mention but a few. The Central Bank is currently formulating policy 
and  regulations  to  regulate  the  sharia  compliant  products  and  therefore  depart  from  the 
current practice of subjecting sharia compliant banking to conventional banking regulations. I 
urge  all  the  Shariah  Boards  to  work  together  to  help  find  solutions  or  come  up  with 
suggestions on how to address these challenges. We at the Central Bank will be willing and 
happy to provide the necessary facilitation and share our views. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen:  The  future  of  sharia  compliant  banking  and  finance  in  Kenya  is 
bright but the challenges that exist need to be tackled collectively. I urge all players in the 
sharia compliant banking to embrace the spirit of cooperation and competition as they come 
up with ways of product and service standardization. 
Kenya  has  pioneered  in  sharia  compliant  banking  in  this  region  but  other  countries  in  the 
region are headed in that direction, with Tanzania already having two fully Sharia compliant 
banks.  Somalia  is  another  country  keen  on  modeling  its  emerging  financial  system 
predominantly  along  sharia  compliance  as  it  reconstructs.  To  maintain  Nairobi  as  the 
predominant  Financial  Centre  in  East  &  Central  Africa  we  need  to  develop  necessary 
expertise and capacities in both conventional and sharia compliant financial systems. 
Ladies and gentlemen: Let me now point out that Kenya’s financial industry is currently one 
of the fastest growing not only in the East African region but in the continent. In this regard, 
the  Government  is  therefore  committed  to  the  implementation  of  sound  policies  towards 
financial deepening and overall economic development of this country as captured in Vision 
2030.  It  goes  without  saying  that  the  banking  industry  is  and  will  remain  a  major  player 
towards this end. 
Ladies and gentlemen: We must now work towards reducing costs of doing business for 
banks  so  that  we  can  bring  down  costs  of  financial  services.  For  example,  the  recently 
introduced  credit  information  sharing  platform  has  enabled  banks  to  extend  more  credit  to 
productive  sectors  boosting  wealth  and  employment  creation.  The  information  sharing 
platform  is  a  new  collateral  technology  in  the  market  and  reduces  the  information  search 
costs.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  positive  information  sharing  with  Credit  Reference 
Bureaus will allow good debtors to leverage on this and bargain for lower costs of borrowing. 
The second area in reducing cost of doing business is the cost of rolling out branch networks 
to reach Kenyans cost-effectively. This will work well with the introduction of Agent Banking. 
The CBK has so far licensed 17,088 Agents since the roll out in May 2010. 
Thirdly, is for banks themselves to develop innovative products for the market by leveraging 
on advanced technology. You have to lower cost on these products to ensure uptake and 
volume.  This  will  lower  unit  cost  to  the  benefit  of  your  customers.  The  Central  Bank  will 
continue more forcefully with its four pronged approach namely advise, cultivate partnership, 
develop and regulate the market. This approach will ensure innovative policies that work for 
the market and ensure financial inclusion for all Kenyans and also the market’s stability. 
Ladies and gentlemen: In conclusion, I would like to assure the banking sector and other 
market  players  that  the Government  and  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to  support market 
development by providing an enabling environment for growth in the banking sector. On the 
basis  of  the  following  three  pillars,  we  shall  continue  to  ensure  that  the  sector  operates 
efficiently, effectively and soundly:- 
• 
First,  ensure  Financial  Stability  through  a  robust  Supervisory  and  Regulatory 
Framework. In this regard, the Central Bank has adopted a consolidated supervision 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
approach  and  Supervisory  Colleges,  where  they  apply,  to  take  cognizance  of  the 
growing pan-African nature of the Kenyan banking sector. 
Second, enhancing Financial Integrity in the Banking Sector so as to ensure that the 
financial  systems  are  safeguarded  against  money  laundering  and  financing  of 
terrorism. 
Third, promoting Financial Inclusion for financial deepening and development in line 
with the aspirations under the Kenyan Vision 2030. 
  National Bank of Kenya should take advantage of the new developments in the industry as 
well as initiatives put forth by the Central Bank to grow its market share.  
Finally,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Let  me  again  congratulate  the  National  Bank  on  this 
endeavour  and  challenge  it  to  be  innovative  in  products  and  services  offering  in  sharia 
compliant banking. I wish the bank every success in this new business segment. 
With these few remarks let me take this opportunity to officially launch “National Amanah”, 
the Sharia Compliant Banking business segment of National Bank. 
Thank you and God bless you all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
