Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Championing microentrepreneurship 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank  of  the  Philippines),  at  the  Citi  Microentrepreneurship  Awards  (CMA)  2013  media 
launch, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, Manila, 8 July 2013. 
 to 
the 
launching  of 
the  2013  Citi 
Good  afternoon  everyone  and  welcome 
Microentrepreneuship Awards or CMA. 
In the ten years of CMA, we have met many microentrepreneurs who lifted themselves from 
poverty,  transformed  into  net  savers  in  banks, and  served  as  catalysts for  development  in 
their respective communities. 
Today, as we launch the 2013 CMA, we look forward to hearing more inspiring stories of how 
access to collateral-free credit can be so empowering. 
Indeed, we have witnessed the power of microfinance to improve lives across the country. 
As a member of the CMA board of judges for 8 years now, I have witnessed how this Awards 
program has also evolved. For instance, in response to the increasing difficulty of the board 
of  judges  to  select  the  winners  from  such  a  rich  field,  the  CMA  made  a  simple  win-win 
decision- it developed new award categories. 
In addition, CMA has made the prizes more meaningful: aside from cash rewards, winners 
also  get  insurance  coverage,  entrepreneurship  training,  and  support  for  expanding  their 
partnership  networks.  In  other  words,  CMA  keeps  pace  with  the  developments  in  the 
microfinance industry. 
The development of the Philippine microfinance industry has been phenomenal. Ten years 
ago, microfinance was limited to microcredit provided by leading NGOs, cooperatives and a 
handful  of  banks.  Since  then,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  and  diversification  of 
microfinance players, products and services, as well as delivery channels. 
The Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas provides leadership in the development of the microfinance 
sector  through  appropriate  policies, regulations  and  programs.  So far  so good. In fact, the 
Philippines  has  been  cited  to  have  the  best  regulatory  framework  for  the  development  of 
microfinance for four consecutive years now. 
As of March 2013, there were 186 banks with microfinance operations reaching out to more 
than 1 million clients. Their combined savings have reached 8.2 billion pesos, higher than the 
8 billion pesos they have borrowed. 
This  is  the  first  time  that  total  microfinance  loan  portfolio  is  exceeded  by  the  savings 
component. This suggests that while microfinance clients take out loans, saving is sustained. 
For microentrepreneurs, savings help them survive through emergencies or take advantage 
of a business opportunity. 
As a further support to microentrepreneurs, the Bangko Sentral issued last January Circular 
782 which expanded the scope of qualified microinsurance clients and increased their risk 
protection. The Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP) reports that there are 
over 500,000 clients of rural banks that now enjoy microinsurance coverage. This supports 
the report from the Insurance Commission that the number of Filipinos with microinsurance 
coverage has doubled in just two years. 
Ladies and gentlemen. Earlier we heard the testimonial of Floraiwin Cainglet, the 2012 CMA 
National Winner. Flor and her husband Rommel started with only two pigs and now have a 
thriving and innovative  hog raising business worth P2.5 million. In addition, they support a 
daycare center and feeding programs in their community. These microentrepreneurs are at 
the forefront of improving lives in their community. Again, let us give them a big hand! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  success  stories  of  more  than  80exceptional  microentrepreneurs  that  the  CMA  has 
recognized  in  the  past  decade  tell  us  that  we  are  successful  in  providing  a  nurturing 
environment  for  microenterprises.  These  stories  lend  a  face  to  the  data  and  serve  as 
validation that our efforts and initiatives in microfinance are effective and sustainable. 
Fellow  advocates  of  microfinance,  let  us  continue  to  work  together  therefore to  strengthen 
and  sustain  partnerships  for  microfinance.  In  October  this  year,  the  Microcredit  Summit 
Campaign will hold its 16th summit in Manila in partnership with the MCPI and with support 
from  the  BSP.  The  theme  for  this  year’s  conference  revolves  around  Partnerships  against 
Poverty. The conference will discuss some of the most advanced and successful examples 
of public-private partnerships in microfinance. I hope you will join the conference. 
The CMA itself is one tangible example of a successful and meaningful partnership against 
poverty  with  Citi,  the  Citi  Foundation,  the  MCPI  and  the  Bangko  Sentral  working  together 
toward a shared goal. 
Together,  we  celebrate the  success  of  our  microentrepreneurs. They  strengthen  our  belief 
that many more Filipinos can have a better life through microfinance. 
Again, my congratulations to everyone involved in CMA: Citi and the Citi Foundation under 
the  leadership  of  Country  Officer  Batara  Sianturi,  the  Micro  Finance  Council  of  the 
Philippines headed by chairperson Mila Bunker, my fellow members in the National Selection 
Committee, my colleagues at the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and our special guests from 
the media who help spread the good news about microfinance in our country. 
Mabuhay ang microfinance! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat! 
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
