François Groepe: The role of the accounting and auditing profession in 
South Africa’s economic growth and development 
Address by Mr François Groepe, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
SAICA Southern Region Trainee Accountant Society, Port Elizabeth, 23 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
I  wish  to  thank  the  Trainee  Accountant  Society  from  the  Southern  Region  of  SAICA  for 
inviting me to speak this evening. It is always an honour and a great opportunity to engage 
with different sectors of society, in particular South Africa’s young professionals who have a 
particularly important role to play in ensuring that this country realises its full potential, both 
socially as well as economically. 
The global economy 
There  are  signs  that  the  global  economy  is  recovering,  however,  the  recovery  at  best 
remains fragile and weaker than what had been anticipated just a few months ago. The US 
recorded a quarter-on-quarter real GDP growth rate of 1.8% in the first quarter, somewhat 
lower than the earlier estimates of 2.5%, weighed down by the fiscal contraction. In addition 
to  further  fiscal  consolidation,  the  debt  ceiling  debates,  and  the  impact  of  rising  long-term 
Treasury  yields  and  mortgage  interest  rates  in  response  to  expectations  of  a  tapering  in 
asset purchases by the US Federal Reserve, also pose downside risks. 
Peripheral Eurozone remains mired in recession. Consequently, the euro zone contracted by 
1.1%  year-on-year  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013,  following  a  contraction  of  0.8%  in  the  final 
quarter  of  2012.  The  IMF  has  reduced  its  forecast  for  Eurozone  growth  in  2013,  by 
0.2 percentage points to –0.6%, with a weaker recovery than previously forecast in 2014.  
The  Japanese  economy  recorded  strong  quarter-on-quarter  growth  of  4.1%  in  the  first 
quarter, but it remains too soon to assess the efficacy of the various stimulus measures that 
were adopted. 
A  number  of the  significant  emerging market  economies  have  witnessed  a  slowdown,  and 
have  contributed  to  the  most  recent  downward  revision  by  the  IMF  of  global  growth  by 
0.2 percentage points to 3.1% and 3.8% for 2013 and 2014, respectively. 
Volatility in financial markets in recent days seems to have abated following the assurances 
given  by  the  US  Federal  Reserve  that  it  would  continue  to  support  the  economy  and  that 
monetary policy would remain accommodative despite asset purchase tapering. The earlier 
turbulence  seen,  however,  demonstrates  that  emerging  and  developing  economies  remain 
vulnerable  to  the  spill-over  effects  of  the  reversal  of  the  highly  accommodative  monetary 
policy by the advanced economies. 
The domestic economy 
The domestic economic growth outlook has weakened further following the disappointing first 
quarter  annualised  growth  rate  of  0.9%.  Of  some  concern  is  the  low  growth  in  real  gross 
fixed capital formation, which moderated from an annualised 4.3% in the final quarter of 2012 
to 2.5% in the first quarter of 2013. 
The Bank has recently revised its growth forecast for 2013 lower, from 2.4% to 2.0% and for 
2014 from 3.5% to 3.3%. The risk to the growth outlook is assessed to be on the downside, 
particularly  due  to  the  electricity  supply  constraints,  difficult  labour  market  conditions, 
particularly  in  the  mining  sector,  and  weaker  commodity  prices.  Unemployment  levels 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
continue to remain sticky and have risen in the first quarter of 2013 to 25.2%. Of particular 
concern is the increase in the youth unemployment rate to 52.9% in the first quarter.  
Although targeted consumer inflation surprised on the down side in May 2013, decelerating 
from 5.9% in April to 5.6%, this easing in price pressures is assessed to be temporary. The 
Bank’s  latest  inflation  forecast  has  been  revised  upwards,  and  inflation  is  expected  to 
average  5.9%  and  5.5%  in  2013  and  2014,  respectively,  with  a  temporary  breach  in  the 
target  during  the  third  quarter  of  2013  when  inflation  is  expected  to  average  6.3%.  The 
upward pressure on inflation is mainly due to the continued currency weakness and higher 
than expected fuel price increases. 
The role of the SARB 
The  South  African  Reserve  Bank  mandate  as  set  out  in  the  Constitution  is  to  protect  the 
value of the currency in the interest of balanced and sustainable economic growth in South 
Africa.  Price  stability  is  generally  viewed  as  a  critical  element  of  the  foundation  of  an 
economy  and  contributes 
towards  achieving  economic  growth,  development  and 
employment creation. 
The achievement of price stability, in the case of South Africa, is quantified by the setting of 
an inflation target by government that serves as a yardstick against which price stability is 
measured. The achievement of price stability is furthermore underpinned by the stability of 
the financial system and financial markets. 
In pursuit of its mandate and purpose, the Bank performs the following functions: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In addition to these core functions, the Bank also has a number of initiatives aimed at training 
young  professionals,  in  a  variety  of  fields.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  actively  supports  the 
training  of  chartered  accountants  and  is  a  sponsor  of  the  SAICA Thuthuka  School  camps. 
The  Bank  supports  the  camps  both  financially  as  well  as  through  active  participation  with 
some of our staff members participating as speakers at these camps. 
In  addition  we  currently  fund  10  students  participating  in  the  SAICA  Thuthuka  bursary 
scheme and the Bank is accredited with SAICA for the training of chartered accountants. In 
this regard, we currently have four (4) students completing their articles at the Bank. 
Formulating and implementing monetary policy; 
Promoting financial stability; 
Issuing banknotes and coin; 
Regulating and supervising the banking system; 
Ensuring the effective functioning of the national payment system (NPS); 
Managing the official gold and foreign-exchange reserves of the country; 
Acting as banker to the government; 
Administering the country’s remaining exchange controls; and 
Acting as lender of last resort in exceptional circumstances. 
The role of chartered accountants 
In the most recent World Competiveness Report, South Africa performed dismally, sliding in 
ranking to 52nd place out of 144 countries. The deteriorating state capacity was one of the 
areas that contributed to the slide in the country’s ranking, and some of the more problematic 
areas identified included an inefficient bureaucracy, corruption and policy instability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Strength of Auditing and reporting; 
Regulation of securities exchange; and 
Efficacy of corporate Boards. 
On the positive side, we can be proud to be recognised to be at the forefront of governance 
and was ranked number one in the following areas: 
• 
• 
• 
It is therefore evident that South Africa’s auditing and accounting professionals are among 
the  best  in  the  world,  and  I  do  believe  that  accountants  have  an  important  role  to  play  in 
ensuring that some of the structural challenges in this country are addressed effectively. The 
profession can for example make a tangible contribution in commerce and industry, but also 
towards the public sector by ensuring that our enterprises are capacitated to deal with the 
many  challenges  that  are  faced.  Members  can,  by  using  the  skills  and  aptitude  that  are 
acquired  during  their  academic  and  practical  training,  and  which  include  skills  such  as 
analytical  ability,  professionalism,  integrity,  understanding  complexity,  etc.  assist  in  solving 
complex problems and challenges but also ensure that the many opportunities for innovation 
and advancement are fully exploited. 
I also would like to remind, especially the younger members of the profession, of a quote by 
John F. Kennedy which goes: “To those whom much is given, much is expected.” As trainees 
and  newly  qualified  chartered  accountants  many  of  you  have  had  the  benefit  of  good 
schooling and tertiary education. You have further benefitted from the investment in you and 
opportunities  created  for  you  by  this  society.  This  privilege  imposes  upon  you  a  moral 
obligation to plough back into both your immediate communities and our society at large by 
ensuring that you adhere to and promote the high ethical and professional standards of your 
profession. 
It  is  in  this  context  that  it  is  appropriate  that  members  and  aspiring  members  of  the 
profession  respond  positively  to  the  call  of  public  service  and  that  members  do  not  only 
become service providers to the private sector, but that they also join the ranks of the public 
service in order to address the shortage of skills within that sector. In this context they have 
much to contribute to root out corruption, design monitoring and early warning systems so as 
to  ensure  improved  service  delivery,  institute  controls  that  would  minimise  instances  of 
wasteful and fruitless expenditure, design reports so that politicians and officials have access 
to accurate and timely information and which should contribute to improved decision-making 
and policy outcomes. 
I wish to encourage members to think critically and to help shape the regulatory landscape, 
both  locally  and  domestically,  and  to  actively  contribute  to  the  debate  and  continuous 
improvement  of  the  international  standards  and  frameworks.  Andy  Haldane,  Executive 
Director  for  Financial  Stability  at  the  Bank  of  England,  in  a  speech  to  a  conference  in 
December 2011, hosted by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales, for 
example, questioned the appropriateness of fair value accounting for the banking sector. He 
claimed  that:  “historically,  fair  value  accounting  principles  have  gained  ground  when  the 
going has been good, and lost it when it has got tough. …During the downswing, fair value 
principles are rolled back.” Similarly, Brenton Saunders, a Director at an asset management 
firm, in a recent article in a local financial magazine questioned the appropriateness of full 
fair  value  accounting  and  the  mark-to-market  of  reserves  and  resources  of  mining 
companies. 
I shall refrain from expressing an opinion on the appropriateness of fair value accounting, as 
we  know  that  other  conventions  such  as  amortised  cost  valuation  also  have  their  own 
shortcomings, particularly when it comes, for example, to the recognition of interest rate risk. 
I do, however, believe that both Andy Haldane and Brenton Saunders touch on issues that 
are worth debating and I would like to see far more robust public discourse by a wider range 
of  stakeholders  as  to  both  the  appropriateness  but  also  the  possible  unintended 
consequences of some of the international reporting standards and frameworks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Conclusion 
As we enter the sixth year of the global crisis, with several factors pointing to a prolonged 
period  of  weak  economic  recovery,  new  and  fresh  thinking  has  become  more  critical  than 
ever.  Add  to  this  our  list  of  significant  structural  challenges  that  we  need  to  overcome 
domestically,  and  it  is  essential  that  we  have  all  hands  on  deck.  I  believe  that  Chartered 
Accountants through their unique skill set have a very important role to play in helping us to 
steer the country to exploiting its full potential. 
I  hope  that  you  are  not  only  up  to  the  task  but  that  you  enthusiastically  embrace  the 
challenge. 
I thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
