Andrew Bailey: Capital and lending 
Article by Mr Andrew Bailey, Deputy Governor of Prudential Regulation and Chief Executive 
Officer  of  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  at  the  Bank  of  England,  published  in  the 
Sunday Times, 5 May 2013. 
 Crises often lead to big changes in public policy. Britain’s decision in the 1990s to embrace 
the objective of sustained low inflation and an independent central bank had its roots in the 
horribly high inflation of the 1970s. 
Now we have a big change in financial regulation rooted in a more recent crisis, the credit 
crunch of six years ago. Since the start of April, the financial policy committee (FPC) of the 
Bank of England has had a statutory duty to protect and enhance the stability of the financial 
system. 
Alongside  it  at  the  Bank  is  the  new  Prudential  Regulation  Authority  (PRA).  Its  job  is  to 
promote the safety and soundness of banks, insurers and large investment firms by focusing 
on  the  problems  they  cause  for  financial  stability.  This  is  a  new  direction  for  financial 
regulation. 
The  crises  that  lead  to  such  big  changes  often  follow  long  upswings  in  economic  and 
financial conditions that are allowed to go to excess. Light touch regulation in the run-up to 
the start of the financial crisis in 2007 supported expansionary growth in the balance sheets 
of banks – too much borrowing – which was literally too good to be true. 
Our  new  approach  is  designed  to  counter  the  risk  that  policy  is  too  accommodating  in 
upswings and too harsh in downturns. Two important principles stand out for me: first, that 
we must carry out financial regulation with an eye on conditions in the real economy, which 
means promoting stable and sustainable credit creation and growth; and second, we should 
always be prepared to look to the risks ahead, and exercise sensible judgment. 
The financial crisis has taught us in the most painful way of the dangers of waiting too long to 
take action and then being unable to prevent the worst consequences of delay. 
The FPC has recommended that British banks make sure their capital level is high enough to 
withstand  future  threats.  Some  banks  will  need  to  increase  their  equity  capital  for  a  given 
level of risk in their balance sheets. 
Concerns have been expressed that this change will harm lending to the UK economy. I do 
not agree with these concerns. Equity capital is not money that has to be stashed away for a 
rainy day and thus put to no good use. It is the shareholders’ stake in the company. In non-
financial companies, shareholder capital or equity is used to finance the acquisition of assets. 
The  same  is  true  for  banks.  Equity  finances  the  provision  of  loans  to  households  and 
companies, and those loans are the banks’ assets. In that sense, capital supports lending by 
banks and does not substitute for it. Higher capital requirements ensure that enough of the 
finance raised by banks is in a form that can absorb losses without the banks failing. 
Higher  levels  of  capital enable  banks  to  attract other  non-capital funding,  in  turn making  it 
easier for them to lend to households and businesses. At present it is the better capitalised 
banks that are expanding lending. 
How well are the banks doing in building resilience? There is good news here, as the banks 
have  strengthened  their  capital  positions  since  the  darkest  days  of  the  crisis.  But  there  is 
further to go. These capital positions are most often measured by the ratio of capital to risk-
weighted assets. 
Risk is difficult to measure, but I think that we must continue to do this, albeit accepting the 
uncertainty  in  the  process  by  using  a  healthy  dose  of  scepticism,  and  aiming  to  keep  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
method of measurement as simple as we reasonably can. But it is helpful to back up the risk-
based measure with a leverage ratio that simply measures capital as a proportion of assets. 
In the lead-up to the crisis, banks around the world chronically underestimated the risks to 
which they were exposed. The consequences were dramatic and highly damaging, and we 
are still living with them today. 
The crisis has been fundamentally a product of banks that grew rapidly  and failed to back 
that growth with sufficient capital to bear the losses. The FPC has recommended that banks 
should ensure that they take the necessary steps to put our system in a place where it can 
support the economy without compromising its stability. 
The Bank of England has taken steps to extend the Funding for Lending Scheme, and within 
that has acted to provide a clear incentive to stimulate lending by banks to small firms. 
But banks that are short of capital cannot increase lending. That is why in March the FPC 
made a series of recommendations to ensure that UK banks are well capitalised, and that 
banks meet that requirement in a way that does not hinder lending to the economy. 
You may be assured that we are determined that the newly formed PRA follows through on 
those recommendations.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
