Mario Draghi: Stable euro, strong Europe 
Speech by Mr Mario Draghi, President of the European Central Bank, at the Wirtschaftstag 
2013, Berlin, 25 June 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  speak  to  you  today.  And  I  am  grateful  for  the  invitation  from  the 
Wirtschaftsrat, an institution grounded on the principles of the Soziale Marktwirtschaft in the 
tradition of Ludwig Erhard. 
In a speech here in Berlin just 18 months ago, I quoted Erhard’s famous dictum: “Die soziale 
Marktwirtschaft ist ohne eine konsequente Politik der Preisstabilität nicht denkbar”. 
So I am happy to accept our host’s invitation to reflect on the importance of a stable euro and 
a strong Europe. 
All  policy-makers  can  and  should  contribute  to  preserving  the  stability  of  our  common 
currency and to building a stronger and more prosperous Europe. I would like to emphasise 
my personal commitment to this goal. 
I  am  confident  that  through  our  joint  efforts  to  complete  the  institutional  architecture  of 
economic and monetary union (EMU), we can serve this collective mission. 
The  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  an  unambiguous  mandate  against  which  our 
performance  can  be  measured:  medium-term  price  stability,  understood  as  an  average 
annual inflation rate of just below 2%. 
The ECB’s task and track record 
With  this  objective,  we  are  continuing  for  17  countries  what  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank 
achieved for Germany. Our history is younger, but it is with some pride that I say that the 
ECB has accomplished this objective for almost 15 years. And it is with emphasis that I say 
that we are committed to taking the exact same objective into the future. 
The  euro’s  track  record  demonstrates  the  ECB’s  success  in  attaining  this  objective. 
According to our projections, by the end of 2014, the average annual inflation rate since the 
start of the euro will decline to 1.97%. 
This  inflation  record  over  such  a  long  period  is  well  below  those  recorded  in  any  larger 
country now part of the euro area in the half-century preceding the euro and also compares 
very well in an international context. The ECB’s track record is therefore remarkable. 
Our  commitment  to  taking  the  exact  same  objective  forward  is  reflected  in  inflation 
expectations. They confirm that the currency is stable. Survey- and market-based measures 
of inflation expectations are firmly anchored at levels consistent with our definition of price 
stability. 
In  the  spirit  of  Ludwig  Erhard,  the  ECB  is  making  its  contribution  to  the  social  market 
economy. 
The ECB’s response and instruments 
Having the same objective does not necessarily mean using the same instruments. The ECB 
has  inherited  its  objective  from  the  Bundesbank,  but  it  is  operating  in  a  new  and  different 
environment. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Today’s economic and monetary union is larger and more diverse than a single country, such 
as Germany. It is highly integrated but still at times fragmented. And it comprises a very large 
number of policy-makers on fiscal, structural and other economic matters. 
All policy-makers have to recognise that we belong to EMU together and that policies as well 
as policy inaction create spillovers for other members. This is an enormous responsibility for 
governments and other economic policy-makers. 
For  the  ECB  to  operate  in  this  environment,  and  to  be  responsible  and  effective  in 
accomplishing its objective, we have to use a wide range of instruments. Some instruments 
are standard, some non-standard, but all are based on the ECB Statutes. The use of these 
instruments  has  been  essential  in  safeguarding  our  objective  during  the  financial  and 
sovereign debt crisis. 
In the run-up to the crisis, inappropriate fiscal, structural and other economic policies fostered 
an  excessive  build-up  of  risk  in  the financial  sector  and  created  vulnerabilities  on  a  global 
scale. 
When  the  crisis  erupted,  these  vulnerabilities  placed  a  heavy  burden  on  central  banks.  In 
particular,  the  threat  of  a  financial  meltdown  jeopardised  their  capability  to  counteract 
downside risks to price stability. 
The  ECB  acted  on  that  threat  according  to  our  unambiguous  mandate  to  deliver  price 
stability. 
We  have  reduced  our  main  policy  rates  to  historical  lows.  This  contributed  to  stabilising 
investment and consumption decisions in the euro area. Our actions prevented a steeper fall 
in aggregate demand and ensured the conditions for stable prices in the euro area. 
In  a  bank-based  economy  like  the  euro  area,  monetary  policy  works  through  banks,  and 
banks  lend  to  each  other,  based  on  mutual  trust.  In  the  crisis,  that  trust  got  lost,  and  the 
banks no longer lent to each other. Facing the threat of a euro-area wide funding crisis, they 
turned to the central bank. 
We,  the  central  bank,  provided  liquidity  to  banks  because  we  have  to  work  through  them. 
They  are  our  counterparts  –  and  we  had to  act.  There  was  no guarantee  that the  liquidity 
provided would all end up in the real economy but because we acted, we avoided an even 
larger credit crunch and a collapse of parts of the banking system. 
We  designed  our  instruments  so  as  to  provide  long-term  credit  to  banks  and  give  them 
reassurance that they could satisfy their liquidity needs over an extended period. This gave 
banks a clear funding perspective and put them in a position to provide credit lines to the real 
economy, in line with their business assessment of credit risks. 
ECB policy responses over the past 12 months 
By mid-2012, the crisis took a new turn. We saw the risk of a complete collapse of all credit 
markets.  Risks  to  fiscal  sustainability  and  growing  market  distrust  in  some  euro  area 
countries  started  to  spill  over  into  their  respective  banking  sectors.  Close  links  between 
sovereigns and banks threatened the stability of the entire banking sector in some countries. 
While  impairments  to  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  eased  in  some  countries,  they 
became  entrenched  and  more  acute  in  others.  Fractures  in  transmission  –  a  new 
phenomenon since the start of EMU – appeared along national borders. 
Investors suddenly lost confidence that the euro area could survive in its current composition. 
In  fact,  the  prospect  that  claims  on  certain  governments  and  private  companies  in  certain 
countries could not be discharged in euros had become a possibility. 
International  investors  started  divesting  securities  issued  by  governments  of  non-core 
economies and of private institutions domiciled in those countries. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Germany became the destination of “safe-haven” flows. Capital, deposits and central bank 
liquidity  were  leaving  the  periphery  and  concentrating  in  the  core.  Market  interest  rates  in 
Germany fell as bond prices were driven upwards, and at some point, German bond market 
rates were lower than ECB refinancing rates! 
At the same time, the loss of liquidity and bank funding capacity in the periphery produced a 
tightening of credit conditions in those economies. Interest rates for bank customers, firms 
and households were dropping in the core and rising in the periphery. 
Eventually,  the  fragmentation  of  financial  conditions  became  so  severe  that  we  were 
effectively losing the steering ability of our monetary policy for the euro area as a whole. In 
this environment, we once again had to act. 
As our main instrument,  we announced the programme of Outright Monetary Transactions 
(OMT) in secondary government bond markets. The aim is to eliminate redenomination risk, 
namely uncertainty about the survival of the euro. 
Since  OMT  was  announced  almost  one  year  ago,  its  benefits  have  been  widely 
acknowledged. 
The glut of liquidity in core economies has been partly reabsorbed, as deposits and savings 
have returned to the periphery. 
Interest rates in Germany have increased and they have fallen in the periphery. 
Target balances, a powerful summary indicator of fragmentation, have come down by one 
quarter from their peak last year. 
Funding costs in the countries under stress have fallen substantially. Both banks and firms in 
stressed countries have been able to regain access to market financing, both for funding and 
raising capital. 
Our initiative has therefore been beneficial to all: banks, companies and households – and it 
has benefited both periphery and core countries. 
Let me highlight a few features of OMT that are essential to bear in mind. 
First, OMT comes with strict and effective conditionality attached to a programme with the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM). The initiative is activated only if a country submits to 
policy conditionality that leads to policy reforms. 
Governments are not presented with a choice between reforms or OMT. OMT comes only 
with  reforms.  And  reforms  need  a  disciplined  process  of  monitoring  and  international 
surveillance for the country concerned. Otherwise, there is no OMT activation. 
Second,  conditionality  enhances  the  independence  and  the  effectiveness  of  our  monetary 
policy. The reason is that conditionality is a necessary but not sufficient condition to activate 
OMT.  We  would  only  act  if  the  right  conditions  for  effective  use  of  this  monetary  policy 
instrument were in place. 
Third, the ECB would not act to compress spreads artificially; on the contrary, we believe that 
spreads  should  naturally  reflect  the  underlying  fiscal  position  of  the  sovereign  and  the 
economic prospects of the country. This is also why we emphasised that a sovereign needs 
to have market access to qualify for OMT. 
Fourth, OMT does not entail a transfer of risks from periphery to core countries via the ECB’s 
balance sheet, over and beyond risks that are inevitable and inherent in the implementation 
of a single monetary policy for 17 sovereign states. 
The OMT announcement has lowered risks for core countries: the risks of a euro area break-
up;  the  risks  arising  from  Target  balances  in  such  a  scenario;  and  the  risks  from  market 
interest rates distorted by safe-haven flows. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Because of OMT, the euro area is a more stable and resilient place to invest in than it was a 
year ago. 
Indeed, I would say that OMT is even more essential now as we see potential changes in the 
monetary  policy  stance  with  associated  uncertainty  in  other  jurisdictions  of  the  integrated 
global economy. 
Essential reforms going forward 
So where do we stand? 
In terms of monetary policy, price stability is assured, and the overall economic outlook still 
warrants an accommodative stance. We see some signs of stabilisation in sentiment, even 
though  uncertainties  remain.  And  we  expect  that  monetary  stimulus  and  improvements  in 
financial markets will support a recovery later in the year. 
The situation has improved; fragmentation has receded; and tentative signs of stabilisation 
have occurred. 
But monetary policy is only a small part of the overall policy agenda for overcoming the crisis 
and  laying  the  foundations  for  sustainable  growth  and  renewed  employment  creation. 
Governments, social partners and other important economic decision-makers have to live up 
to their responsibilities, too. 
One key issue is structural reform to make euro area economies more business friendly and 
more  competitive  in  the  global  economy.  There  is  a  host  of  indicators  –  from  the  Global 
Competitiveness indicators to the Ease of Doing Business indicators – that lay out the reform 
agenda  in  no  uncertain  terms:  only  a  handful  of  euro  area  countries  rank  highly  on  these 
indicators. Germany is among them, thanks to the resolute structural reforms implemented in 
this country ten years ago. These reforms are an inspiration for other countries. 
Many European countries have structural problems: it takes longer to get licenses, permits 
and other administrative authorisations than in other countries; the judicial system is slower; 
and regulation is more complex. Structural reforms may hurt a few vested interests, but they 
would clearly strengthen the effectiveness, competitiveness and, yes, also the fairness of our 
economies. 
Another key  issue  is  growth-friendly  fiscal  consolidation. We  have  to  be  mindful  that  debt-
based fiscal spending is no way to growth. Euro area government debt has risen by almost 
20 percentage points of GDP in the last 15 years and by over 50 percentage points in the 
last 30 years. At the same time, growth has fallen, from 3.8% on average in the 1970s to 
2.1% in the 1990s and roughly zero now. Debt spending has not avoided the stagnation of 
economic growth. 
But  fiscal  consolidation  can  be  made  much  more  growth-friendly  by  cutting  unproductive 
expenditures, by establishing credible and detailed medium-term fiscal plans and by lowering 
the tax burden where it is harming economic activity and job creation in particular. 
The  third  key  issue  is  ensuring  a  sound  financial  system.  This  is  where  current  efforts  to 
establish a European banking union are crucial. The aim of the banking union is to establish 
transparency, stability and incentive-compatibility in the euro area financial market. 
Conclusion 
I have outlined what we at the ECB have been doing – and what needs to be done in other 
key domains of European economic policy. 
The June 2012 summit was so important because in times of great uncertainty it provided a 
clear  vision  of  what  is  necessary for  a  stable  and  genuine  economic  and  monetary  union. 
Much of it is being implemented. And I am confident that the project for Europe will continue 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  evolve  towards  renewed  economic  strength and  social  cohesion  based  on  mutual  trust, 
both within and across national borders, and above all stability. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
