Eddie Yue: The development and future of the offshore Renminbi market 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the Euromoney Global Offshore RMB Funding Forum 2013, Hong Kong, 8 May 
2013. 
 1 Richard (Morrow),2 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Tony (Shale)(cid:15)
Good morning, and thank you all for coming. I’m honoured that Euromoney has invited me to 
speak at the Global Offshore RMB Funding Forum for the second year in a row. I recognise 
many  familiar  faces  in  the  audience  today,  and  I  note  the  presence  of  a  wide  range  of 
panellists who will no doubt examine the offshore RMB market from every possible angle and 
perspective. 
Here in Hong Kong – the world’s premier offshore RMB business centre – we have had a 
front row seat to watch the offshore RMB market take shape over the past few years. Since I 
last addressed this forum in May 2012, this market has continued to expand and evolve at a 
dizzying pace, which will provide for an interesting and timely dialogue today. 
However, before we get into what will be a spirited discussion, I want to use my role as the 
opening  keynote  speaker  to  take  a  step  back  and  gain  a  broader  perspective  of 
developments to date. I also want to look at the macro context, which is likely to play a major 
role in shaping future developments. 
As we consider the possibilities for the offshore RMB market, it is instructive to review the 
development  of  the  Eurodollar  market.  What  are  the  key  underlying  elements  that  have 
driven the growth of the Eurodollar market and how do they feature in the current offshore 
RMB market environment? 
The Eurodollar market as a comparison 
A  close  examination  of  the  differences  and  similarities  between  the  two  markets  can  help 
shed  light  on  how  offshore  RMB  market  activities  might  evolve  as  well  as  how  its  further 
development  can  be  fostered.  Let’s  compare  the  two  markets  using  four  sets  of 
characteristics. 
Economic weight and trade centrality 
The first set of characteristics involves economic weight and trade centrality. 
The Eurodollar market is an offshore market for the currency of a country that has both. 
Similarly, the offshore RMB market is supported by China’s rapidly expanding economy and 
its substantial trade links with other parts of the world, given its status as the world’s second 
largest economy and largest trading nation. 
Indeed, these are two important macro trends that are driving offshore RMB market activities 
now  and  in  the  future.  In  roughly  three  years  since  the  relevant  policies  were  liberalised, 
currently some 10% of Mainland China’s total trade, about 12% of foreign direct investment 
into China and about 4% of outward direct investment from China are settled in RMB. 
                                                
1   Mr Tony Shale, Chief Executive Officer, Euromoney Institutional Investor, Asia. 
2   Mr Richard Morrow, Editor, Asiamoney. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Compare this with the fact that about 30% of Japanese trade is settled in yen, 50–60% of 
euro area trade is settled in euros, and 80–90% of US trade is settled in US dollars. Clearly 
there  is  the  potential  for  more  RMB  transactions  –  especially  trade  and  direct  investment 
transactions where regulations have been liberalised – to be carried out internationally. And 
we can trust that China’s economic development and its global links will continue to be at the 
forefront in the coming years to support a full spate of offshore market activities. 
Currency convertibility and onshore financial market depth and liquidity 
The  second  set  of  characteristics  involves  currency  convertibility  and  onshore  financial 
market depth and liquidity. 
The  Eurodollar  market  is  an  offshore  market  of  a  convertible  currency  and  supported  by 
extensive links with deep and liquid onshore financial markets. 
On the other hand, the offshore RMB market is a market of a currency that is not yet fully 
convertible,  and  the  links  with  the  onshore  financial  markets  are  still  subject to  limitations. 
The RMB is convertible in respect of the current account and certain capital account items 
such  as  direct  investments,  while  other  flows  like  portfolio  investments  can  only  be 
conducted under specified quotas. 
The opening up of even more channels for two-way flows between the onshore and offshore 
markets  would  be  required  to  spur  offshore  RMB  activities.  A  few  years  ago,  these  ideas 
would have sounded difficult, but today we are edging ever closer to realising many of them, 
which is indicative of the rapid pace of change in the offshore RMB market. But as we all 
recognise,  this  will  be  a  paced  process  and  not  something  that  would  or  should  happen 
overnight. 
On  this  front,  the  HKMA  has  been  engaging  with  Mainland  Chinese  authorities  on  further 
expanding fund flows between the onshore and offshore RMB markets. And I am pleased to 
say that significant progress has been made. Most recently, the quota for the RMB Qualified 
Foreign Institutional Investor (RQFII) scheme was expanded by RMB200 billion, bringing the 
total to RMB270 billion. The Qianhai cross-border lending pilot scheme was also launched, 
enabling companies incorporated in Qianhai to borrow RMB loans from banks in Hong Kong 
for uses relating to the development of Qianhai. 
I  look  forward  to  the  further  streamlining  of  policy  arrangements  so  that  all  cross-border 
transactions currently settled in US dollars can have the option to be settled in RMB also. 
This in turn could be followed by the continued relaxation of cross-border flows of RMB into 
and  out  of  Mainland  China  along  with  the  liberalisation  of  China’s  capital  account.  The 
relaxation of capital account restrictions, the expansion of the offshore RMB market, and an 
increase  in  the  financial  depth  of  the  onshore  markets  can  be  mutually  reinforcing  and 
beneficial to the growth of the offshore RMB market. 
Intermediation among non-residents 
The third set of characteristics involves the provision of intermediation among non-residents. 
The Eurodollar market provides efficient intermediation among non-residents. For example, it 
allows for Eurodollar bonds to be issued by non-US entities and bought by non-US investors. 
To  an  increasing  extent,  the  offshore  RMB  market  is  functioning  as  a  platform  for  RMB 
financial  activities  conducted  by  non-residents.  The  pool  of  RMB  deposits  in  Hong  Kong, 
being  deposits  of  mainly  non-Mainland  individuals  and  corporates,  is  exceeding  RMB  800 
billion. Adding to that is the dim sum bond market, which has a size of RMB 260 billion at 
present.  Offshore  RMB  bonds  are  being  issued  by  Mainland  Chinese  entities  as  well  as 
multinationals, and they are being bought by offshore investors. At the same time, banks in 
Hong  Kong  are  extending  RMB  loans  to  customers,  with  the  outstanding  amount  of  such 
RMB loans currently stands at close to RMB90 billion. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As the market deepens and a greater variety of RMB products become available offshore, 
we  will eventually see  more RMB intermediation within the offshore markets, especially as 
non-Chinese residents become willing borrowers of RMB. However, for that to happen, work 
on  different fronts  needs  to  be  pursued  and market efficiency furthered  through  innovative 
solutions and active participation by different market players. I anticipate this could play out 
in three dimensions: 
• 
First, there will be a need to facilitate the further development of the RMB banking 
market  so  that  offshore  RMB  liquidity  can  be  efficiently  allocated,  which  would 
enable banks in need of RMB to easily obtain it from banks with surplus liquidity. We 
can already see the market moving in this direction as banks begin to diversify and 
expand  their  RMB  assets  progressively.  Meanwhile,  the  introduction  of  a  cross-
border collateral management arrangement opens an efficient channel for financial 
institutions  to  widen  their  liquidity  sources  and  obtain  offshore  RMB  liquidity  from 
Hong Kong, using even non-RMB papers for repos. 
Second,  there  will  also  be  a  need  to  facilitate  the  development  of  RMB  capital 
markets. On this front, Hong Kong’s dim sum bond market has shown encouraging 
development. Already, multilateral companies and international financial institutions 
such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank have tapped the dim sum 
bond market. For the market to develop further, there will be a need to continue to 
broaden the participation of both issuers and investors. Additionally, the tenor and 
variety of debt instruments will need to increase to meet the financing requirements 
of  different  issuers  while  satisfying  the  appetites  of  different  investors.  There  has 
been repeated RMB sovereign bond issuance by the Ministry of Finance and more 
regular issuance in due course will help to gradually build a benchmark yield curve. 
In the meantime, I am pleased to note that the first RMB equity securities have been 
listed on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange. 
Third, there will also be a need to enhance the price discovery process and related 
market infrastructure for RMB transactions. This will mean introducing the necessary 
benchmarks  for  RMB  transactions  in  the  offshore  market,  including  an  exchange 
rate  fixing,  interest  rate  fixing  and  various  kinds  of  benchmarks  for  RMB 
investments. The Treasury Markets Association introduced spot USD/CNH fixing in 
June  2011,  and  they  recently  announced  the  June  2013  launch  of  CNH  HIBOR 
fixing.  This  welcome  development  will  provide  a  reliable  benchmark  to  price  loan 
facilities  and  facilitate  the  development  of  the  offshore  RMB  interest  rate  swap 
market. 
  Global hubs and linkages 
The fourth and final characteristic – the presence of a network of global hubs and linkages – 
is  especially  apt  for  all  of  us  in  this  room  today  as  we  consider  Hong  Kong’s  role  in  the 
nascent offshore RMB market. 
The Eurodollar market, which originated in London, is made up of different hubs connected 
by extensive links. London remains a major centre, while other hubs serve other time zones 
and networks, and together they form an integrated whole through the free flow of funds. 
In 2004, Hong Kong was the first offshore market to launch RMB business, and since then it 
has  provided  an  efficient  and  reliable  settlement  platform  from  which  trade  settlement  is 
conducted,  RMB  liquidity  built  up,  financing  activities  arranged  and  a  wide  range  of  RMB 
products developed. 
As the RMB becomes more widely used internationally, other markets that complement Hong 
Kong’s  central  role  are  emerging  around  the  world.  Cooperation  between  these  different 
markets is conducive to growing the whole market, and we are seeing increasing linkages 
being set up to facilitate the flow of funds between the markets. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
These increasing linkages are the result of several encouraging trends, including the fact that 
financial institutions in different financial centres have strengthened their business networks 
in order to serve customers’ RMB needs. For instance, the operating hours of Hong Kong’s 
RMB Real Time Gross Settlement system have been lengthened, providing the capability to 
serve the settlement of offshore transactions in the European timezone and early business 
hours in North America. We at the HKMA are also conducting a range of outreach activities 
to strengthen Hong Kong’s RMB business links with other parts of the world. These include 
conducting  roadshows  to  showcase  Hong  Kong  as  the  offshore  RMB  business  centre,  as 
well  as  facilitating  private  sector-led  forums  and  dialogue  meetings  with  authorities  in 
Australia  and  London.  These  and  other  initiatives  have  encouraged  actions  to  enhance 
various 
liquidity  management  and  settlement 
arrangements, between markets in different parts of the world. 
financial  services, 
including  RMB 
Concluding remarks 
As  I  mentioned  at  the  outset,  I  had  the  privilege  of  delivering  the  keynote  address  at  last 
year’s  Global  Offshore  RMB  Funding  Forum  as  well.  In  my  remarks  of  a  year  ago,  I 
mentioned that we are at a period of historic transition with regard to the development of the 
offshore RMB market. 
Looking at the development of the Eurodollar and offshore RMB markets side-by-side, as we 
just did, gives us a unique perspective on how things might play out in the long run. Indeed, 
as the offshore RMB market reaches maturity, there will no doubt be volumes of literature 
written by financial historians that compare the birth and development of these two markets. 
While developments so far have been encouraging, we are still at the initial phase of RMB 
offshore  market  development.  The  policy  headroom  to  develop  RMB  business  is  already 
present,  and  we  at  the  HKMA  will  continue  to  provide  a  safe  and  efficient  financial 
infrastructure for the conduct of RMB offshore activities. But the most important of all, I would 
encourage  businesses  and  financial  institutions  to  make  full  use  of  such  opportunities 
already  available  and  promote  the  development  of  a  wide  range  of  RMB  services  and 
financial products. Forums like this one help us prepare for the future by examining what has 
transpired,  making  comparisons  and  exploring  business  opportunities  and  collaborative 
initiatives. 
I am eager to work together with all of you in shaping what is to come. 
Thank you. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
