George A Provopoulos: Overview of recent developments in the Greek 
economy 
Speech by Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 80th Annual 
Meeting of Shareholders, Athens, 25 February 2013. 
 The outlook is improving – efforts should continue in order to ensure that the 
sacrifices are not in vain 
The improvement in Greece’s economic prospects is visible 
The  ten  months  since  the  last  General  Meeting  of  Shareholders  have  seen  important 
developments, which are now shaping a new and clearly improved economic environment. 
A year ago many analysts anticipated that a Greek default and exit from the euro area was 
almost inevitable. Today, such an eventuality is significantly reduced and the economy can 
look forward to a gradual exit from the crisis. 
The turnaround in sentiment has been due to a number of factors, which helped the Greek 
economy  to  avoid  the  risk  of  collapse  and  get  back  onto  the  track  of  rebalancing  and 
stabilisation. 
The first among these factors was the affirmative answer of the Greek people to the historic 
dilemma  concerning  Greece’s  continued  participation  in  the  euro  area.  The  coalition 
government explicitly stated its determination to safeguard the country’s European path. This 
key choice, along with progress in making up for the major delays associated with the two 
consecutive  national  elections,  made  it  possible  for  the  Eurogroup  to  decide  to  support 
Greece financially. These developments had a beneficial effect on economic sentiment. 
On the domestic front, pessimistic expectations have dissipated considerably and confidence 
is 
in  
December 2012–January 2013. An improvement in confidence is also evidenced by the fact 
that  domestic  banks  are  now  less  reliant  on  refinancing  from  the  Eurosystem.  This  is 
attributable to a reversal of the downward trend of deposits (which have increased by EUR 
15  billion  since  the  elections  of  last  June),  while  it  also  partly  reflects  the  first  successful 
attempts of Greek banks to regain access to international money markets. 
Abroad,  the  climate  as  far  as  Greece  is  concerned  is  also  turning  around.  Negative 
references to Greece are less frequent, while EU officials express unequivocally their desire 
to support Greece. The changed climate is reflected in a sharp narrowing of the yield spread 
between Greek and German ten-year government bonds. 
The second factor which has contributed to this improvement is the progress made in the 
implementation  of  the  adjustment  programme,  particularly  in  addressing  the  twin  deficits  – 
fiscal and external. This progress is a sign of incipient rebalancing and restructuring in the 
economy. 
• 
improving.  The  Economic  Sentiment 
Indicator  stood  at  a 
In  the  fiscal  domain,  deficit  reduction  has  been  remarkable.  Between  2009  and 
2012,  both  the  general  government  deficit  and  the  corresponding  primary  deficit 
were reduced by 9 percentage points of GDP, while the fall in the structural deficit, 
at 15 percentage points, was even larger. 
Regarding the external sector, the current account deficit shrank to 2.9% in 2012, 
down from a peak of almost 15% of GDP in 2008. More importantly, between 2010 
and  2012,  Greece  recovered  more  than  75%  of  the  loss  in  cost  competitiveness 
incurred over the 2001–2009 period. 
two-year  high 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A third crucial factor was the success in safeguarding financial stability and confidence in the 
banking  system.  Today  we  would  not  be  talking  about  the  prospect  of  recovery,  had  the 
banking system collapsed making Greece’s exit from the euro area inevitable. This risk was 
averted. In a period marked by record levels of uncertainty, not one depositor suffered the 
slightest loss. Not only was systemic stability fully preserved, but the groundwork was also 
laid for a robust banking system. 
The fourth  factor  behind  the  improvement  in  confidence  has  been  the  continued  financial 
support from official lenders, which gives Greece time for the structural transformation of its 
economy to proceed smoothly. This support, provided on favourable terms, is unprecedented 
by international standards. 
A fifth factor that also bolsters confidence are the steps being taken towards supplementing 
the  institutional  architecture  of  both  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area.  The  ongoing 
discussions and decisions taken in this direction have helped to turn the international climate 
around; in turn, this affected sentiment in Greece favourably. For instance, the adoption of 
the proposal to move to a banking union will lead to a deepening of economic and monetary 
union.  The  announcement  of  “Outright  Monetary  Transactions”  by  the  Eurosystem  in 
September 2012, which by itself helped to restore relatively normal conditions in euro area 
financial markets, was of particular importance. 
In  conclusion,  the  risk  of  collapse  has  been  averted,  the  possibility  of  a  Greek  exit 
from  the  euro  area  is  now  significantly  reduced,  and  confidence  is  gradually  being 
restored. Yet, these encouraging developments leave no room for complacency. 
2013 will be another year of recession and unemployment will continue to rise 
The Greek economy is still going through a deep crisis, and the risk of a derailing has not 
been completely eliminated. 
In 2012, GDP contracted for the fifth year in a row, bringing the cumulative decline for the 
five-year period 2008–2012 to 20.1%. This percentage will be bigger for 2008–2013, as the 
recession is expected to continue, albeit at a slower pace. 
The recession led to a dramatic decline in employment and pushed the unemployment rate 
up to a historically high annual average of 24.5% in 2012; a further rise is expected in 2013. 
This crisis, unprecedented in magnitude and duration, has multiple adverse effects as it: 
• 
• 
• 
reduces per capita income and living standards; 
leads physical and human capital to become obsolete; 
causes  savings  and  banks’  deposit  base  to  shrink,  thereby  leading  to  liquidity 
constraints; 
feeds uncertainty and discourages investment; 
hampers fiscal consolidation, as lower incomes mean less revenue for government. 
This fuels a vicious circle of deficits and recession that leads to repeated revisions of 
deficit and debt targets, undermining the credibility of the consolidation programme. 
 The deeper-than-expected recession makes a faster pace of structural reforms 
imperative 
Over the last few years, the recession has turned out to be deeper than initially forecast. The 
reasons  behind  this  should  be  sought  in  the  way  the  adjustment  programme  was 
implemented:  in  the  wavering,  the  mistakes  and  omissions  and,  above  all,  the  lag  in 
implementing  structural  reforms.  This  lag  prevented  the  contractionary  effects  of  fiscal 
consolidation from being mitigated and hindered the return of confidence. The same reasons 
also  explain  the  unfavourable financial  conditions  that  prevail.  By  contrast,  if the  structural 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reforms  envisaged  in  the  programme  had  been  implemented  consistently  and  from  the 
programme’s  inception,  their  favourable  effects  would  already  have  made  themselves  felt 
and would have reduced the duration and severity of the recession. On a positive note, the 
depth of the recession and its implications have, in fact, been taken into account as shown 
by the revisions to the programme: the implementation horizon, the cost of borrowing and the 
maturities of the loans provided to Greece, the size of financial support and the measures to 
reduce the level of sovereign debt. 
In any event, the recession cannot be used as an excuse for not honouring the commitments 
made and, particularly, for any relaxation in the effort to promote the necessary reforms. If 
this were to happen, it would seriously undermine the gains in confidence that have come at 
the cost of painful sacrifices. 
2013 will be a difficult year, but recovery will be visible in the course of 2014 
As  long  as  the  prospect  of  an  exit  from  the  crisis  is  not  clearly  in  sight,  the  continuing 
recession creates an unfavourable climate and feeds social tensions. Nevertheless, we are 
now at a turning point. There is no doubt that 2013 will be a difficult year, mainly due to the 
continuing  recession  and  high  unemployment.  But  we  can  expect  recessionary  forces  to 
weaken gradually and the Greek economy to return to positive growth rates in the course of 
2014. Positive effects are expected from: 
• 
a boost to liquidity and confidence as a result of the recapitalisation of banks and the 
return of deposits to the banking system; 
a  further  improvement  in  cost  competitiveness  –  expected  in  2013  to  more  than 
offset  the  competitiveness  losses  of  2001–2009  –  and  a  resulting  increase  in 
exports; 
a speeding-up of the privatisation process, leading eventually to investments several 
times larger than the initial ones; 
progress in the deregulation of markets; 
the restarting of major infrastructure projects such as highways; 
the implementation of private investment projects, with the support of the National 
Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) and European Investment Bank funds; 
the planned repayment of public sector arrears. 
• 
In order to ensure that the above factors will deliver the expected results, it is necessary to 
safeguard  the  recent  improvement  in  confidence.  Any  extreme  or  untimely  demands  put 
forward by different social groups would be counterproductive. Society as a whole stands to 
make  a  lasting  gain  when  the  economy  gets  back  on  its  feet  again.  It  also  goes  without 
saying  that  unlawful  incidents  against  business  operations  –  no  matter how  isolated  –  are 
particularly  harmful  to  the  investment  environment  and  undermine  the  prospect  for  a 
recovery in employment. 
   Pressing ahead with the implementation of the programme is a prerequisite for 
recovery 
Where  we  stand  today  bodes  well  for  the  future.  It  can  be  reasonably  expected  that  real 
economic  recovery  will  come  fairly  soon,  provided  that  certain  conditions  are  fulfilled.  The 
most  important  is  the  continued  implementation  of  the  adjustment  programme,  with 
strict adherence to the targets and timetables set. This will ensure continued funding and 
eliminate once and for all the risk of exit from the euro area, consolidate confidence in the 
economy’s  future,  attract  new  investment  and  convey  a  clear  message  that  the  worst  is 
behind us and an exit from the crisis is in sight. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Implementation of a new model of outward-looking growth 
The  rebasing  of  the  country’s  productive  capacity  on  new  foundations  must  be  driven  by 
strengthening  its  export  orientation.  This,  in  turn,  requires  shifting  resources  towards  the 
production  of  competitive,  internationally  tradable  goods  and  services.  But  if  we  are  to 
succeed  in  transforming  the  economy,  we  must  realise  that  the  adjustment  programme 
highlights  only  the  minimum  changes  that  need  to  be  made.  Thus,  in  no  way  does  the 
programme  relieve  us  from  our  primary  responsibility  as  a  nation  to  implement  a  broader 
national  action  plan  for  growth,  incorporating  policies  for  the  transition  to  a  new  model  of 
sustainable growth. Now that public finances are stabilising, it is essential that we proceed 
faster with fundamental reforms that will ensure: 
• 
• 
• 
an efficient public sector, both citizen- and business-friendly; 
modern infrastructure; and 
open, competitive markets. 
Effective use of EU funds 
Following the recent European Council decision, the Structural Funds available to Greece for 
2014–2020 will total EUR 18.3 billion. These resources can play a decisive role in bringing 
the recovery forward and in implementing a long-term strategy for the transformation of the 
economy’s productive base. 
Under  current  circumstances,  EU  resources  could  help  to  address  serious  gaps  in  the 
financing  of  new  investment  projects.  So  far,  EU  funds,  despite  their  positive  contribution, 
have  not  been  used  to  maximum  advantage.  This  is  precisely  why  such  resources  will 
function at this time as powerful tools for growth, provided they are integrated into a broader 
national plan for growth. 
Creating the conditions for lightening the tax burden of those who already pay taxes 
The central goals of the tax reform agenda should be to broaden the tax base and curb tax 
evasion.  Indeed,  fiscal  adjustment  should  focus,  first,  on  cutting  down  those  expenditure 
items  that  are  not  conducive  to  growth  and  increasing  the  return  on  other  items  of 
expenditure and, second, on modernising tax administration in order to effectively tackle tax 
evasion.  Action  along these  lines  will  create  scope for reducing the  heavy  tax  burden  that 
has,  increasingly  in  the  last  few  years,  been  shouldered  by  those  who  already  pay  taxes. 
This will help foster a sense of equity in tax matters and will generate positive expectations 
that will partly offset the contractionary impact of spending cuts. 
The reform of the banking sector is key to restoring normal liquidity conditions 
Since the onset of the crisis, Greek banks have borne the brunt of the repeated downgrades 
of Greek sovereign debt. They were cut off from international markets, while the prevailing 
uncertainty  led  to  large  deposit  outflows  and  a  loss  of  more  than  one  third  of  the  banks’ 
deposit base in less than three years. 
The banking system’s funding constraints impaired its capacity to finance the real economy, 
causing problems for production, investment and export activity. 
Liquidity tensions were significantly eased by Greek banks’ recourse to the monetary policy 
operations of the Eurosystem and to emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) from the Bank of 
Greece. Thanks to the ample provision of liquidity from these sources, the decline in bank 
credit  to  households  and  businesses  was  much  milder  than  the  shrinking  of  the  banks’ 
deposit base. Thus, the Bank of Greece contributed to mitigating the adverse impact of the 
sovereign debt crisis on economic activity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Heightened uncertainty in the first half of 2012 posed major risks to the banking 
system 
In the January–September 2012 period, the banking groups listed on the Athens Exchange 
recorded losses of EUR 5.1 billion. These losses reflected, on the one hand, additional write-
downs  on  their  Greek  government  bond  holdings  as  a  result  of  PSI  and,  on  the  other, 
impairment charges on loans to the private sector. Accumulated losses led to a sharp decline 
in banks’ capital adequacy; thus, their recapitalisation became necessary. The NPL ratio for 
the banking system as a whole rose to 22.5% by end-September 2012, from 16% at end-
December 2011. 
Despite the adverse conditions, the risk of instability was averted 
The  uncertainties  that  prevailed  during  the  prolonged  election  period  led  to  successive 
surges in cash outflows from banks, requiring the latter to be supplied with an exceptionally 
large  amount  of  banknotes  to  banks.  The  banks’  needs  for  banknotes  were  fully  and 
efficiently met by the Bank of Greece. Even in the direst of circumstances, there was not the 
slightest doubt as to the banks’ ability to repay customer deposits. Otherwise, there would 
have been a collapse in confidence, with devastating consequences for financial stability and 
Greece’s  membership  of  the  euro  area.  Despite  the  extremely  adverse  conditions,  action 
taken  by  the  government  and  the  Bank  of  Greece  ensured  that  the  banking  system 
weathered  the  shock  and  that  not  one  depositor  lost  a  single  euro  of  their  savings.  This 
response averted a collapse in confidence in the banking system and ultimately an exit from 
the euro area. 
The recapitalisation of banks is under way 
In  May  and  December  2012,  the  four  big  banks  identified  as  viable  by  the  Viability 
Assessment Exercise of the Bank of Greece received an advance payment from the Hellenic 
Financial Stability Fund (HFSF) to replenish their capital above the regulatory minimum. The 
next  steps  of  the  recapitalisation  process  involve  the  issuance  of  contingent  convertible 
bonds and the completion of capital increases by the end of April 2013. Private shareholders 
will retain control of HFSF-supported banks, provided that they subscribe no less than 10% 
of the new common shares to be issued. According to the Memorandum, the other banks will 
have to raise private capital by the end of April 2013. If they fail to do so, the Bank of Greece 
will activate the steps envisaged in the resolution framework, at the latest by June 2013, in a 
manner that will safeguard financial stability. 
Considerable progress to date in the consolidation of the banking system 
In 2012, despite the deep crisis, the groundwork was laid for the banking system to turn the 
page. Banks are already taking their first steps towards internal reorganisation, by adapting 
their  business  models.  The  entire  banking  sector  is  being  reshaped through mergers. The 
size of the Greek economy and the excess capacity prevailing in the banking system call for 
fewer and stronger banks, which in the long run will be more resilient to exogenous shocks. 
This process of consolidation will be to the benefit of depositors and borrowers alike. Larger 
banks  typically  have  easier  access  to  international  markets  and,  given  their  greater 
efficiency, have fewer incentives to undertake high-risk investments. 
At the onset of the crisis, there were 17 banks in operation. There were also 16 cooperative 
banks, with a combined market share of just 1%. The resolution and restructuring process is 
well under way, as evidenced by the following facts and data: 
• 
So  far,  the  resolution  framework  has  been  used  to  resolve  seven  banks  –  four 
commercial banks and three cooperative banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
   At present, a merger between the two largest banks, the National Bank of Greece 
and Eurobank, is in the process of being completed. 
Alpha  Bank,  the  third  largest  bank,  has  absorbed  Emporiki  Bank,  a  subsidiary  of 
Crédit Agricole. 
Piraeus Bank has absorbed Geniki Bank, a subsidiary of Société Générale, as well 
as the sound assets and the deposits of the state-owned ATEBank; it is currently 
negotiating the acquisition of Millennium Bank. 
It is therefore expected that, in a few months from now, when the process is completed, the 
banking system will comprise three large, strong groups, as well as a few smaller banks. The 
market shares of these smaller banks, along with the presence of foreign banks, will ensure 
competition. The Greek banking system is clearly becoming more compact and efficient, as 
conditions are being put in place to enable it to exploit synergies and economies of scale. It 
is becoming stronger and better-capitalised. At the same time, it has retained its significant 
presence in south-eastern Europe. 
A robust banking system capable of financing economic recovery 
The  restructuring  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banking  system  are  pivotal  reforms  that 
contribute to strengthening confidence in the prospects of the Greek economy. The gradual 
return of deposits is a first sign that developments in the banking sector are being positively 
assessed.  The  continued  return  of  deposits  and  the  successful  completion  of  the 
recapitalisation  process  will  help  Greek  banks  to  gradually  regain  access  to  international 
money and capital markets. We are already witnessing an incipient return of Greek banks to 
the  international  markets.  On  a  more  general  note,  the  relaxation  of  banks’  capital  and 
liquidity  constraints  is  creating  conditions  for  stronger  credit  flows  to  finance  production, 
investment and exports. Having navigated through very troubled waters, the banking system 
is emerging stronger, more resilient, and able to finance growth. 
Challenges and opportunities 
The  economic  crisis  has  brought  about  not  only  acute  problems,  but  also  significant 
opportunities. 
The two most important opportunities, which pose a challenge for Greece, are: 
• 
First,  to  restructure  the  economy  towards  high-productivity  and  high-value-added 
sectors  that  would  produce  internationally  tradable  goods  and  services  that  can 
prove competitive both in the external and in the domestic market. 
Second, to modernise public administration and rationalise the boundaries and the 
management  of  the  public  sector,  while  making  it  more  citizen-  and  business-
friendly. 
 The  ability  to  rise  to  these  major  challenges  hinges  on  building  and  strengthening  social 
consensus  as  regards  the  implementation  of  the  appropriate  policies,  so  as  to  bring  the 
recovery forward and create the conditions for sustainable growth. 
Comparing the current situation with the one prevailing just a few months ago, it is clear that 
much has changed for the better. Most importantly, the risk of default and exit from the euro 
area is now remote. Thus the main factor that had fuelled unprecedented market uncertainty 
with  debilitating  effects  on  the  Greek  economy  is  weakening.  We  can  now  expect,  with 
reasonable certainty, that the steps made so far are indeed leading Greece out of the crisis 
and  onto  a  path  of  growth.  As  this  expectation  is  consolidated,  sentiment  in  Greece  will 
continue  to  improve,  setting  in  motion  a  virtuous  circle.  For  this  to  happen,  though,  the 
implementation  of  the  adjustment  programme  must  continue  without  deviations  or  delays. 
Commitment  to  achieving  the  targets,  and  where  possible,  overshooting  the  targets,  will 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
remove any remaining uncertainties and strengthen positive prospects, with very beneficial 
effects on social cohesion and the country's economic development. 
We have already come most of the way on a long and difficult road at tremendous cost to 
Greek  citizens  and  businesses.  The  distance  still  to  be  covered,  though  shorter,  will  be 
equally difficult, as it will require additional effort on top of the earlier sacrifices. However, the 
groundwork for dealing with the long-standing problems of the Greek economy has been laid. 
Now that the end of this difficult road is finally in sight, we need to intensify our efforts and 
quicken our pace in order to cover whatever distance remains and ensure that the citizens’ 
sacrifices will not be in vain and that, better yet, a promising future lies ahead. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
