Stefan Ingves: Where to next? Priorities and themes for the Basel 
Committee 
Keynote address by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank and Chairman of 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to the Third BCBS-FSI High-Level Meeting for 
Central  and  Eastern  Europe  on  “Strengthening  Financial  Sector  Supervision  and  Current 
Regulatory Priorities”, 12 March 2013. 
As prepared for delivery 
 Good morning. It is my great pleasure to be with you again today. I would like to begin by 
extending  my  appreciation  to  the  Financial  Stability  Institute  and  the  Banking  Supervisors 
from Central and Eastern Europe for their efforts in bringing us together again for another of 
these High-Level Meetings. Last year, I was pleased to have been able to be a part of what 
was a very interesting and enjoyable meeting in Warsaw hosted by our Polish colleagues. I 
hope we can replicate the success of that event this year here in Basel. 
I would like to take the opportunity today to reflect a little on what the Basel Committee has 
been doing since we last met. Then I will outline work currently in train as well as our longer-
term  strategic  priorities.  The  Committee  meets  in  this  building  tomorrow,  and  continues  to 
have a very full agenda. Indeed, the key message I would like to leave you with is that our 
work, although changing in nature, shows no signs of easing off. 
What have we done? 
Before I discuss what’s left to do, let me recap what has been done over the past year. 
The key initiatives completed by the Committee in the past year include: 
• 
reaching  agreement  on  a  package  of  revisions  to  finalise  Basel  III’s  Liquidity 
Coverage Ratio (LCR); 
revising the Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision; 
developing  a  policy  framework  for  dealing  with  domestic  systemically  important 
banks; 
establishing disclosure requirements for the new Basel III definition of capital; and 
updating  the  supervisory  guidance  for  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  a  bank’s 
internal audit function. 
  In addition, the Committee established a sound operating framework within which to assess 
its members’ implementation of Basel III. As a result, the Committee produced: 
• 
two regular semiannual reports on Basel III implementation in all member countries 
(along with two special reports to the G20 on implementation); 
assessments  of  Basel  III  implementation  in  the  European  Union,  Japan  and  the 
United States; and 
a report analysing the variability of risk-weighted asset calculations for market risk in 
individual banks. 
  Further down the agenda, my colleagues from the Basel Committee Secretariat will provide 
additional insights on our implementation work. I would like to make the point now, however, 
that these efforts are critical to delivering on the benefits that Basel III offers. Rules written 
have no effect if not implemented: we cannot fail on this front, and I will say more about our 
efforts shortly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
What are we doing? 
There is still a great deal of work being done to finish the Basel III framework. The capital 
standards are now largely settled, with the exception of some technical work on issues like 
exposures  to  central  counterparties  (CCPs).  As  I  noted  earlier,  the  LCR  has  also  been 
finalised – albeit again with some final technical details to be resolved. But there are other 
parts  of  the  Basel  framework  which  we  are  currently  working  to  flesh  out  and  make 
operational. 
Major projects currently under way include: 
• 
finalising  the  specification  of  the  leverage  ratio,  and  associated  disclosure 
requirements; 
reviewing the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR), which addresses the longer-term 
structure of bank debt and complements the short-term focus of the LCR; 
completing  the  review  of  the  trading  book  capital  requirements.  This  entails  an 
evaluation of the design of the market risk regulatory regime as well as weaknesses 
in risk measurement under the framework’s internal models-based and standardised 
approaches; 
enhancing  the  treatment  of  securitisations  to  make  capital  requirements  more 
prudent  and  risk-sensitive.  We  are  also  reviewing  ways  to  reduce  mechanistic 
reliance  on  external  credit  ratings  and  to  reduce  current  cliff  effects  in  capital 
requirements; 
strengthening standards to limit excessive and opaque risk-taking through over-the-
counter  (OTC)  derivatives  and  to  reduce  systemic  risk  posed  by  OTC  derivatives 
transactions, markets and practices. Work on margining requirements, counterparty 
credit risk and capital for banks’ exposures to central counterparties are examples of 
our efforts related to derivatives; and 
revising  the  supervisory  framework  for  large  exposures  to  complement  the 
Committee’s risk-based capital standard and to help improve banks’ measurement 
and control of large exposures. 
All  of  these  projects  are  necessary  to  ensure  that  the  regulatory  framework  adequately 
factors in the lessons from the financial crisis. The challenge, almost five years on from the 
height of the crisis, is to ensure that we bring closure to these projects and that they are in 
place before the next stage of the financial cycle begins. 
Underpinning the Committee’s policy initiatives is an extensive framework for the collection 
and  analysis  of  data  to  help  us  assess  the  quantitative  impact  of  a  particular  policy. 
Quantitative impact studies (QIS) have become a central element of the Committee’s work, 
and we have a full slate of QIS exercises planned for this year. Alongside the semiannual 
Basel III monitoring reports, almost all of the policy initiatives I have just mentioned have one 
or more data collections or impact studies planned. While this can be a burden for banks and 
supervisors, this hopefully makes for well informed policymaking – so is well worth the effort. 
In addition to all of the policy and analytical work, the Committee intends to: 
• 
continue to monitor members’ commitments to the timely implementation of agreed 
reforms. To  date, this  has  focused  on  capital,  but  will  be  expanded  over  the  next 
year to encapsulate local implementation of the LCR, as well as the frameworks for 
global and domestic systemically important banks (G-SIBs and D-SIBs), since these 
come into effect over the next couple of years; 
undertake  a  full  set  of  implementation  assessments  for  2013.  We  will  conduct 
reviews of Singapore, Switzerland, China, Australia, Brazil and Canada. Follow-up 
      2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 reviews of the European Union and the United States are also planned once their 
Basel III regulations are finalised; and 
publish a report on the initial, detailed review of risk-weighted asset calculations for 
the banking book; we hope to publish the full results by the summer. Together with 
the recently published results on the trading book, this analysis identifies the specific 
drivers that lead to variations in risk weights for similar exposures. The Committee’s 
next  step  will  then  be  to  consider  policy  responses  to  reduce  any  unwarranted 
variability and to therefore improve the comparability of banks’ ratios. 
A theme I will be returning to is the importance of this implementation monitoring work for the 
Committee. While it is a relatively new component of the Committee’s mandate, it should not 
be  seen  as  an  adjunct  to  the  Committee’s  standard-setting  role.  Rather,  it  is  absolutely 
critical to successfully delivering desired policy outcomes. 
Where to next? 
As you can see, the Committee is engaged in a variety of projects that require us to combine 
the efforts and input of regulators and supervisors across a large number of countries. This is 
a  challenging  task.  An  even  greater  challenge,  however,  is  prioritising  among  competing 
projects to achieve our most pressing objectives. The Committee’s response to the financial 
crisis has been strong, but there is still much to accomplish. So we have recently spent some 
time identifying our key strategic priorities, to make sure we have a good means of deciding 
what we really must do. As you may have seen, these priorities were endorsed by the Group 
of  Governors  and  Heads  of  Supervision  (GHOS)  at  the  same  time  they  endorsed  and 
announced the revisions to the LCR. 
The  Committee’s  primary  focus  in  the  short  and  medium  term  is  completing  and 
embedding the full suite of responses to issues that emerged from the financial crisis. With 
that in mind, foremost consideration will be given to five priority areas: 
completing the crisis-initiated reforms of the policy framework; 
1. 
monitoring and reinforcing the implementation of Basel regulatory standards; 
2. 
3. 
assessing the impact of, and industry response to, implementation of the regulatory 
reforms; 
examining the comparability of model-based internal risk weightings and considering 
the appropriate balance between the simplicity, comparability and risk sensitivity of 
the regulatory framework; and 
enhancing the effectiveness of both micro- and macroprudential supervision. 
4. 
5. 
Completion of the crisis-initiated reforms of the policy framework 
As I have already highlighted, the policy reforms initiated in response to the financial crisis 
are not yet complete. While the basic frameworks for risk-based capital and, more recently, 
liquidity are now largely settled, many of the other reforms I noted earlier remain very much a 
work in progress. To ensure that the weaknesses in the regulatory framework brought to light 
by the financial crisis do not persist for any longer than necessary, the Committee is aiming 
to  have  much  of this  work  completed  by  the  end  of  2014. This  is  an ambitious  target,  but 
given the importance of these reforms, there is no basis for unnecessary delay. 
Our plan is for the leverage ratio work – which is largely devoted to the detailed specification 
of the exposure measure (ie the denominator) of the ratio – to be largely completed this year, 
while the NSFR, trading book, securitisation and large exposures policy work will be finalised 
in  2014.  The  Committee  also  has  two  other  major  policy  initiatives  that  it  plans  to  launch 
soon. While not obviously thought of as immediate and essential responses to the financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
crisis,  they  are  nevertheless  quite  important  for  ensuring  that  the  overall  prudential 
framework remains robust, and existing reforms are effective. These projects are: 
• 
a  review  of  the  standardised  (credit  and  operational  risk)  approaches  to  capital 
adequacy, which need to be re-examined in light of calls for greater simplicity and 
comparability  in  the  regulatory  framework  as  well  as  the  desire  to  reduce  the 
reliance on credit rating agencies if possible; and 
an  examination  of  the  need  for  a  capital  framework  for  interest  rate  risk  in  the 
banking book, particularly given the desire to limit arbitrage opportunities between 
the trading and banking books. 
 These last two projects are still at an embryonic stage, so I cannot say too much about what 
they might entail at this point in time, but they will be the last pieces in what has essentially 
been a complete overhaul of the regulatory framework since the financial crisis. 
Monitoring and reinforcing implementation of Basel regulatory standards 
As I have already said, the establishment of the implementation monitoring programme has 
been a high priority for the Committee; it is critical to the successful delivery of the benefits of 
the  agreed  reforms.  Starting  from  scratch  at  the  beginning  of  2012,  a  comprehensive 
assessment framework has been developed that is growing in its acceptance and credibility, 
and  I  am  pleased  to report that the  Committee  now  has  dedicated  capacity  in  the  area of 
implementation work. 
The  implementation  framework  is  being  continuously  strengthened  through  a  lessons-
learned process. Our goal is to take a more holistic view on the implementation process by 
focusing not only on the existence of a regulatory framework but also on its functioning. The 
implementation  process  is  also  envisaged  to  be  closely  linked  to  the  ongoing  policy 
development  process,  creating  a  positive  feedback  loop  that  can  help  strengthen  the 
regulatory regime. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  new  monitoring  and  assessment  initiative  has  already  had  a 
positive impact. As a result of the regular monitoring of how countries are tracking against 
agreed  deadlines,  as  well  as  the  forthcoming  country  assessments,  member  jurisdictions 
regularly  approach  the  Committee  about  specific  aspects  of  the  Basel  framework,  actively 
seeking to ensure that their local adoption of the Basel rules would not be inadvertently out of 
line with the spirit of the agreement. Jurisdictions have also brought forward the release of 
their  rules  to  ensure  that  their  progress  was  captured  in  the  periodic  updates  that  the 
Committee  has  provided  to  the  G20  and  made  public.  The  self-assessment  responses 
undertaken for the assessment process are also benefiting the implementation process. In 
addition, the assessments of drivers that lead to variation of banking and trading book risk-
weighted assets are continuing and are to likely lead to both more consistent implementation 
of  existing  rules,  and  the  development  of  policy  options  to  address  identified  areas  of 
weakness. 
The priority for the Committee now is to build on these achievements in monitoring regulatory 
compliance with Basel standards and to continue to enhance the rigour of all aspects of the 
implementation monitoring and assessment process. There is a very full agenda planned for 
2013 and beyond which will deliver quite a number of new monitoring requirements (such as 
rules  relating  to  liquidity,  the  leverage  ratio  and  G-SIBs),  as  well  as  country  and  thematic 
assessment reports. It is a credit to member jurisdictions, and evidence of their commitment 
to  the  process,  that  this  work  can  be  undertaken:  first,  it  requires  the  willingness  of  each 
member to be subject to review by their peers, and then a continuing strong commitment, 
including substantial resourcing of expert staff, from all involved. Nevertheless, the effort will 
be  well  worth  it  if  we  achieve  our  objective  of  consistent  implementation  of  the  Basel 
standards. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Assessing the impact of, and industry response to, the implementation of the 
regulatory reforms 
The major reforms that have been developed by the Committee, coupled with those being 
introduced  at  the  domestic  level,  are  designed  to  fundamentally  reshape  banking.  The 
reforms are intended to generate a more resilient financial system, in which higher levels of 
capital and liquidity are held, and in which risk is appropriately managed and priced. This will 
obviously  have  consequences  for  the  costs  of  financial  intermediation,  although  studies 
undertaken  suggest  that  this  cost  is  both  relatively  small,  and  considerably  outweighed  by 
the benefits of increased financial stability. 
Nevertheless, this is not a case of “set and forget”. The Committee is mindful of two potential 
consequences from the programme of reforms. 
While a degree of deleveraging and increased risk premia are intended consequences of the 
reforms,  there  is  always  a  danger  that  some  unintended  consequences  may  arise.  The 
Committee needs to continue to undertake monitoring exercises to ensure that it responds 
when truly unintended consequences materialise; we understand fully that, if left unattended, 
they will serve to undermine support for the reform agenda. However, we also need to avoid 
using  this  as  an  excuse  to  delay  necessary  reforms;  to  the  extent  there  are  unintended 
consequences,  we  need  to  see  how  they  can  be  addressed  without  losing  the  reform 
benefits. 
A  second  potential  consequence  relates  to  the  incentives  that  may  arise  as  the  banking 
sector  adapts  to  the  reforms  by  moving  into  those  businesses  where  risk-adjusted 
(regulatory)  returns  are  greatest.  This  reshaping  of  banking  (either  within  bank  balance 
sheets or outside the regulated banking system) needs to be monitored on an ongoing basis 
for the Committee to maintain a robust regulatory framework in light of the evolving nature of 
the  banking  industry.  That  does  not  mean  that  the  regulatory  framework  should  be  in  a 
constant state of flux, as there are considerable benefits for financial firms being able to plan 
in a stable environment. But, equally, we cannot have a regulatory regime that is set in stone, 
and completely unresponsive to changes in the environment that it is tasked with regulating. 
Creating greater simplicity and comparability in the regulatory framework 
A  vigorous  public  debate  has  developed  recently  as  to  whether  the  Basel  regulatory 
framework  strikes  an  appropriate  balance  among  different  desirable  characteristics: 
simplicity, comparability and risk sensitivity. The policy development process must take these 
and  several  other  –  often  competing  –  factors  into  account,  and  finding  the  right  balance 
often involves a difficult set of trade-offs. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  keep  this  issue  under  review,  and  so  the  Committee 
established  a  high-level  task  force  last  year  with  a  view  to  looking  at  this  concern  from  a 
broader,  strategic  perspective.  The  Committee  has  already  had  some  discussions  on  the 
task force’s findings, and will have more in the coming months (including at our meeting that 
begins tomorrow). The way forward will also be guided by the findings of the reviews of risk-
weighted assets that I mentioned earlier, since at the heart of that work is a concern about 
comparability. 
It  is  too  early  to  say  how  we  will  take  this  work  forward.  Some  issues,  such  as  those  in 
relation  to  market  risk  modelling,  can  be  taken  up  via  our  existing  trading  book  review. 
Others  might  require  tweaks  to  the  framework,  or  supervisory  guidance,  which  can  be 
implemented  in  the  near  term.  And  others  might  necessitate  a  deeper,  longer-term  review 
before  we  can  decide  on  any  solution.  We  will  publish  a  discussion  paper  in  the  coming 
months that deals with discusses some of the complex trade-offs that need to be made. But 
one point I would stress is that whatever we decide upon, it will be designed to strengthen 
the current framework, and there is nothing that is being proposed that should give reason to 
hold off on the implementation of Basel III and other recently agreed reforms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Enhancing the effectiveness of both micro- and macroprudential supervision 
Not  surprisingly,  the  Committee’s  agenda  in  the  past  few  years  has  been  dominated  by 
policymaking.  In  2012,  implementation  also  came  to  the  fore.  But  it  is  perhaps  stating  the 
obvious that effective supervision is the key to ensuring that regulation, once implemented, 
continues to work as intended. Only if supervisors are given the tools they need to act can 
they effectively perform their role. As the policy reform agenda moves towards completion, 
and the new rules are rolled out by national regulators, the Committee will increasingly turn 
its attention to enhancing supervisory practices. 
Enhancing microprudential supervision 
The  Committee  has  a  great  deal  of  guidance  on  supervisory  matters  already  on  issue. 
However, much of this was developed before the financial crisis and will benefit from being 
updated to reflect lessons learned in recent years. Given the general applicability of much of 
this material, the benefits of this work will also extend well beyond Basel Committee member 
countries. As with all multi-year projects, this will require prioritisation. Near-term attention is 
likely  to  be  given  to  operational  risks  (internal  controls  and  information  technology), 
governance, supervisory colleges, stress testing and dealing with weak banks. 
Enhancing the practical implementation of macroprudential supervision 
The systemically important bank – “SIB” – regimes will continue to be a priority area for the 
Committee over the coming years. Although the regimes for global SIBs and domestic SIBs 
have  now  been  published,  both  will  require  a  certain  amount  of  ongoing maintenance  and 
monitoring.  Furthermore,  as  noted  in  the  G-SIB  standard,  the  methodology,  including  the 
indicator-based measurement approach itself and the cutoff/threshold scores, will be subject 
to periodic review and refinement every three years. 
Beyond this work, the Committee will now turn its attention to the practical implementation of 
tools and techniques to deal with systemic risks. This will include two complementary areas 
of work: 
• 
Regulatory consequences of SIB classification: Being a SIB means more than just 
higher capital. In light of the risks they impose on the financial system, SIBs must be 
held  to  a  higher  standard  with  respect  to  supervisory  expectations  for  risk 
management functions, data aggregation capabilities, risk governance and internal 
controls,  all  of  which  are  topics  that  feature  prominently  in  the  Committee’s  work 
plan.  In  addition,  given  the  principles-based  nature  of  the  D-SIB  framework,  the 
Committee  will  monitor  emerging  practice  as  banking  supervisors  move  towards 
implementation  so  as 
facilitate  cross-border  cooperation  and  mutual 
understanding. 
Use  of  microprudential  tools  for  macroprudential  purposes:  The  Committee  will 
oversee preparations for the countercyclical buffer, as well as exchange information 
on the wider range of microprudential tools that have been used for macroprudential 
purposes (eg sectoral adjustments to risk weights, stress testing requirements, loan-
to-value limits or varying margin requirements). 
to 
 Concluding remarks 
Since the financial crisis, the Basel Committee has accomplished a great deal. But we still 
have work to do to complete the overhaul of the regulatory framework and fully factor in all of 
the lessons learned. We also need to see whether we have the balance right when it comes 
to simplicity and risk sensitivity. That work is going to keep the Committee busy for at least 
the next two years. 
But  that  is  far  from  the  end  of  it,  because,  as  I  have  noted  a  number  of  times  today,  our 
policy work will not generate its full benefits if not implemented in a full, timely and consistent 
manner. So our implementation monitoring work is equally important. And then even when 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the new standards are implemented, we will need effective supervisors to ensure that they 
are  adhered to. This  is an  area  where  the  Committee  has  the  potential  to  do much more, 
particularly once the policy pipeline begins to slow. In other words, the Basel Committee will 
continue to provide you with much to talk about – at this meeting and those in the future!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
