Yaseen Anwar: Brief strategy for the revitalization of the Pakistani 
economy 
Speech by Mr Yaseen Anwar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at the Pakistan Navy 
War College, Lahore, 5 March 2013. 
 Respected guests, esteemed servicemen, and students at this fine establishment, Assalam-
o-Alaikum! 
I’m  glad  that  you  could  join  us  today  and  thank  you  for  inviting  me  to  introduce  you,  very 
briefly, to a strategy for the revitalization of the Pakistani economy. 
Our roles at the State Bank, and your roles in the armed forces, are not very different from 
each other. We are both tasked with guarding national interests and we both seek to actively 
mitigate threats – both from within our boundaries, and from the outside world. Today, I hope 
to  be  able  to  share  with  you,  how  we,  at  the  central  bank, guard  and guide  this  economy 
towards a path of sustainable growth and stable prices. 
But  before  I  go  down  that  path,  I  would  like  to  put  some  things  in  perspective  here.  For 
instance, I’d like to point out that we are not in the middle of an economic meltdown. In fact, 
we are not even close to being in an economic meltdown. That is why the topic of this lecture 
“A strategy to improve economic meltdown” may just have been a tad misleading. So yes, we 
certainly  face  challenges,  but  I  assure  you  that  they  can  hardly  be  categorized  as  a 
meltdown. 
Since we’re on the subject of economic catastrophes, I think it would be enlightening if we 
talk  about  a few  countries  that  have  seen  their economies  collapse  in  the  past few  years. 
Let’s start with Greece. Their latest unemployment rate is roughly 27 percent. That means 
that more than one in four people remain jobless. Let me reemphasize that: one out of every 
four  individuals  does  not  have  a  job!  Can  such  a  high  unemployment  rate  be  socially 
acceptable  or  sustainable?  Of  course  not.  That’s  why  the  country  was  beset  with  riots, 
massive protests, political bickering and a very uncertain and bleak outlook. 
Youth unemployment in Greece is more than 50 percent. That means that more than half of 
the youth – the most productive part of any labor force – remains jobless. Can you imagine 
how demoralizing that is for new entrants into the workforce? If you throw this into the mix, 
you  will  have  some  very  strong  incentives  for  social  unrest,  with  sharp  rises  in  crime, 
hooliganism,  and  general  despondency.  It’s  no  surprise  then  that  the  suicide  rate  in  the 
country  has  doubled  in  the  past  five  years.  2013  will  mark  the  sixth  year  of  the  Greek 
Depression. For six consecutive years, the economy has shrunk. The light at the end of the 
tunnel is a very, very long way off for Greece. That – ladies and gentlemen – is an economic 
meltdown. 
In fact, southern Europe has been teetering on the edge of an economic disaster for a while 
now. Their governments borrowed incredible sums of money when times were good in the 
first  few  years  of  the  21st  century,  and  are  now  struggling  to  repay  their  debts.  In  some 
instances,  their  debts  reached  200  percent  of  their  GDP  –  twice  the  size  of  their  entire 
economy’s  output.  It  was  fiscal  irresponsibility  at  its  worst.  Pakistan’s  national  debt  is 
60 percent of its GDP – and that is an uncomfortable level for us. 200 percent, on the other 
hand, is a completely different ballgame. Now they have to balance their books once more 
and  live  within  their  means.  And  they’re  discovering  just  how  painful  the  process  of 
deleveraging,  or  paying  off  their  debts,  can  be.  Their  economies  are  facing  serious 
difficulties, unemployment is very high, and the prospect of default looms large. Since their 
economies  are  so  interconnected  with  the  rest  of  Europe  and  indeed,  with  the  rest  of  the 
world,  they  are  threatening  to  plunge  the  entire  world  into  a  recession  if  their  economic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
1 
conditions deteriorate further. And if that happens, ladies and gentlemen, I will be inclined to 
believe that we are living in the middle of a global economic meltdown. 
At this point, let me walk you through a meltdown that happened quite recently in the largest 
economy  in  the  world:  the  financial  meltdown  of  2008–2009  in  the  US.  It  started  off  with 
irresponsible  lending  by  the  banks,  which  was  backed  implicitly  by  the  government,  to 
individuals  who  wanted  to buy property – and not just one. Investment banks then bought 
these  loans  from  the  banks  that  had  originated  them,  and  proceeded  to  create  complex 
financial  products  anchored  to  these  loans,  which  were  then  peddled  to  other  investors. 
Some of those investors were pension funds, and state governments – funds that basically 
came from hardworking families’ taxes and savings. Such funds are only allowed to invest in 
riskless assets, ones which are considered as safe as possible. 
But most investors did not truly understand the nature of these products, and instead turned 
to  rating  agencies  for  assurance.  Rating  agencies,  such  as  S&P  and  Moody’s,  evaluate 
financial  assets  and  rate  them  in  terms  of  their  riskiness.  For  reasons  that  should  not  be 
mentioned,  these  agencies  decided  that  the  toxic  assets  were  of  the  highest  quality,  and 
least  riskiness  –  equal  to  sovereign  debt.  All  this  while,  the  regulators  had,  more  or  less, 
gone to sleep. 
Eventually,  they  woke  up  to  a  very  rude  shock.  Since  the  financial  system  was  so 
interconnected, one ripple is all it needed to create a tidal wave in such an unstable scenario. 
Banks’ irresponsible lending meant that eventually, individuals defaulted on their mortgages. 
Once this  cycle  of  defaults  started,  it  spilled  over from mortgage  companies  to  investment 
banks. Of the five large investment banks in the US, one defaulted, two got sold, and two 
others had to be rescued by the government. 
The fear and panic that gripped the financial markets meant that banks were reluctant to lend 
to each other – markets froze completely. The regulators had to no choice but to step in, but 
a lot of the damage had already been done. The economy went into recession, and the next 
four years brought a flickering flame of economic growth – vulnerable to the next gust of wind 
that threatens to blow it out altogether. 
[Governor’s comments on the future of the US and the Euro, and their efforts to rekindle their 
economies after the financial meltdown…] 
Let me get back now to the Pakistani economy. The word that’s been used to describe our 
economy quite a few times has been “resilient”. I think it’s worth talking about how that word 
describes  this  economy.  In  65  years,  Pakistan  has  never  gone  through  an  episode  of 
hyperinflation; Pakistan has never defaulted on its international and domestic debts; in fact, 
our economy has grown consistently, but not spectacularly, over the past six decades. Not 
many countries in the developing world can claim to have achieved all of that. This has been 
despite periods of international alienation and sanctions, three expensive wars, two hostile 
fronts, regular political upheaval, social unrest, sharp increases in the price of oil, and much, 
much more. 
However, it would be dishonest to say that the economy’s resilience is completely by design. 
Yes, regulation and strict oversight has had a part to play in it. And I’d like to briefly touch 
upon that here. The State Bank has always ensured that the financial system of the country 
remains safe and stable. We may not have always gotten things completely correct, but we 
have made sure that banks remain healthy and depositors’ money remains safe. We have 
managed to do this despite privatizing the banking system almost entirely. This means that 
capital is now allocated more efficiently, and private sector businesses can borrow freely for 
their requirements. I must add though that we are a little disappointed with the current risk 
aversion of the banks. 
The  reforms  process  was  initiated  in  the  early  90s  and  focused  on  more  private  sector 
participation  as  financial  intermediaries;  developing  a  more  robust  regulatory  framework; 
restructuring banks; and developing non-bank financial institutions (also known has NBFIs), 
2 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
as well as equity and bond markets, as alternatives to the banking system for both savers 
and borrowers. The financial sector was essentially given a completely new look during the 
course of that decade. The purpose of all these changes was to enhance competition and 
efficiency in the financial sector. That would mean that capital gets allocated into productive 
investment, which can drive future growth. Simultaneously, as banks became more efficient, 
savers  could  receive  a  better  return  on  their  deposits  and  borrowers  could  finance 
themselves at lower rates. 
The robustness of our financial system, is a direct consequence of the reforms process and 
the  State  Bank’s  constant  vigilance.  There’s  a  lot  that  can  be  improved  in  our  financial 
system – for instance, I would love to see the development of efficient debt markets, even 
better regulatory and reporting practices, and the broadening of the financial sector’s scope 
to  include  largely  unbanked,  such  as  agriculture,  small  and  medium  enterprises,  and 
housing.  Despite  this  wish-list,  the  fact  remains  that  our  financial  system  is,  by  design, 
secure and does not pose any threat to the economy as a whole. 
Now  let’s  turn  to  the  features  of  this  economy  that  have,  helped  the  country  become  and 
remain  resilient  in  the  face  of  adversity.  I  believe  that  our  social  system  in  Pakistan 
influences  why  the  economy  remains  resilient.  Our  family  structure  is  a  huge  blessing  in 
economic  terms.  Children  take  care  of  their  parents,  and  that  spares  the  state  from  the 
responsibility  of taking  care  of  the  elderly  and  sick. Governments  in  developed  economies 
are currently struggling to meet their social commitments, with healthcare costs surging for 
an  aging  population.  Our  social  fabric  also  ensures  that  informal  employment  is  always 
readily available in some shape or the other – relatives and family friends usually help out in 
providing  the  unemployed  with  some  form  of  work,  and  the  immediate  family  supports 
unemployed  individuals  financially.  That  spares  the  state  from  paying  out  unemployment 
benefits  to  such  individuals.  I  believe  that  the  nature  of  our  society  and  the  close 
relationships  of  a  family-oriented  society,  is  one  of  the  primary  reasons  for  Pakistan’s 
relatively low rate of unemployment and overall resilience to adverse conditions. 
I would like to clarify here that this resilience has come with a cost: the size of the informal 
sector. The size of Pakistan’s undocumented economy is, by some estimates, as large as 
the formal economy. The informal economy does not file taxes and, while it does absorb a 
significant  chunk  of  the  labor  force,  it  also  evades  corporate  and  labor  laws.  Therefore, 
although close informal relationships do make the economy more resilient, they do so at a 
cost to the overall economy, by eroding the ambit of the regulators. Ideally, we, at the State 
Bank, would like to see a smaller informal economy, while society retains the structure that 
has made it so resilient. 
The  second  factor  that  has  unintentionally  helped  the  country’s  resilience  is  the  limited 
interconnectedness  between  the  Pakistani  and  the  global  financial  and  economic  system. 
Although the absence of such integration is by no means desirable, it has happened due to 
non-economic factors, and has insulated our domestic economy. It’s also the reason that our 
financial system and financial markets remain relatively sheltered from global events. 
Let me re-emphasize here, that greater integration with global markets is something that we 
should  aspire  towards.  But  that  does  not  mean  we  should  not  have  proper  controls  and 
mechanisms in place to safeguard our own interests. For instance, greater integration with 
financial  markets  will  mean  that  capital  will  flow  more  quickly  through  our  borders.  It’s 
definitely something that will boost the national economy, but, as most East Asian countries 
learned in the 90s, it can be a double-edged sword. Therefore, having some capital controls 
in place, which reduce the volatility of capital flows, is a necessary regulation in this day and 
age. 
Personally, I believe the role of effective regulation only increases as the economy becomes 
more integrated and more market-oriented. Markets in themselves have no moral character. 
Inherently, they are neither good, nor evil. But they remain very powerful tools that distribute 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
3 
goods and services across the economy. Regulation is necessary because it gives markets a 
direction, and can govern them with a set of values, which markets do not possess innately. 
Less, but more effective regulation is the need of the hour for our own economy too. It’s an 
essential  part  of  what  is  needed  today  to  get  the  economy  on  a  track  for  steady  and 
sustainable growth. The government’s footprint in some sectors of the economy is very large, 
and  quite  negligible  in  other  sectors.  Such  divergence  is  unhealthy.  For  instance,  the 
government has a very large presence in our agriculture and energy markets. Those sectors 
are, in some ways, over-regulated. Too much regulation and red tape can breed incentives 
for the abuse of power, mismanagement and corruption. It also acts as a disincentive for the 
private sector. And we must remember here that it is always the private sector that functions 
as the engine of the economy. 
However,  effective  regulation  is  sorely  lacking  in  other  sectors. The  tax  machinery  can  be 
tightened considerably. One of the country’s most challenging problems today is the size of 
the fiscal deficit – and a large part of the solution lies in increasing our tax base by enacting 
regulation that encourages tax compliance, and punishes tax evasion. 
The link between better tax collection and faster economic growth deserves to be flushed out 
here. Better tax collection means that the government has to depend less on foreign support 
for its budgetary needs, and can decrease its fiscal deficit. More importantly, the government 
will  not  have  to  borrow  as  much  from  the  domestic  banking  system  to  finance  itself.  Less 
borrowing  from  commercial  banks  will  encourage  market  rates  to  fall  and  banks  will  lend 
more  to  the  private  sector.  As  investment  picks  up,  the  growth  potential  of  the  economy 
increases. Similarly, the government will need to borrow less money from the central bank as 
well.  Borrowing  from  the  central  bank  is  popularly  known  as  printing  money.  This  is 
inflationary, and I don’t think I need to introduce you to the problems associated with high 
levels of inflation. If government borrowing from the central bank falls, inflation will follow suit. 
Therefore, better tax collection is a necessary condition for faster economic growth. And for 
that we need to have more effective tax regulation. 
Another problem that we desperately need to fix is our energy problem. It’s something that 
has  been  affecting  every  citizen  of  the  state,  and  I  don’t  think  that  I  need  to  highlight  the 
scope of the problem here. Similarly, I think the effect on the economy of an energy shortage 
should  be  fairly  straightforward:  energy  is  one  of  the  key  inputs  in  any  value-added 
production process. Less energy availability will translate into lower output. The solutions to 
the energy problem will take time – unfortunately, there is no magic pill here. We will need to 
invest in infrastructure for hydro-electricity, natural gas transportation and transmission, and 
more  efficient  power  plants.  Moreover,  we  will  need  to  move  to  greater  private  sector 
participation in the energy sector. That means there will, once again, be a need for less, but 
more effective regulation – one that safeguards the rights of both producers and consumers, 
while ensuring adequate incentives for the exploitation of our natural resources 
The most important incentive here  will be prices. Unfortunately, a large part of our energy 
problems  today  can  be  traced  to  a  mispricing  of  fuels.  Under-pricing  any  commodity  will 
always lead to a shortage – that’s one of the fundamental axioms of economics. Letting the 
market  decide  the  price  is  one  way  of  ensuring  that  future  shortages  are  averted.  But 
remember that markets do not have morals – and that’s why we will need regulation to make 
sure that those markets serve and protect the interests of all stakeholders. 
At this point, I would also like to touch very briefly upon the State Bank’s efforts to accelerate 
economic growth. As you may know, any central bank’s primary policy tool is the discount 
rate  –  the  basic  interest  rate  which  acts  as  an  anchor  for  all  other  rates  in  the  economy. 
Unlike most central banks, and similar to the US Federal Reserve, the State Bank has a dual 
mandate:  it  must  tackle  the  issue  of  maintaining  price  stability,  i.e.  inflation,  while  also 
keeping an eye on economic growth. The preamble to the SBP Act of 1956 defines that the 
institution  has  “to  regulate  the  monetary  and  credit  system  of  Pakistan  and  to  foster  its 
growth  in  the  best  national  interest  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  and  fuller 
4 
  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
utilization of the country’s productive resources”. So at the State Bank, we need to pay close 
attention to both monetary stability and fuller utilization of the country’s resources. 
That is a tough balance to strike in the best of times. The Bank’s policy is to use any room 
available  to  cut  interest rates  in  order to  promote  economic growth.  After  being  in  double-
digits almost consistently for two years, inflation has come down substantially in the past few 
months  to  single  digit,  because  of  this,  the  Bank  decided  to  reduce  its  interest  rate  into 
single-digits. The benchmark rate now stands at 9.5 percent. We also expect that average 
inflation for the year will remain in the 8.50–9.50 percent range. Interest rates are reviewed, 
and may be revised, every two months, which allows our policy responses to be nimble and 
respond quickly to any changes in the economic environment. The Bank also ensures that 
the  money  market  is  never  short  of  funds,  which  means  that  monetary  policy  signals  are 
transmitted efficiently. 
Our primary constraints to faster growth, however, remain the large size of the fiscal deficit 
and the energy shortfall. As with most economic problems, there is no immediate solution. 
Both  problems  require  systemic  changes  that  will  take  time  to  achieve,  through  the 
implementation  of  effective  regulation  and  a  move 
towards  greater  private  sector 
participation. Meanwhile, rest assured that while our current economic situation is less than 
optimal, it is also very far from what may be described as an economic calamity. In fact, over 
the  years,  this  economy  has  shown  an  inherent  resilience,  and  I’ve  shared  my  thoughts 
about  why  I  think  our  economy  has  the  ability  to  navigate  through  choppy  waters. 
Nevertheless, this economy remains quite far below its potential – however, the solutions to 
our problems regarding faster growth are an open secret. It’s only a question of implementing 
them. 
I’d like to end my talk here on that relatively optimistic note. Unlike the problems of the US 
and the Euro, our problems have very attainable solutions. Those economies are still trying 
to work out what would work best for them. We already know what we need to do. It’s only a 
matter of execution now. I’m excited by the economic potential that this country holds, and I 
encourage  you  all  to  become  a  part  of  the  country’s  future,  by  becoming  a  part  of  the 
solution. 
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  
5 
