Benoît Cœuré: SME financing, market innovation and regulation 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  plenary  Session  11  “Challenges  and  feasibility  of  diversifying  the  financing  of  EU 
corporates and SMEs”, at the Eurofi High Level Seminar, organised in association with the 
Irish Presidency of the Council of the EU, Dublin, 11 April 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Annalisa  Ferrando,  Petra  Köhler-Ulbrich  and  Balázs  Zsámboki  for  their  inputs.  I  remain  solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Why SMEs are special 
Small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) are special. They are the backbone of the euro 
area  economy:  they  constitute  about  98%  of  all  euro  area  firms,  it  employs  around  three-
quarters  of  the  euro  area’s  employees,  and  they  generate  around  60%  of  value  added.1 
These figures happen to be even higher in those jurisdictions which have been most affected 
by the crisis.  
SMEs are also specific in their financing structure. They turn more often to banks for their 
external financing than large firms but, at the same time, they are generally more likely to 
experience  greater  difficulties  in  obtaining  funds.  There  are  structural  reasons  for  this, 
notably  they  are  more  opaque  and  their  corporate  capabilities  more  difficult  to  assess, 
because their financial statements are less informative and their credit histories are usually 
shorter.  These  characteristics  are  compounded  by  fixed  costs  in  external  assessment  and 
monitoring.  All  this  leads  to  higher  transaction  costs,  especially  those  stemming  from 
asymmetric information, for SMEs.  
It is therefore to some extent inevitable that credit sources for small firms tend to dry up more 
rapidly than for large companies during economic downturns, thereby disrupting the business 
and investment activities of these firms to a greater extent.2 And this has indeed been the 
case during the crisis in the euro area. The creditworthiness and financial health of SMEs 
have deteriorated more sharply than those of large firms, and the protracted period of weak 
economic conditions has exacerbated the asymmetric information challenges of SMEs. The 
statistics  currently  available  do  not  provide  timely  and  high-frequency  hard  data  on  the 
balance  sheet  position  of  a  representative  set  of  SMEs  for  the  euro  area.  Yet,  based  on 
survey information provided by the ECB (the Survey on Access to Finance of Enterprises, 
SAFE),  we  see  that  SMEs’  profits,  liquidity  buffers  and  own  capital  have  developed  less 
favourably than have those of large firms during the crisis3 (Charts 1 and 2).  
From  the  viewpoint  of  commercial  banks’  risk  management,  it  may  thus  be  partly 
understandable that banks take a more selective approach in supplying loans in a recession 
in order to preserve the quality of the asset side of the balance sheets. But, in general, such 
credit tightening currently appears to be very severe for SMEs, because they are perceived 
                                                 
1  See “EU SMEs in 2012: at the crossroads. Annual Report on SMEs in the EU 2011/2012”, EC DG-Enterprise. 
2  See  Fazzari,  S.,  G.  Hubbard  and  B.  Petersen  (1988),  “Financing  Constraints  and  Corporate  Investment”, 
Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity  1,  141-195  and  Duchin,  R.,  O.  Ozbas  and  B.  A.  Sensoy,  “Costly 
external  finance,  corporate  investment,  and  the  subprime  mortgage  credit  crisis”,  Journal  of  Financial 
Economics, Vol. 97, Issue 3, (2010), pp. 418–435. 
3  Qualitative information on SME access to finance is extracted from the ECB’s biannual survey on access to 
the  euro  area  (SAFE).  See  http://www.ecb.europa.eu/stats/money/surveys/sme 
in 
finance  of  SMEs 
/html/index.en.html. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by  banks  to  have  a  higher  probability  of  default  than  larger  firms,  and  because  SMEs  are 
often unable to switch from bank credit to other sources of external finance. 
As a result, SMEs are more likely to be affected by excessive bank risk aversion and thus by 
outright  rationing  of  credit  provision  than  are  large  firms.  Difficulties  in  borrowing,  which 
influence  not  only  their  day-to-day  activities,  but  also  their  ability  to  grow,  may  then  easily 
transform liquidity constraints into solvency risk. 
To illustrate this point, two facts are worth mentioning. First, SMEs tend to face higher costs 
for  bank  finance.  A  simple  comparison  between  small  loans  (typically  to  SMEs)  and  very 
large  loans  (typically  to  large  corporations)  shows  that  euro  area  SMEs  were  paying  on 
average around 160 basis points more than large euro area companies in the six months up 
to January 2013.4 There is also a substantial divergence across euro area countries which 
has worsened since the beginning of the financial crisis (Chart 3). For instance, in the same 
period, the spread was around 50 basis points for SMEs in Austria and Belgium, but 261 in 
Spain  and  174  in  Ireland.  Just  to  put  this  in  a  “historical”  perspective:  between  2003  and 
2008 the same spread was 84 basis points in the euro area, 79 basis points in Spain and 
44 basis points in Ireland. 
The second fact that is worth mentioning is the higher rejection rates of loan applications of 
SMEs, as the ECB survey shows (Chart 4). SMEs are systematically reporting that they face 
more  financing  obstacles  than  large  firms  across  major  euro  countries  (except  here  in 
Ireland,  where  firms  are  reporting  to  be  highly  constrained  irrespective  of  their  size).  This 
appears,  at  least  in  part,  to  be  related  to  their  financial  position.  Indeed,  when  linking 
information  on  the  financial  health  of  SMEs  with  the  actual  financing  obstacles  they 
experience,  it  turns  out  that  firms  in  countries  with  higher  leverage  and  interest  payment 
burdens as well as lower profits tend to be more affected by financing obstacles than SMEs 
in other euro area countries (Chart 5). 
However,  it  is  worth  noting  that  in  conjunction  with  credit  constraints,  several  other  issues 
have  an  impact  on  the  environment  in  which  SMEs  operate.  For  instance,  they  are  more 
affected by downward trends in the economy and structural rigidities, i.e. a lack of demand 
for their products, high input prices, unfavourable regulation, heavy administrative burdens, 
inflexible  labour  and  product  markets,  etc.  Since  such  factors  differ  across  countries,  the 
financing  costs  of  SMEs  will  inevitably  also  vary  across  the  euro  area.  Obviously,  the 
Eurosystem cannot influence these factors. 
In periods of binding bank lending constraints, a mitigating factor is the ability of corporates 
to  replace  bank  credit  with  alternative  sources  of  financing.  Since  the  outbreak  of  the 
financial crisis, internal financing and external financing instruments other than bank loans in 
general  have  increased  in  importance  relative  to  bank  loans.  Depending  on  the  financing 
environment,  substitution  effects  have  differed  markedly  across  euro  area  countries 
(Chart 6).  On  the  one  hand,  enterprises  have  replaced  bank  loans  with  market-based 
financing or financing via unquoted equity during the crisis. In this respect, the relevance of 
debt securities has increased, especially in some countries, such as France. On the other 
hand, inter-company loans have gained importance in other countries, such as Germany. In 
the  same  period,  trade  credit  appears  to  have  taken  on  a  buffer  role  in  some  euro  area 
countries. 
We  know,  however,  that  some  of  these  substitution  activities  have  mainly  affected  larger 
companies,  as  in  the  case  of  debt  securities,  while  trade  credit,  leasing  and  factoring  are 
closer  substitutes  to  loans  for  SMEs  (Chart  7).  But  trade  credit,  leasing  and  factoring  are 
                                                 
4  The spread refers to the difference in the rates on small-sized new business loans (up to €1 million) and large 
new  business  loans  (over  €1  million).  Euro  area  rates  are  weighted  averages,  based  on  new  business 
volumes, of national rates. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
strictly related to the business activity of companies and in recessions their buffer role might 
be limited by the reduction in the exchange of goods and services. 
Taking a macroeconomic perspective, credit supply conditions have certainly been found to 
have an impact on real economic activity during the crisis. Analyses carried out by ECB staff5 
suggest a rather limited contribution of credit supply conditions to euro area economic activity 
between  2007  and  the  first  quarter  of  2008.  By  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  however,  the 
impact of credit supply conditions appears sizeable. At the peak of the crisis, namely in the 
first  half  of  2009,  model-based  analysis  points  to  credit  supply  effects  accounting  for  an 
almost 2– percentage-point contraction in annual real GDP growth, namely around one-third 
of the overall contraction. As the sovereign debt crisis unfolded, credit supply factors turned 
detrimental to growth again. In this context, riskier borrowing segments are highly vulnerable 
to the self-reinforcing dynamics of weak economic conditions, low financial buffers and tight 
bank lending policies. Actually, the Eurosystem Bank Lending Survey shows over the recent 
quarters that both healthy and stressed banks report risk perceptions as their main concern 
and significantly tighten margins on riskier borrowers. 
Policy actions supporting lending to SMEs 
During the crisis, the ECB took exceptional monetary policy actions, distinguishing between 
standard and non-standard measures. Standard measures have included the reduction of all 
key interest rates. Non-conventional measures have comprised fixed-rate full allotment mode 
in refinancing operations, the lengthening of the maturity of such refinancing operations up to 
36 months, the extension of the list of eligible collateral (see Chart 8), the liquidity provision 
directly in foreign currencies, the reduction in the reserve requirements from 2% to 1%, the 
covered  bond  purchase  programmes,  the  securities  market  programme,  and,  finally,  the 
announcement  of  the  outright  monetary  transactions.  Such  actions  have  proved  to  be 
effective  in  alleviating  bank  funding  constraints,  containing  the  risks  of  a  disorderly  bank 
deleveraging process, and supporting the effective transmission of interest rates across the 
euro  area,  amid  a  dysfunctional  financial  market.  These  measures  were  exceptional  in 
nature,  scope  and  magnitude,  and  yet  appropriate  for  the  severity  of  the  circumstances. 
These  interventions  have  served  to  considerably  ease  the  downside  pressures  to  price 
stability by avoiding an abrupt credit crunch stemming from sudden shortages of liquidity and 
funding  for  banks.  However,  at  times,  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  itself  has  been 
hindered by financial fragmentation, in particular against the backdrop of a sovereign debt 
crisis in some euro area jurisdictions. As a result, the accommodative monetary policy stance 
set by the Governing Council has affected firms rather unevenly. The ECB will provide ample 
liquidity as long as needed, but market participants have to continue their efforts to facilitate 
the transition to a less central-bank reliant, more market-based financial system. 
Against  this  background,  attention  has  turned  to  the  role  of  public  policies  in  reducing 
impediments  and  unclogging  credit  channels  towards  SMEs.  As  a  first  measure,  most 
governments have expanded credit guarantees to SMEs for the purpose of inducing banks to 
reopen  their  lending  facilities,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  that  banks  need  to  take  on  their 
balance  sheets  when  granting  new  loans.  Other  measures  have  tended  to  stimulate  the 
chronic shortage of supply of capital into new seed, start-up and early-stage firms. Venture 
capital  (VC)  funds  have  been  channelled  through  public/private  co-investment  VC  funds 
managed  by  private  sector  fund  managers.  Innovative  instruments  have  included  the 
promotion of investment in SME equity to cope with the undercapitalisation problem. Some of 
                                                 
5  For a detailed description of a model-based methodology of this type, see Box 2 “Analysis of the impact of 
credit  supply  factors  on  economic  activity  using  structural  models”,  Monthly  Bulletin  Article,  January  2011, 
European  Central  Bank.  See  also  ECB  Structural  Issues  Report  2013,  “Corporate  finance  and  economic 
activity in the euro area”, forthcoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
these  measures  have  a  longer-term  structural  perspective,  rather  than  something  that  can 
address the immediate conjunctural weakness of SMEs.  
Overall, loan schemes, especially guarantees, tend to have a much larger impact in terms of 
the  number  of  firms  affected,  while  venture  capital  and  similar  schemes  are  much  more 
targeted and restricted to specific groups of firms. However, they have proved to be of limited 
effectiveness  in  stressed  countries,  given  the  higher  funding  costs  faced  by  stressed 
sovereigns themselves.  
In terms of impact, while governments have strengthened their support measures for SMEs 
during the financial crisis, it seems that SMEs in most countries have not yet seen a visible 
improvement, at least based on evidence from survey results (Chart 9). Apparently, while a 
range of government support measures exists for alleviating SMEs’ access to finance, it has 
proved difficult to reach the policy targets, i.e. the SMEs. 
Beyond government financing instruments to support SMEs’ access to finance, other policy 
actions  may  be  considered.  This  includes  the  development  of  deeper  capital  markets 
accessible  also  for  SMEs  and  a  wider  use  of  ratings  for  SMEs.  In  addition,  combating 
payment  delays  in  trade  credit  financing  helps  to  alleviate  liquidity  constraints  and  has 
already been put in place in some countries.  
Besides  governments,  supranational  institutions  also  offer  support  measures  to  SMEs  – 
measures which could be enhanced. Traditional instruments of intervention are related to the 
European  Investment  Bank  (EIB)  lending  to  SMEs6  and  the  European  Investment  Fund’s 
(EIF)  actions  in  the  ABS  market  designed  to  revive  investors’  interest  and  confidence,  by 
facilitating  large  and  liquid  transactions.  An  interesting  pilot  project  on  trade  finance  was 
launched by the EIB in December 2012 for Greece. For the first time, the EIB is involved in a 
short-term credit support instrument. 
The regulatory framework 
In addition to direct support measures by national governments as well as by European and 
international institutions, the regulatory framework may also have an impact on the incentives 
of banks regarding their exposures to SMEs. Let me note in this context that the European 
Banking Authority (EBA) has recently published a detailed analysis of the estimated impact 
of  banking  solvency  regulation  on  SME  lending,  with  a  particular  focus  on  the  relevant 
provisions of the forthcoming capital requirements legislation in the EU7 In this regard, a clear 
distinction should be made between micro- and macro-prudential policy objectives and tools 
that may have relevance for supporting SME lending. 
From a micro-prudential perspective, minimum capital requirements and the underlying risk 
weights can be considered as the main factors potentially affecting banks’ incentives to lend 
to SMEs. In the current regulatory framework, there are different provisions affecting SMEs, 
depending on whether a standardised approach or more sophisticated approaches are used. 
As regards the standardised approach, loan size plays an important role when defining the 
risk  weight  and  thus  the  pertinent  capital  requirement.  To  clarify:  small-sized  loans  up  to 
€1 million  are  treated  as  retail  exposures,  and  benefit  from  a  lower  risk  weight  of  75%, 
compared  with  a  risk  weight  of  100%  for  unrated  corporate  loans.  Hence,  the  current 
regulation  treats  small-sized  loans,  which  are  likely  to  be  taken  up  mainly  by  SMEs,  in  a 
more favourable manner. 
                                                 
6 
In  2012,  more  than  200000  SMEs  received  EIB  Group  support,  compared  to  120000  in  2011.  EIB  signed 
loans  for  SMEs  and  mid-caps  in  2012  amount  to  €12.1  bn  and  disbursements  to  €9.8  bn.  EIF  committed 
1.4 bn of new venture capital in 63 new funds leveraging over €7 bn. 
7  See European Banking Authority (EBA), “Assessment of SME proposals for CRD IV/CRR”, September 2012. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
However, for larger (over €1 million) loans there is no favourable treatment for SMEs under 
the  standardised  approach.  For  unrated  loans  exceeding  €1  million,  the  treatment  of 
exposures  to  SMEs  and  large  companies  is  the  same.  Only  companies  with  good  credit 
ratings – which are typically larger corporates – benefit from lower risk weights. 
Importantly,  for  banks  using  the  more  sophisticated  approaches  for  credit  risk,  namely  the 
advanced internal ratings-based (IRB) approaches, the current regulatory framework further 
provides for preferential treatment of SME loans vis-à-vis large corporate exposures.  
The Capital Requirements Regulation and Directive, or CRD IV, entails a significant increase 
in the quality and quantity of capital. While the phasing-in is rather long and expected to end 
in 2019, the implementation of various capital buffers and the higher level of minimum capital 
requirements – though clearly beneficial for enhancing financial stability in the long term – 
are estimated to increase the overall cost of funds. This is likely to be reflected in the interest 
rates charged to all clients, including SMEs. 
Aware  of  the  potential  implications  for  SMEs  and  with  the  aim  of  partly  neutralising  the 
potential adverse impact of increased minimum capital requirements, EU co-legislators have 
agreed on the inclusion of a specific discount factor for exposures to SMEs, for loans up to 
€1.5  million.  This  measure  is  expected  to  reduce  capital  requirements  for  SMEs  by  about 
25%.8 The ECB supports this proposal and considers it as an important policy tool that may 
help SMEs in their access to bank finance.  
Taking  a  long-term  perspective,  together  with  micro-prudential  considerations,  the  CRD  IV 
will also provide a harmonised legal framework for a range of macro-prudential tools. In this 
regard, the first policy tool that is explicitly designed to address systemic risk is the counter-
cyclical  capital  buffer,  which  will  be  phased  in  gradually  from  2016  onwards.  While  the 
primary objective of this buffer is to enhance the resilience of banks by building up buffers in 
periods of excessive credit growth that can be released when the system as a whole is in 
distress, a positive side effect of the application of the measure is that it may contribute to 
smoothing the credit cycle, thus providing funds for corporate clients, including SMEs, also in 
recessions.  This  however  also  implies  that  as  long  as  we  do  not  have  sufficient  capital 
buffers that could be released to absorb losses or to loosen prudential measures regulated 
by EU law, the use of macro-prudential tools to support SME lending is very limited. 
Finally, in a broader context, there is a need for structural market innovation to improve SME 
financing. Such an innovation would create a market for asset-backed securities, where the 
underlying assets are loans to SMEs. It could also support the revival of this market segment 
by  increasing  its  transparency  and  therefore  investor  confidence.  Having  access  to  a 
diversified  source  of  finance  for  SMEs  will  enhance  their  resilience  through  the  business 
cycle. Because SMEs are characterised by their relatively small size and because it is costly 
to  collect  information  on  their  projects,  they  have  limited  access  to  capital  markets.  In  this 
context,  securitisation  offers  an  opportunity  for  the  custodians  of  large  pools  of  European 
savings, i.e. insurance and pension funds, to channel resources to SMEs. In this vein, the 
efforts  put  in  place  in  the  Prime  Collateralised  Securities  (PCS)  initiative  should  be 
commanded.  The  PCS  has  defined  common  criteria  on  standardisation,  quality,  simplicity, 
and  transparency  with  the  aim  to  improve  market  depth  and  liquidity  for  the  ABSs.  It  also 
includes specific criteria on SME ABS. 
Prudential reforms could also help to revive securitisation activity. A key initiative in this field 
is  the  so  called  Solvency  II  Directive  for  the  insurance  sector,  which  aims  to  align  capital 
requirements  with  risks  that  insurance  companies  have  actually  taken  in  their  investing 
activities.  In  the  current  proposal  for  Solvency  II,  which  will  probably  come  into  force  on 
                                                 
8  See Article 476a, Para (1), of the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR): “Capital requirements for credit risk 
on exposures to small and medium sized enterprises shall be multiplied by the factor 0.7619.” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
1 January  2016  with  a  10-year  phase-in  period,  the  capital  requirements  for  certain 
securitised products will increase significantly, thus potentially reducing insurers’ willingness 
to  allocate  funds  to  such  asset  classes.  The  appropriateness  of  the  capital  charges  in 
Solvency II and their consistency with the capital requirement rules under the CRD IV are 
currently being reviewed by EIOPA. In this regard, particular attention needs to be paid to 
providing  a  level  playing  field  for  banks  and  insurers  as  well  as  to  enhancing  long-term 
financing of the real economy through the securitisation of debt. 
Conclusion 
In  the  nearer  term,  how  can  the  impediments  to  bank  funding  of  SMEs  be  addressed?  In 
essence,  these  impediments  are  of  three  types:  the  banks’  own  funding  conditions,  their 
perception of the credit risk of their clients, and lack of capital. The ECB does not have a 
magic  wand.  The  central  bank  cannot  compensate  for  a  shortage,  or  a  misallocation  of 
equity.  That  is  something  that  has  to  be  addressed,  in  one  form  or  the  other,  by  other 
stakeholders.  Neither  can  the  central  bank  alter  the  credit  risk  of  individual  borrowers, 
although governments can have an impact here through reforms that improve the operating 
environment of those firms – labour and product market regulation for instance. Where the 
central bank has a direct role, within its mandate, is primarily with respect to bank funding 
conditions.  Indeed,  the  ECB  has  taken  and  will  continue  to  take  appropriate  measures  to 
ensure that bank funding is not a source of financial fragmentation or an impediment to bank 
lending. It is reasonable to think that simultaneous action on all three counts, by the relevant 
stakeholders in each case, would be mutually reinforcing. 
 
 
 
6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
