Manuel Sánchez: Mexico in a weak global environment 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  Morgan 
Stanley’s Mexico’s Moment Investor Conference, Mexico City, 17 June 2013. 
 It  is  a  privilege  to  participate  in  this  conference  dedicated  to  examining  investment 
opportunities  in  the  Mexican  economy.  I  appreciate  Morgan  Stanley’s  invitation  to  share  a 
few thoughts with you on the economic situation and outlook in Mexico. 
My remarks will be divided in three parts. First, I will briefly review the status of the Mexican 
economy  in  the  current  context  of  global  economic  softness;  second,  I  will  analyze  recent 
developments  in  Mexican  financial  markets  in  connection  with  the  monetary  policies  of 
developed  countries;  and  third,  I  will  describe  some  challenges  to  monetary  policy  and 
inflation in Mexico. 
Developments in the Mexican economy 
Mexico’s economic performance of this year has been limited by the weakness of the world 
economy. On the one hand, the United States has shown signs of recovery, confirmed by 
indicators such as those related to personal consumption, the housing sector, lending, and 
the  labor  market.  Yet,  growth  has  been  dampened  by  a  contraction  in  public  spending, 
reflecting  fiscal  consolidation  efforts,  as  well  as  by  a  recently  lower  contribution  from  net 
exports. 
Forward-looking indicators reveal that economic activity in the United States may continue to 
strengthen. So far this  year, analysts’ consensus forecasts posit GDP  expansion higher in 
2014  than  for  this  year.  However,  this  expected  growth  is  still  insufficient  for  the  U.S. 
economy  to  return  to  its  secular  trend,  something  that  continues  to  challenge  current 
economic policy. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  euro  zone  remains  in  recession,  despite  progress  on  financial 
stability.  In  addition,  emerging  economies  appear  to  be  slowing,  as  shown  by  the 
performance of industrial production and exports. Even if PMIs from the manufacturing and 
services  sectors  imply  that  expansion  in  these  economies  will  continue,  both  indicators 
exhibit a declining trend. 
In short, global growth forecasts for 2013 have been revised slightly downward, and those for 
2014 are unchanged, all remaining below the average rates seen before the crisis.1 
So far in 2013, Mexico’s economic output has continued the upturn begun four years ago, 
although  at  a  slower  pace.  Moderation  in  the  Global  Economic  Activity  Indicator  (IGAE) 
stems from stagnation in industry and a contraction in agriculture, the latter largely resulting 
from  March  frosts.  The  lack  of strength  in  manufacturing  reflects  weakness  in the  sector’s 
exports, both those directed to the United States and especially those to other markets. 
In contrast, the services sector has remained highly dynamic. Lending to the private sector, 
in  particular  consumer  lending,  has  kept  growing,  albeit  at  lower  rates.  Additionally,  the 
number of formally employed workers has continued to increase, but the unemployment rate 
remains somewhat above the historic average. 
                                                 
1   Consensus forecasts for U.S. GDP growth are 1.9 and 2.7 percent for 2013 and 2014, respectively. The world 
economic growth forecast for 2013 dropped from 2.6 to 2.5 percent between January and June 2013, while 
estimates for 2014 have remained at 3.2 percent during the same period. See Consensus Economics (2013), 
Consensus Forecasts, January and June. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Some indicators imply that lower external demand has likely had negative repercussions for 
domestic  spending.  Retail  sales  have  lost  momentum  and  gross  fixed  investment  has 
recently slowed. 
Nevertheless,  most  prospective 
the  manufacturing  and  non-
manufacturing  PMIs  and  other  leading  indicators,  still  suggest  that  economic  performance 
may  improve.  Consistently,  analysts  have  revised  their  forecasts  for  Mexican  GDP  growth 
downward for the current year but, in general, they have kept their forecasts the same for 
indicators, 
including 
2014.2 
Even though downside risks to near-term growth forecasts appear to have increased for this 
year,  for  next  year  upside  risks  may  remain.  In  particular,  if  the  recovery  in  U.S. 
manufacturing consolidates in the following months, the upswing could fuel manufacturing in 
Mexico, with favorable effects on other sectors of the economy. 
In the medium term, economic expansion in Mexico will continue to depend on productivity 
growth, the lack of which has been the biggest drag on income improvement. Progress on 
the nation’s structural reform agenda is encouraging, including changes affecting the labor 
market,  government  accounting,  education,  and  competition  and  telecommunications. 
Finally,  approval  of  a  financial  reform  initiative  submitted  recently  to  Congress  could  yield 
additional benefits. 
Capital inflows and financial markets 
During the last three years, emerging markets saw significant capital inflows, which appear to 
have  accelerated  during  the  first  four  months  of  2013.  In Mexico,  the  largest  proportion  of 
flows went to peso-denominated government bonds. 
The  relative  abundance  of  external  funds  for  emerging  markets  seems  to  reflect  three 
fundamental factors. First, loose monetary policy in developed nations, which in the case of 
the United States has implied policy interest rates cut to near zero and significant quantitative 
easing, has triggered a search for higher yields. 
Second  and  not  completely  unrelated  to  the  preceding  factor,  global  risk  aversion  has 
remained relatively tame since 2010. 
Third,  individual  characteristics  of  different  countries  contribute  to  explaining  why  capital 
inflows have not been equal in all emerging economies. In particular, Mexico’s attractiveness 
could involve factors such as the openness of the capital account, the free-floating exchange 
rate regime, the certainty of no discretionary intervention in the markets, moderate country 
risk, and positive prospects for structural reforms.3 
During  the  last  few  weeks,  sentiment  has  changed  in  global  financial  markets.  Favorable 
U.S.  economic  data  and  various  Federal  Reserve  officials’  statements  have  fueled  market 
and analysts’ expectations for an imminent start to the tapering of quantitative easing in the 
United States. 
Hence,  the  April  employment  report  published  in  May  approximately  coincided  with  the 
beginning of a rising trend in long-term government bond rates in the United States and other 
nations.  At  the  same  time,  the  U.S.  dollar  has  been  appreciating  with  respect  to  many 
currencies. 
                                                 
2   Economic growth expectations for Mexico in 2013 dropped from 3.6 to 3.0 percent between January and May 
2013,  while  those  for  2014  have  remained  at  4.0  percent  during  the  same  period.  See  Banco  de  México 
(2013), Survey of Private-Sector Economic Analysts’ Expectations, May. 
3   Two empirical analyses of factors that explain capital flows, including idiosyncratic factors, are Ghosh, A.R., et 
al. (2012), “Surges,” IMF Working Paper, WP/12/22, January; and Fratzscher, M. (2011), “Capital flows, push 
versus pull factors and the global financial crisis,” ECB Working Paper Series, No. 1364, July. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The resulting volatility in global financial markets has brought about considerable increases 
in Mexican government bond yields. For some maturities, the upward shift in the yield curve 
has offset the downward shifts seen in the first four months of the year. Like other emerging-
market currencies, the peso has been depreciating against the dollar. 
Adjustments  in  Mexico’s  financial  markets  have  occurred  in  an  orderly  way.  FX  market 
volumes  have  continued  to  be  high,  bid-ask  spreads  have  remained  slim,  and  foreign 
holdings of peso-denominated bonds are still near record highs, although portfolio duration 
has been declining throughout the year. 
Recent global financial volatility is a foretaste of what could happen when the process of U.S. 
monetary  policy  unwinding  begins  in  earnest.  Hence,  it  is  likely  that  some  turbulence  may 
continue. 
Given  this  scenario,  the  Mexican  economy  is  expected  to  confront  any  new  episode  of 
uncertainty  in  a  solid  manner.  However,  it  is  important  that  creditors  as  well  as  debtors 
remain wary of their FX and interest-rate risk exposures. At the same time, authorities need 
to remain vigilant in order to ensure that financial markets operate normally at all times. 
Inflation and monetary policy 
In the last decade, monetary policy in Mexico has sought the convergence of inflation toward 
the  3  percent  permanent  target.  Progress  in  price  stability  over  the  same  time  has  been 
considerable. 
Nevertheless,  during  the  current  year,  inflation  has  posted  somewhat  higher  levels,  since 
March surpassing the Bank of Mexico’s upper limit in the variability interval of plus or minus 
one percentage point around its inflation target. Higher inflation mainly reflects pressures in 
the  noncore  component  of  the  CPI,  from  agricultural  prices  as  well  as  energy  prices  and 
government tariffs. 
However,  the  negative  supply  shock  is  expected  to  be  transitory.  At  the  same  time, 
moderation in core inflation continues to depend, to some degree, on a positive shock from 
certain  services  prices. Nevertheless,  core  inflation  has  remained  around  3  percent  during 
the last few months and is expected to stay around this level during the rest of this year and 
next. 
Up to now, there is no evidence of secondary effects from recent changes in relative prices. 
Analysts’  short-term  inflation  expectations  have  increased  somewhat,  but  expectations  for 
the  medium  and  long  terms  have  remained  stable,  albeit  above  3  percent.  The  Bank  of 
Mexico expects inflation to return to the variability interval in the second half of this year, and 
to be very close to the permanent target in 2014. 
Upside  risks  to  inflation  prevail,  including  greater-than-expected  hikes  to  transportation 
prices, additional agricultural price pressures, given avian flu, low precipitation and reduced 
water  levels  in  dams,  and  greater  volatility  due  to  uncertainty  over  U.S.  monetary  policy 
normalization. 
The persistence of higher inflation carries the risk of fueling second-round effects that may 
contaminate  the  price  and  wage  formation  process.  Thus,  the  Bank  of  Mexico  Governing 
Board has warned that it will remain alert to adverse supply shocks in order to keep them 
from producing these effects so that the process of convergence to the permanent inflation 
target remains on track.4 
                                                 
4   See the Bank of Mexico’s monetary policy announcement, June 7, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Concluding remarks 
Recent  indicators  highlight  slower  expansion  in  the  Mexican  economy,  largely  caused  by 
global  economic  weakness.  By  next  year,  as  the  external  environment  improves,  Mexico’s 
economic activity is expected to post a healthier pace. Also, in the medium term, structural 
reforms could enhance productivity. 
The  financial  volatility  of  the  last  few  weeks  has  had  significant  implications  for  emerging 
markets.  Adjustments  in  Mexico  have  been  orderly.  In  the  face  of  the  possibility  that 
uncertainty may continue, prudence should prevail on the part of creditors and debtors, and 
the  authorities  should  remain  alert  in  order  to  ensure  that  at  all  times  financial  markets 
operate normally. 
Finally,  an  increase  in  annual  inflation  so  far  this  year  is  due  to  negative  supply  shocks, 
reflected  especially  in  the  noncore  component  of  the  CPI.  Given  the  temporary  nature  of 
recent pressures, it is likely that inflation will soon resume a downward trend toward the 3 
percent permanent target. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
