DeLisle Worrell: Introduction of new banknotes in Barbados 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the launch of 
the new family of currency notes, Bridgetown, 2 May 2013. 
 This  is  a  very  special  occasion  for  the  Central  Bank  and  for  Barbados.  As  I  reminded 
everyone in my first press conference after being appointed Governor, the enduring worth of 
our  currency  is  a  source  of  national  pride  for  all  Barbadians.  Understandably  so,  because 
maintaining the value of the currency is what has distinguished between the more successful 
small  economies  the  world  over,  and  those that  have  fallen  behind  in  the  race  to  improve 
living  standards.  In  the  Caribbean  the  contrast  is  obvious,  where  small  poorly  endowed 
islands, Barbados among them, have moved far ahead of their larger more richly endowed 
neighbours. The Caribbean is not unique in this regard. Singapore is a country held in high 
regard by many; the value of the Singapore currency is carefully managed by their monetary 
authority, albeit with the use of a basket of currencies rather than the US dollar, as in our 
case.  
Today  we  preview  the  introduction  of  new  currency  notes,  for  the  first  time  since  the 
Barbados  currency  was  first  introduced  in  1973.  The  new  notes  are  grounded  in  the  past 
stability of our money. The personalities featured on each value note remain the same, and 
the general look of the note will be familiar. But Barbados has come a long way since 1973, 
and we are now considered a developed country, as evidenced by our very high levels of 
purchasing power, health and education, when compared with countries around the world.  
As  a  symbol  of  our  new  status,  we  are  now  introducing  notes  that  are  as  modern  as  the 
latest technology can make them. These notes are our declaration of intent; we recognise 
that, having reached this advanced level of human development, we must cross swords with 
the best in the world and prevail, in order to maintain our forward momentum. That is why we 
have spared no effort in making our new notes the best they can be: the design is appealing, 
yet classy, the security features incorporate the most up-to-date technologies, and the notes 
include special aids for the visually impaired.  
Our  mandate  to  our  banknote  printer,  De  La  Rue,  was  to  provide  us  with  a  secure,  user-
friendly  series,  and  we  are  happy  that  we  have  accomplished this. The  new  notes  have  a 
contemporary layout and design that mirrors our status as a modern nation, but that at the 
same time honours our history and our culture. We’ve added tactile marks for the blind so 
that  they  will  now  be  able  to  identify  the  different  denominations  without  assistance.  Our 
thanks to the Barbados Association for the Blind and Deaf and the Barbados Council for the 
Disabled for their help.  
Finally, I invite you to visit our website or our Facebook page to learn more about the new 
notes.  We  also  have  explanatory  flyers  and  booklets  available  and  we  will  be  conducting 
training sessions for businesses and interested individuals leading up to the issue of the first 
of the new notes on June 4.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
