William C Dudley: Why financial stability is a necessary prerequisite for 
an effective monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture, Bank for International Settlements 2013 
Annual General Meeting, Basel, 23 June 2013. 
 This panel is entitled Monetary Policy and Banking.1 That takes in a lot of territory. Rather 
than try to cover the waterfront, I am going to start with a single premise: Financial stability is 
a necessary prerequisite for an effective monetary policy. There is a critical chain of linkages 
from  monetary  policy  to  banking  and  onwards  to  the  real  economy.  Financial  stability  is  a 
necessary  condition  for  those  linkages  to  operate  effectively.  Thus,  it  is  a  necessary 
condition for monetary policy to be able to achieve its economic objectives.  
I  will  then  outline  briefly  what  I  see  as  some  of  the  major  implications that  stem  from  that 
premise. These include that the central bank has a major role to play in ensuring financial 
stability and should evaluate the stance of monetary policy in light of problems in the financial 
system that may impair the monetary policy transmission mechanism.2  
In my mind, the biggest lesson of the financial crisis has been that monetary policy cannot 
work properly when there is financial instability. When financial instability occurs, it disturbs 
market functioning and can also impair bank balance sheets. The result can be disruption to 
the financial intermediation function with resulting constraints on the availability of credit for 
households  and  businesses.  This,  in  turn,  can  lead  to  further  reductions  in  aggregate 
demand that put additional stress on the weakened financial system. Obviously, this is not a 
favorable dynamic. 
Financial  instability  can  impact  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  via  three  major  channels. 
First,  financial  instability  can  generate  a  sufficiently  large  shock  to  aggregate  demand  that 
the  central  bank  may  encounter  the  zero  lower  bound  constraint  –  the  constraint  that  the 
monetary policy instrument, for example, the federal funds rate – cannot easily be pushed 
below zero. In such circumstances, it may not be easy to fully offset the shock through the 
pursuit  of  a  more  stimulative  monetary  policy.  At  the  zero  bound,  the  central  bank  is  not 
powerless, and may turn to other monetary policy tools such as forward guidance and large 
scale asset purchases. But these tools may not be as effective as lowering the short-term 
rate  instrument.  In  particular,  the  central  bank  may  not  be  willing  to  use  these 
nonconventional tools to the full extent necessary to provide the same degree of stimulus as 
it  would  provide  if  it  could  set  interest  rates  at  negative  levels.  That  might  be  because  of 
uncertainty  about  how  nonconventional  tools  will  work  or  because  of  the  potential  costs 
associated with the use of such tools in terms of market functioning and the risks of future 
financial instability.  
Second,  financial  instability  can  impair  the  linkage  between  monetary  policy  and  financial 
conditions.  The  central  bank  may  move  to  a  much  more  accommodative  monetary  policy 
stance,  but  this  may  not  lead  to  much  improvement  in  financial  conditions.  We  see  this 
clearly in spreads and risk premia during periods of financial stress. Depletion of capital in 
the  banking  system  or  the  interaction  of  frictions  and  market  failures  may  also  lead  to 
constraints on the availability of credit following a financial shock. As a recent U.S. example 
of the second issue, households with lower FICO scores have had difficulties in refinancing 
                                                 
1   Krishna Guha, Marc Saidenberg and others on my staff contributed to these remarks. 
2   As always, what I have to say here today reflects my own views and not necessarily those of the FOMC or the 
Federal Reserve System. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
their mortgages or in obtaining new mortgages to purchase a home. This stems from worries 
by lenders about put back risk – that such mortgages might be put back to them by Fannie 
Mae or Freddie Mac should the mortgages become nonperforming. For any given reduction 
in mortgage rates relative to normal levels, this reduces the support for the housing sector 
and consumption. Thus, another lesson of the crisis is that monetary policymakers need to 
be more attuned to how the condition of the financial system influences how monetary policy 
changes affect financial conditions.  
Third, the linkage between financial conditions and aggregate demand may also be impaired. 
For example, if an asset bubble has caused a buildup of debt that now needs to be reduced 
significantly,  then  lower  interest  rates  that  ease  financial  conditions  may  not  stimulate 
aggregate demand very much. Separately, in a protracted zero bound episode, the monetary 
policy impulse may become attenuated over time. Lower interest rates may make financial 
conditions  easier,  lifting  wealth,  and  encouraging  households  to  shift  spending  from  the 
future  to  the  present.  But  when  the  future  arrives,  spending  may  then  be  lower  as  a 
consequence.  The  linkage  between  financial  conditions  and  economic  activity  may  vary 
depending on how long the accommodative monetary policy regime has been in place. 
So what are the implications that stem from the fact that financial instability can impair the 
efficacy of monetary policy? I think there are at least three major implications: 
 
The central bank has a strong stake in preventing financial instability.  
When  financial  instability  occurs,  the  central  bank  has  an  important  role  in  taking 
 
steps  to  mitigate  that  financial  instability.  This  includes  ensuring  that  credible 
liquidity  backstops  are  available  and  forcing  banks  to  strengthen  themselves,  for 
instance by raising additional capital.  
The  stance  of  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  judged  in  light  of  how  well  the 
transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  are  operating.  When  financial  instability 
has  disrupted  the  monetary  policy  transmission  channels,  following  simple  rules 
based  on  long-term  historical  relationships  can  lead  to  an  inappropriately  tight 
monetary policy.  
 Let me now consider each of these implications in turn. The first implication, that the central 
bank has a strong stake in preventing financial instability, has several elements. The central 
bank needs to be willing to respond to limit financial market bubbles from developing in the 
first place. This includes not just paying attention to asset price bubbles, but also to related 
excesses in leverage and in short-term funding markets. As I noted in a speech a few years 
ago, this is difficult to do in practice.3 After all, bubbles are difficult to identify in real time and 
the central bank’s policy toolkit to deal with bubbles may be limited. However, this difficulty 
cannot  be  an  excuse  for  inaction.  Using  the  bully  pulpit,  implementing  macroprudential 
measures, or adjusting monetary policy can generate superior results compared to inaction.  
The  central  bank  also  has  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  is  sufficiently  robust  and 
resilient  so  that  if  there  are  financial  market  shocks,  the  banking  system  can  absorb  any 
shocks and continue to perform its credit intermediation function. This has many elements 
including  tough  capital  and  liquidity  requirements  for  banks  and  strong  financial  market 
infrastructures. It also includes taking action to eliminate sources of vulnerabilities whenever 
they  may  arise  –  for  example,  strengthening  the  triparty  repo  system,  reducing  the 
vulnerability  of  money  market  mutual  funds  to  runs,  or  forcing  derivatives  contracts  to  be 
standardized and centrally cleared. These actions should be undertaken during “peacetime” 
rather than when a crisis is already underway. 
Finally,  the  central  bank  needs  to  look  over  the  horizon  and  identify  market  practices  and 
processes  that  could  make  the  financial  system  more  vulnerable  to  shocks  or  that  could 
                                                 
3   See “Asset Bubbles and the Implications for Central Bank Policy”, Economic Club of New York, April 7, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
amplify such shocks. As an example, a tougher response to the poor mortgage underwriting 
practices evident during the U.S. housing bubble would have been appropriate in my opinion. 
Or  more  attention  to  bank  compensation  practices  could  have  mitigated  the  incentives  for 
excessive risk-taking.  
The second implication is that when financial instability does occur, the central bank needs to 
respond forcefully to mitigate such instability. This includes ensuring that appropriate liquidity 
backstops are available. This is necessary in order to reassure counterparties that solvent 
institutions will have access to liquidity so that they can repay their obligations regardless of 
the degree of illiquidity or stress in the financial system. As we saw in the fall of 2008, without 
appropriate  backstops,  markets  can  seize  up  completely  even  when  counterparties  are 
perceived as solvent. That is because market participants tend to hoard liquidity during times 
of  stress  and  because  counterparties  may  not  engage  with  one  another  when  they  are 
uncertain whether others will do so. Central bank liquidity backstops act as a coordinating 
device, solving the collective action problem faced by private market participants. 
However,  in  the  most  serious  stress  episodes,  credible  liquidity  backstops  alone  will  not 
always prove sufficient. It is also necessary to take steps to restore the banking system to 
health as soon as possible. This means forcing banks to cut their capital distributions early 
and  to  raise  new  capital  in  a  timely  way  even  if  such  capital-raising  results  in  the  forced 
dilution of existing shareholders.  
With respect to bank capital, we saw two unwelcome behaviors during the crisis that central 
banks and other banking regulators need to lean against. Banks were reluctant to cut their 
capital  distributions  because  of  worries  that  this  would  signal  weakness.  Of  course,  these 
capital distributions just made the banks and the banking system weaker.  
Also,  we  saw  that  banks  were  reluctant  to  raise  capital  to  guard  against  particularly  bad 
states of the world because they thought this might unnecessarily dilute their shareholders 
should such bad states of the world not materialize. Of course, the collective action of banks 
to not raise this additional capital made the banking system weaker than it would otherwise 
have been. This in turn made the possibility of the particularly bad states of the world more 
likely.  In  such  circumstances  –  which  the  U.S.  faced  in  2009  and  arguably  the  Eurozone 
faces today – it is essential for the authorities to force sufficient capital into the system. The 
subtlety here is that in a time of stress it is necessary to overcapitalize the banking system 
relative to the base case scenario in order to ensure financial stability and an ongoing supply 
of credit to the real economy in a stress scenario. Doing this makes the bad scenario less 
likely  to  materialize  and  the  improvement  in  credit  supply  helps  to  engineer  a  stronger 
recovery than would otherwise materialize.4  
The third implication is that the stance of monetary policy needs to be assessed based on 
the state of the financial system and the real economy. How the monetary policy impulse is 
transmitted to the real economy is not immutable but changes depending on how monetary 
policy affects financial conditions and how financial conditions affect economic activity.  
During  and  following  financial  crises,  problems  in  the  financial  system  can  impair  the 
transmission of monetary policy to the real economy. When this happens, policy may need to 
be more accommodative than otherwise in order to achieve its objectives.  
The experiences of both Japan and United States are cases in point.5 In retrospect, we know 
that following the collapse of the property bubble and the investment boom in Japan in the 
1990s, the Bank of Japan (BoJ) did not follow a sufficiently accommodative monetary policy 
                                                 
4  
Ideally, as was the case in the U.S. in 2009, the authorities should require banks to meet their stress scenario 
capital ratio standards by adding equity capital, with no credit given for reducing assets. This leans against the 
incentive to deleverage to meet higher capital ratio requirements. 
5   See  my  recent  speech  “Lessons  at  the  Zero  Bound:  The  Japanese  and  U.S.  Experience”,  Japan  Society, 
May 21, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  prevent  deflation.  Although  the  BoJ  response  was  appropriate  relative  to  the  economic 
forecasts that prevailed at the time, those forecasts proved much too optimistic. Thus, policy 
was insufficiently accommodative with the benefit of hindsight. To a lesser degree, the same 
critique  also  applies  to  the  United  States.  Despite  an  aggressive  shift  towards  greater 
monetary policy accommodation in 2008 and 2009, and ongoing subsequent easing – which 
has supported a return to growth and helped to facilitate needed adjustments in housing and 
household  balance  sheets  –  the  economic  recovery  has  been  consistently  weaker  than 
forecast. As a result, the Federal Reserve has fallen short of meeting its employment and 
inflation  objectives.  This  suggests  that  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  U.S.  monetary  policy, 
though aggressive by historic standards, was not sufficiently accommodative relative to the 
state of the economy.  
In this regard, I would caution against the mechanical use of monetary policy rules following 
a  financial  crisis.  In  the  United  States,  the  so-called  Taylor  Rule  receives  considerable 
attention  as  a  guide  to  policy.  But  there  are  a  number  of  reasons  to  believe  that  using  it 
mechanically  would  result  in  too  tight  of  a  monetary  policy  setting.  While  discussing  the 
shortcomings of the Taylor Rule is beyond the scope of my remarks today, let me make one 
simple  point.  If  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  are  impaired,  then  the 
equilibrium  real  rate  associated  with  monetary  policy  neutrality  is  likely  to  be  considerably 
lower  than  the  2.25  percent  real  rate  assumption  embodied  in  the  typical  Taylor  Rule 
formulation.  Monetary  policy  needs  to  take  this  onboard,  even  before  considering  other 
issues such as risk-management at the zero bound. 
I have argued today that the central bank needs to have a major role in ensuring that the 
financial system is sound. Without this, the central bank cannot ensure that monetary policy 
will be effective in achieving its objectives. This is the important linkage of monetary policy to 
banking.  
Now some express concern that involvement in banking regulation and supervision may lead 
a central bank to bias the setting of monetary policy to try to help troubled banks or other 
institutions. This fear is misplaced. Problems in the financial sector are taken into account for 
monetary policy purposes only to the extent that they affect the transmission of policy to the 
real  economy.  There  is  a  separate  tool  kit  to  address  problems  at  the  level  of  the  banks 
themselves. 
Others will argue that having the central bank involved in the oversight and regulation of the 
financial system puts too much power in the hands of one authority. Another concern is that 
such  a  consolidation  of  responsibilities  is  dangerous  for  the  central  bank  because  it  could 
threaten the central bank’s independence with respect to monetary policy. I think these are 
legitimate  issues.  But  the  bigger  risks,  in  my  view,  are  a  monetary  policy  that  fails  to 
accomplish its economic objectives because of financial instability, and difficulties that stem 
from  the  inevitably  imperfect  coordination  that  takes  place  between  multiple  agencies  with 
divided responsibilities during a crisis. In those cases, not only will the central bank own that 
bad  outcome  with  the  resulting  negative  consequences  for  its  ongoing  credibility  and 
effectiveness, but also the economic consequences will be severe for its citizens. 
To  address  concerns  about  central  bank  power,  the  best  approach  is  to  ensure 
accountability. This means appropriate oversight by the legislature and ongoing transparency 
by the central bank about the motivations for its actions, what it can reasonably expect to 
accomplish, and an honest assessment of its successes and failures.  
Thank you very much for your kind attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
