Rundheersing Bheenick: Becalmed – but still on course 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and 
Vice-Chairman  of  the  Association  of  African  Central  Banks  (AACB),  at  the  Opening 
Ceremony of the 2013 Symposium of Governors preceding the 37th Assembly of Governors 
of the AACB, Balaclava, Mauritius, 22 August 2013. 
  
It  is  an  immense  privilege  for  me  to  welcome  you  all  today  on  the  occasion  of  this 
symposium  on  financial  inclusion  on  the  eve  of  the  37th  Assembly  of  the  AACB  –  the 
Association of African Central Banks. This is an historic occasion both for Mauritius and for 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  We  are  hosting  the  Assembly  Meeting  and  the  Symposium  of  the 
Association for the first time in the history of our small island-state. 
 
There are indeed many firsts: this is the very first time the AACB is meeting off-shore – 
away from the African mainland. It is the first time that AACB annual meetings are witnessing 
such a record attendance; and also the first time that we are having in our midst the General 
Manager of the Bank for International Settlements, the President of the African Development 
Bank, and the Secretary-General of the Islamic Financial Services Board. 
 
We have all of Africa here, and when we include the flagship institution of the G-20, we 
have almost all the world represented under one roof, bearing testimony to the growing interest 
in the happenings on this great Continent. And from Africa itself – just to give you an indication 
of the representation − from North Africa we have our Chairman, Governor Laksaci of Algeria; 
from the West we have  Governor Sanusi of Nigeria; from Central Africa, we have Governor 
Nchama of Banque des Etats de l’Afrique Centrale; from the East we have Governor Mutebile 
of Uganda, and from the South we have Governor Marcus of South Africa – a grand total of 
32 Governors  and  heads  of  Central  Bank  delegations  representing  44 countries.  I  welcome 
you all here today. I wish the meeting great success and hope your stay here will be fruitful and 
worthwhile for you all. 
 
We are here to discuss what is emerging from the G20 Financial Inclusion Action Plan 
to improve the livelihoods of the poor, and to support Micro Small and Medium Enterprises, 
the  engines  of  economic  growth  and  job  creation  –  in  much  of  the  world,  and  not  just  in 
Africa. At the time Governors decided upon the theme of the Symposium last year, we could 
not have foreseen that the subject would assume such importance as to attract this splendid 
attendance. Governors will recall that we did discuss financial inclusion as far back as 2007. 
In  truth,  our  choice  of  this  AACB  Agenda  converges  with  its  development  through  the 
G-20 process. 
 
Many  countries  worldwide  are  actively  engaged  in  reforms  and  programmes  for  the 
provision  of  affordable  banking  services,  which  makes  the  topic  of  our  Symposium 
particularly pertinent. The slow recovery from the global crisis forces us to revisit our growth 
strategies  and  take  a  closer  look  at  their  impact  on  the  whole  of  the  societies  we  are 
expected to serve, not just the prosperous, but also the poor and the excluded –  who are 
showing increasing signs of impatience as they wait for the elusive magic of trickle-down to 
improve their lot. 
 
Africa  is changing fast. From  the gloom  and  the  conflict  of  the  last decades  we  now 
have new hope and opportunity spreading across the whole continent. In some parts, it is not 
just a wind of change but a veritable tempest. Indeed, in certain places, such is the pace of 
change  that  some  fear  that  we  are  moving  straight  from  the  African  Spring  into  a  wintry 
period of discontent. We are here, therefore, to address the issue of what can the world of 
banking do to push back this spectre. With 77% of our population still having no access to 
formal finance, we have our work cut out for us. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 
Today, as we open our discussions on inclusive finance and banking, we must frankly 
admit that in an environment where only a small minority of people ever set foot in a bank, 
and  where  banking  itself  is  hardly  part  of  the  greater  political  debate,  we  face  a  daunting 
prospect to find a pathway for promoting the best use of the capital resources available to the 
continent, to ensure balanced and sustainable growth with social stability, hand-in-hand with 
price  stability,  financial  stability,  and  monetary  stability.  Stable  currencies  and  control  of 
inflation figure high among pro-poor policies. To maintain our focus as central banks and to 
remind  ourselves  of  the  distance  we  still  have  to  travel,  it  is  sobering  to  note  that  we  are 
reaching the time when we should embark on Stage IV of the African Monetary Cooperation 
Program, which reduces the annual inflation target from the current 5% to 3% − a bar which 
is too high for many of us at this juncture. 
The wider agenda, when the present troubles have been overcome, is of course the 
 
movement towards regional economic, monetary and fiscal union. The steps to be taken on 
that pathway are many and difficult. Our model from Europe is itself under great scrutiny; and 
we  must  adapt  our  strategy  and  our  timetable  as  we  absorb  the  lessons  we  have  been 
learning from that troubled experiment. An important issue here is how far we can together 
achieve  even  the  early  stage  of  economic  convergence,  when  only  4  out  of  46  countries 
successfully met the targets in 2011, the last year for which we have comparable data. Even 
Mauritius is having difficulty here. Meeting these soft targets is a sine qua non if we are to 
have  any  real  hope  of  achieving  the  overarching  ambition  of  an  African  Economic 
Community. 
 
But as necessity is the mother of invention, if I may quote from my good friend Plato, I 
see with pleasure how many of our colleagues have been vigorously inventive. Across the 
African region we are seeing innovation with branchless and mobile banking, which is cutting 
down the barrier of distance, reducing the cost of financial services, and delivering low-cost 
accounts  for  poorer  people  and  small  businesses.  Indeed,  technology  is  transforming  the 
contours of the banking and financial landscape – and nowhere more so than here in Africa. 
 
We have also been more than busy, counteracting fraud and money laundering, and 
locking  up  the  real  “banksters”  in  the  profession,  who  for  too  long  have  been  giving  our 
business a bad name. Our friend and distinguished colleague from Nigeria, Governor Sanusi, 
has been one of the pioneers in this sharp-shooting side of the business. Such reforms in 
banking  discipline,  security  and  probity  are  essential  prerequisites  for  extending  banking 
services to the unbanked, but deserving, majority, in Africa. 
 
Driven  by  such  innovation,  banking  in  Africa  today  is  emerging  as  a  poster  boy  of 
empowerment and growing inclusiveness. Kenya, as Governor Ndungu can attest, is widely 
recognized as leading the field in a new generation of banking in Africa. 
 
We must, however, beware of hubris: for if we are at last getting on the right track, we 
must  not  just  sit  there  contented,  only  to  be  run  over  by  the  next  train  that  comes  along! 
Innovation, built on sound R & D, must be our way of life. For we have a major job in hand to 
keep pace with innovation in trade and investment in the region, and to provide the support 
that will ensure they thrive. As financial inclusion becomes another accepted test of quality in 
banking policy, it will, I am sure, provide a more solid foundation for promoting sustainable, 
equitable, and inclusive growth in the region. 
 
Now  let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  warmly  welcome  experts  from  the  African 
Development Bank, the Bank for International Settlements, the IMF and Standard Bank. Your 
contribution to our proceedings is eagerly awaited. You have done so much over the years, 
as  our  major  advisers  and  development  partners,  to  help  us  steer  our  countries  from  the 
darker days of the past, into the fresh light of a future rich with promise. For Africa is now 
emerging as the up-and-coming global centre of attention, a continent on the cusp of a major 
breakthrough.  I  have  no  doubt  you  can  enrich  our  discussions  on  the  general  aspects  of 
financial inclusion, as well as on the more technical issues of monetary policy and financial 
stability and their relevance to inclusiveness. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 
The General  Manager  of  the  Bank for International  Settlements,  Jaime Caruana,  will 
give a special address on the Basle process and the global aspects of Financial Inclusion. 
He  is  very  committed  to  the  Financial  Inclusion  Agenda  of  the  G-20  which  has  been 
germinating since 2008, in the wake of the global crisis. We thank him for his interest in the 
work of the AACB. We take this opportunity to also thank him for hosting at his headquarters 
in  Basel  an  annual  Round  Table  for  the  benefit  of  African  Governors,  with  selected  peers 
from  elsewhere.  This  new  development  agenda  pulls  together  the  policy  objectives  of 
financial  stability,  financial  inclusion  and  consumer  protection,  to  overcome  the  clear 
shortcomings  of  the  traditional  framework  of  financial  liberalisation.  Jaime  Caruana  will  no 
doubt brief us on the work of the two subcommittees of the G-20 on SMEs and on consumer 
access  through  innovation.  Commissioner  Maruping  will  share  with  us  the  African  Union’s 
perspective on our work. 
 
Tomorrow  at  the  Assembly  of  Governors,  we  will  have  the  President  of  the  African 
Development Bank, Donald Kaberuka, who will talk to us about the Africa 50 Fund and how it 
can help to bridge the infrastructure gap now hampering faster growth and better quality of 
life  on  the  continent.  And  the  Secretary  General  of  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board, 
Jaseem Ahmed, will bring his inputs later into our discussions by sharing with us his views on 
Islamic Finance and financial inclusion. 
 
I  must  express  my  thanks  to  those  organisations  who  have  partnered  with  us  to 
organise this event, and given us such fulsome support. First, the three banks: State Bank of 
Mauritius,  Standard  Bank  and  Barclays  Bank.  They  are  all  leading  the  way  in  working 
towards  closer  financial  links  between  Mauritius  and  the  wider  region.  Next,  our  two 
banknote  suppliers:  Oberthur  Fiduciaire,  a  leading  banknote  printer,  won  their  very  first 
supply contract in Mauritius with the notes which we shall be launching today. De La Rue, 
our traditional supplier, has a much longer association with Mauritius, going all the way back 
to 1860 when they supplied us with the first ever banknotes that the company produced. De 
la Rue is the supplier of the Rs 500 polymer note that we launch today. Third, two technology 
partners: SICPA, which manufactures the special security inks for our bank notes; and the IT 
company  CMA  Business  Systems,  who  have  been  working  with  us  on  the  COMESA 
Regional  Payments  System,  the  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System,  and  the  Cheque 
Truncation System. We thank them most sincerely for their generous support. 
 
Our  symposium  will  be  successful  only  if  we  uncover  new  knowledge,  form  new 
partnerships  for  collaboration,  if  we  establish  new  networks  for  continual  communication 
across this vast continent and its island-states, and above all if we secure new professional 
friendships, to be nurtured over the years to come. 
 
Colleagues  and  friends,  just  a  word  about  financial  inclusion  and  financial  access  in 
Mauritius.  Mauritius  is  making  slow,  but  steady  progress  in  economic  and  social 
development,  despite  the  global  economic  and  financial  crisis.  The  Bank  of  Mauritius  has 
been  working  closely  with  Government  in  promoting  SMEs  through  a  Bank  of  Mauritius- 
managed  scheme,  now  in  its  second  year,  extending  credit  for  new  start-ups.  We  have  a 
Task Force hard at work on Unfair Terms in Financial Contracts, that have been subject of 
complaints by consumers, for their excessive cost, inhibiting development and trade. 
 
A  major  innovation  in  banknote  technology  is  the  use  of  polymer  to  replace  the 
traditional paper substrate. We are following in the steps of some of our African peers in the 
introduction of polymer bank notes. We trust that these notes, like our population here, will 
enjoy increasing length of life and security. Today’s Symposium could not have been a more 
perfect  timing  for  launching  our  polymer  bank  notes.  Our  Prime  Minister  has  accepted  to 
address  us  this morning  when  he  will  proceed  with  the  official  launching  of these  polymer 
notes. By this happy coincidence, AACB will forever be associated with polymer notes here 
in Mauritius. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 
Let me reiterate that I am delighted to have you with us here in our small island. I have 
no doubt that our meeting will be very stimulating and generate lots of ideas on how finance 
could promote inclusive growth. 
 
Organising this meeting in this small island-state has been quite a challenge for us. I 
must therefore express my personal thanks to the AACB, the organising team at the Bank, 
the Office of the PM and the various agencies involved in the logistic arrangements for your 
reception.  And  I  must  add  my  personal  thanks  to  the  head  of  my  office  at  the  Bank  for 
coordinating the whole thing. 
 
I wish  you a pleasant stay  in  Mauritius. I hope that our meeting will help to promote 
greater innovation and make a contribution to stimulate economic growth and prosperity in 
this great continent. In this way, we can validate the perennial and evergreen character and 
continued  pertinence  of  the  famous  remark  of  the  Roman  historian,  Pliny  the  Elder,  who 
observed 
 
“There is always something new out of Africa!”  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
