Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Challenges for sound banking systems 
in East Africa – a central banker’s perspective 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
the  16th  East  African  Community  (EAC)  Monetary  Affairs  Committee  Meeting,  Kampala, 
23 May 2013. 
 Governors of EAC Central Banks  
Secretary General of the EAC  
Senior staff and technical officials  
Ladies and gentlemen  
Good morning  
It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  you  to  Kampala  for  the  16th  meeting  of  the  East 
African Community Monetary Affairs Committee (MAC). It is also an honour for me to host 
this  meeting.  The  purpose  of  the  meeting  is  to  assess  the  status  of  implementation  of 
previous MAC decisions, and to consider any salient issues that may have emerged since 
our last meeting a year ago here in Kampala.  
As is usual at the MAC meeting, the format will involve the presentation of a report of the 
technical officials of our five central banks, followed by a discussion of the issues raised in 
the  report.  The  technical  report  will  be  presented  by  the  current  chairman  of  the  technical 
officials, Dr Adam Mugume, of the Bank of Uganda. Our technical staff has worked extremely 
hard  over  the  last  three  days  to  produce  a  very  comprehensive  and  analytically  rigorous 
report.  I  would  like  to  thank  them  all  for  the  very  good  job  that  they  have  done.  Fellow 
Governors, you have already received a brief on the issues in the technical report from your 
own technical officials this morning.  
Without  wishing  to  pre-empt  the  discussions,  I  would  like  to  highlight  briefly  the  following 
issues which I think merit particular attention today.  
First, financial stability is becoming an increasingly important area of responsibility for central 
banks in East Africa as elsewhere in the world. For the EAC, several trends in recent years 
have the potential to heighten vulnerability to financial instability. These trends include, inter 
alia, the rapid growth in the volume of short term portfolio  capital flows, attracted often by 
favourable  interest  rate  differentials.  These  capital  flows  are  intermediated  through  our 
banking systems and could potentially expose banks to both liquidity and market risk. The 
volatility  of  these  capital  flows,  which  is  often  caused  by  events  in  the  global  financial 
markets, sometimes leads to highly disruptive movements in nominal exchange rates which 
policymakers  cannot  ignore.  The  importance  of  regional  and  international  banks  in  our 
economies  also  poses  risks  unless  we  can  put  in  place  effective  systems  of  consolidated 
supervision  and  mechanisms  for  resolving  cross  border  banks  in  the  event  of  a  financial 
crisis, in a manner which avoids systemic disruption. We will hear a presentation on financial 
stability by officials of the IMF late this morning.  
Secondly,  during  the  transition  to  East  African  Monetary  Union  (EAMU),  we  need  to 
strengthen coordination of macroeconomic policies among each of the partner states. This is 
especially  important  for  monetary  and  exchange  rate  policies,  which  will  have  to  become 
progressively  more  closely  aligned  as  we  move  towards  the  irrevocable  implementation  of 
the EAMU. The macroeconomic convergence criteria, which will be enshrined in the EAMU 
Protocol, provide the framework for macroeconomic policy harmonisation.  
Thirdly, I would like to emphasise the need to accelerate the integration of payment systems 
within  the  EAC.  There  are  several  ongoing  initiatives  in  this  field,  among  which  is  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
East African  Payments  Systems  (EAPS).  The  EAPS  project  aims  to  interlink  all  the  Real 
Time  Gross  Settlement  Systems  in  the  region  to  enable  cross  border  transactions  to  be 
processed in an efficient manner, which is essential for boosting intra-regional trade.  
Fellow  Governors,  before  we  begin  our  deliberations,  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  remarks 
about the lessons to be drawn from the ongoing crisis in the Euro zone. As central bankers 
we have naturally been keen observers of the unfolding events in the Euro zone, such as the 
recent bail out of Cyprus and its banking system. The problems of the Euro zone have direct 
relevance for the East African Community because the EAMU is analogous in many respects 
to the European Monetary Union. Hence it is imperative that we draw the right lessons from 
the euro zone crisis and avoid the mistakes made in the Euro area if we are to build a single 
currency in East Africa on sustainable foundations.  
One of the key lessons which I draw from the Euro zone crisis is the need for a very robust 
institutional framework. This is especially relevant in two areas, that of fiscal policy and bank 
regulation. The euro zone crisis is simultaneously both a sovereign debt crisis and a crisis of 
fragile banking systems, both of which reflect, to some extent, institutional weaknesses in the 
Euro zone. This has prompted reforms in the Euro zone such as the Fiscal Compact and the 
ongoing efforts to create a Euro area wide banking union. The fiscal framework of the EAMU, 
including  the  rules  for  fiscal  balances  and  public  debt,  is  the  responsibility  of  the  EAC 
Ministers  of  Finance,  but  the  responsibility  for  ensuring  that  our  banking  systems  remain 
sound and are resilient to shocks lies with ourselves as central bankers.  
Finally, fellow Governors, I once again want to reiterate that it is a great privilege to host you 
in our beautiful city, Kampala, the City of undulating hills. I invite you to enjoy the sites and 
savour the cuisine in this part of the world.  
 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
