Christine M Cumming: Enhancing payment system speed, efficiency and 
security 
Keynote remarks by Ms Christine M Cumming, First Vice President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  TCH  Annual  Payments  Symposium  and  Business  Meeting, 
New York City, 5 July 2013. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  today  to  speak  to  you  about  the  evolution  of  the  U.S. 
payments system and the Federal Reserve Banks’ role in that evolution. The views I express 
will be mine and not those of the Federal Reserve System or the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York, although I will draw on the considerable work being done in the Federal Reserve 
on the future payments direction. 
Without  question,  we  are  living  in  an  once-in-a-lifetime  period  of  change  in  the  U.S. 
payments  system.  Payments  providers  are  seeking  ways  to  bring  mobile  technology  to 
payments, an integration widely seen as a game-changer by payments industry participants. 
Person-to-person  payments  mechanisms  have  grown  rapidly,  and  the  potential  for  those 
funds to be immediately credited to the receiver could be another game-changer. Commerce 
increasingly  integrates  with  a  payments  mechanism,  especially  as  information  about 
spending patterns are a source of value to firms and loyalty discounts and points become an 
important part of the business value proposition to customers. Indeed, rather than talk about 
a  payments  industry,  we  find  ourselves  talking  about  a  payments  ecosystem,  a  web  of 
banks, service companies, alternative payments providers and commercial firms. 
Some have called these developments a second internet revolution. End-user demands and 
new  industry  participants  (i.e.,  non-banks)  are  driving  innovation,  with  technology  enabling 
faster  processing,  more  convenience  to  users,  and  the  extraction  and  use  of  valuable 
information  that  accompanies  payments.  As  the  term  “second  internet  revolution”  implies, 
these  developments  represent  another  instance  of  high  levels  of  innovation,  fueled  by 
disruptive technology, challenging traditional business models. But this time, they are not just 
any business models – they are our business models. 
How are end-users driving innovation? Let me mention my personal hypothesis: that we may 
be  seeing  fundamental  change  in  the  way  households,  small  businesses  and  some 
merchants  manage  their  finances.  We’re  seeing  trends  in  financial  data  and  bankers  are 
seeing the trends in practice: less reliance on debt and closer attention to cash balances to 
manage spending. Some nonbank e-wallet providers are facilitating the management of the 
points, coupons and discounts that have become an important source of value to customers 
and of customer loyalty for business. And those behavioral changes, if durable, could prompt 
major  evolution  in  the  traditional  deposit  banking  model,  which  was  built  to  meet  a  wide 
range  of  customer  demands,  but  perhaps  not  these  newly  emerging  demands.  Those 
behavioral  changes  suggest  that  great  business  opportunity  lies  in  addressing  those 
21st century customer needs. 
The  payments  industry  has  demonstrated  strong  ability  to  innovate,  but  innovation  often 
creates  pain  points,  and  we’re  hearing  about  them.  Virtually  all  of  the  mobile,  person-to-
person or commerce-related systems are closed-loop. If the loops don’t communicate, we fall 
short of the network opportunities that checks, debit and credit cards, and ATM cards offer. 
The tremendous potential in mobile lies in the eventual speed and quality of the end-to-end 
experience and in the security of any information on the device or in transit, tough challenges 
simultaneously to engineer. And beyond mobile payments, achieving the speed and general 
availability of faster payments seen or planned for in the United Kingdom, Australia and other 
countries requires tremendous coordination across the payments industry. 
So, how does the Federal Reserve fit into this period of extraordinary change and challenge? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  long  championed  access,  including  nationwide  connection, 
coordination,  as  well  as  the  security,  efficiency  and  resiliency  of  the  nation’s  principal 
payments mechanisms. In light of the tremendous increase in payments innovation, last fall 
the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  launched  a  new  strategic  plan  for  Federal  Reserve  Financial 
Services. We’re asking how our services may need to change to facilitate the direction of the 
payments market and how we could enable existing and future innovation by the payments 
industry.  The  Federal  Reserve  Banks  are  actively  engaged  in  adjusting  our  planning,  our 
product development and our resources to address innovation in the marketplace. 
To  do  that,  however,  we  need  to  build  consensus  within  the  industry  around  a  broad 
direction,  around  the  benefits  of  access  and  connectivity  across  the  nation,  and  about 
understanding and managing the risks of new technologies and new business models that 
emerge. 
What can the Federal Reserve bring to the table? First and foremost, we can convene the 
industry  and,  as  needed,  drive  toward  consensus.  We  can  bring  strong  research  and 
analysis to the table. We can synthesize the large volume of payments research developed 
by industry, think tanks, consultants and academics, as we’ve already done for ourselves, as 
well  as  provide  research  by  Federal  Reserve  economists.  We  can  analyze  use  cases,  as 
we’ve done over the last six months. And to help shape the consensus, we can draw on the 
basic principles that have guided Federal Reserve provision of payments services over the 
postwar period: access, efficiency, security and resiliency. 
Historically, the Federal Reserve’s focus has been on the interbank clearing and settlement 
of  payments,  operating  efficiency,  such  as  the  conversion  from  paper  to  electronics, 
technologies that extend and improve accessibility, and infrastructures and services that are 
robust  to  security  threats.  Moving  forward  our  strategy  maintains  emphasis  on  those  key 
areas, but expands our focus to the flow of a payments transaction from end to end, end-
user  to  end-user.  The  vision  is  to  make  sure  the  core  services  we  provide  enable  and 
encourage innovation among payments providers who serve the end-users at the two ends 
of  the  payment.  The  end-to-end  view  means  that  payment  initiation  and  delivery  of  good 
funds to end-users in the future state need to be timely, cost-effective, safe and easy. 
When we talk about timeliness and a faster payments system, what exactly does that mean? 
Speed of payment clearing and settlement is defined as the time from payment initiation to 
payment  completion  in  final  funds.  In  a  world  where  many  other  countries  are  moving  to 
payment systems that support near real-time payments from any bank account sender to any 
bank  account  receiver,  the  U.S.  payments  system  is  slow.  Countries  such  as  the  UK, 
Australia, Mexico, Switzerland and Singapore have built or are building near real-time retail 
payment systems. 
Is the need for faster payments in the U.S. a key gap in the payment industry that should be 
addressed? As we’ve discussed this issue with industry leaders, we hear that although end 
users don’t demand this today, they will expect it tomorrow. The sentiment seems to be that 
a proactive approach to preparing for a real-time future is wise. And near real-time seems 
likely to be transformative to the transactions of daily life and work. 
Notification of payment to end-users is an element of speed in payment clearing. End users 
increasingly  expect  near  real-time  informational  features,  which  are  lacking  in  payment 
mechanisms such as ACH and even in much provision of wire, but typically available with 
cards and certain non-bank innovator products. For credit transactions, receivers expect to 
be  informed  that  good  funds  have  arrived  or  are  on  their  way.  Transaction  confirmation  is 
expected  by  both  the  sender  and  receiver.  If  settlement  is  deferred,  the  sender’s  financial 
institution may need to send a message to communicate that good funds are on their way. A 
key  question  for  the  future  is  this:  do  notification  and  memo-posting  suffice,  so  that  funds 
actually move at discrete times in the day, as they do in the UK, or do funds need to move in 
near real time as well? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In the near term, we in the Federal Reserve continue to work to reduce the time required to 
complete  payments  and  deliver  payments-related  information  in  the  channels  in  which  the 
Fed  operates.  The  debate  to  be  had  by  the  industry  is  whether  our  existing  payments 
mechanisms can meet the needs of the future or we need to embark upon designing a next 
generation payment instrument. We welcome your voice in that debate. 
Let’s turn our focus to end-to-end efficiency in the payments system. Innovation is occurring 
in closer proximity to end-users, at points between payment providers and their customers, 
and between merchants and consumers. Enhancing efficiency will mean moving business-to-
business  (B2B)  and  person-to-person  (P2P)  payments  from  paper  to  electronics,  and 
bringing down the end-to-end cost of initiating and receiving payments. Efforts will continue 
by  Internet/Web  vendors  to  create  customer-facing  technologies  to  help  users  initiate 
payments.  Here’s  where  mobile  and  handheld  innovations  may  play  a  large  role.  In  what 
form,  and  when,  growth  occurs  will  depend  on  when  alternatives  offer  the  speed, 
convenience, simplicity and other advantages that drive broad adoption. 
End-to-end  efficiency  also  means  that  innovation  in  payments  origination  and  receipt 
integrates  smoothly  into  demand  account  systems  and  traverses  risk  filters  and  the 
payments infrastructure with both speed and relatively low cost. 
We have ample room to increase efficiency. End-users are still writing paper checks by the 
billions across many different use cases. Some recent payment innovations are designed to 
address  these  opportunities.  For  example,  in  the  P2P  space  there  are  PayPal,  PopMoney 
and Dwolla; in B2B, Paymode X and PayNetExchange; for bill payment, FIS and Fiserv, and 
among the proliferating mobile options, Square Wallet and LevelUp. 
In  many  ways,  however,  checks  continue  to  provide  features  that  are  not  replicated  by 
electronic  alternatives  and  innovations.  Checks  offer  a  large  measure  of  ubiquity.  In  other 
words,  senders  and  receivers  can  reach  nearly  everyone  without  signing  up  for  multiple 
services.  They  provide  convenience  because  the  payer  doesn’t  have  to  know  the  payee’s 
account  information.  Virtually  all  the  innovative  services  I  noted  involve  closed  payment 
communities, which require both the sender and receiver to join. A more efficient mechanism 
would  facilitate  payments  from  any  sender  to  any  receiver.  Achieved  through  directories, 
standards  or  some  other  solution,  ubiquity  will  be  key  to  achieving  the  efficiency  of 
all-electronic payments in the end-to-end value chain. 
Let  me  touch  on  one  more  possible  form  of  efficiency;  in  my  personal  view,  an  efficient, 
faster,  secure  and  ubiquitous  payments  mechanism  (especially  if  it’s  mobile)  could 
significantly change the risks in payments. Faster clearing, especially with a balance check at 
initiation  and  immediate  posting  or  credit  at  the  receiving  end  could  reduce  the  amount  of 
credit involved in managing commerce or a payments business, credit that arises today from 
returned checks, for example. Customers that are relying more on their balances and less on 
float  or  credit  may  borrow  less  but  may  need  to  be  more  liquid.  The  possibility  that  future 
payments might rely somewhat less on a firm’s economic capital and its liquidity could also 
contribute to efficiency. 
Along  with  enabling  innovation,  technology  drives  new  risk.  Reports  of  denial  of  service 
attacks and data breaches have raised data security concerns across the payments industry. 
Concern  is growing  about  the  potential  to  corporate  and  or  other  bank  account  takeovers. 
Any  of  these  disruptions  has  the  potential  for  undermining  confidence  in  the  payments 
system, particularly given that it is difficult for end-users to assess the security of payment 
services. 
Security and resiliency have always been paramount concerns across the payments system. 
The impact of a significant outage or fraud on the public’s confidence may adversely impact 
increasingly electronic or “digital” commerce. New ways of making payments and the entry of 
non-traditional  payments  system  participants  create  change  that  presents  new  risks  and 
challenges to assess. The sophistication of some recent frauds introduces the potential for 
material  risk.  The  Federal  Reserve  Banks’  strategic  plan  focuses  on  fostering  safety  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
security not only in Federal Reserve interbank networks and applications, but also the safety 
and security of the payments process from end-to-end. 
The challenges and opportunities related to speed, efficiency and security of payments are 
most  apparent  when  we  examine  the  mobile  and  international  payment  ecosystems.  The 
mobile  revolution  is  blurring  the  lines  between  commerce,  both  online  and  offline,  and 
payments. In this new world, payments are but a small part of the value to be delivered in the 
commerce  experience,  with  loyalty  programs,  location  and  behavior-based  offers,  and 
personal  financial  management  tools  becoming  part  of  the  broader  customer  experience. 
Financial  institutions  are  working  hard  to  figure  out  how  they  will  participate.  We  must 
consider how the payments industry can design its future systems and services to address 
these new opportunities. 
The  business  challenges  for  financial  institutions  are  also  great  when  considering 
international  payments.  Cross-border  transactions  are  generally  slow,  inconvenient  and 
inefficient, especially bank account-centric international payments sent or received on behalf 
of consumers or businesses. Some closed networks, such as Western Union and PayPal, 
have made advances in this space, but their networks are not as ubiquitous as open banking 
networks.  Our  leadership  in  the  global  economy  calls  for  a  more  seamless  international 
payment experience. 
Each of these areas – speed, efficiency, security – are embodied in the Federal Reserve’s 
vision for the future of payments. Success in achieving these goals will require collaboration 
and  engagement  with  the  industry.  We  need  to  understand  industry  views  on  the  benefits 
and costs of addressing these gaps and opportunities, the technical and operational impacts 
of potential solutions, and the associated safety and settlement issues. 
In the coming months, we intend to work with industry stakeholders to facilitate development 
of a shared vision for enhancing the future payments system. A recent Payments Strategy 
Roundtable  in  Chicago  was  a  first  step  in  this  effort,  we  envision  many  forums  to  gather 
diverse industry perspectives. Our ongoing collaboration with The Clearing House leadership 
on  strategic  issues  is  critical  to  this  planning  process,  given  our  key  roles  in  common  as 
payment  system  operators.  In  September,  our  Chicago  Payments  Symposium  will  offer  a 
platform to report on the progress of our work. 
All of us at Federal Reserve Financial Services are committed to working collaboratively with 
the leaders in this room and the entire payments industry to implement innovations that meet 
user needs today and into the future. We thank you for  your ongoing partnership in these 
endeavors.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
