Jörg Asmussen: Saving the euro 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at The Economist’s Bellwether Europe Summit, London, 25 April 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
First of all, let me thank the Economist for inviting me to speak on this panel on “Saving the 
euro”.  
This is a catchy title – but, in truth, I think it is out of date. The euro is already “saved”. It will 
survive this crisis, it will emerge from it stronger and more countries will join the euro in the 
future.  
The problems we are facing today are different: how to avoid a “lost decade” of stagnating 
growth  and  high  unemployment;  how  to  deal  with  unhealthy  bank  balance  sheets;  how  to 
answer to the understandable frustration of many citizens who do not see a “light at the end 
of the tunnel”. 
In  other  words,  we  are  not  facing  an  acute  or  terminal  sickness,  but  as  the  IMF  recently 
noted, a chronic one, that could cause us pain for years to come unless we fix it.  
And fixing it is complex. We are simultaneously facing a banking crisis, a crisis of public and 
private debt, a competitiveness crisis and a crisis of trust in institutions and political decision 
making.  There  is  no  magic  bullet  that  can  solve  it.  We  are  in  the  middle  of  a  decade  of 
adjustment.  
But this of course begs the question: what can we do? 
And this is what I want to focus on in my remarks today: what it is realistic to expect the euro 
area to achieve – and what it is not. In particular, I want to answer three questions: 
First, should the ECB be doing more? 
Second, how can we overcome the political challenges to adjustment? 
Third, how will Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) develop from here? 
Should the ECB be doing more? 
Starting with the first question, “should the ECB be doing more”? 
First of all, it is important to understand that the ECB has already done a lot.  
We have given funding to banks at fixed rates and in unprecedented volumes. We have lent 
at  up  to  3  year  maturities.  And  we  have  widened  the  collateral  that  can  be  used  in  our 
operations,  allowing  national  central  banks  to  differentiate,  within  limits,  according  to  their 
domestic conditions. 
More  recently,  with  Outright  Monetary  Transactions,  we  have  taken  tail  risks  out  of  the 
market by creating a fully credible backstop against unfounded fears about the euro area.  
All this has prevented that bank funding tensions created a general credit crunch, as well as 
helped normalise financial conditions across the euro area. Target-2 balances have fallen by 
almost 20%, or 200 billion euro, from their peak last year. Banks’ access to funding is slowly 
improving,  including  in  some  of  the  peripheral  counties.  This  is  reflected  by  the  fact  that 
many banks decided to repay early a substantial part of the LTRO funds adding to 274 billion 
Euro or half of the initial net liquidity injection.  
But  as  you  know,  there  are  some  key  indicators  where  we  are  still  not  seeing  an  effect. 
Availability  of  credit  to  SMEs  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area  remains  constrained.  More 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
generally,  growth  remains  weak  and  unemployment,  especially  for  young  people,  is 
unacceptably high. 
This has led many people, especially in this country, to ask, “why doesn’t the ECB do more? 
Why doesn’t it copy the measures of other central banks like the Fed, the Bank of England or 
the Bank of Japan?” 
This is of course a very complex issue – and there are three dimensions to the answer. 
First,  we  have  to  respect  our  mandate,  which  is  price  stability.  This  means  that  there  are 
certain  ideas  –  like  allowing  higher  inflation,  or  targeting  a  rate  of  employment  –  that  we 
simply cannot entertain.  
Second, we have to work within the financial structure we have in the euro area.  
The two key facts about this financial structure are that it is bank-based, rather than capital 
market-based, and that there are multiple benchmark interest rates, rather than a single rate 
universally acknowledged as “risk free”. 
This means that large-scale asset purchase programmes targeted at capital markets would 
not be very helpful in the euro area. And it means that policies like forward guidance or QE, 
which aim to push down the risk-free rate, are not easily applicable here. 
Moreover,  a  more  recent  feature  of  our  financial  structure  is  financial  fragmentation.  This 
implies  that  lower  interest  rates  have  asymmetric  effects,  and  not  in  the  direction  that  we 
want them. 
Due to impaired monetary policy transmission, the pass-through of rate cuts to the periphery 
would be limited, and this is where they are most needed. At the same time, rate cuts would 
further relax already unprecedentedly easy financing conditions in the core. This is not per se 
a problem – but interest rates that are too low for too long can eventually lead to distortions. 
In particular: 
• 
• 
to a misallocation of resources, which ultimately leads to lower potential growth, 
to  excessive  capital  inflows  into  a  number  of  emerging  economies  with  exchange 
rate effects and credit risks,  
and to reduced incentives for governments, banks, and corporates to adjust. 
• 
These  costs  of  very  low  interest  rates  are  real,  and  they  rise  over  time.  Of  course,  these 
costs have to be weighed against the need for exceptional monetary policy measures in a 
crisis.  
These  transmission  problems  bring  me  to  the  third  dimension:  we  have  to  recognise  the 
limits to what monetary policy can achieve in current conditions.  
The ECB can and has addressed bank funding problems. But there are other barriers holding 
back  bank  lending,  like  heightened  risk  aversion,  a  lack  of  loan  demand  and  insufficient 
capital. And above all, bank lending will only fully come back when the bank balance sheet 
repair is completed in all member states. The ECB cannot remove these constraints. This is 
where our responsibility ends and that of governments or other EU institutions begins. 
Monetary policy is not an all-purpose weapon for any kind of economic illness. 
How can we overcome the political challenges to adjustment? 
Some of you might react to this that governments are already being asked to do too much. 
That the costs of adjustment are too high in some countries, and at some point, people will 
simply not take anymore. 
This  links  to  my  second  question:  how  can  we  overcome  the  political  challenges  to 
adjustment? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let  me  be  clear:  every  policy-maker  in  the  euro  area  understands  that  the  process  of 
rebalancing  within  the  euro  area  is  painful.  We  are  deeply  concerned  by  the  levels  of 
unemployment we are seeing, in particular for young people. 
In Spain, more than 5 in 10 young people currently cannot find work. In Greece, the figure is 
almost 6 in 10. This is unacceptable – and it is also dangerous.  
But the political challenge, I believe, comes not from the process of adjustment itself. People 
can accept a period of hardship if it is necessary.  
It comes from the belief that there are better alternatives available that are being denied. This 
is what causes people to reject adjustment, or to blame others at home or abroad for their 
predicament. 
This is fine as far as it goes: we are democracies and we need a robust public debate. But it 
becomes a problem when the debate does not contain all the facts. If politicians put forward 
supposed  alternatives,  then  they  also  need  to  be  honest  with  citizens  about  their 
consequences. 
Take  for  instance  the  common  claim  that  “austerity  has  failed”  and  that,  to  get  back  to 
growth, fiscal policy has to be loosened. 
This may sound attractive at first sight, but delaying fiscal consolidation is no free lunch. It 
means higher debt levels. And this has real costs in the euro area where public debts are 
already very high. 
First, it puts countries back at the mercy of financial markets, which may or may not choose 
to  finance  the  new  debt  at  affordable  rates.  We  should,  after  all,  not  forget  that  financial 
markets create our own “debt ceiling” in the euro area and several countries are pressing up 
against it. This also reduces their room for fiscal stabilisation in the future, which is essential 
in the euro area where we have no federal budget. 
Second, it leads to an ever greater proportion of revenue going on servicing debt, rather than 
investing in future growth. In Italy, for instance, around 80 billion euros a year goes on debt 
service – this is more than 10% of the annual budget which is not being spent on education 
or infrastructure.  
Third, it simply passes the burden of consolidation to the next generation. Under the new EU 
debt rule, all euro area countries are legally bound to start reducing their public debts below 
60% of GDP. So the more debt rises today, the more it has to be brought down in the future. 
And six euro area countries already have debt levels in excess of 90% of GDP.  
In short, delaying fiscal consolidation is not an easy way out – if it were, we would have taken 
it. Countries are consolidating because, given their already high debt levels, it is the best way 
to secure long-term stability and inter-generational fairness.  
It would help the politics of adjustment if this message got more attention. 
Another claim that we sometimes hear is that countries should put off structural reforms; that 
combining them with fiscal consolidation in the current economy will only make the downturn 
worse. 
But again I have to ask, what are the consequences? 
First, it is, in a sense, only delaying the inevitable. The growth models of a number of euro 
area  countries,  based  on  ever-rising  public  spending,  or  a  particular  booming  sector,  are 
over.  Change  had  to  come.  Several  are  facing  an  unavoidable  period  of  “double 
deleveraging” in both the public and private sectors. If they want economic growth, it has to 
be  through  a  more  competitive,  export-led  model  –  and  this  can  only  happen  through 
structural reforms. 
Second, far from being separated from fiscal consolidation, structural reforms are essential to 
make  fiscal  consolidation  work.  If  people  see  only  budget  cuts  and  tax  rises,  with  no 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
measures to produce higher growth, it is no wonder they reject adjustment. We have seen 
this for example in Italy. By contrast, the experience of Latvia shows that frontloaded reform 
and consolidation efforts can lead to a quick bounce-back in growth and employment. 
Third, those who reject structural reforms often overlook a key aspect from the debate, which 
is their wider social effect, in particular on fairness. Ultimately, structural reforms benefit the 
many at the expense of the few. And this is key during a crisis like this where inequality is on 
the rise. 
By breaking down two-tier labour markets, like in Spain, they create opportunity for excluded 
young people. By opening up closed professions, like in Italy, they help reduce persistently 
high inflation that erodes real incomes. By reforming tax administration, like in Greece, they 
ensure the burden of consolidation is spread more fairly over different social groups. 
A recent OECD Report called this the “Double Dividend” of structural reforms: they increase 
growth, and if implemented properly, decrease inequality.  
To  sum  up,  overcoming  the  political  challenges  to  adjustment  is  fundamentally  about 
communication. It is about pointing out the real costs of alleged alternatives; about resisting 
the  temptation  to  blame  others for  problems that  begin  at  home;  and  about  explaining  the 
long-term benefits of the path being taken.  
Ultimately, however, this is the job of political authorities. 
How will EMU develop from here? 
If  this  is  what  governments  can  do  to get through  the  crisis,  what  can  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole do? How will – my third question – EMU develop from here?  
I think it goes without saying that anyone who is expecting the creation of the United States 
of Europe anytime soon will be disappointed or – in this country maybe – relieved. But that 
said,  we  have  made,  and  will  continue  to  make,  big  strides  in  building  a  more  robust 
institutional architecture for EMU. 
And let me stress: this progress is not all for the future, to prevent the next crisis. It could 
feed into this one, too. In particular it could help boost the three “Cs” that are key to restart 
growth: credit, confidence and competitiveness. 
First,  the  initiatives  that  have  been  taken,  and  that  are  in  store,  to  build  a  Banking  Union 
could give an important stimulus to credit.  
Having  in  place  a  credible  single  supervisor,  which  is  now  agreed,  should  encourage  the 
gradual reintegration of financial markets, which will improve the transmission of the ECB’s 
monetary policy. On top of this, an effective single resolution mechanism and a fund filled by 
levies  from  the  industry  should  kick  start  a  clean-up  of  banks’  balance  sheets,  preventing 
“zombification”  and  unblocking  new  lending.  That  is  why  this  is  the  key  challenge  for  this 
year. 
Second,  the  new  measures  we  have  in  place  for  Fiscal  Union  could  do  a  lot  to  bolster 
confidence.  
By limiting the “wiggle room” for future governments, the fiscal compact should help anchor 
medium-term  expectations  about  fiscal  responsibility  and  debt  sustainability.  This  will  be 
complemented  by  the  new  “Two  Pack”  of  legislation,  which  creates  real  intervention  rights 
from  the  centre  into  national  affairs,  for  instance  allowing  the  Commission  to  pre-screen 
budgets before they are adopted by national parliaments.  
Third, the plans in place for Economic Union could help ensure competitiveness, in particular 
the new idea of reform contracts. 
The enhancement of the governance framework shows that governments in the euro area 
have finally understood, what had been laid down in the Maastricht Treaty already: that in a 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
monetary union, the economic policies of each country are “a matter of common concern” for 
all. 
If questions about the Slovenian banking sector remain unanswered; if worries about French 
competitiveness  remain  unaddressed;  if  an  ageing German  society  cannot  better  integrate 
migrants into the labour market – this has an impact on all countries of the single currency 
zone. 
It is therefore right and legitimate, that the euro area countries establish – and accept – much 
closer oversight of national decisions. Other countries may see this differently. But the euro 
area  has  to  move  ahead  with  deeper  union.  Like  it  or  not,  the  euro  area  has  become  the 
engine of European integration, for its own sake, and that of the EU as a whole. 
This process is not a threat to the idea of the European Union. The fiscal compact and the 
SSM show that countries that are willing and able to fulfil the requirements are invited to join. 
As  David  Cameron  recently  said  in  his  Bloomberg  speech  on  Europe,  this  kind  of  flexible 
integration “far from unravelling the EU, will in fact bind its Members more closely”. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
My aim has been to create realistic expectations about what we can and cannot expect the 
euro area to achieve. 
We in the euro area have already done a lot to stem this crisis. Budget deficits have been 
significantly  reduced.  Rules  have  been  strengthened.  With  the  EFSF  and  the  ESM, 
700 billion euros have been put on the table for financial assistance. 
But we also have to work within our laws and institutions. And we have to take the people 
along. We cannot manage the crisis by diktat or impose leaps in integration for which people 
are not ready. This means that our progress will be slow, incremental and at times messy.  
As the Economist’s own Charlemagne columnist noted when reviewing the outcome of 2012, 
“the  pessimists  did  not  overestimate  the  euro’s  problems,  so  much  as  underestimate  the 
political will to do enough to stop a euro break-up.” 
And anyone who continues to underestimates this will turn out either very wrong, or if you are 
an investor, very poor. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
