Njuguna Ndung’u: Implementing reforms in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 15th East 
AFRITAC Steering Committee Meeting, Naivasha, 8 April 2013. 
 Members of the East AFRITAC Steering Committee here present;  
Mr. Xavier Maret, the East AFRITAC Centre Coordinator;  
Mr. Ragnar Gudmundsson, IMF Resident Representative to Kenya;  
East AFRITAC Advisors and Consultants;  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is my pleasure to officially open the 15th East AFRITAC Steering Committee meeting. On 
behalf of the Government of Kenya, I take this opportunity to welcome you all to Kenya. In 
particular, I would like to welcome you to Naivasha, one of our leading horticultural producing 
regions and a tourist destination at the heart of the Great Rift Valley. 
I know that we have some good work cut out for us in the next one and a half days but at the 
same time I would like to encourage all of you and especially those visiting the region for the 
first  time,  to  find  time  to  sample  our  beautiful  tourist  attractions  in  Naivasha  before  you 
depart. 
Naivasha is also the home town of the roses that are cherished in Europe and the town is 
also located in the precincts of the panoramic landscapes of the Great Rift Valley which you 
must have enjoyed as you descended the escarpment on your way to this resort. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Some  of  you  may  be  wondering  why  I  am  opening  the  15th  East  AFRITAC  Steering 
Committee meeting this evening instead of tomorrow, 9th April 2013 as had been indicated in 
the programme. It is for a good reason because on the 9th of April we will be witnessing the 
culmination  of  a  process  that  started  way  back  in  2010  when  we  promulgated  our  new 
constitution. 
The  Kenyan  Constitution  2010  brought  in  new  governance  structures  and  processes 
including the way we conduct elections and procedures for transfer of political power. This is 
why we had to adjust the programme to allow my participation during the inauguration of the 
Fourth  President  of  the  Republic  of  Kenya  on  Tuesday,  9th  April  2013.  Given  the  critical 
importance of this meeting, we thought it should proceed as planned. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Let me now turn to the subject matter of our meeting and in this regard, I would like to first 
and foremost express our sincere gratitude to East AFRITAC for the support that we have 
received over the years. Through this support, we have been able to implement far reaching 
reforms  in  many  areas  including  public  financial  management,  revenue  administration, 
financial sector regulation as well as macroeconomic policy analysis. I am sure you will agree 
with me that these reforms have contributed substantially in the growth and development of 
our economies that we have witnessed in the region in recent years. 
In Kenya for example, East AFRITAC has been our main source of Technical Assistance in 
implementing the public financial management aspects that were required to be implemented 
in a time bound manner by our Constitution 2010. In this regard, we have received valuable 
and  timely  support  in  enacting  the  Public  Finance  Management  Act  2012  and  the 
accompanying  regulations,  reengineering 
the  National  Treasury, 
Performance  Based  Budgeting,  revenue  administration,  and  financial  reporting  and  in 
developing the VAT Bill that is now in Parliament. 
IFMIS,  setting  up 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
These  are  just  a  few  examples  of  the  critical  support  that  we  have  received  from  East 
AFRITAC.  But  one  common  feature  of  the  support  in  these  areas  is  that  the  Technical 
Assistance has been relevant and demand driven primarily to meet the requirements of our 
Kenya Constitution 2010. I must add that Kenyans, through the National Assembly have also 
been very proactive in demanding many of these reforms especially in performance based 
budgeting  and  financial  reporting  and  accounting.  There  is  therefore  strong  ownership  of 
these reforms and this is a clear indication that they will be sustained. 
I believe what I am saying for Kenya should be true for all the seven recipient countries of 
East AFRITAC’s technical assistance and capacity building initiatives. In this regard, and on 
behalf of all the seven recipient countries, I would like to take this opportunity to once again 
thank the IMF and the other contributing partners without whose support these reforms would 
not have been possible. 
But let me add that while we have made substantial progress, we need to do a lot more to in 
order to advance our reform agenda and in this regard, I 
welcome this meeting because it will help us in assessing implementation of our work plan 
for the financial year 2013 and also consider the proposed work plan for the financial year 
2014. 
Let  me  also  say  that  the  mid-term  evaluation  of  East  AFRITAC’s  performance  will  play  a 
useful role in establishing the exact extent to which we have achieved the objectives we have 
set together. It will also inform any necessary realignment to sharpen our focus to the most 
relevant  and  priority  areas.  The  evaluation  report  to  be  presented  on  Wednesday  should 
therefore be of keen interest to the Steering Committee. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Turning  to  the  financial  sector,  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  the  continued  expansion  of 
players  in  the  sector  across  borders  is  another  development  that  needs  our  attention.  In 
order to effectively regulate and supervise such players, adequate capacity building on cross 
border supervision is necessary. 
I appreciate the East AFRITAC’s technical assistance and capacity building to the recipient 
countries  on  consolidated  supervision,  risk  based  supervision  and  establishment  of 
supervisory colleges. The knowledge base established has proved useful for the supervisors 
to  facilitate  innovations  by  the  players  without  comprising  the  stability  and  integrity  of  the 
financial systems of the region. These are the pillars of strong institutions of the regulators 
and the regulated. 
The dynamic reforms being witnessed in the region point to the continued need for technical 
assistance and capacity building to be able to derive optimum results. In this regard, I see 
the role of East AFRITAC becoming more pronounced than ever before. The current areas of 
focus  by  East  AFRITAC’s  technical  assistance  and  capacity  building  remain  relevant. 
However, I expect that the mid-term evaluation will offer suggestions on new areas of focus 
that will ensure that East AFRITAC remains relevant to the evolving needs of members. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
As I conclude, let me make one observation. I am informed that at the end of the two-day 
meeting,  there  will  be  an  excursion  to  the  Olkaria  Geothermal  site. This  is  part  of  a  major 
initiative by the Kenyan government aimed at increasing the use of green energy while at the 
same time addressing the adverse effects of climate change by exploiting natural steam that 
we have in abundance along the Great Rift Valley. 
I am sure that some of you may be asking how this is related to what we are doing here. In 
Kenya,  we  do  not  have  sufficient  hydro  power  potential  and  we  have  been  increasingly 
relying on thermal generation which is very expensive and unfriendly to the environment. As 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
such, the government has been subsidizing thermal generation to make it affordable and this 
has  substantial  fiscal  implications.  With  geothermal  generation,  a  lot  of  resources  can  be 
saved that would be allocated to other priority areas. I therefore urge you to spare some of 
your time to participate in the excursion. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would not wish to take any more of your time but before I conclude, I once again take this 
opportunity to welcome you all to Kenya and wish you an enjoyable stay. I wish all of you a 
fruitful meeting. 
With these remarks,  it  is  now  my  pleasure  and  honour to  declare  the 15th  East  AFRITAC 
Steering Committee meeting officially open. 
Thank you all and enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
