Anselmo Teng: Overview of Macao’s 2012 financial sector development 
Address by Mr Anselmo Teng, Chairman of the Monetary Authority of Macao, at the Spring 
Cocktail Reception of the Monetary Authority of Macao, Macao, 18 March 2013. 
 The Honourable Secretary for Economy and Finance, Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, 
The Honourable Deputy Director General, Economic Affairs Department of the Liaison Office 
of the Central People’s Government in the MSAR, Mr. Kou Ming, 
The Honourable Deputy Director-General of the Office of the Commissioner of the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, Ms. Ji Ziyuan, 
Dear Guests, Practitioners of the Financial Sector, Friends of the Media, Colleagues, 
“The Dragon goes back to the sea and bids farewell to the old calendar. The Golden Snake 
is clad in colours to greet the new Spring.” At this moment, flowers bloom in the warm March 
air, we gather together again to bid farewell to the Year of the Dragon and greet the Year of 
Snake in the midst of well wishes. We are honoured to have the presence of Mr. Tam Pak 
Yuen,  Secretary  for  Economy  and  Finance  to  officiate  this  Spring  Cocktail  Reception.  As 
such,  I  would  like  to  express,  on  behalf  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Macao,  our  candid 
gratitude  to  Mr.  Tam  for  squeezing  out  some  time  from  his  tight  schedule  to  come  to  this 
function.  At  the  same  time,  I  would  like  to  extend  our  warmest  welcome  to  our  guests, 
particularly Mr. Kou Ming of the Liaison Office, and Ms. Ji Ziyuan of the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs. 
In the past year, the international economic and financial status was still unstable. The shock 
arising from the international financial crisis remained unsettled. The negative impacts of the 
European debt crisis and the U.S. “fiscal cliff” continued to ferment. Major economic entities 
adopted  loose  monetary  policies  consecutively.  Coupled  with  the  problems  and  threats 
triggered by other geopolitical factors, the global financial situation was further complicated 
and  looked  opaque.  Under  the  interaction  of  all  risks,  global  economic  recovery  was 
moribund.  The  economic  entities  of  major  developed  nations  had  anaemic  growth. 
Recession loomed in Eurozone. 
Under such an uncertain global economic and political environment, the MSAR Government 
insisted on promoting appropriate economic diversification. Through continued deepening of 
regional  cooperation  and  the  locomotive  effect  of  the  thriving  tourism  services  industry, 
satisfactory growth was achieved by its overall economy, which laid down solid foundation for 
the  MSAR  to  stave  away  economic  turmoils.  At  the  same  time,  under  the  coordinated 
endeavour of all sectors of the community, our financial industry realized steady growth and 
scored flying colours. It has never been better.  
As at the end of 2012, total assets of the banking system reached MOP796.2 billion, a year-
on-year increase of 21%; total deposits stood at MOP554.2 billion, a year-on-year increase 
of 32.7%; total loans amounted to MOP407 billion, a year-on-year increase of 26.2%; capital 
adequacy  ratio  was  14.6%,  basically  core  capital.  Asset  quality  was  fine,  non-performing 
assets ratio was only 0.19%. Profits of the banking system amounted to MOP5.7 billion, a 
year-on-year  increase  of  25%.  As  per  the  end  of  2012,  RMB  deposits  in  Macao  reached 
RMB41.63  billion  while  cross-border  RMB 
to 
RMB97.25 billion, a year-on-year increase of 62%. 
The insurance industry is an important component of the Macao financial industry. As at end 
2012, total insurance premium receipts amounted to MOP5.38 billion, a year-on-year increase 
of 24%; of which life-related receipts amounted to MOP3.73 billion, a year-on-year increase of 
19%; while non-life receipts were MOP1.65 billion, a year-on-year increase of 36%. 
trade  settlement  business  amounted 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
On  the  issue  of  supervisory  duty  as  a  whole,  AMCM  in  2012  continued  its  supervision  on 
authorized  institutions  via  measures  such  as  onsite  inspection,  offsite  surveillance,  theme 
inspection and study, cross-border cooperation supervision. Moreover, it established regular 
meeting mechanism with relevant trade associations to strengthen information exchange and 
risk surveillance communication which enhanced the function of self-regulation on the part of 
the trades concerned. 
On the banking supervision front, to ensure that banks will maintain prudent operation in an 
ever  changing  environment  through  appropriate  internal  control  and  risk  management, 
AMCM continued its supervision on banks operating in Macao. Simultaneously, it postulated 
and  amended  suitable  and  timely  supervisory  requirements  and  arrangements  in  line  with 
international  prudent supervisory  standards  and  principles  in  accordance  with  the  practical 
needs and conditions of Macao. These included the step-by-step implementation of the “New 
Capital  Accord”  II/III  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision.  The  “Guideline  on 
Financial Information Disclosure” was promulgated to enhance the requirement for banks to 
disclose  information.  In  response  to  the  implementation  of  the  Pataca  Real  Time  Gross 
Settlement System, the “Rules for Cash in Hand and Minimum Solvency” was amended. 
In the supervision of the insurance industry, inspections were carried out according to annual 
plan.  Simultaneously,  AMCM  finalized  thematic onsite  inspections  of  AML  and  CFT  on  life 
insurance  institutions  operating  in  Macao.  At  the  same  time,  AMCM  amended  the  existing 
supervisory  legislations  and  guidelines,  mainly  related  to  supplements  to  the  provisions  of 
the “Macau Insurance Ordinance” and “Insurance Agents & Brokers Ordinance”. Moreover, 
drafting  of  amendments  to  the  legislations  relating  to  employees’  compensations,  and 
guidelines which included corporate governance were carried out.  
In  the  management  of  Fiscal  Reserve  of  the  SAR  and  Exchange  Reserves,  following  the 
legislation of the creation of the new SAR Fiscal Reserve System which became effective at 
the beginning of 2012, AMCM takes into consideration the legal provisions relating to basic 
and excess reserve and the tolerance of acceptable risks to secure commensurate returns. 
Moreover,  AMCM  has  been  endeavouring  to  perfect  investment  management  and  widen 
investment channel, including the execution of the “China (Mainland) Interbank Bond Market 
Investment Agency Agreement” with the People’s Bank of China in March last year. Besides, 
AMCM  continues  to  listen  to  the  community,  particularly  the  Fiscal  Reserve  Advisory 
Committee,  all  relevant  advices;  and  will  increase,  as  appropriate, the proportion  of  riskier 
assets in the portfolio in the expectation of a higher return. As at end February 2013, Fiscal 
Reserve stood at MOP164.3 billion while FX Reserves amounted to MOP132.6 billion. 
In financial infrastructure construction, AMCM continues improvement and enhancement of 
the  systems  which  are  in  operation.  It  also  develops  new  systems  so  as  to  enhance 
management  and  service.  The  Pataca  Real  Time  Gross  Settlement  System  (RTGS)  was 
developed and was formally in operation at the beginning of 2013. The RTGS provides highly 
efficient and modern payment settlement service to the market and it is expected that it will 
provide impetus to upgrade the Macao financial industry. 
In the disclosure of financial statistics and data, AMCM makes use of the vehicle “Monetary 
and  Financial  Stability  Review”,  which  is  compiled  and  published  at  regular  intervals,  to 
conduct thematic research on the supervision of monetary and financial stability in order to 
strengthen surveillance on cross-border fund movements arising from international balance 
of payment of the SAR, which can enhance our ability in detecting and preventing financial 
hazards.  On  the  other  hand,  according  to  the  most  up-to-date  request  of  international 
organizations,  we  keep  on  revamping  the  method  of  compiling  the  monetary  and  financial 
data of the SAR. A study has been started to shorten the intervals between the publication of 
financial  data  of  all  kinds  of  currencies  conducive  to  financial  market  development,  risk 
control requirements and the timelines of the release of such statistical information. 
All along, AMCM has been promoting our financial sector to participate in regional financial 
cooperation  and  communication  programmes.  In  2012,  the  14th  “Guangdong-Macao 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Financial Cooperation Meeting” and the “12th Quadripartite Meeting of Insurance Regulators 
of  Guangdong-Hong  Kong-Macao-Shenzhen”  were  successfully  held 
in  Macao. 
Simultaneously,  AMCM  coordinated  with  the  Office  of  Financial  Services  of  Guangdong 
Province and other financial regulatory institutions in Guangdong to found the “Guangdong-
Macao  Financial  Cooperation  Task  Force”  which  convened  two  meetings  in  the  year  to 
gradually  implement  the  “Guangdong-Macao  Cooperation  Framework  Agreement”  to  deal 
with  matters  relating  to  financial  cooperation.  In  January  2012,  the  Shanghai  People’s 
Government Financial Delegation led by the Vice-Mayor, Mr. Tu Guangshao visited AMCM. 
Consensus  was  arrived  at  in  promoting  financial  cooperation  between  the  two  regions.  In 
June, under the witness of Mr. Tam Pak Yuen, Secretary for Economy and Finance, and Mr. 
Tu  Guangshao,  Vice-Mayor  of  the  Shanghai  People’s  Government,  AMCM  executed  the 
“Shanghai-Macao  Financial  Cooperation  Agreement”  with  the  Financial  Services  Office  of 
Shanghai, with a view to promoting financial cooperation and development between the two 
regions. 
On the other hand, AMCM is proactively promoting liaison between China and Portuguese 
speaking countries. In October last year, AMCM organized a financial forum with the main 
theme  “Exploit  Macao’s  Platform  Function 
to  Promote  Economic  and  Commercial 
Development between China and Portuguese Speaking Countries”, which was participated 
by governors of central banks of some Portuguese speaking countries. They had a candid 
communication  with  the  representatives  of  the  Shanghai  Financial  Services  Office  and the 
Office  of  Financial  Services  of  Guangdong  Province  on  how  to  strengthen  economic, 
commercial and financial relationship by making use of the platform function of the MSAR. In 
November,  representatives  of  AMCM  participated  in  the  22nd  “Lisbon  Meeting”  held  in 
Lisbon,  Portugal.  Our  attendees  made  use  of  the  opportunity  to  enhance  mutual 
understanding and information exchange. 
AMCM  has  achieved  fruitful  results  last  year  as  aforementioned.  We  are  grateful  to  the 
Secretary  for  Economy  and  Finance,  for  his  wholehearted  support  and  guidance  and  we 
have had the care and coordination of the Liaison Office of the Central People’s Government 
in the MSAR, the Office of Commissioner of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in the MSAR, all 
government agencies, the financial sector and the community. It goes without saying that the 
efforts  and  hard  works  of  our  colleagues  are  indispensable.  I  would  like  to  take  this 
opportunity, on behalf of the AMCM Board of Directors, to express our candid appreciation. 
At  the moment,  international  financial  conditions  show  signs  of  recovery.  However,  hidden 
elements  of  uncertainty  are  still  around. We  shall  keep  a  watchful  eye  and  stay  vigilant  to 
deal  with changes arising from external environment which may inflict risks and impact on 
our  economy  and  financial  system.  Through  further  deepening  of  the  regional  financial 
cooperation with Guangdong Province, there is an increasing space for development for our 
financial  industry.  I  believe  that  our  practitioners  will  grasp  the  opportunity  to  exploit  the 
competitive  edge  of  their  institutions  and  Macao  to  realize  organic  growth  with  a  view  to 
contributing to the  continued  stability  of  our financial  industry  conducive  to the  appropriate 
economic diversification of Macao. 
Finally,  let  us  toast  to  the  burgeoning  prosperity  of  our  Motherland  and  the  MSAR!  The 
Macao  financial  industry  will  continue  its  steady  development!  At  the  same  time,  we  wish 
every guest health and wishes come true. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
