Mark Carney: Jane Austen to feature on Bank of England banknotes 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at Jane Austen’s House Museum, Chawton, 24 July 2013. 
 Good afternoon, and welcome to Chawton, home in her final eight years to Jane Austen and 
her  family.  This  cottage  occupied  a  special  place  in  Jane  Austen’s  life,  as  a  return  to  the 
countryside brought contentment after an unhappy spell in Bath. All six of Jane Austen’s best 
known novels were published after she moved to Chawton, and three of them were written in 
their entirety here. 
It therefore gives me great pleasure to be here today to announce that Jane Austen will be 
the next character to appear on the Bank of England’s £10 note, replacing Charles Darwin. 
Jane Austen will become the 17th historical figure to feature on our banknotes. She merits 
her place in this select group as one of the greatest writers in English literature. Her novels 
have an enduring, timeless and universal appeal – they have never been out of print since 
first being published, have inspired numerous modern adaptations and are loved by people 
around the world. Austen’s combination of sharp wit, engaging narrative, knowing satire and 
social commentary has ensured her place among the country’s favourite authors. 
I am delighted now to unveil the image for the new Jane Austen note. It features a portrait 
adapted in the late 19th century from an original sketch by Jane’s sister and closest friend 
Cassandra, together with the quote “I declare after all there is no enjoyment like reading!” 
from  Pride  and  Prejudice.  Our  intention  is that the  Austen  note  will  be  introduced  within  a 
year  of  the  recently  announced  Churchill  £5  note,  so  that  the  new  note  could  come  into 
circulation as early as 2017. I am certain she will prove to be a popular choice. 
This will not, however, be the first time that the Austen name has appeared on a banknote. 
Jane’s brother Henry set himself up as a banker with interests here in Hampshire as well as 
in  London.  At  that  time  many  banks  were  small  and  local,  and  could  issue  their  own 
banknotes. The British Museum in fact holds a £10 note from Henry Austen’s bank in Alton, 
just a couple of miles from here, listing on the note the names of the partners in the bank: 
Austen,  Gray  and  Vincent.  Unfortunately,  while  Jane  Austen  wrote  in  an  early  work  that 
“when a man has once got his name in a banking house he rolls in money”, that turned out 
not  to  be  the  case  for  her  brother  Henry.  Banking  was  for  a  time  profitable,  but  unwise 
lending led to the collapse of Alton bank, followed by the collapse of Henry’s London bank 
and his bankruptcy in 1816. Depositors in these banks, including Jane Austen herself, were 
left out of pocket. 
While there is a familiar ring to parts of this sorry tale, you can be comforted that our job at 
the Bank of England is to protect the value of the new Jane Austen note. In fact, maintaining 
confidence  in  our  currency  is  the  fundamental  responsibility  of  your  central  bank.  That 
extends to maintaining its value, protecting against counterfeiting, and also ensuring that the 
choice of character on the notes commands respect and legitimacy. 
The Bank of England has, through its banknotes, a unique and rare opportunity to promote 
awareness of Britain’s history and to acknowledge the life and work of its greatest citizens. 
After the announcement of the Churchill note concerns were expressed that – in the absence 
of any other changes to the Bank of England’s notes  – none of the four characters on our 
notes would be a woman. That was not the Bank’s intention; we have listened and we fully 
understand the concerns raised by many people, including some whom I am delighted to see 
here  today.  We  believe  that  our  notes  should  celebrate  the  full  diversity  of  great  British 
historical figures and their contributions in a wide range of fields. The Bank is committed to 
that objective, and we want people to have confidence in our commitment to diversity. That is 
why I am today announcing a review of the selection process for future banknote characters. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There are two objectives: first, to review the principles and refine the criteria that guide the 
choice of historical characters for banknotes; and second, to establish a process to ensure 
that potential candidates are consistently and transparently judged against those criteria. The 
review  will  be  led  by  Chris  Salmon,  the  Bank’s  Chief  Cashier,  who  will  be  meeting  with 
interested parties as well as inviting feedback from members of the public via our website. 
The conclusions will be announced by the end of the year. 
Now let me introduce a real expert to tell you a bit more about Jane Austen and her time at 
Chawton. Elizabeth Proudman is Chairman of the Jane Austen Society, and I would like to 
thank  her,  along  with  Ann  Channon  and  staff  here  at  Jane  Austen’s  House  Museum,  for 
hosting today’s event. Elizabeth, over to you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
