Terrence J Checki: Observations on the global economy and financial 
system 
Remarks by Mr Terrence J Checki, Executive Vice President of the Emerging Markets and 
International  Affairs  Group  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  IIF  Annual 
Meeting of Latin America Chief Executives, Santiago, Chile, 6 March 2013. 
 Good  afternoon.  Thank  you,  Tim  (Adams),  for  the  kind  introduction.  Let  me  take  this 
opportunity to congratulate you and wish you well as you take the helm of the IIF (Institute of 
International Finance). 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Santiago,  and  to  see  so  many  old  friends  among  the 
distinguished  participants.  Having  spent  much  of  my  early  career  in  this  part  of  the  world 
during difficult times, it is gratifying to be reminded first hand of the progress the region has 
made. That progress is especially evident here in Chile. 
In my remarks this afternoon, I thought I would offer a few reflections on the current state of 
the global economy and financial system, and some of the challenges going forward. 
Let me note, for the record, that my comments this afternoon are personal, and should not be 
taken  as  reflecting  the  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  or  the  Federal 
Reserve System. 
As we all know, the mood in global markets has improved quite a bit since the middle of last 
year:  stocks  are  up,  spreads  are  down,  volatility  is  lower,  and  capital  market  activity  has 
picked up. A big part of that reflects recent success in averting tail risks that were weighing 
on investor confidence. 
Europe’s  common  currency  hasn’t  fragmented,  the  U.S.  didn’t  go  over  its  fiscal  cliff,  and 
China hasn’t had a hard landing. 
But in each of these cases, there is plenty of unfinished business, and important challenges 
remain. 
In the euro area, while there are grounds for cautious optimism, much remains to be done to 
restore confidence and growth. 
Fiscal adjustment is far from complete and is likely to continue to weigh on growth for some 
time  to  come.  Financial  conditions  in  the  periphery  have  improved,  but  remain  much  less 
supportive than in the core. Plans to build a banking union and deepen economic, fiscal and 
political integration remain very much works in progress. And, as the elections in Italy have 
reminded  us,  there  is  an  important  political  counterpart  to  the  economic  and  financial 
challenges and risks confronting the region. 
In the U.S., we are only part way toward addressing our fiscal challenges. Recent measures 
are chipping away at the deficit, but the approach hardly corresponds to anybody’s ideal of 
efficiency. While  there  is  little  mystery  about  what  ultimately  needs  to  be  done,  we  simply 
have not yet mustered the political will to make the compromises needed to get there. 
And,  unfortunately,  with  deadlines  coming  –  and  one  just  having  passed  for  decisions  on 
mandatory  spending  cuts  and  spending  and  borrowing  authorizations  –  we  can’t  be 
comfortable that this is going to go smoothly. 
Finally,  in  China,  while  the  policy  cycle  has  turned  and  the  economy  appears  to  have 
reaccelerated,  the  authorities  there  will  need  to  continue  to  deal  with  new  challenges, 
including  rapid  growth  in  non-bank  finance,  increased  leverage  across  the  economy,  and 
maintaining equilibrium in the midst of rapid structural change and increasing complexity. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to 
this  backdrop,  developed  economy  central  banks  are  continuing 
So, while global growth appears to be picking up (after a lackluster 2012 which saw Europe 
and  Japan  contracting  in  the  second  half  of  the  year,  and  a  second  consecutive  year  of 
slowing growth in the emerging market economies) the pick-up is likely to be only moderate; 
and significant economic slack in the mature economies (high unemployment, large output 
gaps, etc.) seems likely to be with us for some time to come. 
Against 
take 
extraordinary measures to support growth. Policy interest rates are close to zero, and central 
bank  balance  sheets  have  grown  to  unprecedented  proportions  via  asset  purchases  and 
lending. 
As  you  know,  the  Fed  is  in  its  third  round  of  large  scale  asset  purchases.  The  Bank  of 
England and Bank of Japan (BoJ) have been expanding their balance sheets as well, and 
markets expect the BoJ to engage in stepped-up asset purchases in the months ahead. And 
while the ECB’s (European Central Bank) framework is less focused on quantitative targets, 
there is little doubt that the ECB’s willingness to expand its balance sheet through lending 
and through the OMT (Outright Monetary Transactions program) has been a key support to 
stability. 
This  activism  has  some  observers  asking  –  with  some  justification  in  my  view  –  whether 
central banks are trying to do too much. 
Concerns are being raised as to whether price stability and financial stability are being put at 
risk, and about potential spillovers into currency markets. 
Monetary policy is, after all, a blunt instrument. It supports investment and consumption in 
the real side of the economy by stimulating financial activity, by lowering borrowing costs and 
boosting financial wealth. But, as we have learned the hard way, easy monetary and credit 
conditions are also the stuff out of which credit excesses and bubbles can form 
So the question many central banks face is whether the benefits of further easing are worth 
the  potential  costs:  in  essence,  will  we  get  enough  risk-taking  on  the  real  side  of  the 
economy, before we get too much on the financial side? 
Of course, this is not a static calculation. Sound structural policy can improve the odds that 
monetary stimulus feeds through to the real economy. After all, firms’ decisions to invest, hire 
more  workers  and  expand  their  operations  depend  not  just  on  the  cost  and  availability  of 
funds, but also on the opportunities and the uncertainties in the business environment. 
Is enough being done on this score? From my vantage point, it is far easier to see areas in 
need  of  improvement  on  the  structural  side  than  to  detect  any  clear  momentum  toward 
addressing them. 
In  the  U.S.,  greater  clarity  around  policies  in  areas  such  as  trade,  tax  reform,  energy, 
environmental  regulation,  and  the  strategy  for  fiscal  adjustment  would  help  extend 
investment  horizons,  increasing  the  prospect  that  accommodative  financial  conditions  will 
have their intended effect. 
In  Japan,  the  new  government  is  talking  about  structural  reform,  and  policymakers  have 
identified many areas where the business climate could be improved. In fact, I suspect that 
Japan’s success in durably boosting growth will hinge as much or more on progress on the 
structural front, as on developments in monetary or fiscal policy. 
Robust regulation and oversight can also improve the cost-benefit calculus. Here, let me say 
a few words about the ongoing global regulatory reform process. 
As you know, the scope and scale of the regulatory response to the crisis of 2008 has been 
quite  ambitious  –  some  would  say  too  ambitious.  Nonetheless,  the  scale  should  be 
understandable  against  the  backdrop  of  the  weaknesses  revealed  in  the  crisis,  and  the 
economic and financial fallout that resulted. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And the reality is that a great deal has been accomplished, both in establishing goals, and in 
progress  toward  those  goals.  That  is  not  to  suggest  that  I  am  equally  enamored  with 
everything that has been done, or the way in which it has been done. 
The reform effort has many moving parts, and further efforts are clearly needed to ensure 
that those parts fit together, and that the various parties work together. And these reforms 
are yet to be fully implemented, let alone tested over a full credit cycle. 
Of  course,  building  a  stronger  system  is  not  just  about  regulatory  reform.  Changes  in 
institutional  governance  and  culture  are  also  needed.  Many  of  the  problems  that  surfaced 
during  the  crisis  and  more  recently  reflect  a  culture  that  emphasizes  short-term  gain  over 
institutional  sustainability  –  a  culture  in  which  regulation  is  viewed  as  an  obstacle  to  be 
arbitraged or circumvented, rather than as an additional check on broadly shared objectives. 
That  needs  to  change  if  progress  is  to  take  root.  Making  sure  that  happens  will  require  a 
realignment of incentives, and strong leadership from the top. 
All of this will take time. The question is, how much time do we have? 
While  risk-taking  has  been  somewhat  constrained  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  and  the 
resulting  uncertainties  in  the  macro  environment,  we  are  beginning  to  see  signs  of  things 
heating up in some areas of the markets: e.g., record issuance of junk bonds and emerging 
market debt, including enthusiastic take-up for issuers from “frontier markets” with little to no 
prior  presence  in the  capital  markets;  increased  leveraged  buyouts;  weakening  covenants; 
and a rebirth of the collateralized loan obligation market. 
Complacency at this point would not be a good thing. 
When I think of the risks ahead, my concern goes less to countries, institutions or particular 
markets, and more to the broad set of challenges associated with the eventual normalization 
of the policy measures which are being taken now, especially in the context of markets that 
may be frothier than what we see today, and in ways that may not be fully apparent given all 
the  new  incentives  being  created  for  “innovation”  in  intermediation  and  in  the  nature  and 
location of risk taking. 
Tightening cycles tend to bring surprises. And in the upcoming cycle, both central banks and 
markets will be operating in unfamiliar territory. Minimizing potential fallout for markets and 
for the economy will require deft management, and skillful and disciplined communication on 
the part of policymakers. 
That said, at least for now, inflation risks appear contained. Notwithstanding the additional 
liquidity,  inflation  in  the  advanced  economies  is  running  toward  the  low  side  of  desired 
ranges  –  and  in  Japan,  well  below.  Financial  markets  show  little  evidence  of  longer-term 
inflation  expectations  becoming  less  firmly  tethered.  And  when  the  time  comes  for 
normalization, there are a number of powerful tools available to keep them in check. 
Finally, on the issue of currency spillovers: this is a topic where, at least so far, the rhetoric 
appears to have substantially outpaced the reality. The talk about so-called “currency wars” 
strikes me as having gotten a little ahead of itself – better for capturing headlines than for 
accurately describing recent policy or the current situation. 
There has long been acceptance of the fact that central banks should be free to cut or raise 
rates  in  pursuit  of  domestic  policy  objectives,  even  though  such  actions  might  indirectly 
impact  exchange  rates.  Now  that  some  central  banks  are  constrained  by  the  zero  lower 
bound,  it  seems  only  natural  that  this  understanding  should  carry  over  to  domestic  asset 
purchases for domestic policy purposes. Such purchases represent just another channel to 
influence local financial conditions and thereby spur growth. 
This is quite different from deliberately targeting exchange rates through exchange market 
interventions or other means, which could indeed be problematic. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  current  system  of  market-determined  exchange  rates  among  the  major  advanced 
economies  brings  to  mind  the  old  quip  about  democracy  being  the  worst  possible 
system...except  for  all  the  others.  While  it  is  hardly  perfect,  it  does  work  to  smooth 
adjustments  across  countries  facing  different  macroeconomic  circumstances  and  provides 
domestic policy makers with important and necessary room for maneuver. 
Let me close with a few thoughts on the emerging world, against the backdrop of trends and 
challenges facing the mature economies. 
As  we  all  know,  the  role  of  the  emerging  markets  has  changed  dramatically  over  the  last 
decade  and  a  half.  The  emerging  market  economies  are  now  an  increasingly  important 
source of dynamism, stability, and profitability for the world economy and financial system. 
This  progress  is  the  result  of  policy  improvements  that  have  reduced  the  imbalances  and 
fragilities that fed past boom-bust cycles; greater openness to international trade and deeper 
economic and financial integration; and, for commodity exporters, some good fortune in the 
form of strong prices. 
Nonetheless,  while  trend  growth  in  the  emerging  market  economies  has  substantially 
outpaced that in the mature economies, the emerging market economies generally continue 
to accelerate and decelerate in step with the mature economies. So much for decoupling. 
This continuing close correlation reflects the fact that stronger emerging market growth has 
been  built  upon  deeper economic  and financial  integration  with  the  mature  economies...as 
well as with each other. 
Against  that  backdrop,  spillovers  from  the  mature  economies  clearly  played  a  part  in  the 
recent slowdown across the emerging world. But something more appears to be going on as 
well. 
As  a  general  matter,  the  emerging  market  economies  appear  to  be  operating  closer  to 
capacity  than  the  mature  economies.  Emerging  market  economy  labor  markets  generally 
look somewhat tight by historical standards, and while emerging market inflation is down, it is 
still an issue for a number of countries. 
This suggests that capacity constraints and structural issues have been playing a role in the 
recent sluggishness, and that somewhat slower growth may be part of the new normal for the 
emerging market economies as well. 
How much slower will in part depend on policy choices in the emerging market economies. 
Just  as  in  the  mature  economies,  there  is  room  for  emerging  market  economies  to  boost 
potential  growth  through  structural  reforms,  such  as  measures  to  improve  the  investment 
regime for infrastructure, improve public services and the business climate, and overhaul tax 
systems. 
Having said all that, it is completely understandable that there is uneasiness in much of the 
emerging world with what is going on in the developed economies. 
Over  the  years, the  emerging markets  have  learned  about financial  stability  the  hard  way, 
from their own crises and those of their neighbors. They have had too much experience with 
the aftermath of excessively loose fiscal and monetary policy, and political gridlock. 
Those  experiences  have  engendered  a  cautious  approach  to  fiscal  and  monetary 
management and financial sector oversight that has served countries well during the volatility 
of  recent  years.  It  has  also  made  them  understandably  uncomfortable  with  the  risks  they 
perceive in the developed economies. 
The fact of the matter is that the potential spillovers do pose risks for everyone, developed 
and emerging. 
The large and volatile capital flows encouraged by accommodative financial conditions in the 
developed economies, and the attendant pressures they put on credit markets, asset prices, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
and  currency  values  do  add  to  the  challenges  countries  face  in  containing  external 
vulnerabilities. 
And  the  failure  to  address  underlying  vulnerabilities  in  the  developed  economies  does 
expose the EMs to the risk of sudden reversals in capital flows. 
Having spent much of my career working with emerging market policymakers, I have a lot of 
sympathy for these concerns, and the policy challenges they present. 
Regrettably,  there  are  no  easy  answers  here.  The  reality  is  that,  if  policy  were  less 
accommodative in the developed economies, global growth would inevitably be slower, and 
the EMs would face another set of side effects including weaker demand for their exports, 
potential spillovers from renewed macroeconomic weakness or recessions in the developed 
economies. And, perversely, yields might still remain quite low and capital flows even more 
volatile. 
Lest you get the wrong impression: I do think that the EMEs have a valid complaint but, in my 
view,  it  has  less  to  do  with  monetary  policy  than  with  the  incompleteness  of  the  policy 
response in the mature economies in a range of other dimensions I alluded to earlier. 
Let  me  put  it  another  way.  Some  countries  in  the  developed  world  have  been  treating 
structural  illness  with  cyclical  medicine  for  a  fairly  long  time.  Larger  and  larger  doses  of 
“medication”  have  been  required,  over  time,  to  produce  smaller  and  smaller  effects.  The 
efficacy of this course of treatment remains to be seen, as do its potential side effects, some 
of which could be quite important. 
Let  me  close  with  a  simple  thought.  Policymakers  are  fond  of  talking  of  economic  and 
financial  frameworks,  which  conveys  a  rather  appealing  sense  of  structure,  stability  and 
order. But the reality is that we are linked together in a complex economic and financial eco-
system where everything hinges on, and changes in relation to, everything else. 
The  emerging  markets  have  a  great  stake  in  the  success  of  the  developed  economies  in 
meeting  their  challenges  –  and  the  developed  economies’  stake  in  the  success  of  the 
emerging markets is no less great. Global prosperity is and will remain a joint and common 
endeavor. 
And,  as  the  financial  crisis  and  the  Great  Recession  have  painfully  reminded  us  all,  past 
performance is not a guarantee of future success. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
