Patrick Honohan: The European Union – financial, fiscal, economic and 
political challenges ahead 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  the  National 
Bank of Poland Bi-annual EU Presidency Lecture, Warsaw, 19 March 2013. 
 Let me begin by thanking Marek Belka, President of the National Bank of Poland, for inviting 
me  to  give  this  inaugural  lecture  in  the  National  Bank’s  bi-annual  series  during  Ireland’s 
Presidency of the European Union.  
It is not, to be sure, my first visit to Poland: I have come here for both business and leisure, 
and  most  recently  had  the  most  interesting  pleasure  of  visiting Wroclaw  during  the  Polish 
Presidency at the Informal Ecofin meeting hosted by Marek and by Jacek Rostowski.  
Ireland  and  Poland  have  many  cultural  ties,  and  as  you  know  we  have  welcomed  a  large 
population of Poles in Ireland over the past decade. They came during the boom years, but 
many  have  put  down  roots  and  are  staying  with  us  even  in  these  more  difficult  economic 
times; over 2½% of Ireland’s population have Polish nationality.  
I was interested to discover that, thanks to this migration flow and the associated two-way 
travel that follows from it, there are no fewer than 66 weekly nonstop flights between Ireland 
and Poland, surely a remarkable instance of European integration considering the distance 
involved  of  as  much  as  2000  kilometres  and  the  relatively  small  population  of  my  own 
country at just 4½ million. 
A big part of the explanation – other historical developments aside – is of course the fact that 
Ireland and Poland share membership in the European Union; indeed, form the Western and 
Eastern borders of the Union at the latitude (52°-53°N) which Dublin and Warsaw share.  
Poland took the Presidency of the Union for the first time in 2011; this role has rotated now to 
Ireland  which  performs  it  for  the  seventh  time  in  the  40  years  of  its  membership.  As  you 
know,  during  these  semesters,  each  national  government,  supported  by  the  national 
administrative structures, seeks to progress the Council’s role in the strategic and legislative 
programme of the Union. 
Poland’s effective Presidency, in which you steered the turbulent discussions on economic 
governance during one of the most pressured episodes of the economic crisis, and secured 
agreement  on  reinforcing  fiscal  coordination  through  the  so-called  “six-pack”  of  legislative 
measures, is recalled as a strikingly successful one.  
Eighteen months later, though the systemic financial crisis of the euro area is less acute, and 
even if employment growth has resumed in some countries, unemployment at record levels 
is but the most conspicuous evidence of the depth and persistence of recessionary times in 
Europe.  
It would be astonishing if institutional deepening and reform in the economic infrastructures 
of the European Union were not still centre stage in the legislative agenda in 2013 and I can 
assure  you  that  a  large  and  intensive  effort  has  been  mounted  by  the  administrative 
resources of the Irish economic and financial authorities to try to progress this agenda. 
Before mentioning some of the detailed elements of current legislative debate, let me stand 
back a bit, though and ask why it is that the Eurosystem has needed a relaunch. How come 
the great expectations for the euro as the single currency of the European Union seem not to 
have  been  fully  realized?  Why  have  some  commentators  been  identifying  the  euro  as  a 
source of weakness rather than strength of the euro area economies, as well of those which, 
like that of Poland, are intertwined with the euro area (I see, for example, that well over half 
of  Poland’s  exports  go  to  the  euro  area)?  And  are  the  reforms  that  are  currently  being 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
discussed of the correct type and sufficient in scale to set things back on the kind of path 
which  was  not  only  expected  in  advance,  but  up  to  the  current  crisis  actually  had  been 
achieved in practice, with not only low inflation and anchored inflationary expectations, but 
also modest and falling debt ratios, convergence of financial market conditions, reasonably 
steady growth and – notably – a considerable reduction in unemployment? 
In case there is any doubt that a relaunch is needed, it may be useful to note that the key 
entry-requirement  indicators  of  government  debt,  government  deficit  and  bond  yields  now 
show  considerably  greater  divergence  than  at  entry  (even  though  the  entry  criteria  were 
applied in a relatively liberal manner. 
But  what  is  needed  is  not  only  the  kind  of  fiscal  restraint  that  is  clearly  a  prerequisite  for 
restoring something closer to what was envisaged for these indicators as threshold levels for 
entry – that is the task of the six-pack and the two-pack legislative measures – but a deeper 
reform  of  policy  and  behaviour  to  ensure  that  the  divergences  do  not  easily  recur,  and 
construction  of  institutions  that  will  help  rebuild  trust  and  confidence  both  to  market 
participants and to partner countries within and outside the euro area. 
For this, we need to understand what went wrong. It is easy to point to the global financial 
crisis as the culprit, and certainly that crisis, which had its origins in the United States, has 
had a devastating impact. But why have the problems been particularly deep and intractable 
in the euro area? After all, not all euro area countries have been equally affected. Germany, 
to take the largest and most striking example, has emerged from the shocks of the last few 
years with lower unemployment than before.  
And, as for the most adversely affected countries, the imbalances and excesses which they 
have experienced have been quite diverse. Greece’s problems have emerged as the result 
of large and under-appreciated fiscal deficits, Italy’s as a result of high debt and persistent 
lack of growth dynamism, Ireland from a banking-driven boom-and-bust cycle. What is the 
common feature of these and other syndromes?  
This is important for us in understanding what needs deepening in a relaunch of the system, 
and it also, of course, is vital for a country contemplating and preparing itself for a future euro 
membership. 
I believe that the key to this mystery lies in the fact that the euro represents a commitment 
device,  a  policy  straitjacket  which,  if  accompanied  by  the  behaviour  to  which  the  country 
implicitly  and  explicitly  commits  when  it  joins  the  currency  union,  will  lead  to  an  improved 
economic performance relative to what can otherwise be achieved.  
The commitment is of course to policies that retain macroeconomic balance, which requires 
fiscal discipline, and international competitiveness in both price and non-price dimensions.  
For  decades,  many  European  Union  countries  have  had  a  chequered  history  of 
macroeconomic imbalances, generally resolved through devaluations at the cost of relatively 
high  inflation,  and  high  nominal  and  real  interest  rates,  all  of  which  contributed  to  growth-
damaging uncertainty.  
In  addition  to  the  considerable  microeconomic  benefits  of  eliminating  currency  conversion 
costs and all of the exchange rate risk for intra-euro area transactions, the main advantage of 
the currency union was seen to be lower inflation and interest rates, contributing to a stable 
growth platform.  
Yet it was as if policymakers and market participants believed that the results would happen 
semi-automatically.  
Governments  would  adopt  restrained fiscal  policies for fear  of market  reaction,  and  if they 
didn’t markets would quickly penalize them with interest penalties that would incentivize them 
to get back on track.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Likewise any loss of competitiveness due to wage rates increasing faster than the currency 
area  would  result  in  such  quick  damage  to  employment  that  such  divergences  would  be 
short-lived.  Above  all,  private  capital  flows  could  be  relied  upon  to  be  stabilizing  and 
sustainable.  
With such strong forces for macroeconomic stability, what need for anyone to pay attention 
to fiscal and cost competitiveness?  
But  markets  were  not  as  effective  task-masters,  and  they  allowed  the  old  pattern  of 
imbalances to persist. Indeed, the very fluidity of large-scale international capital flows (partly 
attributable  to  the  currency  union  itself,  but  even  more  –  as  can  be  seen  by  the  parallel 
experiences of countries such as Iceland and Latvia – by technology-driven liberalization of 
finance) allowed the imbalances to become larger than ever.  
The  difference  now  was  that  the  old  adjustment  device  –  devaluation  and  inflation  –  had 
been eschewed. Imbalances, allowed to emerge, had even more costly consequences when 
those  safety  valves  –  imperfect  and  corrosive  though  they  are  –  were  not  available.  High 
debt ratios had to be sweated down or, when this was impossible in Greece, in effect written 
down.  
The  needed  fiscal  contraction  removed  demand  and  triggered  the  double-dip  of  the 
recession in several of the most affected countries, and unemployment soared, especially to 
the  extent  that  the  inflexibility  of  nominal  wage  rates  inhibited  needed  restoration  of  cost-
competitiveness.  
The solvency of banks, both those in the countries suffering the adjustment, and those which 
had  extended  large  advances  across  borders  within  the  currency  union,  came  under 
suspicion.  
On top of this, the severity of the needed adjustment made markets question the ability of 
some member states to stick with the single currency – a doubt whose elimination required 
the invention of the ECB’s Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme. 
In  sum,  the  continued  failure  to  maintain  fiscal,  cost  and  financial  discipline  in  some 
countries, despite the implicit commitment to do so embodied in euro area membership, had 
much more severe consequences than they had had in the previous decades of autonomous 
and often weak currencies.  
How  can  Poland  ensure  that  life  in  the  euro  (whenever  that  comes  about)  could  be 
accomplished  without  the  mishaps  and  imbalances  that  have  characterized  several  euro 
area countries in the financial crisis?  
I believe that Ireland’s experience suggests that this can be done, and that the errors that 
were made could be avoided without too much difficulty, as long as the commitment required 
of membership is widely appreciated.  
Thus  one  would  envisage  a  more  decisive  response  –  with  macro  prudential  and  fiscal  
tools  –  to  the  big  property  price  and  construction  boom  that  made  Ireland  such  a  record-
breaker  in  mid-decade;  the  degree  to  which  fiscal  balance  was  becoming  dependent  on 
boom-time  revenues  could  have  been  better  recognized,  and  public  expenditure  kept  in 
check accordingly; finally, if and when things had got to the point of wide scale bank failure, 
crisis management could have allowed for a lower socialization of the losses.  
In avoiding such pitfalls for the future, the new euro-area institutional arrangements will help, 
but in fact a well-managed economy has nothing to fear from the euro.  
The consequences of misbehaviour in policy by those who failed to respect the commitment, 
have not only been for economic performance in stressed countries, but have also spilled-
over into wider concerns about the functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union.  
Cross-border interbank lending dried-up, introducing sizable divergences between the cost of 
credit in different member states which, though not as wide as they were at one point, have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
remained substantial and represent a departure from what had come to be expected from the 
single currency area. 
Credit no longer seems to flow seamlessly across borders without incurring what is de facto 
a country premium for the stressed countries.  
It is often remarked that this is nothing more than a wholly justified risk-premium that should 
have been present from the start. That could be true for interest charged by the market for 
lending to Governments. But I am not so sure that it holds for non-Government borrowers: it 
seems  to  me  that  this  is  largely  a  spillover  from  fiscal  and  macro-prudential  risks  which 
cannot  easily  be  avoided  by  firms  in  stressed  countries  even  if  their  own  firm-specific 
conditions would not warrant a high risk premium.  
This is not, of course, the only country-specific national source of competitive advantage and 
disadvantage.  Tax  rates,  social  benefits,  infrastructure,  to  name  just  a  few.  So  the 
emergence of interest differentials on lending is not unique. But it is a departure from what 
was envisaged at the outset of the single currency and held out as an important integrating 
function of the euro.  
And the sudden awakening of market to credit risk on lending to Governments is much more 
damaging now, when Governments have accumulated so much debt, than if it had been a 
constant from the outset.  
Stressed countries have naturally turned, not only to the IMF, but also to their partners in the 
European  Union  for  assistance  in  these  circumstances.  The  countries  that  have  avoided 
these errors have been called upon to provide financial assistance on a rather large scale to 
five stressed countries.  
The  assistance  being  granted  is  in  the  form  of  loans,  but  even  so  some  taxpayers  and 
electorates  may  fear  that  their  savings  are  being  threatened  by  being  lent  where  markets 
have  been  reluctant  to  go.  The  fear  seems  to  be  that  the  system  is  having  the  effect  of 
spreading  the  cost  of  policy  errors  in  some  countries  to  the  taxpayers  of  countries  that 
maintained  discipline.  This  fear  has  been  influencing  the  design  of  crisis  management 
measures.  
Thus, as is so often the case when it comes to the finances of stressed borrowers; neither 
the borrower nor the lender is content.  
Herein  lies  the  most  fundamental  rationale  for  a  relaunch  of  the  euro:  the  need  to  ensure 
collaborative  arrangements  that  command  the  confidence  of  both  the  stressed  and  the 
strong. That confidence can underpin quicker and more comprehensive crisis management 
based on a stronger sense of trust, solidarity and common purpose among member states 
than has yet been fully in evidence. 
The  fiscal  aspect  of  the  crisis  was  the  first  to  receive  attention  from  the  point  of  view  of 
reforming  and  strengthening  institutional  structures.  As  the  successive  financial  assistance 
packages to Greece, Ireland, Portugal and now Cyprus have been put in place in conjunction 
with  the  IMF  to  deal  with  the  loss  of  market  access  by  those  countries  in  the  crisis, 
institutional deepening has also been in the works. The initial funding vehicle, the EFSF, has 
been  succeeded  by  a  permanent  successor, 
incorporating  risk-sharing 
mechanisms based on mutual national guarantees proportional to the share of ECB capital. 
But that is just one dimension of the fiscal institutional reforms. 
I have already mentioned in passing the progress towards strengthening the surveillance of 
national  policies  and  economic  policy  coordination  through  the  adoption  of  legislative 
measures:  the  six-pack  under  your  Presidency  and  the  two-pack  under  our  own,  thereby 
building the fiscal dimension to this concept of closer collaborative arrangements. The six – 
pack  greatly  reinforces  the  preventive  arm  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  with  the 
possibility  of  sanctions  and  stronger  powers  for  the  Commission  and  the  two  –  pack 
introduces the procedures to allow for meaningful and timely action. The Intergovernmental 
the  ESM, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Fiscal Stability Treaty has incorporated the core principles of the Stability and Growth Pact 
into binding national legislation. It was passed by Referendum in Ireland in May 2012 with 
60% of the vote. As for Poland, I understand that the President of Poland last month gave his 
assent also to this Treaty. 
But  the  crisis  has  above  all  had  at  its  root,  failures  in  banking  and  finance,  and  in  the 
regulation and supervision of banks. Faced with the crisis, the ECB has stepped up to the 
plate  with  a  succession  of  policy  innovations  (difficult  to  design  in  a  multi-country 
environment)  including  the  open-ended  liquidity  provision,  the  long-term  refinancing 
operations,  the  securities  market  programme  and  its  successor  the  OMT,  specifically 
designed  to  remove  redenomination  risk.  These  have  been  non-standard  measures 
designed  to  improve  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  thereby  serving  to  remove 
obstacles to the accommodating low interest rate policy being effective throughout the euro 
area.  
Here too (in banking and finance) structural reforms are needed alongside these conjunctural 
measures,  and  an  institutional  strengthening  agenda  is  also  being  fleshed-out.  The  most 
immediate part of this agenda at present is the creation of a Single Supervisory Mechanism 
for banking based in the ECB. Securing agreement on the legal texts that will form the basis 
of the SSM is high on the action list of the Irish Presidency. 
Would the SSM, had it been in place, have prevented the banking collapse? This is a tough 
question. While there is a lot to hope for from centralization of bank supervision – removal of 
the  perception  of  national  political  pressures,  emotional  detachment  from  the  waves  of 
euphoria  that  occasionally  sweep  national  financial  systems,  a  cross-fertilization  of 
supervisory perspectives from different parts of the Union to name a few aspects – it has to 
be  acknowledged  that  supervisory  failures  across  the  world  in  the  lead-up  to  the  great 
financial crisis were very widespread.  
Still, not creating a single supervisor was a missed opportunity at the start of the EMU and 
one which will yield benefits, I am convinced, down the road. In the more immediate future, I 
think  its  creation  is  one  of  the  essential  ingredients  for  building  confidence  in  the  strong 
countries that banking weaknesses that have been exposed in the stressed countries are not 
going to recur or persist because of supervisory inadequacies.  
To be sure, a single resolution authority and a common deposit guarantee system will also 
be  needed  in  the  Banking  Union  when  it  is  complete. The former  will  build  on  the  current 
draft  legislation  on  national  resolution  systems,  which  is  being  actively  negotiated  in  this 
Presidency, and the latter’s importance has been underlined, I believe, by some very recent 
developments. 
Let me describe in a little more detail the progress of discussions in our Presidency. 
As an over-riding theme for this Presidency, Ireland seeks to be seen as “a recovery country 
driving recovery in Europe”. Thus, we are trying to build on our national experience through 
considerable domestic efforts for recovery to help consolidate fiscal and economic stability 
across the European scene. Ireland has long entered such endeavours inspired by certain 
core values: 
• 
• 
• 
Ireland has always upheld the Community method rather than intergovernmentalism 
Ireland is strongly commited to working constructively with the European Parliament 
Ireland  is  a  long  standing  advocate  of  global  institutions  and  of  trade.  (Recent 
examples:  it  is  a  member  of  the  UN  Human  Rights  Council  and  chaired  the 
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe in 2012). 
Apart from the financial agenda, among the specific objectives of the current Presidency – on 
a number of which good progress has already been made – are: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
    Support  to  President  Van  Rompuy  in  getting  agreement  on  the  budget  for  
2014–2020 and finalising negotiations with the European Parliament. 
Finalising agreement on the “two-pack” of measures to enhance coordination of the 
budgetary process for the Euro area. 
Promoting the Digital Single Market Agenda, tackling issues such as e-signatures, 
intellectual property rights and cyber security. 
Agreement on opening a comprehensive EU-US trade deal. 
A Youth Unemployment package including a Youth Guarantee, a fund to help young 
people into a job, apprenticeship or further education or training within 4 months of 
leaving school. 
On the Financial Services front the Irish Presidency has, in the interests of getting results for 
the Union as a whole, made some tactical decisions and prioritised efforts on six files for the 
first half of our mandate. In the coming days, we will review progress and decide priorities for 
the second half. This approach partly reflects a pragmatic approach from a relatively small 
administration but is primarily based on a realistic assessment of the decision-taking capacity 
of the Union’s institutions. 
Absolute priority has been given to all files relating to the promotion of a Banking Union as 
set out in the December 2012 European Council conclusions. As I have already suggested, a 
Banking  Union,  shifting  supervision  of  banks  to  the  European  level,  combined  with  a 
common system for deposit protection and integrated bank crisis management will reassure 
citizens and markets that a common, high level of prudential regulation is being consistently 
applied. It will help build the necessary trust between member states which is a pre-condition 
for the introduction of common financial arrangements. This will pave the way towards the 
use  of  the  ESM  as  a  public  backstop  to  directly  recapitalise  banks  and  help  break  the 
negative feedback loop between banks and their sovereigns. 
I will say a little about progress on the Banking Union files: 
CRD IV 
Agreement  on  CRD  IV  (when  it  is  confirmed)  will  mean  that  Europe  can  fulfil  the 
requirements  of  Basel  III  and  its  G20  commitments  to  greatly  strengthen  the  prudential 
requirements for banks, and improve governance and remuneration practices. It will also be 
a large step forward in the completion of the single rulebook. 
A huge effort has been put into getting final agreement on CRD IV. This has been a massive 
undertaking which has absorbed the energies of many Presidencies including the Polish. In 
the first 8 weeks our Presidency held 7 Council Working Party meetings, 5 Political Trilogues 
and a large number of technical Trilogues before reaching outline overall agreement with the 
Parliament  on  28  February  and  in  the  Council  on  5th  March.  Final  formal  agreement 
(including clarification of a number of technical drafting points) is in sight. 
Single supervisory mechanism 
The SSM, the transfer to the European level of key supervisory tasks for banks, is designed 
to provide strong and consistent supervision across the Euro Area. As I mentioned, it holds 
the promise of removing local politics from the enforcement of bank supervision and will lever 
a diversity of supervisory experience – best practice across Europe. Most importantly it will 
help to break the link between sovereigns and banks. 
There have been 10 Political Trilogues and 8 meetings of the Ad Hoc Working Party. Good 
progress has been made on the ECB Regulation and examination of the EBA Regulation is 
under way. The contours of an agreement are emerging. Intensive negotiations and technical 
work is scheduled to continue for the coming weeks and Parliament is geared to conclude by 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the end of the month. A particular pressure is the need to allow sufficient time for the German 
parliamentary process of ratification to conclude before Bundestag dissolution on 5 July. 
Extensive preparations are well under way in the ECB to take responsibility for supervision 
within 12 months of final agreement on the Regulations. 
Crisis management: bank recovery and resolution 
Even  if  the  European  Commission’s  estimate  that  banking  collapses  have  led  to  over 
€4.5 trillion (or 37% EU GDP) of state aid going to distressed financial institutions between 
October  2008  and October  2011  adopts  the most  expansive  possible  definition  (and  is far 
greater than the likely ultimate fiscal cost of the crisis), it is clear that crisis management and 
resolution  has  entailed  extremely  high  budgetary  costs,  and  even  higher  overall  economic 
costs  –  crippling  in  the  case  of  some  countries.  The  Recovery  and  Resolution  proposal 
(relating to national crisis resolution, and not specifically to a Union-wide, or euro area-wide 
mechanism) would ensure that in future national authorities will have the means to intervene 
decisively  before  problems  occur  and  early  on  in  the  process  if  they  do.  They  could  also 
ensure  that  the  cost  of  restructuring  and  resolving  failing  banks  falls  on  the  owners  and 
creditors and not on taxpayers. 
The  December  Summit  asked  the  Council  to  agree  this  dossier  by  end  March  and  for 
Trilogies to be completed before June. This is a very tight schedule indeed. The Commission 
proposal dates from June 2012. The Presidency has conducted intensive work teasing out 
and clarifying the issues. Principally they are: 
• 
the balance of power between home and host authorities in group scenarios and the 
role of the EBA in mediation  
financing and funding arrangements 
bail-in; its scope and possible exclusions 
the use of Deposit Guarantee Schemes in bail-in 
the transposition date for the bail-in tool 
possible inclusion of public intervention tools in the Directive  
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Discussions to date within the Council have been technical and slow moving and it is only 
recently that a compromise text covering all the elements has been tabled. We now have a 
tool box which is understood and which can work but Member States have not addressed the 
cost of the compromise needed to achieve a workable regime. 
Now  that  the  issues  have  been  clarified  it  is  time  for  the  member  states  to  begin  to  take 
decisions. 
Related  to  this  is  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme  Directive  which  aims  to  significantly 
enhance depositors’ confidence by introducing a higher level of coverage, faster payout and 
more  credible  funding  of  the  schemes.  However,  Member  States  are  unwilling  to  restart 
negotiations  of  this  proposal  until  the  Bank  Resolution  package  is  nearer  conclusion  –  in 
particular its treatment of funding. The European Council asked for work on this dossier to be 
accelerated so that it can be adopted in line with Bank Recovery and Resolution. 
Clearly  the  Recovery  and  Resolution  proposal  and  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme  will  be 
pressure points for the remainder of the Irish Presidency. 
Outside of the Banking Union priority we are focusing on certain Markets and Consumer files 
and I will deal briefly with them. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
MiFID II/MiFIR 
This proposal aims to make financial markets more efficient, resilient and transparent and to 
respond to the challenges of new trading venues, products and technological developments. 
Following an intensive round of bilaterals the Presidency has issued 3 compromise texts in 
the  hope  of  getting  agreement  on  a  General  Council  approach  by  April  so  as  to  allow 
engagement with an impatient Parliament to begin. 
There are important differences between key member states on three main issues 
• 
• 
• 
Having  said  that,  discussions  are  beginning  to  go  in  the  right  direction  as  Member  States 
realise they have to finalise their positions soon. 
transparency for equity trading venues  
rules for the Organised Trading Facility category 
non-discriminatory clearing access. 
Market abuse regulation 
The issue of market abuse has risen up the agenda especially for the Parliament who are 
linking it to public concern about the manipulation of benchmarks including LIBOR. 
Steady progress is being made and depending on resources the file may be taken forward in 
a drive for agreement in the second half of the Presidency. The main issue to get right is the 
interaction within the Regulation between criminal and administrative regimes. 
Central securities depositories regulation. 
This regulation aims to bring more safety and efficiency to security settlement in Europe. It is 
also linked to the introduction of T2S on schedule in 2015. The Presidency is carrying out a 
technical review and may allocate additional resources to advance this file in the latter half of 
the  Presidency.  There  are  a  number  of  issues  on  which  it  will  be  quite  difficult  to  achieve 
compromise  including  whether  banking  services  should  be  separated  from  core  CSD 
services and on whether to include provisions on conflict of laws 
Consumers 
Within  the  broad  consumer  agenda  the  Irish  Presidency  is  concentrating  its  resources  on 
getting agreement on the Mortgage Credit Directive. 
The Directive would facilitate cross border activity, enhance consumer protection and ensure 
more responsible mortgage lending. 
There  have  been  a  large  number  of  Council Working  Party  meetings  and  Trilogues. Good 
progress is being made but there are a considerable number of outstanding issues. These 
include  FX  lending,  tying  practices,  conduct  of  business  requirements,  the  treatment  of 
variable interest and loan rates and early repayment. 
The Presidency is intent on reaching agreement. It hopes that the willingness to negotiate 
and  compromise  which  was  earlier  expressed  by  all  institutions  –  Council,  Parliament  and 
Commission – begins to be translated into concrete results. 
ECOFIN 
The  next  major  event  for  the  Presidency  will  be  the  informal  ECOFIN  meeting  in  Dublin  
12–13 April. Among the topics for discussion I expect that Ministers and Governors will be 
wanting  to  take  a  strategic  view  in  their  discussions  on  Banking  Union;  there  is  also  the 
opportunity  to  have  a  discussion  on  Long  Term  Financing  of  the  European  Economy,  an 
issue  which  may  have  been  a  bit  neglected  in  the  crisis,  but  is  to  be  the  subject  of  a 
forthcoming Commission Green Paper (which is expected mid-March). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 In these difficult times, Jean Monnet’s famous remark – true not only for our continent and 
the great endeavour that he and others launched so effectively – “Europe will be forged in 
crises, and will be the sum of the solutions adopted for those crises” should be a leitmotiv for 
our thinking now. This is not a time for stop-gaps, but for ensuring that each policy choice 
that  is  made  is  guided,  not  only  by  short-term  expediency,  but  by  a  clear  vision  of  where 
Europe is going. Europe is far more than an economic, budgetary and financial entity, but it is 
in these fields that current challenges inevitably dominate official decision-making now. 
I hope not to sound sycophantic, but I have to say that I think that the proposals for a new 
architecture – for Union in the financial, fiscal, economic and political domains – which have 
been made by the four Presidents of the European Council, the European Commission, the 
Eurogroup  and  the  ECB  last  Summer,  hit  the  nail  on  the  head,  and  sketched  the  way  in 
which a new European framework must emerge, heralding a greater sharing of sovereignty 
combined with risk sharing and financial backstops. This is a viable path which, if we follow it 
to its conclusion, will help replace the somewhat fraught and crisis-prone regime in which we 
have been living for the past half-decade. To recall, this vision incorporates 
• 
• 
an integrated financial framework – Banking Union – to ensure financial stability 
an  integrated  budgetary  framework  –  Fiscal  Union  –  ensuring  coordination  and 
solidarity 
an integrated economic policy framework – Economic Union – to promote growth, 
employment and competitiveness 
the necessary democratic legitimacy and accountability – Political Union   
• 
What  is  needed,  therefore,  is  a  staged  process,  a  mutually  reinforcing  series  of  carefully 
sequenced  steps  which  will  combine  substantial  ambition  with  careful  balancing  in  each 
phase. Moves towards more responsibility and economic discipline should be combined with 
more  solidarity  and  financial  support.  Deeper  integration  of  regulation  and  policy  must  be 
accompanied by political integration to ensure democratic legitimacy and accountability.  
Fine  words,  you  will  say,  but  who  can  doubt  the  need  for  this  –  including  the  Political 
Integration dimension which really is well beyond my mandate, not to say my competence. 
After  all,  Jean  Claude  Juncker  (drawing  on  his  long-term  experience  as  President  of  the 
Eurogroup)  put  it  succinctly:  “Ministers  know  what  measures  need  to  be  taken  but  do  not 
know how they can be subsequently re-elected.”  
It  will  not  be  enough  to  provide  in  the  future  for  a  greater  involvement  of  the  European 
Parliament, however essential that may be. Decisions on national budgets traditionally have 
been  at  the  heart  of  Member  States’  parliamentary  democracies;  a  stronger  European 
dimension  and  mechanisms  will  have  to  be  found  by  which  national  parliaments  can  be 
brought further into the European decision making process. 
The crisis, its resolution and the long term development of the EMU have both a European 
and  a  domestic  dimension.  Onto  the  national  political  system  level  falls  the  challenge  of 
striking a new social contract, reorienting expenditure, modernising tax systems, promoting 
flexibility, strengthening competitiveness. 
In  Ireland  we  believe  that  if  we  are  to  stay  on  the  path  to  a  successful  consolidation  and 
adjustment  continued  efforts  are  needed  at  both  national  and  European  levels.  Other 
countries are facing or may face the same challenges. 
The  coming  years  will  test  the  ability  of  all  our  leaders  to  manage  successfully  in  the 
interaction between the national and the European. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
  12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13 
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
 16 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19 
  20 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21 
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23 
  24 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25 
