Andreas Dombret: Total Impact – how regulation and crisis management 
will change the world’s financial landscape 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Frankfurt Finance Summit, Frankfurt, 19 March 2013. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to conclude this year’s Frankfurt Finance Summit. For the third year in a row, 
this event has provided an excellent platform for an exchange of views between high-level 
experts from  politics,  academia,  as  well  as  the  financial  and  the  official  sectors  to  discuss 
financial market issues of major current importance. 
Today’s  conference  has  been  asking  about  the  total  impact  that  regulation  and  crisis 
management will have on the financial landscape. The keynote speakers and panellists have 
given wide-ranging and, in some cases, diverging answers to that question. I am pleased to 
conclude this year’s summit by offering my views on some particular aspects of the issues 
discussed today. 
Future of the European Monetary Union 
2. 
Let me start with the topic of the first panel this morning: the future of European Monetary 
Union. The crisis has highlighted shortcomings in the Union’s institutional framework. Let me 
remind you of three serious flaws. 
First, the deficit rules of the Stability and Growth Pact were not only circumvented by some 
member states, but deliberately bent. 
Second,  member  states’  borrowing  was  not  effectively  curbed  because  financial  markets 
failed to exert a disciplining effect on public budgets. 
Third,  contagion  effects  transmitted  via  member  states’  financial  systems  were  largely 
underestimated.  The  introduction  of  the  single  currency  led  to  a  greater  integration  of 
European  financial  markets.  The  highly  integrated  market  increased  the  probability  of 
contagion  effects  occurring  via  member  states’  financial  systems.  Hence,  it  amplified  the 
existing close link between risks stemming from a country’s public finances and the state of 
its banking system. 
These flaws were a major factor in the emergence of the sovereign debt crisis and that fact 
makes  a  good  case  for  strengthening  the  institutional  framework  of  the  monetary  union.  I 
welcome the measures that have been initiated. The reform of the Stability and Growth Pact 
and  the  agreement  on  the  Fiscal  Compact  are  major  steps  towards  sounder  budgetary 
policies. With the agreement on a European banking union, we have made further progress 
in one important specific area. 
A  banking  union  can  help  to  strengthen financial  stability  by  loosening  the  nexus  between 
banks and sovereigns. A European banking supervisor would benefit from the ability to make 
cross-border comparisons, for instance. Such a body should be able to monitor the build-up 
of excessive risks and pinpoint them more easily and at an earlier stage. A single supervisory 
mechanism should also overcome the national bias of supervisors. 
But  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  not  sufficient.  To  shield  banks  from  weak  public 
finances,  it  must  be  accompanied  by  a  sound  regulatory  underpinning.  Such  regulation 
should  include  upper  limits  for  lending  to  governments  and  appropriate  capital  backing  for 
sovereign  bonds.  Finally,  a  banking  union  should  comprise  a  European  resolution  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
recovery mechanism to ensure that bank creditors – and not taxpayers – are the first in line 
to bear losses from a bank’s failure. 
Such a comprehensive banking union will be an important element of the new  institutional 
framework of the monetary union. It will bring about significant changes not only for banks 
and  their  stakeholders,  but  also  for  regulators  and  supervisors  with  functions  being 
transferred from the national to the European level. 
Financial sector reforms 
3. 
Changes  will  also  be  made  through  financial  sector  reforms.  The  financial  crisis  has 
highlighted weaknesses in financial sector regulation. As a response to this, the G20 Heads 
of State or Government set in train a comprehensive reform agenda in November 2008. 
In  the  meantime,  we  have  passed  a  number  of  major  milestones  on  that  agenda.  But  to 
make the international financial system as resilient and robust as it should be, we still have a 
long way to go. 
One of the most pressing issues is the implementation of Basel III. What is most worrying is 
that doubts about implementation have been voiced with respect to countries that are home 
to  global  financial  centres  and  systemically  important  institutions.  I  consider  it  of  utmost 
importance that all G20 countries live up to their self-commitment of leading by example. The 
initial implementation timelines have been modified in the EU and the US. We need to make 
sure that such delays do not lead to a watering down of the measures that we agreed upon 
internationally. 
Stricter banking regulation might set incentives to move business to less regulated entities. 
The regulation of the shadow banking system is therefore another pressing issue. Regular 
monitoring exercises help us to gain a better understanding of the kind and scale of business 
conducted  outside  the  regulated  banking  system.  But  its  actors  and  activities  still  remain 
largely  unregulated.  I  consider  it  particularly  important  to  deliver  a  final  set  of  integrated 
recommendations on regulating the shadow banking system to the G20 in September. 
And it is absolutely crucial to finally solve the too-big-to-fail problem. However, we have to 
keep in mind that this term is not very precise. In many cases, institutions were not too big 
but actually too important to fail. Recent examples of nationalisations and repeated bail-outs 
of institutions in the Netherlands and France show that, ultimately, it is still the taxpayer who 
is at risk when banks are in trouble. We need to remove the implicit government subsidy for 
systemically important institutions and subject them to the ultimate sanction of the market. It 
must be possible to force banks to exit the market without destabilising the financial system. 
To  make  this  threat  credible,  we  have  to  restore  a  constitutive  element  of  any  functioning 
market economy: the principle of liability. The one who profits must also be the one to bear 
the losses. I consider the implementation of the internationally agreed framework for dealing 
with systemically important financial institutions as a top priority. 
Similarly, a “too big to fail” issue – but this time in the truest sense of the word – can also 
occur if the banking sector is too large in relation to the economy as a whole. The cases of 
Iceland,  Ireland  and  Cyprus  are  good  examples  of  this.  The  banking  system  in  Cyprus  is 
currently about 7 times the size of national GDP. By way of comparison, an average banking 
system in the monetary union is 3.5 times the size of national GDP. This problem has also 
been fuelled by the Cypriot business model of providing a low-tax environment. 
If  the  banking  sector  is  too  large,  the  national  taxpayer  will  be  unable  to  bear  the  costs. 
Consequently,  European  solidarity  will  be  required  to  resolve  the  problems.  This  is 
comparable to the case of systemically important banks, which depend on the support of the 
taxpayer if the bank gets into difficulties. 
This  is  why  the  problem  of  banking  sectors  that  are  “too  big  to  fail”  also  needs  to  be 
addressed one way or another. This could be achieved by downsizing the banking sector, as 
agreed at the meeting of the Euro Group. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But let me get back to the current reform initiatives. They need to be fully and consistently 
implemented  to  enhance  the  resiliency  of  the  financial  sector.  To  ensure  consistency,  we 
need  to  focus  even  more  on  the  systemic  aspects  of  financial  regulation.  Regulatory 
measures  must  build  upon  each  other  and  be  interlocked  to  set  consistent  incentives. 
Otherwise, we run the risk of individual measures conflicting with each other. Such a lack of 
consistency  might  lessen  the  desired  effects  of  the  new  regulations  or  even  negate  them 
entirely.  Impact  studies  are  an  important  tool  in  this  context.  To  gauge  the  effects  of  new 
regulation, such studies should accompany all major reform projects. 
To  avoid  regulatory  arbitrage,  we  must  take  into  account  the  cross-border  effects  of 
regulation. The global financial system needs global rules. Accordingly, we need to ensure 
that internationally agreed measures are transposed into national laws and regulations in a 
timely and consistent manner. I strongly support the in-depth implementation monitoring by 
the Financial Stability Board and by international standard-setting bodies as essential tools 
for maintaining implementation pressure. 
Finally,  the  crisis  has  reminded  us  that  containing  systemic  risk  is  vital  for  safeguarding 
financial stability. To mitigate and prevent systemic risks, macroprudential policy frameworks 
are  being  implemented  in  many  countries,  including  Germany.  Since  the  beginning  of  this 
year, the German Financial Stability Act has been in force. A Financial Stability Commission 
comprising representatives of the Bundesbank, the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority 
and  the  German  Finance  Ministry  has  been  established.  The  Commission  is  in  charge  of 
designing consistent macroprudential policies and held its first meeting just yesterday. The 
institutional  set-up  is  fairly  advanced.  Now,  we  need  to  deepen  our  understanding  of  the 
effects of macroprudential tools and operationalise their use. 
Changes to the financial landscape 
4. 
Although  financial  sector  reforms  are  not  yet  complete,  it  is  already  possible  to  see  the 
impact of new regulation on the financial landscape. Some banks have fallen off the list of 
global systemically important banks because they have simplified their structure, downsized 
or  de-risked  their  operations.  This  also  includes  a  German  bank.  Several  banks  are  de-
emphasising  high-profile  but  risky  capital  market  business  that  benefited  employees  more 
than shareholders and society as a whole. The modified business models should ultimately 
result in a more resilient and diversified sector with a more sustainable risk-return profile. 
Further  changes  to  banks’  business  models  will  be  brought  about  by  structural  measures. 
Concerns  about  institutions’  business  conduct  built  the  political  case  for  such  measures, 
including the ring-fencing or prohibition of certain activities. Corresponding recommendations 
have been made by Paul Volcker, John Vickers and Erkki Liikanen in the US, the UK, and 
the  EU  respectively.  While  the  proposals  differ  in  important  details,  they  share  the  same 
general  idea.  Deposit-taking  credit  institutions  should  be  shielded  from  the  risks  of 
speculative proprietary trading and high-risk lending. Such a separation of business lines can 
play  a  part  in  making  the  financial  system  more  stable  and  resilient.  But  it  is  not  a  silver 
bullet.  Ultimately,  we  should  leave  it  to  bank  boards  and  management  to  decide  what 
business model is best for the future. I appreciate that the German legislative proposal on 
introducing a ring-fence leaves some leeway in that regard. 
Finally, there is evidence that the corporate culture of banks is changing. Risk management, 
for example, has gained a more prominent role in the organisational structure of some banks. 
Efforts 
further 
improvements are necessary. The manipulation of benchmark interest rates by traders is a 
case  in  point.  Withholding  or  clawing  back  variable  parts  of  remuneration  packages  of 
employees  who  were  involved  in  such  fraudulent  activities  can  only  be  a  first  step.  In  the 
future, I expect to see further changes in institutions towards the promotion of sounder risk 
cultures. 
to  strengthen  risk  governance  have  been  undertaken  as  well,  but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
