Ravi Menon: Monetary Authority of Singapore’s Annual Report 2012/13 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore’s  Annual  Report  2012/13  Press 
Conference, Singapore, 23 July 2013. 
 Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ annual report press conference. 
I would like to highlight five key messages today. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
first, macroeconomic outlook better this year than last; 
second, strong S$ more than offset good returns on MAS’ investments; 
third, banking system sound but build-up in household debt worrying; 
fourth, stepped up efforts to ensure we remain clean and trusted financial centre; 
fifth, good progress in key drivers of financial centre growth. 
GDP growth stronger and CPI inflation lower this year compared to last 
Let me start with the economy. The overall macroeconomic outlook this year is better than 
last year. 
Barring  shocks,  Singapore’s  GDP  growth  will  be  stronger  and  CPI  inflation  lower  in  2013, 
compared to 2012. 
Economy comfortably on track to meet 1–3% growth forecast 
The Singapore economy will comfortably meet the growth forecast of 1–3% for 2013. Growth 
was estimated at 2% in H1 and should pick up further in H2 
First, the advanced economies are in better shape this year. 
• 
Tail risks have receded. There is less likelihood of a Eurozone break-up or a fiscal 
cliff in the US. 
Growth in the US is gaining momentum, supported by consumer spending and the 
strengthening of the housing market. Corporate profitability is also rising. 
In Japan, expansionary macroeconomic policies will lift private consumption and net 
exports. 
In the Eurozone, the pace of contraction has moderated; and exit from the recession 
may be in sight for several economies towards end of year. 
   Second, there has been some consolidation in Asian domestic demand but the export sector 
will gradually improve. 
• 
The  slowdown  in  China  has  so  far  been  measured.  Consumption  and  investment 
growth is moderating amidst tighter financial conditions. Job creation is strong and 
the labour market tight. China’s GDP growth for 2013 is unlikely to fall below 7%. 
In some of the ASEAN countries, public spending has eased. China’s slowdown has 
softened  demand  for  commodities  and  this  could  dampen  broader  intra-regional 
trade flows. 
But anticipated pick-up in exports to advanced economies will partially offset some 
of these headwinds in Asia. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Third, there are several signs that global IT industry, which Singapore is plugged into, will do 
better this year. 
Global chip sales have improved. 
• 
Previously high inventory levels are reverting to historical trends. 
• 
• 
Final IT demand, particularly from US corporate sector, is on a general uptrend. 
Fourth, financial services in Singapore is expected to grow faster compared to last year. 
• 
is  broad  based  strength 
intermediation  and  asset 
in  both  financial 
There 
management activities. 
Inflation forecast revised down to 2–3% but core inflation pressures will persist 
For the first time in three years, CPI inflation has come down closer to historical trends and 
within MAS’ comfort range. 
• 
CPI-All  Items  inflation  averaged  4.2%  over  2010–12.  Car  prices  and  imputed 
accommodation costs contributed around 60% to overall inflation during this period. 
But this year, there has been a clear and significant step-down in inflation. CPI-All 
Items inflation in H1 is estimated to have dipped below 3%. 
 CPI-All  Items  inflation  forecast  for  2013  is  therefore  revised  down  to  2–3%,  from  3–4% 
previously. 
• 
The sharp fall in car prices following the tightening of financing restrictions on motor 
vehicle loans is a major factor. COE prices have risen recently and could be volatile 
for  the  rest  of  year,  but  this  should  be  accommodated  within  the  2–3%  inflation 
forecast range. 
Accommodation  costs  are  also  increasing  at  a  slower  pace.  More  completed 
housing units are coming on stream, easing the pressure on market rentals. 
 But MAS’ Core Inflation, which excludes car prices and imputed accommodation costs, will 
show  moderate  increase  to  around  2%  or  slightly  above  by  end-2013,  due  to  continuing 
tightness in labour market. 
• 
This is a percentage point lower than recent peak in Q1 2012, and in line with the 
historical average. 
The Core Inflation forecast for 2013, therefore, remains at 1.5 to 2.5%. 
• 
MAS’ monetary policy stance since 2010 has underpinned the gradual improvement that we 
are seeing in Singapore’s inflation-growth trade-off. 
• 
• 
MAS is committed to ensuring that recent improvements in inflation are sustained. 
The  current  policy  stance  of  modest  appreciation  of  the  Singapore  dollar  is 
appropriate in containing the re-emergence of strong cost and price pressures in a 
restructuring economy. 
Strong Singapore Dollar impacts MAS profits despite good investment returns 
Let me now move on to MAS’ financial results. 
MAS made investment gains of S$8.9 billion for the FY ended March 2013. 
• 
This  is  lower  than  the  S$12.0  billion  earned  in  the  previous  FY,  due  primarily  to 
lower interest income as interest rates continued to decline in FY 2012/13. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But  MAS  recorded  an  overall  loss  of  S$10.6  billion  after  taking  into  account  translation 
effects from an appreciating Singapore dollar. 
• 
• 
In FY 2012/13, the Singapore dollar appreciated against all major currencies 
In particular, the Singapore dollar strengthened 5% against the Euro, 6% against the 
Sterling, and 14% against the Yen during FY. 
It also appreciated against traditionally strong currencies like the Aussie Dollar and 
the Canadian Dollar. 
 In short, we made good investment returns, but when measured in Singapore dollars, these 
gains more than offset by strength of the currency. 
• 
This  is  an  issue  of  reporting  currency.  If  we  had  reported  our  profit  and  loss  in 
international currency, it would show healthy profit. 
It is important to note that the international purchasing power of our reserves is unaffected by 
the strength of the Singapore dollar. 
• 
Our  foreign  reserves  serve  two  key  purposes  during  a  crisis:  they  finance  our 
imports from rest of world, and they help to safeguard the value of our currency. 
On both fronts, it is the foreign currency value of reserves that matters. 
We  report  our  profit  and  loss  in  Singapore  dollar  only  because  it  is  international 
convention for central banks to report in national currencies. 
 Banking system remains sound, but concerns over rising household debt 
Now I will touch on financial stability, asset prices, and leverage. 
A key focus of MAS in the last two years is managing risks posed by extremely loose global 
monetary conditions. 
• 
• 
Short-term interest rates at or close to zero bound globally. 
This  has  in  turn  spurred  strong  demand  for  credit  in  Asia  and  banks  flushed  with 
liquidity are more than willing to lend. 
There is a substantial flow of credit to asset markets, especially in real estate. 
Accelerations  in  property  prices  and  build-up  in  household  leverage  are  seen 
throughout Asia. 
 The combination of low interest rates, growing leverage, and surging property prices poses 
significant risks to financial stability – hence MAS’ concern. 
Singapore’s  credit-to-GDP  ratio  has  risen  from  200%  to  270%  over  last  three  years.  MAS 
has  been  monitoring this  very  closely  but  credit  growth,  in  and  of  itself,  is  not  a cause for 
major concern. 
• 
• 
Growth in total credit reflects Singapore’s growing role as regional financial centre. 
Banks  in  Singapore  are  intermediating  surplus  funds  to  meet  credit  demand 
throughout Asia, particularly for productive economic activities like trade financing. 
The increase in resident credit-to-GDP ratio is less sharp, from 125% to 155% over 
last three years. 
Domestic  credit  growth  is  broad  based  across  both  households  and  corporates, 
including financing capacity expansions by the petrochemical industry. 
  Nonetheless, the strong flow of domestic credit to real estate is a concern: 
• 
Housing loans by banks grew 18% each year over last three years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Housing  loans  as  a  percentage  of  GDP  now  stands  at  46%,  up  from  35%  three 
years ago. 
When interest rates rise and if property prices fall, any risks built up will materialise. 
• 
• 
A return to normal monetary conditions is not far off. 
Financial  markets  are  already  reacting  to  anticipated  tapering  and  unwinding  of 
quantitative easing (QE) in the US. 
• 
Long-end bond yields are already rising as markets price in higher interest rates. 
So how do we stack up against this global backdrop? Our banking system remains sound. 
• 
Our  local  banks  have  strong  financial  positions.  They  are  well-capitalised  with 
prudent provisions against loss. 
There  is  a  healthy  buffer  against  property  price  reductions.  In  fact,  the  average 
outstanding housing loan-to-value ratio in the banking system is just under 50%. 
Our banks also undertake regular stress tests on their own and those coordinated 
by MAS. 
We  have  subjected  the  banks’  balance  sheets  to  a  combination  of  stresses  – 
including  a  sharp  rise  in  interest  rates,  a  decline  in  property  prices,  and  a  rise  in 
unemployment rate. They have enough capital to see them through. 
   It is the household sector that we are concerned about. 
• 
At the aggregate level, household balance sheets are resilient. Cash and deposits 
exceed household debt. 
But the health of the balance sheet is not uniform across all households. 
• 
Many  households  could  have  over-extended  themselves,  fuelled  by  low  interest  rates  and 
stretched loan tenures. 
• 
The  vast  majority  of  mortgage  loans  are  on  floating-rate  packages,  which  means 
that households will face higher monthly repayments when interest rates normalise. 
An estimated 5 to 10% of borrowers have probably over-leveraged on their property 
purchases,  i.e.  they  have  total  debt  service  payments  at  more  than  60%  of  their 
income. 
If mortgage rates were to rise by 3 percentage points, the proportion of borrowers at 
risk could reach 10 to 15%. 
In particular, lower income households and those with smaller saving pools may find 
this a strain. Those with longer tenure loans will also be adversely affected. 
   So, when interest rates rise, long before any bank gets into trouble, some households will. 
Banks must therefore practice responsible lending, and consider the ability of borrowers to 
service their debt in a sustainable manner. 
This  is  the  main  reason  why  MAS  introduced  the  Total  Debt  Servicing  Ratio  (TDSR) 
framework. During our inspections, we picked up some worrying practices. 
• 
Most of them are in property loans 
– 
A couple with combined household income of $6,000 was able to obtain a 
new housing loan of $400,000. Their monthly installments on this new loan 
and  their  existing  loan  obligations  came  to  more  than  90%  of  their 
combined monthly income. 
The  bank’s  decision  to  approve  the  loan  was  based  solely  on  fact  that 
couple had savings deposit of $90,000. This is not prudent. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  We picked up similar instances for car loans 
– 
Some applicants of car loans borrowed close to 100% of the value of car, 
with little or no down payment, for what is essentially a depreciating asset. 
This is also not prudent. 
– 
We also found cases of excessive borrowing through credit cards 
– 
A  concerned  mother  called  MAS  for  assistance:  her  24-year  old  son  had 
been  paying  only  the  minimum  sum  on  his  credit  card  bills  and  steadily 
chalking up debts. 
She requested MAS to stop financial institutions from issuing credit cards to 
those who have not been making full payment on their credit card bills. 
 Over  last  three  years,  MAS  has  introduced  variety  of  measures  to  contain  excessive 
borrowing against the backdrop of highly loose monetary conditions globally. 
• 
ratios,  higher  minimum  cash 
tighter 
loans, 
loan-to-value 
For  property 
downpayments, caps on loan tenures, and guidance on total debt service ratios. 
For car loans, tighter loan-to-value ratios and caps on loan tenures. 
For credit card loans, new proposals to: 
– 
– 
– 
help individuals with credit problems avoid further debt accumulation; 
improve due diligence conducted by FIs; and 
empower consumers to make informed decisions. 
 These measures helped to limit risks facing financial institutions but more importantly helped 
to encourage greater financial prudence among borrowers. 
• 
• 
It is important that we act now to limit the build-up of leverage. 
It is much harder to do so later, when growth might be weaker, interest rates higher, 
and property prices lower. 
Stringent efforts to ensure Singapore’s financial centre remains clean and trusted 
Next, let me touch on the efforts we have been making to ensure that Singapore remains a 
clean and trusted financial centre. 
• 
There has a growing concern internationally on the use of financial centres to hide 
illicit funds or evade taxes. 
Singapore  takes  seriously  the  integrity  of  its  financial  centre  and  is  fully  committed  to 
international efforts to combat money laundering and tax evasion. 
The policy measures Singapore has taken on this front well-known; so I will not elaborate. 
• 
Laundering  proceeds  of  tax  evasion  and  tax  fraud  is  now  a  crime  in  Singapore, 
effective 1 July. Financial Institutions are required to conduct customer due diligence 
to deter and detect proceeds from serious foreign tax offences, even if they are not 
offences in Singapore. 
We  will  automatically  extend  Exchange  of  Information  (EOI)  assistance  in 
accordance with OECD standard to all existing Avoidance of Double Tax Agreement 
(DTA) partners without the need for negotiation. 
We signed the OECD Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance 
in Tax Matters. 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
What  is  less  well-known  is  the  rigorous  supervisory  regime  in  place  to  combat  financial 
crime. 
MAS’ approach is preventive. 
• 
We  seek  to  identify  control  weaknesses  early  so  that  financial  institutions  can 
strengthen  their  processes  and  prevent  attempts  to  launder  money  or  finance 
terrorism. 
This is more effective than punishing financial institutions only after actual acts have 
been committed and detected. 
 Our coverage is comprehensive. 
• 
three 
last 
conducted 
years,  MAS 
total  of  108  Anti-Money 
Over 
Laundering/Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) inspections covering 
banks,  insurance  companies,  money  changers,  remittance  agents,  and  licensed 
intermediaries. 
Financial  institutions  have  enhanced  AML/CFT  controls  over  the  years,  and  most 
have  in  place  the  necessary  policies,  procedures  and  controls  to  combat  money 
laundering and terrorism financing. 
Financial institutions with control deficiencies are firmly dealt with. 
• 
Example: 
– 
– 
– 
– 
Another example: 
– 
A bank which facilitated ship-closing transactions, did not conduct adequate 
due diligence on the final identity of buyers behind these transactions. 
MAS ordered the bank to commission an independent audit of its AML/CFT 
controls. 
The audit uncovered serious control weaknesses and compliance failures. 
MAS imposed a composition sum of S$350,000 on the bank. 
The bank has since beefed up its control framework and checks. 
A licensed financial adviser was rated poor following MAS’ inspection, for 
serious lapses in policies and procedures on customer due diligence. 
We  did  not  discover  any  actual  money  laundering  or  terrorism  financing 
cases but MAS imposed composition of $187,500 on the licensed financial 
adviser for breaching AML requirements. 
MAS then directed the licensed financial adviser to cease all new business 
until the independent person has verified that the licensed financial adviser 
has taken corrective actions to address inspection findings. 
The  licensed  financial  adviser  is  in  process  of  winding  down  its  financial 
advisory operations. 
      MAS will not tolerate abuse of our financial system for criminal activity. 
• 
Our  message  to  tax  criminals  is  loud  and  clear:  their  money  is  not  welcome  in 
Singapore. 
And our message to our financial institutions is also loud and clear: if you suspect 
the money is not clean, don’t take it. 
 Financial centre made good progress in future drivers of growth 
Last, a few words on prospects for financial sector. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  growth  of  the  sector  is  often  volatile,  due  to  the  sentiment-sensitive  nature  of  many 
financial activities. 
• 
Abstracting  from  this  volatility,  there  are  a  few  discernible  trends  emerging  that 
augur well for future of Singapore’s financial centre. 
First, asset management. 
• 
    As at end-2012, total assets managed by Singapore-based asset managers reached 
an all-time high of S$1.63 trillion, a year-on-year increase of 22%. 
About 80% of AUM was sourced from outside Singapore and more than 70% of total 
assets  were  invested  in  the  Asia-Pacific  region,  reflecting  Singapore’s  role  as  an 
asset management hub serving both regional and international investors. 
We  continue  to  see  strong  interest from global fund  houses,  seeking to  set  up  or 
expand their Asian presence in Singapore 
Second, insurance and reinsurance. 
• 
Singapore  is  now  the  leading  reinsurance  and  specialty  insurance  hub  in  Asia, 
housing a strong cluster of direct insurers, reinsurers, captives, brokers and ancillary 
service providers. 
Increasingly, more insurers and brokers are offering specialised lines such as trade 
credit  and  political  risk  insurance,  aviation,  marine,  energy,  against  terrorism  and 
professional indemnity. 
For example, we are home to Lloyd’s Asia, the only major marketplace outside of 
Lloyd’s of London that writes specialist and reinsurance business in the region. 
Third,  our  offshore  RMB  centre.  A  key  milestone  in  2013  was  launch  of  RMB  clearing 
facilities in Singapore. More importantly, a broader ecosystem is taking shape. 
• 
MAS  has  entered  enhanced  bilateral  currency  swap  arrangement  with  People’s 
Bank of China (PBOC) in Mar 2013: 
– 
– 
The size of the swap arrangement has doubled to RMB300 billion. 
The scope of the facility has been expanded to allow short-term liquidity to 
be provided to promote market stability. 
     The  Industrial  &  Commercial  Bank  of  China  (ICBC)  Singapore  branch  has 
commenced RMB clearing services in May 2013. 
We have since seen issuance of four RMB bonds amounting to RMB2.5 billion. This 
is a promising start. 
This  month,  MAS  issued  rules  allowing  participating  banks  to  conduct  foreign 
exchange (FX) conversion in China via the RMB Clearing Bank in Singapore for the 
settlement of eligible cross-border trade. 
And  the  move  by  China  last  week  to  extend  RMB  Qualified  Foreign  Institutional 
Investor  (RQFII)  privileges  to  Singapore  means  that  financial  institutions  in 
Singapore  can  expand  their  RMB  product  offerings  to  cater  to  needs  of  their 
investors. 
MAS will work closely with the industry to develop the infrastructure and capabilities 
necessary to fully tap on opportunities created by RMB internationalisation. 
Conclusion 
Let me sum up on how MAS has done on its key functions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
     8 
 Monetary policy. Our tight stance since 2010 is paying off. Inflation has come down 
to within our comfort zone. But there is no room for complacency. Wage and cost 
pressures will persist and bear close watching. 
Reserve  management.  We  made  good  investment  returns  last  FY.  But  in 
Singapore dollar terms, we have recorded a loss because of strength of currency. 
This  is  not  a  cause  for  concern  because  it  is  the  foreign  currency  value  of  the 
reserves that matters. 
Financial  stability.  Our  financial  system  is  sound.  It  will  be  resilient  against  a 
normalisation  of  global  monetary  conditions.  But  household  balance  sheets  are  a 
source of concern – not at the aggregate level, but a significant minority could be 
over-leveraged.  Hence,  the  variety  of  macroprudential  measures  we  have  taken 
over the last three years. 
Financial  supervision.  We  are  fully  compliant  with  international  standards,  and 
have  taken  strong  measures  to  ensure  we  remain  a  clean  and  trusted  financial 
centre.  We  have  stepped  up  to  meet  enhanced  global  standards  on  information 
exchange and have intensified our supervision of financial institutions to ensure we 
keep illicit money out from our financial centre. 
Financial development. The key drivers of future growth in our financial centre are 
showing good promise. The asset management industry has reached a new peak. 
We are now clearly the insurance and reinsurance hub in a growing Asia. And we 
are off to a good start to building a vibrant ecosystem as an offshore RMB hub.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
