Christian Noyer: The end of the financial dictatorship? 
Introduction  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, to Session 5 “The end of the 
financial dictatorship?”, Aix-en-Provence Economic Forum, Aix-en-Provence, 6 July 2013. 
 Firstly, is finance really a dictatorship?  
1. 
This question isn’t new: already Petronius, in Roman times, at the start of our modern era, 
asked: “What use are laws when money is king?”  
The  question  seems  rhetorical,  and  you  can  sense  in  its  resignation  that  the  Latin  writer 
(who, incidentally,  was born in the nearby city of Marseille)  was already  worried about the 
difficulties of establishing the primacy of politics over finance.  
i) 
• 
It is true that the world of finance does have considerable powers:  
The  power  to  create  and  support  economic  development.  In  its  most  traditional 
forms, this is finance’s most crucial role – and power: it is an essential cog in the 
wheel  of  economic  activity,  allocating  capital,  supplying  credit  and  enabling  the 
management  of  risk.  More  than  just  “the  sinews  of  war”,  it  can  be  seen  as  the 
lifeblood flowing through our veins.  
But also a highly destructive power: it was the unchecked sophistication of finance 
and the excesses this caused that lay behind the 2007-2008 financial crisis, a crisis 
that subsequently transformed into an economic, social and political crisis. Limited 
losses  on  subprime  loans  ultimately  led  to  the  destruction  of  millions  of  jobs 
throughout  the  world,  and  the  links  between  finance  and  the  real  economy  were 
cruelly laid bare.  
But finance can certainly not be considered “all powerful”: in my opinion, the world of 
finance only has the political power that State governments choose to give it.  
Granted, the difficulties some countries were facing, notably in the euro area, were 
exacerbated by financial market pressures – think back to the attacks on Italian debt 
in the summer of 2011. But if the markets were able to exert this pressure, it was 
because  those  countries  had,  in  a  sense,  put  themselves  at  their  mercy  by 
demanding  that  they  finance  their  ever-expanding  public  deficits,  even  during 
periods of growth.  
In  nearly  all  the  crises  faced  by  the  euro  area  since  2009,  it  is  true  that  market 
reactions were often brutal and even extreme. But these reactions were frequently 
based on legitimate fears: for example the sustainability of Greek debt, weaknesses 
in  the  institutions  of  monetary  union  and  divergences  in  competitiveness  between 
euro area Member States. Again, it was by failing to make the necessary efforts (to 
ensure  budget  discipline,  preserve  competitiveness  or  finalise  the  institutions  of  a 
European  financial  union,  for  example)  that  these  countries  put  themselves  in  a 
position to be rushed or even pressured by the markets and bear the consequences 
of their overreaction.  
 ii) 
  Governments  should  not  use finance  as  an  alibi  or  as  a  scapegoat. On  the  contrary, they 
should assert their ascendancy over it through strict financial management.  
2. 
i) 
Finance should not dominate the economy, it should serve it.  
Reasserting the importance of regulation and supervision:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   ii) 
• 
   2 
 the 
loss  of  confidence.  Financial 
The period from the 1990s to the start of the 2000s is sometimes called “The Great 
Moderation”  because  inflation  remained  stable  at  moderate  levels  and  growth 
appeared solid and sustainable. In reality, however, the period saw frequent build-
ups  of  financial  excesses.  These  excesses  led  to  the  crisis,  and  they  were  firmly 
rooted in the dogma of self-regulation – a dogma which was itself fostered by the 
belief  that  financial  markets  were  somehow  sacred  and  inherently  “efficient”, 
capable of setting “real” prices.  
The  crisis  completely  discredited  this  theory.  From  the  first  sparks  of  turmoil,  the 
lack  of  transparency  in  certain  segments  of  the  market  –  notably  CDOs  – 
significantly  exacerbated 
institutions  had 
insufficient  capital  cushions  to  absorb  the  shocks,  leading  to  bankruptcies  and 
forcing  the  government  to  bail  them  out,  a  process  that  was  extremely  costly  for 
public finances, but also very damaging to financial sector accountability, as at times 
it  meant  bank  losses  were  “socialised”  whereas  previously  their  profits  had  been 
“privatised”. This is the problem of moral hazard, a subject which will no doubt come 
up over the course of this session.  
The facts therefore served as a stark reminder that self-regulation just doesn’t work, 
primarily because of the imperfections in certain financial markets, which are neither 
transparent  nor  efficient  (like  the  CDS  market  for  example)  and  can  generate 
potentially huge negative externalities. Thus, regulation and supervision were once 
again elevated to their rightful role after the crisis – a role they should never have 
lost. By way of an aside, I note that the crisis was triggered in the United States by 
unregulated entities (conduits) or banks that weren’t applying Basel 2 requirements 
(investment  banks  which  theoretically  were  regulated  by  the  SEC).  By  contrast, 
French  banks  for  example,  where  supervision  was  at  times  branded  “intrusive”, 
managed  on  the  whole  to  get  through  the  different  phases  of  the  crisis  relatively 
unscathed.  
What rules should apply to finance?  
Once a consensus had been reached over the need to reinforce financial regulation 
and supervision, the next question was naturally: what kind of regulation?  
The principle that guided the regulators, notably on the Basel Committee, was that 
finance should once again be made useful to the economy: that it should serve the 
economy rather than govern it.  
More specifically, the new regulations were guided by five main objectives:  
i) 
To  increase  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector  (solvency  and  liquidity 
ratios);  
To prevent excessive leverage and maturity transformation (leverage and net 
stable funding ratios);  
To reduce market risk and increase market transparency (reform of over-the-
counter derivatives, Basel 2.5 on market risk);  
To limit systemic risks (macroprudential rules, identification of and specific 
rules for systemic institutions, rules for bank resolution);  
To  fight  “casino  finance”  (rules  on  the  separation  of  certain  speculative 
banking activities).  
ii) 
iii) 
iv) 
iv) 
Throughout the preparation of the new regulations, the idea was never to suffocate 
banks  with  overly  restrictive  rules.  The  regulators  tried  to  calibrate  the  rules  in  a 
balanced  manner,  and  took  into  account  the  reality  of  the  situations  these  banks 
face – and the risk that, rather than limiting dangerous banking activities, the rules 
might in fact drive banks to shift them into unregulated entities. France, in particular, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  worked hard to make sure that the “pendulum theory” did not mean regulation was 
set at a level that would prevent banks from continuing to finance the economy. I’m 
thinking  of  two  examples  in  particular:  the  improvement  of  the  liquidity  coverage 
ratio (LCR) at the start of the year and the balanced choices made by both French 
and German political authorities on the separation of banking activities.  
Furthermore,  the  idea  was  never  to  place  a  ban  on  financial  innovation.  You  are 
probably familiar with the words of former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker: that the only 
useful  thing  banks  have  invented  is  the  ATM.  I  don’t  completely  agree  with  this 
statement (and, in all likelihood, neither does the man behind it, it was a joke). As 
with  other  industries,  I  believe  that  innovation  and  competitiveness  should  be 
encouraged in finance. Since the first commodity derivatives markets were created 
in  Chicago,  market  innovation  has  more  often  than  not  proved  useful  to  the  real 
economy, notably enabling companies in the real sector to better manage their risks. 
However,  given  that  excesses  in  finance  have  more  potential  than  in  any  other 
sector  to  damage  the  broader  economy,  financial  innovation  needs  to  be  closely 
controlled.  
To conclude, a great deal has already been achieved since 2009 to tighten control 
of the financial industry, and ensure that it fulfils its vital role in serving the economy 
without  destabilising  it.  But  there  is  still  a  lot  of  work  underway  that  needs  to  be 
completed. I’m thinking in particular of work in those sectors where regulators have 
less influence than over banks: shadow banking, hedge funds, tax havens or rather 
regulatory havens. I am sure that the discussions in this session will help to give us 
some ideas.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
