K C Chakrabarty: Contemporary issues in banking – reflections on 
viewpoints of a bank economist 
Remarks by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a book 
release function organised by the Indian Overseas Bank, Chennai, 30 December 2012. 
 Dr.  M.  Narendra,  Chairman  and  Managing  Director,  Indian  Overseas  Bank  (IOB);  Shri 
A.K. Bansal  and  Shri  A.D.M.  Chavali,  Executive  Directors  of  IOB;  Shri  N.  Viswanathan, 
Regional  Director,  RBI;  Smt.  Indira  Padmini  and  other  General  Managers  of  IOB;  Shri  M. 
Ramaswamy,  Retired  Secretary  of  Auroville;  Shri  S.  Muthiah,  Historian;  Shri  M.Ct.P. 
Chidambaram,  grandson  of  the  founder  of  Indian  Overseas  Bank;  Shri  B.J.  Krishnan, 
Environmentalist; Shri Bhakther Solomon, Chief Executive Officer of Development Promotion 
Group;  Shri  Dharmalingam  Venugopal,  who  is  the  reason  for  our  assembling  here  today; 
serving and retired members of the banking fraternity, other invited dignitaries whom I have 
not specifically named; ladies and gentlemen. It is a matter of great pleasure for me to be 
present here today on the occasion of release of Shri D. Venugopal’s book “Indian Banking 
Reforms and After: A Bank Economist’s Take”. Based on my interaction with Shri Venugopal 
and reading of his articles, my assessment of him is of an individual  with an incisive mind 
and an ability to dispassionately analyse diverse subjects of concern to the economy.  
The book being released today is an anthology of articles written by him in various national 
and financial dailies over a period of time. It deals with an impressive array of subjects and 
provides  a  bank  economist’s  perspective  on  various  issues,  which  certainly  makes  an 
interesting reading. I congratulate Shri Venugopal for the book, of which I had the privilege of 
writing the foreword, and hope the book gets all the success and accolades that it, so richly, 
deserves. 
The first thing that strikes about the collection of articles featured in the book is the wide time 
horizon over which the articles were penned. The book succeeds in providing a panoramic 
view of issues that have confronted the economy over the last two decades, a period that 
has been exciting for the Indian economy with the country moving from the throes of despair 
at  the  beginning  of  the decade  of  the  90s  to  a  period  of  heady  growth  and  further,  to  the 
present,  when  we  are  facing  multiple  challenges.  The  book  deftly  captures  several  major 
landmark events/developments in the banking sector with the perspective of the point of time 
when  these  articles  were  actually  written.  It  is  noteworthy  that  apart  from  India,  Shri 
Venugopal has also extensively covered the economic developments in China in his articles. 
Shri Venugopal has made a strong pitch for economic cooperation between the two major 
Asian markets naming China as the market of the future and stating that India should seek to 
get its due share of this market. It is actually a tribute to the vision of the man, as he has 
intensively focussed on two economies that have, since, seen a lot of economic prosperity 
and  have  become  the  cynosure  of  all  in  the  global  market  place.  As  the  Indian  economy 
battles  challenges  on  multiple  fronts,  Shri  Venugopal’s  articles  could  provide  valuable 
insights into these challenges and provide guidance for overcoming them. 
The Indian banking system has seen a complete transformation during the last two decades, 
in  sync  with  the  progress  made  by  the  real  economy.  Almost  every  aspect  of  banking 
operation  has  seen  significant  change  during  this  period  as  banks  sought  to  reinvent 
themselves  in  an  attempt  to  retain  their  preeminent  position  in  the  financial  system.  The 
period  saw  banks  moving  beyond  brick  and  mortar  branches  to  adopt  innovative  delivery 
channels  including  internet  banking,  ATMs,  call  centres,  kiosks,  Business  Correspondents 
(BCs), etc. New products such as retail banking gained prominence. Banks have sought to 
grow,  not  just  in  terms  of  balance  sheet  size,  but  also  in  terms  of  greater  penetration  of 
banking services to the hitherto unbanked segments of the population. It is reasonable to say 
that banks have succeeded in rising up to the challenges posed by the unique needs of a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
transforming economy and have, in no small measure, contributed to the nation’s economic 
progress during this period. 
The  growth  of  the  banking  system  and  its  pivotal  position  in  the  country’s  financial 
architecture implies that the banks cater to a whole host of diverse stakeholders who have 
equally diverse expectations. The success of individual banks and of the banking system as 
a whole depends on how well these stakeholder expectations are met. Some of the problems 
currently  facing  the  banking  industry  bear  their  genesis  to  banks’  inability  to  align  their 
business operations with stakeholder expectations. In view of the considerable debate (and 
sometimes noise) generated by the ills plaguing the banking sector, I thought it appropriate 
to briefly flag some random thoughts on steps the Indian banking industry needs to take, in 
order  to  effectively  meet  the  diverse  stakeholder  expectations  and  overcome  the  present 
challenges.  Some  of  these  thoughts  also  find  resonance  in  the  articles  presented  in  Shri 
Venugopal’s book. 
Productivity and efficiency 
A)  
Banks play the critical role of financial intermediation by performing the task of maturity and 
risk  transformation,  besides  providing  payment  and  settlement  services.  In  order  to 
effectively perform these functions, banks need to ensure that they maintain high levels of 
productivity and efficiency in their operations. Two kinds of efficiency are essential for banks:  
Allocational  Efficiency:  This  requires  banks  to  ensure  that  the  precious  societal 
• 
resources  are  allotted  to  the  most  productive  activities.  Besides,  while  taking 
allocation  decisions,  the  interests  of  the  most  vulnerable  sections  of  the  society 
should also be taken into account. 
Operational  Efficiency:  Operational  Efficiency  requires  banks  to  perform  the 
financial  intermediation  function  in  a  safe,  secure  and  speedy  manner  while 
ensuring that the cost of performing the intermediation function is minimized. While 
profit  margins  are  important  for  sustaining  banking  operations,  the  cost  of 
operational inefficiencies of banks should not be passed on to customers by way of 
higher service charges and fees. 
 Indian  banks  need  to  improve  both,  allocational  and  operational  efficiency,  so  that  the 
financial intermediation function is effectively performed. This would include reengineering of 
all critical products and processes by leveraging on innovative technology-based solutions, 
while retaining a strong customer-centric focus. 
Financial consumer protection and its linkage to risk management function 
B)  
Financial Consumer Protection has emerged as a key area of supervisory focus globally. The 
global financial crisis has highlighted the vulnerability of the consumer class, which has been 
worst hit in the crisis. The key feature of the exploitation has been the discriminatory, non- 
transparent and illogical pricing which has affected the poor and vulnerable consumers most 
emphatically.  The  product  innovations  have  not  focused  on  customer  requirements  and 
have, instead, aimed at serving the interests of the service provider. The basic fact, that the 
well-being  of  the  consumer  is  essential  for  the  sustainability  and  growth  of  the  service 
provider,  has  been  lost  sight  of.  As  part  of  its  regulatory  reform  agenda,  G  20  Finance 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors have also endorsed a set of High-level Principles on 
Financial Consumer Protection, underlining its overall importance for financial stability. The 
principles enjoin upon the supervisors and oversight bodies to ensure an equitable and fair 
treatment of consumers, disclosure and transparency in product and service offerings along 
with promotion of financial education and awareness amongst the consumers.  
In this context, I would like to highlight some important aspects of consumer protection and 
risk management that banks need to imbibe in their business processes: 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    Pricing of asset and liability products should be transparent and non-discriminatory. 
At  a  minimum,  it  must  be  ensured  that  poor  do  not  subsidize  the  provision  of 
banking services to the rich. 
The business operations of banks should be customer-centric in nature. This should 
be  reflected  in  all  aspects  of  banking  operations  including  creation  of  customized 
products  and  services,  pricing  of  services,  delivery  channels,  etc.  Banks  should, 
inherently,  be  flexible  in  their  operations  so  that  they  have  the  ability  to  meet  the 
evolving stakeholder expectations. 
Banks  should  be  able  to  appreciate  the  risk-return  trade-off  involved  in  various 
activities.  The  basic  premise  that  greater  return  would  invariably  come  from 
assumption  of  higher  risk,  needs  to  be  appreciated  and  disseminated,  both  within 
the  organization  and  to  banks’  customers.  Banks  need  to  develop  the  ability  to 
discern good risk from bad so that they selectively take on only those risks that are 
in alignment with the bank’s long term strategic vision. 
The culture of efficient risk management needs to be imbibed in the organization’s 
ethos so that everyone from the top management to frontline managers in the field 
shares a common vision of risk management.  
A key related issue is the integrity of MIS in banks. Each bank claims to be oriented towards 
its customers. But, I have a simple poser. Are the banks aware of the number of customers 
they have? I am not referring to the number of accounts but the actual number of customers 
that the bank serves across all business  verticals by offering different products. Moreover, 
most  of  the  banks  do  not  have  a  system  of  working  out  activity  wise  costs  and  returns. 
Unless banks know the return on each and every product, they cannot arrive at a truly risk 
based pricing. 
Impaired assets 
C)  
Another issue which is generating considerable concern and is likely to impact banks’ ability 
to  serve  its  stakeholders  is  the  rising  portfolio  of  non-performing  assets  (NPAs)  and 
restructured  loans.  While  the  downturn  in  business  environment  globally  and  in  India  has 
contributed  to  this  rise,  we  need  to  reflect  on  why  our  risk  management  practices  during 
boom time were unable to anticipate future downturns and build up suitable safeguards while 
giving loans. 
I do believe that the rising impaired assets is a “governance” issue as banks have forgotten 
the  art  of  saying  “no”,  except,  may  be,  to  small  borrowers.  Banks  need  to  significantly 
improve their risk assessment capability and their ability to price risks, so that they take on 
only those risks that they understand and can effectively manage. I believe that this need is 
all  the  more  pronounced  in  the  case  of  public  sector  banks,  which,  at  times,  end  up  with 
assets  that  have  been  exited  by  private  sector/  foreign  banks  on  account  of  inherent 
weaknesses. 
The ability to manage NPAs is important in order to preserve the strength of bank balance 
sheets and to retain the appetite to take on good risks. An attitude of complete risk aversion 
would  not  be  appropriate  as  banks  are  in  the  business  of  taking  risks,  but  with  adequate 
safeguards. I note that NPAs are a recurrent theme in Shri Venugopal’s articles and hope 
that they do provide insights into how banks can manage this problem. 
Another  issue  that  I  would  like  to  bring  up  before  you  is  the  element  of  discrimination 
practiced by the banks in restructuring of loans. Analysis of available data indicates that the 
larger  borrowers  have  invariably  received  the  benefit  of  restructuring  of  loans,  while  the 
restructuring  in  case  of SME/  agriculture  loans has  remained  abysmally  low.  I  believe  that 
with timely intervention and support from the banks, this sector would have definitely shown 
much lower levels of impaired assets than it presently does.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Financial inclusion 
D)  
Despite several steps having been taken by the Government and the Reserve Bank of India, 
the extent of exclusion in the Indian financial system continues to be unacceptably high. The 
unbanked  masses  constitute  a  unique  but  important  stakeholder  group  for  banks,  even 
though  they  may  not  be  bank  customers.  Meeting  the  expectations  of  this  group  through 
financial inclusion efforts presents a huge business opportunity for banks.  
While there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach to financial inclusion, it is important that banks 
recognize  three  important  prerequisites  for  maximising  the  benefits  of  financial  inclusion 
efforts. These are:  
• 
• 
• 
Holistic approach to provision of financial services, not just credit or deposit alone 
Meeting the needs of small firms 
Focussing  on  segments  of  population  excluded  by  gender  or  geographical 
remoteness 
Banks need to focus on leveraging technology to create new business models and delivery 
channels that are customized to the needs of the targeted population. Technology has the 
potential  to  act  as  a  force  multiplier  in  our  financial  inclusion  efforts,  provided  it  is 
implemented  in  a  planned  manner.  There  is,  however,  an  increasing  realization  that  mere 
reliance  on  technology-enabled  non-face  to face  channels  alone  would  not  be  sufficient  to 
meet our goal of creating an inclusive financial  system. There is a need for opening more 
brick and mortar outlets as delivery points, both as a control mechanism for BCs and to gain 
the trust and acceptability of the masses.  
Our  assessment  of  the  progress  in  financial  inclusion  since  the  introduction  of  Board 
approved Financial Inclusion Plans is that while there has been considerable progress in the 
number  of  accounts  opened,  the  actual  number  of  transactions  per  account  or  per  BC 
continues to be extremely low. This reduces the viability of the financial inclusion efforts and 
would, ultimately, results in concerned stakeholders losing interest in the exercise. The low 
transaction  levels  indicate  inadequacies  on  both  the  demand  and  supply  sides  such  as 
deficiencies in BC operations, non-distribution of smart cards, lack of awareness on the part 
of the account holders, etc. Banks need to identify the causes for the low transaction rates 
and  urgently  address  them.  In  order  to  be  successful,  sustainable  and  scalable,  financial 
inclusion should necessarily be commercially viable for everybody including the bank, the BC 
and  the  technology  provider.  However,  the  pricing  should  not  result  in  exploitation  of  the 
customers.  
It is, indeed, very gratifying to note that besides including financial inclusion prominently in 
his articles, Shri Venugopal, is also working for the financial inclusion of primitive tribes of the 
Nilgiri district. I am also very pleased to note that he is a great friend and protector of nature, 
especially  the  Nilgiris  and  has  been  staunchly  espousing  the  cause  of  the  environment 
throughout  his  career.  We  need  more  such  dedicated  persons  with  a  genuine  passion  for 
inclusive and sustainable growth. 
Conclusion 
As  with  the  economy,  the  Indian  banking  system  is  also  at  a  crossroads  with  multiple 
opportunities and challenges before it. We need to make the right choices now in order to 
ensure the future of the banking system as the key pillar upon which the economic prosperity 
of  the  country  rests.  Banks  are  the  lifeline  of  any  economy  and  it  is  the  collective 
responsibility  of  all  of  us  to  ensure  that  we  have  a  strong,  resilient  and  inclusive  banking 
system geared up to face all domestic and global challenges. 
Opinions  of  thought  leaders  such  as  Shri  Venugopal  are  important  in  deciding  the  right 
course of action for taking the banking system forward. The collection of articles in this book 
provides  insights  into  how  the  economy  has  developed  over  the  last  two  decades  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
provides  clues  to  tackling  the  current  challenges.  The  narratives  are  in  a  very  simple 
language and the coverage of a diverse set of topics makes the book eminently readable and 
useful to most people. I hope the book is the first in a series of many more to follow. I once 
again  congratulate  Shri  Venugopal  for  the  book  and  wish  it  all  success.  I  also  thank 
Dr. Narendra and Indian Overseas Bank for this wonderful function. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
