Ardian Fullani: Overview of economic developments and key issues in 
Albania 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  monetary  policy 
decision by the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, Tirana, 20 December 2012. 
 Today,  on  20  December  2012,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  reviewed  and 
approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the latest monetary and economic 
developments in Albania, and following the discussions on their future outlook, the Bank of 
Albania’s  Supervisory  Council  decided  to keep the  key  interest  rate  unchanged,  at  4.00%. 
The Supervisory Council deems that the current monetary conditions are adequate to meet 
Bank of Albania’s inflation target in the medium term. Moreover, these conditions ensure the 
right monetary stimulus to support the domestic demand. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Annual  inflation  in  November  stood  at  2.5%.  The  major  part  of  inflation  continues  to  be 
determined by the performance of food prices. Contribution of other goods was steady from 
the previous month. Inflation fluctuation owed mainly to the supply-side factors, of external 
and internal origin. Nonetheless, the intensity of supply shocks was low and lasted for a short 
period  of  time.  The  Supervisory  Council  finds  that  developments  in  the  real  economy  and 
financial markets produced low inflationary pressures. The Albanian economy continues to 
remain below its potential. This development is reflected in the low increase of wages and 
production costs. Prices in the global markets and the exchange rate were relatively stable; 
hence,  they  did  not  exercise  pressures  for  upward  prices  at  home.  Likewise,  expected 
inflation  remains  anchored  around  Bank  of  Albania’s  3%  target.  Finally,  monetary 
developments  are  characterised  by  low  demand  for  liquid  monetary  assets.  The  monetary 
policy pursued by the Bank of Albania has contributed to stimulating the aggregate demand, 
administrating the liquidity in the system, and keeping inflationary expectations in check. This 
situation of inflationary pressures is expected to remain steady in the medium run. 
Available  figures  on  the  economic  activity  over  the  second  half  of  the  year  are  partial. 
Indirect  data  analysis,  however,  confirm  earlier  estimates  for  positive  growth  during  this 
period,  at  levels  similar  to  the  second  quarter  of  the  year.  Economic  growth  was  mainly 
driven by foreign demand, while domestic demand was weak. 
Consumer spending is assessed to have been up during the third quarter, reflecting also 
better  activity  of  the  services  sector.  Private  consumption,  however,  remains  weak,  due  to 
the  slow  economic  performance  and  the  perceived  uncertainties  about  the  future.  Its 
prospect in the medium run remains unclear. Private investments remain at low levels, in the 
presence  of  partial  utilisation  of  production  capacities,  uncertainties  about  foreign  and 
domestic demand, and tightened lending terms by the financial sector. 
Public  sector  demand  was  also  low  during  the  third  quarter  and  did  not,  therefore, 
contribute to higher aggregate demand. As at end-October, the budget deficit for this year 
was  about  19.0%  lower  than  a  year  earlier.  The  fiscal  policy  applied  during  the  three  first 
quarters of the year materialised in the annual fall of public spending for this period, whereas 
income  growth  was  low  and  budget  deficit  was  in  check.  On  the  other  hand,  the  fourth 
quarter of 2012 and year 2013 are expected to be characterised by upward fiscal spending 
and budget deficit. This fiscal policy increases the macroeconomic stimulus in the short run; 
however, it should be sensitive to the need for medium and long-term stability of the public 
debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Foreign  demand  was  the  main  driver  of  economic  activity  in  the  third  quarter  of  the  year. 
Latest foreign trade data confirm the same trend for the successive period. Thus, in October, 
the trade deficit continued the corrective trend, narrowing down to 10.3% in annual terms. Its 
performance  has  reflected  mainly  the  good  performance  of  exports,  which  maintained 
positive rates of their annual growth, 12.0% in this month. Imports have also contributed to 
narrowing the trade deficit, contacting 2.3% in annual terms, in this month. 
The  analysis  of  monetary  indicators  points  to  low  monetary  pressures  on  prices.  Higher 
money  supply,  the  M3  aggregate,  continued  to  decelerate  in  October,  settling  at  6.2%.  In 
particular,  lending  to  the  private  sector  slowed  down  significantly.  Annual  credit  growth  for 
the  private  sector  was  2.4%  in  October,  reaching  its  all-time  low.  To  a  large  extent,  it  is 
influenced  by  the  low  demand  of  households  and  business  for  loans,  as  reflected  by  the 
performance  of  consumption  and  private  investments.  On  the  other  hand,  the  banking 
system continues to apply additional prudence with regard to lending, albeit it is under good 
liquidity and capital conditions. 
Financial markets are characterised by downward liquidity risk premiums. Interest rates in 
the inter-bank market fell even further in November, reflecting the ample liquidity and eased 
monetary  conditions.  In  the  primary  market,  government  security  yields  continued  to  fall. 
Moreover,  the  interest  rate  on  deposits  and  loans  denominated  in  the  Albanian  lek  were 
downward,  in  response  to  monetary  policy  signals.  In  the  period  ahead,  a  more 
comprehensive response of the real economy to the eased monetary conditions is expected. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania deems that inflation will remain at low levels 
and close to the medium-term inflation target of the Bank of Albania. The performance of the 
domestic economy, global economy, and financial markets is not expected to generate any 
deviation  from  the  3.0%  inflation  target.  Under  these  conditions  and  in  the  absence  of 
unexpected shocks from the supply side, consumer prices will increase at low rates and will 
range within the target of the Bank of Albania. 
 At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key 
interest rate unchanged, at 4.00%. Keeping the key interest rate at minimum rates helps 
maintain the stimulating character of the monetary policy, thus enabling the real economy to 
take  advantage  of  better  lending  terms  in  2013.  Furthermore,  this  policy  contributes  to 
keeping inflation expectations in control, by helping lower long-term interest rates.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
