Benoît Cœuré and Joachim Nagel: Interview in Börsen-Zeitung 
Joint  interview  with  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  and  Mr  Joachim  Nagel,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  conducted  by  Mr  Mark  Schrörs  of  Börsen-Zeitung  on  12  September  2013, 
published on 18 September 2013. 
 Dear  Mr  Cœuré,  Dear  Mr  Nagel,  former  US  Treasury  secretary  Henry  Paulson  has 
warned about a new financial crisis. The BIS has called it a “phenomenon reminiscent 
of  the  exuberance  prior  to  the  global  financial  crisis”.  Are  we  already  sowing  the 
seeds of the next financial collapse? 
Nagel:  A  long  period  of  low  interest  rates  increases  the  risk  that  market  participants  will 
“search for yield”. Overexuberance in the markets could pose risks to financial stability. As 
central banks we have to monitor that very closely. This is all the more true because we now 
have a major share of responsibility for macroprudential supervision. At the moment, I see a 
low risk of a crash of the kind you have described. 
Cœuré: In this moment I would be less worried than the BIS is. But I’m talking about the here 
and now, not about the future. In the future we have to be very cautious. 
What do you mean? This BIS is especially worried that historically low yields led to a 
continuing squeeze of credit spreads and increased issuance of riskier bonds. 
Cœuré: We know that there is a risk of asset price bubbles if there is a lot of liquidity. We 
have  to  remain  very  vigilant.  But  you  also  have  to  keep  in  mind  that  the  whole  regulatory 
framework  has  changed  radically.  Before  2007  banks  and  other  financial  actors  have 
borrowed to invest in risky assets. Now the ability for banks to do so is much more limited. 
And with Basel III we will get even higher capital requirements and the leverage ratios. But 
there is no reason for complacency. 
In Germany a lot of people fear a real estate market price bubble. 
Nagel: We have emphasised several times that we are monitoring the increase in real estate 
prices very closely. In the past few years, prices in Germany have risen distinctly – especially 
in  urban  centres.  However,  there  do  not  appear  to  be  any  price  bubbles  at  present.  We 
therefore see no acute financial stability risk for the moment. 
And what about the euro area as a whole, Mr Cœuré? 
Cœuré:  Currently  the  superfluous  liquidity  that  has  been  created  by  the  ECB  to  fight  the 
crisis is coming back to us. Therefore we see no material risks of bubbles and even less of 
inflation.  When  the  situation  improves  and  liquidity  finds  it  way  to  the  real  economy,  this 
could change. As soon as we see risks of asset bubbles or of inflation, we will have to start 
withdrawing liquidity. But again, this is still a remote perspective. 
You mentioned the tighter rules for banks. But there are other segments with less or 
even no regulation – for example the shadow banking sector. 
Nagel:  If  one  sector  is  heavily  regulated  and  another  less  strictly,  this  may  provide  an 
incentive to sidestep the regulated part. Credit intermediation outside of the sphere covered 
by banking regulation could give rise to systemic risk. We need to identify this risk and take 
action if required. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
A  big  issue  for  markets  is  the  looming  exit  of  the  US  Federal  Reserve  (“tapering”). 
This has already created turbulence. What will happen if tapering really starts? Will it 
get even worse? 
Cœuré: I think the Fed is very aware of the importance of having a smooth transition towards 
the exit. We fully trust in their ability to steer markets through that process. 
But the recent weeks have not been “smooth”, right? For example, yields on ten-year 
Treasuries  have  increased  significantly  and  this  caused  capital  market  rates 
worldwide to increase – including in the euro area. 
Nagel: When looking at yields, we also have to realise where we started from – yields were 
at  very  low  levels.  There  was  certainly  an  increase.  But  I  would  not  characterise  it  as 
“exaggerated”. 
So fears of a bond crash such as in 1994 are overblown? 
Nagel: The IMF warned of a repeat of 1994, when Fed policymakers did an about-face. At 
the time, yields on two-year Treasuries rose by nearly 400 basis points within the space of a 
year, and growth then collapsed in 1995. The recent rise in interest rates, however, is more 
of  a  return  to  normalcy  from  the  hitherto  very  low  values  than  a  repeat  of  1994.  At  the 
beginning of the tapering discussion there was a little excessive exuberance among markets. 
But  now  market  participants  understand  better  what  the  Fed  is  going  to  do.  And  the  Fed 
knows the markets very well. I’m not worried about what the Fed will do. 
Cœuré: We must  see the  difference  between  the  short  and  the  long  end  of  the  euro  area 
yield  curve.  The  long  end  of  the  curve  has  always  been  driven  by  arbitrage,  activities  of 
market  participants  –  and  we  are  not  going  to  suppress  that.  This  is  how  international 
financial markets work. What really matters for us is the short end. There we wouldn’t like 
shocks from outside the euro area to drive money market rates to levels not consistent with 
the  situation  of  the  euro  area  economy.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  have  decided  to  give 
forward  guidance:  to  make  sure  that  money  market  rates  remain  appropriate  for  our 
economic fundamentals. 
But  market  participants  do  not  seem  to  be  convinced.  Money  market  rates  –  for 
example the Eonia – are higher than before the start of the tapering discussion. 
Nagel: Are they really not convinced? I have a counterquestion: Where would Eonia be today 
without forward guidance? 
Cœuré: Exactly. We have already seen some degree of de-correlation between the US and 
euro  money  market  rates  as  a  result  of  forward  guidance.  But  of  course  it  remains  to  be 
tested. 
What does that mean? 
Cœuré:  Our  forward  guidance  should  protect  the  euro  area  economy  along  the  whole 
recovery  path.  If  the  Fed  –  as  intended  –  starts  tapering  the  QE,  then  there  will  be  other 
developments  in  the  global  economy.  In  that  case  the  guidance  will  help  the  euro  area 
economy to be shielded. This is the purpose: We see the value of the guidance not only in 
what happened since July. What is more important is what will happen over the horizon of 
forward guidance, that is, an extended period of time. 
And what will happen if rates increase further, but – as in recent weeks – also because 
of  better  economic  data  from  the  euro  area  itself  and  not  only  because  of  the  US 
influence? 
Cœuré: We  are  looking  at  it  closely  in  an  environment  where  global  financial  markets  are 
generally more volatile. We want to make sure that money market rates don’t overreact even 
to positive economic news from the euro area. Their reactions should remain in line with the 
economic situation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But it is clear that the ECB is aiming at the – short-term – money market rates and less 
so at the – longer-term – bond yields, right? 
Nagel: That is the tradition of monetary policy in the euro area. We are much more focused 
on  the  short  end  of  the  yield  curve.  With  our  forward  guidance  we  also  want  to  stabilise 
expectations  at  the  short  end.  Forward guidance  can  help  reduce  uncertainty  about future 
developments  in  policy  rates  and  can  thus  also  have  a  stabilising  effect  on  longer-term 
interest rates. 
Cœuré: I would like to add another reason: We need a functioning market at the long end of 
the  curve.  One  of  the  issues  that  we  have  been  facing  before  the  crisis  was  lack  of  price 
discrimination in the bond markets, both for private and public issuers. Market discipline had 
de facto disappeared. That has not served the euro area well. When you think about how the 
euro area should look like and function after the crisis, one desirable feature would certainly 
be that market discipline works and is effective at the long end of the curve. I don’t think that 
central banks or public authorities should steer long term rates. 
But  some  critics  of  forward  guidance  say  that  central  banks  should  not  try  to 
“fine-tune” markets at the short end, either. 
Nagel:  To  be  honest:  I  really  don’t  understand  this  argument.  This  “fine  tuning”  was  even 
greater  before the crisis.  For  our  refinancing  and fine-tuning  operations we  always  tried  to 
estimate the liquidity needs in such a way that at the end Eonia was pretty close to our MRO 
rate. 
Cœuré: It is normal that central banks monitor short term money market rates. This is about 
the transmission of our monetary policy. This is our core business. But the further we move 
along  the  yield  curve  the  less  legitimate  central  banks  are  to  manipulate  prices  and  to 
substitute market forces. 
You  mentioned  the  influence  on  market  prices.  In  recent  years  central  banks  have 
pumped  enormous  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the  markets.  This  has  eliminated  price 
mechanisms. Is an exit without turmoil possible? 
Cœuré:  You  are  absolutely  right,  central  banks  around  the  world  –  the  Fed,  the  BoE,  the 
BoJ,  and  we  at  the  ECB  –  have  injected  so  much  liquidity  into  the  markets  that  we  have 
suppressed price mechanisms to some extent. But this period will end. Market participants 
must learn to price risks correctly again. And they have to get used again to the idea that 
markets can go both ways – up and down. 
The  tapering  discussion  and  the  turbulence  seem  to  suggest  that  this  learning 
process might become very difficult. 
Nagel: Financial markets always have a tendency to overshoot the mark a little bit. But all in 
all my impression is that the learning process is making progress. 
Cœuré: One proof of that seems to be the situation in the emerging countries. Markets have 
not  adjusted  identically  in  all  economies.  Countries  with  better  fundamentals  are  less 
affected. Market participants look at the fundamentals and differentiate again. This is a good 
sign. We need properly functioning markets. 
Nagel: Perhaps the turmoil surrounding tapering was even helpful. 
In what way? 
Nagel: By reminding market participants not to forget that, sometime in the future, there will 
be an exit from non-standard monetary policy measures. 
Cœuré: Yes, it was a useful reminder. 
Nagel:  From  time  to  time  we  have  the  feeling  that  banks  are  getting  too  used  to  these 
extraordinary circumstances. There is a risk that they might change their business models in 
a  way  we  do  not  approve  of.  Banks  have  to  understand  that  the  current  monetary  policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
regime is truly exceptional: the ECB’s mandate is price stability – and the ECB Governing 
Council’s interest rate policy is oriented to this mandate. The Governing Council expects the 
euro-area  economic  outlook,  and  thus  also  the  outlook  for  price  stability,  to  remain 
dampened for some time. However, I do not expect interest rates to remain low for years – 
not least because the cyclical stimulus of the ultra-loose monetary policy will diminish over 
time and risks to financial stability will increase. Full allotment at a fixed rate – this will not be 
the reality in the future. 
Cœuré:  This  is  not  only  true  for  banks  but  for  all  market  players:  There  was  a  need  for 
central bank action in the crisis to avoid a collapse of the system and in so doing to protect 
price stability. But we will withdraw them. And market participants will have to live again with 
higher levels of interest rates. With our decisions we gave them time. It is important that they 
use this time and prepare themselves and become more resilient. But there is one important 
point I would like to stress. 
Which one? 
Cœuré: The  timeline  of the  exit  in  the  US  is  completely  different from  the  one  in  the  euro 
area. For the euro area economy an exit at this moment in time would come way too early. 
Our  judgement  is  that  the  economic  recovery  will  be  very  gradual.  We  still  need  a  high 
degree  of  monetary  accommodation  to  protect  the  recovery.  Or  to  put  it  another  way: We 
should not steel the patient’s crutches before he is able to stand up and walk by himself. 
Nagel:  I  agree  one  hundred  percent.  Given  the  dampened  euro-area  inflation  outlook,  the 
monetary  stance  is  appropriate  for  the  time  being.  This  is  why  we  have  introduced  our 
forward  guidance.  But  it  is  also  clear:  if  new  data  cause  a  change  in  the  outlook for  price 
level  stability,  we  will  also  modify  the  monetary  policy  stance.  Forward  guidance  is  not  a 
paradigm shift in the ECB’s monetary policy and, above all, not an unconditional promise to 
keep central bank policy rates low over a relatively long period of time. 
Cœuré: And this is also the most important reason why we delivered our guidance the way 
we did. We have one single objective and this is medium-term price stability. So we will move 
out of guidance when we see upside risks to medium term price stability. 
Besides  forward  guidance,  markets  have  been  talking  a  lot  about  OMT  and  the 
upcoming  decision  of  the  German  constitutional  court.  What  would  be  the 
implications if Karlsruhe imposes tight constraints on OMT? 
Nagel: It is not helpful to speculate about the upcoming decision of the court. We expect to 
see  a  legally  balanced  outcome  to  the  pending  case.  The  Bundesbank  has  expressed  its 
criticism of OMT and stands by its reservations. The conduct of OMTs involves risks of which 
we must be aware at all times. 
Mr Cœuré , do you agree with that assessment? 
Cœuré: I also do not want to speculate. We at the Executive Board of the ECB think that the 
potential risks of the OMT – also those raised by the Bundesbank – have been identified and 
mitigated through the design of the programme. OMT has helped us eliminate the risk of an 
unintended  euro  exit,  which  could  have  had  catastrophic  consequences  and  would  have 
threatened  price  stability.  The  subsequent  improvement  on  financial  markets  also  reduced 
the  reliance  of  banks  on  ECB  liquidity,  and  as  a  consequence  it  reduced  the  risks  to  the 
ECB’s balance sheet. One can speculate about the potential risks related to OMT, but the 
existence of OMT has – as a fact – reduced risks borne by the ECB and its shareholders. 
Anyway, from the legal point of view the decisions of Bundesverfassungsgericht would not be 
binding on the ECB, which is a European institution. 
This would only be the case with a decision of the Court of Justice of the European 
Union. But Karlsruhe could impose de facto limits on OMT – through the ESM and the 
Bundestag. 
Cœuré: I really don’t want to speculate on such ideas, this is an unchartered territory. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Klass Knot of the Dutch central bank has said that OMT could last at least for 10 years 
because it would take at least a decade for euro-area countries to reduce their debt 
ratios substantially. 
Cœuré: OMT is a very narrow instrument targeted at a very specific type of risk, which we 
call  the  redenomination  risk.  Meaning:  the  risk  of  markets  wrongly  expecting  countries  to 
leave the euro area. There is only a low probability that OMT will be used, but it will stay with 
us. I also don’t see any reason for changing the conditionality. It is as it is. Now it’s for the 
countries to decide whether they want to apply or not. 
Ireland will ask for a precautionary credit line from the ESM to safeguard the return to 
the capital markets. Would it be possible for the ECB to activate OMT and buy bonds 
before such a credit line is drawn? 
Cœuré:  Once  the  Eurogroup  has  agreed  on  an  appropriate  programme,  the  ECB’s 
Governing  Council  can  activate  OMT.  The  credit  line  doesn’t  have  to  be  drawn.  But  the 
Governing Council will make this decision in full independence. 
There is another issue I would like to discuss with you: the collateral framework of the 
ECB. In the recent past there have been several problems with national central banks 
being too lax with regard to the eligibility and valuation of collateral. 
Cœuré: The ECB and the Eurosystem is unique in the sense that we  operate in 17, soon 
18, countries,  across  very  different  legal  frameworks,  contractual  standards  and  market 
structures.  This  creates  complexity.  We  have  to  ensure  a  level  playing  field  across  all 
countries. At the same time market structures are constantly changing. And to put it bluntly: 
There is a risk that market participants try to circumvent our rules. 
And what is the consequence? 
Cœuré: First: We need a strong will within the Governing Council to make sure that our rules 
are enforced in a consistent way. I see this will. And second we constantly have to monitor 
market developments and adapt our framework so that market participants cannot game it. 
Nagel: The single collateral framework must be understood and applied the same way by all 
central banks. All central banks must have the same interest: to reduce the risk stemming 
from  our  operations.  If  there  is  a  loss  it  is  a  loss  for  all  of  us.  Moreover,  the  Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  regularly  reviews  the  adequacy  of  the  risk  control  measures  in  the 
collateral framework. 
But critics say that it is not only market players trying to circumvent rules but also 
national central banks using loopholes to support their domestic banks. 
Cœuré: I wouldn’t cast the blame on national central banks. One proof of the common will of 
the Governing Council is the fact that it has agreed unanimously to create a compliance unit 
at the ECB and a network of collateral experts to check any inconsistency and any factual 
error in the eligible asset database, and report back. 
Nagel: There are around 40.000 items of eligible collateral in our database which have to be 
valued on a daily basis. There are also historical reasons for this: the idea behind a broad 
collateral  framework  was  to  ensure  that  banks  from  all  participating  countries  could 
participate in the Eurosystem’s refinancing operations. It is not a big secret that this is a big 
challenge. Especially in a crisis this might become extremely difficult. However, I still think 
our track record over that period is good – with a very few exceptions. 
And what about simplifying the system? 
Cœuré: In the future we should aim at simplifying it to the extent possible, not forgetting, that 
good  availability  of  collateral  to  our  counterparties  across  the  euro  area  allows  proper 
implementation of our monetary policy. This is why the system became even more complex 
during the crisis times. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
So for the time being there will be errors? 
Cœuré: We will do what we can to avoid errors. What is important to know is that none of 
these  errors  have  led  the  Eurosystem  to  lending  too  much  to  financial  institutions.  All 
operations are over-collateralised. 
Nagel:  In  cases  where  errors  were  made,  we  have  eliminated  them.  In  cases  where 
loopholes  emerged,  we  have  closed  them.  We  are  constantly  learning  lessons  from  our 
experiences. 
On lessons: What will the collateral framework and the framework for monetary policy 
operations in general look like after the crisis? 
Cœuré: It is too early to say. On one hand, we are not yet in the exit mode. On the other 
hand, we have to see how markets and regulation will look like in the future. My personal 
view is that we should have an aim at one point to eliminate the temporary measures that we 
have taken. But there is a possibility, that we will include some of these assets, for example 
additional credit claims, in our permanent list. But under the common control of course. 
Nagel: I am critical of the additional credit claims (ACCs) because they entail risks and I, in 
particular,  regret  the  fragmentation  of  the  monetary  policy  framework.  The  Bundesbank 
therefore  advocates  reducing  the  ACC  framework  as  quickly  as  possible  as  soon  as  the 
situation  in  the  financial  markets  permits.  It  is  possible  to  expand  the  general  collateral 
framework  provided 
the  Eurosystem’s  current  high  creditworthiness  standards  are 
maintained.  I  see  two  particular  future  developments.  The  long-term  funding  of  banks  will 
become  more  important,  owing  not  least  to  new  banking  supervisory  regulations.  And  the 
unsecured money market will not play the same role as before the crisis. 
Some  experts  say  the  ECB  should  look  at  its  collateral  framework  not  only  as  an 
instrument  to  control  risks  but  as  a  monetary  policy  instrument  –  also  to  enable  a 
response to country-specific circumstances. 
Nagel:  The  collateral  framework  is  not  about  monetary  policy  in  and  of  itself  but  about  its 
implementation.  If  different  country-specific  collateral  requirements  were  to  be  introduced, 
this  would  ultimately  mean,  owing  to  the  division  of  risk,  a  redistribution  of  financial  risks 
between countries. 
Cœuré: Indeed the collateral framework is not a monetary policy instrument per se. These 
decisions are not aimed at injecting liquidity into one country and withdrawing it from another 
one. There is a problem if there are collateral shortages in some countries. This is something 
we would have to look into. But – and that is a very important but – I don’t see a trade-off 
between these considerations and controlling the risk. We have to achieve both. We will not 
expand our collateral framework at the expense of risk and just for the sake of improving the 
transmission of monetary policy. This wouldn’t be right. 
Some  people  argue  that  the  ECB  should  not  worry  about  risks  and  losses  because 
central banks can operate with negative capital. 
Nagel:  There  is  a  general  understanding  that  central  banks  can  function  with  negative 
capital. But the Bundesbank believes that this would be a dire signal. 
Cœuré: This is exactly the right answer. Technically and legally it would be possible for the 
ECB to run with negative capital, but it would undermine the confidence in the ECB and the 
trust in the euro and therefore it should not happen.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
