Mark Carney: Summary of Canada’s January 2013 Monetary Policy 
Report 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada and Chairman of 
the Financial Stability Board, presented to the House of Commons Standing Committee on 
Finance, Ottawa, Ontario, 12 February 2013. 
 Good  morning.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  be  here  with  you  today  to  discuss  the  January 
Monetary Policy Report, which the Bank recently published. 
• 
While the global economic outlook is slightly weaker than the Bank had projected in 
October MPR, global tail risks have also diminished. 
The  economic  expansion  in  the  United  States  is  continuing  at  a  gradual  pace, 
restrained  by  ongoing  public  and  private  deleveraging,  global  weakness  and 
uncertainty related to fiscal negotiations. 
Europe  remains  in  recession,  with  a  somewhat  more  protracted  downturn  now 
expected than in October. 
Growth in China is improving, though economic activity has slowed further in some 
other major emerging economies. 
Supported by central bank actions and by positive policy developments in Europe, 
global financial conditions are more stimulative. 
Commodity prices have remained at historically elevated levels, though temporary 
disruptions and persistent transportation bottlenecks have led to a record discount 
on Canadian heavy crude. 
In Canada, the slowdown in the second half of 2012 was more pronounced than the 
Bank had anticipated, owing to weaker business investment and exports. 
Caution about high debt levels has begun to restrain household spending. 
The Bank expects economic growth to pick up through 2013. 
Business  investment  and  exports  are  projected  to  rebound  as  foreign  demand 
strengthens, uncertainty diminishes and the temporary factors that have weighed on 
resource sector activity are unwound. 
Nonetheless, exports should remain below their pre-recession peak until the second 
half of 2014, owing to a lower track for foreign demand and ongoing competitiveness 
challenges, including the persistent strength of the Canadian dollar. 
Consumption is expected to grow moderately and residential investment to decline 
further  from  historically  high  levels.  The  Bank  expects  trend  growth  in  household 
credit  to  moderate  further,  with  the  debt-to-income  ratio  stabilizing  near  current 
levels. 
Relative to the October MPR, Canadian economic activity  is expected to be more 
restrained. Following an estimated 1.9 per cent in 2012, the economy is expected to 
grow by 2.0 per cent in 2013 and 2.7 per cent in 2014. The Bank now expects the 
economy to reach full capacity in the second half of 2014, later than anticipated in 
October. 
Core inflation has softened by more than the Bank had expected, with more muted 
price  pressures  across  a  wide  range  of  goods  and  services,  consistent  with  the 
unexpected increase in excess capacity. 
           BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        Total CPI inflation has also been lower than anticipated, reflecting developments in 
core inflation and weaker-than-projected gasoline prices. 
Total  CPI  inflation  is  expected  to remain  around  1  per  cent  in the  near  term. It  is 
expected to rise gradually, along with core inflation, to the 2 per cent target in the 
second  half  of  2014  as  the  economy  returns  to  full  capacity  and  inflation 
expectations remain well-anchored. 
Despite  the  reduction  in  global  tail  risks  as  a  result  of  a  series  of  actions  by 
European and American authorities, the inflation outlook in Canada is still subject to 
significant risks. 
The  three  main  upside  risks  to  inflation  in  Canada  relate  to  the  possibility  of 
stronger-than-expected growth in the U.S. economy, higher Canadian exports and 
renewed momentum in Canadian residential investment. 
The three main downside risks to inflation in Canada relate to the European crisis, 
more protracted weakness in business investment and exports in Canada, and the 
possibility that growth in Canadian household spending could be weaker. 
Overall, the Bank judges that the risks to the inflation outlook in Canada are roughly 
balanced over the projection period. 
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank, on 23 January, maintained the target for the 
overnight rate at 1 per cent. 
While  some  modest  withdrawal  of  monetary  policy  stimulus  will  likely  be  required 
over time, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target, the more muted 
inflation outlook and the beginnings of a more constructive evolution of imbalances 
in  the  household  sector  suggest  that  the  timing  of  any  such  withdrawal  is  less 
imminent than previously anticipated. 
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
