Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: Challenges in the rotating world 
Keynote address by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, 
at the Thomson Reuters FX Awards Ceremony 2013, Bangkok, 27 March 2013. 
 Distinguished guests, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  join  the  Thomson  Reuters  2013  FX  Awards  Ceremony 
today. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the winners of the FX awards this 
year and to thank all market participants, as well as Thomson Reuters, for your contribution 
to the development of the Thai foreign exchange market. For the winners of the awards this 
year, one is reminded that the awards are given not only for the outstanding achievement on 
business  grounds,  but  also  as  recognition  of  the  notable  efforts  in  enhancing  market 
efficiency. So a hearty congratulation for a job well done! 
2. 
As you know, much has happened over the past few years, both at the global level 
and  within  the  Thai  economy.  The  global  economy  has  shown  signs  of  improvements, 
although in a measured pace, but reactions from the financial markets seem to run ahead of 
developments  on  the  grounds.  For  many  of  us  who  have  seen  the  global  economy  and 
financial  markets  over  many  business  cycles,  such  euphoria  and  exuberance  can  be 
expected  whenever  global  risk  sentiments  improve  and  investment  strategy  shifts  toward 
more risk- taking. Today, a new theme or the so-called “The Great Rotation”, has taken the 
center  stage.  However,  such  turnaround  may  lead  to  new  concerns  and  challenges  going 
forward.  Today’s  event  thus  provides  an  opportune  occasion  for  us  to  deliberate  and 
exchange views on this topical issue. 
3. 
Although latest economic data point to stronger growth momentum and smaller tail 
risks, uncertainty and short-term threats still remain. For example, the situation in Europe can 
easily come back to take centre stage thus providing a reality check and a pointed reminder 
that  structural  problems  take  time  to  resolve.  Besides,  anti-austerity  pressure  could  delay 
ongoing reform efforts. This may, from time to time, raise uncertainty and spark volatility in 
the market.  Meanwhile,  improving  economic  outlook  in  the  US  needs  to  be  tempered  with 
reality of the fiscal drag and the near-term risk from spending cuts which can come back to 
hit  market  sentiment.  Thus,  we  should  proceed  with  care  since  the  market  has  somewhat 
overly priced in the global recovery story. 
The challenges from the great rotation can be viewed in two dimensions. First, risk 
4. 
preference  has  shifted  from  safety  to  riskier  assets  with  the  improved  global  sentiment. 
Particularly, global stock markets have rallied far beyond the modest global recovery. This 
can be seen in the MSCI World Index which surged by almost 25% during the last 9 months 
while global growth remains at low level. 
5.  
Rallies in stock prices on the back of over optimistic sentiment may sow the seeds 
of potential bubble. Although the market realizes that a further rise in the asset price would 
virtually  compress  yield,  the  market  appears  to  be  less  concern  about  a  bubble  in  asset 
prices. Therefore, there is a risk of a sharp correction which we all witnessed in the recent 
episode in the Thai stock market last week. 
The second dimension of the great rotation is the global fund flow, which is one of 
6.  
the greatest challenges emerging markets are experiencing. The continued monetary easing 
in  advanced  economies,  economic  growth  differential  and  protracted  low  interest  rate 
environment are key factors pushing investors to search for yield; fund flows have therefore 
switched from advanced to emerging economies. 
This  second  dimension  of  the  great  rotation  is  a  concern  to  policymakers  in  the 
7. 
region  and  has  called  for  wider  public  discussions  among  academics,  businesses  and 
policymakers.  Discussion  typically  centred  on  the  potential  recourse  to  macroprudential  or 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
unconventional  measures  on  the  part  of  recipient  countries,  given  that  such  practice  has 
been  adopted  by  the  source  countries  of  the  fund  flows.  As  market  participants,  we  all 
recognize  the  benefits  of  capital  inflows  that  provide  a  two  way  view  for  the  market,  thus 
adding  depth  and  breadth  to  emerging  financial  markets.  Therefore  any  considerations  on 
the  use  of  capital  flows  policies  need  to  be  carefully  thought  out  with  consideration  of 
potential  unintended  consequences  and  impacts.  Needless  to  say,  there  is  greater 
acceptance for these measures to be part of the toolkit of the authorities and central banks 
are  continually  monitoring  the  markets  and  ready  to  take  actions  in  cooperation  with 
regulators and market participants. 
8. 
To respond to the surge in inflows, the BOT has chosen the route of capital account 
liberalization  as  the  most  natural  counter  to  encourage  the  outward  flows  of  capital.  We 
believe that this measure will help lessen the pressure from the rotating fund flows as well as 
provide  the  opportunity  for  Thai  enterprises  to  secure  new  markets  in  preparation  for  the 
ASEAN  Economic  Community  (AEC).  The  roadmap  includes  relaxation  in  outward  direct 
investment  and  portfolio  investment.  In  addition,  the  BOT  has  allowed  Thai  corporates  to 
issue  foreign  exchange  denominated  bonds  domestically.  There  is  no  reason  why  a 
reputable Thai corporate should have to go oversea to secure funding if they are well known 
domestic  household  names  that  can  mobilize  funds  at  a  more  attractive  rate  domestically. 
Hence, the rotation in fund flow will be taken place at both ends; thereby balancing Out-In 
with In–Out flows. 
9. 
Against  the  backdrop  of  a  rotating  world,  the  financial  industry  is  confronted  with 
tighter regulation. Since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 the world has been thrown 
in a global recession for half a decade. During this time the debate on financial reregulation 
has  raged  from  public  outcry  over  bonus  compensation  of  bank  CEOs  to  reregulation  of 
financial  services  in  the  form  of  Basle  III,  Dodd  Frank  and  similar  regulations  across  the 
Atlantic.  Under  the  current  course,  the  trend  towards  tightened  financial  regulation  is  not 
likely to be reversed and we would all have to live to more regulation, though much of the 
new regulations were cure for diseases that were contracted elsewhere. 
10. 
When  speaking  about  financial  regulation,  I  am  reminded  of  the  issue  of 
transparency  and  governance.  The  investigation  into  the  LIBOR  scandal  in  major  global 
financial  centres  and  the  consequent  pursuit  of  similar  investigation  in  regional  financial 
centres point to the need for greater attention to market conducts. As market confidence is 
critical to the development of financial markets, any scandals may derail and set us back in 
the development process. We therefore have a duty to oversee that our markets function in a 
fair and transparent manner, to safeguard the reputation and trust of the users of financial 
services.  In  the  past  few  years,  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  with  the  help  of  key  market 
participants, have put a great effort to promote our own reference rate – the BIBOR, so we 
have  an  interest  to  see  that  the  market  is  transparent  and  inspire  confidence  among  the 
users. 
11. 
To enhance market conduct, the BoT in collaboration with the ACI are considering a 
code of conduct for FX dealers and brokers. This would institute a process by which these 
businesses,  which  are  important  infrastructure  in  the  Thai  foreign  exchange  market,  are 
given  attention  and  importance  to  ensure  that  they  contribute  to  building  confidence  and 
trust. 
12. 
In conclusion, let me congratulate once again the winners of this year’s FX Award. 
Let  me  also  thank  Thomson  Reuters  again  for  inviting  me  today.  With  the  support  and 
continued cooperation from all side, the Thai financial markets would continue to press on 
with  the  reform  efforts  that  have  been  made  over  the  years.  These  improvement  will  help 
raise  the  standard  of  practice  and  ensure  that  our  financial  market  continue  to  make  a 
positive  contribution  to  the  growth  and  development  of  the  Thai  economy  which  is  the 
ultimate goal for sustainable development. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
