Timothy Lane: Shedding light on shadow banking 
Remarks by Mr Timothy Lane, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the CFA Society 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 26 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to you today. I would like to take this opportunity to talk 
about shadow banking, which is an important area for financial system reform, both globally 
and in Canada. 
Shadow banking refers to a set of activities outside the formal banking system that carry out 
similar  functions  to  those  performed  by  banks.  While  the  term  “shadow  banking”  tends  to 
suggest something secretive or illicit, I will argue that, on the whole, shadow banking serves 
a useful purpose. At the same time, the experience during the global financial crisis revealed 
that shadow banking has some important fragilities. I will talk about certain common threads 
in the reforms being developed at the international level to address these fragilities and their 
relevance to Canada. 
How does shadow banking work? 
Shadow  banking  comprises  activities  involving  some  element  of  maturity  and  liquidity 
transformation,  credit  extension,  and  risk  transfer,  conducted  partly  or  wholly  outside  the 
“traditional”  banking  system.  It  covers  a  wide  range  of  activities,  including  securitization, 
repos,  and  money  market  funds  (MMFS)  as  well  as  some  activities  of  non-bank  financial 
institutions such as finance companies and credit hedge funds. 
Different  investors  have  different  time  horizons  and  different  degrees  of  tolerance  for 
illiquidity and risk. Investors seeking safe places to park their cash holdings typically prefer to 
hold assets that are of short maturity and liquid. The economy benefits from the existence of 
safe assets – assets that can be accepted without constantly having to scrutinize the issuer’s 
financial statements.1 At the same time, many of the productive long-term investments in the 
economy  –  investments  that  are  essential  to  build  its  productive  potential  –  are  inherently 
illiquid, long-term, and risky. 
As a result, there is a clear role for institutions – either banks or shadow banks – to issue 
liabilities  that  are  shorter-term,  liquid  and  safe  while  holding  longer-maturity,  less  liquid 
and/or risky assets. At the same time, this role brings with it intrinsic risks, as seen by bank 
runs  and  failures  throughout  the  history  of  banking.  Such  risks  are  also  illustrated  by  the 
implosion  of  some  shadow  banking  activities  –  such  as  the  collapse  of  asset-backed 
commercial paper and runs on repos and MMFs – during the global financial crisis. 
So how do you establish confidence that liabilities are safe and liquid? 
Banks  have  a  number  of  features  that  help  them  establish  confidence.  Traditionally,  they 
seek to build and maintain reputations for safety and soundness, in part to earn profits based 
on those reputations. They typically engage in a broad range of activities, both to diversify 
their risks and to pursue such profit opportunities. The scope of their activities in many cases 
makes banks highly interconnected with the rest of the financial system. 
                                                
1   A  paper  by  G.  Gorton,  S.  Lewellen,  and  A.  Metrick,  “The  Safe-Asset  Share,”  American  Economic 
Review 102 (3)(2012): 101–106, discusses the economic role of safe assets – characterized as assets that 
are “informationally insensitive” – and shows that they have been stable as a share of total assets over a long 
historical period. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Banks  also  maintain  confidence  through  their  capital  and  liability  structure.  The  capital 
invested by their shareholders is available to absorb losses. They hold liquid assets so that 
they can redeem deposits on demand. At the same time, since banks are highly leveraged, 
they have a strong incentive to manage the risks to which they are exposed, notably credit 
risk, including by collecting information about their borrowers and monitoring their behaviour. 
Strong  banks  have  long  been  synonymous  with  high  capitalization  levels,  conservative 
balance-sheet structures, and robust risk-management and lending standards. 
Despite  these  traditional  features,  banks  are  still  subject  to  runs  and  failures,  which  carry 
enormous  costs  for  the  economy.  From  the  Great  Depression  to  the  Great  Recession, 
instances of banking failures have led to public policy initiatives to make banks safer. Central 
banks provide liquidity to banks that are solvent but have run short of liquid assets. Deposit 
insurance  reduces  the  incentive  for  depositors  to  run  on  a  bank  in  times  of  stress.  These 
elements of the “safety net” are complemented by stringent regulation – requiring that banks 
have enough capital to absorb losses and enough liquid assets to meet plausible potential 
drains. In addition, bank supervisors scrutinize many aspects of their operations. Regulation 
and supervision are essential to maintain depositor confidence and to ensure that banks do 
not rely excessively on the safety net – thus limiting moral hazard. 
So what about shadow banking? 
Confidence  in  shadow  banking  is  partly  based  on  collateral.  For  example,  investors  hold 
asset-backed securities mainly on the strength of the underlying assets, rather than on the 
reputation of the issuer – which may be an anonymous special purpose vehicle created for 
the  sole  purpose  of  holding  the  assets  and  issuing  securities.  Similarly,  investors  provide 
cash in repo transactions because, even if the institution receiving the cash were to default, 
the institution providing the cash would have a claim on the underlying asset. 
In  other  cases,  shadow  banking  assets  are  perceived  to  be  safe  because  of  the  narrow 
range of activities in which they engage. For example, MMFs provide a close substitute for 
bank deposits, partly because they invest only in very liquid, short-term, low-risk securities. 
Other shadow banking institutions, such as credit hedge funds and finance companies, have 
structured their assets and liabilities in various ways to avoid being subject to runs. 
Thus,  shadow  banks  have  a  variety  of  business  models  to  maintain  investors’  confidence 
and obtain access to financing. These models are different from those of regular banks, and 
from one another. 
So what is the advantage of shadow banking, given that banks already exist? 
For  some  forms  of  intermediation,  shadow  banking  may  be  more  efficient  and  provide 
healthy competition for traditional banks. Room on banks’ balance sheets is expensive, so 
avoiding the use of those balance sheets can save money and free up lending capacity. The 
regulations  to  which  banks  are  subject  may  also  give  them  less  flexibility  to  serve  some 
sectors of the market, or at least restrict their ability to offer those customers a competitive 
package. Where banks do not tread, shadow banking steps in to fill the gaps and make the 
financial system more efficient. A financial system with a diverse set of business models may 
be  both  more  innovative  and  more  resilient.  And,  given  that  banks  are  often  highly 
interconnected,  there  may  be  an  advantage,  in  the  interest  of  financial  stability,  to 
transferring  some  risk  outside  of  the  banking  system.  In  particular,  by  using  market 
mechanisms to distribute and diversify this risk, it will end up being borne by those investors 
most willing to hold the risk. 
At the same time, shadow banking can be a form of regulatory arbitrage, circumventing the 
regulations to which banks are subject. Such behaviour can create distortions and additional 
risks  to  the  system.  As  bank  regulations  are  tightened,  the  incentives  for  such  behaviour 
obviously increase. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
While  banks  and  shadow  banks  have  separate  functions  and  activities,  it  is  important  to 
remember that their paths intersect. Shadow banking relies on traditional banks. Many forms 
of shadow banking, such as asset-backed commercial paper and related structured products, 
often require support from banks through liquidity lines to bring them to market. And banks in 
turn  rely  on  shadow  banking  for  funding,  for  example,  through  repo  residential  mortgage 
backed securities or covered bonds. 
What went wrong? 
The  weaknesses  of  both  traditional  banking  and  shadow  banking  were  clearly  exposed 
during  the  global  financial  crisis:  both  proved  vulnerable  to  run-like  behaviour  despite 
features  intended  to  bolster  confidence.  A  number  of  core  funding  markets  froze  up  as 
financial institutions lost the confidence to lend to one another. The flight from counterparty 
risk reflected the vulnerabilities of many banks, as well as the fragility of the shadow banking 
system. 
I won’t dwell on the vulnerabilities of the banks and how they are being addressed, since that 
has  been  discussed  in  considerable  detail  elsewhere,  but  I  will  discuss  some  of  the 
weaknesses exposed in global shadow banking. 
During the crisis, repo markets came under severe stress. Market makers and cash lenders 
became  less  able  and  willing  to  provide  repo  financing,  and,  as  a  result,  some  repo 
borrowers  experienced  difficulties  financing  even  good-quality  collateral.  Borrowing  limits 
were reduced, the terms of transactions shortened, haircuts on private securities accepted as 
collateral widened and the range of securities accepted as collateral narrowed down to all but 
the  safest.  The  volume  of  repo  transactions  dropped  off  sharply.  Such  strains  were 
experienced in Canada and around the world. 
Markets  for  various  asset-backed  securities  collapsed.  In  the  United  States,  markets  for 
mortgage-backed  securities  and  various  other  structured  products  essentially  closed: 
issuance stopped, prices fell sharply, and perceptions of these securities’ safety were badly 
damaged. Canada experienced its own crisis in non-bank asset-backed commercial paper in 
mid-2007;  only  coordinated  action  by  the  public  and  private  sectors  prevented  potentially 
catastrophic system-wide repercussions. 
Money market funds in the United States experienced substantial drains, as fears emerged 
that  these  funds  would  have  to  “break  the  buck.”  The  Federal  Reserve  introduced 
extraordinary  liquidity  facilities  and  the  United  States  government  provided  temporary 
guarantees to halt a full-fledged run. 
These  developments  were  similar  to  traditional  bank  runs  –  a  general  withdrawal  of 
participation from certain markets for fear of counterparty risk. They also exposed the risks 
associated with the use of collateral as it became more difficult to value and dispose of in 
illiquid markets. We saw that as the system came under stress, market participants faced the 
prospect of unloading collateral at fire-sale prices – in many cases exposing institutions to 
“wrong-way” risks for which they were inadequately prepared.2 For similar reasons, margins 
on  derivatives  transactions  and  haircuts  on  collateral  increased.  These  stresses  in  the 
shadow banking system amplified the stresses on the financial system more generally and 
transmitted them globally. 
Another underlying issue that surfaced was the misalignment of incentives. Here, a striking 
example is the case of mortgage-backed securities, structured products and the “originate to 
distribute” model. Since investors could not readily assess the quality of the assets backing 
                                                
2   “Wrong-way”  risk  refers  to  the  risk  that  the  value  of  collateral  is  more  likely  to  decline  under  the  same 
circumstances  in  which  a  counterparty  is  more  likely  to  default.  (In  other  words,  collateral  turns  out  to  be 
insufficient precisely when it is needed most). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
these securities, there was an incentive for originators to use, and over-issue, lower-quality 
assets, knowing that they would earn the origination fees, while the investors would bear the 
risk. Moreover, the complexity of some structured products obscured high levels of leverage, 
which exacerbated losses when the underlying asset values declined.3  
The linkages between traditional banks and shadow banks meant that vulnerabilities spread. 
For  example,  when  asset-backed  securities  came  under  pressure,  the  sponsoring  banks 
faced  significant  drains  through  the  credit  and  liquidity  lines  they  had  provided.  In  some 
cases,  they  ended  up  standing  behind  the  asset-backed  securities  they  had  sponsored, 
largely to maintain their reputations, despite having no legal obligation to do so. At the same 
time,  since  shadow  banking  had  become  an  important  source  of  funding  for  the  banks 
themselves,  stresses  in  shadow  banking  had  an  impact  on  the  banks:  for  example,  when 
repo markets seized up, banks faced severe funding pressures. 
How to fix it? 
The experience of the crisis points to a need for reforms that will enable shadow banking to 
continue to play a useful role while addressing its inherent risks. The purpose here is not to 
stamp  out  all  risk,  but  to  ensure  that  risks  are  appropriately  understood  and  managed.  A 
related  purpose  is  to  prevent  an  increase  in  shadow  banking  activity  driven  solely  by 
regulatory arbitrage in response to the tightening of regulations faced by banks. 
The Financial Stability Board (FSB) has mapped out international work on shadow banking, 
identifying  five  work  streams:  links  between  banks  and  shadow  banking;  money  market 
funds; other shadow banking organizations; securitization; and securities lending and repos. 
The FSB has also begun monitoring the evolution of the sector and the associated risks. 
To  guide  the  key  reforms,  the  FSB  has  established  some  basic  principles.  The  regulatory 
measures should be: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
focused, to target the risks that shadow banking creates; 
proportionate to the risks to the financial system; 
forward looking and adaptable to emerging risks and innovations; 
effective,  so  that  they  balance  the  need  for  international  consistency  as  well  as 
jurisdictional differences; and, finally, 
regularly  assessed  and  reviewed  following  implementation,  and  improved  as 
necessary. 
 I  would  like  to  stress  some  common  threads  that  run  through  the  global  reform  agenda: 
reducing susceptibility to runs and liquidity freezes and better aligning incentives. Let me talk 
about  how  they  apply  to  three  shadow  banking  activities:  repo  markets,  securitization  and 
MMFs. 
With  repo  markets,  a  key  element  is  to  reduce  vulnerability  to  the  kind  of  concerns  about 
counterparty  risk  that  surfaced  during  the  crisis.  One  important  aspect  of  the  reform 
discussion  relates  to  how  market  participants  set  haircuts  –  the  amount  of  collateral  they 
require  –  on  repo  transactions.  The  focus  on  haircuts  is  a  question  of  perception  versus 
                                                
3  
In the United States, during the pre-crisis period, securitization did not disperse risks to the extent that had 
been believed. In fact, it amplified the exposure of many institutions to a common shock linked to the U.S. 
housing and mortgage markets and may have increased interconnectedness within the financial system. The 
widespread use of credit ratings for these structured mortgage products gave investors a misleading sense of 
security  because  these  ratings  were  primarily  based  on  the  idiosyncratic  risks  of  the  mortgages  in  the 
securitization pool, rather than on the systemic risk of a collapse in the U.S. housing market. The Financial 
Stability Board has since introduced principles to reduce reliance on ratings from credit-rating agencies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reality.  It  recognizes  that  when  market  conditions  are  good,  with  low  volatility  and  low 
perceived levels of risk, the haircuts charged by market participants can fall below levels that 
might be considered prudent from a risk-management perspective. 
This  can  result  from  competitive  pressures  among  financial  institutions  or  because  haircut 
methodologies place more weight on recent benign market movements. Declines in haircut 
levels  increase  the  ability  of  market  participants  to  obtain  leverage,  which  in  turn  can  fuel 
further increases in asset prices. When a shock hits, this cycle can quickly reverse as asset 
prices fall, volatility spikes, haircuts are raised and margin calls ensue.4  
In light of this possibility, serious consideration is being given to enforcing minimum quality 
standards  for  the  methodologies  that  market  participants  use  to  set  collateral  haircuts  for 
repos.  This  could  include  imposing  minimum  numerical  haircuts  for  certain  types  of  more 
risky transactions.5  
Now  let  me  turn  to  securitization.  Here,  one  of  the  priorities  is  to  align  the  incentives  of 
institutions that originate loans with those of investors. Proposals have focused on the need 
to ensure that the originators have “skin in the game,” by requiring them to retain a certain 
minimum  share  of  the  securities  they  sell,  and  to  enhance  transparency  regarding  the 
underlying assets. 
Proposals for the reform of MMFs focus on reducing their vulnerability to run-like behaviour. 
Like bank deposits, an MMF traditionally promises to redeem its shares at par, that is, at a 
constant net asset value. The MMF investors may thus have an incentive to run in a case 
where  the  assets  may  be  insufficient  to  back  up  that  claim  –  for  instance,  if  there  are 
concerns that the fund may have suffered serious credit losses on some assets. 
Various proposals to address that weakness are on the table: moving to variable net asset 
value; requiring a cushion of capital or imposing tighter requirements on the liquidity of the 
assets  held  by  the  MMF;  establishing  “gates”  –  i.e.,  restrictions  on  investors’  ability  to 
withdraw  their  money  at  short  notice;  or  a  combination  of  these  measures.  The  goal  is  to 
make MMFs less vulnerable to runs without ending their usefulness as a close substitute for 
bank  deposits  and  an  important  source  of  short-term  funding  for  a  number  of  private  and 
public sector borrowers. 
What does this mean for Canada? 
So  far,  I’ve  been  talking  about  shadow  banking  issues  mainly  from  an  international 
perspective. Now I would like to focus on how these issues apply here at home. In Canada, 
shadow banking is more limited in scale and scope than in other jurisdictions, especially the 
United States, where competitive pressures and regulatory restrictions drove some activities 
out of the banking system. 
Let’s  look  at  some  numbers.  Shadow  banking  in  Canada  represents  about  40  per  cent  of 
activity in the traditional banking sector, down from an average of about 50 per cent during 
the decade before 2008. As a share of GDP, Canadian shadow banking is roughly 40 per 
cent, compared with about 95 per cent in the United States.6  
                                                
4   Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System,  2010,  “The  Role  of  Margin  Requirements  and  Haircuts  in 
Procyclicality,” CGFS Publications No. 36. 
5   Financial  Stability  Board,  2012,  “Securities  Lending  and  Repos:  Market  Overview  and  Financial  Stability 
Issues,” Interim Report of the FSB Workstream on Securities Lending and Repos, 27 April. 
6   See, T. Gravelle, T. Grieder and S. Lavoie, “Monitoring and Assessing Risks in Canada’s Shadow Banking 
Sector,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2013): 55–63.This is a measure of shadow banking 
activities, some of which are undertaken by banks and other regulated financial institutions. This is in contrast 
to  entity-based  measures  reported  by  the  FSB,  which  comprise  only  the  assets  of  institutions  outside  the 
perimeter  of  prudential  regulation.  According  to  the  FSB  definition,  assets  of  shadow  banking  entities  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  composition  of  shadow  banking  is  also  different  in  Canada  than  elsewhere.  One  key 
element  is  repo  markets,  which  are  an  important  funding  market  for  Canadian  financial 
institutions.  Although  repo  markets  are  based  primarily  on  government  securities  involving 
little credit risk, and in most cases at least one of the counterparties is a regulated financial 
institution,  during  the  crisis  they  experienced  the  kind  of  freezes  that  occurred  in  other 
countries. This experience is motivating the move toward central clearing of repos using the 
Canadian Derivatives Clearing Service, which went live last year.7  
A very important element of shadow banking in Canada is the securitization of government-
guaranteed  mortgages,  which  essentially  converts  illiquid  assets  –  mortgages  –  into  more 
liquid, securitized debt instruments. This form of securitization has more than doubled over 
the past five years.8 When mortgage lending is funded by issuing debt securities backed by 
insured  mortgages,  it  moves  mortgage  lending  away  from  its  traditional  on-balance-sheet 
model whereby mortgages are funded by branch-sourced, retail deposits. This represents a 
relatively low-cost form of term funding for financial institutions. Here, a key concern is the 
potential misallocation of resources away from non-mortgage lending toward mortgage credit 
– which, in the current economic environment, contributes to the buildup of imbalances in the 
household sector.9  
Another aspect of the securitization of insured mortgages is the increasing role of specialized 
mortgage-lending institutions. These institutions are not subject to the same level of scrutiny 
as banks and in some instances don’t have access to as stable and diversified sources of 
funding. While their small size suggests that they do not pose systemic risk, they do involve 
elements of shadow banking risk that call for careful monitoring. 
Money-market funds make up a fairly small segment of shadow banking in Canada. At the 
end of 2012, Canadian MMFs had approximately $30 billion of assets under management, 
less  than  half  of the  peak  level  reached  in  2009.  Despite  their  small  size,  the  risk  of  runs 
posed by MMFs still exists and must be managed carefully. 
Coming in from the shadows 
Recognizing  both  the  benefits  and  the  risks  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  we  need  to 
continue working to make it safer. 
Internationally, we are working with our partners in the FSB to develop an integrated set of 
recommendations  that  will  be  presented  at  the  G-20  meetings  in  St.  Petersburg  in 
September. 
The Canadian authorities will need to decide how to implement the reforms that are agreed 
at the global level. Some measures that could be considered include: 
• 
Establishing  consistent  standards  for  how  haircuts  are  set  on  repo  transactions, 
including numerical minimum haircuts for some types of transactions; 
Requiring  that  originating  securitized  products  have  enough  skin  in  the  game  to 
align their incentives better with those of investors; 
                                                                                                                                                    
Canada were 28 percent of GDP in 2011. The measure of traditional bank liabilities consists of gross deposits 
(including longer-term Canadian-dollar unsecured debt), subordinated debt and the foreign currency deposits 
of Canadian residents. 
7   A. Côté. 2013. “Toward a Stronger Financial Market Infrastructure for Canada: Taking Stock.” (speech to the 
Association for Financial Professionals of Canada (Montréal Chapter), Montréal, Quebec, 26 March). 
8   The value of securitized mortgages grew from $160 billion in 2007 to $386 billion at end-2012. 
9   The Bank of Canada’s June 2013 Financial System Review provides an updated assessment of the system-
wide risks associated with household sector imbalances. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   Making  money  market  funds  less  vulnerable  to  runs,  through  an  appropriate 
combination of capital and liquidity requirements, and restrictions on withdrawals; 
Establishing a clear and consistent framework for regulating other shadow banking 
institutions; 
Limiting banks’ exposure to shadow banking activity; and 
Providing the right degree of transparency around many aspects of shadow banking, 
so that market discipline can work better. 
Conclusion 
As I have stressed, shadow banking delivers important benefits to the economy. There is a 
need  for  the  liquidity  and  maturity  transformation,  credit  extension  and  risk  transfer  it 
provides.  In  delivering  these  services,  it  is  healthy  to  have  an  alternative  to  the  traditional 
banking system that provides competition, diversity and innovation. 
At  the  same  time,  reforms  are  needed  to  make  shadow  banking  safer.  Shadow  banking 
should be made less susceptible to run-like behaviour and contagion. Aligning incentives – 
through transparency and appropriate regulation – is also essential. Canada has a stake in 
these reforms, both as a beneficiary of a more resilient global financial system and because 
our own shadow banking activities could be made more robust. 
Since innovation is one of the key benefits of shadow banking, innovation is also a fact of life 
in regulating the sector. Shadow banking has been known to reinvent itself and will continue 
to  do  so  in  response  to  regulation. We  will  need  to  develop  and  adopt  principles  that  are 
broad-based enough to encompass new activities. 
Risk is inherent in the global financial system. We can’t stamp it all out, nor would we want 
to.  Rather,  the  goal  is  to  create  incentives  so  that  risk  is  allocated  and  managed 
appropriately, both in banking and in shadow banking activities, making the entire financial 
system stronger and more resilient. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
