Vítor Constâncio: Deutsche Bank Prize attribution to Raghuram Rajan 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Panel 
on  “Liquidity  and  Monetary  Policy”  at  the  occasion  of  Deutsche  Bank  Prize  attribution  to 
Raghuram Rajan, Frankfurt am Main, 26 September 2013. 
 It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this panel on the occasion of the award of the 
prestigious  Deutsche  Bank  prize  –  and,  in  particular,  to  be  associated  with  this  event 
honouring the work of Raghuram Rajan.  
I became a greater admirer of Raghuram’s work, even if not a wholly uncritical one, after his 
premonitory  paper1  presented  at  the  Jackson  Hole  central  banking  conference  in  2005.  It 
was  a  paper  I  distributed  widely  to  friends  and  colleagues  at  the  time.  But,  of  course, 
Raghuram’s  previous  work  was  also  quite  well  known  –  particularly  his  research  on  the 
theory of banking, on bank capital or liquidity risk, and on liquidity creation by banks with the 
unavoidable financial fragility that this implies2. That research, conducted often with Douglas 
Diamond, fits well with our panel theme today. 
Liquidity has been a somewhat elusive concept ever since Keynes defined it in his Treatise 
on Money in 1930 and Hicks developed it in subsequent work3. Liquidity is a relative concept, 
a matter of degree, and we all start from Keynes’s definition that one asset has more liquidity 
than another if it is “more certainly realizable at short notice without loss,” Here, “realizable” 
means  the  capacity  to  be  exchanged  into  narrow  money  or,  even  better,  into  goods  and 
services. 
Where does the demand for liquidity come from? 
The need for liquidity does not arise in the perfect and utopian world of general equilibrium 
with Arrow’s debt contracts or complete calculable contingent claims. Also, as Hicks pointed 
out,  liquidity  demand  does  not  appear  in  traditional  portfolio  analysis,  which  he  tried  to 
expand by adding a liquidity preference complement. 
But there are many ways of changing the assumptions of perfect general equilibrium analysis 
to  generate  demand  for  liquidity.  For  instance,  Rajan  and  Diamond  (2001)  assume  that 
assets  are  illiquid  and  so  they  “cannot  be  sold  or  borrowed  against  for  the  full  value  they 
generate”4  which  implies  that  there  is  a  demand  for  liquidity.  Jean  Tirole  and  Bengt 
Holmstrom (2011)5 assume that part of future income stream of firms (and the totality of the 
households’  income)  cannot  be  pledged,  meaning  they  cannot  make  their  consumption  or 
production  plans  contingent  on  contracts  that  can  transfer  numeraire  from  one  period  to 
                                                
1  Rajan, Raghuram (2005) “Has financial development made the world riskier?” also as NBER working paper 
n. 11728. 
2  See Rajan Raghuram and Douglas Diamond (2001) “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility: a 
theory  of  banking”  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  Vol  109,  no  2  (April  2001)  and  also  by  the  same  authors 
“Money in a theory of banking” The American economic Review, March 2006, and “Liquidity shortages and 
banking crises", The Journal of Finance, Vol LX, No. 2, April 2005. 
3  J.M.  Keynes  (1930),  Treatise  on  Money,  vol  II,  page  67.  John  R.  Hicks  (1967)  “Critical  essays  in 
monetary theory” Oxford at the Claredon Press and chapter 19 of the “Collected Essays on Economic 
Theory: Money, Interest and Wages (Volume 2), Wiley-Blackwell, 1982, where Hicks’ 1962 speech on 
Liquidity is reproduced and updated. 
4  Rajan Raghuram and Douglas Diamond (2001) “Liquidity risk, liquidity creation and financial fragility: a theory 
of banking” Journal of Political Economy, Vol 109, no 2 (April 2001), page 290. 
5  Bengt Holmstrom and Jean Tirole (2011) “Inside and outside liquidity, The MIT Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
another.  Consequently,  they  must  prepare  for  financial  shocks  and  reinforce  their  liquidity 
position, thus generating a demand for liquidity. 
These  authors  distinguish  between  inside  liquidity  –  created  against  pledgeable  income  – 
and outside liquidity, created by public entities backed by the state capacity to tax present 
and future income. This refers particularly to central banks, but also to the state budget via 
deposit  guarantee  schemes,  occasional  bailouts  or  social  security  programmes.  Outside 
liquidity also includes international cross-border lending.6 
Inside liquidity can be excessive, as we saw before the crisis with the expansion of shadow 
banking and secured lending and repos with repeated re-hypothecation. This is why Adrian 
and Shin (2008)7 question the relevance of monetary and credit aggregates in representing 
the overall liquidity situation, a fact that has clear regulatory implications for shadow banks 
and for the control of leverage. 
Inside liquidity can also be insufficient, as we saw after the crisis when the chain of inside 
liquidity  creation  collapsed,  markets  froze,  fire  sales  reduced  asset  values  and  recession 
expectations affected estimates of future income. That is when public intervention becomes 
necessary to substitute at least part of the liquidity needed to sustain the financial sector and 
economic activity.  
There are also other concepts or perspectives on liquidity that have to be considered in order 
to understand how the term is used – and also because different perspectives are useful for 
different types of analysis. I mention four in particular: 
1. 
First,  macroeconomic  liquidity,  which  refers  to  broad  monetary  and  financial 
conditions  assessed  against  some  idea  about  what  would  be  adequate  to 
non-inflationary growth. These can be measured by quantities, like money or credit 
aggregates growth, or by price, interest rate and the shape of the yield curve.  
Second, market liquidity, which refers to the easiness to buy or sell in monetary and 
financial  markets  without  changing  the  price.  This  depends  on  the  breadth,  depth 
and resilience of the asset markets. 
Third, balance sheet liquidity, which means the volume of liquid assets that can be 
mobilised at short notice. 
Finally, funding liquidity – the possibility of facing liquidity requirements either from 
the  balance  sheet  or  from  committed  credit  lines.  Funding  liquidity  interacts  with 
market  liquidity,  as  Brunnermeier  and  Pedersen  (2008)8  illustrated  for  the  recent 
crisis.  They  demonstrated  the  existence  of  liquidity  spirals  when  both  types  of 
liquidity are mutually reinforcing. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
These  different  concepts  are  of  course  all  related  and  are  considered  in  different  degrees 
and forms by monetary authorities. 
With these definitions in mind, we can now ask ourselves how to assess the present liquidity 
situation in Europe and the US. Some observers tend to look only at the provision of official 
liquidity by central banks, and then to claim that “the world is awash with liquidity” or to write 
that high inflation is around the corner – something that is encouraged by gold bugs. 
                                                
6  The  inside/outside  liquidity  concepts  do  not  completely  overlap  with  the  distinction  between  private  and 
official  liquidity,  because  outside  liquidity  at  country  level  includes  cross-border  liquidity  flows  which  are 
provided normally by private institutions. 
7  See,  among  other  texts,  Tobias  Adrian  and  Hyun  Song  Shin  (2006)  “Money,  liquidity  and  financial  cycles” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2008) “Liquidity and Leverage” 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports. 
8  Markus K. Brunnermeier and Lasse H. Pedersen (2009) “Market liquidity and funding liquidity” The Review of 
Financial Studies, Vol 22, no 6. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Yet  these  observers  often  overlook  that  we  cannot  assess  in  isolation  the  evolution  of the 
monetary base. Banks are deleveraging and inside and private liquidity are shrinking. This 
means that credit and money multipliers have collapsed. Indeed, if we look at total liquidity in 
Europe we see that credit is decreasing and monetary aggregates are increasing now close 
to nominal GDP.  
Regarding  price  indicators,  developments  in  output,  unemployment  and  inflation  in  the 
market  of  goods  and  services  do  not  indicate  a  situation  of  total  excessive  liquidity.  The 
ECB’s staff projections estimate inflation for next year at 1.3%, which is below and not very 
close to 2%. A negative output gap and high unemployment indicate that the full employment 
equilibrium real interest rate should be more negative, which is impossible to achieve as we 
approach the nominal zero bound.  
So much for the market of goods and services – what about asset markets?  
It is true that nominal interest rates have been low for quite a while, which creates some risks 
for asset markets. We observed, prior to the crisis and during the period of the mislabelled 
Great Moderation, a disconnect between asset prices and inflation in the market for goods 
and services. In February this year in a noted speech9, Jeremy Stein raised the possibility of 
this  happening  again  as  search  for  yield  by  financial  institutions  was  beginning  to  affect 
prices  in  some  riskier  asset  classes  –  such  as  covenant–lite  loans,  REITs,  junk  and  high 
yield bonds. 
What I like in his analysis is that he abandons the textbooks’ fiction that asset prices depend 
only  on  the  behaviour  and  preferences  of  final  consumers  as  investors.  Instead,  he 
introduces  an  “institution-driven”  analysis,  making  prices  dependent  on  the  incentive 
frameworks of managers in searching for yield (and bonus). This is exactly what Raghuram 
did in his 2005 paper. 
It  is  indeed  important  to  consider  institutions’  behaviour  –  think  for  instance  about  the 
structural  trend  of  banks  and  dealers  to  reduce  their  inventories  of  bonds,  and  how  the 
consequent reduction of liquidity in the secondary market may affect volatility, overshooting 
and price spikes. 
Pointing to the responsibility of low interest rates in creating such incentives, Jeremy asks 
cautiously: “… would one really want to raise rates, and risk choking off economic activity? 
Wouldn’t it be better to use a more narrowly focused supervisory or regulatory approach with 
less potential for damage to the economy?”  
Considering the limitations of macroprudential policies in dealing with asset price booms, he 
did not want to exclude forever the possibility of using monetary policy to help do the job. I 
too  recognise  that  monetary  policy  cannot  ignore  financial  stability  considerations.  In 
situations of high credit growth that threaten to create asset price bubbles, I have endorsed 
the  possibility  of  a  “leaning  against  the  wind”  approach  to  monetary  policy.  Excesses  in 
credit, leverage and asset prices invariably lead to crises and endanger medium term price 
stability.  
However, the situation today is different. None of the phenomena identified by Jeremy for the 
US are really present. Moreover, the institutional changes after the crisis have enhanced the 
instruments  of  macroprudential  policy  and,  I  am  confident,  reinforced  policymakers’ 
disposition to apply them. In my view, macroprudential policies must therefore be tried in a 
serious way, as a priority. We should recognise that monetary policy cannot do everything 
and  is  already  too  much  burdened  with  maintaining  price  stability,  providing  adequate 
liquidity to the banking sector and, in the US, with maintaining low unemployment.  
                                                
9  Jeremy C. Stein “Overheating in credit markets, origins, measurement and policy responses” February 2013, 
speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
I consider that in Europe the ECB has been managing liquidity adequately in the pursuance 
of our goal of ensuring price stability on a medium-term basis – and when that is ensured, 
catering for financial stability, output and employment. 
Nevertheless,  when  risks  to  inflation  subside  or  disappear,  the  traditional  role  of  central 
banks as Lenders of Last Resort (LOLR) tends to come to the fore, and we have to be aware 
of  the  moral  hazard  that  this  can  create  –  for  example  banks  becoming  permanently 
dependent  on  central  bank  money  to  operate.  This  consideration  adds  to  the  rationale 
justifying the two liquidity ratios that have been introduced as part of the Basel III agreement, 
which will make banks better prepared to face liquidity stresses. 
How has the crisis affected the way the ECB conducts its liquidity operations? 
In normal times, modern central banks manage their provision of primary liquidity with a view 
to achieving their target for a short term market rate – normally, the overnight rate. 
The ECB, like most other modern central banks, conducts monetary policy with mandatory 
remunerated reserves and a corridor around the policy rate defined by two standing facilities. 
This  means that  the  signal  of  one  particular  policy  rate  can  coexist  with  different  levels  of 
bank reserves – so long as our “liquidity management operations” ensure that the liquidity 
provided is neither excessive nor insufficient in relation to the demand by profit maximising 
banks that react to the opportunity cost of reserves. 
What matters for managing liquidity is the targeted policy rate and the amount of liquidity that 
is necessary to achieve it. In our case, we keep the banking sector in a liquidity deficit and 
supply liquidity via lending to the banks through a system of auctions. Other central banks 
supply  liquidity  mostly  through  outright  purchases  of  securities,  normally  short-term 
government paper. 
Both models of liquidity provision have changed during the crisis. In the case of the US, the 
Federal  Reserve  started  to  buy  longer  maturities  and  some  private  paper.  In  our  case,  in 
October 2008 we abandoned the system of auctions with variable rates and entered a mode 
of fixed rate, full allotment – supplying as much liquidity as banks’ demanded, provided they 
had eligible collateral to pledge. 
On top of this, in December 2011 and February 2012, we launched extraordinary operations 
with 3-year maturities that totalled 1 trillion euro. The net increase in our monetary base was 
around 500 billion euro as banks reduced their use of shorter maturity facilities.  
Our particular method of supplying primary liquidity makes the future absorption of liquidity in 
excess  of  the  minimum  reserve  requirements  easy  to  achieve.  Banks  have  to  repay  what 
they have borrowed when maturity is reached. In reality, as their situation has improved, they 
are anticipating the repayment of the LTROs. They have repaid 362 billion euro (or 64% of 
the net increase of 500 billion euro) and excess liquidity, which reached a peak of 813 billion 
euro  in  March  2012,  has  now  fallen  to  218  billion  euro. We  have  been  exiting  quietly  and 
smoothly from an extraordinary phase of high central bank liquidity provision.  
However,  this  new  mode  of  conducting  monetary  policy  also  presents  challenges.  As  the 
overnight  market  rate  is  determined  by  the  volume  of  excess  liquidity  and  the  size  of  the 
corridor between the policy rate and the deposit facility rate, it is more difficult to influence its 
level – and correspondingly, to influence other short term money market rates. For instance, 
if excess liquidity keeps declining, as determined by the banks, there may be pressure on 
short rates to increase.  
To this picture we also have to add the international dimension – notably the risk of spillovers 
from  the  US.  We  already  saw  that  the  announcement  of  a  tapering  of  outright  purchases 
resulted in higher money market rates in Europe. 
In  this  overall  context,  we  decided  to  introduce  an  important  change  in  our  policy, 
announcing a form of forward guidance. We stated that we will keep our key interest rates at 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
present  or  lower  levels  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  dependent  on  our  assessment  of 
medium-term prospects for inflation. 
It  should  be  noted  that,  although  compatible  with  our  monetary  policy  framework,  this 
represents a real innovation in our instruments. It is conditional, it has a negative bias and 
this  forward  guidance  will  change  only  when  we  change  our  assessment  of  the  impact  of 
economic and monetary conditions on inflation prospects. 
The new policy has already produced visible effects: the whole forward curve of euro rates 
up  to  two  years  came  down  immediately  after  our  announcement.  Although  it  has  in  the 
meantime increased somewhat, it remains stabilised at levels lower than we saw before our 
announcement.  For  the  future,  we  are  as  usual  data-dependent  –  but  if  declining  excess 
liquidity were to put undue upward pressure on short-term rates, we would have to address 
this problem. 
We still have several policy instruments available in our toolbox and will use them as needed. 
We  will  continue  to  manage  liquidity  conditions  so  as  to  maintain  a  stable  monetary  and 
economic environment that ensures our main goal of medium-term inflation below but close 
to 2%.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
