Dimitar Bogov: Macedonia’s Needs Analysis Report concerning 
accession to the European System of Central Bank and the Eurosystem 
Address by Mr Dimitar Bogov, Governor of the National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, 
on  the  occasion  of  the  closing  of  the  IPA  project  “Needs  Analysis  Programme”  with  the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia, Skopje, 10 July 2013. 
 Dear Mr. Asmusen, member of the Executive Board of the ECB 
Dear Mr. Orav, EU Ambassador to the Republic of Macedonia 
Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, media representatives, 
It is my great pleasure to inform you that today, at the meeting of the Steering Committee of 
the joint EU-funded project with the European Central Bank on the NBRM Needs Analysis in 
the process of its accession to the European System of Central Banks and the Eurosystem, 
we  adopted  the  final  Report,  the  Needs  Analysis  Report.  Thus,  I  may  conclude  that  the 
project, whose implementation took nine months, ended successfully. 
The  success  is  primarily  due  to  the  commitment  to  the  project  and  the  good  cooperation 
among all stakeholders over the past nine months. So, let me first express my gratitude to 
the  ECB,  with  which  we  jointly  initiated  and  organized  this  collaboration,  to  the  national 
central banks of the European System of Central Banks and to their experts who participated 
and  were  directly  involved  in  the  implementation  of  the  project,  as  well  as  to  the 
EU Delegation in our country for their support throughout the project duration and of course 
for providing financial assistance to ensure the implementation of the project. Also I would 
like  to  stress  the  benefit  for  the  NBRM  from  the  extraordinary  collaboration  with  the 
representatives of the ECB and of the national central banks of the Eurosystem. 
Considering the role of the central bank in the country's accession to the EU, the National 
Bank  of  the  Republic  of  Macedonia  has  initiated  this  project  in  order  to  prepare  for  future 
membership in the European System of Central Banks and the Eurosystem. The road to the 
EU is a process that requires from us to build strong and effective institutions. This project 
has  exactly  that  aim:  strengthening  the  institutional  capacity  of  the  National  Bank  and 
harmonization of the standards for the national central banks in the EU by means of revising 
the current legal framework, the adoption and implementation of new policies and practices 
and staff training. 
The  implementation  of  European  standards  and  best  practices  in  the  operations  of  the 
NBRM  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  will  contribute  to  strengthening  of  the  role  of  the  National 
Bank in ensuring price stability and the stability and efficiency of the financial system in the 
country, as well as strengthening the capacity of the National Bank in meeting the challenges 
that lie ahead on the road to the accession of the Republic of Macedonia into the EU. 
Let  me  discuss  briefly  the  results  and  significance  of  the  project  in  relation  to  the  further 
operation of the National Bank. 
The first and most important benefit of the project is the set of relevant findings of the experts 
on the existing gaps, and the recommendations for their overcoming within time frame and 
resources needed. In this regard, the Needs Analysis Report will be the basis for strategic 
planning  of  the  National  Bank  and  for  setting  the  future  strategy  for  joining  the  European 
System of Central Banks and the Eurosystem. 
With  great  pleasure  I  would  point  out  that  in  the  Report,  the  NBRM  is  regarded  as  a 
professional,  independent,  technically  efficient  and  strategically  oriented  institution,  and  in 
some areas of central banking it is noted that it already operates in accordance with EU and 
ESCB  standards.  Also  I  am  pleased  to  say  that  some  recommendations  that  were  given 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
during  the  project  have  already  been  implemented,  which  encourages  me  to  confirm  our 
strong commitment for implementing and applying the recommendations given in the Report. 
I would like to assure you that depending on the nature of the recommendations, some will 
be  implemented  in  a  short  period  of  time,  while  others  will  take  more  time  and  additional 
technical  and  human  resources,  and  of  course,  further  technical  assistance  in  terms  of 
experience and knowledge of the ECB and the national central banks of the EU. 
It is the creation of opportunities for further cooperation that I consider the second important 
benefit  for  the  National  Bank  from  the  implementation  of  this  project.  Namely,  the  project 
involved a number of experts from various areas of central banking from the ECB and from 
11 central banks of the European System of Central Banks. In the past nine months they had 
intensive  communication  and  cooperation  with  their  counterparts  in  the  NBRM  and 
conducted a total of 16 assessment missions within which they unselfishly transferred their 
whole experience and knowledge. The implementation of the project, further contributed to 
increasing the awareness and knowledge of the NBRM staff in the relevant EU regulations, 
standards and practices applied by modern central banks. 
Hence, I would especially like to emphasize the future prospects of our mutual cooperation 
that will hopefully continue in the same spirit and will further deepen. 
Finally, let me once again emphasize my satisfaction and give the credit for the successful 
implementation of the project, to the resident programme coordinator from the ECB, and to 
all  participating  experts  from  the  ECB,  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  and  the 
National Bank of the Republic of Macedonia.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
