Joachim Nagel: The internationalisation of the renminbi 
Speech by Dr Joachim Nagel, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Chamber of Industry and Commerce (IHK) Conference on the “Internationalisation of 
the Renminbi – Opportunities for Frankfurt”, Frankfurt am Main, 3 July 2013. 
 Welcome 
1 
Dear Dr Raettig, 
Dear Ambassador Shi, 
Dear Minister Rentsch, 
Dear Dr Schuknecht, 
Dear Mr Ji, 
Ladies and gentlemen 
First of all, I would like to thank you for inviting me to speak at today’s  conference on the 
“Internationalisation of the Renminbi – Opportunities for Frankfurt”. I am pleased to have this 
opportunity  to  discuss  the  internationalisation  of  one  of  the  most  interesting  currencies  at 
present. 
Since its accession to the World Trade Organisation in 2001, China’s GDP has been growing 
at  an  average  rate  of  10%  each  year.  At  the  same  time,  China  has  hugely  expanded  its 
volume  of  foreign  trade,  overtaking  Germany  in  2009  as  the  world’s  foremost  exporter. 
Thanks  to  its  continued  current  account  surpluses,  the  People’s  Republic  of  China  has 
accumulated  the  largest  foreign  currency  reserves  in  the  world  at  USD  3.4  trillion.  The 
country’s sheer economic size and its manifold trade relationships all over the world, as well 
as the appeal of participating in its fascinating growth, awaken a desire to invest in China and 
in its currency. 
A survey among reserve managers revealed that 14% of respondents have already invested 
in the renminbi. Of those surveyed, 37% indicated that they were considering investing in the 
currency in the next 5 to 10 years.1 Given the growing significance of non-traditional reserve 
currencies, there is certainly a demand for renminbi as an investment currency. 
All  of  us,  whether  we  are  representatives  from  industry  or  politics,  private  or  institutional 
investors,  have  become  intrigued  by  this  remarkable  process.  The  development  of  the 
currency reminds many of us perhaps of Germany’s economic miracle, but of course on a 
much smaller scale. In the early 1950s, Germany experienced an unprecedented economic 
upturn,  which  led  it  to  accumulate  a  large  volume  of  foreign  exchange  reserves  and 
eventually bestowed upon the Deutsche Mark the status of a global investment and reserve 
currency.  The  renminbi  is  certain  to  have  similar  long-term  prospects  if  market  access  is 
liberalised further. 
The internationalisation of the renminbi 
2 
The further opening of the Chinese market is therefore one of the central objectives of the 
government’s current five-year plan. Its goals include promoting foreign direct investment in 
renminbi, supporting domestic banks in issuing renminbi-denominated loans outside of China 
                                                
1  RBS (2013), RBS Reserve Management Trends 2012, Central Banking Publications. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
and  facilitating  the  gradual  development  of  cross-border  renminbi  settlement  for  private 
investors. 
Additionally,  Hong  Kong’s  role  as  a  renminbi  offshore  centre  has  been  further  bolstered. 
Already, over 10,000 banks worldwide are offering their customers the opportunity to settle 
transactions in renminbi, a remarkable increase from just over 900 banks in June 2011.2  
Although international use of renminbi – approximately 0.69% of all transactions worldwide 
are  currently  settled  in  renminbi3  –  does  not  reflect  China’s  economic  prowess  at  present, 
with its increasing convertibility, the currency has the potential to become one of the future 
global reserve currencies. 
Cross-border  use  of  a  currency  depends  on  many  factors,  one  significant factor  being  the 
size of the economy, both in terms of gross domestic product and trading activities. It is also 
essential that investors have confidence in the monetary and fiscal policy of the economy in 
question,  as  well  as  its  legal  framework.  Moreover,  the  breadth,  depth  and  liquidity  of  the 
domestic financial market play a decisive role. 
Reserve currencies usually undergo a multi-stage internationalisation process, starting as a 
trading  currency,  developing  into  an  investment  currency  and  finally  becoming  a  reserve 
currency. These stages were also evident in the development of the Deutsche Mark. 
The  introduction  of the Deutsche  Mark  in  1948  set  the  stage for  the  rapid  recovery  of  the 
German  economy  after  the  Second  World  War;  this  was  followed  by  Germany’s 
“Wirtschaftswunder”  in  the  1950s  and  1960s.  With  the  introduction  of  the  Bretton  Woods 
system, the Deutsche Mark’s exchange rate was pegged to the US dollar. In this system of 
fixed exchange rates, Germany’s frequent current account surpluses manifested in growing 
gold and foreign currency reserves at the Deutsche Bundesbank. 
What stage is the renminbi at now? 
The  renminbi  is  a  fundamental  factor  in  China’s  economic  development  and  plays  an 
important role in the Chinese boom. In 1994, China decided to peg its currency to the US 
dollar. By fixing the exchange rate, China bolstered its export-driven growth strategy. In July 
2005, the People’s Bank of China moved away from the dollar peg and fixed the renminbi’s 
exchange rate to a trade-weighted currency basket. The widening of the fluctuation range in 
April 2012 from +/–0.5% to +/–1% further advanced the process of liberalising the exchange 
rate.  Despite  the  global  financial  crisis,  China’s  real  economy  continued  to  grow  strongly 
even  after  2008.  And  since  2009  in  particular,  China’s  continued  high  current  account 
surpluses have led to a further expansion in its foreign currency reserves. 
Summing  up  at  this  stage,  it  is  clear  that  the  internationalisation  process  of  the  Chinese 
currency is taking place more gradually than was the case with the Deutsche Mark, which, at 
times, was subject to radical upheaval, such as the collapse of the Bretton Woods system 
and the EMS crisis in the early 1990s. 
Although the US dollar has been the most commonly used currency for China’s trade up to 
now, use of the renminbi has increased a great deal over the last few years. Between 2010 
and  2012,  the  percentage  of  trading  transactions  settled  in  renminbi  has  jumped  from 
virtually zero to around 12%, and is likely to increase further.4 As a result of the currency’s 
                                                
2  HSBC Global Research, The rise of the Redback II (März 2013). 
3  SWIFT RMB Tracker (Mai 2013): Abrufbar unter: http://www.swift.com/products_services/renminbi_reports. 
4  SWIFT (2013): The complicated Path of RMB Internationalisation, abrufbar unter: http://www.swiftinstitute.org/ 
newsletters/the-complicated-path-of-rmb-internationalisation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
growing  use  in  foreign  trade,  international  renminbi  deposits  in  Hong  Kong  have  also 
increased considerably to over 670 billion renminbi (approximately EUR 83 billion).5 
To come back to my question at what stage is the renminbi now? We can ascertain that the 
renminbi has already achieved the first step and become a trading currency. Because of the 
capital controls still in place, the renminbi is currently in transition from being a pure trading 
currency to being an investment currency. While both inward and outward direct investment 
is  now  possible,  portfolio  investments  will  continue  to  be  regulated.  Nonetheless,  China 
intends to further develop existing initiatives in this area. 
What  opportunities  will  be  opened  up  to  China  and  the  renminbi  by  having  an  offshore 
market, which clearly sets the renminbi apart from other freely tradable currencies? 
The Chinese government established the offshore renminbi market to expedite the transition 
from being a currency purely intended for trading to an investment currency. By taking this 
roundabout  approach,  China  is  able  to  establish  its  currency  internationally  and  protect  its 
domestic financial system at the same time, until the government deems the capital market 
to have sufficient breadth and depth for a complete liberalisation. From demand side, China’s 
growing economic importance and its manifold trade and investment relationships has led to 
a  steadily  growing  need  around  the  world  for  renminbi  transactions.  Due  to  the  capital 
controls  still  in  place,  the  only  opportunity  to  participate  in  the  internationalisation  of  the 
renminbi is via the offshore market. 
Offshore centres: opportunities for Frankfurt as a financial centre 
3 
In the past, the internationalisation of major currencies always coincided with the growth of a 
country’s economic power. In the 19th century, between 60% and 90% of international trade 
was conducted in British pounds. After the Second World War, the  US dollar overtook the 
pound as the most important investment and reserve currency. In 1999, the euro followed in 
the footsteps of European currencies and with that the Deutsche Mark. Today, the euro is the 
second most important investment and reserve currency after the dollar. 
Given China’s growing economic importance, the internationalisation of the renminbi seems 
long  overdue.  The  Chinese  government  has  been  actively  promoting  this  process  since 
2009. The unique separation of the onshore and offshore currency market, in particular, will 
facilitate  the  transition  from  a  currency  purely  intended  for  trade  to  an  investment,  and 
potentially, a reserve currency. 
The  Chinese  government  chose  Hong  Kong  as  the  first  offshore  centre  but  limited  the 
volume of liquidity allocated to the market. Almost 80% of offshore renminbi trade is currently 
settled in Hong Kong.6 Based on the positive experience to date, China plans to extend the 
currency’s offshore market. 
After  the  positive  experiences  with  Hong  Kong,  other  financial  centres  are  now  becoming 
more important for the renminbi, too. Since July 2012, around 4% of renminbi trade has been 
conducted  both  in  London  and  in  Singapore.7  Singapore  and  Taipei  have  both  been 
strengthened  by  the  appointment  of  a  Chinese  commercial  bank  as  a  clearing  bank  for 
renminbi transactions in their respective financial centres.Frankfurt, too, is trying to establish 
itself as a renminbi trading centre in Europe. The Bundesbank welcomes all these initiatives 
and  sees them  as  a  step  in  the  right  direction, towards  the free movement  of  capital. The 
                                                
5  HKMA 
(2013):  Monthly  Statistical  Bulletin 
(June  2013  – 
Issue  No.  226),  abrufbar  unter: 
http://www.hkma.gov.hk/eng/market-data-and-statistics/monthly-statistical-bulletin/table.shtml. 
6  SWIFT Value Analyser (Oktober 2012). 
7  SWIFT Value Analyser (Oktober 2012). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
high  level  of  interaction  between  China’s  and  Germany’s  real  economies  highlights  the 
necessity for a more active renminbi trade, perhaps even using Germany as a hub. 
I would like to conclude with this ideas and l look forward to discussing with you the potential 
in  and  for  Frankfurt  as  a  financial  centre  for  renminbi,  and  perhaps  at  the  end  of  our 
discussion, we will be able to answer the question together as to what opportunities this may 
hold for Frankfurt. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
