Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Uganda’s Primary Dealer System 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Annual Primary Dealer Award Ceremony, Kampala, 31 January 2013. 
 Distinguished Guests  
Chief Executive Officers of Primary Dealer Banks  
Members of the Press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Good Afternoon  
It is my pleasure and honor to welcome you to this ceremony, at which we will recognize the 
best performing Primary Dealer in Uganda Government Securities in 2012.  
Introduced in 2003, the main objective of the Primary Dealer System is to promote financial 
markets development and to reduce the costs associated with issuing government securities, 
by:  
1) 
2) 
Increasing demand for government securities;  
Increasing  market  efficiency,  thereby  making  government  securities  easier  to  buy 
and sell;  
Encouraging secondary market trading of government securities, and;  
Improving the quality of market information that is shared amongst the participants 
and with the Central Bank.  
3) 
4) 
By  and  large,  the  Primary  Dealer  (PD)  model,  that  requires  all  investors  in  government 
securities to access the primary market through a PD, is proving successful in achieving its 
objectives. In particular, the PDs have contributed to the growth of the securities market by 
ensuring high and consistent demand for securities at the primary auctions. Over the last five 
years, most of the primary auctions for government securities have been oversubscribed by 
large  margins,  with  the  auction  bid-coverage  ratio  for  both  Treasury  bills  and  bonds 
averaging  more  than  200  percent,  which  is  an  indication  of  the  strong  demand  for 
government debt by investors.  
The  Primary  Dealers  have  also  contributed  to  the  growth  of  the  secondary  market  in 
government  securities  by  quoting  effective  two-way  prices.  The  ratio  of  secondary  market 
turnover  to  the  stock  of  outstanding  securities  increased  from  35  percent  in  2011  to 
58 percent in 2012, which reflects the increasing buoyancy of the secondary market.  
Despite  the  progress  we  have  made  in  developing  the  government  securities  market  in 
Uganda, we will not rest on our laurels. Instead the Bank of Uganda, in collaboration with all 
of  the  stakeholders,  is  implementing  further  reforms  to  enhance  market  efficiency, 
transparency and competition. These reforms include the following:  
i) 
ii) 
The  process  of  upgrading  the  Reuters  system  to  allow  real  time  reporting  and 
viewing of market activity – thereby enhancing market transparency and minimizing 
price  distortions  –  is  in  the  final  stages  of  implementation.  The  first  stage  of  the 
upgrade,  involving  10  commercial  banks,  is  expected  to  be  ready  by  the  end  of 
March  of  this  year  and the  second  stage,  involving  all  of the remaining banks,  by 
June.  
The enhanced Central Securities Depository (CSD) system is in the final stages of 
user acceptance testing. Among the envisaged benefits from the CSD to the market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
iii) 
iv) 
v) 
participants will be electronic bidding, trading and reporting. We hope that the CSD 
can go live in April of this year.  
The securities pricing matrix that will provide a yield curve for all on-the-run and off-
the-run government securities has been finalized and will shortly be posted daily on 
the BOU website and on the Reuters information system. Generating a daily yield 
curve will require the PDs to provide two-way secondary market price quotes in a 
timely manner.  
The  BOU  is  working  closely  with  Ministry  of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic 
Development to improve the predictability of government debt issuance through the 
introduction  of  a  bond  calendar  and  to  further  improve  market  liquidity  by  issuing 
benchmark bonds.  
The consultative process on debt market reforms is still ongoing. We expect that this 
will lead to the introduction of Non-bank Broker/Dealers in the securities market and 
that this will boost the retail end of the market  
Before  I  announce  the  winner  of  the  Primary  Dealer  of  the  Year  award,  I  want  to  explain 
briefly how  we determine the winner. Each of the PDs is graded in five categories: i) their 
contribution to the volume of bids in the primary market; ii) the volume of bids they bring to 
the auction from other investors who are not PDs; iii) the competitiveness of their pricing in 
the primary market; iv) their market share in the secondary market for securities and in the 
repo market; and v) their contribution to the market intelligence which is provided to the BOU 
and which is valuable in helping us to manage liquidity and plan debt issues. The contribution 
of each PD to the primary and secondary market is deflated by the size of its balance sheet, 
to ensure that size alone cannot guarantee that a PD will win the award.  
I  now  come  to  the  announcement  of  the  winner  of  the  2012  Primary  Dealer  of  the  Year 
Award. The winner is Stanbic Bank, mainly on account of its contribution to the volume of 
bids in the primary market, the competitiveness of its pricing in the auctions and the market 
intelligence it has supplied to the BOU. I would now like to invite the Managing Director to 
receive the award.  
Congratulations to Stanbic Bank and thank you for listening.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
