Yaseen Anwar: Developing non-bank financial models while addressing 
the risks of shadow banking 
Address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the  SECP 
(Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  of  Pakistan)  Conference  on  “Non-bank  financial 
institutions”, Karachi, 4 March 2013. 
 Mr. Muhammad Ali, Chairman, SECP, 
Distinguished Speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen – Good Afternoon! 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  SECP  for  inviting  me  to  join  you  and  address  this  very  timely 
conference  on  Non-Bank  Financial  Institutions  (NBFIs).  I  congratulate  the  organizers  for 
holding  this  pertinent  event  which  has  gained  special  prominence  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
global financial  crisis. I sincerely  hope  that today’s  session  will  give  further  impetus  to  our 
efforts in promoting NBFIs as an alternative source of funding for businesses and also as a 
separate class of assets for investors in the country, adding to the financial sector’s diversity, 
stability and viability in the long-run. 
Globally,  NBFIs  have  gained  a  prominent  position  and  role  in  the  financial  sector  and 
economy. However, the role of this sector has recently been scrutinized for its contribution to 
financial sector fragility during the recent global financial crises. Therefore, at the November 
2010 G20 Seoul Summit, while reviewing the new capital standards for banks (Basel III), the 
G20 Leaders identified some remaining issues of financial sector regulation that warranted 
attention. They highlighted “strengthening regulation and supervision of shadow banking” as 
one of these issues and requested the Financial Stability Board (FSB), in collaboration with 
other  international  standard  setting  bodies,  develop  recommendations  to  strengthen  the 
oversight and regulation of the “shadow banking system”. 
The “shadow banking system” is defined as “the system of credit intermediation that involves 
entities  and  activities  outside  the  regular  banking  system”  in  other  words  intermediation 
through non-banks. The term started to be used widely at the onset of the recent financial 
crisis.  The  emergence  of  the  term  reflected  recognition  of  the  increased  importance  of 
entities  and  activities  structured  outside  the  regular  banking  system  that  perform  bank-like 
functions.1 
The  financial  sector  in  Pakistan  comprises  of  Commercial  Banks,  Development  Finance 
Institutions (DFIs), Microfinance Banks (MFBs), Non-banking Finance Companies (NBFCs) 
(leasing  companies,  Investment  Banks,  Discount  Houses,  Housing  Finance  Companies, 
Venture  Capital  Companies,  Mutual  Funds),  Modarabas,  Stock  Exchange  and  Insurance 
Companies. Under the prevailing legislative structure the supervisory responsibilities in case 
of  Banks,  Development  Finance  Institutions  (DFIs),  and  Microfinance  Banks  (MFBs)  falls 
within  legal  ambit  of  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  while  the  rest  of  the  financial  institutions  are 
monitored by other authorities such as Securities and Exchange Commission and Controller 
of Insurance. 
In  Pakistan,  while  the  overall  assets  of  the  financial  sector  have  increased  from 
Rs. 5.202 trillion  in  2005  to  Rs.  11.107  trillion  in  2011,  the  share  of  the  financial  sector  in 
terms of GDP is very  low at 57.4 percent. In 2011, Banks held 74 percent of the financial 
assets  while  the  share  of  NBFIs  was  only  4.7  percent  of  the  total  financial  sector  assets 
which  was  around  7.6  percent  in  2005.  The  low  financial  sector  to  GDP  ratio  and  NBFIs 
                                                
1  Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues: A Background Note of the Financial Stability Board, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
declining  share  in  financial  sector  assets  clearly  underscores  the  need  for  financial  sector 
development  and  diversification  of  financial  sector  assets  to  attract  investors  with  different 
return  expectations  and  risk  appetite  and  channelize  financial  resources  for  the  economic 
development of the country. Therefore, today’s conference is very important and we should 
use  this  opportunity  to  understand  the  key  bottlenecks  in  the  way  of  financial  sector 
development and also come up with concrete measures to address these shortcomings in a 
sustainable manner. 
Alan Greenspan identified the role of NBFIs in strengthening an economy, as they provide 
“multiple alternatives to transform an economy’s savings into capital investment [which] act 
as backup facilities should the primary form of intermediation fail”.2 On the other hand, the 
NBFIs  offer  an  alternative  to  typical  commercial  banking  saving-investment  products. 
However,  in  Pakistan,  NBFIs  other  than  Investment  banks  and  leasing  companies  which 
offer  saving  and  investment  products  on  a  relatively  small  spectrum  need  to  develop 
appropriate and affordable products to increase its market share. The key negative outcome 
of  this  is  that  there  remains  limited  access  to  funding  resources  and  relatively  higher  risk 
avenues to earn spreads. 
Here I would like to briefly touch on the major constraints that the NBFI sector in Pakistan is 
beset with: 
First, although there has been an increasing effort by NBFIs to broaden the range of their 
business activities and product base, thereby diversifying their revenue streams, the sector is 
yet to make a breakthrough in this regard. 
Second, the sector is fragmented and each NBFI is trying to create its niche market in pursuit 
of  establishing  a  sustainable  revenue  stream.  In  this  regard,  most  companies  are 
concentrating on financial advisory and other fee-based income segments. Unfortunately, the 
sector is yet to capitalize on the huge opportunities offered by previously relatively untapped 
areas  like  SMEs,  Consumer,  and  Agriculture  segments  to  enhance  avenues  for  fund 
deployment. 
Third, the sector needs to develop and diversify sources of funding for sustainable growth. 
This would require a shift from the traditional sources such as commercial banks credit lines 
etc for on lending to clients. The NBFIs need to develop capital market instruments to pool 
funds from a diverse set of investors to ensure certainty to the source and cost of funding. 
Fourth,  we  need  to  strengthen  the  oversight  and  regulation  of  NBFIs  to  reduce  the  risks 
emanating from “shadow banking”. As observed by FSB, the objective of this exercise should 
be  to  ensure  that  shadow  banking  is  subject  to  appropriate  oversight  and  regulation  to 
address  bank-like  risks  to  financial  stability  emerging  outside  the  regular  banking  system 
while not inhibiting sustainable non-bank financing models that do not pose such risks.3 The 
measures articulated today adhere those very regulatory issues going forward. 
In conclusion, I would like to say that the financial system in Pakistan is yet to grow to its full 
potential  and  play  a  more  meaningful  role  in  the  economic  development  of  the  country. 
Therefore,  we  definitely  need  to  add  to  its  diversification  and  depth.  NBFIs  can  play  a 
meaningful role in this pursuit. In light of the global financial crises, we are better informed 
about the various risks that the NBFIs/Shadow Banking carries with it. As regulators we need 
to  remain  vigilant  to  ensure  that  those  risks  are  mitigated  without  inhibiting  sustainable 
non-banking financing models. 
Thank you. 
                                                
2  FRB: Speech, Greenspan – Do efficient financial markets mitigate crises? – October 19, 1999 
3  FSB  Consultative  Document:  Strengthening  Oversight  and  Regulation  of  Shadow  Banking  –  An  Integrated 
Overview of Policy Recommendations, 2012. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
