Deepak Mohanty: Indian inflation puzzle 
Acceptance speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, 
in  the  function  of  Late  Dr  Ramchandra  Parnerkar  Outstanding  Economics  Award  2013, 
Mumbai, 31 January 2013. 
 The assistance provided by Praggya Das and Abhiman Das in preparation of the speech is acknowledged. 
Respected dignitaries on the dais: Advocate V. R. Parnerkar, Advocate Laxmikant Parnerkar, 
Shri  Pradip  Palnitkar,  Shri  Mohan  Tanksale,  Justice  Mhase,  Dr. S. N.  Pathan  and 
Dr. Ashutosh Raravikar; Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is indeed my honour that Late Dr. Ramchandra Parnerkar Outstanding Economics Award 
for 2013 has been bestowed upon me. I thank the Poornawad Charitable Trust and its Life 
Management Institute for this recognition. It is heartening to see that over the last so many 
years,  the  Trust  has  taken  up  the  mission  of  people’s  welfare  and  is  working  towards 
enrichment of our life through various social service activities, inspired by the life and mission 
of Dr. Parnerkar. 
Vidvat  Ratna  Dr.  R.  P.  Parnerkar  (1916–1980)  was  a  great  philosopher  and  thinker.  He 
recognised  that  human  beings  require  incentive  for  action.  At  the  same  time,  they  need 
emotional support to tie over adversities and sustain their effort. He was a Karma Yogi. He 
used to say, “Only singing the praise of the God without putting in efforts would not lead you 
anywhere.  Master  is  like  electricity  and  disciple  is  like  a  bulb.  A  bulb  with  broken  filament 
cannot experience the illumination from electricity.” 
Dr. Parnerkar put forth his economic and philosophical thought, which he termed Poornawad. 
It says that matter and the mind are manifestations of only one and the same reality which he 
called  Poorna.  The  economic  doctrine  revolves  around  the  central  idea  of  food  as  a 
fundamental  human  right.  He  believed  that  as  long  as  a  person  has  to  earn  his  food  at 
somebody else’s wishes, humanity would always remain in doldrums. He believed that free 
food will not make people indolent as multiple other needs would make him toil. 
The problems of food security, poverty and unemployment, which were close to his heart, are 
the burning issues even today. The Food Security Bill as introduced in the Parliament by the 
Government  in  a  way  comes  close  to  that  dream  of  Dr.  Parnerkar.  His  economic  insight 
blended with humanism will always remain a beacon for generations. I was wondering how 
best to honour Dr. Parnerkar’s contribution? Given his deep commitment to social welfare, I 
thought he would have been concerned as we have been in the Reserve Bank of India about 
the current state of inflation, particularly food inflation. We have been grappling with this for 
some time now. 
I take this opportunity to share my thoughts on the topic of inflation which affects one and all. 
Over the last three years the persistence of inflation in an environment of falling economic 
growth has come out as a “puzzle”. In my presentation I propose to address the following 
questions: What do I mean by a “puzzle”? Why do we need to worry about inflation? What is 
the nature of the current inflation process? How did monetary policy respond to the recent 
bout of inflation? I conclude with some thoughts on the way forward to achieve price stability. 
Current inflation puzzle? 
First, let me begin by giving the context. India is a moderate inflation country. For example, in 
the  62  years  since  1950–51average  annual  inflation  rate  as  measured  by  changes  in  the 
wholesale price index (WPI) increased at a rate of 6.7 per cent per annum. That is not a very 
high rate considering that many countries, both developed and developing, experienced very 
high  inflation  in  their  modern  development  history.  In  fact,  more  recently  in  the 1980s  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
1990s the world inflation averaged around 17 per cent per annum. In the 2000s there was a 
sharp all round moderation in global inflation. 
In  the  eight  year  period  from  2000  to  2007,  the  world  inflation  averaged  3.9  per  cent  per 
annum. Even the emerging and developing economies (EDEs) which traditionally had very 
high  inflation  showed  an  average  annual  inflation  at  6.7  per  cent.  India’s  inflation 
performance  was  even  better  at  5.2  per  cent  as  measured  by  WPI  and  4.6  per  cent 
measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI-IW).  In  2008  the  global  financial  crisis  struck 
following which inflation rose sharply both in advanced countries and EDEs as commodity 
and  oil  prices  rebounded  ahead  of  a  sharp  “V”  shaped  recovery.  Thereafter,  inflation  rate 
moderated both in advanced economies and EDEs. In India too the inflation rate rose from 
4.7  per  cent  in  2007–08  to  8.1  per  cent  in  2008–09  and  fell  to  3.8  per  cent  in  2009–10 
(Table 1).  However,  the  inflation  rate  backed  up  and  stayed  near  double  digits  during  
2010–11  and  2011–12  before  showing  some  moderation  in  2012–13.  Given  India’s  good 
track record of inflation management, the persistence of elevated inflation for over two years 
is apparently puzzling. 
 
Second, the deceleration of growth and emergence of a significant negative output gap has 
failed  to  contain  inflation.  It  is  understandable  if  inflation  goes  up  in  an  environment  of 
accelerating economic growth. There could be a situation when the real economy is growing 
above  its  potential  growth  that  could  trigger  inflation  what  economists  call  an  overheating 
situation.  It  is  like  an  electric  cable  exploding  if  we  overload  it  with  appliances  beyond  its 
capacity. But, that is not the case. The Reserve Bank estimates suggest that the potential 
output  growth  of  the  Indian  economy  dropped  from  8.5  per  cent  pre-crisis  to  8.0  per  cent 
post-crisis and it may have further fallen to around 7.0 per cent in the recent period. Even 
against this scaled down estimate of potential growth, actual year-on-year GDP growth has 
decelerated significantly from 9.2 per cent in the fourth quarter of 2010–11 to 5.3 per cent in 
the second quarter of 2012–13. The loss of growth momentum that started in 2011–12 got 
extended into 2012–13. 
During a boom, economic activity may for a time rise above this potential level and the output 
gap  becomes  positive.  During  economic  slowdown,  the  economy  drops  below  its  potential 
level  and  the  output  gap  is  negative.  Economic  theory  puts  a  lot  of  emphasis  on 
understanding  the  relationship  between  output  gap  and  inflation.  A  negative  output  gap 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
implies  a  slack  in  the  economy  and  hence  a  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  So,  India’s 
current  low  growth-high  inflation  dynamics  has  been  in  contrast  to  this  conventional 
economic  theory.  Real  GDP  growth  has  moderated  significantly  below  its  potential.  Yet 
inflation did not cool off. 
Third,  the  Reserve  Bank  raised  its  policy  repo  rate  13  times  between  March  2010  and 
October 2011 by a cumulative 375 basis points. The policy repo rate increased from a low of 
4.75 per cent to 8.5 per cent. Still it did not help contain inflation. The critics of the Reserve 
Bank  argue  that  monetary  tightening  rather  than  lowering  inflation  has  slowed  growth. 
Interest  rate  is  a  blunt  instrument.  It  first  slows  growth  and  then  inflation.  But  the  growth 
slowdown has not been commensurate with inflation control. 
The  above  three  considerations  will  suggest  that  the  recent  persistence  of  inflation  is  a 
puzzle. I will come back to the causes of the recent bout of inflation; but before that, let me 
address the question as to why do we need to worry about high inflation? 
  100  now  is  worth  only 
Costs of inflation 
Inflation, though a nominal variable, imposes real costs on the economy. Let me elaborate. 
First, inflation erodes the value of money. As I mentioned earlier, India is a moderate inflation 
country with the 62-year long-term average inflation rate being 6.7 per cent, notwithstanding 
occasional  spikes  in  inflation.  Yet  during  this  period  the  overall  price  level  has  multiplied 
45 times.  This  means  that 
  2.2  at  1950–51  prices.  Since  price 
stability  is  a  key  objective  of  monetary  policy,  central  banks  are  obviously  concerned  with 
inflation. 
Second,  high  and  persistent  inflation  imposes  significant  socio-economic  costs.  Given  that 
the burden of inflation is disproportionately large on the poor, and considering that India has 
a large informal sector, high inflation by itself can lead to distributional inequality. Therefore, 
for  a  welfare-oriented  public  policy,  low  inflation  becomes  a  critical  element  for  ensuring  a 
balanced progress. 
Third, high inflation distorts economic incentives by diverting resources away from productive 
investment to speculative activities. Fixed-income earners and pensioners see a decline in 
their disposable income and standard of living. Inflation reduces households’ savings as they 
try to maintain the real value of their consumption. Consequent fall in overall investment in 
the  economy  reduces  its  potential  growth.  With  a  high  inflation  of  over  two  years  we  are 
already seeing a fall in household savings in financial assets, particularly in bank deposits. At 
the  same  time  households’  preference  for  gold  has  increased.  This  is  putting  additional 
pressure on our balance of payments. 
Fourth, economic agents base their consumption and investment decisions on their current 
and expected future income as well as their expectations on future inflation rates. Persistent 
high inflation alters inflationary expectations and apprehension arising from price uncertainty 
does lead to cut in spending by individuals and slowdown in investment by corporates which 
hurts economic growth in the long-run. 
Fifth,  as  inflation  rises  and  turns  volatile,  it  raises  the  inflation  risk  premia  in  financial 
transactions.  Hence,  nominal  interest  rates  tend  to  be  higher  than  they  would  have  been 
under low and stable inflation. 
Sixth, if domestic inflation remains persistently higher than those of the trading partners, it 
affects external competitiveness through appreciation of the real exchange rate. 
Finally, as inflation rises beyond a threshold, it has an adverse impact on overall growth. The 
Reserve Bank’s technical assessment suggests that the threshold level of inflation for India is 
in the range of 4 to 6 per cent. If inflation persists beyond this level, it could lower economic 
growth over the medium-term. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Causes of recent inflation spike 
Let me first identify the high inflation period. The WPI inflation rate accelerated from 7.1 per 
cent  in  December  2009  to  a  peak  of  10.9  per  cent  by  April  2010,  thereafter  it  remained 
stubbornly close to double digits till November 2011. Thus, we experienced two years of high 
inflation between January 2010 to December 2011. During this two-year period, WPI inflation 
averaged 9.5 per cent per annum. All the major components of inflation contributed to this 
surge.  The  trigger  for  inflation  first  emanated  from  the  failure  of  South-West  monsoon  of 
2009,  following  which  food  prices  rose  sharply.  Concurrently,  the  global  economy  made  a 
sharp recovery from the recession of 2009. As a result, global commodity prices including oil 
rose  substantially.  India  being  a  net  commodity  importer,  particularly  oil,  the  intermediate 
prices rose. This quickly spilled over to non-food manufactured products inflation, making the 
inflation  process  fairly  generalised.  In  the  subsequent  one  year  between  January  2012  to 
December  2012  the  average  WPI  inflation  moderated  to  7.5  per  cent  led  by  all  its  major 
components except fuel and power (Chart 1). 
 
The  high  inflation  during  2010  and  2011  was  a  combination  of  both  adverse  global  and 
domestic factors as well as supply and demand factors. 
First, crude oil and other global commodity price trends as well as exchange rate movements 
are  increasingly  playing  an  important  role  in  defining  domestic  prices.  With  the  gradual 
external liberalization, the Indian economy is much more open and globalised now than ever 
before. Currently, over 85 per cent of demand for crude oil in India is met by imports. The 
imported Indian basket of crude oil price rose from US $ 49 per barrel in April 2009 to an 
average  of  US  $  79  per  barrel  in  2010  and  further  to  US  $  108  per  barrel  in  2011  and 
remained high at US $ 110 per barrel in 2012. Global metal prices, reflected in the IMF index, 
rose by 48 per cent in 2010 and again by 14 per cent in 2011 before moderating by 17 per 
cent in 2012. 
Moreover, the Rupee depreciated from an average of 45.7 per US dollar in 2010 to 46.7 in 
2011. The depreciation of the Rupee was particularly sharp in 2012 as the Rupee averaged 
53.4  per  US  dollar.  Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  one  percentage  point  change  in  the 
Rupee-dollar exchange rate has 10 basis points impact on inflation. While, during 2010 and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2011, global commodity prices had an adverse impact on domestic inflation, the depreciation 
of the Rupee more than offset the beneficial impact of modest softening of global commodity 
prices on domestic inflation in 2012. 
There is another important dimension of India’s external sector linkage, particularly towards 
explaining  high  non-food  manufactured  product  inflation.  Analysis  suggests  that  the  pass-
through  from  non-food  international  commodity  prices  to  domestic  raw  material  prices  has 
increased in the recent years reflecting growing interconnectedness of domestic and global 
commodity markets. This trend is also corroborated by corporate finance data which show 
that the share of raw material costs as a percentage of both expenditure and sales has been 
rising.  Therefore,  as  the  economy  is  increasingly  getting  integrated,  external  sector 
developments are progressively becoming important for domestic price behavior. 
Second,  while  the  growth  in  domestic  agricultural  production  has  stagnated  around  3  per 
cent  per  annum,  the  demand  for  food  has  increased.  Although  the  country  currently  has 
sufficient  foodgrains  stocks,  it  is  not  yet  self-sufficient  in  pulses  and  oilseeds.  Further, 
demand  for  protein  based  products  like  meat,  eggs,  milk  and  fish  as  well  as  fruits  and 
vegetables  has  increased  substantially  with  rising  per  capita  income.  The  protein  inflation 
has  assumed  a  structural  character.  This  has  also  resulted  in  substantial  divergence 
between WPI and CPI as food has a larger share in the consumer price index basket. 
Further, with the increase in income, real consumption expenditure has grown significantly. 
Recently  released  key  results  of  the  NSSO  68th  round  survey  (2011–12)  on  household 
consumption expenditure indicate that real per capita consumption expenditure in rural areas 
increased at an average rate of 8.7 per cent during 2009–12 as compared with 1.4 per cent 
during 2004–09. Similarly, urban real per capita consumption increased by 6.7 per cent as 
against 2.4 per cent in the corresponding period. The fact that real consumption expenditure 
expanded  during  a  period  of  high  food  inflation  indicates  that  the  demand  remains  strong, 
feeding into higher price levels as supply elasticities remain low. 
The high food prices are supported by increase in wages. The average nominal rural wage 
increase  was  of  the  order  of  17  per  cent  during  2008–09  to  2012–13  so  far.  Even  after 
adjusting  for  high  rural  consumer  inflation,  real  wage  increase  over  6  per  cent  per  annum 
was significant (Table 2). In the formal sector, company finance data suggest that the wage 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
bill has risen at a faster rate since the middle of 2009–10. As wages increase, entitlement 
goes up, and consequently demand and preference for essential commodities increases. 
Third, with the persistence of near double-digit inflation in 2010 and 2011, the medium- to 
long-term inflation expectations in the economy have risen, underscoring the role of higher 
food prices in expectations formation. If inflation is expected to be persistently high, workers 
bargain  for  higher  nominal  wages  to  protect  their  real  income.  This  creates  a  pressure  on 
firms’ costs and they may in turn increase prices to maintain their profits. Independently, the 
producers’ own inflation expectations also affect inflation directly by influencing their pricing 
behaviour. If companies expect general inflation to be higher in the future, they may believe 
that they can increase their prices without suffering a drop in demand for their output. 
Fourth, there has also been added stimulus from the crisis driven fiscal and monetary policy. 
Fiscal consolidation process was reversed in 2008–09 which impacted the macroeconomic 
conditions  (Chart  2).  Higher  fiscal  expansion  also  impedes  efficacy  of  monetary  policy 
transmission.  The  moderation  in  private  demand  resulting  from  anti-inflationary  monetary 
policy stance is partly offset by the fiscal expansion. Let me now turn to the role of monetary 
policy in a little more detail. 
 Role of monetary policy 
The current phase of high inflation followed the global financial crisis, which affected India’s 
economy, though not with the same intensity as advanced  countries. India, though initially 
somewhat insulated from the global developments, was eventually impacted significantly by 
the global shocks through all the channels – trade, finance and expectations channels. The 
Reserve Bank, like most central banks, took a number of conventional and unconventional 
measures to augment domestic and foreign currency liquidity, and sharply reduced the policy 
rates.  In  a  span  of  seven  months  between  October  2008  and  April  2009,  there  was  an 
unprecedented  policy  activism.  For  example:  (i)  the  repo  rate  was  reduced  by  425  basis 
points to 4.75 per cent, (ii) the reverse repo rate was reduced by 275 basis points to 3.25 per 
cent, (iii) cash reserve ratio (CRR) of banks was reduced by a cumulative 400 basis points of 
their  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  to  5.0  per  cent,  and  (iv)  the  total  amount  of 
primary liquidity potentially made available to the financial system was over 
 5.6 trillion or 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
over  10  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  Government  also  came  up  with  various  fiscal  stimulus 
measures. 
The Reserve Bank, in October 2009, highlighted the need for exit from crisis-time monetary 
policy  stimulus.  But  it  was  not  easy  to  exit  from  the  excessively  accommodative  monetary 
policy  stance  for  two  main  reasons.  First,  the year-on-year  headline WPI  inflation  had  just 
barely turned positive and was entirely driven by food inflation (Chart 3). Industrial production 
had  started  to  pick  up  but  exports  were  still  declining.  Hence,  recovery  was  not  assured. 
Second,  globally,  most  central  banks  were  in  favour  of  continuing  stimulus.  On  the  other 
hand,  domestically,  consumer  price  inflation  was  high,  households’  inflation  expectations 
were  rising  and  surplus  liquidity  was  substantial.  These  developments  had  inflationary 
consequences. 
 
Nevertheless, the Reserve Bank withdrew the unconventional liquidity support measures and 
restored the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) of banks to its pre-crisis level. At the same time, 
monetary policy had to recognise that the economic growth was recovering from the crisis 
time slowdown and any aggressive monetary tightening at that point would have affected the 
recovery. Subsequently, in January 2010, the CRR was raised by 75 basis points of banks’ 
net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL),  and  policy  rate  was  increased  for  the  first  time  in 
March 2010 by 25 basis points. Between March 2010 and October 2011 the policy repo rate 
was  raised  by  375  basis  points  to  contain  inflation  and  anchor  inflationary  expectations.  It 
may, however be emphasised that policy rate was raised from a historically low level of 4.75 
per cent. As inflation had already risen sharply, the real policy rate during this period was 
negative.  Thus,  monetary  policy  was  still  accommodative 
the  extent  of 
accommodation was gradually closing (Chart 4 & Table 3). 
The policy rate was left unchanged at 8.5 per cent between October 2011 and March 2012. 
Consequently, the inflation rate started trending down from October 2011 and the real policy 
rate  tuned  positive  since  January  2012.  This  enhanced  the  efficiency  of  monetary  policy 
which was reflected in easing of the inflation rate. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank reduced 
the  policy  rate  by  50  basis  points  in  April  2012  and  again  by  25  basis  points  in  the  last 
monetary policy review on 29th January 2013. Currently the CRR stands at a historically low 
level of 4 per cent of NDTL of banks and policy repo rate is at 7.75 per cent. 
though 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Conclusion 
While I have tried to unravel the inflation puzzle and provide some explanation why inflation 
remained  entrenched  despite  output  gap  being  negative,  we  know  that  sustained  level  of 
high  inflation  is  bad  for  the  economy  as  it  imposes  real  costs  which  are  borne 
disproportionately by the different segments of the economy. In order to bring inflation down 
on an enduring basis and anchor inflation expectations there is a need for policy action on 
several fronts. 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First,  it  is  important  to  aim  for  nutritional  security  not  only  to  harness  the  demographic 
dividend stemming from our sizeable young population but also to contain food prices. This 
will  require  addressing  the  supply-demand  imbalance  in  the  agricultural  sector  and 
modernising the supply chain. 
Second, concerted efforts are required to secure energy security for the country. The bulk of 
our  fossil  fuel  requirement  is  met  by  imports.  A  necessary  step  in  this  direction  is  market 
related  pricing  of  petroleum  products  to  economise  consumption  and  reduce  the  subsidy 
burden. This should be supplemented by step up in electricity generation so as to minimise 
fall back option of diesel generation of power. 
Third, in a supply constrained economy, potential output is not a reliable gauge for inflation 
threshold as firms operate below capacity and yet retain the pricing power. Hence, reliability 
of  power  supply  and  availability  of  necessary  industrial  raw  materials  are  important  for 
industrial capacity utilisation and improvement in productivity. Besides moderating inflation, 
this will also reduce reliance on imports of products for which domestic capacity exists. 
Fourth,  it  is  imperative  to  maintain  exchange  rate  stability  to  cushion  transmission  of 
international  price  pressures  in  commodities,  particularly  crude  oil.  This  will  require 
management of the current account in our balance of payments with the rest of the world at 
sustainable levels. 
Fifth, fiscal consolidation is important for maintaining both domestic and external balance so 
that  we  avoid  the  risks  of  twin  deficits.  As  our  own  high  growth  experience  of  2003–08 
suggests,  lower  fiscal  deficit  not  only  encourages  private  investment  but  also  helps  in 
maintaining price stability. 
Finally,  while  persevering  with  the  steps  to  increase  the  depth  of  the  financial  market  and 
addressing credit constraints, monetary policy needs to be calibrated to the evolving growth-
inflation  dynamics  so  that  we  move  towards  our  potential  growth  in  a  non-inflationary 
manner.  For  a  country  at  our  stage  of  development  with  a  vast  labour  supply,  potential 
growth is not a constant. Only in an environment of price stability, a step up in investment 
accompanied  by  productivity  improvements  could  bolster  potential  growth.  Even  when  the 
supply  side  factors  dominate  the  inflationary  pressures,  given  the  risks  of  spillover  into  a 
wider  inflationary  process,  there  is need  for  policy  response.  While  monetary  policy  action 
addresses  the  risk  of  unhinging  of  inflation  expectations,  attending  to  the  structural  supply 
constraints becomes important to ensure that these do not become a binding constraint in 
the long-run, making the task of inflation management more difficult. By ensuring a low and 
stable inflation, the Reserve Bank could best contribute to social welfare. 
I  once  again  express  my  best  wishes  to  the  precious  social  welfare  endeavours  of 
Poornawad  Charitable  Trust  and  its  Life  Management  Institute  and  accept  the  honour 
conferred on me with utmost humility. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
