Peter Praet: Monetary policy in the context of balance sheet adjustments 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC, 22 May 2013. 
 I would like to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla and Massimo Rostagno for their contribution to preparing this speech. 
Slides to the presentation can be found on the ECB’s website. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to speak to you today. 
I  would  like  to  use  this  opportunity  to  discuss  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  response  to  the 
profound balance sheet adjustments currently taking place in the euro area. 
Like  in  most  developed  economies,  different  sectors  in  different  euro  area  countries  have 
entered into a deep deleveraging phase over recent years. A deleveraging phase follows a 
credit  boom  gone  into  reverse:  financial  and  non-financial  firms  shift  their  focus  from 
exploiting  business  opportunities  to  reducing  risk  exposure.  Likewise,  households  seek  to 
clean their balance sheets from sources of vulnerability. Deleveraging presents central banks 
with a delicate balancing act: 
• 
It is a necessary and healthy reversal of past borrowing excesses. To that extent, 
policy-makers should not stand in the way of “the invisible hand” (or perhaps, more 
fittingly, “the invisible scissors”) that trims balance sheets to sustainable proportions. 
Unless  the  oppressive  load  of  debt  and  capital  overhangs  is  run  down,  the 
misallocation  of  resources  will  constrain  future  opportunities.  Solving  a  stock 
problem  today  means  resolving  a  chronic  flow  problem  –  anaemic  income, 
production and expenditure – for years to come. 
At  the  same  time,  deleveraging  carries  risks  if  it  is  abrupt  and  disorderly. 
Accelerated deleveraging by the financial industry brings with itself the threat of a 
protracted suspension in financial intermediation. In a worst-case scenario, this can 
lead  to  a  fully-fledged  financial  meltdown.  But,  even  if  the  meltdown  scenario  is 
avoided,  lack  of  finance  adds  to  the  economic  headwinds  by  suppressing 
investment. Sluggish investment, in turn, lowers income and prices, thus reinforcing 
deleveraging pressures. 
 If this cycle of adverse externalities across sectors sets in, the ensuing deleveraging spiral 
becomes  a  matter  of  public  policy  concern.  It  becomes  a  monetary  policy  concern  to  the 
extent that it impairs the transmission of monetary policy signals to the real economy. 
Central banks thus have a role to play in managing the deleveraging process, knowing that 
crisis management has to complement, but should not obstruct, crisis resolution. They must 
ensure that the economy does not enter into a downward spiral that would be inconsistent 
with price stability. 
But how can they succeed in this task without delaying structural repair? Do they have the 
tools? If not, who can complete the policy framework? How can central banks align short-
term crisis fighting efforts with their longer-term monetary policy strategies and mandates? 
These are the questions that currently preoccupy central bankers around the globe, albeit to 
different degrees and a varying sense of urgency. Let me frame these preoccupations today 
with a euro area perspective. I will proceed in three steps: 
• 
First, I will highlight the key challenges that central banks and policy makers face 
when  formulating  their  crisis  response  in  the  context  of  acute  deleveraging 
pressures. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
  Second,  I  will  explain  how  the  ECB  has  responded  to  these  challenges  and  how 
other policy domains have to contribute to tackling the deleveraging risks. 
Finally, I will reflect on how the institutional framework of Economic and Monetary 
Union  (EMU)  in  Europe  directs,  complements  and  bolsters  the  ECB’s  crisis 
response. 
Ongoing balance sheet adjustments 
1. 
Leverage cycles are difficult for central banks to tame, essentially for two reasons: first, they 
are  difficult  to  empirically  identify,  measure  and  describe  with  available  analytical  tools, 
especially  in  real-time;  second,  even  if  analysts  found  ways  to  spot  them  with  reasonable 
accuracy in real-time, central banks and other macro-policy authorities may need to apply an 
atypical  degree  of  inventiveness  to  control  the  potential  macroeconomic  fall-out,  when 
leveraging finally goes into reverse. 
Let me explain these two issues one-by-one. 
Identification of the leveraging cycles 
1.1 
First  of  all,  it  is  financial  cycles,  i.e.  long  and  deep  swings  in  asset  values,  that  policy 
authorities  essentially  care  about.  They  do  not  necessarily  care  about  leveraging  per  se. 
Leveraging  cycles  become  the  problem  because,  as  has  long  been  recognised,  swings  in 
asset  prices  do  not  pose  serious  threats  to  the  economy,  unless  they  are  facilitated  and 
compounded by trends in debt. This combination and mutual feed-backs between trends in 
asset  values  and  sustained  movements  in  leverage  are  what  James  Tobin  defined  the 
“Achilles heel of capitalism”. So, let me concentrate on leveraging cycles, knowing that it is in 
fact this mutually reinforcing process between debt and financial values that we fear most. 
Leveraging  and  deleveraging  cycles  are  difficult  to  interpret  and  turning  points  hard  to 
identify. Is a debt hump that leads to a surge in the average loan-to-income ratio justified by 
an increase in future incomes? Or is it a reflection of imprudent behaviour? Or is it a gamble 
for survival? It is difficult for a central bank to pass a clear-cut judgement in real time. This 
problem is not unlike the well-known identification problem for business cycles, but it applies 
to deleveraging to an even greater extent. 
Traditionally, and until  very recently, published  empirical analysis has not supported policy 
practitioners too generously in their effort to divine the direction of financial trends. The crisis 
has  of  course  propelled  the  study  of  the  leverage  cycles  to  the  forefront  of  research.  But 
statistical  inference  is  imperfect  when  it  comes  to  real-time  identification  of  underlying 
tendencies which take a long time to develop and emerge to observation. 
For example, Drehmann, Borio and Tsatsaronis (2012) at the BIS have used a methodology 
to  visually  chart  how  leveraging  and  deleveraging  waves  interact  with  the  business  cycle, 
occasionally  coming  to  a  coincidental  climax  that  makes  the  successive  turning  of  both 
waves very deep and prolonged.1 That methodology identifies also points which – ex post – 
you would understand as changes in direction. 
But the usual problem that we encounter in identifying business recoveries and recessions 
when  they  start  is  amplified  here  by  a factor  of 2.  In  order  to  identify  business  cycles  you 
need statistic filters with frequencies from 1 to 8 years. To do the same for leveraging cycles 
– at least in the sample of advanced industrial countries that the BIS study surveys – you 
need  a  16  year  frequency.  This  obviously  calls  for  long  spells  of  data.  And,  the  two-sided 
structure of the filter stretches data requirements even further – into the unknown future! So, 
                                                
1  Drehmann M., C. Borio and K. Tsatsaronis (2012), “Characterising the financial cycle: don’t lose sight of the 
medium-term!”, BIS Working Paper No 380. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the approach – interesting and informative as it is for retrospective inference – is not yet fully 
applicable for policy purposes. 
Other  detectors  of  the  state  of  leveraging  and  the  risks  originating  from  leveraging  cycles 
exist,  some  of  them  using  combinations  of  warning  indicators.  For  instance,  Alessi  and 
Detken  (2011)  use  indicators,  inter  alia,  of  private  credit  to  parse  out  costly  boom-bust 
episodes  from  garden-variety  changes  in  asset  prices  in  real-time.2  Claessens,  Kose  and 
Terrones  (2011)  characterise  the  interplay  of  cycles  between  different  market  segments, 
including credit, housing and equity markets, and between countries.3 Also exploiting cross-
correlations between various market segments, Holló, Lo Duca and Kremer (2012) develop a 
composite indicator to measure systemic stress in the financial system.4 
Reading  this  analysis,  we  know  that  the  credit-intensity  of  the  expansion  phase  is  closely 
associated with the severity of the recession phase. A stronger increase in financial leverage, 
measured by the rate of change of bank credit relative to GDP in the prior boom, tends to 
correlate with a deeper subsequent downturn. We know that credit changes its nature as the 
leveraging cycle progresses. It is a facilitating factor in the run-up stage of the boom, when 
agents are intent on maximising return opportunities. And it turns into a forcing factor when 
the  first  –  and  almost  exclusive  –  business  priority  for  over-indebted  agents  becomes 
reducing  indebtedness.  As  Jordà,  Schularik  and  Taylor  (2011)  report  on  the  title  of  their 
paper on credit cycles, “credit bites back”.5 
These analytical efforts, along with the other work currently conducted in this vibrant strand 
of literature, clearly enhance our appreciation of risks. At the same time, further research will 
be necessary to operationalize these findings in a way that can reliably guide policy-makers 
in  a  real-time.  For  example,  more  analysis  is  needed  on  how  different  policy  action  would 
feed back into the different indicators of financial market risk. 
The many facets of liquidity and their interaction with leverage cycles 
1.2 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  the  second  reason  for  macroeconomic  authorities  to  be  wary  of 
leveraging cycles is that their reversal poses policy challenges of unconventional intensity. 
The  reason  is  that  deleveraging  cycles  interact  with  liquidity  cycles  in  complicated  and 
sometimes impenetrable ways. 
Before explaining these interactions, let me introduce some additional taxonomy. 
What  is  a  liquidity  cycle?  In  fact,  there  are  several  important  concepts  and  definitions  of 
liquidity. One crucial distinction refers to asset market versus funding liquidity: 
• 
Asset market liquidity measures the ease with which an asset is traded at any time 
with  little  price  concessions.  It  reflects  the  cost  per  unit  of  time  of  converting  a 
financial asset into money. When market liquidity collapses – in a liquidity crisis – 
assets that had enjoyed high tradability become illiquid in the sense that trimming 
exposures is possible only at a large penalty. 
                                                
2  Alessi,  L. and  C.  Detken  (2011),  “Quasi  real  time  early  warning indicators  for  costly  asset  price  boom/bust 
cycles: A role for global liquidity”, European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 27(3), pp. 520–533. 
3  Claessens, S., M. A. Kose and M. E. Terrones (2011), “Financial cycles: What? How? When?”, IMF Working 
Paper No. 76. 
4  Holló, D., M. Kremer and M. lo Duca (2012), “CISS – a composite indicator of systemic stress in the financial 
system”, ECB Working Paper No. 1426. 
5  Jordà, O., M. H. P. Schularik and A. M. Taylor (2011), “When credit bites back: leverage, business cycles and 
crises”, NBER Working Paper No 17621. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Funding liquidity – an alternative, if complementary concept – measures the ability 
of a financial institution which engages in maturity transformation to obtain constant 
funding for its long-term assets. 
This  distinction  is  at  the  centre  of  Brunnermeier’s  and  Pedersen’s  (2009)  analysis  on  the 
interplay between leverage and liquidity cycles. Here, the authors show the reinforcing nature 
of  funding  shocks  and  leverage  in  shadow-banking  intermediation.6  Here,  a  funding  shock 
materialises in the form of higher haircuts in the repo market, where intermediaries operating 
in the shadow-banking market – say, a hedge fund – finance the acquisition of assets. For a 
hedge  fund  that  is  financing  asset  holdings  in  the  repo  market,  mechanically,  a  rise  in 
haircuts that is not offset by either slack in the existing equity capital base or an infusion of 
fresh  equity  capital  will  cause  the  fund  to  liquidate  assets.  A  collective  trend  to  liquidate 
assets cannot happen unless prices drop. But a fall-off in asset prices devalues the collateral 
that is pledged in parallel leveraged operations and more margin calls are triggered. So, the 
original  funding  liquidity  shock  turns  into  an  asset  market  liquidity  shock.  The  latter  then 
retroacts into a more severe and widespread funding liquidity problem. See also how these 
cycles  get  intertwined  with  leverage  decisions  and  can  trigger  rapid  deleveraging  in  the 
shadow  banking  industry:  for  hedge  funds  or  broker-dealer  businesses,  which  typically 
finance  an  asset  acquisition  in  the  repo  market,  the  maximum  leverage  for  that  specific 
operation is given by the inverse of the haircut which is applied on the value of collateral by 
the  funding  entity  in  the  repo  transaction.  As  the  haircut  increases  in  the  adverse  liquidity 
conditions that I have described, the leveraging potential of the shadow-bank plunges almost 
mechanically. 
These notions of liquidity cycles – and their interactions with leverage – are now almost old 
hat for macroeconomists. 
But  there  is  another  representation  of  a  liquidity  cycle  that  has  escaped  much  academic 
investigation.  This  representation  distinguishes  different  types  of  liquidity  depending  on  its 
issuer: 
• 
Outside  liquidity  comprises  currency  or,  more  generally,  central  bank  overnight 
liabilities.  These  liabilities  are  what  we  typically  understand  as  “money”  in  the 
narrowest sense of the word. In our modern fiat-money systems, this form of money 
is backed by a legal and social promise to essentially preserve its purchasing power 
and transaction services over time. 
Inside liquidity is a much broader object, including short-dated money-like liabilities 
that are issued by the private entities and thus backed by private credit. They would 
cancel out if all the claims held by banks on private creditors were to be settled. So, 
it is one form of currency that is created – and can be destroyed – within the private 
economy. 
 On  the  basis  of  this  distinction,  we  can  explain  another  type  of  liquidity  cycle,  which  I  will 
refer to as the “outside-inside” liquidity cycle. This cycle reflects the alternating phases and 
sometimes  wild  swings  characterising  banks’  demand  for  precautionary  buffers  of  outside 
money from the central bank. 
Again,  the  alternating  phases  of  this  type  of  cycle  come  to  interplay  with  the  underlying 
deleveraging course. And they do so in a way that can strongly complicate policy. 
The scope and limits for central banks to control leveraging cycles 
1.3 
Let me describe how these complications played out in the current crisis. 
                                                
6  Brunnermeier M. K. and L. H. Pedersen (2009), “Market liquidity and funding liquidity”, Review of Financial 
Studies, vol. 22(6), pp. 2201–2238. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  the  early  days  of  the  financial  crisis,  banks  were  saddled  with  a  legacy  of  illiquid  and 
unprofitable  assets,  which  they  were  forced  to  refinance.  As  the  markets  had  withdrawn 
credit, and the price of those assets in the market had plunged, they came to central banks 
for refinancing. This produced a huge expansion in central bank liquidity which banks were 
drawing into the system as central bank credit was replacing private finance. Because the 
network of interbank trading had seized up almost entirely, banks with excess deposits were 
unwilling to lend to banks with a structural funding shortfall. The trading gap was filled by the 
ECB, which was asked to absorb the liquidity supplied by the former and give more credit to 
the latter. 
In other words, outside liquidity substituted for an erosion of inside liquidity. 
As a consequence, in the ten months following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, outstanding 
ECB credit to euro area banks rose by around 90%, while the outstanding volumes of euro 
liquidity deposited overnight with the ECB went from virtually zero to three-digit billion figures. 
By any account – whether measured on the ECB’s assets side or on its liabilities side – the 
demand for central bank liquidity had reached unprecedented peaks. That was the first stage 
of  a  very  severe  outside-inside  liquidity  cycle,  which  central  banks  –  everywhere  –  had  to 
accommodate. Note that, at that very early stage, the de-leveraging cycle had hardly started. 
For instance, in the nine months after Lehman total assets of the euro area banking system 
fell  by  around  one  percentage  point.7  So,  banks  needed  an  outsized  volume  of  liquidity  at 
hand  in  order  to  be  able  to  refinance  a  balance  sheet  that  had  remained  more  or  less 
constant at around its pre-crisis size. 
The early steps of the outside-inside liquidity cycle – the phase in which banks’ demand for 
outside liquidity surges – were effectively cushioned. Successive rate cuts since the onset of 
the crisis have brought our main policy rates to historical lows. Our standard liquidity facilities 
have been expanded in maturity and used to channel unlimited liquidity at a certain price to 
provide funding reassurance to euro area banks. For example, in a bold step, the maturity of 
our lending operations was extended to three years. In two long-term refinancing operations 
which we launched at the end of 2011 and early 2012 banks absorbed a net volume of EUR 
500 billion in additional liquidity. The replacement of central bank liquidity for failing market 
credit  has  averted  devastating  prospects  of  a  fully-fledged  financial  depression.  Our 
measures  were  instrumental  in  cushioning  the  value-destroying  deleveraging  forces  that 
could have developed into a deflationary spiral. 
But, with a certain lag, the de-leveraging cycle started at some point to run its own course. 
Banks began shedding assets – either because those illiquid, unprofitable exposures had run 
off  in  the  meantime,  or  because  they  had  been  written  down,  or  because  other,  more 
profitable, assets had been sold at a profit, to make up for losses. Or simply because banks 
had realised that their old business model was unsustainable and the size of their activities 
had to be reduced discretely. 
Whatever the reason behind a down-sizing of banks’ balance sheets, when they embarked 
on large scale deleveraging, their liquidity needs declined. So, they started shedding central 
                                                
7  A  somewhat  puzzling  fact  of  relative  crisis  narratives  across  the  Atlantic  is  that  over  the  same  period,  and 
unlike  banks  in  the  euro  area,  US  commercial  banks  re-leveraged  rather  than  de-leveraged.  See  He,  Z., 
I. G. Khang,  and  A.  Krishnamurthy  (2010),  “Balance  Sheet  Adjustments  during  the  2008  Crisis”,  IMF 
Economic Review, 58: 118–156. The authors offer various explanations for this phenomenon, including FDIC 
and  US Federal  government  guarantees  on  bank  liabilities,  which  were  unavailable  to  other  financial 
intermediaries,  such  as  shadow  banks,  which  therefore  had  to  shed  assets  quickly  as  a  consequence.  It 
remains  to  be  seen  why  euro  area  banks  reacted  to  the  early  post-Lehmann  liquidity  squeeze  with  a 
downscale of assets which, at least qualitatively, resembles more the non-bank response in the US. Overall, 
such comparisons are complicated by: (i) certain one-off factors over that period (such as the reclassification 
of remaining broker dealers to commercial banks in the US) that may give rise to a distorted interpretation of 
data  on  commercial  bank  assets  and  (ii)  differences  in  accounting  treatment  across  the  Atlantic  (e.g.  as 
regarding the balance sheet implications of securitisation of loans). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
bank liquidity as well. The liquidity surge is being gradually unwound, bringing the  outside-
inside liquidity cycle to a mature stage. One manifestation of this unwinding of exceptional 
liquidity demand is the early repayment of the ECB’s three-year refinancing operations that 
have amounted to more than €280bn to date. 
The  voluntary  reimbursement  of  liquidity  can  be  interpreted  as  a  good  sign,  as  it  largely 
reflects  normalisation  in  banks’  funding  conditions.  When  we  explore  the  determinants  of 
reimbursements, we see that it comes together with a measurable return of retail lending to 
banks that had long suffered loss of funding, and, for some of them, even a timid resurgence 
of  wholesale  borrowing  activity.  So,  the  shrinking  of  liquidity  demand  has  a  positive 
connotation. But the potentially difficult aspect of this process for a central bank is that the 
demand  for  central  bank  liquidity  and  the  underlying  de-leveraging  process  are  not 
synchronised.  In  fact,  the  demand  for  central  bank  liquidity  (and  the  sensitivity  of  private 
sector lending decisions to policy signals) may drop just when the de-leveraging cycle starts 
producing its effects on the economy. 
This intersection between the two cycles can be risky for the economy. Asset shedding can 
be as extreme and divorced from fundamentals as the build-up of debt that had preceded  
– and largely caused – the crisis. So, as I said at the start, the central bank may have to be 
vigilant  that  the  pace  of  asset  reduction  by  banks  is  commensurate  with  an  evolution  of 
income, activity and employment that does not create downside risks to price stability. But 
this  policy  strategy  may  be  difficult  to  pursue  in  a  situation  in  which  banks’  propensity  to 
absorb central bank liquidity is muted. 
The short-term crisis response 
2. 
Does this mean that, in the dark-grey zone of intersection between the two cycles, policy is 
left impotent? 
The answer is: absolutely no. But the complexities and risks that I tried to describe require a 
well-designed, multidimensional and consistent policy response. 
First  and  foremost,  what’s  needed  is  a  thorough  and  transparent  identification  of  risks  on 
bank  balance  sheets  and  a  robust  reconstruction  of  equity.  This  is  not  limited  to  banks  – 
households’ and firms’ own capital should be reinforced too, if they are to withstand future 
shocks and restart planning growth. But it particularly applies to banks. 
This call for balance sheet repair may sound like the ceterum censeo of anyone commenting 
on  the  financial  sector  these  days.  But  we  should  not  forget  the  successful  practical 
precedents to underpin these calls. 
For example, the Nordic banking crisis in the 1990s provides a case study of how decisive 
and  well-targeted  crisis  management  can  mitigate  and  shorten  the  damaging  effects  of 
deleveraging  stress.8  With  an  external  crisis  constraining  the  room  for  manoeuvre  for 
monetary policy and fiscal policy alike, the authorities addressed balance sheet repair head-
on.  They  first  forced  a  comprehensive  recognition  of  losses  on  their  domestic  banking 
systems.  Then,  they  recapitalised  institutions  subject  to  stringent  stress  tests,  sorting 
institutions based on viability, and dealing with bad assets through disposal. And, finally, they 
ensured a reduction in excess capacity in the financial system. 
More  recently,  we  saw  important  financial  reform  put  into  practice  in  some  euro  area 
countries.  Most  notably,  one  year  ago,  the  Spanish  banking  system  was  ostracised  in  the 
inter-bank market and deserted by capital investors and depositors. Adverse selection was in 
full display: uncertainty about the location and extent of exposures to the real estate sector 
                                                
8  For an overview on the Swedish case, see Ingves, S. and G. Lind (1996), “The management of the bank crisis 
– in retrospect”, Swedish Riksbank Quarterly Review No 1, pp. 5–18. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
was  heavily  weighing  on  the  stability  and  viability  of  the  Spanish  banks.  The  authorities, 
within  the  new  European  Stability  Mechanism  framework  for  financial  stability  assistance, 
took an approach in many respects similar to that followed 15 years before by Sweden. First, 
they  embarked  on  a  serious  mapping  of  the  problem  through  a  detailed,  state-of-the-art 
stress testing exercise. Second came a surgical separation and removal of assets of dubious 
quality for those banks which had detected capital shortfalls and proved most vulnerable to 
future  shocks.  Third,  loss  recognition  and  recapitalisation  took  place  by  activating  the 
European  Stability  Mechanism.  Fourth,  they  put  in  place  a  comprehensive  and  innovative 
regulatory  reform  which  empowers  authorities  to  take  timely  and  decisive  action  for  bank 
recovery and resolution. 
It is too early to declare victory. And many challenges still loom ahead. But today, many of 
the  banks  that  had  suffered  from  a  generalised  loss  of  confidence  have  returned  to  the 
market and see their funding gaps decline rapidly. In fact, in a sign of normalisation, some of 
them have participated en force in the early repayment of the long-term refinancing that they 
had requested 18 months ago in very tense liquidity conditions. 
Obviously many of the measures involved in these policy efforts go well beyond the tasks 
and powers of the ECB as a monetary policy-maker. In fact, many of the necessary steps will 
need to be taken in other policy domains. 
But  the  ECB  can  flank  and  support  some  of  these  steps,  in  particular,  by  forcefully 
responding to price stability risks. To that effect, monetary policy will continue employing its 
existing  instruments  and  if  necessary  to  expand  its  instrument  set  within  the  safeguards 
established by its strategy. 
The long-term ECB strategy 
3. 
To be successful in delivering on its mandate in troubled waters, the ECB’s strategy has to 
combine two main attributes: it must be sufficiently flexible to adjust its policy conduct to the 
specific challenges at hand. And it must be sufficiently binding to anchor expectations and 
build central bank credibility with market participants and the general public. 
The flexibility of the ECB’s monetary policy framework derives from three features: 
The  first  is  a  definition  of  price  stability,  which  is  formulated  in  terms  of  a  range,  with  an 
explicit focal point for policy identified within that range. The range is defined as comprising 
rates of inflation which do not distort economic decisions: positive inflation rates of no more 
than two per cent. Within that range the ECB’s Governing Council aims at attaining a level of 
inflation  over  the  medium  term  –  the  focal  point  of  policy  –  which  is  “close  to”  the  upper 
ceiling of two per cent. The buffer interval between our focal point and the floor of the range 
serves  as  a  safeguard  against  deflation  risks  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  It  also  allows 
monetary policy to account for inflation differentials across individual euro area countries. In 
the presence of large and persistent dispersion in inflation rates across countries, an inflation 
objective too close to zero would  imply that countries with below average inflation have to 
systematically operate under deflation – even if average inflation rates for the euro area were 
in positive territory. 
The second element is that our definition of price stability applies over the medium-term. In 
other words, the policy-relevant horizon is a choice variable. But the choice of the extension 
of the horizon is conditional on the nature of the shocks shaping the inflation and economic 
outlook. 
Let me explain how that flexibility guides our policy response to different shocks in practice. 
If the shock that moves inflation at a certain point in time comes from demand forces, our 
strategy postulates a monetary policy response that brings inflation back, within the range of 
values  that  define  price  stability,  to  its  focal  point  over  a  relatively  short  horizon.  “Short” 
means here: in line with the minimum time period that monetary policy actions typically take 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
to  transmit  their  impulse  to  the  real  economy.  This  way,  inflation  expectations  are  kept 
anchored and a stable path of the economy toward the new equilibrium is ensured. 
If the underlying shocks are on the supply side, there might not be an immediate cause for 
action.  The  medium  term  in  this  case  may  be  stretched  beyond  the  canonical  minimum 
transmission  lag  and  thus  provides  for  an  in-built  mechanism  to  see  through  temporary 
supply shocks. Crucially, this applies only to the extent that you are reassured that long-term 
inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored.  Therefore,  once  it  transpires  that  the  supply 
shock is likely to be of a permanent nature because it is passed through to price and wage 
setting behaviour, the ECB would act.9 But the flexibility in the policy-relevant time horizon 
grants  it  sufficient  time  to  identify  whether  the  shock  is  transitory  or  permanent  before 
changing course. This, in turn, allows for a steady-hand approach to our monetary policy that 
avoids undue policy-induced economic fluctuations. 
Third, adding to the flexibility deriving from the price stability definition and the variable policy 
horizon, the ECB has large scope in adopting further tailored measures to address specific 
market impairments. In this context, deliberations on enhancing the provision of credit in the 
economy take particular prominence in our current strategy process. 
So, let me move to the issue of credibility. 
The  attribute  of  credibility  is  even  more  important  than  flexibility.  In  fact,  credibility  is  a 
precondition  for  a  central  bank  to  be  able  to  act  flexibly  without  unhinging  market 
expectations. The extent and success of central bank intervention to stabilise the economy 
hinges  on  the  credibility  of  their  monetary  policy  framework.  Higher-order  constraints  –  an 
institutional  discipline  –  make  the  conduct  of  policy  –  a  lower-order  activity  –  both  more 
flexible and effective. 
This is due to the following reasons. 
If  market  participants  are  confident  that  the  central  bank  –  in  line  with  its  mandate  –  is 
determined  to  offset  price  pressures,  they  will  immediately  factor  this  into  their  economic 
decisions.  Hence,  the  mere  prospects  of  future  central  bank  accommodation  will  induce 
consumers  and  firms  to  shift  consumption  and  investment  decisions  across  time.  For 
instance, in a slump consumers and firms anticipate additional accommodation in the future, 
thus  frontloading  consumption  and  investment.  Vice  versa,  in  an  overheating  phase, 
consumers and firms restrain current spending to prepare for a more constrained monetary 
policy environment in the future. 
In  both  cases,  the  reliable  anticipation  of  the  future  central  bank  response  mitigates  the 
fluctuations.  In  other  words,  central  bank  credibility  acts  as  an  automatic  stabiliser  by 
inducing  inter-temporal  substitution  in  economic  activity.  All  that’s  needed  is  a  clear  and 
credible commitment by the central bank to a certain course of action. 
But  how  can  we  establish  such  commitment?  The  answer  is:  through  an  institutional 
framework that makes the central bank predictable and that protects it from the temptation to 
leave the path prescribed by its objective. 
This  rationale  lies  at  the  heart  of  forceful  safeguards  to  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy 
independence.  These  safeguards  ensure  that  our  decisions  are  not  contaminated  by 
considerations other than those deriving from our price stability objective. 
This is the backdrop, against which I interpret the monetary financing prohibition, which bans 
central  bank  direct  lending  to  fiscal  authorities:  engaging  in  such  direct  lending  to 
governments  jeopardises  a  central  bank’s  capacity  to  act  independently  and  with  the  sole 
                                                
9  When a sustained string of negative supply side shocks is allowed to pass through into inflation expectations, 
the shocks mutate into demand shocks. The reason is that the real interest rate would be allowed to fall, thus 
giving rise to inflation pressures that are typically associated with loose monetary policy conditions. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
focus on monetary policy objectives; the loss of independence and focus, in turn, jeopardises 
central bank credibility;  and the loss of central bank credibility jeopardises macroeconomic 
performance as it contravenes automatic stabilisation induced by private sector expectations. 
The monetary financing prohibition in the ECB’s legal framework plays an essential role in 
fostering central bank instrument independence. It is not simply a constraint on what the ECB 
can do. It is also a safeguard that reinforces our action and protects our capability to act in 
pursuit of our objective, when such action becomes necessary. 
It  is  a  catalyst  of  credibility.  And  building  on  the  credibility  arising  from  independence,  the 
ECB  is  therefore  well-placed  to  forcefully  and  flexibly  confront  any  risks  to  the  economy 
without unanchoring expectations. 
It is within the frame laid down by the Treaty that we can confidently say that the ECB will act 
decisively  to  preserve  price  stability  and  –  subject  to  that  condition  –  minimise  wasteful 
fluctuations in activity. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17 
 18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
