Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Needs, expectations and willingness of 
the private banking sector and possible facilitating frameworks 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
Trans-East African Networks Regional Match-Making Conference, Kampala, 4 July 2013. 
 I would like to begin by thanking the organisers for giving me the opportunity to speak at this 
important conference. Sub-Saharan Africa lags way behind other developing regions in most 
indicators of infrastructure provision, such as electricity production per capita and paved road 
density.  The  closing  of  the  infrastructure  gap  will  only  be  possible  if  resources  can  be 
mobilised  in  a  sustainable  manner;  i.e.  in  a  manner  that  is  consistent  with  the  economic 
viability  of  projects,  taking  into  consideration  their  commercial  nature,  and  the  fiscal 
sustainability of the Governments which back infrastructure projects. It is these issues that I 
will focus my discussion on today. 
In assessing the appropriate frameworks for financing infrastructure projects, it is useful to 
consider separately two distinct types of project. The first type is projects that produce “public 
goods”; which can be defined as goods for which it is not normally optimal or even possible 
to charge consumers for their use. Most roads, with the exception of toll roads, fall into this 
category, as do many other types of public infrastructure. Infrastructure services which have 
the  character  of  public  goods  are  paid  for  out  of  general  Government  revenues  (i.e.  by 
taxpayers).  Hence,  any  debt  that  is  contracted  to  finance  the  construction  of  this  type  of 
project  must  be  serviced  out  of  general  Government  revenues.  As  such,  the  key  factors 
which  will  determine  whether Government  can mobilise  finance from the  private  sector for 
these  projects,  and  the  terms  on  which  finance  can  be  raised,  depend  on  the  overall 
sustainability of public finances and the credibility of the Government’s management of public 
finances, as well as the Government’s credibility to maintain macroeconomic stability. Let me 
elaborate further on these points. 
Governments  will  usually  prefer  to  finance  infrastructure  projects  which  have  public  good 
characteristics  with  long  term  local  currency  denominated  debt.  The  debt  is  long  term 
because  public  infrastructure  projects  typically  have  very  long  payback  periods  and  hence 
their indirect impact on tax revenues only materialises over the long term. The debt should 
be  local  currency  denominated  because  the  bulk  of  tax  revenues  are  mobilised  in  local 
currency. Most Governments in the East African Community are now able to mobilise long 
term  local  currency  finance  by  issuing  Treasury  instruments  such  as  Treasury  Bills  and 
Bonds through regular auctions. Issuing local currency instruments on the domestic market is 
the optimal vehicle for raising private sector finance for the budget. With such instruments 
auctioned in competitive market and actively traded in the secondary market, their pricing is 
relatively cheaper than other forms of debt such as commercial bank loans. 
The  main  investors  in  local  currency  denominated  Government  bonds  are  pension  funds, 
insurance companies, commercial banks and, to a lesser extent, offshore portfolio investors. 
All of these investors are acutely aware of the need to balance risk with competitive rates of 
return. The main risk facing investors in local currency bonds is that the Government’s fiscal 
position  becomes  unsustainable,  such  that  it  either  defaults  on  its  debt or  has  to resort to 
inflationary  finance  to  service  its  debt,  which  would  then  erode  the  real  value  of  the  debt. 
Hence  to  mitigate  these  risks,  Government  must  be  able  to  demonstrate,  in  a  credible 
manner, that it will not allow its fiscal position to become unsustainable. 
To  generate  confidence  in  the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  Governments  should 
formulate their budgets within a medium term fiscal framework which clearly shows the path 
of the fiscal deficit over at least the next five years and the associated path of public debt. A 
fiscal framework in which fiscal deficits are so large as to require continuously rising public 
debt to GDP ratios will be perceived as being unsustainable and is, therefore, not conducive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
financed 
to  mobilising  long  term  finance  from  the  private  sector  except  at  very  high  interest  rates. 
Therefore,  the  prerequisite  for  mobilising  long  term  finance  for  infrastructure  projects  is  a 
prudent fiscal framework, in which the future path of public debt remains comfortably within 
sustainable levels. The most important message which I want you to take from my remarks 
this morning is that any consideration of mobilising finance for infrastructure by Governments 
must take place within a framework of fiscal sustainability. 
The  second  category  of  infrastructure  project  is  that  of  commercial  projects.  These  are 
projects  for  which  it  is  feasible,  and  usually  optimal,  to  sell  the  services  produced  by  the 
infrastructure directly to the users, with the tariffs charged covering the full cost of producing 
the  service,  including  its  debt  servicing.  They  include  electric  power  generation  and  port 
facilities. Such projects are usually owned by separate legal entities from Government; e.g. 
limited  liability  corporations.  Increasingly  in  East  Africa,  as  elsewhere  in  the  world,  the 
corporations which own and manage these projects are owned by the private sector, or are 
joint ventures between private investors and the Government. 
In  principle,  commercial 
independently  of 
infrastructure  projects  can  be 
Governments, provided that potential creditors are convinced that the project will generate 
sufficient revenues over the long term to service its debt in full, as well as meeting its other 
costs.  Furthermore,  these  types  of  projects  may  benefit  from  financing  that  is  specifically 
structured  to  meet  the  idiosyncratic  requirements  of  the  project,  especially  in  terms  of  its 
cash flow and upfront capital expenditures. Hence it may be more optimal for finance to be 
raised through bank loans or syndicated bank loans, rather than through bonds. 
Commercial projects are often financed with foreign currency denominated loans raised on 
external capital markets, either because the quantum of finance required is too large to be 
mobilised domestically or due to a large share of the capital costs of the project taking the 
form of foreign currency payments. If debt is contracted in foreign currency, the Government 
must provide a commitment that the debtor will always be able to purchase foreign currency 
to  service  its  debt  and  that  no  capital  account  restrictions  will  be  imposed  to  prevent  the 
debtor from paying its creditors. 
Beside  the  commercial  viability  of  the  infrastructure  project,  the  other  key  requirement  for 
raising finance for commercial projects is an institutional framework that guarantees the legal 
rights  of  creditors,  including  appropriate  legislation  and  honest  and  efficient  commercial 
courts.  If the  domestic  legal framework  is  not  perceived  as  being  adequate,  creditors  may 
require that any disputes be settled in a foreign jurisdiction. 
A  key  feature  of  many,  although  not  all,  commercial  infrastructure  projects  is  that  they 
operate in monopsonistic markets; for technical reasons they can sell their output to only one 
customer,  which  is  often  a  state  owned  enterprise.  This  is  usually  the  case  for  power 
generation  projects.  As  a  consequence,  the  project  is  vulnerable  to  the  abuse  by  the 
monopsonist  of  its  market  power,  which  could  have  serious  consequences  for  the 
commercial  viability  of  the  project  and  thus  its  ability  to  service  its  debt. To  safeguard  the 
viability  of  the  project,  it  will  usually  be  necessary  for  the  monopsonistic  user  of  the 
infrastructure services to sign a legally binding long term agreement to buy the services at 
predetermined prices. Again, if these agreements are to be credible, the local legal system 
must be able to enforce their implementation. 
Finally  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  remarks  about  public  private  partnerships  (PPPs)  as  a 
vehicle for building infrastructure projects. There are several sound reasons for using PPPs 
to  develop  some  infrastructure  projects.  In  particular,  projects  may  be  implemented  more 
efficiently  if  private  sector  companies,  with  specialist  expertise,  invest  in,  and  manage  the 
project and bear the risks that the project will not be completed on time and within budget. 
These are important advantages, not least because project implementation capacity is weak 
in Uganda and some other countries in the region. However, it is a misperception that PPPs 
reduce  the fiscal  burden  on  the  Government  over  the  long term;  instead  they  usually  only 
extend the time frame over which the fiscal costs are incurred. PPPs in many countries have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
also entailed substantial quasi fiscal liabilities because of implicit or explicit public guarantees 
given to private investors. PPPs should be one of the options considered by Governments for 
developing  infrastructure  but  they  should  not  be  seen  as  a  panacea  for  a  shortage  of 
budgetary resources. 
Thank you very much for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
