Benoît Cœuré: Harmonising cashless payments – the SEPA experience 
Dinner  speech  by  Mr  Benoît  Cœuré,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  ECB  Seminar  “Sharing  the  European  experience  in  retail  payments 
integration and innovation”, Frankfurt am Main, 15 April 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to have dinner with you tonight. I am very happy that central bankers 
from  all  five  continents  are  together  here  today  and  tomorrow  to  hear  about  Europe’s 
experience  in  retail  payments  integration  and  innovation,  and  to  talk  about  how  this 
experience could benefit other countries and communities. 
Sharing information and exchanging views with colleagues from different parts of the world 
benefits us at the ECB, too. In fact, this seminar gives us all an opportunity to enhance our 
knowledge and to strengthen personal and institutional ties.  
Before dinner is served, let me give you some food for thought.  
There  are  different  ways  to  establish  and  maintain  a  domestic,  integrated  retail  payments 
market.  To  illustrate  this,  let  me  first  briefly  look  at  the  retail  payments  market  in  Europe, 
which has been fragmented along national lines and is still integrating, and then compare it 
with the market in the US.  
Although  the  population  of  the  US  is  comparable  with  that  of  the  euro  area1,  the  US  still 
generates a higher GDP2. Households have a considerably higher gross disposable income.3 
Yet  the  gross  savings  of  households  in  the  euro  area  (as  a  percentage  of  their  gross 
disposable incomes, HGDI) are higher than in the US4. 
Given these figures, it is not surprising that the number of cashless payment transactions per 
inhabitant in the US is higher than in the euro area.5 However, the fact that it is twice as high 
is remarkable. 
Why do the retail payments markets in the US and euro area differ? As I will explain, it’s not 
only  because  of  customer  preferences  and  technology,  but  also  because  of  different 
approaches to regulation and different pricing. The paths followed for payment transactions 
will  always  differ  from  country  to  country  and  region  to  region.  But,  the  diversity  of 
instruments reveals some interesting facts about the retail payments market in both areas. 
In the US, about two-thirds of cashless payment transactions are card payments. Of those 
card  payments,  one-third  of  them  are  made  with  credit  cards.  In  the  euro  area,  card 
payments are less dominant: just over one-third of cashless payment transactions are card 
payments. Debit cards are generally preferred. 
Consequently,  whereas  consumer  credit  cards  are  the  biggest  driver  of  revenue  in  the 
US payments  industry6,  their  role  in  the  euro  area  is  less  prominent.  It  has  been  rightly 
pointed out in one of the presentations today that, in contrast to the US, the sustainability of 
                                                
1  Euro area 332.4, US 312 million, source: Statistics Pocket Book March 2013, 2011 figures. 
2  US €12.1 trillion (PPP), euro area €9.4 trillion (PPP), source ibid. 
3  US €29,600 HGDI per capita (PPP), euro area €18,700 HGDI per capita (PPP), source ibid. 
4  US 8.3 % of HGDI, euro area 13.2% of HGDI, source ibid. 
5  US, 366 transactions, euro area 183, source: Red Book for US, SDW for euro area, 2011 figures. 
6  Source: McKinsey. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
card  business  models  in  the  euro  area  depends  –  notably  because  of  regulatory 
interventions  –  on  improvements  in  efficiency  and  on  the  cost  side,  and  not  on  driving 
revenue.  
An  Occasional  Paper  published  by  the  ECB  in  September  2012  entitled  “The  social  and 
private costs of cash and retail payment instruments – A European perspective” shows that 
in Europe debit card payments have on average the lowest social costs per euro transaction 
value. In other words, society may benefit from an increase in their usage. 
The  same  paper  reported  that  cheques  were  the  most  expensive  form  of  payment.  Thus, 
they  are  not  part  of  the  integration  efforts  in  the  retail  payments  market  in  Europe.  In  the 
US however,  despite  a  steady  decline,  cheques  still  play  an  important  role  as  a  cashless 
payment instrument. In fact, they are used more often than credit transfers and direct debits 
put together. The low number of electronic payments (i.e. credit transfers and direct debits) in 
the US has not only to do with consumer preference and systemic restrictions on consumer-
initiated transfers but also with the set-up of batch processing of electronic payments. The 
CEO of Western Union has commented that bank-to-bank credit transfers in the US are so 
complicated that banks ask Western Union to process them.7 
As you heard this morning, the creation of domestic credit transfer and direct debit schemes 
formed  the  basis  of  the  Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA).  These  electronic  payment 
instruments  facilitate  straight-through-processing  (STP)  and  are  thus  operationally  efficient 
solutions. They  can  also  serve  as  the  basis for further  developments  in online  and  mobile 
payments. 
The  ultimate  aim  of  SEPA  is  to  create  a  truly  domestic  European  retail  payments  market 
which  does  not  differentiate  between  euro  payments  made  by  individuals,  businesses  or 
public  administrations  within  one  country  or  between  SEPA  countries.  Tommaso  Padoa-
Schioppa,  a  former  member  of  the  ECB’s  Executive  Board,  called  this  the  “principle  of 
indifference”.  In  that  sense,  SEPA  is  also  part  of  the  political  objective  to  create  a  more 
integrated Europe. 
The creation of a safe and efficient domestic retail payments market is also an issue of social 
relevance because individuals and businesses in any country can benefit from retail payment 
services. It is a means to increase financial inclusion and it strengthens the formal economy. 
It also has great potential to make remittance payments cheaper and more efficient. 
Let me emphasise: SEPA is one of Europe’s most successful financial integration projects. 
Even during the current financial crisis, SEPA has shown its strengths and its implementation 
has  continued  without  major  obstacles.  This  may  be  because,  as  research  has  shown, 
effective  retail  payment  services  are  associated  with  greater  bank  stability  and  because 
banks perform better in countries with more developed retail payment services. Last but not 
least, there is evidence that retail payments have a positive impact on economic growth.8 
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  in  a  world  marked  by  growing  mobility  and  by  increasing 
cross-border trade, retail payments cannot and should not be overlooked. In Europe, with its 
single market for goods, capital, services and a single currency, it is essential to harmonise 
cashless payments via such a system as SEPA. I am convinced that this harmonisation can 
serve  as  a  valuable  point  of  reference for further  integration  activities  in  other  parts  of the 
world and also at global level. 
                                                
7  See  the  Austrian  newspaper  Der  Standard,  26.9.2010,  at  http://derstandard.at/1285199287021/Western-
Union-Anti-Geldwaesche-Regeln-bringen-uns-Geschaeft. 
8  Advisory  Committee  on  the  Future  of  Banks  in  the  Netherlands  (“Restoring  Trust”,  April  2009),  UK  HM 
Treasury  (“Banking  reform:  delivering  stability  and  supporting  a  sustainable  economy”,  June  2012),  ECB 
(“Retail payments and economic growth”; work in progress 2013). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
European retail payment integration should not be seen as a stand-alone project. There are 
interdependencies  with  standardization  and  regulatory  issues  at  global  level.  For  instance, 
full EMV migration for cards in Europe and the move to chip-only cards remain difficult as 
long as there are regions in the world where the magnetic stripe remains dominant.  
And yet, SEPA and Europe’s retail payments integration is affecting initiatives for integration 
at  global  level.  International  initiatives  such  as  the  International  Payments  Framework 
Association (IPFA) see SEPA as a blueprint for developing multi-currency schemes for non-
urgent  cross-border  payments.  These 
the  additional  challenge  of 
accommodating  control  requirements  relating  to  anti-money  laundering  and  countering 
terrorist  finance.  Finally,  retail  payments  integration  at  global  level  may  also  extend  to  the 
remittance market and make remittance payments cheaper and more efficient.  
These  are  all  weighty  matters  and  I’m  sure  you’ll  be  considering  them  in  the  sessions 
tomorrow. I hope you will have a stimulating, useful and successful morning.  
But now, I’d like to wish you bon appétit!  
Table 1: Use of payment instruments: number of transaction per inhabitant (BIS Red Book 
for US figures, ECB SDW for euro area figures, 2011 figures) 
initiatives 
face 
   
credit transfer 
direct debit 
cheques  
cards 
total 
Euro area 
51 
54 
11 
67 
183 
US 
25 
38 
68 
235 
366 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
