Stanley Fischer: Recent developments in the Israeli economy 
Summary of remarks by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at Ono 
Academic College, Kiryat Ono, 27 February 2013. 
 The Israeli economy is a very small and very open economy. It is therefore largely affected 
by events in the global economy. We export about 40 percent of GDP, so we are dependant 
on demand from global economies. Additionally, in determining monetary policy, the interest 
rate that we set is affected by interest rates set abroad. If we raise the interest rate in Israel 
sharply above global interest rates, we will be flooded by capital inflow from abroad, which 
will affect the appreciation of the exchange rate. As such, everything that is important in the 
Israeli economy is affected by what happens abroad. Therefore, any lecture that deals with 
the Israeli economy must begin with a description of the global economic situation. 
The global economy grew by 3.2 percent in 2012 – very close to the 3 percent rate that is 
considered  the  baseline  of  a  global  recession.  The  International  Monetary  Fund’s 
expectations  are  for  3.5  percent  growth  in  2013,  and  it  is  possible  that  the  results  of  the 
elections in Italy will reduce these expectations to 2012 levels. In the United States, growth 
this  year  is  expected  to  be  2  percent.  In  Europe,  expectations  are  for  the  recession  to 
continue, with a slow recovery in 2014. Developing and emerging markets had more rapid 
growth. Growth in global trade is the most important variable from the standpoint of Israeli 
exports. Before the global crisis, such trade grew by about 7 percent per year on average, 
while in 2012 it grew by less than 3 percent, which explains the difficult year experienced by 
Israeli  exporters.  The  background  conditions  in  which  the  Israeli  economy  operates, 
therefore, are not optimal. 
Between 2003 and mid-2011, the Israeli economy enjoyed average growth of 5 percent per 
year, despite the global recession. This is a very good growth rate for a rich and developed 
economy,  which  is  what  Israel  is  when  compared  internationally,  even  if  we  don’t  always 
want to admit it. In 2012, growth was slower. I was not satisfied by the 3.2 percent growth 
rate in 2012, but each time I spoke with colleagues abroad, they said that they would have 
been  thrilled  if  their  economies  had  grown  at  such  a  rate.  This  year,  the  Bank  of  Israel 
expects growth of 3.8 percent, with a significant part of that – about 1 percent – expected as 
a result of natural gas starting to flow from the Tamar field. 
Unemployment in Israel has been in a continuing decline for a considerable number of years. 
The Central Bureau of Statistics changed its measuring framework in 2012, which makes it 
difficult for us to compare this year’s data to previous years. Therefore, we look at the data 
for the 25–64 age group, which is less affected by the change in methodology. In this group, 
we  can  see  a  continued  decline.  Unemployment  in  Israel  is  lower  than  in  many  other 
countries,  including  those  that  are  very  advanced.  Toward  the  end  of  this  lecture,  I  will 
enumerate a number of challenges and problems that require handling in the long term, but 
the  macroeconomic  situation  in  Israel  is,  in  the  final  analysis,  very  good  other  than  one 
aspect: the government budget. 
Beginning in 2003 there was a decline in the government deficit until 2007, when the budget 
was balanced and the deficit was close to zero. This was the result of the courageous and 
steadfast program formulated by the finance minister at the time, Binyamin Netanyahu, with 
the support of the prime minister. In 2008, the global growth rate began to decline, and in 
2009 we returned to a budget deficit similar to what we had in 2003. This was an expected 
result in light of the decline in economic growth. Once the recovery began, it was expected 
that we would be able to restore the path that began in 2003, a path of decline in the deficit. 
There was a good beginning, but in 2011, it became more difficult, and in 2012 the deficit, 
which was planned to be 2 percent of GDP, reached 4.2 percent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Many  people  ask  who  is  responsible  for  the  deficit  in  2012?  The  answer  is  that  the 
responsibility  lies  mainly  with  growth,  which  was  lower  than  expected.  At  the  beginning  of 
2011,  the  Finance  Ministry  had  a  projection  for  tax  receipts  which,  in  retrospect,  was  too 
optimistic. At the Bank of Israel, we did not think that their projection was too optimistic at the 
beginning of 2011. We only understood this in retrospect. Following the decline in the growth 
rate  in  2012,  the  government  spent  more  than  what  it  had  planned  to  spend,  which  was 
another factor in increasing the deficit. 
Unemployment data show that the economy is very close to full employment. In this situation, 
tax receipts are relatively high. If the economy enters a recession, the deficit will begin at the 
2012  level  and  will  grow  from  there.  The  recession  at  the  beginning  of  the  last  decade 
significantly increased the deficit, and the government was forced to ask for help from the 
US government through guarantees for raising debt. 
When we looked at the government’s commitments for 2013, we found that commitments are 
expected to lead to a real increase of 10 percent in government expenditure over 2012. This 
is a very large increase, particularly for an economy that is growing at a rate of three percent. 
A few years ago, the government made decisions limiting the rate of year-over-year growth in 
expenditure, and the limitation for 2013 according to this law is growth of about 5 percent in 
expenditure.  It  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  reduce  planned  expenses  by  5  percent. We 
must remember that even if the government does this, there will still be a significant increase 
in government expenditure for 2013. In addition, in order to meet the deficit target, we believe 
that it will be necessary to increase receipts by about NIS 6 billion, or about 0.6 percent of 
GDP. Those who will need to decide where to cut will need to make tough decisions, but in 
the  final  analysis,  after  all  of  the  cuts,  this  will  be  an  expansionary  budget,  and  I  feel 
sufficiently at ease with such a budget. 
The Bank of Israel’s monetary policy is successfully keeping inflation within the target range 
most  of  the  time.  Currently,  both  inflation  and  inflation  expectations  are  within  an  easy 
environment, but we must not become complacent about inflation. A central bank governor 
who acts that way will find himself forced to deal with inflationary developments later on. We 
are  constantly  watching,  with  a  magnifying glass, for  any  appearance  of  inflationary  signs. 
We do not see any right now, but we must keep our finger on the pulse. 
Public discourse constantly deals with the question of whether the Bank of Israel should have 
raised interest rates in order to deal with the problem of housing prices. We must remember 
that the interest rate affects a variety of variables in the market: the exchange rate, the level 
of investment, and more. If we raise the interest rate just to deal with housing prices, it will 
cause an appreciation in the shekel and a slowdown in economic growth. This is the trade-off 
we must constantly take into consideration. We need to remember that the main factor in the 
increase  of  housing  prices  is  the  lack  of  supply.  The  increase  in  prices  has  led  to  the 
expected supply response: an increase in the number of building starts. This rate, which was 
30,000 units per year, reached 44,000, which is a significant increase. However, the rate of 
land marketed by the State then declined, and the rate of building starts fell to 40,000 per 
year.  According  to  the  Israel  Lands  Administration,  the  problem  is  with  the  authorities 
approving building plans, without whose approvals they cannot continue marketing land. 
The way to handle housing prices must come from the supply side. What we cannot do is to 
use the interest rate, which is a policy tool that affects the entire economy, only to handle 
housing prices. People tell us that we took too heavy a responsibility on ourselves in terms of 
housing  prices.  This  reminds  me  of  those  who  argue  that  the  Chairman  of  the  Federal 
Reserve,  Ben  Bernanke,  releases  the  government  from  its  responsibility  to  stabilize  the 
economy by doing everything he can to spur its growth. We do what we can, and I wouldn’t 
want to cause damage to the entire population in order to teach politicians how to act better. 
The problem of poverty in Israel is not easy to solve, since poverty is concentrated mainly in 
two population groups – the Ultra-Orthodox and the Arabs – although this is not to minimize 
the problem of poverty among the rest of the general population. However, among the ultra-
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Orthodox,  less  than  half  of  men  participate  in  the  workforce,  and  among  the  Arabs,  just 
20 percent of women work. Therefore, we cannot deal with poverty by providing grants that 
will raise all of the poor above the poverty line due to the effect such a policy will have on 
employment incentives. We will need to find a solution to this complex problem. Observing 
both  historic  and  expected  demographic  trends  shows  continued  growth  in  the  Arab  and 
ultra-Orthodox  segments  of  the  population.  If  these  labor  market  trends  continue,  we  will 
reach  a  situation  where  half  of  the  population  belongs  to  sectors  where  labor  force 
participation is low, while the other half finances it. This won't happen, because we cannot 
continue to be in such a situation, and the relevant population groups understand this. 
Other  challenges  that  the  economy  will  need  to  deal  with  over  the  long  term  include 
improving achievements in the educational system and reducing bureaucracy, which weights 
heavily on economic activity, as reflected, for instance, in the World Bank’s “Doing Business” 
index. 
All in all, the Israeli economy is a success story. If we think about the history of the economy, 
the  security  situation,  the  challenges  that  we  have  met,  we  have  succeeded  in  building  a 
flourishing economy. As stated, there are problems and challenges, but despite the fact that 
we  can’t  solve  all  of  them  quickly,  I  am  certain  that  we  will  deal  with  the  challenges  and 
succeed in solving the problems. 
In response to questions from the audience: 
Apartment  buyers  who  want  to  take  out  mortgage  loans  must  take  into  account  that  the 
interest rate today is very low, and that when it rises, their monthly payments will rise as well. 
The  Bank  of  Israel  is  limiting  the  leverage  rate  because  when  the  time  comes  when  the 
buyers can’t meet their mortgage payments, that’s when the problems start. These limitations 
mainly affect investors, and have less of an effect on those purchasing their first apartment. I 
like to quote the book, This Time is Different: During good time, everyone thinks the situation 
is good, prices are going up, and we know how to deal with problems. But in recent years, 
we  have  seen  how  this  type  of  thinking  led  to  the  most  serious  economic  crisis  in  many 
years. We will not let such a thing happen in Israel. 
I frequently hear the argument that “the Bank of Israel is more interested in the stability of the 
banks than in the customers”. We maintain bank stability in order to protect the public and 
the  customers. We  have  a  responsibility  to  the  public,  and  we  have  a  duty  to  prevent  the 
things that we see happening in other countries. 
The change made in measuring unemployment data was done in order to bring the method 
of measurement in line with the manner accepted in the OECD. 
In terms of the Foreign Minister’s position, I again quote what a professor who taught me for 
many  years  told  me:  “The  biggest mistake  university  graduates  like  you  make  is  that they 
accept offers that haven’t been made to them.” 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
