Christian Noyer: “Noyer heralds new era for eurozone and for France” – 
Interview in Euroweek 
Interview  with  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France  and  Chairman  of  the 
Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  in  Euroweek  “France  in  the 
Capital Markets”, 25 February 2013. 
 EUROWEEK:  You  were  frequently  quoted  in  2012  as  saying  that  the  eurozone  was 
moving in the right direction. Do you feel vindicated by the recent strength of the euro 
and the performance of the eurozone’s financial markets? 
Noyer: Things have clearly improved, but this should not come as a surprise. It’s clear that 
markets lagged a bit before taking stock of what has happened, but looking back, enormous 
progress has already been made on all levels. This is true in terms of policies aimed at the 
restoration of sound public finances in many, if not all, eurozone countries as well as in the 
field of structural reforms. 
For example, we have seen very extensive progress in areas like pension reforms in France 
and  Italy,  banking  reform  in  Spain  and  labour  market  reforms  across  much  of  southern 
Europe and France. 
We have also seen great progress in terms of surveillance – not just surveillance of fiscal 
policies, which is a must in the context of the European monetary union, but also surveillance 
of  competitiveness  which  is  the  basis  for  structural  reforms.  This  is  essential  if  we  are  to 
avoid  distortions  in  the  convergence  of  competitiveness  and  therefore  prevent  a  re-
emergence  of  the  problem  of  growth  moving  towards  certain  parts  of  the  eurozone  to  the 
detriment of others. 
In  structural  terms  a  decisive  move  in  this  direction  was  the  agreement  on  banking  union 
which will break the negative feedback loop between banks and sovereigns and will ensure 
the  efficiency  of the  single  monetary  policy.  Last  but  not  least  there  was  the  new  concept 
developed by the ECB saying it was determined to do whatever it took to ensure the stability 
of the euro. The concept of the OMT has the merit of making it difficult for the market to fight 
the central bank once it has expressed a determination to do whatever it takes to achieve a 
certain goal. 
On the other hand, the OMT is also credible because of the conditionality. It’s not a case of 
simply endlessly signing cheque after cheque. It is framed within the context policies which 
are geared towards sustainability. 
Finally, of course there is the permanent backstop of the ESM. So I think that when we look 
at all these decisions they amount to a very comprehensive package which addresses all the 
doubts  and  questions  which  have  been  raised  since  the  start  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis. 
Therefore it is quite natural that 2012 is considered by market participants to have been a 
landmark in the creation of a new era for the eurozone. 
EUROWEEK: You have often expressed frustration that markets aren’t ready enough 
to acknowledge the longer term sustainability of monetary union. Are views changing, 
especially beyond the eurozone itself? 
Noyer:  Although  it  is  of  course  clearly  understood  in  Europe,  it  is  starting  to  become 
relatively  well  understood  in  the  US  and  in  Asia.  It  is  taking  more  time  outside  Europe  to 
develop this comprehensive view, because markets in the US and Asia don’t have as much 
information at their disposal about Europe. But given how globalised markets now are, the 
fact that they have been so positive in recent weeks is to me a clear sign that it has started to 
be understood relatively well all around the globe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
EUROWEEK: You’ve been speaking with your eurozone hat on, rather than specifically 
about France. Some of the data that has come out recently about European growth in 
general and French growth in particular have been very depressing, haven’t they? Is 
there a concern that the so-called modèle Français is defunct? 
Noyer: It is absolutely true that the figures have been disappointing in 2012. But what has to 
be taken into account is that France has been facing the same very strong headwinds that 
have been blowing across certain parts of Europe. Apart from Germany, the major markets 
for French exports are the southern European countries and the UK, all of which have been 
in recession in 2012. 
The consequence was that the French economy was more or less stagnant. At a time when 
so  many  other  parts  of  Europe  were  stagnant  or  in  recession,  this  should  not  come  as  a 
surprise. 
Additionally,  French  consumption,  which  had  been  very  resilient  during  the  crisis,  was 
weakened  by  the  fact  that  to  restore  credibility  in  the  consolidation  of  public  finances  the 
government decided to implement a number of tax increases. These inevitably have had an 
impact on consumers’ behaviour. 
I  do  not  believe  that  this  will  necessarily  last,  because  the  savings  ratio  in  France  is  high 
compared to the average elsewhere in Europe. We can therefore expect the savings ratio to 
decrease somewhat, leading to a more sustained recovery in consumption. 
That is hopefully one positive factor for the future. Another is that France is definitely moving 
towards reversing the trends in terms of competitiveness. The country is now demonstrating 
that  there  is  a  clear  understanding  of  the  need  to  pay  close  attention  to  firms’  production 
costs,  which  is  illustrated  by  the  government’s  so-called  Competiveness  Pact.  It  is  also 
illustrated  through  a  number  of  structural  reforms  that  have  started  to  be  introduced  to 
increase the flexibility of the economy and make job creation more resilient. 
From that  standpoint  the first  move  which  is  very  significant  is the  so-called  National  Pact 
between business and unions which will be vetted by law. This is a complete reversal of the 
previous trend. So in a sense, yes, the modèle Français is adapting. 
But I also think the model is retaining some features which are strong cultural characteristics. 
It  relies  on  positive  demographic  trends,  high  educational  standards  and  the  quality  of 
infrastructure.  So  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  the  French  economic  model  has  been 
characterised exclusively by the excessive inflexibility of its welfare system. 
I would add finally that France has started taking measures to correct the excessive costs in 
the welfare system while not by changing radically the way it is constructed. Instead, we will 
probably  move  more  towards  what  the  Scandinavian  countries  have  been  able  to  do  by 
introducing pension reforms to contain the costs of the system for corporates and containing 
healthcare  expenditures.  The  Nordic  countries  have  proved  that  you  can  have  an  efficient 
welfare system without damaging competitiveness. 
EUROWEEK:  But  countries 
their  exports  surging, 
underpinned by lower unit labour costs, while France’s exports continue to fall. Does 
it  concern  you  that  the  IMF  has  openly  suggested  that  France  is  in  danger  if  being 
overtaken by southern Europe? 
Noyer:  My  understanding  of  what  is  behind  the  IMF’s  comment  is  the  idea  that  these 
countries are addressing their competitiveness problems in a very strong manner, knowing 
that  their  problems  were  much  more  severe  than  those  we  had  in  France.  Their  relative 
productivity was lower and they also had relatively inflexible labour markets, which they are 
now reforming, notably in Spain and Italy. 
So the IMF has simply observed that France can’t afford to stand still when Germany began 
to reform some years ago, and given that the southern European countries are also moving 
to  address  the  problems  of  cost  competitiveness  and  rigidities.  This  is  clearly  why  the 
like  Portugal  are  seeing 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
economic reforms announced in France are so important. I’m delighted that the government 
has made this such a high priority. 
EUROWEEK:  Let’s  move  on  to  France’s  relationship  with  the  financial  markets  and 
with  the  developments  in  its  banking  system.  Are  you  concerned  about  what  the 
ratings agencies have been saying about France? Or are ratings agencies irrelevant 
these days? They don’t seem to have had much of an impact on France’s borrowing 
costs. 
Noyer:  No.  I  don’t  worry  about  ratings  agencies.  The  crisis  led  to  a  weakening  in  public 
finances in most countries, so in relative terms there have been few changes in their ratings. 
No agency is denying that France still has one of the strongest risk profiles in Europe. 
The second reason why I don’t worry is that worldwide authorities such as the G20 and the 
FASB  have  said  very  clearly  that  they  want  market  players  to  rely  less  on  credit  ratings 
agencies and to make their own judgments. This can be done by banks’ internal models or 
other types of analysis by investment managers which are more sophisticated than they used 
to be a few years ago. For all those reasons I don’t think the agencies are as influential as 
they used to be. 
The  agencies  themselves  have  always  claimed  that  they  are  just  one  of  the  resources 
available  in  the  market.  They  have  always  insisted  quite  rightly  that  they  are  not  the  final 
arbitrators of investment decisions. 
EUROWEEK: What  about  the  French  banking  system?  Are  you  comfortable  that the 
French banks are adequately prepared for Basel III? 
Noyer: I have always considered each of the five major groups within the French banking 
system to be basically resilient. The universal banking model is playing an important role in 
that respect because it creates a large base of diversified revenues which means that when 
one business line of the banks has been hit by a shock they can rely on the variety of their 
other revenues and preserve their earning capacity. 
But this being said, with the benefit of hindsight, it’s clear that like many others the French 
banks weren’t sufficiently resilient to withstand major external shocks and tail risks during the 
crisis. 
So the French banking sector had to increase its capital base and reduce its leverage. I have 
to  say  that  in  my  view  the  French  banks  have  done  so  quite  successfully  and  rapidly. 
Between the end of 2011 and June 2012 they increased their capital base by €20bn through 
retained profits or fresh fundraising in the market or from their shareholders. 
They  have  also  managed  to  achieve  a  very  well  controlled  process  of  deleveraging  by 
reducing their exposure to non-core businesses, in general at good prices. So their overall 
balance sheet situation has been substantially improved and they are now in the process of 
meeting in full the requirements of Basel III with core tier one ratios of 9% before the end of 
2013. This is several years ahead of the schedule that was originally stipulated. 
By  the  way,  I  always  felt  that  the  time  frame  determined  by  the  supervisors  in  Basel  for 
compliance  by  the  beginning  of  2019  was  always  a  little  bit  theoretical,  because  markets 
were likely to ask for more rapid implementation, which is what the French banks have done. 
So when I compare the French banking system with other major banking systems, be it in 
North America or in Europe, I have the clear conviction that the French banks are on track 
and are among the best performers in terms of their capital ratios. 
EUROWEEK: Has this deleveraging process been at all damaging to the economy, as 
some  people  say  it  has  been  in  the  UK  and  in  southern  Europe,  by  reducing  their 
lending to the corporate sector? Or is the universal banking system such that this is 
much less of a threat in France than elsewhere? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Noyer: The deleveraging of the French banks has been partly done through the reduction of 
their exposure to sovereign debt markets globally. The remainder has been in areas such as 
project and trade finance. 
The French banks haven’t exited from these businesses altogether, because they have very 
strong  franchises  in  these  areas  which  are  a  good  source  of  revenue.  But  they  have 
managed to liquidate a number of operations that were weighing down their balance sheets. 
That has helped them to reduce their financing needs. 
They did not reduce their leverage through imposing some kind of credit crunch – absolutely 
not. 
Actually,  the  change  in  the  volume  of  bank  lending  in  France  has  been  less  rapid  than  in 
almost all other eurozone countries – or almost all other European countries, including the 
UK. 
I don’t believe there has been any constraint on the supply of credit to the economy. If there 
has been a decline in lending volumes this has been a reflection of reduced demand, rather 
than any decline in supply. 
Possibly  in  the  future  there  may  be  a  relative  decline  in  the  importance  of  bank  lending, 
because  we  have  worked  a  lot  on  developing  simple  and  transparent  alternative  financing 
instruments such as securitisation. 
These may attract more attention from institutional investors and would therefore be a way of 
providing more credit to the economy without putting as much pressure as there may have 
been in the past on the balance sheets of the banks. This will be positive as long as we can 
avoid the defaults we saw at the beginning of the crisis, which were created by vehicles that 
were opaque and complex and impossible for investors to understand. 
EUROWEEK: At the same time, presumably French banks should not be discouraged 
from using the skills of their derivatives technicians, which are recognised throughout 
the world? 
Noyer:  I  agree  completely.  That  is  why  I  have  been  reticent  about  the  idea  of  separating 
investment banking and retail operations. I don’t think that is an appropriate concept. 
We live in a world where medium-sized and large corporates require access to bank lending 
for  a  large  number  of  banking  activities  but  also  for  market  operations.  Exporters,  for 
example, also use the markets to hedge their risks – so they’re re-shaping the risk on their 
balance sheet by changing the structure of their liabilities or their assets if they have claims 
arising from trade. 
For  all  these  activities  and  risks,  giving  corporates  access  to  banks  which  are  able  to 
respond  to  their  entire  commercial  and  investment  banking  needs  is  crucial  for  the 
development of the economy. 
On  the  other  hand,  what  we  don’t  want  to  see  is  banks  embarking  on  proprietary  trading 
which is totally disconnected from their banking activities. The ideal approach is to have a 
clear separation between what we in France call "purely speculative activities" – in America 
they would call it "prop trading" – and what is useful for the financing of the economy. 
Admittedly, it is not always simple to know exactly where the line should be drawn between 
these two purposes. But if the guidelines are clear enough it should be up to the supervisors 
in each country to make sure that this line is respected, and if need be to oblige banks to 
reorganize their activities. This is the philosophy which was the basis of the Liikanen Report 
and hopefully it will prevail. 
EUROWEEK: And if things do go wrong is it fair to have a bail-in regime where debt 
investors bear their share of the losses?  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Noyer:  Bail-in  is  an  important  concept.  We  discovered  during  the  crisis  that  if  all 
stakeholders  are  not  eventually  obliged  to  take  part  in  the  cost  of  restructuring  a  bank  if 
necessary, the consequence might be that the taxpayer has to foot the bill, which is not fair , 
although it can be necessary in extreme circumstances. 
The other consequence is that banks are forced into fire sales of assets, which means the 
prices they command are very low and their losses are maximised. The result is either that 
the bank is pushed towards bankruptcy if the state allows it, or has to be supported using 
taxpayers’ money and possibly having them bearing the losses, which as I said before is not 
right. 
So the concept of bail-in after all the equity holders and the subordinated debt holders have 
been wiped out, could involve the transformation of senior debt into equity or semi-equity in a 
going concern bank. In such a case, it is a very good and important concept. 
To my mind, bail-in should be part of the extra powers given to the supervisor. That is the 
only way we can reassure investors that it will be used only when it is absolutely needed to 
avoid a bankruptcy. That means that ultimately it is in the interests of senior bondholders to 
know  that  they  won’t  be  penalised  just  because  it’s  beneficial  for  other  stakeholders,  but 
because it can’t be avoided. This is why it is essential that this power should be in the hands 
of the supervisor. 
But bail-in needs to apply to the whole of the senior debt. I’m not completely convinced that 
there is merit in having specific bail-inable instruments like CoCos. This is because either it 
makes the basis of the bail-in very restricted and may not be sufficient in many instances so 
that in the end you may need recourse to a second layer. Or, if it is a big amount, it can be 
extremely costly because of the specific risk, and therefore it may be better in that event to 
move directly to equity. 
In any case, the fact that bail-in is now on the table and can be used by the supervisor will 
probably be one of the reasons why the banks will be tempted to increase their capital base 
regularly  over  time,  to  demonstrate  to  the  buyers  of  senior  debt  that  they  are  sufficiently 
protected. It will also be a strong incentive for banks to limit and control their risks and clearly 
communicate to the market how they do so. 
EUROWEEK: Has all this done enough to break the pernicious and highly damaging 
loop between sovereign and bank risk that was so central to the crisis? Or is that loop 
one that is simply impossible to break? 
Noyer:  I  think  we  have  reduced  that  risk.  The  work  is  not  totally  finished.  We  need  to 
continue in the direction we have taken. But to my mind there were three decisive moves that 
have addressed the problem of this feedback loop. One was the action that was taken on the 
consolidation of public finances, because if you have stronger government finances then of 
course the risk for banks is reduced. 
The second was moving decisively on the banks’ capital bases, because clearly if you have 
stronger banks then the risk for governments is lower. 
And finally, the decision to move to a banking union starts with supervision and then allows 
us to advance to the second and third steps which will have to be a resolution scheme and a 
resolution authority and finally a euro area deposit guarantee scheme. 
There  is  also  the  possibility  in  the  euro  area  to  ask  for  refinancing  by  the  ESM.  Those 
developments are key for providing a comprehensive response. We still have some work to 
do to finalise the consolidation of public finances and establish them on a stronger footing. 
But  clearly  we  are  well  advanced  in  the  process  of  doing  so,  and  the  same  is  true  of  the 
banks’ capital base, although we may have to finish that with the SIFIs’ capital surcharge as 
from  next  year  or  thereafter,  and  with  banking  union  which  is  in  the  process  of  being 
negotiated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
EUROWEEK: You’ve made some very strong comments about London. But what role 
does Paris see itself playing as a financial centre in the European context? 
Noyer: First, it’s clear that London is and will remain a major financial hub which brings a lot 
of  advantages  to  the  global  economy,  given  its  skills  base  and  the  capacity  of  its 
infrastructure. 
The comment I made was not a suggestion that Paris should replace London but simply that 
I do not believe in the trend of financial services concentrating more and more in London. 
This is something that should not be acceptable from a financial stability perspective by the 
euro area authorities. 
Why? Because, in the event of any problems, the central bank needs to be able to provide 
liquidity without any time lag where and if it is needed, and in a strictly controlled way. To do 
so, central banks need to exercise very close oversight not only on the banks themselves but 
all the major financial players and infrastructure providers. 
So  I  think  it’s  normal  that  within  a  given  monetary  area  the  bulk  of  banking  and  financial 
activities should take place within the area itself and not overseas. Clearly there are many 
US dollar operations that take place outside the US, but the bulk is still concentrated in the 
US, and the same is true of activities in pound sterling, Japanese yen, Canadian dollar. The 
same  must  apply  in  the  eurozone  because  it  is  a  complex  area  and  its  activities  should 
therefore be shared between Paris, Frankfurt and other financial centres within the zone. 
To answer your question about the specificities of Paris, we have several assets to play an 
important role. First, the Paris marketplace has a very strong position in equity markets within 
the euro area. Second, in the fixed income sector, Paris is by far the most important centre in 
two areas – the market for short term paper, where it has a share of about 36% of the euro 
market, and the corporate bond market, where its share is about the same. 
Finally, we have in Paris the world’s second largest asset management industry after New 
York. We may not have the entire panoply of banking strengths, but we have a number of 
very  strong  niches  which  will  continue  to  make  Paris  a  strong  hub,  which  can  and  should 
continue to play an important role in the European financial services sector. 
EUROWEEK: At the same time, would you like to see the big French banks continue to 
be active on the global stage, where their experience has been mixed? They didn’t do 
very well in southern Europe, did they? 
Noyer: There was a time when there was a feeling in the market that we were going to move 
towards  a  return  to  more  national  banking  system,  which  meant  that  international 
diversification was basically a weakness. 
Things have changed quite a lot and I don’t think anyone would argue that the move by BNP 
Paribas to acquire Fortis during the crisis was not a clever one. 
The  French  banks  weren’t  alone  in  believing  that  because  we  were  supposed  to  have  a 
single market in Europe, it was natural for banks to expand to neighbouring countries – just 
as it is natural for banks originally set up in Scotland to expand to England. So it was natural 
for French banks to see the eurozone and future euro area members in central and eastern 
Europe as their backyard. 
Yes, we had the Greek problem, which  was painful and costly for Crédit Agricole. But this 
was  really  an  extreme  case  and  hopefully  we’ll  never  see  similar  accidents  again  in  our 
banking industry. 
As  we  move  out  of  the  financial  crisis,  I  believe  that  having  activities  in  several  countries 
across the eurozone will soon re-establish itself as a normal diversified business model that 
is regarded as a strength rather than a weakness. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
