Mario Draghi: Opening remarks at the session “Rethinking the 
limitations of monetary policy” 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  farewell 
conference honouring Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, Jerusalem 
18 June 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
The topic for this session – “the limitations of monetary policy” – is one that has attracted a 
great deal of attention since the beginning of the financial crisis. Circumstances have forced 
all major central banks to resort to instruments and policies carefully tailored to the unusual 
situation. Alex Cukierman and Michael Woodford, who will present their views on the issue in 
a few minutes, are among the prominent academics that have written about it extensively1. 
Before handing the floor to them, let me say a few words about the current situation in the 
euro area, about our perspective at the European Central Bank (ECB) on today’s topic and 
about longer-term issues for the euro area. 
In terms of the current situation, the euro area economy is still in a phase of adjustment. Real 
GDP  fell  by  0.6%  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2012  and  by  0.2%  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013. 
Output has thus declined for six consecutive quarters, labour market conditions remain weak 
and  public  and  private  sector  balance  sheet  adjustments  continue  to  weigh  on  economic 
activity.  Unacceptably  high  levels  of  unemployment,  particularly  youth  unemployment,  are 
the prime concern of economic policy-makers. 
Recent survey data suggest some improvement, but from low levels. Export growth should 
benefit  from  a  recovery  in  global  demand.  Domestic  demand  should  be  supported  by 
accommodative monetary policy; by the recent real income gains from lower oil prices and 
lower inflation; and by the confidence and wealth effects stemming from the improvements in 
financial markets since last summer. 
The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  has  stressed  that  that  monetary  policy  will  remain 
accommodative for as long as necessary. In the period ahead, we will monitor very closely all 
incoming  information  on  economic  and  monetary  developments  and  stand  ready  to  act  if 
necessary. 
In the meantime, it is important to note that economic and financial fragmentation in the euro 
area has declined significantly since last summer. This has had beneficial effects for the real 
economies of all euro area countries. 
Banks  in  stressed  countries  have  been  able  to  regain  access  to  interbank  and  capital 
markets – and they have raised funds as well as capital. Larger corporations have benefited 
from lower borrowing costs in capital markets. And small and medium-sized enterprises have 
seen borrowing costs from banks somewhat reduced. All of this should support investment. 
Target  balances,  which  provide  a  powerful  summary  indicator  of  fragmentation,  have 
declined by almost 300 billion euros or 25% from their peak. The costs of protection against 
                                                
1   See, for example, Cukierman, A., 2013, Monetary policy and institutions before, during, and after the global 
financial crisis, Journal of Financial Stability, in press, and Cúrdia, V. and Woodford, M., 2011, The central-
bank balance sheet as an instrument of monetary policy, Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 54–79. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
risks of deflation have fallen from peaks twice their long-term average last summer to slightly 
below average now2. 
Overall,  monetary  policy  has  regained  steering  capacity,  which  had  become  lost  for  large 
parts of the euro area in mid-2012. This is an important positive development. 
Let me turn now to the limitations of monetary policy. Here I see two possible dimensions. 
The first is positive and refers to the effectiveness of central bank actions at the margin – for 
example, when interest rates are close to zero. 
The second is normative and refers to the constraints imposed on us by our mandate and to 
the  fears  that  boundaries  between  central  bank  policies  and  other  policies  might  become 
blurred. 
I will not dwell on the first dimension because I do not think that we are materially challenged 
in our ability to deliver our objective of price stability by the low level of interest rates. 
Looking  back,  despite  extraordinarily  testing  economic  circumstances,  inflation  in  the  euro 
area has remained on the whole consistent with the ECB’s objective of below but close to 
2%. 
Looking forward, Eurosystem staff project annual HICP inflation at 1.4% in 2013 and 1.3% in 
2014, but medium-term inflation expectations remain anchored in line with our definition of 
price stability. 
One reason why inflation expectations have remained broadly stable is that we – and other 
major central banks around the world – have prevented the materialisation of deflation risk by 
adopting both standard and non-standard measures as and when necessary. 
In  the  euro  area,  one  such  non-standard  measure  was  the  introduction  of  the  outright 
monetary transactions (OMT) programme last year, the stabilising effects of which are widely 
recognised. 
There  are  numerous  other  measures  –  standard  interest  rate  policy  and  non-standard 
measures – that we can deploy and that we will deploy if circumstances warrant. 
At the same time, I have also made clear that some of those measures may have unintended 
consequences. This does not mean that they should not be used, but it does mean that we 
need to be aware of those consequences and manage them appropriately. We will look with 
an open mind at these measures that are especially effective in our institutional setup and 
that fall within our mandate. 
This leads me to the second dimension of discussion of the limitations of monetary policy, 
namely the risk of a blurring of the boundaries of central bank policy. 
To  approach  this  question,  it  is  useful  to  refer  to  the  framework  put  forward  by  another 
prominent scholar in central bank matters. Marvin Goodfriend classifies central bank actions 
into three categories3. 
The  first  category  is  what  he  calls  “monetary  policy”  proper  –  changes  in  the  size  of  the 
monetary base via purchases and sales of government securities. 
Second  comes  “credit  policy”  –  changes  in  the  composition  of  the  central  bank’s  assets 
between government securities and claims on the private sector of various kinds. 
                                                
2   See P. Praet, Monetary policy in the context of balance sheet adjustments, Speech at Peterson Institute for 
International Economics, 22 May 2013. 
3   See Goodfriend, M., 2011, Central banking in the credit turmoil: an assessment of Federal Reserve practice, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, 58(1), 1–12. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Third  is  “interest  on  reserves  policy”  –  changes  in  the  opportunity  cost  for  banks  to  hold 
reserves or excess reserves. 
Goodfriend argues that all three categories have fiscal implications. And he states that credit 
policy and interest on reserve policy involve the use of public funds in a way that may imply 
an allocative role – and which may therefore blur the respective roles of the monetary and 
fiscal authorities. 
In  this  context,  it  is  worth  recalling  that  the  monetary  constitution  of  the  ECB  is  firmly 
grounded in the principles of ‘ordoliberalism’, particularly two of its central tenets: 
• 
• 
First, a clear separation of power and objectives between authorities; 
And  second,  adherence  to  the  principles  of  an  open  market  economy  with  free 
competition, favouring an efficient allocation of resources. 
More  explicitly,  and  by  reference  to  another  famous  framework  –  the  three  basic  policy 
functions that Richard Musgrave described as allocation, stabilisation, and distribution, and 
which aim delivering what Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa later described as efficiency, stability 
and  equity  –  our  policy  is  concerned  only  with  macroeconomic  stabilisation  through  the 
pursuit  of  price  stability.  We  do  not  and  should  not  play  an  active  role  in  the  functions  of 
allocation and distribution4. 
At  the  same  time,  our  operational  framework  has  always  included  elements  of  what 
Goodfriend qualifies as credit policy. 
The ECB manages liquidity and steers money market rates by lending to banks in temporary 
credit operations against a broad range of collateral. 
Furthermore, we have always remunerated reserves. 
Does the fact that our operations entail some credit risk on the balance sheet of the central 
bank  imply  a  violation  of  our  ordoliberal  principles?  Does  it  imply  that  the  ECB  policy 
interferes with credit allocation? My answer is no. 
The risks we take onto our balance sheet in the context of our operations are controlled, and 
they are accepted only insofar as they are strictly necessary for the pursuit of price stability. 
This  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  concept  of  monetary  dominance,  which  stipulates  that 
fiscal considerations cannot stand in the way of the achievement of price stability. 
Indeed,  ECB  credit  is  backed  by  adequate  collateral,  which  implies  that  the  amount  of 
residual risk borne by the central bank is buffered. There are two layers of protection. 
The first is founded on the ECB’s recourse to the borrowing institutions and the full credit and 
guarantee represented by their balance sheets. 
The  second  –  when  the  first  is  exhausted  –  is  given  by  the  appropriation  of  the  collateral 
posted  as  backing  of  the  loan.  If  a  counterparty  defaults,  the  underlying  collateral  assets 
allow for the recovery of the amount lent. The use of risk control measures such as valuation 
haircuts and variable margins further mitigate the exposure to credit risk. 
The  same  risk  control  principle  applies  in  the  context  of  the  OMT  programme,  through 
limitations  on  the  maturity  of  eligible  securities  (one  to  three  years)  and  through  the  strict 
conditionality for a country to be eligible for the programme. 
Another  aspect  of  our  operations  is  that  they  are  designed  precisely  with  the  goal  of 
achieving neutrality in credit allocation. 
                                                
4   Having said that, the objective of monetary policy being stabilisation does not imply that it cannot contribute to 
efficiency and equity, and indeed stable prices are a precondition of both (see B. Coeuré, Monetary Policy in a 
fragmented world”, Speech at Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 10 June 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
The  ECB’s  policy  framework  was  designed  with  a  view  to  allowing  the  participation  of  a 
broad range of counterparties. 
The framework rests on the fundamental principle of equal treatment of counterparties. 
Equal treatment is also reflected in the collateral framework, which features a broad range of 
assets and a set of eligibility criteria that apply to all Eurosystem credit operations without 
distinction. 
A  further  observation  is  that  lending  to  banks  is  consistent  with  an  untargeted  monetary 
policy. 
In the euro area, the majority of credit intermediation is processed via the banking system, as 
opposed  to financial  markets.  Banks  lend  to  households  and  to financial  and  non-financial 
firms of any size across the credit spectrum. Influencing bank funding conditions amounts to 
influencing credit conditions across the whole economy. 
What  I  have  said  applies  in  normal  times,  but  it  also  largely  applies  in  the  specific 
circumstances of a fragmentation of the financial system – circumstances that we have faced 
and continue to face, albeit to a diminishing extent. 
Financial  fragmentation  in  itself  creates  a  distortion  of  the  allocation  of  resources.  It 
undermines  the  concept  of  a  free  market  economy  because  it  alters  the  conditions  of 
competition. 
In this context, the measures that we have implemented through the crisis do not have an 
allocative  or  distributive  role.  On  the  contrary,  by  supplementing  financial  intermediation 
where  it  had  become  dysfunctional,  they  have  contributed  to  re-establishing  the  allocative 
and distributive neutrality of markets. 
The liquidity measures that we took early in the crisis can be interpreted in this light. At that 
time,  central  banks  had  to  substitute  for  the  sudden  disappearance  of  interbank  market 
activity by acting themselves as a money market intermediary when necessary. 
For  the  ECB,  this  task  was  facilitated  by  the  wide  range  of  counterparties  accepted  in 
refinancing  operations  and  by  our  broad  collateral  framework.  Other  central  banks  had  to 
innovate  more  through  the  use  of  various  targeted  facilities  outside  their  normal  operating 
framework in order to reach out to the broad economy. 
The ECB could also mobilise its collateral framework to relieve the liquidity constraints faced 
by banks. We expanded the list of eligible collateral, so that banks could liquefy their balance 
sheets and mobilise assets that had become difficult to trade. 
In addition, the ECB could further contribute to alleviating the banks’ funding uncertainty by 
providing  banks  with  assurance  that  they  could  rely  on  our  refinancing  operations  for 
extended periods. 
The  maximum  maturity  of  our  operations  increased  from  three  months  to  three  years. 
Through  these  measures,  the  ECB  decisively  addressed  the  liquidity  pressures  faced  by 
euro area banks and avoided a genuine credit crunch. 
Professor Fischer, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
What  must  be  clear from  what  I  have  said  so  far  is  what  constitutes the  limitations  to  our 
actions, consistent both with the letter of our mandate and with the philosophy of the market 
economy  that  underpins  it.  We  have  been  able  to  regain  better  control  of  monetary 
conditions in the euro area economy, which is very important for providing the appropriate 
monetary policy impulse to the economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Part of this achievement is due to the announcement of the OMT programme. But equally 
important has been the progress in economic reform and adjustment at both the country level 
and the euro area level. 
Such reforms need to continue. There is still a rich reform agenda, especially structural, at 
the  country  level  for  many  members  of  the  euro  area.  There  is  also  an  important  reform 
agenda at the European level. One key aspect of that is the banking union, which rests on 
single supervision and single resolution, the latter with an effective backstop if necessary. 
Preparations for single supervision at the ECB are advancing, and naturally we are working 
closely  with  the  relevant  national  authorities.  Five  work  streams  are  underway:  first,  on 
mapping the euro area banking system to identify systemically important banks; second, on 
the  supervisory  model  to  be  adopted,  which  is  most  likely  to  be  centred  around  joint 
supervisory teams; third, on supervisory data reporting; fourth on legal issues; and fifth, on 
the asset quality review that we will undertake prior to taking any bank under supervision. 
Formal adoption of the legal texts by the European Parliament will allow us to formalise the 
preparations and launch them so that we can be operational one year after adoption. 
Effective supervision requires effective resolution, which in turn requires establishment of a 
single resolution mechanism. We count on the European Commission to make a proposal in 
due course. 
Once  these  processes are  launched, the  banking  union  will  be  within  operational  reach.  It 
should provide an answer to many of the challenges currently facing the euro area, including 
uneven credit conditions and the fragmentation of financial markets. 
When  observers  from  outside  look  at  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  they  often 
emphasise  how  unfinished  it  appears  compared  with  fully  established  unions  such  as  the 
United States. In so doing, they highlight a number of unresolved issues, for example that in 
a  monetary  union  of  17  otherwise  sovereign  states,  a  credit  or  transfer  across  Member 
States is viewed differently from a credit or transfer within an individual Member State. The 
equivalent  of Target  balances, for  example,  is  a  non-issue  in  the  United  States.  However, 
such observers vastly underestimate the political capital invested in the euro by our leaders, 
as well as the political significance that such an investment has for the future of Europe. 
Of course, much work remains to be done for economic policy-makers across Europe. But I 
am  confident  that  together  we  can  build  a  stronger  economic  and  monetary  union  that 
ultimately delivers jobs, growth and a return to prosperity for the citizens of the euro area. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
