Choongsoo Kim: Harmonious operation of macroprudential and 
monetary policies, and challenges 
Speech by Dr Choongsoo Kim, Governor of the Bank of Korea, at the International Seminar 
on “Macroprudential and monetary policies”, Bank of Korea, Seoul, 8 April 2013. 
 to  assess 
Good morning 
Let me bid a heartfelt welcome to you all from academia and research institutes attending 
this  seminar.  My  special  thanks  go  to  Professor  Charles  Goodhart  of  LSE  who  will  be 
delivering  a  lecture  and  to  Professor  Dimitrios  Tsomocos  of  Oxford  University  who  will  be 
making a presentation. I would also like to thank all moderators, presenters and discussants. 
Since being given a mandate for financial stability under the revised Bank of Korea Act, we at 
the Bank have been widely involved in lively discussions concerning macroprudential policies 
in  the  international  community  along  with  other  central  banks,  supervisory  bodies  and 
academia,  and  it  has  been  well  to  the  fore  in  discharging  its  macroprudential  policy 
responsibilities by initiating fresh changes, for example, taking an active part in the drawing 
up of global financial regulations. 
The Bank of Korea is one of the few central banks in the world to have set up a Department 
in  charge  of  macroprudential  analysis  and  policy  tool  development;  this  is  called  as  the 
Macroprudential  Analysis  Department  which  is  incidentally  responsible  for  organizing  this 
seminar.  The  Bank  of  Korea  has  also,  by  developing  a  systemic  risk  assessment  model 
(SAMP1)  designed 
financial  stability  comprehensively  and  systematically, 
generated the momentum that, in a process of consultation with the BIS, the IMF, the BOE 
and  the  Fed,  can  contribute  to  better  understanding  about  the  root  causes  of the financial 
instability  for  both  Korea  and  worldwide  academic  community.  Seeking  to  heighten  the 
quality  of  its statutory  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  Bank  of  Korea  has  taken  advice from 
global experts and devoted its unremitting efforts to ensuring that the report gains worldwide 
recognition and respect. 
The theme of this seminar “Macroprudential and Monetary Policies” constitutes a core issue 
that  all  central  banks  should  consider,  in  order  to  carry  out  their  financial  stability 
responsibilities successfully. 
Studies on this issue have already been actively undertaken by central banks, academia and 
international organizations. In particular, through the construction of macroeconomic models 
that include the financial sector and macroprudential policy tools, the foundations have been 
laid for the comprehensive analysis of the effects of monetary and macroprudential policies 
on macroeconomic and financial stability. 
This seminar is therefore an invaluable opportunity to review the research findings so far and 
to set out future tasks. 
In this context, I would like to touch upon the limits of the macroeconomic policy operating 
framework before the outbreak of the crisis, the efforts to improve it to bring financial stability, 
the need for carrying out macroprudential policies and how best to achieve harmony in the 
conduct of monetary and macroprudential policy. 
                                                
1   Systemic Risk Assessment Model for Macroprudential Policy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Limits of macroeconomic policy framework operation before the crisis 
As the Great Recession triggered by the financial crisis has been persisting for a long time, 
each nation’s policy responses are more critical than ever before to prevent recurrence of a 
financial crisis. Although some nations especially emerging market economies have regained 
the  trend  growth  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  advanced  economies  including  Europe  are 
fretting  about  the  possibility  of  long-term  low  growth  as  their  economic  recovery  has  been 
delayed. 
For appropriate policy responses, nations around the world have first to recognize that the 
conventional  macroeconomic  policy  operating  framework  used  before  the  crisis  was  of 
limited effectiveness in properly preventing the recurrence of financial crises and coping with 
the Great Recession. Prior to the crisis, the policy authorities played down the effects that 
monetary, fiscal and microprudential policies have on each other and were effectively unable 
to  avoid  the  outbreak  of  the  financial  crisis.  In  addition,  although  major  economies  have 
implemented bold macroeconomic policies since the crisis including a massive expansion of 
fiscal  spending  and  interest  rate  cuts  for  economic  pump  priming,  fiscal  deficits  swelled 
enormously and sovereign credit crisis concentrated above all in Southern Europe erupted. 
Therefore, the importance of a new paradigm for new policy operation has been highlighted, 
and in this sense it is necessary to carry out in-depth studies on the conduct of monetary and 
macroprudential  policies.  First,  it  is  urgent  to  undertake  research  on  how  to  improve  the 
monetary policy operating framework when central banks implement monetary policies giving 
attention  to  financial  stability.  Since  the  crisis,  active  discussions  have  been  underway  on 
introducing  macroprudential  policy  tools  as  a  way  to  respond  to  systemic  risks.  However, 
studies  on their  effects and  limits  are  still  ongoing  and further  clarification  is  needed  as  to 
who should carry out such policies and their precise delineation. To work effectively toward 
stability in real economic activity and the financial sector while avoiding conflict or overlap of 
their  policy  effects,  we  need  continuous  research  concerning  ways  of  operating  monetary 
and macroprudential policies in harmony. 
Efforts to improve monetary policy operational framework considering financial 
stability 
Before  the  financial  crisis,  there  was  a  prevailing  notion  that  the  goal  of  monetary  policy 
should generally be limited to price stability. This seems attributable mainly to the situation 
that as nations around the world suffered high inflation during the 1970s, price stability had 
come  to  be  considered  the  most  important  policy  goal.  It  was  also  thought  that  monetary 
policy responses were regarded unnecessary as financial stability could be achieved through 
microeconomic regulations on financial institutions and financial instability had little impact on 
the real sector. 
However, while the low levels of inflation persisted during Great Moderation before the crisis, 
financial imbalances accumulated and systemic risks were created. After the outbreak of the 
crisis, the heightened financial instability had a serious direct impact on the real economy. As 
a  new  economic  phenomenon  that  runs  in  the face  of conventional  wisdom  has  emerged, 
discussions on re-establishing the monetary policy operating framework are underway in a 
direction that strengthens central banks’ financial stability function. 
These movements, as Professor Goodhart so ably and succinctly brought into order for us, at 
the 2010 BIS annual conference, seem to be natural considering that the central banks’ role 
previously  underwent  a  dynamic  change  from  financial  stability  to  fiscal  support  and  price 
stability  in  line  with  the  times  and  economic  issues  we  faced,  and  the  monetary  policy 
operating framework also changed along with it. 
With  regard  to  the  direction  of  improvement  of  the  monetary  policy  operating  framework 
taking account of financial stability, the opinion has been put forward that the effects arising 
from taking a macroprudential perspective should be considered in making monetary policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
decisions, but it has not yet been clearly formalized. People share the view that monetary 
policy should be conducted preemptively and proactively to resolve financial imbalances by 
paying  attention  to  credit  growth  rates  and  the  rate  of  increase  in  asset  prices  as  well  as 
inflation to prevent financial instability. 
However, I think there should be further discussions on the view of Dr. Adrian of US Fed and 
Professor Shin of Princeton University that central banks should consider price stability and 
financial stability at the same time and on the argument of Olivier Blanchard of the IMF and 
Professor Rogoff of Harvard University that macroprudential policy tools should also be used 
separately,  divorced  from  the  policy  rate  which  is  the  main  monetary  policy  instrument.  It 
seems  that  collapse  of  the  financial  system  can  be  avoided  by  actively  injecting  liquidity 
through unconventional monetary policies at an early stage of crisis as in the recent global 
financial  crisis.  This  has  many  implications  for  improving  the  monetary  policy  operational 
framework going forward. 
to 
the 
financial  system 
through  contagion  effects  due 
Need for the conduct of macroprudential policies 
After  the  experience  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  it  seems  that  a  consensus  has  been 
already  formed  that  microprudential  regulations  alone  are  not  sufficient  and  a  policy 
approach from a macroprudential perspective is needed. Many nations experienced a rapid 
destabilization  of 
their 
interconnectedness, even if their own financial institutions were sound before the crisis. They 
also witnessed a further amplification of the volatility of economic activity when it was passed 
through the financial sector owing to its procyclicality. 
Accordingly,  the G20, the  FSB,  the  BCBS  and  the  IMF  have  been  leading  discussions  on 
establishing  a  macroprudential  policy  framework  and  developing  policy  instruments,  and  a 
wide  variety  of  findings  have  emerged  from  these  discussions.  Major  regulations  include 
Basel  III  regulations,  such  as  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer,  liquidity  and  G-SIFI 
regulations.  Besides  this,  countries  have  pushed  ahead  with  establishing  country-specific 
macroprudential  policy  frameworks  and  introducing  instruments  commensurate  with  their 
own particular economic systems. 
For  the  case  of  Korea  in  a  situation  in  which  global  financial  interconnectedness  has 
intensified,  the  expansion  of  capital  flow  volatility  and  household  debt  accumulation  until 
recently posed potential systemic risks. In response, Korea adopted macroprudential policy 
instruments.  As  macroprudential  instruments  in  the  foreign  exchange  sector,  Korea 
established 
imposed  a 
Macroprudential  Stability  Levy  to  curb  the  inflow  of  short-term  capital  and  prevent  sudden 
capital outflows. 
Hyun Shin of Princeton University showed that the introduction of macroprudential policy tool 
targeting non-core liabilities in open economies could increase the maneuvering room for the 
monetary  policy  operation  by  reducing  the  effects  of  exchange  rate  fluctuations  on  the 
economic  system.  And  in  accordance  with  his  view,  the  introduction  of  foreign  exchange 
macroprudential instruments by Korea can be assessed favorably. 
As  policy  tools  for  household  debt,  we  used  the  LTV  and  DTI  ratios  out  of  concern  over 
surges  in  housing  prices  and  household  debt  delinquencies. The  LTV and  DTI  regulations 
were effective to a large extent as they cooled down the increases in mortgage lending and 
blunted the run-up in housing prices. They are also thought to have contributed to preventing 
household debt delinquencies during the global financial crisis. 
Since  macroprudential  policy  measures  have  been  in  place  for  a  relatively  short  period  of 
time  compared  to  other  macroeconomic  policies,  however,  their  effects  need  further 
verification. While Hong Kong, Brazil and Turkey have introduced macroprudential policies or 
strengthened  related  regulations  in  the  wake  of  the global  financial  crisis,  it  is  too  early  to 
decide on their effectiveness. 
foreign  exchange  derivatives  positions  and 
the  ceiling  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Macroprudential  policies  should  capture  potential  systemic  risk  factors  before  financial 
instability gets out of control and turns into a crisis and be applied preemptively. What is most 
important  is  to  determine  the  appropriate  timing  of  their  application.  In  addition,  since  the 
development  of  indicators  designed  to  determine  the  choice  and  settings  of  these 
macroprudential policy tools is still at an early stage and the data on the basis of which they 
are determined is insufficient, the conduct of policy should be based on more abundant and 
sophisticated micro data when implementing policies. 
Macroprudential  policy  instruments  are  normally  applied  in  the  form  of  regulations  on 
financial institutions. As the pursuit of regulatory arbitrage by financial institutions including 
the use of shadow banking could undermine the policy effects, we need responses to deal 
with  this.  It  has  been  assumed  so  far  that  macroprudential  policy  measures  will  be  used 
mostly  during  economic  expansion.  We  should  be  however  mindful  of  asymmetry  as  well 
which  rather  accelerates  procyclicality  or  weakens  regulatory  effects  during  economic 
downturn. 
from 
to  expect  satisfying  synergy  effects 
Harmonious operation between monetary and macroprudential policies 
As  mentioned  earlier,  countries  around  the  world  do  not  yet  have  enough  experience  with 
implementation  of  macroprudential  policies  and  systemetic  risk  indicators  measuring  the 
degree of financial uncertainty are still under development. Against this backdrop, it would be 
difficult 
the  mutual  complementarity  of 
macroprudential  and  monetary  policies.  If  the  effects  of  the  two  policies  overlap  or  are  in 
conflict  and  they  are  not  operated  harmoniously,  this  may  give  rise  to  the  problem  of 
excessive  or  offsetting  policy  effects,  as  they  both  work  by  way  of  changes  in  financial 
institutions’ balance sheets. 
If  macroprudential  policy  works  smoothly  toward  the  targeted  objectives  at  an  opportune 
time, however, it can form a mutually complementary relationship with monetary policy and 
thus maximize social welfare through price stability and financial stability, as suggested by 
Stijn  Claessens  and  others  of  the  IMF.  This  view  claims  that,  as  we  can  see  from  the 
experience  of  the  financial  crisis,  it  is  possible  to  respond  to  the  accumulation  of  financial 
imbalances, including the build-up of leverage which can be triggered by monetary policy, by 
using  macroprudential  policy  instruments  which  reduce  the  interconnectedness  of financial 
institutions  and  procyclicality  through  regulations  on  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets. 
Furthermore, if additional macroprudential policies which can contribute to financial stability 
successfully play a complementary role to monetary policy, this can contribute to enhancing 
the monetary policy’s credibility and transparency. 
In  order  to  achieve  financial  stability  through  the  harmonization  of  operations  between  the 
two policies, it is essential for the various policy authorities to cooperate closely. And there is 
a  global  trend  toward  emphasizing  the  central  bank’s  role  in  setting  up  an  institutional 
framework  to  ensure  seamless  cooperation.  Policy  decisions  should  be  made  through this 
institutional  framework  based  on  adequate  sharing  and  analysis  of  information  to  avoid 
overlap and conflict between policy goals. 
In the process, the role of the central bank is important particularly since it is in charge of 
monetary  policy  and  forms  the  mainstay  of  macroprudential  policy  implementation.  While 
carrying  out  monetary  policy  so  far,  central  banks  have  been  equipping  themselves  as 
systemic regulators to take the lead in implementing macroprudential policies by building up 
expertise  in  evaluating  overall  economic  conditions  and financial  market  stability  based  on 
their  process  and  analysis  of  macro  and  financial  data.  The  US  FSOC  (Financial  Stability 
Oversight Council), Europe’s ESRB (European Systemic Risk Board), the UK FPC (Financial 
Policy Committee) set up to carry out macroprudential policies since the crisis show that the 
central bank plays a leading role within the financial stability policy agencies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusion 
Almost five years have now gone by since the global financial crisis and we have faced two 
major  assignments  of  overcoming  the  crisis  successfully  and  subsequently  preventing  a 
recurrence  of  the  crisis.  On  the  one  hand,  major  advanced  countries  are  implementing 
quantitative  easing  to  overcome  the  crisis,  and  on  the  other  hand  international  financial 
bodies  such  as  G20,  FSB  and  BCBS  are  developing  global  financial  regulatory  reform 
measures  and  promoting  their  implementation.  Coordinating  these  measures  designed  to 
overcome  the  crisis  and  prevent  its  recurrence  is  one  of  the  major  challenges  the 
international community now faces. 
Along with this, international policy cooperation to curb regulatory arbitrage, as well as each 
individual  country’s  coordinated  operation  of  its  macroeconomic  policies,  is  crucial  for  the 
sustainable and stable growth of the world economy. There has been of course a constant 
repetition  of  financial  and  economic  crises,  most  prominently  the  Great  Depression  of  the 
1930s,  and  consequently  regulatory  measures  have  been  put  in  place  to  prevent  crisis 
recurrence, but it is still hard to say for sure that there are no more crises to come. In order to 
prevent  the  eruption  of  a  further  crisis,  we  should  prepare  for  a  new,  unpredictable  crisis 
rather than looking back at the previous ones, and in this respect, we should make sure that 
the regulatory reforms not just reflect lessons from previous crises but preemptively identify 
potential factors triggering a crisis and prevent their occurrence. 
Organizations carrying out macro-prudential policies need to have the abilities of a prophet to 
monitor on a constant basis and identify preemptively all the economic and social factors that 
could possibly give rise to systemic risks. This being the case, the policy authorities must be 
imbued with a sense of mission to shoulder the great national responsibilities that they bear. 
Thank you for listening so attentively and I hope that what we have discussed today will give 
us a clue how to cope with the challenges we have in front of us. 
References 
Kim,  Choongsoo,  “Monetary  Policy  after  Global  Financial  Crisis  (In  Korean),”  2013 
Economics Joint Conference, Feb. 2013 
Adrian, T. and H. S. Shin, “Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, and Monetary Policy,” 
FRB NY Staff Report No. 346, 2008. 
Blanchard, O., G. Dell’Ariccia and P. Mauro, “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy,” IMF Staff 
Position Note, 2010. 
C.A.E. Goodhart, “The Changing Role of Central Banks,” presentation at the 9th BIS Annual 
Conference, Lucerne, Jun. 24, 2010. 
Erlend  W.  Nier,  Jacek  Osiski,  Luis  I.  Jcome,  and  Pamela  Madrid,  “Towards  Effective 
Macroprudential  Policy  Frameworks:  An  Assessment  of  Stylized  Institutional  Models,”  IMF 
Working Paper No. 250, 2011. 
H. S. Shin, “IMF Financial Stability & Systemic Risk Forum,” Mar. 2013. 
Itai Agur and Sunil Sharma, “Rules, Discretion, and Macro-Prudential Policy,” IMF Working 
Paper No. 65, 2013. 
Reinhart, C. M. and K. Rogoff, “Shifting Mandates: The Federal Reserve’s First Centennial,” 
presentation at the AEA meetings, San Diego, Jan. 3, 2013. 
Stijn  Claessens,  Karl  Habermeier,  Erlend  Nier,  Heedon  Kang,  Tommaso  Mancini-Griffoli, 
Fabian  Valencia,  “The  Interaction  of  Monetary  and  Macroprudential  Policies,”  IMF,  Dec. 
2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
