Norman T L Chan: How can Hong Kong consolidate its position as Asia’s 
premier wealth and asset management hub 
Welcoming  remarks  and  keynote  speech  by  Mr  Norman T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of the 
Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the  Treasury  Markets  Summit  2013,  Hong  Kong, 
6 September 2013. 
 Good morning, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. 
It is very nice of the Treasury Markets Association (TMA) to invite me to speak at 
this year’s Summit. It should not come as a surprise to you if I choose to talk about the “soft 
powers of Hong Kong” again today. I have no doubt that financial centres aspiring to win the 
privileged  position  of  IFC  (international  financial  centre)  all  have  very  good  hard 
infrastructure,  such  as  airport,  roads, 
IT  etc.  But  what  really 
differentiates a winner from the rest is its clear edge in the “financial market infrastructure” or 
the “soft powers”. Today I would like to talk about two key building blocks in the arena of “soft 
powers” competition: “platform building” and “reaching out”. 
telecommunications, 
Tribute to TMA 
2. 
The  aim  of “platform  building”  is quite simple.  An  IFC  must  ensure that it  has  the 
appropriate legal, regulatory, tax and policy framework for the financial services to develop 
and prosper. Competition is not just about how good you are or have been, but more about 
whether you are better than your competitors or not. So it is no good for Hong Kong to sit on 
its laurels and just hope or pray that other financial centres do not or cannot catch up. 
3. 
The main reason why I decided to set up the TMA back in 2005 was precisely the 
desire  to  enhance  the  “soft  powers”  of  Hong  Kong’s  financial  services  industry.  As  many 
founding members of the TMA who are here today may recall, the predecessor of the TMA 
was the ACIHK, the Hong Kong branch of the international ACI headquartered in Paris. The 
ACIHK played a useful role in supporting the treasury markets in Hong Kong, but there were 
limitations  on  its  remit  and  resources.  I  can  still  remember  vividly  how  I  worked  with  the 
founding  members  (some  of  them  are  here  today),  such  as  Horace  Fan,  Andrew  Fung, 
Benny Luk and Peter Pao to transform the ACIHK into the TMA as we now know. I would like 
to take this opportunity to thank all the founding members for their efforts and contributions to 
help bring this important piece of soft infrastructure into fruition. 
4. 
The TMA’s work through the years is commendable. In the past year alone, the TMA 
has,  in  collaboration  with  the  HKMA  and  other  stakeholders,  made  many  contributions  to 
enhance Hong Kong’s soft powers. I would like to highlight today three important pieces of 
work of the TMA: 
(a)  
the TMA has conducted a thorough review of the Hong Kong Interbank Offered Rate 
(HIBOR) fixing mechanism and presented to the Hong Kong Association of Banks (HKAB) 
recommendations to enhance the transparency, robustness and governance of the HIBOR 
fixing mechanism. These recommendations were subsequently accepted by the HKAB and 
endorsed  by  the  HKMA  in  February  2013  for  implementation.  Under  the  new  regime,  the 
TMA has taken over from HKAB as the administrator of the HIBOR fixing mechanism with 
Hong Kong Interbank Clearing Limited serving as the calculating agent. 
(b)  
Another landmark achievement was the launch of CNH HIBOR. Having undertaken 
more than one year of pilot trials, the TMA officially launched in June 2013 the CNH HIBOR 
fixing,  which  is  the  first offshore  RMB  interest  rate  benchmark  in  the  world.  This  is  a  very 
important piece of market infrastructure which will facilitate the development of a whole array 
of offshore RMB credit and interest rates contracts and products; and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
(c)  
The TMA is also an important player in professional training. In close collaboration 
with  the  HKMA,  the  Hong  Kong  Institute  of  Bankers  and  the  Hong  Kong  Securities  and 
Investment  Institute,  the  TMA  has  participated  and  contributed  to  the  design  of  a  new 
professional  competency  framework  for  practitioners  in  the  private  wealth  management 
industry. Good progress has been made and we expect the new competency framework can 
be rolled out within the next few months. 
5. 
hands with the HKMA and others in the “platform building” work. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  TMA  and  its  committees  for  their  tireless  efforts  in  joining 
Measures that make Hong Kong more competitive as a wealth and asset management 
centre 
6. 
It is not easy to come up with an exhaustive list of factors that affect Hong Kong’s 
competitiveness as a wealth and asset management centre in Asia. There are some factors 
such  as  air  quality,  law  and  order,  cost  of  doing  business,  international  school  places,  etc 
that have a major effect on individual firms’ decision to locate or expand operations in Hong 
Kong and not elsewhere, but these factors apply across the board and are not confined to 
the financial services sector. What I propose to do now is to highlight a couple of key “soft” 
infrastructure  that  is  uniquely  important  to  Hong  Kong’s  future  development  as  the  wealth 
and asset management hub in Asia: 
(a)  
as we all know, the existence of an inheritance tax or estate duty, even at low rates, 
is a material impediment to the development of wealth and asset management businesses. 
Back in 1998, the HKMA started to lobby the HKSAR Government to abolish the estate duty 
in Hong Kong in order to foster Hong Kong’s development as a wealth management centre. 
The  lobbying  efforts  met  with  considerable  resistance  initially  but  we  did  not  give  up  and 
continued  with  such  efforts  under  the  terms  of  three  successive  Financial  Secretaries.  In 
2005, after seven years of relentless appeals, we finally convinced the Financial Secretary to 
include the abolition of estate duty proposal in his Budget Speech. This was followed by the 
Legislative Council’s passage of the bill implementing the abolition from February 2006; 
(b)  
Modernisation  of  the  trust  laws:  the  amendment  bill  seeking  to  modernise  Hong 
Kong’s  trust  laws  was  passed  by  the  Legislative  Council  on  17  July  2013.  This  was  an 
important  milestone  to  revamp  Hong  Kong’s  antiquated  trust  regime  which  had  not  been 
substantially reviewed and modified for decades. This is again something that the HKMA had 
advocated and pushed strongly within the Government in the past few years so that our trust 
law regime can catch up with the other financial centres; 
(c)  
Promotion of Islamic Finance: the legislative amendments to provide a comparable 
taxation framework for common types of sukuk vis-à-vis conventional bonds were passed by 
the Legislative Council on 10 July 2013. It was a key policy proposal made in the study jointly 
led by the HKMA and the TMA in late 2007, following the announcement in the 2007 Policy 
Address of the initiative to develop an Islamic financial platform in Hong Kong. Last week, 
HKMA  also  announced  jointly  with  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (BNM)  the  establishment  of  a 
private-sector led joint forum for advancing the development of Islamic finance in Hong Kong, 
and we are glad to have Assistant Governor Bakarudin Ishak of the BNM attending the panel 
discussion of the Summit this afternoon; 
(d)  
open-ended  investment  company  (OEIC):  the  HKMA  has  intensively  lobbied  for  a 
legislative  framework  and  regulatory  regime  for  OEIC  in  Hong  Kong.  We  were  very 
encouraged  that  this  initiative  was  announced  by  the  Financial  Secretary  in  the  2013–14 
Budget to provide more choices to market participants in terms of the legal form of funds. 
This would be a major step to attract more funds to domicile in Hong Kong; and 
(e)  
last but not least, the HKMA, in close collaboration with the Securities and Futures 
Commission (SFC) and the private banking industry, has undertaken a series of measures to 
promote the development of Hong Kong as the premier private wealth management hub in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to 
In  addition 
lobbying  and  advising 
the  region.  The  HKMA  issued  guidance  to  private  banks  in  June  2012  to  facilitate  the 
adoption  of  a  portfolio  based  approach  in  assessing  the  suitability  of  investment 
recommendations  so  that  private  banks  can  be  more  flexible  in  serving  customer  needs 
without compromising investor protection. 
7. 
the 
abovementioned  measures  that  are  crucial  to  Hong  Kong’s  development  as  a  wealth  and 
asset management centre, the HKMA has seconded staff to provide technical support to the 
Financial Services Branch during the policy formulation as well as the legislative process. 
8. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while we have done a lot in the past few years to build and 
reinforce  Hong  Kong’s  platform  as  the  wealth  and  asset  management  hub,  we  fully 
appreciate  that  such  work  is  a  never  ending  task  as  most  financial  centres  in  the  region, 
including those in Mainland China, all harbour the understandable aspirations to become an 
international financial centre. 
the  HKSAR  Government  on 
Outreaching to supplement platform building 
9. 
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  second  “building  block”  of  soft  powers,  which  is  “reaching 
out”.  I  am  sure  most  of  you  would  agree  with  me  that  the  platform  building  work  must  be 
supplemented by appropriate “outreaching” efforts. This is similar to the situation in which a 
company,  having  created  a  very  superior  and  competitive  product,  needs  to  do  a  lot  of 
marketing and advertising in order to increase customer awareness and market share. For 
this reason, the HKMA has over the past few years undertaken a series of outreaching and 
marketing  programmes  with  special  emphasis  on  Hong  Kong  as  the  Asian  hub  for  wealth 
and asset management businesses. 
10. 
Hong Kong is already a hub for private wealth and asset management. Nearly 80 of 
the top 100 global money managers are in Hong Kong. Fifteen private banks have opened 
for business since 2009, bringing the total to 45 banks offering private banking services to 
their  clients  today.  For  the  asset  management  business  as  a  whole,  the  combined  fund 
management  assets  hit  a  record  high  of  US$1.6  trillion  in  2012,  with  65%  of  the  funds 
sourced from  non-Hong  Kong  investors,  according to  a  recent  SFC  survey.  It  is, however, 
worth  noting  that  the  survey  also  showed  that  74%  of  the  practitioners  in  the  asset 
management field were engaged in the sales and marketing functions. While the figure has 
already trended downward from 81% in 2008, it does reflect the fact that Hong Kong needs 
to further expand the other segments of the asset management “value added” chain, e.g. in 
structuring,  research,  investment  and  trading.  To  achieve  this  objective,  the  HKMA’s 
outreach work in the last two to three years has taken a new focus on asset owners, such as 
pension funds and sovereign wealth funds. 
11. 
Since  2010,  the  Market  Development  Team  of  the  HKMA  attended  hundreds  of 
meetings  with  overseas  asset  managers  and  owners.  I  am  pleased  to  report  that  these 
outreaching campaigns are generating positive results, with about one-third of the institutions 
that  we  have  approached  indicating  a  commitment  to  devote  resources  to  Hong  Kong. 
Specifically, 67 institutions have expressed interest in pursuing a Hong Kong presence and 
48 institutions are planning to expand their existing operations in Hong Kong. 
12. 
There  are  several  reasons  why  the  HKMA  is  uniquely  well  placed  to  undertake 
effective outreach programmes. First, the HKMA is a banking supervisor and banks are the 
key players in the financial markets in Hong Kong. Second, the HKMA is also itself a major 
asset  owner  and  manager,  with  over  US$370  billion  of  Exchange  Fund  assets  under 
management. This makes it easier for the HKMA to make the right connections and speak 
the  same  language  of  the  asset  owners  or  managers  overseas.  Thirdly,  the  HKMA  senior 
management  is  fortunate  to  have  the  support  from  a  small  but  dedicated  team  of  highly 
professional  staff  in  the  outreaching  programmes.  Finally,  the  HKMA  is  part  of  the 
Government and it is easier for us to refer issues or problems to the relevant government 
bureaux or departments for consideration or actions. In this context, I would like to thank in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
particular the SFC and InvestHK, which have been working very closely with us to provide 
the much needed advice or help when overseas financial institutions are thinking of locating 
or relocating their operations to Hong Kong. 
Concluding remarks 
13. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to end my comments by saying this: competition 
amongst  financial  centres  has  always  been  fierce  and  will  be  even  more  so  in  the  future. 
Competition is quite like rowing a boat up a river, in which case there is a Chinese saying: “
逆水行舟，不進則退”or in English: “excel and advance” or “stay put and be left behind”! 
14. 
Hong Kong has already built a world class platform for the private wealth and asset 
management industry. However, there is no room for complacency. We will need to do more 
to further enhance the platform and to reach out to the overseas asset managers and owners 
to market Hong Kong’s platform. We will continue to look to the TMA and all the stakeholders 
in the financial services industry for support and collaboration to build “Hong Kong” as the 
brand  name  that  represents  quality,  trust  and  confidence  to  asset  owners  and  managers. 
This is an ongoing task and I have no doubt that Hong Kong, in line of our “can do” spirit, can 
live up to the challenges ahead of us. Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
