Ignazio Visco: The exit from the euro crisis – opportunities and 
challenges of the Banking Union 
Speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the conference “Europe and 
the future of global governance”, organized by the Italian Institute of International Affairs and 
the US Council on Foreign Relations, Rome, 10 September 2013. 
 The  euro  area  has  suffered  two  recessions  in  the  last  five  years.  GDP  contracted for  five 
consecutive quarters starting in the spring of 2008; the fall came to more than 4 percent in 
2009. The subsequent recovery was short-lived: the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis in 
mid-2011 was followed by six quarterly declines. In 2012, GDP was still 1.3 percent less than 
in 2007. 
The signs now are that the contraction is drawing to a close. GDP resumed moderate growth 
in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year,  reflecting  the  expansion  of  exports  and  progress  in 
domestic  demand,  and  the  confidence  indicators  improved  somewhat  over  the  summer. 
Actual and expected inflation remain subdued, well below 2 percent. 
However, the timing and strength of the recovery are still highly uncertain. The resolve with 
which European and national authorities continue to implement the reform strategy devised 
to deal with the crisis will be decisive for financial conditions and for business and consumer 
confidence. Externally, the slowdown in the emerging economies and the recent geopolitical 
tensions in the Middle East threaten to undermine the prospects for world demand. 
The  crisis  did  not  hit  all  the  euro-area  countries  in  the  same  way,  and  the  recovery  is 
correspondingly  asymmetrical.  In  Italy  the  recession  has  been  longer  and  deeper  than  in 
most other countries. Last year’s output was almost 7 percent less than in 2007. In the first 
half of 2013 GDP diminished again, but at a slower pace, with exports still providing the main 
stimulus. The latest indicators are consistent with gradual improvement: the decline in output 
should  come  to  a  halt  in  the  coming  months.  The  downside  risks  to  this  scenario  are 
compounded by investors’ concerns about possible political instability. 
The spark that ignited the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area at the end of 2009 was the 
unveiling of the dramatic state of the public finances in Greece. But the tensions soon fed on 
the economic weaknesses of other member states – macroeconomic imbalances, real-estate 
bubbles,  distressed financial  systems,  high  public  debt. The  crisis  became  systemic  in  the 
summer  of  2011  with  the  announcement  of  the  involvement  of  private  investors  in 
restructuring the Greek debt, which made the markets suddenly aware of the implications of 
the no bail-out clause in the EU Treaty. These events laid bare the incompleteness of the 
European construction, the euro being a “money without a state”. The spreads between the 
government bond yields of the fiscally weak countries and the German Bund soared. 
A serious crisis of confidence in the very survival of the single currency ensued, with adverse 
consequences for the real economy. The situation deteriorated most severely in the banking 
systems  of  the  countries  most  directly  affected  by  the  tensions,  whose  perceived  credit 
standing soon aligned with that of their sovereigns; wholesale funding conditions deteriorated 
sharply,  cross-border  interbank  lending  all  but  dried  up.  There  emerged  a  perverse  loop 
between  fragile  public  finances,  weak  economic  performance,  and  deteriorating  bank 
conditions. 
Given the risk of a severe credit tightening, the Governing Council of the ECB took resolute 
action. With  two  special  refinancing  operations  in  December  2011  and  February  2012  the 
Eurosystem supplied banks with a trillion euros in three-year funds (over €500 billion net of 
the volume of funds reimbursed in other refinancing operations). The liquidity injection was 
effective: sovereign spreads dropped and the wholesale markets revived. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Europe’s response to the sovereign debt crisis has been twofold. Domestically, to rein in the 
risks  from  unsustainable  public  finances,  individual  countries  have  committed  to  prudent 
fiscal policies and structural reform to enhance competitiveness. At European Union level, to 
dispel  the  fears  of  euro  break-up  and  “redenomination  risk”,  a  reform  of  economic 
governance has been undertaken. 
National action on the sovereign debt crisis has been heterogeneous. Fiscal adjustment was 
indispensable in the more economically fragile countries, including Italy, to ward off the risk 
of losing access to the market, which would have precipitated the crisis. Its negative short-
term effect on economic activity was the price paid for averting more serious consequences. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight  it  is  clear  that  the  reform  of  European  governance  was  long 
overdue.  The  long-dormant  process  was  effectively  set  in  motion  by  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis. Despite hesitancy, overlaps and redundancies, within a very short span of time definite 
progress has been achieved. 
Together with the efforts at national level, the reform of European governance has begun to 
rebuild  trust  among  member  states.  The  strengthening  of  the  budgetary  rules,  which  has 
reinforced  existing  commitments  and  made  them  more  credible  without  imposing  more 
demanding  targets,  and  the  extension  of  multilateral  supervision  to  macroeconomic 
imbalances  have  accompanied  the institution  of mechanisms for managing  sovereign  debt 
crises and paved the way for discussion with a view to deepening European integration. 
Until recently, Europe lacked the tools for managing a sovereign crisis. Between 2010 and 
2012 EU countries disbursed some €280 billion in loans to their partners in difficulty, either 
directly  or  through  the  newly  established  common  financing  instruments  (the  European 
Financial  Stability  Facility,  EFSF,  and  the  European  Stability  Mechanism,  ESM).  Italy’s 
contribution  amounted to  €43  billion,  which  according  to  official estimates  will  rise  to more 
than €60 billion in 2014. 
The  European  reforms  are  still  in  the  making.  Their  full  pay-off,  as  well  as  the  reward  for 
national efforts, will come in the medium term. In the meantime, the distortions still affecting 
the financial  markets  could  undermine  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  jeopardize 
the  entire  process.  This  risk  materialized  in  the  spring  of  2012  when  sovereign  spreads 
started  widening  again.  By  July  the  differential  between  10-year  Italian  BTPs  and  the 
equivalent German Bunds had once more exceeded 500 basis points, against the value of 
about  200  points  then  estimated  to  be  consistent  with  the  two  countries’  economic 
fundamentals. 
The ECB Governing Council reacted by announcing Outright Monetary Transactions (OMTs), 
a  new  method  of  intervention  on  the  secondary  market  for  government  securities  whose 
purpose  is  to  counter  excessive  increases  in  sovereign  yields  where  they  stem  from 
redenomination risk and distort monetary policy transmission; as such, they are fully within 
the  Eurosystem’s  mandate.  The  announcement  of  OMTs  produced  immediate  benefits: 
medium-  and  long-term  yields  in  the  countries  under  pressure  decreased  and  the 
fragmentation of markets along national lines was attenuated. 
OMTs were made possible not only by the credibility of the Eurosystem but also by the very 
process of reform they intend to protect. The fears of euro reversibility are linked in the first 
place to concerns about the sustainability of the public debt and the competitiveness of some 
member  countries.  For  this  reason  the activation  and  continuation  of  OMTs  are  subject  to 
specific  commitments  regarding  the  public  finances  and  structural  reform,  as  part  of 
assistance programmes. The financing of the programmes with the ESM’s resources is an 
incentive to strengthen the governance of the Union further. Monetary policy can guarantee 
stability  only  if  the  euro  area’s  economic  fundamentals  and  institutional  architecture  are 
consistent with it. 
Confidence in the irreversibility of the euro is the key. In the short term, the effective use of 
ESM resources will preserve the progress made and safeguard the rights and the efforts of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
those  who  have  helped  to  develop  the  instruments  of  financial  support.  The  OMT 
announcement prevented a financial collapse with potentially ruinous consequences for the 
European economy: all the member countries benefited, not just those at the centre of the 
sovereign debt crisis. 
responsibilities  where  circumstances  warrant.  This 
Towards deeper European integration: the Banking Union 
To  ensure  stability  over  the  longer  run,  the  effort  to  reform  the  European  governance  has 
been  stepped  up.  The  subsequent  stages  are  outlined  in  the  report  Towards  a  Genuine 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (presented  in  June  2012  and  updated  in  December  by  the 
President  of  the  European  Council,  working  closely  with  the  Presidents  of  the  European 
Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB)  and  in  the  Blueprint  for  a  Deep  and  Genuine 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  published  by  the  Commission  last  November.  Both 
documents envisage a banking union, the introduction of autonomous fiscal capacity for the 
whole euro area, and a common budget; they set the scene for the eventual political union. 
A keystone of institutional reform, Banking Union is crucial to break the perverse feedback 
loop  between  sovereigns  and  domestic  banking  systems.  It  has  three  key  components:  a 
single  supervisor,  a  single  bank  resolution  mechanism,  and  a  single  deposit  insurance 
scheme. 
In the summer of 2012 the European leaders decided to give priority to the construction of 
the first component, the Single Supervisory Mechanism. The SSM comprises the ECB and 
the national supervisory authorities. For the largest banks it will be based on strict integration 
of European and national structures. For the others, it will involve the direct responsibility of 
national  authorities,  under  common  guidelines;  the  ECB  will  retain  the  right  to  take  over 
direct  supervision 
far-reaching 
institutional innovation will require an organizational adaptation as far-reaching and at least 
as  complex  as  that  leading  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  The  delicate  launch  phase  will 
require substantial investment in human resources and technical infrastructure. The national 
supervisory  authorities’  workload  will  not  diminish,  as  we  strive  to  build  a  unitary  new 
mechanism  from  frameworks  that  differ  in  many  respects.  The  preparatory  work  is 
proceeding at the greatest speed compatible with the challenges of the task. 
Building on the technical experience and reputation of national authorities, the SSM will have 
to  ensure  a  supranational  vision.  Supervisory  practices  within  the  euro  area  are  quite 
heterogeneous. It is vital to avoid any lowering of standards and instead to converge on the 
best practices in supervisory methodology, modelling and assessment of banking risks. This 
will ensure early warning of emerging instability at individual banks and at systemic level. We 
attach special importance to aspects that are a fundamental part of the tradition of the Bank 
of Italy, such as the central role of on-site inspections, methodologically robust quantitative 
analysis, and close interaction with banks. 
If successfully managed, the SSM will bring substantial benefits to the single market: it will 
improve  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  transmission,  counter  the  ring-fencing  trends 
observed in the last years, thus fostering financial integration, facilitate comparison between 
banks  and  banking  systems  in  different  countries,  and  in  this  way  improve  the monitoring, 
control and mitigation of vulnerability factors. 
Work is also continuing on the single resolution mechanism (SRM), the second component of 
the  banking  union.  This  is  indispensable  to  align  the  responsibilities  for  supervising  banks 
and handling crises. The Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive is intended to harmonize 
the heterogeneous national practices, rules and tools for bank crisis management and keep 
rescue operations from being financed with public funds. The Directive lays down a number 
of preventive measures, together with rules for timely intervention and resolution, including 
the  bail-in  of  bank  creditors.  A  fund  to  be  financed  by  the  banks  themselves  will  be 
earmarked for bank resolution. The European Commission recently issued a proposal for a 
Regulation – which should be fully operational in 2015 – to institute an SRM under a single 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
resolution  authority  and  with  pooled  resources.  Concerning  the  third  component  of  the 
Banking  Union,  a  draft  directive  has  been  prepared  to  implement  a  common  network  of 
national deposit guarantee schemes by the end of this year. 
The  institution  of  the  SRM  must  proceed  expeditiously,  with  appropriate  negotiations 
between national and Community authorities. Once the mechanism is fully operational, the 
availability  of  adequate  resources  will  allow  the  cost  of  crises  to  be  divided  between  the 
bank’s shareholders, creditors and the banking system as a whole. 
During  the  transition  to  the  SRM,  the  risk  of  a  vicious  circle  between  a  fiscally  weak 
sovereign state and its fragile domestic banks persists. The ESM will only be able to directly 
recapitalize banks – with the aim of restoring their viability and obtaining a remuneration of 
the capital invested – after the effective entry into operation of the SSM. There remains the 
possibility of using ESM funds indirectly, by means of loans to member states, but this would 
bear on the public debt of the countries concerned, bringing the bank-sovereign loop back 
into the picture. 
The comprehensive assessment of the main European banks … 
With a view to the launch of the SSM, the ECB and the national supervisory authorities are 
working to undertake a comprehensive assessment of the soundness of the significant euro-
area  banks,  those  that  will  fall  under  the  direct  supervision  of  the  SSM.  This  assessment 
consists of thorough analysis of each bank’s risk profile, comprising an overall balance-sheet 
assessment (BSA), including an asset quality review, and a stress test. The exercise will also 
cover other relevant aspects of banks’ business, including leverage, corporate governance 
and organization. 
The comprehensive  assessment  is  designed  to make  sure that  the  area’s  main  banks  are 
managed  in  a  sound  and  prudent  manner,  helping  to  dispel  market  concerns  over  their 
soundness  and  risk  profiles.  Significantly,  from  the  outset  the  assessment  will  also  foster 
confidence  in  the  SSM  itself,  reinforcing  mutual  trust  among  participating  countries.  It  will 
therefore be a fundamental step in normalizing wholesale markets and restoring the banking 
system to its principal, fundamental role of supporting economic activity and growth. 
In  order  to  attain  these  objectives,  the  comprehensive  assessment  must  be  completely 
transparent,  as  regards  not  only  results  but  also  process  and  methodologies.  The 
appropriate  involvement  of  external  reviewers  may  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  exercise. 
Attention  must  obviously  be  paid  to  potential  conflicts  of  interest  and  problems  of 
confidentiality. Also, level-playing-field issues among participating banks must be avoided. 
The design  of  the balance-sheet  assessment  must  recognize  that  national  accounting  and 
supervisory  practices  differ  radically,  especially  in  the  definition  and  measurement  of  non- 
performing  loans  (NPLs).  The  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  is  working  to  make 
definitions  uniform  across  systems  and  has  recently  issued  a  consultation  paper  on  the 
matter. This is a step in the right direction and should be finalized in time for its results to be 
used for the BSA. In any case, the BSA requires a de facto harmonization of NPL definitions. 
National practices also differ substantially  in the measurement of risk-weighted assets, the 
denominator of regulatory capital ratios. Differences in the models used by banks to compute 
capital  requirements  –  or  in  the  approaches  adopted  by  supervisors  for  validating  them  – 
may  undermine  the  comparability  of  banks’  capital,  so  the  BSA  will  have  to  pay  close 
attention to the way in which these models compute the risk weights of different categories of 
assets, including off-balance-sheet items and “level 3” assets (non-traded assets whose fair 
value  is  estimated  through  internal  models).  Again  in  this  case,  de  facto  harmonization  is 
necessary. 
Furthermore,  in  order  to  be  fully  credible  and  to  be  perceived  as  a  confidence-building 
exercise the comprehensive assessment must be rigorously designed and carried out, with 
clearly  defined  and  well  motivated  thresholds  for  gauging  any  capital  shortfalls.  If,  as 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
observed  earlier,  one  of  the  objectives  of  the  Banking  Union  is  to  break  the  perverse 
feedback loop between banks and sovereigns, then an essential prerequisite is the presence 
of adequate backstops against the capital shortfalls that may emerge from the BSA. Also, to 
avoid pro-cyclical effects, clear and extensive communication of the process and its results is 
necessary. The mistakes of the past in the sequence of the actions taken by different policy 
makers should not be repeated. 
… and a perspective on the Italian banking system 
The  Italian  banking  system  offers  a  few  illuminating  examples  of  the  problems  and 
challenges of the comprehensive assessment. In the international comparison Italian banks 
appear  to  have  a  high  NPL  ratio  and  a  low  coverage  ratio  (i.e.,  the  ratio  of  loan  loss 
provisions  to  gross  non-performing  loans).  But  it  is  clear  by  now  that  the  comparison  is 
vitiated  by  disparities  in  accounting  and  supervisory  practices,  which  must  be  taken  into 
account in order to obtain a fair assessment. 
A case in point is the treatment of collateralized loans. Some major European banks do not 
classify fully collateralized loans as NPLs, while in Italy loans are classified on the basis of 
the borrower’s creditworthiness, irrespective of collateral or guarantees. Both practices are 
fully  consistent  with  international  accounting  standards  enforced  in  Europe,  but  the  Italian 
method makes the bank’s balance sheet more transparent for investors. If Italian banks used 
the same definition as some foreign banks, their stock of non-performing loans would fall by 
about  a  third,  decreasing  their  average  NPL  ratio  significantly  and  raising  their  coverage 
ratio;  at  the  same  time,  the  rise  in  the  NPL  ratio  in  the  recent  years  would  be  less 
accentuated, reflecting the sharp increase in collateral demanded by Italian banks in reaction 
to the deteriorating economic outlook. 
Let me be clear: I am not suggesting a relaxation of the Italian definition of NPLs – which, by 
the way, is broadly in line with the one proposed in the EBA consultation paper. I am arguing 
that the BSA needs to take this and other sources of heterogeneity into account. 
Similar  considerations  apply  to  leverage.  Italian  banks  have  lower  leverage  than  their 
international  competitors,  partly  because  of  their  relatively  small  volume  of  business  in 
derivatives. Arguably, their operational risks are also comparatively low: Italian banks have 
not  been  involved  in  any  of  the  serious  episodes  of  malpractice  or  the  market-rigging 
schemes  that  have  damaged  the  reputation  and  of  some  foreign  intermediaries  and  cost 
them expensive legal settlements. These and other sources of heterogeneity, which tend to 
bias international comparisons against Italian banks, have been documented by the Bank of 
Italy in its Financial Stability Report as well as by market analysis. They will have to be duly 
taken into account in the comprehensive assessment. 
These  arguments  are  intended  simply  to  support  a  fair  approach  to  the  forthcoming  BSA; 
they are not meant to downplay the risks that the Italian banking system faces. While Italian 
banks have demonstrated good resilience overall, thanks to their sound fundamentals at the 
outset of the financial crisis, the sovereign crisis and two long and deep recessions have put 
their  balance  sheets  under  severe  stress.  NPLs  have  been  rising  steadily  since  2008, 
depressing  profitability  and  raising  concerns  over  provisioning  among  analysts  and  market 
operators.  And  even  though  I  have  set  out  the  reasons  why  we  need  to  quickly  enhance 
comparability among European banks, we take these concerns seriously. Indeed, we have 
taken decisive action to address these risks, and we are confident that this will improve the 
outlook for the Italian credit market. 
Apart  from  episodes  of  malfeasance,  which  are  relevant  but  circumscribed,  serious 
difficulties mainly concern a handful of medium-sized and small banking groups. This class of 
banks  has  been  particularly  hard-hit  by  the  recession,  owing  among  other  things  to  lesser 
diversification of risks and revenues. Additional challenges have sometimes been raised by 
weak  ownership  and  corporate  governance  structures,  which  may  complicate  capital 
strengthening  and  adaptation  of  business  models.  Intense  supervisory  actions  have  been  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
– and continue to be – taken on these banks. In some instances special administration has 
been necessary to allow a clear recovery and return rapidly to ordinary management. 
The Bank of Italy regularly reviews banks’ asset quality as part of its standard supervisory 
activity,  assessing  the  risk  exposure  of  each  institution.  The  quality  of  banks’  assets  is 
assessed  continuously  off-site,  on  the  basis  of  detailed  monthly  supervisory  reports.  In 
particular, the information contained in the Central Credit Register includes the exposure of 
each bank to each individual firm: this enables us to assess the consistency of the different 
banks’  classifications  of  the  same  borrower,  checking  that  non-performing  debtors  are  not 
classified  as  performing  by  some  intermediaries.  Moreover,  the  Bank  of  Italy  monitors  the 
adequacy  of  loan  classification  criteria  through  extensive  on-site  inspections,  among  other 
things in order to curb the forbearance risk typical of economic slowdowns. 
In  the  second  half  of  last  year,  against  the  backdrop  of  an  exceptional  and  largely 
unanticipated  macroeconomic  deterioration,  the  Bank  of  Italy  launched  an  ad  hoc 
supervisory  review  of  the  adequacy  of  banks’  NPL  provisioning  policies.  This  involved 
simultaneous  on-site  inspections  at  20  large  and  medium-sized  banking  groups  whose 
coverage ratios either were lower than average or had fallen significantly. The main findings 
were  published  in  a  note  posted  on  our  website.  Overall,  the  coverage  ratio  for  the  entire 
NPL  portfolio  of  the  20  groups  rose  from  41  to  43  per  cent  between  June  and  December 
2012, notwithstanding the sharp rise in NPLs themselves (the denominator of the ratio) in the 
same period. In other words, the downward trend in coverage ratios since the beginning of 
the crisis (2007–08) has come to a halt. The intelligence gathered in the course of the review 
will also be used for the application of second-pillar capital add-ons. 
Our  supervisory  action  continues.  We  are  closely  monitoring  the  implementation  of  the 
corrective measures that the banks were asked to adopt, while assessment of banks’ asset 
quality  and  provisioning  levels  is  still  ongoing  and  has  been  extended  to  other  banking 
groups in the course of regular on-site inspections. Any capital shortfalls that may emerge 
will have to be met through proper actions within the banks’ perimeter of decisions and with 
recourse to the market. 
At the same time, we are taking care to minimize the pro-cyclical impact of banks’ actions on 
the availability  of  credit to the economy. This  is  why  we  have  called  on  banks to  increase 
their  internally  generated  resources  by  curbing  operating  costs  as  well  as  dividends  and 
executive and directors’ compensation. 
Our current assessment is that notwithstanding specific difficulties, the challenge will be met 
and market concerns will abate. But the state of the banking system is not independent of the 
general economic environment. Action to revitalize the Italian economy and raise its growth 
potential is thus as important as ever. 
The  move  to  the  SSM  must  not  blur  our  focus  on  the  conditions  of  the  banking  system. 
Supervisory  standards  and  practices  must  be  kept  at  the  highest  level  of  quality.  This  will 
permit  us  to  perform  a  homogenous  and  comprehensive  assessment  of  euro-area  banks, 
with  full  disclosure  of  differences  in  business  models  but  also  with  a  common  mandate  to 
build on existing strengths and to counter and shrink the areas of weakness. 
The crisis has constituted a fierce challenge for the European construction. The threat of a 
break-up  of  the  euro,  never  taken  seriously  by  the  markets  before,  increasingly  distorted 
asset  prices  across  the  euro  area.  The  economic  and  social  costs  have  been  severe. 
Unemployment,  especially  youth  unemployment,  has  soared.  In  the  worst-hit  countries 
poverty levels have risen sharply, and social tensions have surfaced. 
The  responsible  reaction  of  national  and  European  authorities  has  averted  the  worst.  The 
recovery  is  now  at  hand,  but  downside  risks  remain  significant.  If  we  are  to  seize  the 
opportunity,  we  cannot  relax  our  efforts.  Ultimately,  our  economies  must  restructure  to 
become  more  competitive  in  order  to  rise  to  the  challenges  of  technological,  demographic 
and geopolitical change. We must press on with structural reform. The key to success will be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
a shared determination to advance towards a fully fledged European Union. In the current 
stage, the test of our resolve is the building of an effective Banking Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
