Loi M Bakani: Transforming Papua New Guinea’s banking system 
Speech  by  Mr  Loi  M  Bakani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  on  the 
presentation of the Spectrum Licence, Port Moresby, 5 July 2013. 
 Good  morning  and  welcome  to  this  ceremony  for  the  signing  of  the  agreement  between 
NICTA and the Bank of Papua New Guinea for BPNG’s wireless spectrum licence. 
This  is  a  significant  milestone  for  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  and  indeed  all  of  the 
banking system in PNG. 
It represents a step in our country’s transition to a twenty first century banking system using 
the  latest  technology.  The  implementation  of  electronic  inter-bank  funds  transfer  and  Real 
Time  Gross  Settlement  is  a  major  step  forward  for  our  country  and  will  bring  many 
advantages to all sectors of the economy. 
It will not only reduce systemic risk within the banking system but it will also streamline the 
funds transfer process making it more reliable and efficient. 
By way of example, importers will soon be able to transfer payments to Customs in real time 
and thereby uplift their cargo from the wharves much more quickly than is currently the case. 
Tax payments will be able to be made electronically which will not only increase efficiency 
but  reduce  fraud.  Government  employees  will  also  benefit  by  being  paid  through  a  more 
streamlined process by the Department of Finance. 
Most  importantly,  the  introduction  of  a  state  of  the  art  banking  system  represents  a 
fundamental step in facilitating PNG’s transition to a modern, efficient economy. Through this 
initiative, BPNG and the commercial banks are transforming PNG’s banking system to the 
equivalent  of  that  of  already  developed  nations  such  as  Australia,  New  Zealand  and 
Singapore. 
The  new  system  will  facilitate  greater  use  of  electronic  banking  and  reduce  fraud  and  by 
improving electronic payment facilities, there will be a reduction in the amount of time people 
wait in queues. 
To support the new systems, all the banks, and especially the Bank of Papua New Guinea 
are enhancing their internal IT systems, procedures and processes. 
The implementation of the wireless network is a crucial component that will ensure that the 
banking  communications  network  is  failsafe.  The  wireless  network  will  provide  the 
communications vehicle should the fibre network fail. 
Thus  the  granting  of  the  Bank’s  spectrum  licence  is  yet  another  significant  milestone  on 
realising our vision of transforming PNG’s banking system to the equivalent of that found in 
the most developed of countries. 
I would like to thank all of the stakeholders involved in making this happen, including NICTA, 
HiTRON, the Commercial Banks and the Bank of Papua New Guinea. 
Thank you  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
