Duvvuri Subbarao: Statistics in Reserve Bank of India’s policy making 
conceptual and empirical issues 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
7th Statistics Day Conference of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 30 August 2013. 
 1. 
We have gathered here today to celebrate the seventh Statistics Day Conference of 
the Reserve Bank. The Reserve Bank instituted the Statistics Day Conference to honour the 
memory  of  Prof.  P.  C.  Mahalanobis,  who  has  had  an  enduring  influence  on  planning  and 
policy making in India. This annual conference has developed into an important forum for the 
Reserve Bank’s Research Departments to meet with researchers and engage on a specific 
theme of statistical analysis. The theme for this year’s conference is: “Challenges to Policy 
Making and Evolving Role of Statistical Analysis”.  
I  am  happy  to  acknowledge  the  participation  in  today’s  conference  of  several 
2. 
renowned  statisticians:  Prof.  Bimal  Roy,  Director,  Indian  Statistical  Institute;  Prof.  Richard 
Smith, University of Cambridge; Prof. B.L.S. Prakasa Rao, C R Rao Institute, Hyderabad and 
Prof. Subhashis Ghoshal, North Carolina State University. It is my pleasure to extend a warm 
welcome to each one of you.  
3. 
Over the last five years that I have served in the Reserve Bank, we have confronted 
a  host  of  conceptual  issues  in  statistical  analysis  in  the  course  of  policy  making.  As  I  am 
preparing  to  leave  the  Reserve  Bank,  I  thought  the  best  way  I  can  add  value  to  this 
conference is to present some of these conceptual issues, and the dilemmas that we have 
faced in resolving them. In particular, I will address five issues.  
Inflation measure for monetary policy in India: WPI or CPI? 
4. 
An  important  –  and  in  some  countries  the  predominant  –  objective  of  monetary 
policy is price stability, which is measured in terms of inflation. There are, however, several 
measures of inflation which are prevalent, for example, inflation indices based on consumer 
prices and wholesale prices. Determining the appropriate inflation measure to be used for the 
purpose of calibrating monetary policy is, therefore, critical. Central banks typically tend to 
articulate  the  price  stability  objective  in  terms  of  a  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  as  CPI  is 
considered  to  be  a  better  indicator  of  the  cost  of  living  and  hence  is  seen  to  be  better 
reflecting the welfare objective of monetary policy. 
5. 
As far as inflation measures go, the problem in India is not of deficit, but of excess. 
Ours is a tale of many indices. They include the wholesale price index (WPI); three legacy 
measures of CPI inflation, viz., CPI (Industrial Workers), CPI (Agricultural Labour) and CPI 
(Rural Labour); and the new CPIs, viz., CPI(Urban), CPI(Rural) and CPI-combined.  
6. 
What should be the preferred measure for calibrating monetary policy in the Indian 
context? The traditional practice in the Reserve Bank has been to use WPI as the headline 
measure  of  inflation.  The  primary  reason  for  this  is  that  the  legacy  CPIs  were  not 
representative  enough  for  the  entire  population.  Further,  in  India,  WPI  has  been  more 
extensively researched by way of its empirical relationship with other relevant variables such 
as  output,  monetary  aggregates  and  interest  rates  therefore,  presents  richer  analytical 
insights. I must add though that even as we use WPI as the headline measure of inflation, we 
also  study  the  trends  in  CPI  inflation  and  the  findings  of  household  inflation  expectation 
surveys for calibrating our monetary policy. 
7. 
Several analysts have argued that the use of WPI inflation by the Reserve Bank is 
flawed on the ground that in India, the WPI proxies producers’ prices rather than consumer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
prices. Moreover, it is contended that WPI does not adequately capture the movement in the 
prices of services, which constitute close to 2/3rd of our economic activity. 
8. 
The inflation dynamics that WPI and CPI project are quite different. This results in 
considerable divergence between the CPI and WPI, at least in the short term. For example, 
WPI based inflation was significantly higher than inflation based on the CPIs during 2003–05. 
Subsequently, till June 2008, inflation based on CPIs was much higher than that of WPI. The 
gap between WPI and CPI narrowed thereafter but has widened again in the recent period. 
While WPI is currently below 6 per cent, CPI is near double digits. In the long run, however, 
RBI’s in-house research suggests that the gap between WPI and CPI tends to narrow. 
9. 
To some extent, the divergence between WPI and CPI can be attributed to statistical 
differences stemming from coverage, classification of items and the relative weights of their 
constituents.  However,  there  could  be  other  reasons  for  this  as  well.  For  example,  higher 
transaction costs, taxes, etc. are reflected in the CPI but not in the WPI. Regardless of the 
reasons, the large magnitude of the short term divergence between the two indices poses a 
major challenge for assessing inflation dynamics in the short term. 
10. 
An increase in wholesale prices, if sustained, results in an eventual increase in retail 
prices and/or a squeeze in trade margins. When demand is strong, a greater burden of the 
increased prices will be shifted to the consumer. Conversely, when demand is weak, traders 
will have to absorb the burden through lower margins. Even as this logic is clear, we do not 
yet  have  a  full  understanding  of  the  process  by  which  wholesale  price  changes  are 
transmitted to retail prices or of the magnitude of the associated pass-through and lags. 
11. 
Going forward, is there a case for shifting to CPI for the conduct of monetary policy 
in India? There are several issues which will need to be considered in this context. First, the 
new CPI inflation series has only 19 data points which is not sufficiently long for statistically 
robust  analysis.  Second,  in  the  new  CPI,  food  prices  comprise  nearly  50  per  cent  of  the 
index,  making  the  movement  of  CPI  relatively  more  sensitive  to  food  price  changes.  This 
implies  that  the  influence  of  supply-side  factors  could  dominate  the  trends  in  CPI.  Also, 
house  rents  comprise  about  10  per  cent  weight  in  the  new  CPI.  With  house  rents  being 
largely  imputed,  there  could  be  concerns  about  the  efficacy  of  their  measurement.  These 
issues  are  not  unique  to  us.  Several  central  banks  emphasize  monitoring  CPI  inflation 
excluding housing, food and energy, but in our case similar exclusion would leave the CPI 
bereft of substantial coverage and information content.  
12. 
Before moving to use of new CPI, we will also need to satisfy ourselves on several 
other  fronts.  Does  the  new  CPI  ensure  sufficient  national  representativeness  in  terms  of 
coverage and current consumption baskets? Does it adequately cover prices of services? Is 
the number of price quotations being obtained for computation of the index sufficiently large?  
13. 
Finally, if and when we move to the CPI for calibrating monetary policy, will we make 
a clean break and abandon the WPI altogether? I believe not. As I said at this conference 
last year, analytically it would be useful to develop a series of producer price index (PPI) that 
would help us to gauge how price momentum builds up in the economy.  
Potential output, threshold inflation and Taylor rule 
14. 
The second conceptual challenge I want to address relates to the measurement of 
two  important  macroeconomic  variables  in  the  context  of  monetary  policy:  potential  output 
and  threshold  inflation.  Understanding  the  divergence  of  actual  output  and  inflation  from 
potential output and threshold inflation respectively is critical for the formulation of monetary 
policy. Reliable estimates of these variables are necessary for formulating the central bank 
reaction function in the form of Taylor type rules for setting interest rates. 
15. 
Conceptually,  the  potential  output  of  an  economy  is  defined  as  the  maximum 
sustainable level of output that is consistent with stable inflation. If the demand for goods and 
services exceeds supply at a given level of prices, prices will rise and vice versa. But, what 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
level  of  demand  is  consistent  with  stable  prices?  It  is  this  unobserved  number  which 
determines  how  the  pulse  of the  overall  economy  is  assessed.  Any  estimation  error  could 
result  in  inappropriate  monetary  policy  action  with  potentially  significant  consequences  for 
the economy.  
16. In practice, potential output cannot be observed directly, but has to be estimated using 
statistical  techniques.  Estimates  of  potential  output  are  susceptible  to  errors  for  several 
reasons. First, real GDP data is subject to frequent revisions. Second, there is considerable 
uncertainty  about  the  level  of  productivity  growth  at  any  point  in  time.  Third,  there  is  what 
economists  call  the  Knightian  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  choice  of  the  appropriate 
modelling approach to measuring potential output (Mishkin, 2007). Fourth, in India, we have 
an  additional  constraint  by  way  of  lack  of  comprehensive  and  consistent  data  on 
employment.  Finally,  potential  output  is  time  varying.  For  example,  it  is  widely  recognised 
that the global financial crisis has resulted in a loss of potential output in several economies, 
although  by  varying  magnitudes. Whether  such  loss  is  permanent  or temporary  remains  a 
matter of debate. 
17. 
In practice, the probability of error in the estimation of potential output is sought to 
be  minimized  by  juxtaposing  estimated  potential  output  with  other  available  real  time 
information. For example, to assess if there is slack or excess capacity in the economy, at 
the RBI, we estimate output gaps based on various models with a wide range of indicators, 
including the findings of forward looking surveys of macroeconomic changes. In its Annual 
Report for 2009/10, the Reserve Bank had reported that the potential output growth of the 
Indian economy may have dropped from 8.5 per cent pre-crisis to 8.0 per cent, post-crisis. 
Our  latest  assessment  suggests  that  potential  output  growth  may  have  further  declined  to 
around 7.0 per cent. 
18. 
Let me now turn to the challenges in estimating the second important variable for 
monetary policy i.e. the threshold level of inflation. The threshold level of inflation is defined 
as  the rate  of  inflation  beyond  which  inflation  itself  becomes  a  drag  on growth.  Estimating 
threshold inflation is no less daunting than estimating potential output. Like potential output, 
threshold inflation is also unobserved and is time-varying. Its estimates are, therefore, model 
dependent with the associated potential for errors.  
19. 
In  the  mid-1980s,  the  Chakravarty  Committee  (1985)  had  suggested  a  tolerable 
level  of  inflation  of 4.0  per  cent  per  annum for  India  to facilitate changes  in  relative  prices 
necessary to attract resources to growth sectors. The Reserve Bank’s current assessment 
suggests  that  the  threshold  level  of  WPI  headline  inflation  for  India  is  in  the  range  of  
4.4–5.7 per cent, implying a mid-point rate of 5.0 per cent.  
20. 
Estimates of output and inflation gaps are critical inputs for central banks for using 
the  Taylor  rule  for  calibrating  the  interest  rate  policy.  The  Taylor  rule  is  an  interest  rate 
feedback  rule  which  aids  in  determining  the  short-term  interest  rate  to  achieve  the  twin 
objectives of stabilizing the economy and achieving price stability. The rule recommends that 
the short-term interest rate should be changed according to the deviation of inflation from its 
threshold or predetermined target and of output from its potential level. Essentially, given the 
real  interest  rate  of  the  economy,  the  combination  of  inflation  and  output  gaps  should 
determine  the  appropriate  policy  rate  that  would  return  the  economy  to  its  potential  level 
without causing excessive inflation.  
21. 
Implementation  of Taylor  type  rules  essentially  requires  an  a  priori  assessment of 
three indicators: output gap, inflation target and the equilibrium real interest rate. Once we 
understand  and  measure  the  level  of  potential  output  and  threshold  level  of  inflation,  it 
becomes feasible to investigate a Taylor-type rule. Of course, countries have modified the 
Taylor rule and extended it in a variety of ways for adapting to their specific country contexts. 
I have attempted to outline today some of the challenges associated with these estimations.  
22. 
The  Reserve  Bank  explicitly  targets  the  overnight  interest  rate  as  the  operational 
objective using the policy repo rate as the instrument. The relevant questions for us in this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
context  are:  How  should  the  policy  interest  rate  be  determined?  Should  interest  rate 
calibration follow a rule or should it be left to the central bank’s discretion?  
Neutral interest rate 
23. 
The third issue I want to address is the concept of neutral interest rate, which is also 
closely  linked  to  the  Taylor  rule.  Theoretically,  the  neutral  interest  rate  is  generally 
understood as a real variable, and it is common practice to add the inflation objective – the 
implicit or explicit target inflation rate – to determine the neutral nominal policy rate. Neutral 
real interest rate has the simplest interpretation in terms of a rate that is neither expansionary 
nor  contractionary.  When  Wicksell  first  conceptualized  it  in  19361,  it  was  coined  as  the 
natural  rate  of  interest.  According  to Wicksell,  if  the  money  or  market  determined  rate  fell 
below the natural rate, then demand would increase leading to higher prices. Conversely, if 
the money or market rate is higher than the natural rate, then demand will decline and prices 
could fall.  
24. 
As  I  said  earlier,  Reserve  Bank’s  estimates  suggest  that  in  recent  years,  India’s 
potential growth has declined. The domestic savings rate has also moderated. What then is 
the relevant neutral real rate that should be used for the conduct of monetary policy, and also 
for assessing the stance of monetary policy? Can statistical analysis provide any answer to 
this? 
25. 
The challenge in answering these questions is that the neutral rate is invisible, and 
no  single  empirical  estimate  can  be  unconditional  and  free  of  errors.  Blinder  (1998)2  had 
noted  in  this  context  that  “...  the  neutral  real  rate  of  interest  is  difficult  to  estimate  and 
impossible to know with precision. It is therefore most usefully thought of as a concept rather 
than as a number, as a way of thinking about monetary policy rather than as the basis for a 
mechanical rule”. 
The task statisticians confront is how to make this invisible concept less invisible? 
26. 
The practical answer would obviously be to determine with a reasonable degree of statistical 
robustness the potential growth and threshold inflation. The assessment of both is obviously 
empirical  and  country  specific.  And  consistent  with  that,  researchers  generally  refer  to  an 
interest rate path implied by the Taylor rule and compare that with the actual policy rate. If 
the  actual  policy  rate  is  lower  than  the  implied  path,  then  the  monetary  policy  stance  is 
viewed as accommodative.  
27. 
Using  similar  analysis,  the  recent  BIS  Annual  Report  (June  2013)  highlights  that 
nominal  policy  rates  in  EMEs  have  remained  below  the  Taylor  rule  implied  path  on  a 
sustained basis since 2003, almost for a full decade now. Accommodative monetary policies 
in  both  advanced  and  emerging  economies  have  played  a  role  in  accentuating  global 
vulnerabilities.  
28. 
The 2013 Article IV Report of the IMF for India adopts a similar approach to suggest 
that the repo rate (as on September 14, 2012) was less than the rate implied by the Taylor 
rule,  and  therefore,  that  RBI’s  monetary  policy  stance  has  been  accommodative.  Contrast 
this with the criticism in several quarters in the past that monetary policy was tight.  
29. 
Despite  the  known  limitations  of  statistical  methodologies  in  providing  a  reliable 
reference  neutral  policy  rate  that  can  inform  policy  formulation,  it  is  important  to  have 
reasonable  estimates  to  reduce  the  risk  of  a  completely  discretionary  monetary  policy. 
Acknowledging  the  logic  of  this  argument,  we  have,  in  recent  times  emphasized  internal 
research on assessment of monetary policy stance based on alternate monetary policy rules.  
                                                
1  Wicksell, Knut, “Interest and Prices”, London: Macmillan, 1936, translation of 1898 edition by R.F. Kahn. 
2  A S Blinder (1998), “Central Banking in Theory and Practice”, MIT Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
30. 
What  is  the  challenge  for  statisticians  here?  If  the  potential  growth  of  India  has 
declined,  should  the  neutral  real  interest  rate  also  correspondingly  decline?  Given  the 
negative  spillovers  from  globalisation  for  almost  five  years  now  and  domestic  supply 
constraints, should India’s neutral real interest rate be lower than that during the pre-crisis 
high growth period?  
Equilibrium exchange rate – Why no single statistical measure has a consensus 
reference value? 
31. 
Let me now turn to the fourth issue on my list which relates to exchange rates. I do 
so  with  some  trepidation  since  my  staff  in  the  Reserve  Bank  often  caution  me  against 
speaking  on  the  subject  of  exchange  rate.  Notably,  it  is  not  common  practice  for  central 
banks to speak much on exchange rate. It is easy to understand though why, even in this 
age of forward guidance and transparent communication of monetary policy, central bankers, 
in both advanced and emerging economies, are so reticent on the subject of exchange rate. 
32. 
So far as my remarks today are concerned, let me say upfront that they relate to the 
statistical  challenge  of  estimating  an  equilibrium  value  of  the  rupee  from  an  empirical 
perspective.  It  will  not  be  useful  to  interpret  them  in  the  context  of  currency  market 
developments over the last few months and RBI’s response to those pressures.  
33. 
Can  improved  statistical  methods  and  better  data  help  us  in  improving  our 
understanding of the concept of fair value, if not the equilibrium value of the rupee? This is a 
wide and involved topic. So, I will restrict myself to a few major issues.  
In  a  market  determined  exchange  rate  regime,  any  level  of  exchange  rate  at  any 
34. 
point  of  time  is  an  equilibrium  value,  reflecting  the  interactions  of  demand  and  supply.  A 
market  equilibrium  exchange  rate,  however,  is  different  from  a  fundamental  equilibrium 
exchange rate (FEER), as the latter can tell how misaligned the market exchange rate may 
be at any point of time. 
35. 
John  Williamson,  who  pioneered  the  concept  of  FEER,  emphasised  that  the 
equilibrium  rate  is  the  rate  which  is  consistent  with  internal  balance  –  meaning  full 
employment  or  full  potential  growth  with  low  and  stable  inflation  –  and  external  balance  – 
meaning  a  sustainable  external  balance  position.  The  FEER  approach,  however,  ignores 
cyclical  and  speculative  factors  in  determining  the  exchange  rate  path  in  the  short-run. 
Therefore some analysts view FEER only as a medium-term concept. This being a normative 
approach, some also see it as the Desired Equilibrium Exchange Rate (DEER) – internal and 
external balance being the obvious desires or objectives of policy.  
36. 
There is another approach to estimating equilibrium exchange rate – known as the 
Behavioural Equilibrium Exchange Rate (BEER), which tries to explain the behaviour of the 
exchange  rate  by  accounting  for  sources  of  cyclical  and  temporary  movements,  while 
focusing  on  current  fundamentals,  unlike  the  sustainable  external  balance  and  internal 
balance focus of the FEER.  
37. 
Given these conceptual building blocks of an equilibrium exchange rate, the IMF’s 
Consultative  Group  on  Exchange  Rates  (CGER)  uses  three  alternative  methodologies  to 
estimate  fair  values  of  exchange  rates:  (i) the  Macroeconomic  Balance  (MB)  approach, 
(ii) the  Equilibrium  Real  Exchange  Rate 
(iii) the  External 
Sustainability (ES) approach.  
38. 
The macroeconomic balance (MB) approach first estimates the difference between 
the  projected  current  account  balance  (CAD)  position  over  the  medium  term  at  prevailing 
exchange rates, and the CAD norm which is believed to be sustainable. Then, the exchange 
rate adjustment that could eliminate this difference over the medium-term is estimated. The 
reduced-form  equilibrium  real  exchange  rate  (ERER)  approach  estimates  directly  an 
equilibrium real exchange rate for each country as a function of medium-term fundamentals 
such as the net foreign asset (NFA) position of the country, relative productivity differential 
(ERER)  approach,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
between  the  tradable  and  non-tradable  sectors,  and  the  terms  of  trade.  The  external 
sustainability  (ES)  approach  aims  at  calculating  the  difference  between  the  actual  CAD 
position  and  the  balance  that  could  stabilize  the  NFA  position  of  the  country  at  some 
benchmark level. 
39. 
What  if  these  three  alternative  estimates  throw  up  different  results?  Take,  for 
example, the IMF’s different estimates for India. According to the Article IV Report released 
in  February  2013,  the  macroeconomic  balance  approach  suggested  India’s  real  exchange 
rate  to  be  undervalued  by  3.5  to  4.5  per  cent,  the  ERER  approach  suggests  the  rupee  is 
overvalued  by  around  12  per  cent,  and  the  external  sustainability  approach  pointed  to  the 
real  exchange  rate  remaining  broadly  in  line  with  its  medium-term  economic  value.  This 
varying  range  of  estimates  leaves  scope  for  judgment,  undermining  the  faith  on  statistical 
models.  
40. 
The  IMF’s  position  on  this  has  been  that  “...it  should  be  recognized  that  such 
assessments  are  unavoidably  subject  to  large  margins  of  uncertainty.  These  relate  to  a 
number  of  factors,  such  as  the  potential  instability  of  the  underlying  macroeconomic  links, 
differences  in  these  links  across  countries,  significant  measurement  problems  for  some 
variables, as well as the imperfect “fit” of the models. Some of these problems may be more 
severe  for  emerging  market  economies,  where  structural  change  is  more  likely  to  play  an 
important  role  and  where  limitations  in  terms  of  data  availability  and  length  of  sample  are 
more acute.”3  
41. 
Moving the concept of FEER from theory to practice, therefore, is not so easy. As 
per  the  assessment  of  one  US  Department  of  the  Treasury  paper  “...  It  is  difficult  for  any 
model  to  describe  adequately  all  features  of  modern  economies  that  are  relevant  to 
determining  exchange  rate  movements,  especially  of  economies  fully  integrated  into  the 
international  economic  and  financial  system.  Some  economists  argue  that  misalignment 
cannot  be  measured  at  all  because  empirical  techniques  are  unable  to  capture  the 
continuous evolution of structural economic relationships that drive exchange rates.”4  
42. 
How do we deal with this lack of unanimity and precision? One solution is a simpler 
concept  that  is  easy  to  understand  and  also  relevant.  The  purchasing  power  parity  theory 
(PPP)  clearly  stands  out  as  the  most  conventional  but  still  relevant  approach  to  assess 
equilibrium  exchange  rates.  PPP  is  based  on  the  principle  of  a  “law  of  one  price”,  which 
suggests that in the absence of frictions such as transaction costs, taxes, and transportation 
costs,  the  same  commodity  must  sell  for  the  same  price,  when  expressed  in  a  common 
currency.  
43. 
The  more  commonly  used  version  of  PPP  is  called  “relative  purchasing  power 
parity,” which emphasises the relationship between changes in the price level or inflation and 
changes in exchange rates. A country having relatively higher inflation over successive years 
should  experience  currency  depreciation,  but  for  market  frictions.  Empirically,  however, 
relative  PPP  may  not  hold  in  the  short-run,  because  of  capital  flows,  and  asymmetric 
adjustment of goods and asset markets to both monetary and real shocks, leading to either 
overshooting or undershooting of exchange rates. REER, which is an indicator of the extent 
of  deviation  of  the  exchange  rate from  PPP  at any  point  of time, therefore,  should  have  a 
medium-term perspective.  
44. 
The construction of a relevant REER index for a country is not easy because of the 
diverse  range  of  possibilities,  each  having  its  own  merits  and  demerits.  Three  important 
considerations in this regard are: (i) choice of a proper price indicator, (ii) selection of a base 
                                                
3  Methodology for CGER Exchange Rate Assessments, November 8, 2006, Page no. 4, Para No. 8. 
4  Equilibrium Exchange Rate Models and Misalignments, Department of the Treasury, Occasional Paper No. 7, 
March 2007. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
year that could represent a condition of both internal and external balance so that deviations 
from that base could be interpreted as the degree of misalignment, and (iii) use of relevant 
weighting procedures.  
45. 
On  the  choice  of  the  price  indicator,  practices  range from  use  of  CPI  to  PPI,  unit 
labour  costs,  and  prices  of  exports  and  imports  or  tradables.  On  the  choice  of  base,  it  is 
difficult  to  pick  a  particular  point  of  time  when  both  external  and  internal  balance  may  be 
perfectly attained. More importantly, even if one such point can be identified from the past, 
because of structural changes taking place in the economy, that base may become irrelevant 
over time. An alternative solution to this could be using an average of the REER as the proxy 
for the long-term trend, assuming that on an average a country achieves both internal and 
external balance over the medium-run. Another important adjustment that is often ignored is 
the role of changing and divergent productivity across tradables and non-tradables, a la the 
Balassa Samuelson effect. 
46. 
My intention in presenting the above debate is to underscore the point that no single 
statistical measure of equilibrium exchange rate can be an acceptable reference point for all 
purposes.  The  estimation  of  REER  is  sensitive  to  the  methodology.  The  challenge  for 
statisticians  would  to  design  one  or  more  constructs  which  provide  the  “best”  possible 
measures of equilibrium exchange rates.  
Financial stability and stress indicators  
47. 
Let  me  finally  turn  to  financial  stability  and  stress  indicators.  The  challenge  of 
preserving and bolstering financial stability has come centre stage post crisis. We now know 
that  price  stability  and  macroeconomic  stability  do  not  necessarily  guarantee  financial 
stability and that financial stability needs to be pursued as a policy objective in its own right. 
This  post  crisis  thinking  has  presented  statisticians  with  a  new  set  of  challenges  –  that  of 
developing additional matrices to monitor financial stability. Indeed, the crisis has highlighted 
the  importance  of  developing  relevant  statistics  that  are  timely,  internally  consistent,  and 
comparable across countries.  
48. 
By far the biggest challenge both for policy makers and statisticians is that there is 
as yet no universally acceptable definition of financial stability. Financial stability is also multi-
dimensional, encompassing as it does, economies, markets, the financial sector institutions 
and financial market infrastructure, and hence is more difficult to measure.  
49. 
Several  techniques  are  employed  to  assess  financial  stability  and  a  host  of 
quantitative  measures  are  in  the  process  of  being  developed  for  assessing  systemic  risks 
and for potentially predicting systemic events. The development of these models / techniques 
is in a nascent stage and each of them has its merits and demerits. Some of the commonly 
used quantitative methods for financial stability assessment include early warning systems, 
macro-stress testing, and financial stability indices. 
50. 
Early  warning  systems  are  constructed from  potential  leading  indicators  to  predict 
the  probability  of  a  financial  crisis.  Macro  stress  testing  models  /  techniques  attempt  to 
estimate  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  adverse  macroeconomic  scenarios. 
Aggregate  financial  stability  indices  represent  another  class  of  quantitative  methods  which 
aim at measuring the stability of a financial system at any given point in time. Absence of 
specific benchmarks however, limits the use of such indices for predicting stress conditions/ 
crisis more effectively. 
51. 
As I mentioned earlier, financial stability is multi-dimensional and it can be impacted 
through different channels. Signs of instability or vulnerability could thus manifest in different 
variables or indicators. There are thus challenges in first identifying a set of indicators which 
need  to  be  monitored  for  financial  stability  and  then  identifying  the  level  at  which  each 
indicator reflects stress conditions. The task becomes challenging given the interdependence 
and the complex interactions of different elements of the financial system among themselves 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
and  with  the  real  economy.  Further  complications  arise  from  the  time  and  cross-sectional 
dimensions of interactions. There are also limitations relating to availability of data – the kind 
of data needed to assess risks to financial stability and the timeliness and frequency of such 
data. There are, in fact, several initiatives underway internationally to improve the availability 
of data for systemic risk assessment. 
52. 
Considerable progress has been made, over the past two decades, by researchers 
from central banks and elsewhere to capture conditions of financial stability through various 
indicators  of  financial  system  vulnerabilities.  Indeed,  many  central  banks,  through  their 
financial stability reports (FSRs), attempt to assess the risks to financial stability by focusing 
on  a  small  number  of  key  indicators.  Broadly,  the  challenges  involved  in  development  of 
stress  indicators  are:  (i) identification  of  suitable  variables,  (ii) developing  composite 
indicators,  (iii)  testing  the  ability  for  detecting  vulnerabilities  at  an  early  stage,  and  finally 
(iv) benchmarking. 
53. 
In India, we started publishing Financial Stability Reports in March 2010 and have 
issued seven reports so far. The reports present the several quantitative techniques that we 
are using within the Reserve Bank to assess risks to financial stability. They include stability 
maps,  which  show  quantitative  shift  in  risk  perception  between  two  periods,  and  macro-
stress  testing  to  assess  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  to  adverse  macroeconomic 
conditions. These indicators / models are being continuously reviewed and upgraded within 
the Reserve Bank.  
54. 
In  a  nutshell,  considerable  research  effort  should  be  devoted  to  development  of 
indicators for financial stability analysis, which in conjunction with sound judgment must be 
employed for comprehensive assessment of the risks to the stability of the economy and the 
financial system. 
Conclusion 
55. 
i. 
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
Let me now conclude. I have raised the following five conceptual issues: 
Inflation measure for monetary policy in India: WPI or CPI? 
Potential  output,  threshold  inflation  and  Taylor  rule  for  monetary  policy  reaction 
function 
Neutral interest rate and assessment of monetary policy stance 
Equilibrium exchange rate – Why no single statistical measure is acceptable as a 
consensus reference value? 
Financial stability and stress indicators – way forward 
v. 
Through these issues I have tried to highlight the formidable challenges confronting 
56. 
statisticians 
integrated  and  complex. 
Simultaneously,  the  demands  on  statisticians  are  increasing  as  policy  makers  are  looking 
towards them for robust and reliable technical analysis to guide policy making. I hope you will 
reflect on some of these issues during the deliberations over the day. I wish the conference 
all success.  
in  a  world  which 
is  becoming 
increasingly 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
