Deepali Pant Joshi: Indian rural banking sector – big challenges and the 
road ahead 
Speech by Dr Deepali Pant Joshi, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Mangalore Institute of Technology and Engineering (MITE), Mangalore, 4 May 2013. 
 Assistance rendered by Shri A.K. Misra, General Manager, Shri T.V. Rao, Deputy General, 
Smt. Sushma Vij, Deputy General Manager, Shri P. Manoj, Assistant General Manager, Shri 
Bipin  Nair,  Assistant  General  Manager  and  Smt.  Mruga  Paranjape,  Manager  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Respected  Dr.  Thingalaya,  Former  CMD  Syndicate  Bank,  Dr.  G.  L.  Easwara  Prasad, 
Principal,  Mangalore  Institute  of  Technology  and  Engineering,  senior  bankers  and  dear 
students. I am extremely delighted to be amongst you in this prestigious institute which has 
several achievements in engineering studies to its credit in a very short span of time. I am 
honoured, privileged and happy to inaugurate this topical seminar aptly titled Indian Banking 
Sector  Big  Challenges  and  the  Road  Ahead  and  speak  in  a  hallowed  place  which  is 
considered the cradle of Indian Banking. I felicitate the organizers and especially respected 
Dr Thingalaya and thank you for having me here. 
The  global  financial crisis  and  the  current  Euro  zone  crisis have  affected  the  banks  in  the 
advanced economies; the spillover is ricocheting on banks in emerging economies including 
India.  Issues  of  financial  stability,  economic  growth  and  managing  inflation  are  the  major 
challenges  confronting  regulators  in  advanced  economies  and  are  equally  important  for 
emerging  economies  like  ours.  Global  economic  growth  has  slowed  from  3.9%  in  2011  to 
3.2% in 2012 we are not unaffected by what happens in the rest of the world our economy 
too has slowed after 2010–11. In the current year CSO has projected a growth estimation of 
5% while the RBI has put it at 5.5%. As Shri Chidambaram our Finance Minister has rightly 
put  it  “Whatever  be  the  final  estimate  it  will  be  below  India’s  potential  growth  rate  of  8%, 
getting back to that growth rate will be the challenge that faces the country”. This is clearly 
not feasible if large sections of society remain marginalized and people who lack access to 
financial services from Institutional service providers are not mainstreamed .The challenge of 
financial inclusion presents an inflexion point for Indian banking. 
The  biggest  challenge  for  next  decade  or  more  to  banks  in  the  country  is  to  capture  the 
banking business of over 50% population of this country of over 120 billion people. Today, I 
will use the opportunity to discuss contemporary challenges facing Indian Rural Banking, i.e, 
Priority  Sector  Lending,  Regional  Rural  Banks,  Financial  Inclusion,  Financial  Literacy  and 
Education. Aptly Dr. Subbarao, RBI Governor terms Financial Inclusion as the supply side of 
the equation and Financial Literacy the demand side. 
Priority sector lending 
(i) 
The  definition  of  priority  sectors  has  evolved  over  a  period  of  time  and  at  present,  priority 
sectors are broadly taken as those sectors of the economy which in the absence of inclusion 
in the priority sector categories would not get timely and adequate finance. Typically, these 
are  small  loans  to  small  and  marginal  farmers  for  agriculture  and  allied  activities,  loans  to 
Micro  and  Small  Enterprises,  loans  for  small  housing  projects,  education  loans  and  other 
small loans to people with low income levels. Presently, the target for aggregate advances to 
the  priority  sector  is  40  per  cent  of  the  Adjusted  Net  Bank  Credit  ANBC  or  the  credit 
equivalent  of  Off  Balance  sheet  Exposure  (OBE),  whichever  is  higher  for  domestic  banks. 
Foreign  banks  with  20  or  more  branches  in  the  country  are  being  brought  on  par  with 
domestic banks for priority sector targets in a phased manner over a five year period starting 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
from April 1, 2013. For foreign banks with less than 20 branches the overall target is fixed at 
32 per cent. 
The domestic banks, i.e, public and private sector, could not achieve the target of 40 percent 
for the year 2012 as can be evidenced from the table below. 
As per 59th NSS Survey, households with 2 hectare or less land accounted for 84% of all 
farmer households. The percentages of such small and marginal famers who have access to 
credit is only 46.3%. A large section of farmers is still dependent on moneylenders for their 
financial needs. 
  The major challenge is to bring all farmers into the institutional credit framework. To boost 
the credit to agriculture sector, apart from a host of initiatives, the Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
Scheme  was  introduced  in  the  year  1998–99  to  enable  farmers  to  purchase  agricultural 
inputs and draw cash for their production needs. In 2004, NABARD revised the Model KCC 
Scheme  to  provide  adequate  and  timely  finance  for  meeting  the  comprehensive  credit 
requirements  of  farmers  under  single  window,  with  flexible  and  simplified  procedure, 
adopting whole farm approach. The scheme now covers term credit as also working capital 
for  agriculture  and  allied  activities  and  a  reasonable  component  for  consumption  needs. 
During  2011–12,  public  sector  banks  have  issued  68,03,051  KCCs  with  sanctioned  limits 
aggregating to Rs. 69,51,768.45 lakh. Since inception of the scheme, the number of KCCs 
issued by public sector banks stood at 5,47,49,373.00 till March 2012 with sanctioned limits 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
aggregating to Rs. 3,53,14,527.11 lakh. We have recently  revised the  guidelines on Kisan 
Credit Card scheme. Margin /security norms are waived for loans up to Rs.1 lakh to enhance 
the flow and easy delivery of bank loans to small agricultural borrowers. 
The  revised  priority  sector  guidelines  lay  emphasis  on  direct  delivery  of  credit  to  the  poor 
beneficiaries  i.e.  without  the  involvement  of  intermediaries,  which  will  ensure  better 
management of risks and also reduction in transaction, delivery and administrative costs for 
these loans, which being essentially small ticket, low value high volume loans, do generate 
profits  translating  to  a  stable  low  cost  deposit  stream  for  banks  and  to  the  fortune  at  the 
bottom of the pyramid. 
To  make  priority  sector  lending  viable  for  the  banks,  RBI  has  removed  the  interest  rate 
ceiling on all types of loans including small loans by linking it to Base Rate of the banks with 
effect  from  April  1,  2010.  Thus,  there  is  no  preferential  rate  of  interest  for  priority  sector 
loans. Thus priority sector lending is competitive and commercially viable. 
Why have we removed caps on pricing? The cost of absence of bank lending to poor and 
vulnerable sections of the society is heavy, as the poor have no option but to borrow from the 
unorganized sector, the informal or alternative channels at usurious price. There is a need for 
reorienting the approach of banks to look at priority sector areas. The challenges in priority 
sector  can  be  overcome  only  if  banks  consider  priority  sector  lending  as  part  of  normal 
business operations of the banks and not as an obligation. Rural untapped market offers a 
big business opportunity to the banks. Banks need to innovate new products which cater to 
the needs of farmers, weaker sections and other vulnerable sections of the society, develop 
new  delivery  channels  and  embrace  technological  developments  which  will  reduce  the 
delivery costs. Priority sector must be treated as a viable business proposition. 
Regional rural banks 
(ii) 
Regional  Rural  Banks  (RRBs)  were  established  in  the  year  1976  as  a  low  cost  financial 
intermediation structure in the rural areas to ensure sufficient flow of institutional credit for 
agriculture and other rural sectors. RRBs were expected to have the local feel and familiarity 
of the cooperative banks with the managerial expertise of the commercial banks. RRBs are 
jointly  owned  by  GoI,  the  concerned  State  Government  and  Sponsor  Banks,  the  issued 
capital  of  a RRB  is  shared  by  the  owners  in  the  proportion  of  50  percent,  15  percent  and 
35 percent  respectively.  In  practice  they  borrowed  the  politicization  in  lending,  rampant  in 
cooperative Banks, with the worst form of unionism replicated from the commercial banks. 
The  low  cost  structure  was  also  washed  away  after  the  Obul  Reddy  report  which  brought 
parity of pay scales with Commercial Banks. 
Several  RRBs  suffered  humongous  losses.  Government  of  India  and  RBI  initiated  several 
measures to improve the financial health of RRBs. During a review carried out by GOI in the 
year 2009 it was found that the Capital Risk Weighted Assets Ratio (CRAR) of the RRBs were 
too  low.  Dr.  K.C  Chakrabarty  committee  suggested  bringing  the  CRAR  of  RRBs  to  at  least 
9 percent  in  a  sustainable  manner.  The  Committee  inter-alia  recommended  recapitalization 
support to the extent of Rs. 2,200 crore, to 40 RRBs in 21 States, out of which Rs.1,100 crore 
was  to be contributed by  Central  Government.  The  recapitalization process which  started in 
2010–11 has been extended till 2013–14. Several Committees looked into issues of viability 
finally  amalgamation  of  RRBS  on  grounds  of  contiguity  in  a  particular  region  was  adopted. 
Initially, there were 196 RRBs working in the country. After the second phase of amalgamation, 
which started w.e.f. October 1, 2012, 34 RRBs have been amalgamated to form 14 new RRBs. 
After  a  massive  consolidation  and  merger  exercise  to  strengthen  the  RRBs,  the  number  of 
RRBs operating in the country today has come down to 62. 
The number of sustainably viable RRBs (i.e. RRBs making net current profit and having no 
accumulated losses) has increased to 60 as on March 31, 2012 as compared to 58 as on 
March 31, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Financial Inclusion 
(iii) 
Now let me turn to extension of banking penetration and branch building. A massive 
exercise in this regard has been taken up by us and this is being done through the 
lead bank scheme channel. We advised banks in November 2009 to draw up a roadmap to 
provide banking services through a banking outlet in every village with a population of more 
than  2000  and  the  target  date  was  March  2012.  Banks  were  advised  that  such  banking 
services need not necessarily be extended through a brick and mortar branch but could be 
provided  through  any  of  the  various  forms  of  ICT-based  models  including  through  BCs. 
Under  the  roadmap  for  providing  banking  outlets  in  villages  with  population  above  2000, 
banking  outlets  have  been  opened  in  hitherto  74199  unbanked  villages  comprising  2493 
branches, 69374 Business Correspondents (BCs) and 2332 through other modes like ATMs, 
mobile van, etc. 
 Now, you may well ask me; How do we plan to provide banking services to villages 
having  population  less  than  2000?  As  per  the  announcement  in  the  Annual  policy 
Statement  2012–13,  State  Level  Bankers’  Committees  (SLBCs)  were  advised  by  RBI  to 
prepare  a  roadmap  covering  all  unbanked  villages  of  population  less  than  2000  and 
notionally  allot  these  villages  to  banks  for  providing  banking  services  in  a  time  bound 
manner, especially, to start with, EBT services. The objective is to provide a bank account to 
every household/person throughout the country. To start with, banks have been advised to 
provide  door  step  services  to  EBT  beneficiaries  to  facilitate  transfer  of  all  State  benefits 
including MGNREGA wages and various cash subsidies to beneficiaries by direct credit to 
the bank accounts, through regular visits of BCs to the allocated villages and over a period of 
time, provide all kinds of banking services viz. remittances, recurring deposit, entrepreneurial 
credit in the form of KCC and GCC, insurance (life and non-life) and other banking services 
to all the residents of the village through a mix of brick and mortar branch and BC network. 
We have also emphasized planning of sufficient number of brick and mortar branches so that 
there  is  a  brick  and  mortar  branch  to  provide  support  to  a  cluster  of  BC  units,  i.e.,  about  
8–10 BC units at a reasonable distance of 3–4 kilometers. As per the Roadmap drawn about 
484000  villages  with  population  less  than  2000  have  been  allotted  to  various  banks  for 
provision of banking services in next 3 years. 
Financial Inclusion Plan 
Financial Inclusion (FI) is the process of ensuring access to appropriate financial products 
and services needed by all sections of the society in general and vulnerable groups such as 
weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  in  particular  at  an  affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and 
transparent manner by mainstream institutional players. Reserve Bank has adopted a bank- 
led model for financial inclusion which seeks to leverage on technology. In January 2006, the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reserve  Bank  permitted  banks  to  utilise  the  services  of  non-governmental  organizations 
(NGOs), micro-finance institutions (other than Non-Banking Financial Companies) and other 
civil  society  organisations  as  intermediaries  in  providing  financial  and  banking  services 
through  the  use  of  business  facilitator  and  business  correspondent  (BC)  models.  The  BC 
model allows banks to do “cash in-cash out” transactions at a location much closer to the 
rural population, thus addressing the last mile problem. 
Reserve  Bank  has  been  furthering  financial  inclusion  in  a  mission  mode  through  a 
combination of strategies ranging from relaxation of regulatory guidelines, provision of new 
products  and  other  supportive  measures  to  achieve  sustainable  and  scalable  Financial 
Inclusion. A structured and planned approach was followed under financial inclusion wherein 
all banks were advised in January 2010 to prepare Board approved Financial Inclusion Plans 
(FIPs)  congruent  with  their  business  strategies  and  comparative  advantage  for  three  year 
period extending up to 2013. The implementation of these plans was closely monitored by 
the  Reserve  Bank  through  quantitative  &  qualitative  reporting  formats  and  through  review 
meetings held with CMDs/CEOs and other senior officials of banks. 
I am sure you would like to know what was the performance of banks under the first 
three year Financial Inclusion Plan period (2010–13)? 
The  Financial  Inclusion  Plan  (2010–13),  introduced  in  April  2010  has  concluded  in  March 
2013. The penetration of baking services in the rural areas has increased to a great extent. 
A snapshot of the progress made by banks, upto December 31 2012, under FIP for certain 
key parameters is given below: 
i. 
Banking connectivity has been extended to 2,11,234/– villages from 67,694 at the 
beginning  of  the  plan  period.  5694  rural  branches  have  been  opened  during  the 
period. 
ii. 
Numbers of Business Correspondents have increased from 34,532 to 1,52,328. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
iii. 
Total  number  of  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  have  gone  up 
from 73.45  million in 2010 to 171.43 million up to December 31 2012, Number of 
Kissan  Credit  Cards  outstanding  have  gone  up  from  24.31  million  in  2010  to 
31.73 million  upto  December  31  2012  and  Number  of  General  Credit  Cards 
outstanding have gone up from 1.39 million in 2010 to 3.11 million upto December 
31 2012. 
iv. 
v. 
  The number of ICT based BC transactions though encouraging is still very low as 
compared to the increase in the number of banking outlets. The focus on monitoring 
has, therefore, now shifted more towards the number and value of transactions in 
no-frills, credit and remittance accounts opened through BCs. In this direction, we 
have now advised banks to disaggregate the FIP upto the branch level and we have 
involved the controlling offices of respective banks as also the Regional Offices of 
RBI in all the States in the monitoring process. 
Naturally  you  will  want  to  know  what  are  some  of  the  major  issues  being  faced  by 
banks in pursuing and achieving the Financial Inclusion Plan targets? 
Efficient business model 
Banks are yet to perceive FI as a  profitable business model. Feedback received suggests 
that many banks are still pursuing FI as a regulatory requirement rather than treating it as a 
business  model.  Banks  have  to  realize  that  the  bankability  of  the  poor  holds  a  major 
opportunity for the banking sector in developing a stable retail deposit base and in curbing 
volatility  in  earnings  with  the  help  of  a  diversified  asset  portfolio.  The  recent  crisis  has 
underscored  the  need  for  reducing  banks’  reliance  on  wholesale  deposits  and  borrowed 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
funds and cultivating a retail portfolio of assets and liabilities for financial stability. Two basic 
issues that need to be understood by banks while implementing financial inclusion is that: 
 
Financial  Inclusion  programmes  should  be  implemented  on  commercial  lines  and 
not  on  a  charity  basis.  It  is  important  that  banking  with  the  poor  is  perceived  and 
pursued as a sustainable and viable business model. 
While  poor  need  not  be  subsidized,  it  is  important  to  ensure  that  they  are  not 
exploited. The need is to ensure that poor people who deserve credit are provided 
access to timely and adequate credit in a non-exploitative manner. 
 BC Model – Viability issues: 
Business  Correspondent  model  is  still  in  the  experimental  stages  and  there  are  various 
challenges  associated  with  the  model.  The  viability  of  BC  model  has  remained  a  critical 
issue. Surveys have revealed that branch officials do not visit BCs or customers and do not 
take any effort in introducing BCs to villagers. One primary reason cited by branch officials 
are the scarcity of staff provided to them for carrying out such visits to villages. Further, most 
of  the  accounts  opened  by  BCs  have  remained  non-operational.  In  order  to  ensure 
participation of all stake holders in the financial inclusion process, we have advised banks to 
disaggregate the FIPs upto the Controlling Office and branch level. This would ensure that 
bank  officials  at  the  ground  level  are  aware  of  the  banks  objective  under  FI  and  of  the 
specific targets given to each Zone/branch for achieving the objectives. 
Technology Issues 
Another  bottleneck  in  achieving  financial  inclusion  is  the  non-availability  of  physical  and 
digital  connectivity.  For  the  success  of  the  ICT  based  model,  resolving  technology  related 
issues is the key. 
Financial literacy 
iv) 
Financial Inclusion and Financial Literacy are two sides of the equation. Financial Inclusion 
acts  from  supply  side  by  providing  financial  market/services  that  people  demand  whereas 
Financial  Literacy  stimulates  the  demand  side  by  making  people  aware  of  what  they  can 
demand.  Therefore,  access  to  financial  services  and  Financial  Education  must  happen 
simultaneously. It must be continuous, an ongoing process and must target all sections of the 
population. 
Financial awareness has to be spread amongst the excluded masses that are illiterate and 
poor. For this, evolving an appropriate Business Model & an Efficient Delivery Mechanism is 
the major challenge for banks. For disseminating financial literacy and awareness, a National 
Level Coordination of all stakeholders like Banks, Governments, Civil Societies, NGOs, etc. 
is required. In India, the need for financial literacy is even greater considering the low levels 
of literacy and the large section of the population still out of the formal financial system. To 
ensure  effective  coordination  of  the  efforts  made  by  all  the  financial  regulators  and  other 
stakeholders,  a  Technical  Group  on  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  has  been 
constituted  under  the  aegis  of  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council.The  technical 
group  is  headed  by  the  Deputy  Governor,  RBI,  Dr  Chakrabarty  with  members  drawn  from 
SEBI,  PFRDA,  IRDA,  Government  of  India,  State  Governments,  Central  Education  Board 
etc. The Group is in dialogue with NCERT/State Education Boards for inclusion of financial 
literacy in CBSE/State curriculum. 
A  national  strategy  on  financial  education  has  been  prepared  which  would  cater  to  all 
sections  of  the  population  in  the  country.  Since  the  challenge  is  to  link  large  number  of 
financially  excluded  people  to  the  formal  financial  system,  the  focus  of  the  strategy  at  the 
base level will be to create awareness of basic financial products through dissemination of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
simple  messages  of  financial  prudence  in  vernacular  language  through  large  campaigns 
across the country. 
The  Reserve  Bank  of  India  had  launched  Project  Financial  Literacy  in  March  2007  with  a 
view  to  create  awareness,  especially  among  the  common  persons,  on  matters  relating  to 
banking,  finance  and  central  banking.  Under  Project  Financial  Literacy,  several  initiatives 
have been taken to achieve financial awareness and literacy among various target groups, 
which  included  publication  of  comic  books  on  banking  and  RBI;  games  on  Financial 
Education;  arranging  school/college  visits  for  creating  financial  awareness;  participation  in 
exhibitions/fairs/melas  at  the  State  &  District  levels;  conducting  essay  competitions  and 
quizzes  in  schools  to  create  awareness  about  banking  and  RBI;  outreach  programmes 
undertaken by theTop  Management and Regional Offices; RBI’s Young Scholars Scheme, 
etc. 
Banks have been advised to setup Financial Literacy Centres (FLCs) in the 630 plus offices 
of  the  Lead  District  Managers  (LDMs).  As  at  the  end  of  December  2012,  658  FLCs  were 
functioning and 1.5 million people were educated during the period April to December 2012. 
Further, 35,000 rural branches of SCBs including RRBs have been mandated to undertake 
outdoor financial literacy activities, at least once a month, with focus on financially excluded 
population.  In  order  to  link  the  financially  excluded  segment  with  the  banking  system,  a 
“Model” for conduct of Literacy Camps to be held by banks has been designed, detailing the 
operational  modalities  to  culminate  in  effective  financial  access  to  the  excluded  people. 
Further, to ensure consistency in the financial literacy material reaching the target audience 
in a simple and lucid manner, RBI has prepared a comprehensive Financial Literacy Material 
consisting of a Financial Literacy Guide, Financial Diary and a set of 16 Financial Literacy 
Posters (few posters have been displayed below). 
 Education 
v) 
One of the most important things, which I want to touch upon before concluding is education, 
as  I  see  there  are  a  large  number  of  youngsters  assembled  here.  The  efforts  and  outlay 
made  by  Government  alone  will  not  meet  the  requirements  of  outlay  on  education.  The 
scope of education has widened both in India and abroad covering new courses in diversified 
areas. Realizing the importance of education for economic development and raising overall 
living  standards,  RBI,  has  classified  loans  and  advances  granted  to  individuals  for 
educational purposes, including vocational courses up to Rs. 10 lakh for studies in India and 
Rs.20 lakh for studies abroad, under “priority sector”. With a view to enable banks, the Indian 
Banks’ Association has brought out a model scheme for educational loan in the year 2001, 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
which facilitated economically weaker sections of the society to avail educational loans from 
scheduled banks with modified easier norms. The Scheme was revised by IBA subsequently, 
the latest being in September 2012. 
Loans  for  education  should  be  seen  as  an  investment  for  economic  development  and 
prosperity, since knowledge and information would be the principal driving force for economic 
growth in the coming years 
In the end, I would sum up by saying that I am hopeful that with our recently revised priority 
sector norms, focusing on small loans directly to small and marginal farmers, micro and small 
enterprises low cost housing projects, student and people with low income the banks will see 
priority  sectors  as  viable  business  opportunity  to  reach  financial  excluded  sections  of  the 
population. In the coming 10–15 years banks in India in particular would realign their position 
in the pecking order based on their ability to convert financial inclusion into a viable business 
opportunity. Banks which are able to craft appropriate business and delivery models to tap 
the  large  excluded  sections  of  society  would  come  on  top.  The  triad  of  financial  inclusion, 
financial literacy and financial stability would be extremely relevant in the foreseeable future. 
The depth and breadth of banking in the country would determine financial stability. 
The Banking sector has played a crucial role in developing the rural economy by providing 
credit and creating financial awareness. But as we are aware, despite all the efforts that we 
have made, a huge section of the rural population is still out of the banking net. Rural India 
has  huge  potential  for  development  and  as  I  said  earlier  it  provides  tremendous  business 
opportunity for the banks, I urge the bankers through this platform to put their heart and soul 
in making a rural India where each and every household has a bank account and is imbued 
with financial awareness. Where Bharat and India morph to one entity and growth with equity 
becomes a reality. 
Let  me  again  close  echoing  our  Finance  Ministers  words  “Any  economist  will  tell  us  what 
India can become as we are the tenth largest economy in the world. We can become the 
eighth  or  perhaps  the  seventh  largest  by  2017.  By  2025  we  could  become  a  $5 trillion 
economy and among the top five in the world.” What we will become depends on us and the 
choices that we make. As Swami Vivekananda, whose 150th birth anniversary we celebrated 
recently, said “All the strength and succor you want is within yourself, therefore make your 
own future” and this young friends is quite the best advice I can give to you along with my 
best wishes for a bright future. 
Heights by great men 
Reached and kept  
We’re not attained by sudden flight 
They while their companions slept 
We’re struggling upward in the night 
I wish the seminar and your deliberations grand success. Thank you. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
