Paul Tucker: A new regulatory relationship – the Bank, the financial 
system and the wider economy 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the Institute for Government, London, 28 May 2013. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me here today. For someone who has spent pretty much 
the whole of my professional life in public service, it comes as something of a relief that the 
UK  has  an  independent  institute  dedicated  to  analysing,  monitoring  and  assessing  the 
workings of government. And, as a central banker during a period in which the role of central 
banks around the world is once again being reshaped in the wake of the financial crisis, I am 
very  glad  to  be  part  of  your  series  on  the  changing  relationship  between  the  State  and 
business. Frankly, it has been impossible not to reflect on precisely that issue as the reforms 
of the Bank of England have proceeded. 
I shall confine what I say this evening to brief remarks under three headings: 
• 
The supervision of the safety and soundness of banks, and the place of rules and 
discretion in that 
Expectations  of  what  the  central  bank  can  and  should  achieve  as  a  macro 
policymaker, and how society can monitor that role 
How  the  central  bank’s  relationship  with  the  business  community  plays  out  in  a 
wider international, indeed global, setting. 
  Before getting to the substance, I should say first that the Bank is releasing a text comprising 
a few bullet points around which I shall frame my remarks; and second, that I am speaking 
for myself this evening and not for any of the policy committees, domestic or international, of 
which I am a member. 
Speaking notes 
Part 1: Prudential regulation of financial firms: rules versus discretion 
• 
Bank of England is once again the prudential supervisor of banks. And this time of 
building societies and insurance companies too. 
Prominence given in public debate to the Bank absolutely not adopting a ‘tick box’ 
approach,  but  instead  a  ‘judgment-based’  approach.  This  has  been  widely 
applauded. 
In  fact,  market  practitioners  tend  to  be  schizophrenic  about  it.  For  a  couple  of 
decades  at  least,  they  have  called  for  ‘certainty’  whenever  any  specific,  isolated 
policy area is being reformed; ie clear and complete rules. But taking the resulting 
monstrous rule books as a whole, senior practitioners rightly condemn the ‘tick box’ 
regulation that almost inevitably results. 
And  leaders  of  firms  have  hardly  stopped  their  staff  from  making  a  living  finding 
ways  around  rules:  endemic  regulatory  arbitrage  was  at  the  heart  of  so-called 
‘shadow banking’ in the run up to the crisis. 
Step back to consider the public policy purpose. Contrast prudential supervision with 
securities regulation as traditionally conceived. Latter works on basis of: write rules; 
check  compliance  with  those  rules;  punish  breaches.  If  the  rules  proved  to  be 
flawed, they should still be enforced, for credibility’s sake; but later changes should 
be made to the rules. 
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
        Animating spirit of ‘prudential supervision’ is completely different. Impossible to write 
down a complete (or even adequate) set of binding rules on the financial health of a 
bank  (or  on  the  substance  of  the  professional  competence  of  bankers).  Instead, 
things like capital ratios or liquidity ratios are really indicators of financial health. 
This is reminiscent of an old debate in monetary policy. Thirty-odd years ago, policy 
was meant more or less mechanically to follow targets for broad or narrow monetary 
aggregates. It didn’t work: the economic world was not sufficiently stable. Since we 
adopted  inflation  targeting,  central  banks  have  had  an  eclectic  approach  to 
indicators. We are constrained by a clear medium-term objective (2% CPI target), 
but do not use a set of supposedly fool-proof core intermediate indicators. 
No more can we write down hard and fast rules on bank balance sheets. 
Nor,  consistent  with  Parliament’s  wishes,  is  the  Prudential  Regulation  Authority 
seeking to achieve a zero failure regime. The failure of individual firms has to be an 
acceptable outcome so long as they can be wound down in an orderly way. 
So  the  PRA’s  approach  to  prudential  supervision  entails  making judgments  of the 
kind: 
Your bank isn’t as strong as you think it is 
Cut back on the risk in your book 
I’m afraid you’re not fit to run the bank 
your business could not be resolved in an orderly way if it fails. 
This shift from rules to judgment changes the relationship between the regulator and 
business, and is an important example of what this series of talks is about. 
Challenge is how to make a judgment-based approach acceptable when we use it in 
earnest. Is our society really ready again for judgments from the Old Lady? 
Part of the solution is public law. The Bank must follow due process when it deploys 
its statutory powers, and that is subject to judicial review in the courts and appeal 
tribunals. 
But  there  is  also  a  wider  question  about  how  society  as  a  whole  will  keep  us 
accountable  or,  more  simply,  just  see  what  is  going  on  during  the  periods, 
sometimes years, in which banks do not fail and the financial waters are – or at least 
seem  to  be  –  calm. Which  brings me  to  our  monetary  and  macroprudential  roles, 
which indirectly touch every business, and household, in the country. 
Part 2: The central bank’s relationship with businesses in the wider economy 
• 
Central  bank  charged  with  achieving  and  preserving  stability  –  stability  in  the 
(internal) value of the currency and stability in the financial system. Medium-term 
goals, requiring a medium-term perspective. 
But what we do affects the path of the economy in the short run. On the one hand, 
that is why these tasks are entrusted to unelected officials in central banks: to solve 
the time-consistency problem. On the other hand, society is rightly hugely interested 
in 
How unelected central bankers manage any short-term trade-offs 
How to satisfy itself that we are not deviating from the medium-term goals we have 
been given. 
In monetary sphere, the solution has been a quantified, well-defined medium-term 
objective for inflation combined with transparency. Everyone is now used to this, but 
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
            remember  that  transparency  in  monetary  policy  is  a  relatively  new  phenomenon. 
Less than 20 years ago, the US FOMC did not even announce its policy rate. 
Transparency  works  well  for  monetary  policy  because  almost  everything  can  be 
published. 
And even there it is always possible to make improvements. Latest Inflation Report 
package  contains  new  charts,  richer  indicators.  And  following  a  new  Remit  from 
HMG,  MPC  is  being  clearer  about  how  we  assess  short-term  trade-offs  between 
growth and inflation in a way that is faithful to our medium-term inflation objective. 
That doesn’t tackle biggest issue of all. Central banks can, to a degree, smooth the 
necessary  adjustment  of  economies  and  so  create  time  for  households,  firms, 
governments  to  strengthen  their  balance  sheets  where  necessary  and  adjust  to 
shifts in the relative pattern of demand for goods and services. That is what is going 
on in the West now. But obviously central banks cannot force others to act. And our 
actions can make delay seductive. 
Given central banks’ responsibility to explain, we can nudge but we must stay within 
our remit. 
In the present crisis, part of the real-side adjustment is needed within the banking 
system. For that the Bank of England does have a special role. Through the new 
Financial Policy Committee (FPC), we have been pressing the banking industry to 
adjust  given  the  external  threats,  as  sound  banks  are  needed  for  sustainable 
recovery. 
This represents the first intervention of so-called macro-prudential policy. Can view 
the  role  of  the  FPC  as  being  to  ensure  that  the  need  for  stability  in  the  financial 
system  is  not  overlooked.  Looking  ahead,  this  will  mean  keeping  the  regulatory 
regime up-to-date as the financial system evolves and, when the time comes, ‘taking 
away the punchbowl’ before the next party gets as dangerously out of control as the 
last one did. 
The case for operational independence here is just as strong as for monetary policy. 
Taking Away The Punchbowl is something that requires a medium-term orientation. 
Parliament can tie us to the mast and rely on us not to seek to wriggle free. 
But, as with monetary policy, this makes it vital that Parliament frames the objective 
and that we are sufficiently transparent to enable ex ante public accountability. 
Objective: The legislation governing the FPC is clear that resilience of the system 
as  a  whole  is  the  primary  goal  but  that  we  must  not  aim  for  the  stability  of  the 
graveyard. Resilience is not quantified, however. 
Transparency: While respecting the confidentiality of data on individual firms, FPC 
is  required  by  Parliament  to  be  as  transparent  as  possible  –  via  the  published 
Record of our policy meetings and the twice-yearly Financial Stability Report. 
This is the background to the FPC calling on the Bank to develop a regime for stress 
testing to be used for both micro and macro prudential supervision. (Part of a much 
bigger project that is needed for policymakers to gauge just how much stress our 
economy can take at any time without serious adverse consequences, and what to 
do about it.) 
One possibility is for FPC to use stress tests to define the degree of resilience the 
system needs. Maybe that could become to financial stability what forecasting is to 
monetary  policy.  In  the  USA  and  elsewhere  the  results  of  such  stress  tests  have 
been published. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
  That  represents  quite  a  change  in  regime  for  regulated  firms.  But  neither  the 
markets nor the public was comfortable with the degree of secrecy on these matters 
in the past. 
It does, though, pose the question of what happens when a firm ‘fails’ a stress test. 
And at this point, I need to broaden these remarks to the international scene and 
how that is affecting our relationships with business. 
Part 3: Policy in a global setting 
• 
This country believes in free trade and open financial markets. Our financial system 
is highly integrated with the global system. 
That means that some firms domiciled or operating in the UK are global, and many 
are international. Creates a huge need for a level playing-field internationally. That is 
a common interest of business and the authorities: 
Business: want to be able to compete more or less anywhere on equal terms with 
local, indigenous firms and with international firms from other countries. 
Authorities: want good standards on top of that. Not only because we need them 
at  home.  The  UK/London  needs  good  standards  abroad  too:  problems  in  the 
international financial system almost anywhere in the world will blow through London 
and  the  UK  to  a  greater  or  lesser  extent.  And  vice  versa.  Financially,  we’re  the 
opposite of an island. 
Up  to  a  point  we  can  mitigate  that  by  measures  such  as  HMG’s  planned  ‘ring 
fencing’ of retail banks, which has the effect of separating domestic intermediation 
from the entrepôt. But the non-ring-fenced banks matter for stability too! So we can’t 
just leave it there. 
That  gives  UK  a  massive  incentive  to  achieve  good  outcomes  in  international 
standards for financial regulation. 
So far in this argument, so good – business and the authorities together pointing in 
the  same  direction.  Ie  business  will  happily  live  with  what  I’m  calling  ‘good’ 
standards provided they are applied evenly everywhere that matters. 
But two issues remain. First, business is frustrated by the time it takes to reach such 
international  agreements.  They  want  speed.  They  make  the  compelling  point  that 
they can’t determine their business models and plan their strategies until they know 
the regime under which they will function. 
The international community finds that hard. Contrast yesterday’s world of a small 
handful of central bank governors deciding bank-capital standards on their own: a 
world  of  G5  or  at  most  G10.  Today’s  world  is  G20  plus.  And,  as  capital  markets 
have become more important, securities regulators are rightly also at the table – and 
finance ministries too given the social and political issues. The result is a big table. 
(FSB Plenary – c.70). 
By prioritising an international playing-field that is as level as possible and as sound 
as possible, speed is sacrificed. 
Second issue – some key policy discussions end up being away from home, away 
from the Westminster Parliament. Mainly global in fact. 
That global process is pretty transparent – consultative papers, speeches and so on. 
But perhaps not covered in any national media, including here in the UK, as much 
as one might expect. 
           4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
     But there is a deeper question here about the compatibility of domestic and global 
objectives. In the monetary sphere, it is well known that one cannot combine capital 
mobility,  monetary  policy  focused  on  domestic  price  stability,  and  fixed  exchange 
rates. Solution in post-Bretton Woods world has been floating exchange rates. This 
does not mean there are no spillovers. Hence information sharing in Basel meetings 
etc. 
There  is  a  financial  trilemma  too.  Cannot  combine  cross-border  banking,  and  an 
integrated  international  financial  system  more  generally;  financial  stability;  and 
national policies focused solely on domestic stability. 
Came  home  to  roost  in  the  crisis:  global  banks  were,  as  Mervyn  King  put  it, 
“international in life but national in death”. Financial autarky is not the answer. 
Solution:  co-ordination  and  co-operation  on  the  resolution  of  global  banks.  G20 
Financial Stability Board has led the way here. Real progress. 
Means foreign countries have a stake in our banks, and vice versa. Means the key 
policies  are  unavoidably  international,  global.  As  a  trading  nation  we  should 
welcome that. 
I hope these brief remarks provide the basis for a good discussion. In short, the traditional 
roles  of  central  banks  –  for  the  first  time  ever  reflected  in  UK  legislation  –  touch  every 
household and business in this country and, in truth, more widely. We need to be clear about 
what we can do and what we cannot do; we need to operate consistently within our remit; 
and above all we must be sufficiently transparent to make proper accountability realistic. That 
is what trust requires, and we are in the business of trust – trust in the value of money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
