K C Chakrabarty: Banking as a fundamental right of the people! 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
27th National Conference of the AIBEA, Kochi, 9 February 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Shailendra Trivedi and Smt. Sushma Vij in preparation of this address is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Com. Rajen Nagar, President and Com. C H Venkatachalam, General Secretary of All India 
Bank  Employees  Association  (AIBEA),  Shri  P.  Sainath,  Rural  Affairs  Editor,  The  Hindu, 
Prof. Victor Louis Anthuvan, other office bearers of the AIBEA, Office bearers and delegates 
from other trade union bodies, guest delegates from abroad and dear friends. I am extremely 
happy  to  be  here  today  in  Kochi  in  the  “God’s  Own  Country”  to  address  this  gathering  of 
fellow bankers at this National Seminar organized as part of the 27th National Conference of 
the AIBEA. The fact that the AIBEA is one of the oldest and widely respected associations of 
Bank employees is made clear by the fact that Deputy Governor of RBI could not say no to a 
call from Mr. Venkatachalam, your General Secretary. 
Having said that, I would admit that I have come here with a vested interest. Vested interest 
in the sense that the subject you have selected for this seminar is very close to my heart; to 
the hearts of the senior management in the Reserve Bank of India. Also, being in-charge of 
the administration and human resource in the Reserve Bank of India, which is the regulator 
of the entire banking system in India, we want a responsible and strong trade union system 
in  the  banks  because  we  feel  that  strong  trade  unions  are  a  pre-condition  for  strong 
managements in the banks. I will come back to this issue a little later. 
It is, indeed, very heartening to note that the AIBEA has organized this conference on the 
theme “Meeting the Challenges of the Decade”. In fact, this could very well have been titled 
“Meeting the Challenges of the Century”. The banking system is unlikely to face the kind of 
challenges that it has been facing for the last 4–5 years. The challenges for the banking and 
financial  sector  are,  indeed,  gargantuan  as  is  revealed  by  a  recent  survey  conducted  by 
research  firm  StrategyOne,  across  the  globe.  The  interview  based  survey  involving  some 
30,000 people in 25 countries has identified the financial services and banking sectors as the 
world’s least-trusted industry for the second year in a row. The financial crisis has dealt such 
a  blow  to  the  people  that  they  have  lost  faith  in  the  banking  system.  Globally,  the  basic 
challenge for the industry at the present juncture is, therefore, to restore the credibility and 
trust that the banking and finance profession enjoyed before the onset of the Financial Crisis. 
I  hope  the  Conference  is  focusing  on  these  challenges  that  the  banking  industry  currently 
faces and is critically deliberating on the role that the bank employees, as the most important 
stakeholder, can play in managing them. I am sure that discussions held during these four 
days would trigger new thought processes and help chalk out future course of action for the 
employees to make the Indian banking system not just more efficient and resilient but also 
socially more relevant. 
Role of the trade unions 
Over  the  years,  the  trade  union  movement  has  played  a  very  important  role.  Across  the 
globe, they have not only been instrumental in preventing exploitation of the employees but 
have also brought dignity to labour. Not only this, the unions also play a very important role in 
bringing equity and social justice into the system and preventing managements from inflicting 
exploitative practices, not only on the employees but also on the society at large. 
In this context, I must commend the AIBEA, which is the oldest union of the bank employees 
in India, for the commanding role it has played in making the services of bank employees 
respectable, that too, at a time when banking was in private hands. I hail from Bengal, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
province where the modern day Indian banking originated. The people say that the condition 
of bank employees was very bad around the time of the Second World War. In fact, there is a 
saying in Bengali which, when roughly translated, means that vultures, bank clerks and maid 
servants always have their heads down. The bank clerks had no time to raise their heads – 
that was the kind of exploitation they faced. I have heard that even during the time of the 
Sastry Tribunal award, the expenses on the pet dog of the Bank CEO used to be more than 
the salary of an employee. It was during such times that unions were fortunate to have some 
great leaders like Com. Prabhat Kar, Com. Naresh Paul, Com. Asish Sen, Com. Sudhindra 
Nath Biswas, Com. Chadha, Com. H. L. Parwana, Com. Tarakeshwar Chakrabarty and, I am 
sure, several others. These people have, over the last 65 – 70 years, done all of us here a 
very great favour that we probably do not even realize today. They brought respectability to 
the  bank  job  in  the  society,  a  profession  which  was  earlier  looked  down  upon.  Today, 
banking jobs are amongst the most sought after. Here, I will also like to emphasize that the 
improvement  in  the  wage  structure  and  service  conditions  of  bank  employees  were  not 
achieved by agitation, demonstration and strike alone, but by persuasion and logic given by 
enlightened leaders of trade unions such as AIBEA before the bank management and award 
tribunals. In fact, the foundation of bipartite settlement in the banking industry was laid down 
by Sastry Award and Desai Award. While we glorify the bipartite settlement, we should not 
undermine  the  persuasive  and  intellectual  role played  by  trade  union  leaders  in  facilitating 
these two awards, which are landmarks in the history of bank trade union movement in the 
country.  As  our  organizations  transform  into  being  knowledge  institutions,  I  hope  that  the 
glorious  tradition  of  presenting  the  case  of  bank  employees  and  the  bank  customers  with 
logic,  information  and  compassion  will  be  further  encouraged  and  strengthened  by  the 
present leadership of the AIBEA. 
The need of the day 
Let  me,  now,  move  to  the  theme  of  this  seminar.  You  have  chosen  “Banking  as  a 
Fundamental Right of People” as the theme. While you have chosen this theme, let me tell 
you that if the acceptance of banking as a fundamental right of people has not happened so 
far, it is because of all of us – collectively we all are responsible. The issue is, no doubt, very 
relevant.  Especially  at  a  time  when  the  country’s  socio-political  agenda  is  focused  on 
inclusive growth, people ought not to remain financially excluded. I remember that sometime 
in  April  2012,  I  had  said  at  a  seminar  that  “Banking  services  should  now  be  made  a 
fundamental  right,  with  financial  inclusion  drive  turning  from  fashion  to  a  passion  for  the 
country”. In my address today, I would dwell upon the implications of declaring banking as a 
fundamental  right  of  the  people,  essential  pre-requisites  that  must  be  met,  the  spadework 
that needs to precede the promulgation and some of the pitfalls that we must avoid in this 
journey. I would also argue that banks ought to treat banking as a fundamental right, whether 
or not it is constitutionally provided, as it is inextricably linked to their very survival. 
Why are we discussing this issue of making banking a fundamental right today? Why does 
the Deputy Governor of the RBI have to talk about this? Why is the RBI and the Government 
concerned about extending basic banking services to all households in the country? 
Answers to all these questions are right there – like the proverbial “writing on the wall”. Till 
sometime back: 
 
Out of the 600,000 habitations in the country, only about 36,000+ had a commercial 
bank branch. 
Just about 40 per cent of the population across the country had bank accounts. 
The  proportion  of  people  having  any  kind  of  life  insurance  cover  was  as  low  as 
10 per cent. 
People having debit cards comprised only 13 per cent and those having credit cards 
only a marginal 2 per cent of the population. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  2 
 Though Financial Inclusion has remained a national agenda for a fairly long time, as reflected 
in  initiatives  such  as  the  co-operative  movement,  bank  nationalization,  lead  bank  scheme, 
setting up of RRBs, etc., the progress has been nothing to write home about. Why has this 
been  the  state  of  affairs  in  our  country  where  banking,  in  some  formal  way,  has  been  in 
existence  for  more  than  200  years;  where  we  have  several  banks  which  have  been  in 
existence for more than 100 years and why, even the AIBEA is close to 70 years old. Why is 
the position so? Part of the blame could be put on infrastructural bottlenecks – unavailability 
of technology, lack of brick and mortar branches – largely due to high initial costs. However, I 
would  reiterate  that  all  of  us  are  collectively  responsible.  The  bank  managements  are 
responsible, the employees are responsible, and even the Bank unions cannot escape their 
share  of  the  blame.  Considering  the  widespread  exclusion  of  people  from  the  financial 
mainstream, RBI launched a focused drive from 2005 onwards to achieve financial inclusion 
and extend banking services to all inhabitations in the country. 
I would, however, hasten to add here that financial exclusion is a global phenomenon and 
was one of the primary reasons for the financial crisis. Estimates suggest that more than half 
of  the  world’s  adult  population  –  about  2.5  billion  people,  do  not  have  access  to  basic 
financial services like a bank account, some kind of insurance or access to credit. Needless 
to add, most of these people are in developing countries like ours. 
Should banking be made a fundamental right? 
Before we examine an answer to the above question we must understand what Fundamental 
Rights  mean,  genesis  of  their  inclusion  in  our  Constitution  and  what  would  be  the 
implications for the stakeholders if the right to banking was to be made a fundamental right. 
The Fundamental Rights embodied in Part III of the Constitution guarantee civil rights to all 
citizens of the country irrespective of race, place of birth, religion, caste, creed or sex, and 
prevent the State from encroaching on individual liberty while simultaneously placing upon it 
an obligation to protect the citizens' rights from encroachment by society. Thus, the purpose 
of the Fundamental Rights is to preserve individual liberty and democratic principles based 
on equality of all members of society. 
Here, we must understand that banking is not a service that is to be provided by the State. It 
is  a  service  that  has  to  be  provided  on  commercial  lines.  Now,  who  prohibits  banks  from 
opening  everybody’s  bank  accounts  or  from  giving  credit  to  everyone.  Nobody  does. 
However, the price is such that it makes it prohibitive. Take for instance flying by a plane – 
everyone who can afford to buy a ticket can fly in a plane as a matter of right, but how many 
are able to exercise that right? 
If banks had decided to provide banking services to all, of their own accord, right to banking 
could  have  been  a  fundamental  right  on  its  own.  While  this  would  have  been  the  best 
possible  approach,  it  has,  regrettably,  not  happened.  One  may  argue  that  the  bank 
managements  were  not  too  interested  in  financial  inclusion  as  they  did  not  consider  it  a 
viable  business  proposition.  This  essentially  reflected  short-sightedness  and  a  misplaced 
assessment  based  on  static  rather  than  dynamic  considerations.  This  left  one  with  the 
second-best solution – to achieve it is through regulatory measures – something that we are 
trying  to  do.  Our  instructions  to  banks  are  to  open  a  basic  savings  bank  account  for  all 
individuals  without  any  conditions  and  thereby,  make  banking  almost  a  fundamental  right. 
And, please remember, regulations are not only for the public sector banks but are equally 
applicable for private banks, foreign banks, cooperative banks, etc. We want everybody to 
follow the instructions and provide universal access to basic banking services. 
However, if the people in this country are not able to get access to basic banking services 
even  after  the  regulatory  guidelines,  we  would  have  to  think  about  enactment  of  legal 
provisions for making banking a fundamental right. But, it may be like the right to education 
that we have made, the right to food that we are trying to make or the right to liberty that is 
often  debated  due  to  a  variety  of  reasons.  The  point  is  that  if  the  system  is  not  ready  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
delivery  of  a  particular  service  to  all  the  people  efficiently,  making  it  a  fundamental  right 
would only result in all-round chaos. We are unable to implement the right to food or right to 
housing  because  we  do  not,  perhaps,  have  the  ability  today.  While  I  am  happy  that  the 
AIBEA and its leaders are deliberating on this topic, let us also discuss about the modalities 
of  making  banking  services  available  to  all  the  people  and  assess  if  we  are  ready  for  the 
challenge. 
Before going further, let me provide you some global perspective on the issue of banking as 
a  right.  Under  Canadian  law,  everyone  has  the  right  to  open  a  personal  bank  account.  A 
bank  cannot  refuse  to  open  a  bank  account  for  an  individual  merely  because  he/she  is 
unemployed or does not make a minimum deposit or because he/she has previously been 
bankrupt    –    as  long  as  they  have  the  proper  identification.  Of  course,  the  opening  of  the 
account can be refused subject to certain conditions such as the account being likely to be 
used  for  illegal  or  fraudulent  purposes,  false  identification  given  by  the  customer  or  the 
prospective customer suspected to have committed a crime related to any bank. Likewise, in 
the  UK,  banks  cannot  refuse  to  open  an  ordinary  deposit  account  except  where  it  is  not 
possible for the bank to identify the customer in a reliable manner or bank has reasons to 
suspect  abuse  or  if  it  has  any  past  experience  of  the  customer  materially  breaching  the 
contract  entered  into  with  the  bank.  EU  is  presently  holding  consultations  on  a  document 
which,  among  others,  seeks  to  ensure  facilities  of  consumers’  access  to  basic  bank 
accounts,  including  a  provision  which  allows  switch  over  of  the  bank  account  providers, 
including on a cross-border mode. 
Thus,  across  the  globe,  the  provision  of  a  basic  banking  account  for  the  consumer  is 
considered a right. As I have already mentioned, RBI has issued guidelines advising banks 
to offer a “Basic Savings Bank Deposit Account” without any minimum balance and provision 
of basic services without any charges (subject to limitations of operations), thus, conferring a 
right to every citizen to have a bank account. The mandate is already there and it is for the 
bank employees to ensure that they open the accounts of everyone who approaches them 
and not tell them to go to some other bank or branch. 
The  employees  may,  then,  say  that  it  cannot  happen  as  the  owners  do  not  want  it  or  the 
management  does  not  want  it.  But,  this  is  why  the  banks  were  nationalized  –  and  AIBEA 
played an important role in nationalization of the banks. But still, after more than forty years 
of  nationalization,  we  are  still  discussing  whether  banking  should  be  made  a  fundamental 
right. Why the flaw with government appointed managements? Also, I must add that banking 
is an industry where workmen have participation in the management; they are represented 
on the boards and participate in the discussions and the policy making. The unions and the 
employees  can,  therefore,  not  escape  from  the  responsibility  if  banking  services  have  not 
reached  everybody  in  the  country.  All  of  us  –  the  unions,  employees  and  the  bank 
managements are responsible. We could not take products or services to the masses earlier 
as suitable technology was not there. Initially, we opposed technology in banking and it took 
close to twenty years to effectively introduce technology-enabled products and services for 
bank customers. I am happy that we overcame the problem several years ago and today, 
technology  is  widely  accepted  in  banking  industry  and  there  are  no  impediments  in  taking 
banking products or services to the masses. 
The three pre-requisites 
In theory, it may be very easy to say that any service can be declared as a fundamental right. 
However,  from  an  implementation  perspective,  a  service  cannot  be  proclaimed  as  having 
become a fundamental right unless it meets the following criteria: 
(a) Access: A service cannot be called to have an effect of a fundamental right unless it is 
accessible to all. For instance, we cannot say that healthcare is a fundamental right if people 
have  to  travel  to  the  district  headquarters  from  the  village  to  take  treatment.  The  same 
applies to banking also – it must be available at the doorsteps. That is why, it is our target 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that in the next three years, all the 6 lakh villages must have access to banking products and 
services  –  either  through  a  brick  and  mortar  branch  or  through  ICT  based  systems  and 
banking correspondents. 
(b) Affordability: We have tried to provide access to the banking services to the customers. 
Some  15  crore,  new  bank  accounts  have  been  opened.  On  the  face  of  it,  the  statistics 
appear  very  impressive  –  this  is  more  than  the  total  population  of  several  countries  taken 
together. But, we need to view this in the context of our population of 1.2 billion. Moreover, 
there are no transactions in a large proportion of these accounts. This is because the cost of 
transactions  is  very  high.  I  agree  that  there  will  be  a  cost  per  transaction  as  banking  is, 
indeed, a commercial activity. But, what should be that cost? Somebody complained to me 
about a year back that his bank has charged a commission of ₹ 60/– for a demand draft of 
₹ 30/–.  Why  is  this  so?  For  this,  all  of  us  are  responsible.  The  empowerment  of  the 
employees  and  the  improved  service  conditions,  which  were  supposed  to  act  a  means  to 
serve the objective of mass banking, has actually become a deterrent. The salaries of bank 
employees have gone up significantly and, therefore, the transaction costs have also been 
raised significantly to keep the banks viable. 
I  am  not  saying  that  the  bank  employees  are  overpaid  as  per  global  standards  but  as 
compared to our GDP, the operating cost of banking system is very high. The prevalent cost 
structure of banks makes the banking transaction costs unaffordable to the common man. 
Hence to make banking services affordable to all, we need transition to a low cost structure. 
The dream of financial inclusion cannot be fulfilled unless the transaction costs are brought 
down substantially. Now, I do not say that the salaries of bank employees be reduced by half 
in order to reduce the transaction costs. However, all of us – the employees and the unions 
have to collectively work with the policy makers, management and the regulator to see how, 
by use of appropriate information and communication technologies, our productivity can be 
substantially  enhanced.  Increased  productivity  will  lower  transaction  costs  for  the  poor 
people,  making  services  affordable  for  everybody.  Unless  that  happens,  banking  cannot 
become  a  fundamental  right.  This require  change  in  our delivery  model  ,  reshaping  of  our 
rural branches’ organizational set up and creating a low cost cadre of barefoot bankers to 
deliver banking services at an affordable cost to rural poor at their doorsteps. 
(c)  Fair  and  transparent  delivery:  The  third  of  the  essential  prerequisites  for  making 
banking  capable  of  being  declared  a  fundamental  right  is  the  ability  to  deliver  of  banking 
services in a fair and transparent manner consistently. Unless, this happens, people will not 
avail of the services. Unfortunately, the reliability of our technology based systems is worse 
than that of physical systems. I get complaints everyday about ATMs  not dispensing cash 
even  though  the  accounts  had  got  debited.  This  cannot  happen  in  the  physical  branch 
banking system. Nobody who presented a cheque had his account debited without getting 
the money. Now, think of someone who has suffered this fate at an ATM – he would think 
twice before visiting an ATM next, as he had to spend months in getting the position rectified. 
We  have  to  make  the  services  reliable  with  the  use  of  technology.  Take  the  case  of  the 
Business Correspondents (BCs). We are trying to use BCs to take banking to the people’s 
doorsteps. The BC model is aimed at reducing the transaction costs of banking services as 
the cost of regular bank employees is very high, making it difficult to provide low cost banking 
services to the unbanked poor.. However, banks do not seem willing to pay reasonably to 
these people from the unorganized sector. The poor BCs are paid so low that people accept 
this job only if they do not have any other option and at the very first opportunity, leave the 
BC’s work. The BC needs to be paid reasonably and also supported through appropriate ICT 
enabled infrastructure. How do we integrate the BC model with the overall delivery model of 
the banking services is another challenge for making financial inclusion a reality. 
Therefore, unless the banking services are made accessible, affordable and reliable, there is 
no point in making a demand for declaring banking a fundamental right. Moreover, making 
banking  a  fundamental  right  at  this  stage  and  thereafter,  not  being  able  to  provide  the 
services on demand due to lack of appropriate ground work, may only result in the banks and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
bank  employees  getting  implicated  in  avoidable  legal  wrangles.  Hearing  this,  you  might 
sense that you have made a mistake in choosing this theme and inviting me to come and 
speak  on  this.  Let  me  emphasize  that  evading  this  debate  will  not  solve  our  problems  as 
unless banking is made available to everyone  and  universal financial inclusion is attained, 
the development agenda of the country will be incomplete and we will not see the kind of 
economic  growth  that  we  want  to  see.  It  is,  therefore,  essential  that  banking  services  are 
made akin to fundamental rights. We need to collectively deliberate, discuss and work out 
the  modalities  of  how  this  can  be  made  to  happen.  For  this,  we  will  need  to  reform  our 
systems, procedures and functions, and roll out an effective business process reengineering. 
Why the BCs cannot become an integrated part of the banking system as employees. We 
can  have  different  wage  structure  for  them.  You  need  to  deliberate,  innovate  and  work 
towards an integrated structure around the BCs that will remain low cost, while protecting the 
rights  and  dignity  of  the  people  who  work  as  BCs.  The  time  has  now  come  for  the  bank 
unions  to  work  together  with  bank  managements  and  policy  makers  to  develop  integrated 
low cost structures for providing banking at the doorsteps of the people. 
Talking of banking services, I want to highlight one more pertinent issue here. You may open 
bank  accounts,  you  may  provide  some  remittance  facilities,  you  may  also  provide  some 
emergency overdraft or consumption credit. But, bank credit per se cannot be a fundamental 
right.  Bank  credit  is  available  only  to  those  people  who  are  credit  worthy  and  banks  will 
always  argue  that  they  are  not  extending  credit  as  people  are  not  credit  worthy.  Again,  if 
people  are  not  credit  worthy,  they  alone  are  not  to  be  blamed  for  it.  The  banking  system, 
bank employees and unions are also responsible. We must educate the people, make them 
financially literate and credit worthy to take them out of poverty. It is for this reason that the 
Reserve  Bank  is  vigorously  pursuing  the  twin  policy  objectives  of  financial  inclusion  and 
financial  literacy  and  that  is  why,  I  think,  you  have  also  chosen  this  theme  for  today’s 
seminar. We are working hard in pursuit of our goal of universal financial inclusion and we 
want you – the employees and the unions – to work together with us. 
Many people in the unions may not like the idea of working together with the managements. 
They feel that the people in management are adversaries and do not listen to their demands. 
Here, as a last point, I would like to say that the entire industrial relations scenario across the 
world  is  undergoing  a  change;  the  trade  union  movement  is  changing.  Land,  labour  and 
capital were the factors of production about a hundred years ago. Today, especially in the 
knowledge  based  services  like  banking;  the  above  three  are  no  longer  the  factors  of 
production; instead technology, people and skills have become the new factors of production. 
Today, you are no longer “labour” but are “people”. When I say ‘people’, I am including bank 
managements, regulators, policy makers and bank employees of all kinds – officers, clerical 
staff and the sub staff. To effectively harness the new factors of production, trade unions and 
the management should not be adversaries but join together to fight the market forces and 
reap  the  benefits  for  self  and  more  importantly  society.  In  fact,  bank  managements  and 
unions are no longer adversaries as you are represented on the Board and, hence, are part 
of management. Together, you should fight the forces that prevent greater financial inclusion 
and stand in the way of our desire to make banking a fundamental right. And why only should 
the  public  sector  banks  do  financial  inclusion,  we  also  want  the  private  banks,  the 
cooperative  banks  and  the  foreign  banks  to  do  financial  inclusion  and  the  employees  and 
unions have to play a major role in this task. 
Only  responsible  and  strong  trade  unions  can  vigorously  pursue  the  measures  aimed  at 
improving  the  conditions  of  labour  and  the  vulnerable  sections  of  the  society.  In  turn,  this 
makes the management responsible and stronger in meeting its commitment to vulnerable 
customers and, thereby, strengthens the corporate governance in the institution. One of the 
reasons  why  the  general  standard  of  corporate  governance  in  the  banking  system  has 
deteriorated  is  because  trade  unions  preferred  to  have  weak  bank  managements.  This  is 
amplified from the fact that the trade unions in our country has been very active in the public 
sector banks while the customers of the private sector banks appear to be more vulnerable. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We all know that the regulation for doing business and general contours of labour laws for 
private sector banks are identical to that in the public sector. So why are the unions not so 
active in private banks? I hope AIBEA, which has a long tradition of dealing with the strong 
private  bank  managements,  will  ensure  this  change  in  outlook  in  the  banking  trade  union 
movement in the country, thereby improving the corporate governance in the banks and also 
bringing in greater financial inclusion and better customer protection. 
Conclusion 
You may or may not agree to things that I have said here but, believe me, financial inclusion, 
leading to larger social and economic good of the country, is in the interest of the banks. It is 
in  our  interest  and  more  so,  it  is  in  the  interest  of  the  bank  unions  if  they  have  to  remain 
relevant in the system. World over, the trade unions are increasingly becoming irrelevant and 
I  am  sure  an  old  and  responsible  union  like  the  AIBEA  and  its  leaders  and  members  will 
agree with me on the need to reform the trade unions. If you do not embrace reforms you will 
become irrelevant. You have to reform by appropriate use of skills, technology and human 
resources to make banking services accessible, affordable and reliable for the citizens of our 
country. We have a great opportunity for the first time in the history of human civilization to 
bring millions of people within the ambit of banking and financial services and, thereby, make 
inclusive growth a reality. In this endeavour focus should not only be on public sector banks 
but also on private sector and foreign banks. This can only be achieved with the help of the 
bank  trade  unions  and  the  bank  employees  and  by  evolving  a  low-cost  delivery  model. 
Reserve Bank has already laid down the appropriate regulatory framework and this would de 
jure  make  banking  a  fundamental  right.  Once  we  reach  this  stage,  we  would  have  no 
problem in  enacting the law for  making banking a fundamental right or at least a directive 
principle of state policy to begin with. By inviting me to this seminar today, you have signalled 
your willingness to take up this challenge. I am sure with the collective efforts of the bank 
trade unions, bank management, regulators and policy makers; we would realize our dream 
of  making  banking  a  fundamental  right  which,  in  turn,  would  lay  down  the  foundation  of 
making 21st century as India’s century. 
I wish you the very best in your efforts. Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
