Guy Debelle: Remarks at the Funding Australia’s Future Forum – a look 
at Australia’s financial system 
Remarks by Mr Guy Debelle, Assistant Governor (Financial Markets) of the Reserve Bank of 
Australia, at the Funding Australia’s Future Forum, Sydney, 7 August 2013. 
 As I said at the launch of these papers a few weeks back1, the Australian Centre for Financial 
Studies (ACFS)2 has put together a very interesting and timely body of work on an important 
topic. 
I will make two points, the first about global financial regulation, the second about the way 
forward for this project. 
At the launch I talked about the need for a holistic review of global financial regulation. I think 
this does need to be done at a global level. There is a vast global regulatory reform agenda 
which  is  complex  and  interacting  in  a  number  of  different  ways.  We  need  a  better 
understanding  of  how  some  of  these  interactions  occur.  As  I  said  before,  each  of  these 
regulatory changes may well make sense in their own right, and when looked at in terms of 
their impact on their own particular market segment. I just don’t get the sense that we have a 
good idea on how they will all interact and affect market functioning. 
One  good  example  of  this  is  in  the  demand  for  collateral.  Quite  a  number  of  the  global 
reforms require banks, as well as others, to hold more high quality collateral than they did in 
the past. The shift to central clearing is one such reform. In a number of cases, margin has 
always been posted, but depending on how the shift to central clearing actually occurs, we 
may  or  may  not  get  all  the  benefit  of  netting  which  would  mean  a  greater  demand  for 
collateral.  Then  there  are  some  transactions  on  which  margin  has  not  previously  been 
required. The sort of collateral which can actually be posted is also changing. The liquidity 
reforms  under  Basel  III  also  imply  a  material  increase  in  demand  for  High  Quality  Liquid 
Assets (HQLA). I’ll have some more to say on that in the Australian context next week. 
The bottom line is that demand for HQLA is going up. As it so happens, this is occurring at a 
time where the supply is also going up quite a bit, given the fiscal situation around the globe. 
So how is that greater demand for collateral going to play out? What are the implications? Is 
it  just  an  issue  of  price  working  to  clear  the  market  or  will  there  be  impacts  on  market 
functioning? 
The BIS Committee on Global Financial Stability3, on which I sit, has published some work on 
that recently, but there is more to be done. This is just one example where we don’t really 
know the full implications of the many interacting reforms underway. 
That said, what I am not saying is that we should delay implementing some of these reforms 
in Australia, or pick and choose the ones the financial sector likes. I do not agree with that. 
We do not have that luxury. 
As the papers we are discussing today highlight, the Australian system is part of the global 
financial system. The capital inflows are sourced from the global financial system. Given that, 
we don’t have the option to opt out when we feel like it. 
                                                
1   Remarks at the Launch of Funding Australia’s Future – 10 July 201. 
2   http://www.australiancentre.com.au/. 
3   http://www.bis.org/publ/cgfs49.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  second  point  I’d  like  to  make  gets  right  to  the  heart  of  the  ACFS’  agenda:  Funding 
Australia’s Future. It’s a good question to ask. But I suppose I’m not sure how much further 
we can go with it. 
The Australian financial system has undergone a severe stress test over the past five or six 
years. 
And it has come through that pretty well. 
Are there some things that can be done to make it function better and be more resilient? 
Yes, and some of them have already been put in train over the past few years, so that the 
system  now  is  more  resilient  than  it  was  in  2007.  Some  of  them  are  the  reforms  that  are 
being done at the global level. 
The  fact  that  the  problems  didn’t  happen  here  is  also  not  a  good  argument  for  not 
implementing  them.  The  reforms  have  been  developed  with  the  aim  of  increasing  the 
resiliency of the financial system, which would seem to make them worthwhile in their own 
right. I don’t see the logic in not learning from what happened elsewhere rather than waiting 
to  learn the  lesson  painfully  ourselves.  Learning from  others’ mistakes  is  a  lot  less  painful 
approach to life. 
As the past few years show, the financial system is just that, a system, as Rod Maddock and 
Peter  Munckton’s  paper  highlights.  It  is  also  a  set  of  markets  where  there  is  demand  and 
supply and a market-clearing price. As the system evolves and is stressed in different parts, 
other parts of the system adjust. As supply and demand changes, the price adjusts. 
Does this always happen seamlessly or painlessly? 
No. But broadly speaking, the stress test of the past few years shows that it does happen. 
There were a lot of people worrying throughout that period about where the funding would 
come from. But in the event, the system broadly speaking coped. The system here didn’t fail, 
and that is an important point to keep in mind in this whole exercise. 
Prices did adjust. The exchange rate in 2008 was one of them. Deposit pricing was another. 
Do markets always get this right? No they don’t, but it’s not clear what the better alternative 
is. 
Regulation is motivated at least in part to address some of those deficiencies of markets. 
Is regulation always going to get it right? Clearly not. 
So  that’s  why  we  need  to  keep  on  questioning  the  appropriateness  of  the  structure  of 
financial markets and their regulation. It’s good to be asking the question in an environment 
when the system hasn’t failed rather than when it has, as is the case in other countries. And 
that I see as the value of the work the ACFS is doing, namely asking the question, is the 
system working as well as it can? In particular, talking about the system, as Rod and Peter 
do. In terms of the way forward, Kevin Davis had a slide in his presentation which basically 
mapped the path out. What are the broad structural forces shaping the financial system in 
the years ahead. Do we want those structural forces to play out? Are they well founded or 
are they the result of some distortion in the system? So in a nutshell: think about the system, 
think about the broad structural forces. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
