Ravi Menon: Global regulatory reforms – what’s done, what to watch for 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore, at the 4th Pan-Asian Regulatory Summit, Singapore, 25 September 2013. 
 Mr Leas Bachatene, VP & Managing Director (Asia Pacific), Thomson Reuters 
Distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
Exactly  five  years  ago,  this  month,  Lehman  Brothers  collapsed  and  unleashed  a  financial 
crisis  of  unmatched  scale  and  impact.  The  crisis  exposed  deep  fault  lines  in  the  global 
financial  system  and  spurred  far-reaching  financial  regulatory  reforms,  aimed  at  building  a 
more resilient financial industry that better serves the needs of the real economy.  
This morning, I will take stock of the impact of these regulatory reforms: 
• 
• 
As a member of the Financial Stability Board, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, 
and various other international regulatory forums, the MAS has been a strong proponent and 
early  implementer  of  many  of  these  reforms.  But  we  have  not  flinched  from  going  above 
international  standards  where  necessary  or  refraining  from  some  measures  in  other 
jurisdictions which we regard as not relevant in our context. 
the progress we have made in making the global financial system safer; and 
the possible unintended consequences that we must watch for.  
Progress in regulatory reforms 
Let me start with the progress in regulatory reforms. 
Increasing the capacity to absorb losses 
A centrepiece of the reforms in banking is the new Basel III capital standards. Basel III does 
three things.  
• 
First, it raises the quantity of capital that banks must hold. By providing a buffer for 
banks to absorb losses, capital helps to minimise spillovers to the rest of the system.  
Second, Basel III raises the quality of capital that banks must hold. The crisis has 
shown that common equity is the most effective capital instrument to absorb losses 
and write-downs.  
Third,  Basel  III  brings  back  to  banks’  balance  sheets  many  off-balance  sheet 
exposures and applies appropriate capital charges on them. Many banks that had to 
be  rescued  in  2008  had  capital  adequacy  ratios  well  in  excess  of  the  minimum 
requirements then. They got into trouble because they had many risky off-balance 
sheet exposures they did not hold capital against. 
  Singapore has fully implemented the Basel III capital requirements, two years ahead of the 
timeline prescribed by the Basel Committee. And by 2015, Singapore-incorporated banks will 
meet capital requirements which are 2% points higher than the Basel III minimums – in effect 
a surcharge to reflect their systemic importance in our economy and financial system. 
There is no global capital standard for the insurance industry. This is a lacuna that needs to 
be plugged. But the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (“IAIS”) has taken the 
lead to formulate standards for a risk-based solvency regime for insurers. The EU has built 
on  this  to  develop  detailed  capital  standards  known  as  Solvency  II.  Many  jurisdictions  are 
reviewing their rules with the intent to align with IAIS standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Singapore was among the first jurisdictions in Asia to introduce a risk-based capital (“RBC”) 
framework  for  insurers,  in  2005.  In  2012,  MAS  embarked  on  a  review  to  enhance  the 
framework,  known  as  “RBC  2”,  to  take  into  account  the  new  IAIS  standards  and  best 
practices,  including  relevant  aspects  of  Solvency  II.  MAS  will  be  conducting  a  quantitative 
study to assess the impact on the insurance industry of the proposals under RBC 2.  
There  are  no  global  capital  standards  for  capital  markets  services  providers.  The 
International  Organisation  of  Securities  Commission  (“IOSCO”)  has,  however,  set  out 
principles  for  the  solvency  of  securities  market  intermediaries.  Based  on  these  principles, 
MAS has implemented a risk-based capital framework for capital markets services licensees. 
Strengthening liquidity buffers 
The second important area of reform is setting – for the first time – international standards for 
bank  liquidity.  Banks  are  in  the  business  of  transforming  short-term  liabilities  (mainly 
deposits) into long-term assets (mainly loans). This fundamental mis-match in maturity opens 
banks to the risk that they may not be able to finance short-term liabilities as they fall due. 
Even solvent banks with lots of capital can fail if liquidity risks are not well-managed.  
The  new  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (“LCR”)  sets  the  global  minimum  standard  for  bank 
liquidity. Essentially, the LCR framework requires banks to have an adequate stock of high 
quality liquid assets that can be converted into cash to survive a 30-day period of stress. 
In  Singapore  we  have  had  liquidity  rules  for  a  long  time.  Our  risk-based  Minimum  Liquid 
Assets  framework  requires  every  bank  to  hold  a  minimum  percentage  of  its  qualifying 
liabilities in  liquid assets. We are now looking to adopt the Basel III LCR rules, with some 
enhancements to suit domestic conditions.  
• 
Although Basel III applies the LCR framework only to internationally active banks, 
we  propose  to  extend  the  LCR  requirement  to  all  banks  in  Singapore  in  the  first 
instance and grant various reliefs on the basis of risk-mitigating circumstances.  
We will also have a tighter definition of what qualifies as eligible liquid assets and 
not recognise equities and mortgage-backed securities.  
 MAS has issued a consultation paper on the implementation of the LCR framework and will 
carefully consider industry feedback. 
Constraining leverage 
The third important area of reform is in constraining the build up of excessive leverage. At the 
height of the crisis in 2008, the banking industry was forced by markets to reduce leverage in 
a manner that led to downward pressure on asset prices, which in turn led to losses, declines 
in bank capital, and contraction in credit. Even banks with high risk-based capital adequacy 
ratios were found to be excessively leveraged.  
Basel III’s leverage ratio seeks to set a 3% floor for the amount of Tier 1 capital that a bank 
needs  to  hold  relative  to  its  total  exposure.  The  ratio  is  designed  as  a  non-risk  based 
measure to complement the risk-sensitive capital adequacy ratios. It acts like a stop-gap to 
constrain the overall size of the balance sheet, especially given the uncertainty involved in 
the  risk  models  that  banks  use  to  calculate  their  capital  needs.  But  the  leverage  ratio  
– precisely because it is a non-risk based measure – cannot be a substitute for risk-based 
capital  requirements  and  should  not  be  set  at  too  high  a  level  as  to  become  the  binding 
constraint on banks. If it were so, banks may have the perverse incentive to increase their 
exposure to risky assets so as to earn a higher return on capital. 
The final calibration and definition of the leverage ratio is expected to be finalised in 2017, 
with  the  minimum  leverage  ratio  requirement  coming  into  effect  in  2018.  Singapore-
incorporated  banks  can  comfortably  meet  the  current  testing  minimum  of  a  3%  leverage 
ratio.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Making OTC derivatives trading safer 
The  fourth  fundamental  area  of  reform  is  in  the  OTC  derivatives  market.  The  crisis 
highlighted how the opaque inter-connections across financial institutions engaged in trading 
complex  derivative  contracts  over-the-counter  led  to  rapid  contagion  and  systemic  crisis 
when liquidity suddenly dried up. 
Reforms have focused on four areas: standardisation of derivative contracts; central clearing; 
higher margin requirements for non-centrally cleared trades; and mandatory reporting of all 
trades.  In  particular, reporting  to  trade  repositories  will  provide  much-needed  transparency 
on exposures across market participants. 
MAS  has  taken  steps  to  implement  the  trade  reporting  regime  in  Singapore.  Financial 
institutions which book prescribed OTC derivatives in Singapore are required to report such 
trades to a trade repository licensed by MAS. The reporting framework will be up and running 
next month, starting with interest rate and credit derivatives. The degree of standardisation of 
contracts in these asset classes is higher, so starting with these contracts will provide for a 
smoother phase-in.  
We have received feedback from the industry on operational difficulties in obtaining customer 
consent in order to report counterparty information to trade repositories. We are looking to 
amending legislation to address this issue.  
Ending too-big-to-fail 
The high-profile, public rescue of many large, systemically important financial institutions in 
the last crisis has galvanised a powerful resolve to end the “too-big-to-fail” problem. But this 
has proven to be one of the most challenging tasks facing global regulators. 
To be sure, the FSB and Basel Committee have made good progress on several fronts.  
• 
First, they have identified a list of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs).  
Second,  they  have  set  out  additional  loss  absorbency  requirements  for  G-SIBs  to 
• 
reduce the probability of these institutions failing.  
Third, there is ongoing work on a resolution framework to minimise the cross-border 
negative externalities that can be created by their failure. 
 At the same time, major jurisdictions are embarking on plans to reform banking structures in 
a bid to end “too-big-to-fail”.  
• 
In  the  US,  the  Volcker  rule  prohibits  US-operating  banks  from  engaging  in 
proprietary trading or from acquiring or retaining an ownership interest in a hedge 
fund or private equity fund.  
In  the  UK,  the  Vickers  Commission  recommends  ring-fencing  retail  banking 
activities, and subjecting the ring-fenced entity to higher capital requirements.  
In  the  EU,  the  Liikanen  report  proposes  a  mandatory  fencing  off  of  banks’ 
proprietary trading and market making activities from the rest of the banking group, if 
the activities exceed a certain threshold, with higher capital charges imposed on the 
investment banking ring-fence.  
  To  the  extent  that  structural  measures  help  to  simplify  business  models  and  facilitate  the 
resolvability of very large and complex global banking groups, they can help to reduce the 
risk and impact of failures. But it is not clear if the benefits of such measures outweigh the 
costs in all instances. 
First, it is worth considering whether size or complexity are the critical  factors. The Global 
Financial Crisis started not with large universal banks or large global banks, but with narrow 
or specialised players: Northern Rock in the UK, and investment banks like Bear Stearns and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Lehman  Brothers.  Interestingly,  the  Liikanen  report  observed  that  there  was  no  business 
model that performed particularly well or poorly during the crisis. 
Second, it remains unclear if structural reform measures can make a bank or banking group 
safer if a culture of excessive risk-taking is not curtailed and if risk governance frameworks 
are not strengthened. 
MAS subscribes to the universal banking model on the premise that it is not the separation 
between  risky  and  non-risky  activities  that  matters  as  much  as  ensuring  that  risk  is  well 
managed wherever it is.  
• 
For domestic banks, MAS does not impose any structural measures. The focus is 
instead on ensuring that their risk management capabilities are commensurate with 
the complexity of their activities and that capital and liquidity buffers are healthy. 
For  foreign  banks  that  have  a  significant  presence  in  the  retail  market,  MAS  will 
require  local  incorporation  of  their  retail  operations.  The  banks  can  choose  to 
subsidiarise  their  entire  operations  within  the  same  legal  entity  or  continue  to 
operate its wholesale banking business under a branch structure. There is no retail 
ring-fence required. 
 Unintended consequences  
It  is  imperative  that  we  press  on  with  the  regulatory  reform  agenda  and  not  succumb  to 
reform fatigue. But even as we do so, we need to be mindful of unintended consequences.  
Inconsistent implementation of rules 
The first unintended consequence is the inconsistent application of rules across jurisdictions 
and across sectors.  
Inconsistent application of rules across jurisdictions leads to the risk of regulatory arbitrage. 
Take for example, the new capital rules. It is laudable that within such a short period of its 
promulgation, 25 of the 27 member jurisdictions of the Basel Committee have issued the final 
set of Basel III regulations. 
But the implementation has been uneven. The Basel Committee conducted studies on the 
consistency of risk-weighted assets measured in the banking book under the internal model 
approach. It found considerable variation across banks in average risk-weighted assets for 
credit  risk.  A  material  part  of  this  variation  was  due  to  different  bank  and  supervisory 
practices. Such differences in measurement could result in capital ratios varying, in extreme 
cases, by as much as two percentage points in either direction. 
To enhance consistency in implementation, the Basel Committee is considering three steps:  
first, improve public disclosure and regulatory data collection to help the market and 
• 
regulators to better understand how risk-weighted assets are derived;  
second, narrow the range of acceptable modelling choices for banks; and  
third, provide additional supervisory guidance for model approvals. 
• 
• 
Inconsistent  application  of  rules  across  entities  carrying  out  similar  activities  leads  to  the 
issue of shadow banking. The higher capital and liquidity requirements required under Basel 
III  may  create  the  incentive  for  activities  to  be  conducted  outside  the  regulated  banking 
sector. The FSB estimates that shadow banking constitutes about 25% of the total financial 
system,  and  with  regulation  of  banks  still  tightening,  analysts  expect  the  shadow  banking 
sector will continue to grow. 
But  this  is  not  to  suggest  that  intermediating  credit  through  non-bank  channels  is  to  be 
discouraged. The shadow banking system can provide market participants and corporations 
with a useful alternative source of funding and liquidity. Some non-bank entities may have 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
specialised  expertise  that  enables  them  to  provide  certain  credit  intermediation  services 
more efficiently and at lower risk. Shadow banking need not be a bad word in finance. 
What we do need to watch out for is the accumulation of risks in the shadow banking sector 
and the potential spill-over of these risks to the regulated banking sector. The FSB is setting 
out  approaches  to  monitor  the  shadow  banking  system  and  to  identify  possible  regulatory 
measures to mitigate shadow banking risks.  
In Singapore, MAS has taken steps to limit the opportunities for regulatory arbitrage between 
the  bank-  and  non-bank  sectors  by  adopting  broadly  consistent  rules  for  similar  activities, 
even  if  they  are  being  conducted  by  different  types  of  entities.  For  instance,  capital 
requirements for banks, insurance companies, and capital market intermediaries are broadly 
aligned for similar types of risks, to deter regulatory arbitrage.  
Cross-border implications of national rules  
The second unintended consequence is the cross-border implications of national rules. 
• 
Take for example, the US CFTC’s OTC swap rules. These rules apply to financial 
institutions operating outside the US including foreign-domiciled financial institutions 
and foreign branches of US financial institutions. 
Another  recent  example:  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  requires 
financial  market  infrastructures  to  be  subject  to  European  rules  or  rules  that  are 
deemed equivalent to Europe’s before they can provide services to EU players. 
 These  rules  are  well-intended  and  seek  to  address  genuine  regulatory  concerns  in  these 
jurisdictions.  But  extending  national  rules  across  borders  often  gives  rise  to  overlapping 
regulations, which can create additional compliance costs for internationally active financial 
institutions. If there are conflicts between different national requirements, or if the burden of 
complying with multiple sets of rules is significant, this may prevent the execution of trades 
on  a  cross-border  basis.  The  risk  is  that  the  global  derivatives  and  foreign  exchange 
businesses, for example, might become trapped within regional borders, creating fragmented 
markets. 
Cross-border  application  of  national 
collaboration, the principle of consolidated supervision, and cross-border resolution.  
• 
A  BIS  working  paper  published  in  April  2013  cautioned  that  it  may  be  difficult  to 
design  resolution  plans  for  global  banks  which  are  required  by  different  national 
regulations to operate different business models. 
An  IMF  staff  discussion  paper  published  in  May  2013  highlighted  that  differences 
between national structural reforms could lead to cross-border regulatory arbitrage 
by global banks, posing a challenge to consolidated supervision.  
risk  complicating  home-host 
rules  may  also 
 In  the  event  that  the  imposition  of  national  regulations  across  borders  is  unavoidable,  we 
need robust mutual recognition frameworks in place. Such frameworks should be based on 
an outcome-based approach, and not a line-by-line correspondence of rules.  
• 
We  are  encouraged  that  regulators  in  the  US  and  Europe  have  adopted  a 
substituted  compliance  or  equivalence  assessment  approach  so  that  entities  can 
comply with just the set of rules applied by the jurisdictions in which they operate.  
MAS  supports  substituted  compliance  and  equivalence  assessments  as  an 
important measure to avoid potentially duplicative or inconsistent rules, particularly 
for entities with international operations.  
 In the area of OTC derivatives trading, MAS is putting in place the rules and infrastructure to 
support  cross-border  operations  and  to  help  reduce  uncertainty  to  the  industry.  To  allay 
concerns from the industry over the regulatory burden of having to comply with both home 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
and  host  regulations,  we  are  participating  in  equivalence  assessments  under  the  US  and 
European regimes.  
Thus  far,  ESMA,  the  European  securities  regulator,  has  recommended  to  the  European 
Commission that the Singapore framework is broadly equivalent to Europe’s, paving the way 
for central counterparties in Singapore to offer their services to European participants.  
We  have  also  submitted  to  CFTC  an  application  for  substituted  compliance  in  respect  of 
requirements on US banks operating here. We are in active discussions with CFTC, and will 
work with them on the substituted compliance determination, where appropriate, as our OTC 
regulatory regime comes into force.  
Impact on trade finance and long-term finance  
The  final  unintended  consequence  is  the  impact  on  trade  finance  and  long-term  finance. 
There  are  concerns  that  the  various  regulatory  reforms  taken together may  lead  to  a  pull-
back in trade finance and long-term investment financing. The global regulatory community 
and national governments have become increasingly sensitised to these concerns. 
In the area of trade finance, the Basel Committee consulted the World Bank, the World Trade 
Organisation, and other relevant bodies. A number of adjustments were made to the capital 
and liquidity rules to facilitate trade finance.  
• 
In the area of capital rules, the Basel Committee waived the one year maturity floor 
for  certain  trade  finance  instruments  under  the  advanced  internal  ratings-based 
approach  for  credit  risk.  It  also  waived  the  sovereign  risk-weight  floor  for  certain 
trade finance-related claims using the standardised approach for credit risk.  
In  the  area  of  liquidity,  the  Basel  Committee  issued  guidance  for  national 
supervisors to apply relatively low run-off rates for trade finance commitments.  
 Preliminary data suggests that the availability and cost of trade finance has not been greatly 
impacted to-date by the implementation of Basel III. Spreads have normalised post-crisis and 
pricing  appears  to  be  influenced  more  by  broader  macro  factors  and  competition.  Further, 
there are many well-capitalised banks, especially in Asia, that are well-placed to operate in 
the new regulatory regime; and many of them have stepped up.  
We  should  continue  to  monitor  closely  the  impact  of  regulatory  changes  on  trade  finance. 
Trade is the lifeblood of Asian economies. 
But we have a bigger challenge in long-term financing, especially for infrastructure. It may be 
the  case  that  the  post-crisis  financial  system  may  not  be  adequately  structured  to  provide 
certain types of long-term financing. 
• 
First, longer-term corporate and project finance loans already attract a higher capital 
charge  compared  to  short  term  loans.  Coupled  with  the  increased  overall  capital 
requirements under Basel III, this may create a disincentive for long-term loans.  
Second,  to  meet  liquidity  requirements,  banks  may  substitute  long-term  lending 
activities with short-term lending. In calculating the Net Stable Funding Ratio, lower 
weights are assigned to loans with maturities of less than a year. 
Third,  Solvency  II,  which  will  impose  higher  risk  charges  on  longer-dated  assets, 
may result in insurers de-risking by taking on shorter-dated assets. 
Fourth, the interaction between central clearing, margining and capital requirements 
may impact the variety and liquidity of some derivatives such as long-dated interest 
rate swaps used to hedge risks associated with long-term financing. 
   6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There may be scope for some intelligent, risk-sensitive fine-tuning of regulation: 
• 
The design of risk weights for insurers should not penalise them for holding good 
quality long term assets, if they are matched by long term liabilities. 
The  preferential  treatment  of  sovereign  debt  in  bank  regulation  should  be  re-
examined, so that banks are not disincentivised from holding good quality, long term 
corporate debt. 
Better calibration of the risk weights for securitisation for banks and insurers may be 
necessary.  
  But the fundamental solution does not lie in diluting regulatory requirements. Policymakers 
should also focus on ways to develop sustainable alternative sources of long-term finance. 
At  the  same  time,  we  must  recognise  that  the  immediate  constraint  on  infrastructure 
development  in  Asia  is  not  financing  per  se  but  the  supply  of  bankable  projects  with  an 
acceptable risk-return profile to attract banks or investors. We need integrated solutions that 
involve risk-sharing arrangements and bring together bank and non-bank capital. 
In  Singapore,  we  are  working  in  partnership  with  a  diverse  group  of  stakeholders,  to  help 
build such an ecosystem to support long-term financing and unlock the supply of bankable 
projects. 
• 
Multilateral agencies and well-rated public sector entities could provide guarantees 
or credit wraps that would allow banks to reduce their risk exposures to such long-
term projects, thereby encouraging them to originate such loans. 
Bank loans could be structured in ways that facilitate their seamless migration from 
banks to capital markets. 
Institutional investors such as pension funds, insurance companies, and sovereign 
wealth funds could invest in project bonds, infrastructure debt funds, and securitised 
project loans, taking the risks off banks’ balance sheets. 
  Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
We have made reasonable progress in making global finance safer. The regulatory reforms 
since the crisis have helped to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. But the work 
is far from complete. 
We  must  not  forget  that  regulation  must  be  complemented  by  rigorous  supervision  and 
sound risk management. We cannot rely too much on regulation alone to make finance safer. 
As Jacques de Larosiere reminds us: 
“Strong,  intrusive  supervision  as  well  as  careful  risk  assessment  and  management  by 
bankers are of the essence. They will never be replaced by rules.”  
Put differently, a culture of prudence and risk governance is a better guarantee of safety and 
soundness than all the rules on capital and liquidity that we can draw up. 
Finally, we want finance that is not only safe but also purposeful. Regulation must not seek to 
eliminate all risk and must be impact-sensitive. Let us not lose sight of the bigger picture: a 
sound financial system that is able to play its vital role of intermediation, to support sustained 
economic growth and help create opportunities for individuals and enterprises.  
Thank you.  
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
