Jerome H Powell: Anti-money laundering and the Bank Secrecy Act 
Testimony  by  Mr  Jerome  H  Powell,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington DC, 7 March 2013. 
 Chairman  Johnson,  Ranking  Member  Crapo,  and  other  members  of  the  committee,  thank 
you  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  the  important  role  the  Federal  Reserve  plays  in  the  U.S. 
government’s  effort  to  combat  money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing.  I  will  begin  by 
describing  our  efforts  to  ensure  banking  industry  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  the 
Bank  Secrecy  Act  (BSA)  and  the  economic  sanctions  authorized  by  the  President  and 
Congress. I will also highlight some of the important actions we have taken to enforce the law 
and to promote safe and sound practices in this area.  
Background 
Congress  enacted  the  BSA  in  1970  to  help  safeguard  the  U.S.  financial  system  and  our 
financial  institutions from  the  abuses  of financial  crime,  and  has  revised  and  strengthened 
the  act  many  times  since.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  issued  regulations  to  implement  the 
BSA,  including  regulations  that  require  the  institutions  we  supervise  to  establish  a  BSA 
compliance  program,  and  has  integrated  BSA  examinations  into  our  supervisory  program. 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  works  closely  with  Treasury’s  Financial  Crimes  Enforcement 
Network (FinCEN) to ensure that the institutions we supervise provide law enforcement with 
the reports prosecutors need to investigate suspicious activity.  
The particular steps a banking organization must take to develop a BSA compliance program 
have been documented extensively. The foundation for such a program begins with a well-
developed and documented risk assessment that identifies and limits the risk exposures of 
the  banking  organization’s  products,  services,  customers,  and  geographic  locations. 
Monitoring systems should be in place to identify and report suspicious activity, in particular 
any account or transaction activity that is not consistent with the bank’s expectations. These 
systems  should  be  accompanied  by  a  strong  training  program  to  ensure  that  personnel, 
including those in offshore offices, are familiar with U.S. regulatory requirements and bank 
policies.  The  BSA  compliance  program  should  be  reviewed  by  management,  subjected  to 
periodic  independent  tests  that  measure  whether  the  program  is  functioning  properly,  and 
improved as needed. Finally, a qualified bank officer should be given sufficient authority to 
ensure  that  regulatory  requirements  and  bank  policies  are  being  followed  on  a  day-to-day 
basis.  
Banking organizations are also expected to maintain a program for ensuring compliance with 
U.S.  economic  sanctions  administered  by  the  Treasury’s  Office  of  Foreign  Assets  Control 
(OFAC). The OFAC program should identify higher-risk areas within a bank’s operations, and 
implement appropriate internal controls for screening and reporting prohibited transactions. 
Banks  are  expected  to  perform  independent  testing  for  compliance,  designate  a  bank 
employee or employees that are specifically responsible for OFAC compliance, and create 
training programs for appropriate personnel in all relevant areas of the bank. A bank’s OFAC 
compliance program should be commensurate with its activities and its risk profile.  
The supervisory process 
The Federal Reserve conducts a BSA and OFAC compliance program review as part of its 
regular  safety-and-soundness  examination  program  for  the  approximately  1,060  state-
member banks; state chartered branches and agencies of foreign banking organizations; and 
Edge  Act  and  agreement  corporations  we  supervise.  The  frequency  of  the  on-site 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
examination is normally every 12 to 18 months, depending upon the banking organization’s 
condition, asset size, and rating. On average, we conduct approximately 960 BSA and OFAC 
reviews each year.  
The Federal Reserve’s BSA and OFAC reviews are risk-focused. In other words, supervisors 
have the flexibility to apply the appropriate level of scrutiny to higher-risk business lines. To 
ensure consistency in the design and execution of our BSA and OFAC examinations, we use 
procedures developed jointly with the member agencies of the Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination  Council  (FFIEC),1  FinCEN,  and  OFAC.  The  findings  of  our  BSA  and  OFAC 
reviews are taken into account in determining the institution’s examination ratings, either as 
part  of  the  management  component  rating  for  domestic  institutions,  or  as  part  of  the  risk 
management  and  compliance  component  ratings  used  to  evaluate  the  U.S.  operations  of 
foreign bank branches and agencies we supervise.  
The  Federal  Reserve 
targeted 
examinations of financial institutions that show signs of being vulnerable to illicit financing. 
Banks are selected for such examinations based on, among other things, our analysis of the 
institution’s  payments  activity,  suspicious  activity  reports,  currency  transaction  reports,  and 
law enforcement leads.  
The  Federal  Reserve  devotes  substantial  resources  to  BSA  compliance.  Each  Federal 
Reserve Bank has a BSA specialist and coordinator on staff, and, since the late 1980s, the 
Board’s  Division  of  Banking  Supervision  and  Regulation  has  included  an  anti-money 
laundering section, overseen by a senior official, to help coordinate these efforts.  
its  supervisory  program  by  conducting 
reinforces 
Coordination efforts 
Effective implementation and enforcement of the BSA and U.S. economic sanctions requires 
the participation of, and coordination among, several agencies and international groups. Let 
me be specific about the steps we are taking to coordinate.  
First, to ensure that the banking industry has clear understanding of regulatory expectations, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  actively  participated  in  supervisory  forums,  such  as  the  FFIEC, 
which  has  an  expansive  BSA  working  group  that  promotes  high  standards  for  bank 
examinations and compliance. In addition, we participate in the Bank Secrecy Act Advisory 
Group,  a  public-private  partnership  established  for  the  purpose  of  soliciting  advice  on  the 
administration of the BSA. The Federal Reserve also joined the U.S. Treasury’s Interagency 
Task Force on Strengthening and Clarifying the BSA/AML Framework (Task Force), which 
includes representatives from the Department of Justice, OFAC, FinCEN, the federal banking 
agencies,  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  and  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading 
Commission. The primary focus of the Task Force is to review the BSA, its implementation, 
and  its  enforcement  with  respect  to  U.S.  financial  institutions  that  are  subject  to  these 
requirements, and to develop recommendations for ensuring the continued effectiveness of 
the BSA and efficiency in agency efforts to monitor compliance.  
Second,  to  make  the  supervision  of  internationally  active  banking  organizations  more 
effective, we are engaged as a member of the U.S. delegation to the Financial Action Task 
Force,  an  international  policymaking  and  standard-setting  body  dedicated  to  combating 
money  laundering  and  terrorist  financing  globally.  Further,  as  a  member  of  the  Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  we  have  been  involved  in  various  efforts  to 
prevent  criminal  use  of  the  international  banking  system.  For  example,  in  2009,  as  a 
complement to BCBS efforts to promote transparency in cross-border payments, the Federal 
                                                
1  The  FFIEC  member  agencies  include  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  National  Credit 
Union Administration (NCUA), Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), and the Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau (CFPB), as well as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Reserve issued guidance  with other federal banking agencies that clarifies U.S. regulatory 
expectations for U.S. banks engaged in correspondent banking activities.  
Finally, we are working cooperatively with other federal banking agencies, state regulators, 
the  Department  of  Justice,  the  Department  of  Treasury,  and  foreign  regulators  to  ensure 
comprehensive enforcement of the law. We have participated in many of the largest, most 
complex enforcement cases in the BSA and U.S. sanctions area. Collectively, these cases 
have  focused  attention  on  potential  misuse  of  the  financial  system  for  financial  crimes, 
strengthened compliance programs at banking organizations (both in the U.S. and abroad), 
and generated billions of dollars in fines paid to the U.S. Treasury.  
Our coordination efforts begin at an early stage in the supervisory process. For example, the 
Federal Reserve brings every instance of an anti-money laundering deficiency or violation to 
the attention of FinCEN so that FinCEN may consider assessing a penalty for violations of 
the BSA. We also notify OFAC of any apparent, unreported sanctions violations discovered 
in the course of an examination, and direct the banking organization we supervise to provide 
information directly to OFAC as required by regulation. In addition, we share information and 
coordinate  with  the  Department  of  Justice,  state  law  enforcement,  the  federal  banking 
agencies, and state regulators, as appropriate, as part of our enforcement program.  
The enforcement process 
It has been our experience that the majority of institutions supervised by the Federal Reserve 
have  well-administered  and  effective  BSA  and  OFAC  compliance  programs.  Nevertheless, 
there have been instances where concerns have been raised by our examiners. Importantly, 
the  Federal  Reserve  does  not  have  authority  from  Congress  to  conduct  criminal 
investigations or to prosecute criminal cases. The decision to prosecute a financial institution 
for money laundering offenses and criminal violations of the BSA and U.S. sanctions laws is 
made by the Department of Justice.  
Most  of  these  problems  are  resolved  promptly  after  they  are  brought  to  the  attention  of  a 
bank’s management and directors. In some instances, problems are of more serious concern 
and  use  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  enforcement  authority  is  deemed  appropriate.  In  these 
cases, an informal supervisory action may be taken, such as requiring an institution’s board 
of directors to adopt an appropriate resolution or executing a memorandum of understanding 
between an institution and a Reserve Bank.  
In  the  most  serious  cases,  the  Federal  Reserve  may  take  a  formal  enforcement  action 
against  an  institution. These  actions  may  include  a  written  agreement, a  cease  and  desist 
order, or a civil money penalty. Congress has also given the Federal Reserve the authority to 
terminate  the  operations  of  certain  entities  operating  in  the  U.S.  upon  the  conviction  of  a 
money  laundering  offense  by  the  Department  of  Justice,  and  to  prohibit  insiders  who 
intentionally  commit  such  offenses  from  participating  in  the  banking  industry.  The  type  of 
enforcement action pursued by the Federal Reserve against an institution is directly related 
to the severity of the offense, the type of failure that led to the offense, and management’s 
willingness and ability to implement corrective action.  
In the last five years, the Federal Reserve has issued 113 enforcement actions relating to 
BSA  and  OFAC  compliance,  including  25  public  cease  and  desist  orders  and  written 
agreements.  Together  with  these  recent  actions,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  assessed 
hundreds of millions of dollars in penalties. The institutions that have been subject to these 
actions are large and small, domestic and foreign. In each case, the Federal Reserve has 
required the institution to take corrective measures to ensure their programs are brought into 
compliance.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Enforcement of U.S. economic sanctions 
Many of the recent U.S. sanctions cases the Federal Reserve has pursued involve foreign 
banks with operations that extend across many different countries around the world. These 
cases have attracted significant attention and involve a particular type  of activity  worthy of 
special attention.  
The misconduct in these cases relates primarily to the manner in which these firms handle 
cross-border  payments.  Cross-border  payments  can  be  broadly  defined  as  transactions 
between banking entities that are located in different countries, but there are many different 
permutations of cross-border payments. For example, cross-border payments can be carried 
out as a wire transfer where the originator and beneficiary are located in different countries; a 
wire transfer where the originator and beneficiary are in the same country, but where one or 
more correspondents in a second country are used; or as a chain of wire transfers that has at 
least one international element. Cross-border payments typically occur when the originator 
and beneficiary, or their banks, are located in different countries or where the currency used 
for  the  payments  is  not  the  currency  of  the  country  where  the  transaction  originates.  For 
example, U.S. dollars may be used to make a payment between parties each located in a 
different foreign country.  
Structurally,  there  are  usually  two  components  to  these  cross-border  payments:  (1)  the 
instructions, which contain information about the originator and beneficiary of the funds, and 
(2) the  actual funds  transfer. The  payment  instructions for  cross-border  payments  typically 
are sent to an intermediary bank using industry financial telecommunications systems, such 
as  the  Society  for Worldwide  Interbank  Financial  Telecommunication  (SWIFT).  The  actual 
funds transfer occurs separately, typically through the domestic funds transfer system of the 
originator, via a book transfer of an intermediary with a presence on both sides of the border, 
and through the domestic funds transfer system of the beneficiary.  
Foreign banks often operate in jurisdictions that do not impose the same economic sanctions 
on  foreign  customers  as  the  United  States.  Transactions  involving  these  sanctioned 
customers are nonetheless subject to U.S. law if the transaction is routed through the U.S., 
as  is  typical  for  transactions  conducted  in  U.S.  dollars.  Foreign  banks  that  operate  in 
countries without sanctions similar to those imposed by the United States have not always 
had  in  place  the  mechanisms  to  ensure  transactions  routed  through  the  U.S.  comply  with 
U.S.  law.  Many  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  enforcement  activities  are  directed  at  remedying 
these situations.  
One  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  most  important  sanctions  enforcement  cases  involved  ABN 
AMRO. In response to corrective measures the Federal Reserve imposed on the firm’s New 
York branch in 2004,2 which required the bank to review certain historical transactions, ABN 
AMRO discovered numerous payment messages that were sent through its U.S. branch or a 
U.S.  correspondent  in  a  manner  designed  to  circumvent  the  filters  used  by  the  U.S. 
institution  to  detect  transactions  involving  sanctioned  parties.  In  particular,  the  information 
that identified a U.S. sanctioned party was omitted from the SWIFT payment sent through the 
U.S.,  while  a  complementary  payment  instruction  with  sanctioned  party  information  was 
deliberately routed outside the United States. The Federal Reserve responded by escalating 
our enforcement action to a cease and desist order and imposing a substantial penalty on 
ABN  AMRO.3  The  Federal  Reserve’s  order  required  ABN  AMRO  to  implement  a  global 
compliance  program  and  take  specific  steps to prevent  circumvention  of the  required  U.S. 
                                                
2  Board  of  Governors  of the Federal  Reserve  System (2004),  “Written agreement with ABN AMRO Bank,” 
press release, July 26. 
3  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2005),  “Agencies  release  bank  supervisory  and 
penalty actions against ABN AMRO Bank, N.V.,” press release, December 19. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
sanctions filters. We coordinated this action with other U.S. and foreign regulators, including 
the home country supervisor for ABN AMRO.  
The Federal Reserve’s enforcement action against ABN AMRO triggered important changes 
in cross-border payment practices. The Federal Reserve played a key role in this debate and 
in developing the standards that have since been adopted to improve transparency in cross-
border  payment  messages  –  including  the  standards  adopted  by  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  and  SWIFT. These  standards  require the  expanded  disclosure  of the 
originator and beneficiary on payment instructions sent as part of cover payments.  
In the years since the ABN AMRO case, the Federal Reserve and other U.S. authorities have 
taken  action  against  international  banks  that  had  been  engaged  in  similar  evasive 
misconduct.  Most  recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  imposed  cease  and  desist  orders  on 
Credit  Suisse,  Barclays,  Standard  Chartered,  and  HSBC.4  In  each  case,  the  bank’s  home 
country supervisor has agreed to help monitor compliance with the Federal Reserve’s order. 
These  enforcement  cases  reflect  our  continued  view  that  international  banks  have  an 
obligation to ensure that they do not interfere with the ability of U.S. financial institutions to 
comply with the sanctions laws.  
Enforcement of the Bank Secrecy Act 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  taken  a  number  of  recent  enforcement  actions  to  require 
depository  institutions  to  improve  their  BSA  programs  and  comply  with  other  anti-money 
laundering obligations, including the reporting requirements that exist under the BSA. While 
bank  holding  companies  are  not  statutorily  mandated  to  have  the  same  program 
requirements  as  depository  institutions,  we  have  also  taken  action  against  bank  holding 
companies to require them to improve their oversight of the subsidiary bank’s BSA programs 
and compliance. For example, in 2010, we issued a cease and desist order against HSBC 
requiring  the  U.S.  holding  company  to  improve  its  oversight  of the  compliance  program  at 
HSBC’s  national  bank  subsidiary.5  HSBC’s  failure  to  address  our  concerns  in  a  timely 
manner  was  part  of  the  reason  for  imposing  a  substantial  penalty  on  HSBC  and  its  U.S. 
holding company last year.6  
The Federal Reserve takes seriously its responsibility to pursue formal, public action in cases 
of BSA non-compliance. For example, in January, the Federal Reserve issued a cease and 
desist order requiring JPMorgan Chase to take corrective action to enhance its program for 
compliance with the BSA and other anti-money laundering requirements at the firm’s various 
                                                
4  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), “Consent order to cease and desist against Credit 
Suisse,” press release, December 16; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), “Cease and 
desist order against Barclays Bank and Barclays Bank New York Branch,” press release, August 18; Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease and desist 
order,  and  assesses  civil  money  penalty  against  Standard  Chartered,”  press  release,  December  10;  and 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease 
and desist order, and assesses civil money penalty against HSBC Holdings PLC and HSBC North America 
Holdings, Inc.,” press release, December 11. 
5  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2010),  “Cease  and  desist  order  against  HSBC  North 
America Holdings,” press release, October 7. 
6  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), “Federal Reserve Board issues consent cease 
and desist order, and assesses civil money penalty against HSBC Holdings PLC and HSBC North America 
Holdings, Inc.,” press release, December 11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
subsidiaries.7  In  June  2012,  we  issued  a  public  enforcement  action  against  Commerzbank 
AG and its U.S. branch for its failure to comply with certain BSA reporting obligations.8  
Conclusion 
The Federal Reserve places great importance on ensuring that the institutions we supervise 
comply with the BSA and U.S. economic sanctions. When we find problems at a supervised 
institution, we demand specific corrective measures, by specific dates, and we take strong 
enforcement actions when necessary. We will continue these efforts and work cooperatively 
with law enforcement and other financial regulators to ensure a coordinated response to the 
threat posed by illicit financing to the U.S. financial system.  
Thank  you  very  much for  your  attention. I  would  be  pleased  to  answer  any  questions  you 
may have.  
                                                
7  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2013),  “Federal  Reserve  Board  issues  two  consent 
cease and desist orders against JPMorgan Chase & Co.,” press release, January 14. 
8  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2012),  “Federal  Reserve  Board  issues  enforcement 
actions  with  Calvert  Financial  Corporation  and  Mainstreet  Bank,  Commerzbank  AG,  First  Security  Bank  of 
Malta, Grant Park Bancshares, Inc., and Robertson Holding Company, L.P.,” press release, June 14. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
