Pentti Hakkarainen: Banking Union in the Nordic context 
Keynote address by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, at the 
Nordic Opportunities/SEB Seminar, London, 3 September 2013. 
 Accompanying slides can be found on the Bank of Finland’s website: Slides (PDF) 
It is an honor and a great pleasure for me to participate in this seminar here in the heart of 
the  City.  It  is  especially  pleasant  to  do  this  under  the  benevolent  eye  of  the  present  Lord 
Mayor. I am proud to say that Roger was actually one of the first investment bankers I got 
acquainted with at the beginning of my career in finance when  working for a big industrial 
company’s finance management in the 1980s.  
The institution which I represent, the Bank of Finland, has had direct contacts with the City of 
London  for  more  than  150  years  now.  It  was  year  1861  when  the  Bank  of  Finland  first 
opened correspondent accounts with the London bank, N.M. Rothschild & Sons.  
That  correspondent  relationship  was  our  first  outside  the  Baltic  Sea  basin  and  reflected 
commercial contacts with Britain as well as the desire of the Finns to take part in the growth 
of international finance.  
I should also mention that only a couple of years later, we established banking contacts with 
a new entrant to the Nordic banking scene, the Stockholms Enskilda Bank, which evolved 
into  today’s  SEB.  The  role  of  the  founder,  A.O.  Wallenberg,  became  very  significant  for 
Finland, not least as a trusted advisor in financial policy.  
Those  were  the  early  years  of  international  banking,  and  the  beginning  of  the  great  “first 
wave” of financial globalization which continued up till the First World War. 
Now,  of  course,  the  global  integration  of  finance  and  banking  has  reached  totally  new 
dimensions  which  the  recent  international  crisis  has  underlined.  It  is  now  universally 
acknowledged, as a result of the crisis, that regulation and supervision must be brought up to 
date with the new realities of the market place.  
Nowhere has the crisis been more sobering than in the EU which has been forced to face the 
problem of its fragmented structure of supervision and take the bold but long overdue step to 
establish what is now called the Banking Union. 
The Banking Union is still at an initial phase and much remains to be done before we reach 
the goal. Also some changes are still possible. 
It is my intention today to describe the most important features of the Banking Union as they 
appear from my point of view. I will emphasize the Nordic perspective, but with Finnish twist: 
Finland being the only country in the Nordic region which is also a member of the euro area, 
and thus by definition a full participant to the Banking Union project. 
Why a Banking Union?  
[Slide 2] 
The crisis since 2008 has made it clear that a highly interconnected and integrated financial 
sector requires a stronger institutional framework than what we currently have.  
• 
A problem at one bank can quickly spread to other banks both at home and beyond 
national borders with devastating effects on the real economy and taxpayers. 
The crisis  led to  a  sudden  stop  of  capital flows within  Europe,  as  banks  withdrew 
from foreign operations and financial integration took serious setbacks. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
 In 2010 it became desperately evident that the bank and sovereign risks are tightly 
interconnected with two-way causality.  
All  in  all,  the  mismatch  between  the  scope  of  bank  operations  and  the  institutional 
supervisory  framework  made  the  situation  extremely  challenging.  As  Lord  Mervyn  King  so 
tellingly put it, “(global) banks are international in life but national in death”. 
Credibility of national supervision has suffered because of three reasons. 
• 
First,  national  mandates  of  the  supervisors  led  to  inability  to  handle  cross-border 
challenges. 
Second, the so called regulatory capture i.e. close relationships between banks and 
the supervisor led to excessive forbearance on the part of supervisors.  
Third,  the  large  “publicly  influenced”  financial  sector  in  Europe  weakened  the 
credibility of public authorities.  
  Regaining  of  confidence  in  the  banking  sector  is  a  necessary  condition  for  reversing  the 
recent  financial  fragmentation  in  the  EU,  and  for  restoring  a  normal  interbank  market  with 
capital mobility.  
• 
Confidence and capital mobility are also important for restoring economic growth in 
the area and putting the single market programme back on track.  
Let  me  emphasize  that  public  authorities  play  only  a  part  in  this  work.  Financial 
institutions  and  their  stakeholders  also  have  a  very  important  role,  in  redefining 
business  strategies,  governance  and 
risk  management  procedures,  and 
strengthening their capital positions.  
 Key elements of the Banking Union  
[Slide 3]  
The first main element of the Banking Union is the Single Rule Book for supervision. 
• 
This  is  based  on  the  idea  of  identical  regulatory  requirements  (such  as  capital 
adequacy  rules)  for  banks.  These  are  achieved  through  European  Regulations  or 
binding  standards  issued  by  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA),  while  leaving 
leeway for national authorities to impose stricter requirements nationally for macro-
prudential reasons – e.g. in order to contain real-estate bubbles. 
The EBA is charged with the task of harmonizing supervisory practices. It has the 
legal  competence  to  develop  and  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  Single  Rule 
Book. 
The establishment of the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) is the second main element 
of the Banking Union. 
• 
Contrary to the Single Rule Book the institutional framework in the Banking Union 
will  only  cover  a  subset  of  EU  member  states  –  the  euro  area  countries  and  the 
countries opting in. 
As the name implies, the SSM  will be a unitary supervisory system, composed of 
national competent authorities and the ECB – and close cooperation between them 
– and with the possibility of non-euro area Member States to participate.  
The  ECB  will  assume  direct  supervisory  responsibility  and  major  decision  making 
powers  for  significant  banks  meeting  certain  criteria.  We  expect  the  number  of 
banks falling under direct ECB supervision to reach some 130–140.  
I will return to the subject of the SSM in a moment. 
    2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The third element of the Banking Union is the Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM). 
• 
The single resolution mechanism is needed to coordinate and direct the resolution 
policies of the member states, in particular of institutions whose failure would have 
cross-border implications. 
An important precondition for the SRM is a swift adoption of the Bank Recovery and 
Resolution Directive (BRR), as it lays out a harmonised toolbox enabling the orderly 
resolution of even a systemically important institution. 
 The Single Supervisory Mechanism 
The SSM will operate as a system, gathering all of the expertise of national supervisors and 
at the same time possessing a strong decision-making centre.  
• 
Appropriate  decentralisation  procedures  are  being  planned,  while  preserving  the 
unity of the supervisory system and avoiding duplication. 
The  justification  for  the  two-tier  system  is  that  the  local  supervisors  will  have  an 
information advantage with respect to local banks. The centralized decision making 
is  required  to  address  cross-border  issues  and  to  minimize  the  risk  of  excessive 
forbearance on the part of local supervisors.  
The shared competence is important also because credit cycles differ nationally and 
the  associated  potential  problems  need  to  be  mitigated  through  nationally 
differentiated ways.  
  The SSM, with the ECB at its centre, is entrusted with an extensive set of micro- and macro-
prudential  powers,  covering  all  key  tasks  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  credit 
institutions.  
The SSM will possess early intervention powers according to the draft Bank Recovery and 
Resolution  Directive.  The  early  intervention  powers  are  significant  and  make  it  possible  to 
take action with respect to institutions which are approaching the point of non-viability.  
To  ensure  a  strong  centre,  the  ECB’s  overall  responsibility  for  supervision  is  matched  by 
controlling powers over the system as a whole. 
• 
First, all the components of the system will have to act in accordance with a system 
of guidelines, ECB-specific regulations and manuals of supervisory practices.  
Second,  the  ECB  supervisory  function  will  have  the  power  to  overtake  direct 
supervision of any bank or group of banks, if this is deemed necessary in order to 
preserve financial stability and confidence in the institutional framework.  
Third,  the  centre  monitors  that  adequate  supervisory  quality  prevails  in  national 
competent authorities. 
Fourth, the ECB supervisory function, at the centre, will receive all supervisory data 
regarding all the banks. This will make the power to overtake the supervision of any 
bank effective, and will also make it possible to ensure overall supervisory quality. 
   The supervision will, in practice, be based on a risk-based approach.  
• 
A  common  SSM  Risk  Assessment  System  is  being  developed,  relying  on  an 
integrated and harmonized information base.  
The System will be used for assessing the capital and liquidity needs of banks and 
also to direct supervisory resources (e.g. inspections planning) on the basis of the 
risk- and impact assessment. 
Common methods and processes will be developed for assessing the adequacy of 
banks’  capital  and  liquidity  levels.  This  establishment  of  common  supervisory 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
practices within the SSM will go considerably deeper than the work of the EBA in 
developing  the  Single  Rule  book  and  harmonizing  supervisory  practices  at  the 
EU-level as a whole. 
The  governance  structure  of  the  SSM  has  been  designed  so  as  to  separate  the  ECB’s 
monetary  policy  and  supervisory  roles,  and  to  make  the  position  of  different  participating 
countries as fair as possible. 
• 
A new body, the Supervisory Board, will be responsible for the supervisory functions 
of the SSM. While the decisions are formally and finally adopted by the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB,  the  Supervisory  Board  will  be,  de  facto,  the  main  decision-
making body in supervisory matters. 
‒ 
The Governing  Council  cannot  alter the  decisions  of  the  Supervisory  Board, 
but only prevent their entry into force. 
Such  a  veto  power  could  be  exercised  when  the  decision  is  seen  to  be  in 
conflict with monetary policy. 
This  principle  was  accepted  at  the  level  of  the  European  Council  by  all 
governments, which seems to indicate that in the future we see an extension 
of the SSM further beyond the euro area. 
  The  special  status  of  the  non-Euro  Area  countries  is  taken  into  account  in  the  decision-
making mechanism. 
• 
Non-euro  area  member  states  can  participate  through  establishing  a  close 
cooperation agreement with the ECB. 
By  giving  non-euro  area  Member  States  full  membership  and  voting  rights  in  the 
Supervisory Board they are placed on an equal footing with the euro-area members. 
If the Governing Council prevents the entry into force of a decision, which results in 
a  modification  of  the  decision,  a  non-euro  area  country  may  announce  non-
satisfaction with such a decision. 
If  the  Governing  Council  decision  prevails,  the  non-euro  area country  can  choose 
not to adopt the decision. For its part, the ECB could then consider breaking up the 
agreement of close cooperation. 
   Joint  Supervisory  Teams  will  be  established.  They  will  integrate  the  ECB  and  national 
competent  authority  staff  into  single  supervisory  units  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  the 
on-going  supervisory  activities,  planning  of  on-site  inspections  and  other  supervisory  work 
and for preparing supervisory decisions.  
• 
• 
The Teams will be established and led by the ECB. 
There will be one Team for each significant banking group, tailored to the needs of 
each banking group (proportionality).  
The Joint Supervisory Teams will provide a single interface for the supervised banks 
and  a  single  entry  point  for  applications  e.g.  concerning  internal  models  to  be 
approved by the supervisor.  
 The  crisis  has  shown  that  micro-prudential  supervision  at  individual  bank  level  is  not 
sufficient, and that macro and micro risks can actually be mutually reinforcing. This calls for 
very  close  cooperation  between  the  macro-  and  micro-prudential  functions.  The  SSM  has 
powers  also  in  the  macro-prudential  area,  which  is  a  shared  competence  with  national 
macro-prudential authorities. 
• 
The ECB will comment on national measures and has the possibility to tighten the 
national measures if they are deemed inadequate.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  Macro-prudential  instruments  could  also  be  applied  to  the  euro-area  financial 
system as a whole.  
The role of the EU macro-prudential supervisor, the European Systemic Risk Board 
(ESRB), is broader both geographically and functionally than the SSM. The ESRB 
covers  all  EU  member  states  and the  whole  financial  system  rather than  only  the 
banking sector. 
The practical preparation of the SSM has been well underway since autumn 2012.  
• 
The main elements of the supervisory model and the Supervisory Manual are in the 
process of being developed.  
The ECB is preparing a Framework Regulation, setting out the main responsibilities 
of the ECB and national authorities and the main requirements set for banks in the 
SSM. 
The main features of the SSM Risk Assessment System should be available and the 
list of significant banks entering into SSM direct supervision should be completed in 
the next few months. 
Provided  that  the  SSM  regulation  is  accepted  and  promulgated  in  time,  the 
Supervisory Board of the SSM will be established in October 2013.  
During  late  2013  and  the  spring  of  2014  the  newly  established  SSM  Supervisory 
Board carries out the needed consultations and then adopts all the basic documents 
setting out the operations of the SSM.  
The ECB supervisory functions will be staffed during the remainder of 2013 and the 
beginning of 2014 in order to have the SSM fully operational as of October 2014. 
     Of particular relevance for the start of the SSM and a key element in confidence rebuilding 
will be the Balance Sheet Assessment of banks to be conducted before the SSM is up and 
running.  
• 
The  Balance  Sheet  Assessment  is  intended  to  make  sure  that  legacy  asset 
problems will be detected and sufficiently addressed before the operational start of 
the SSM. 
The plan is to have the BSA finalised in the spring 2014, after which pan-European 
stress tests will be conducted in close cooperation between the European Banking 
Authority and the SSM. 
 The Single Resolution Mechanism 
The need for swift and orderly resolution of failing cross-border banks is the Achilles heel that 
needs  to  be  addressed.  Europe  needs  to  move  from  national  to  supranational  resolution 
arrangements for significant banks. 
Enhanced  resolution  policies  complement  and  would  be  supported  by  the  structural 
regulations proposed by the Vickers commission in the UK and the Liikanen report on the EU 
level. 
The  Single  Resolution  Mechanism  will  be  based  on  the  Bank  Recovery  and  Resolution 
Directive. This will create an institutional framework with enhanced powers to restructure and 
wind down failing banks. 
• 
The  new  powers  to  bail-in  bank  debt  holders  are  a  crucial,  element  of  the  future 
resolution  mechanism,  which  should  limit  the  use  of  bail-outs  significantly.  The 
intention is that in the new regime, bail-in will be the rule, bail-out a rare exception. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
  The draft BRR Directive requires that national resolution authorities cooperate with 
each  other  and  that  resolution  colleges  are  established  from  all  the  resolution 
authorities of the countries where the bank has business operations. This takes us 
some  way  in  facilitating  orderly  resolution  of  cross-border  banks.  There  are  some 
weaknesses that remain:  
‒ 
The  draft  BRR  Directive  or  any  other  existing  arrangement  do  not  contain 
compulsory  coordination  of  resolution  measures  before  they  are  taken  by 
home and host authorities. Hence, there is no explicit and binding resolution 
mechanism for cross-border banks. 
Conflicts  of  interest  and  incentives  for  ring-fencing  that  have  plagued  cross-
border crisis management will still be inherent to the framework. Both home 
and host authorities could exercise ring-fencing at their own discretion.  
  the  same 
It  is thus  doubtful  that  a  resolution  college  could  effectively  coordinate  in  time the 
necessary decisions involved in the resolution of a cross-border banking group and 
resolve the conflicts of interest. 
‒  We  need  a  supranational  decision  making  body  with  resolution  powers  and 
institutional  and 
good  decision  making  procedures,  and 
geographical scope as the SSM. 
Ideally there should be a Single Resolution Authority, which would govern the 
resolution of banks and coordinate the application of resolution tools. It should 
have: 
o 
a clear and relatively narrow mandate to protect it from political pressure 
and to achieve credibility.  
a  comprehensive  set  of  enforceable  tools,  powers  and  authority  to 
resolve all banks under the SSM.  
a task to ensure that failing banks are resolved swiftly, through impartial 
decision-making focused on the European dimension. 
o 
o 
Minimizing taxpayers’ liability (with regard to the governments) 
Striving for the least cost solution (with regard to the financial sector). 
Agreeing on the mandate and powers for the EU-level resolution authority  will be easier  if 
unfounded national interests are not allowed to play a role, and if it is clear that the following 
two principles are respected in reorganizations: 
• 
• 
Even  though  these  principles  are  the  main  thrust  of  the  commission  proposal,  a  clear 
statement  on  the  principles  is  warranted.  I  believe  that  kind  of  explicit  statement  would 
facilitate discussions on who is deciding and about what. 
Orderly  and  efficient  resolution  is  not  only  a  problem for the  so-called  peripheral  countries 
which have made the headlines recently.  
• 
• 
The UK has had its share of these cases, as you know. 
In the Nordic region there was earlier experience from the banking crisis of the early 
1990’s. 
The dramatic crisis in Iceland had some repercussions in the other Nordic countries, 
and in the UK and the Netherlands as well, when local host country authorities had 
to intervene in order to control the situation, with more or less satisfactory outcomes. 
There have been also other cases of authorities’ intervention in the Nordic region, 
mostly  in  Denmark,  where  the  local  property  financing  market  threw  a  number  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  6 
 banks  into  trouble.  In  Sweden  and  Finland  there  have  been  cases  of  small 
“boutique” type banks which have been closed.  
Deposit guarantee schemes 
A Pan-European Deposit Guarantee Scheme has also been proposed as an element of the 
banking union. The planning of such a scheme is still in a very early phase. It is clearly more 
difficult  to  establish  than  the  SSM  or  the  SRM.  One  reason  is  that  the  existing  national 
systems are very heterogeneous. 
• 
A  politically  sensitive  issue  is  the  possibility  of  mutualisation  of  risks,  or  national 
funds in a situation in which significant funds have already been gathered in some 
countries  while  at  the  same time  none,  or  very little,  have  been gathered  in  other 
countries.  
Nevertheless, as long as deposit guarantee systems are predominantly national, a 
strong  channel  of  potential  contagion  remains  between  banking  sectors  and  the 
states.  
 It  may  be  that  once  the  SSM  and  the  SRM  have  established  an  effective  control  of  the 
European banking sector, and the legacy issues from the previous crisis have been solved, 
the discussion about a common deposit guarantee scheme will move forward. 
• 
As a first and important step, further harmonization of national schemes along the 
lines suggested by the Commission in the draft Directive is called for.  
The Nordic dimension  
[Slide 4] 
The cross-border character of the Nordic banking sector has a long tradition and has become 
more  and  more  pronounced.  It  calls  for  a  corresponding  structure  for  its  supervisory 
framework.  
• 
The Nordic banking sector is dominated by a small number of international banks, 
which  are  large  relative  to  their  home-country  GDP.  The  assets  of  the  six  largest 
banking groups (Nordea, Swedbank, SEB, Handelsbanken, Danske Bank and DnB) 
comprise roughly 94 percent of the total assets of all 53 publicly-listed Nordic banks 
and equal over 180 percent of the combined Nordic GDP. Four of these have their 
parent banks in Sweden, one in Denmark and one in Norway. 
Each  of  the  large  banking  groups  is  nationally  very  significant.  However,  their 
operations,  credit  exposures  and  depositor  base  are  typically  regional.  About 
85 percent of the largest six banks’ exposures and deposits are located in the four 
Nordic countries and roughly ¾ of their full-time employees are based in the region.  
 Local banking groups add to the heterogeneity of the Nordic banking sector. 
• 
Of the six large banking groups, only the DNB limits almost all of its operations to its 
home country (Norway). 
OP-Pohjola  Group,  with  cooperative  roots, focuses  its  operations  on the  domestic 
market and is one of the two largest banks in Finland. 
The  national  networks  of  savings  banks  have  a  strong  footing  in  many  Nordic 
countries. 
  The establishment of the SSM is very interesting from the perspective of the Nordic banking 
sector.  
• 
As a euro area country, Finland will automatically participate in the Banking Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
  If the national competent authorities of non-euro area Member States, Denmark and 
Sweden, opted to participate in the SSM the supervision of the significant banks in 
these countries would be the direct responsibility of the ECB. 
Should  the  home-country  authorities  of  the  large  banking  groups  headquartered 
outside  the  euro  area  remain  outside  of  the  SSM,  the  ECB  would  assume  the 
responsibility of a host supervisor of the major subsidiaries in the euro area.  
‒ 
Nordea  and  Danske  Bank  have  significant  subsidiaries  in  Finland,  which 
would bring them under direct supervision of the ECB. 
Also  some  other  banks  from  the  outside  potentially  fall  under  SSM 
supervision. The Swedish SEB, for instance, has a subsidiary in Germany. 
Other large subsidiaries of non-euro area banks in the euro area include Bank 
of  America  (Ireland),  HSBC  (France  and  Malta),  RBS  (Netherlands),  Bank 
New  York  Mellon  (Belgium),  Barclays  (Spain),  GE  Capital  (France),  State 
Street (Luxembourg) and Cerberus (Austria). 
  A strong Nordic dimension in the Banking Union would be a positive development, not only 
for  the  Nordics  themselves,  but  it  would  also  help  in  building  highly  competent  regulatory 
bodies. 
• 
It  would  simplify  the  supervisory  structure  if  all  Nordic  authorities  would  operate 
under the SSM roof.  
I  believe  that  the  Banking  Union  would  benefit  from  the  tradition  of  integrity  and 
transparency which are at the core of supervision practices in the Nordic countries. 
Good supervisory practice in the region is built on the experience from the banking 
crisis  that  struck  the  Nordic  countries  in  the  early  1990s.  I  believe  that  the  whole 
Banking Union could benefit from this experience. 
  There  is  a  long  and  evolving  tradition  of  cooperation  between  Nordic  supervisors. 
Participation in the SSM would strengthen the governance of this cooperation and make it 
better aligned with the structure of the major banks in the region.  
Implications for banks  
[Slide 5] 
The  changing  structure  of  supervision  will  probably  have  some  interesting  implications  for 
competition in banking and the operating conditions of the banking sector. 
Banks will find that the SSM brings benefits in the form of reduced administrative costs and 
increased certainty and commonality in supervisory practices. 
• 
Even within such a closely integrated region as the Nordic, there are still differences 
in  the  supervisory  practices.  Without  the  SSM,  this  generates  uncertainty  and 
additional administrative costs.  
Banks in the SSM can benefit from uniform supervisory practices and the single entry point 
to authorities, which should reduce the supervisory burden on cross-border banking groups, 
including  reporting  costs.  It  will  also  provide  additional  assurance  of  a  level  playing  field 
across the banking market.  
• 
Participating  in  the  SSM  may  also  mean  easier  conduct  of  cross-border  mergers 
and acquisitions as supervisory decisions and approvals on such transactions are 
centralised at the ECB.  
With the creation of a banking union, it might also be that the idea of the European 
corporation, which was discussed some 5 to 10 years ago, and some Nordic banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 8 
 were  contemplating,  will  revive.  This  would  have  implications  in  particular  for  the 
operational efficiency of cross-border banks. 
The  unified  supervision  and  the  resolution  tools  of  the  SRM  in  particular  may  have  some 
impact on funding costs. 
• 
While  the  net  impact  of  the  Banking  Union  on  the  banks’  funding  costs  is  less 
straight-forward  to  assess,  the  benefits  of  better  credibility  of  supervision  and 
eventually also of a larger pool of resources for crisis resolution would be positive for 
banks. Cutting the bank-sovereign linkage of creditworthiness, which is the aim of 
the  Banking  Union,  would  be  important  for  banks  based  in  countries  where 
government finances are weak. 
However, the net impact on the funding costs of banks will depend on how much of 
the implicit government guarantee remains. Within the banking union, large cross-
border banks are likely not able to continue to enjoy their too-big-to-fail status. This 
will  correct  the  artificially  low  funding  costs  that  these  banks  enjoy.  In  countries 
outside the banking union, where there will be no pooling of resources to alleviate 
the too-big-to-fail problem, systemically important banks will likely continue to have 
lower funding costs than less significant banks.  
 There  are  reasons  why  the  Banking  Union  may  have  an  impact  on  the  market  value  of 
banks. 
• 
The increased confidence in banks based in countries participating in the banking 
union may increase investors’ interest in them, thus facilitating their funding.  
The core factor is a credible assessment of bank balance sheets. 
‒ 
There is an “uncertainty discount” attached to (almost) all banks due to opacity 
of  bank’s  balance  sheets  creating  some  uncertainty  as  to  the  quality  of  the 
assets.  The  market  (currently)  assesses  assets  with  some  caution  and  is 
hence undervaluing many, if not most, banks to be on the safe side. 
The Banking Union and in particular its Balance Sheet Assessment, provided 
that  it  is  seen  as  credible,  will  increase  transparency  and  thus  reduce  the 
uncertainty attached to the market value of banks. 
Pricing  will  more  correctly  reflect  the  true  value  of  the  banks.  The  discount 
unfairly attached to good banks will be reduced, or even eliminated. The weak 
banks  will,  however,  most  probably  see  their  share  price  drop  even  further. 
Banks  that  are  no  longer  deemed  viable  need  to  be  restructured  or  wound 
down through orderly resolution processes. 
An unanswered question still is the potential impact on the required return on 
equity.  While  some  studies  suggest  that  owners  could  accept  lower  returns 
due to a safer and more stable business environment, there is no really clear 
evidence on that yet. 
   The Banking Union will moreover reduce the impact of the financial position of the 
country in which the bank is headquartered on the market value of the bank.  
‒ 
The size and significance of the cross-border banks will no longer be related 
to the size and fiscal strength of a single country but rather to a region that 
reflects its operations in a more appropriate way. 
In  thinking  about  the  effects  of  the  Banking  Union  on  individual  countries  and  banks  we 
should bear in mind that the Banking Union is built for the long term.  
• 
The  current  positions  of  strength  or  weakness  of  various  countries  and banks  will 
not  be  permanent:  “The  last  will  be  first  and  the  first  will  be  last”.  We  should 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
   therefore  evaluate  the  Banking  Union  from  a  general,  not  particular  or  transitory 
perspective. 
Finally,  the  increased  confidence  in  banks  that  fall  under  the  SSM  supervisory 
umbrella may open up wider cross-border business opportunities for banks and re-
ignite the integration process of the European banking sector. 
Customer perspective 
The SSM will also impact bank customers. 
• 
 For  retail  customers  and  depositors  especially,  there  can  be  some  enhanced 
comfort  through  perceived  high-quality  supervision  that can  come  to  some  benefit 
for SSM banks as e.g. attracting new customers is facilitated. This is particularly true 
for  foreign  subsidiaries,  which  may  be  perceived  as  less  reliable  than  the  well 
established banks. 
Again such matters can become particularly significant if the financial standing of the 
national safety nets is put in doubt. 
Despite the strong financial position of the Nordic countries and the high integrity of 
Nordic supervisors, there, may still be a positive impact on the customer perception. 
One could also expect that improved prudential supervisory procedures could have positive 
spill-over effects on the market-conduct supervision and even consumer protection which will 
remain national responsibilities within the SSM. 
 Conclusions  
[Slide 6] 
The disparity between international banking and national supervision and resolution powers 
have been the Achilles heel of the European banking market, a problem that is now finally 
being  addressed.  It  is  regretful  that  we  had  to  wait  until  the  recent  crisis  before  progress 
started on this front.  
• 
This is particularly important for the Nordic banking market, which is exceptionally 
integrated  and  interconnected,  while  the  countries’  starting  positions  are  so 
divergent, not all being members of the euro area. I hope that the different currency 
arrangements in the region will not prevent progress in supervision. 
An  important  impulse for  the  establishment  of the  Banking  Union  came  from the  desire  to 
protect taxpayers and reduce their liability in the banking system. However, in my view, the 
SSM should also offer significant benefits to the supervised banks: supervisory requirements 
will be harmonised across borders and there will be one entry point into supervision. Group-
level supervision will be emphasised rather than the supervision of subsidiaries.  
• 
This should be quite beneficial especially for those banks which have large cross-
border activities. Big Nordic banks are prime examples of such banks. Clearly, the 
SSM will ease banks’ international operations and help ensure a level-playing-field 
for banks. 
To the above  we can add the benefits of stronger investor confidence which should result 
from the strong, objective and high-quality supervisory work.  
Finally,  the  billion  dollar  question:  would  the  recent  financial  crisis  have  been  avoided  in 
Europe if the EU had established the banking union before the problems surfaced? 
I think probably not completely, since the reasons for the crisis were to a large extent global 
in  nature.  But  the  crisis  would  likely  have  been  milder  and  less  damaging.  The  European 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
market would have been less fragile and the authorities could have been able to act more 
quickly and more decisively. Both supervision and resolution would have contributed to that. 
On the supervision side, better, more credible and internationally uniform supervision would 
have reduced uncertainty among investors and politicians about the condition of the banking 
systems of the highly indebted countries. That would have made markets more resilient and 
avoided  some  of  the  costs  of  the  drying-up  of  the  interbank  market,  which  hurt  even  the 
fundamentally healthy banks. 
On  the  resolution  side,  if  clear  ex  ante  rules  for  dealing  with  problem  banks  had  been  in 
place when the crisis hit, the resolution of unviable banks could have been enforced more 
quickly and more efficiently.  
The bail-in tool would have been available to reduce the cost of the crisis to taxpayers. Also, 
favouring  of  “national  champions”  would  have  been  avoided,  so  recovery  and  resolution 
policies would have been more consistent and effective. Healthy competition in the banking 
sector could have been restored sooner without compromising the stability of the system. 
To conclude: Bygones are bygones, but by learning from the past we can prevent or at 
least mitigate many risks and problems in the European banking sector in the future. 
This  requires  unifying  our  regulatory  structures  to  match  the  European  financial 
market. We should avoid the use of taxpayers’ money and leave unfounded national 
interests aside. The Nordic region should certainly be no exception. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
