Christian Noyer: Current policy debate challenges – a euro area 
perspective 
Welcome address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the Board of Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the 4th Bank of France-
Deutsche Bundesbank Macroeconomics and Finance Conference, Paris, 24 May 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, dear colleagues, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak in front of such a distinguished audience. As you might 
know, this is the fourth time that the Banque de France and the Deutsche Bundesbank have 
jointly organised a conference of this type. It is held every other year, alternately in Germany 
and in France. The fact that these two institutions sponsor an event of this nature sends a 
clear signal to the community of researchers: it illustrates the importance of research for the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy.  This  is  especially  relevant  at  the  current  juncture  as  our 
understanding of the interactions between financial markets and the real economy remains 
incomplete.  The  work  of  outstanding  quality  presented  during  this  conference  could  help 
influence the design and the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  programme  of  this  conference  is  very  rich.  It  covers  topical  subjects  that  are  of  the 
utmost  importance  from  the  point  of  view  of  current  policy  debate.  Let  me  take  as  an 
example the topic covered this morning: unconventional monetary policy, which have been 
my bread and butter as a member of the ECB Governing Council for the already six years.  
After the Lehman collapse, central banks implemented far-reaching unconventional monetary 
policy  measures,  first  by  setting  up  liquidity  facilities  and  then,  for  some  of  them,  by 
undertaking  large-scale  asset  purchase  programmes.  Measuring  the  propagation  of  these 
policies on our economy is a challenge. Unconventional policies are typically announced in 
order to respond to specific economic and financial conditions. They are endogenous. And 
disentangling their effects from those induced by other economic and financial factors can be 
very difficult. 
Empirical  studies  of  the  effects  non-conventional  policies,  including  pioneering  studies  by 
Anne Vissing-Jorgensen, have proceeded through so called “event studies”. This approach 
consists  of  measuring  the  response  of  asset  prices  the  day  when  a  given  measure  is 
announced. The “identification” problem is solved in the sense that reactions by interest rates 
and  asset  prices  on  the  day  when  a  central  bank  announced  a  new  non-conventional 
measure are indeed very likely to the caused by the announcement. This literature has for 
instance showed that the effects of the so called Large Scale Asset Purchase programs of 
the  Federal  Reserve.  “QE1”,  launched  in  2009,  and  “QE3”,  launched  in  2012,  had  larger 
effects on US long-term interest rates than the 2010 “QE2” program. Another insightful result 
from  this  literature,  which  is  presented  this  morning  by  Simon  Gilchrist,  is  the  differential 
effects  of  these  policies  on  credit  risk.  LSAP  programmes  have  reduced  the  non-financial 
sector’s default risk, but they had a very limited impact, if any, on the default risk specific to 
the financial sector. 
Taking a euro area perspective, these results are interesting in at least two respects. First, 
the  level  of  US  interest  rates  are  an  essential  feature  of  the  world  economy  and  the 
economic and financial environment of the euro area. Second, the experience of other major 
central banks is a natural benchmark for the design and the monitoring of our own policies, 
on which I would like to share with you a few thoughts. 
The  predominant  objective  of  our  first  wave  of  unconventional  measures,  which  we  have 
labelled the “fixed rate full allotment” supply of liquidity, was to ensure that liquidity shortages 
do not escalate into defaults, especially in the financial sector. This has mainly consisted in 
ensuring  the  correct  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking  sector  against  the  backdrop  of  a 
major confidence crisis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Yet, by the end of 2010 the crisis had taken on a new form. The fiscal constraint became 
binding in a number of periphery countries. Investors started to price in sovereign credit risks. 
By  2011,  it  appeared  clear  that  investors  were  also  factoring  in  the  risk  of  a  euro  area 
break-up. This, in turn, entailed an increased degree of market fragmentation within the euro 
area, with borrowers facing different credit conditions depending on their country of origin. 
Our Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme was specifically designed to reaffirm 
the  irreversibility  of  the  euro.  The  OMT  allowed  investors  to  discard  a  specific  form  of 
systemic  risk.  In  addition,  financial  fragmentation,  which  exacerbates  heterogeneity  across 
countries and which may exist in part for fundamentally justified reasons, poses an obstacle 
to the smooth transmission of the ECB’ monetary policy stance across the euro area. Like 
the other unconventional measures implemented by the Eurosystem, the OMT programme 
contributes  to  overcome  this  obstacle.  The  OMT  has  very  significantly  reduced  spreads 
across euro area countries and we observe a partial reversal of Target 2 balances. 
There  are  however  evidence  that  a  certain  degree  of  financial  fragmentation  persists.  In 
particular,  our  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  is  not  fully  transmitted  to  the 
financial conditions of small and medium size enterprises at the periphery. In this sense, the 
current  degree  of  financial  fragmentation  within  the  euro  area  remains  an  obstacle  to  the 
smooth  transmission  of  our  monetary  policy.  Hence  we  are  currently  considering  the 
introduction  of  additional  unconventional  monetary  policy  instruments  that  would  further 
reduce financial fragmentation. 
This leads me to a couple of remarks on the institutional design of the European Monetary 
Union.  Inspired  by  the  hard  lessons  of  history,  the  founders  of  EMU  were  especially 
concerned that governments might weaken the union through either debt monetisation or via 
a sovereign default that would cause financial instability in the area. These concerns were 
more than legitimate and led to the now famous Maastricht criteria. But one channel was not 
envisioned  at  the  time:  the  possibility  that  a  major  financial  shock  could  jeopardise  fiscal 
sustainability,  through  large-scale  bail-out  programmes.  In  the  case  of  the  euro  area, 
characterised by a high degree of financial integration, ignoring this risk exposed us to major 
disruptions. This analysis echoes Maurice Obstfeld’s keynote address and I believe that our 
response to these risks is fully in line with his recommendations. 
Indeed, we have learned a great deal from the past five years and have made progress at an 
unprecedented pace. EMU is now firmly on the road to a banking union. To a large extent, 
this is the very institutional mechanism that was lacking in the first place. Our OMTs have 
limited the scale of financial fragmentation and have greatly reduced the risk that increasing 
spreads might end in sovereign defaults. But the euro area needs an institutional framework 
capable of preventing the recurrence of such crises, essentially by decoupling financial risk 
from  sovereign  risk.  The  banking  union  thus  consists  of  three  major  pillars:  a  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism,  a  supranational  resolution  mechanism,  and  a  unified  system  of 
deposit insurance. For now, the first pillar of the banking union is the most advanced, but the 
other two are also in the pipeline and need to be pursued.  
Let  me  now  conclude.  Euro  area  macroeconomic  governance  is  now  stronger  than  it  was 
before the outbreak of the crisis since it has been put on a sounder institutional footing. Our 
institutional architecture is about to be completed, which will help to prevent the resurgence 
of  a  new  sovereign  debt  crisis.  Our  unconventional  policies  were  able  to  address  market 
fragmentation and the ensuing financial disruption, hence facilitating the proper transmission 
of our monetary stance throughout the euro area. 
Huge intellectual efforts are constantly needed to improve and adapt our policies to changing 
environments. The current crisis is a stark reminder of this, not just for policy makers but also 
for economists and academics. This is the very reason why the Bundesbank President, Jens 
Weidmann and I have high expectations for this two-day conference. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, dear colleagues, thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
