Andreas Dombret: An overview of the CRE (Commercial Real Estate) 
market 
Contribution  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  as  Lead  Discussant  at  the  FSB  (Financial  Stability  Board)  Workshop  on 
Commercial Real Estate Underwriting, Frankfurt am Main, 8 May 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to welcome you to the FSB workshop on commercial real estate underwriting 
practices on behalf of the Deutsche Bundesbank. We are very happy to host this important 
FSB event here in Frankfurt. 
I am very pleased that so many dedicated real estate experts from a variety of FSB member 
countries  and  institutions,  from  standard  setting  bodies  and  from  the  private  sector 
participate today. I am sure that the gathered expertise will lead to fruitful discussions and 
provide for interesting insights. 
Let  me  now  start  this  session  by  sharing  my  views  on  global  commercial  real  estate 
financing. I will touch on two issues in the following minutes: first its relevance for banks and 
other participants in the financial markets and second its implications for financial stability. 
One of the reasons for the financial crisis was the US sub-prime crisis caused by lax lending 
practices  and  overheating  residential  real  estate  markets.  The  FSB  has  completed 
considerable  work  in  this  area,  which  mounted  in  FSB  Principles  on  Sound  Residential 
Mortgage  Underwriting  Practices.  The  question  about  the  other  and  perhaps  even  more 
important part of the real estate lending business will be dealt with in this workshop: Could 
excessive  risks  from  commercial  real  estate  financing  negatively  affect  financial  stability? 
(slide) 
The  global  stock  of  commercial  real  estate  is  estimated  at  31.2  trillion  U.S.  dollars  as  of 
2011. About two thirds of global total stock is considered to be investable. The majority of 
investable stock is already invested and accounts for more than 12 trillion U.S. dollars. This 
part  is  in  the  primary  focus  of  this  workshop.  Taking  into  account  the  market  share  of 
commercial banks it is not surprising that for example European banks have an estimated 
total CRE lending exposure of 2.4 trillion Euros. But let me stick to the CRE markets for a few 
more moments before I will turn to the lenders and banks. (slide) 
Since 2007 we have seen a divergent development of CRE prices among the G20 countries. 
South Africa, Canada and Korea are the only countries that show an increase of CRE prices 
since  2007.  Contrary  to  them  most  other  countries  suffer  from  a  more  or  less  strong 
deterioration  of  CRE  prices.  Just  to  name  a  few:  U.S.  –19%,  UK  –23%,  Spain  –29%  and 
Ireland –67% between 2007 and 2012. Recently, there are signs of stabilisation or even an 
upward trend. However, a rapid rebound of CRE prices in most G20 countries to a pre-crisis 
level seems unlikely in the short-term. 
If I look at the development of prices and the annual investment activity at once I can see 
certain coherence between the two. (slide) 
While global invested volumes fell by two thirds from 2007 to 2009, they almost doubled after 
that in only two years to almost 400 billion U.S. dollars. Unsurprisingly, invested volumes for 
Asia-Pacific have gained tremendous market share over the last few years and are now at 
the same level as for Europe and twice as high as for North America. (slide) 
Having the pleasure of welcoming all of you here in Frankfurt – Germany’s banking city – I 
would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  briefly  give  you  some  insights  into  the  German  CRE 
market. Germany  has  seen  a  moderate  development  of  CRE  prices  over  the  last  decade. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However,  the  CRE  market  and  consequently  CRE  prices  –  unlike  most  other  European 
markets  –  have  benefited  from  the  economic  conditions  here.  Foreign  investors  have 
stepped up their investment activity over the past two years. 
Leaving Germany and taking a global view again the question is, what is the state lenders 
and investors are in? (slide) 
Obviously,  falling  prices  have  not  failed  to  leave  a  mark  on  both.  An  enormous  half  of 
investors  in  EMEA  and  75  percent  in  North  America  are  in  talks  with  banks  on  loan 
amendments and/or loan extensions. If restructuring or extension of the loan is not possible, 
investors must find other sources of capital for equity injections or partial loan repayments 
and if this fails even asset sales are on the agenda. Clearly challenging times for investors 
and following them, the lenders. (slide) 
The  latter  have  chosen  a  very  selective  path  in  financing  CRE,  lately.  A  more  cautious 
underwriting practice and tighter lending standards can be observed. According to the survey 
of lenders for DTZ’ global research, a preference for less risky investments was identified. 
Prime  assets  are  in  favour  of  lenders,  whereas  speculative  developments  and  non-prime 
assets  are  currently  not  part  of  their  strategic  agenda.  This  trend  of  consolidation  is  also 
reflected in new lending, where only a minority of survey respondents expected expansion of 
business  in  2012,  while  more  than  a  third  wanted  to  reduce  CRE  lending.  In  addition, 
underwriting  terms  and  conditions  were  expected  to  further  tighten  in  2012.  However,  for 
2013 lenders expect some relaxation of lending practices back to rather normal levels, which 
can be interpreted as a positive sign. 
Now,  let  me  draw  your  attention  to  an  important  aspect  of  CRE  financing  –  the  CMBS 
markets. (slide) 
We have seen deteriorated CRE prices, selective lending practices, and investors being in 
talks about workout with their lenders. Based on this the future does not look promising from 
the point of view of financial stability. If we look at maturity dates for CMBS, there are 40 to 
50 billion U.S. dollars a year to be refinanced globally until 2020. The U.S. accounts for the 
majority of these maturing CMBS. However, the remaining countries, among them the U.K., 
Germany and Japan are most important, account for the other half of maturing CMBS until 
2020.  
Numerous  times  the  question  about  a  funding  gap  was  raised.  For  Europe  alone,  DTZ 
Research looked beyond CMBS and identified a funding gap for all commercial real estate 
for the years 2012 to 2014 that exceeds 100 billion U.S. dollars.  
So, who is going to fill the gap? (slide) 
In Europe and the U.S. more than half of CRE financing is provided by commercial banks. 
Insurers account for more than 10 percent in both regions. In the U.S., ABS issuers gained 
importance over the last 20 years and account for more than 20 percent of the market today, 
according to the Federal Reserve. CRE financing markets can be described as fragmented, 
but  they  are  still  dominated  by  the  banking  sector.  The  current  weakness  of  the  banking 
sector  calls  for  non-bank  financiers  such  as  insurers  and  pension  funds.  Moreover,  the 
impact  of  regulatory  initiatives  such  as  Basel  III  and  banks’  need  to  deleverage  will  affect 
CRE lending. Weak securitisation markets put additional pressure on CRE markets. 
Although banks are the most important providers of finance to the CRE market, CRE loans 
only account for 10 to 15 percent of the loan book globally. Although individual shares may 
differ greatly, certain trends can be observed. In the U.S., CRE loans add up to more than 
20 percent of banks’ loan portfolios while for example in German banks they only account for 
7 percent on average. However, the range for German banks varies and can be as low as 2 
but also as high as 25 percent for an individual bank. (slide) 
In conclusion, let me highlight the key aspects I would like to see considered in the context of 
commercial  real  estate  financing.  You  have  seen,  that  CRE  tends  to  be  more  volatile. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Moreover,  global  and  adverse  economic  developments  usually  have  stronger  impacts  on 
CRE markets and financing compared to its relative, the residential real estate market. CRE 
financing is clearly a global business that accounts for a considerable part of banks’ assets. 
As highlighted before, the CRE market attracts multiple lenders with different backgrounds. 
And they have a multitude of finance tools in their hands. It is not surprising that CRE finance 
is  rather  complex  and  differs  even  more  among  countries  compared  to  the  residential 
equivalent. All this contributes to limited availability, quality and comparability of data on CRE 
financing and markets. (slide) 
This workshop aims at the importance of CRE underwriting and its role in financial stability. 
There  are  numerous  aspects  and  implications  to  discuss  over  the  next  few  hours.  And 
hopefully,  there  are  first  conclusions  being  drawn  and  questions  being  answered.  For 
example:  In  what  way  may  CRE  cycles  and  potential  asset  price  bubbles  affect  CRE 
underwriting  and  financial  stability?  To  what  extent  would  the  deterioration  of  CRE-related 
asset  quality  and  values  affect  banks’  balance  sheets?  Does  banks’  forbearance  play  an 
important role? What  would  be  the  effect  of further  loan  losses  and  break  away  of  profits, 
which relate to CRE lending? What are the dynamics and dependencies between investors, 
different types of lenders, market developments, and economic prospects? And last but not 
least:  From  a  regulator’s  perspective  –  and  as  a  possible  issue  for  discussion  during  the 
afternoon  sessions  –,  do  we  have  all  relevant  information  and  tools  at  our  discretion  to 
identify CRE related risks and to manage or even limit those to an acceptable level?  
A  stable  financial  system  is  essential.  CRE  underwriting  plays  an  important  role  in  this. 
Appropriate information and instruments now need to be identified and if seen as necessary 
should be implemented subsequently. This workshop and all your contributions will help to 
take the right steps towards safer banks and a better financial system. As a central banker, I 
am therefore particularly happy that my fellow lead discussants in this session all are from 
the private sector. And I look forward to your contributions.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 