Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The challenges which will face 
agriculture in an oil economy 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the CEO 
Summit Forum, Kampala, 30 October 2012. 
 Introduction 
1. 
For  a  country  with  fertile  land  and  abundant  rainfall  which  give  it  a  strong  comparative 
advantage in agriculture, Uganda’s agriculture performance is weak. Agricultural productivity 
per worker, at approximately $200 per year, is among the lowest in the world. Real growth in 
agriculture has averaged only two percent per annum over the last 10 years, less than a third 
of the average growth of the rest of the Ugandan economy. Productivity is especially low in 
the food crop sub-sector, which is dominated by smallholder farmers, because farmers use 
rudimentary farm technology and produce mainly for subsistence rather than the market. 
The production of oil on a commercial scale will intensify the problems facing the agricultural 
sector. The spending of the revenues from oil in the domestic economy will inevitably bring 
about  some  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate.  As  a  result  food  imports  will  become 
cheaper  in  real  terms  and  agricultural  exports  such  as  coffee,  tea  and  cotton  will  lose 
competitiveness. Higher wages paid in the non-traded goods industries such as services will 
pull labour out of agriculture. All of these effects have been observed in many oil producing 
countries around the world, including those in Africa such as Gabon and Nigeria; they are 
features of the phenomenon known as Dutch disease. Unless there are radical changes in 
our  approach  to  agriculture,  our  agricultural  performance  will  weaken  further,  with  very 
deleterious consequences for rural poverty, employment, inequality, geographically balanced 
growth and food security.  
The theme  of  my  talk  this  afternoon  is that  it  is imperative  to  implement  a  comprehensive 
strategy  to  support  smallholder  agriculture  if  we  are  to  avert  a  long  term  decline  in  the 
agricultural sector; a decline which will be accelerated by the exploitation of our oil resources. 
If we can help the broad mass of farmers in this country to become more productive, raise 
their yields and sell more of their output on the market, it will be possible to create a more 
dynamic agricultural sector which is strong enough to survive despite the adverse impacts of 
oil on the real exchange rate. Furthermore, by supporting Uganda’s farmers to increase their 
marketable  output,  we  can  boost  agro-processing 
thus  promote 
industrialisation. Strengthening agriculture will not be possible without devoting more public 
resources  to  support  the  sector,  but  how  we  spend  public  resources  is  critical,  as  I  will 
explain later in this talk.  
industries  and 
What should be our strategy for agriculture? 
2. 
The  goal  of  agricultural  strategy  should  be  to  support  the  modernisation  of  agriculture. 
Modernisation  entails  farmers  adopting  good  agricultural  practises,  employing  productivity 
enhancing farm inputs, making decisions about input use and choice of crops or livestock to 
maximise  their  profit  and  selling  more  of  their  output  on  the  market.  It  will  bring  about  a 
switch towards the production of higher value crops, as well as raising yields per acre and 
yields per worker.  
A feasible strategy for agricultural development in Uganda must have at its centre support for 
smallholder farmers. Smallholders comprise 96 percent of Uganda’s farmers. It is unrealistic 
to  expect  that  Uganda’s  agricultural  performance  can  be  turned  around  by  ignoring 
smallholders  and  focussing  instead  on  large  farms.  Furthermore,  small  farms  generate 
higher value added per acre than medium sized farms which in turn are more productive than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
large farms. Although large farms market a higher share of their output than small farms, the 
former are not very efficient.  
On average, crop income per acre is four times higher on small farms than on large farms in 
Uganda.1  With  constraints  on  land  availability  tightening  in  Uganda,  it  is  imperative  to 
implement a strategy which makes more productive use of land, and this is most feasible by 
strengthening smallholder farming.  
Smallholders in Uganda face a raft of constraints to commercialisation, including poor access 
to markets and lack of commercial and technical information, but with adequate support from 
Government  policies  to  alleviate  these  constraints  it  should  be  possible  to  generate 
substantial improvements in productivity, output and incomes; improvements which will help 
to  insulate  agriculture  from  the  negative  impact  of  oil.  How  Government  can  best  support 
agriculture is the question I turn to next.  
Policy measures to support agricultural modernisation 
3. 
Research  carried  out  by  Lawrence  Bategeka  and  John  Matovu  of  the  EPRC,  using  a 
computable general equilibrium model of the Ugandan economy, examined how agriculture 
would be affected by the spending of oil resources. In their baseline scenario, under which oil 
revenues are simply used to fund an expansion of Government, the real appreciation of the 
exchange rate leads to a significant reduction in agricultural production, especially production 
of the traditional agricultural exports. However, Bategeka and Matovu find that, if additional 
budgetary  resources  are  targeted  at  the  agricultural  sector,  in  ways  which  improve 
agricultural productivity, the negative impact of oil on agriculture can be mitigated, enabling 
the sector to avoid a decline in output. Moreover, they also find that investments which raise 
productivity  in  agriculture  also  boost  manufacturing  growth,  because  agriculture  is  an 
important source of intermediate inputs for manufacturing.2 Uganda currently only allocates 
about  3.5  percent  of  the  Government  budget  directly  to  agriculture.  Raising  budgetary 
allocations to agriculture and for investment in rural areas should be a strategic priority.  
Whether or not public spending on agriculture actually contributes to improving agricultural 
productivity depends on the nature of the spending. There is strong empirical evidence from 
around  the  world  to  indicate  that  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services,  which  are 
defined as goods and services which because of their character cannot be supplied optimally 
by  the  market,  have  a  large  positive  impact  on agriculture  with  potentially  very  high  social 
rates of return, if well designed and implemented.3 Examples of the type of public goods and 
services which are relevant for agricultural development in Uganda include:  
i) 
ii) 
iii) 
Agricultural research and development, to produce improved farm technologies such 
as  high  yield  seeds  and  to  determine  the  optimal  farm  technologies  for  the 
conditions prevailing in Uganda; 
Agricultural  extension  services  to  provide  information  and  technical  advice  to 
farmers  to  adopt  good  agricultural  practises  and  to  use  appropriate  purchased 
inputs; this can help farmers raise their yields; 
The construction and especially the maintenance of rural feeder roads to reduce the 
cost  of  transporting  agricultural  produce  to  markets  and  raise farm  gate  prices;  in 
                                                
1   The data are from “Agriculture for Inclusive Growth in Uganda” Inclusive Growth Policy Note 2, World Bank, 
2012. 
2   Lawrence Bategeka and John Matovu (2011), “Oil Wealth and Potential Dutch Disease Effects in Uganda”, 
Economic Policy Research Centre. 
3   The  evidence  is  surveyed  in  Enrique  Blanco  Armas,  Camilo  Gomez  Osorio,  Blanca  Moreno  Dodson  and 
Dwi Endah  Abriningrum  (2012),  “Agriculture  Public  Spending  and  Growth  in  Indonesia”,  Policy  Research 
Working Paper 5977 World Bank. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
iv) 
v) 
vi) 
terms of encouraging farmers to produce more output for their market, investment in 
rural feeder roads is more important than investment in main roads; 
The  provision  of  veterinary  services  and  the  control  of  plant  diseases;  controlling 
animal and plant disease is an activity with very large positive externalities; 
The provision of market information, for example price information, to help farmers 
make more informed decisions about  which crops to grow and to strengthen their 
ability to negotiate prices with traders. 
Clarifying and strengthening land rights and the security of land tenure, to improve 
incentives for farmers to invest in land improvements, encourage land rentals and 
enable farmers to use their land as collateral for credit; 
In  contrast  to  the  provision  of  public  goods  and  services,  the  subsidised  provision  by 
Government  of  private  goods,  such  as  fertiliser  and  credit,  has  a  much  weaker  impact  on 
agricultural  productivity.  Such  subsidies  often  simply  transfer  resources  from  taxpayers  to 
favoured  beneficiaries  and  encourage  the  inefficient  use  of  subsidised  inputs.  When  the 
opportunity  cost  of  subsidising  private  goods  from  the  Government  budget  is  taken  into 
account  –  the  fact  that  the  money  spent  on  these  subsidies  could  have  been  used  more 
productively on public goods and services – the overall impact on agricultural productivity is 
negative. This means that the focus of agricultural extension services should be the provision 
of technical advice to farmers, rather than the sale of subsidised farm inputs. These cardinal 
principles which should inform the formulation of our agricultural strategy – to invest in public 
goods and services and avoid subsidising the provision of private goods – are of particular 
relevance for agricultural finance, a subject to which I will now turn.  
Agricultural finance 
4. 
Agricultural finance generates controversy in many developing countries, including Uganda. 
There  is  often  an  assumption  that  agriculture  faces  inherent  difficulties  in  mobilising  credit 
and  that  this  is  a  binding  constraint  on  expanding  agricultural  output  which  justifies 
government  intervention  to  provide  or  subsidise  finance.  There  is  no  doubt  that  providing 
credit  to  small  farmers  involves  very  large  transactions  costs  and  high  risks  for  financial 
institutions, which means that most small farmers are excluded from formal credit markets. 
Formal  financial  markets  are  subject  to  failures  when  serving  small  farmers  which,  in 
principle, provide grounds for Government intervention to promote financial inclusion.  
But market failures are much less pertinent for larger farmers and agro-processors who are 
able  to  access  formal  credit  markets  if  they  are  creditworthy  and  have  viable  business 
enterprises.  There  are  many  profitable  agro-processors  and  other  high  value  agricultural 
producers in Uganda who are able to meet their requirements for financial services from the 
domestic  financial  sector,  including  the  regional  development  banks  which  operate  in 
Uganda,  because  these  enterprises  are  well  managed  with  a  good  track  record.  Market 
failures are much less in evidence in this segment of the financial market and hence calls for 
direct  Government  support  are  more  difficult  to  justify.  Government  should  avoid  investing 
directly  in  production  facilities,  such  as  agro-processing  facilities,  or  providing  finance  to 
private  investors  for  this  purpose.  Decisions  about  investment  in  agro-processing  are  best 
left to the private sector, to be taken purely on commercial criteria, without being distorted by 
the  provision  of  cheap  credit  or  other forms  of finance  from  the  Government.  Government 
induced distortions in financial markets will lead to the misallocation of resources, reducing 
the social rate of return to these resources.  
Modernising  smallholder  farming  will  entail  smallholders  making  greater  use  of  purchased 
farm inputs. Hence modernisation will require smallholders having better access to finance. 
Nevertheless finance is unlikely to be the binding constraint on modernisation of smallholder 
agriculture  and  unless  more  important  constraints  are  tackled,  enhancing  smallholders’ 
access to finance will be ineffective. Policy measures to strengthen the provision of financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
services  in  the  rural  areas  must  be  part  of  a much  broader  set  of  interventions  to  support 
smallholders to adopt modern farm technology and produce for the market, of the type I have 
already mentioned. Unless smallholders have adopted good agricultural practises, such as 
the  use  of  improved  seeds,  proper  field  preparation,  timely  planting,  weeding  and  pest 
control, proper harvest and post-harvest handling, etc – practises which can improve yields 
significantly – they will not be able to utilise credit effectively because their farms will not be 
profitable.  
How  should  Government  support  the  development  of  rural  financial  markets?  The  key 
interventions  required  are  to  alleviate  the  market  failures  which  impede  the  delivery  of 
financial  services  to  farmers.  For  example,  it  is  necessary  to  strengthen  the  institutional 
environment for loan security to reduce the credit risks of lending to farmers. Strengthening 
land rights to allow farmers to use land as loan collateral would help to make farmers more 
creditworthy.  The  proposed  establishment  of  a  Collateral  Securities  Registry  and  the 
enactment  of  the  Chattel  Securities  Bill,  which  is  currently  before  Parliament,  will  help  to 
widen  the  range  of  assets  which  are  acceptable  to  lenders  as  collateral.  Promoting  the 
warehouse  receipt  system  set  up  by  the  Uganda  Commodity  Exchange  would  also  be  a 
useful measure to support lending to agriculture.  
Microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  and  savings  and  credit  cooperatives  (SACCOs)  are  much 
better  suited  institutionally  than  commercial  banks  to  serving  small  farmers,  but  they  are 
often constrained by managerial and technical weaknesses. Hence there is an important role 
for  Government  to  assist  MFIs  and  SACCOs  to  strengthen  their  management  and  the 
professional skills of their officers. The Bank of Uganda is encouraging the larger tier 4 MFIs 
to  upgrade  to  become  licensed  deposit  taking  MDIs.  Assisting  MFIs  and  SACCOs  to 
strengthen their technical and managerial capacities so that they can mobilise funds from the 
communities that they serve and intermediate these funds to creditworthy farmers is a much 
more sustainable and effective approach to developing rural finance than providing them with 
funds from the budget for on-lending.  
Conclusions 
5. 
I want to end this talk by highlighting what I believe are the four key messages.  
First,  agriculture  in  Uganda  risks  being  severely  damaged  when  oil  production  comes  on 
stream  unless  comprehensive  measures  are  taken  to  modernise  the  sector,  by  raising 
productivity and promoting commercialisation.  
Secondly, the focus of agricultural strategy must be smallholder farmers, who comprise the 
vast majority of farmers in Uganda, rather than large farms.  
Thirdly,  Government  should  allocate  a  much  larger  share  of  the  budget  to  agriculture  and 
investment in rural infrastructure, but this spending should be allocated to public goods and 
services, not the subsidised provision of private goods.  
Fourthly, rural finance can contribute to agricultural modernisation in Uganda, but only if it is 
accompanied  by  effective  measures  to  encourage  farmers  to  adopt  good  agricultural 
practises,  improve  access  to  markets,  improve  control  of  animal  and  plant  diseases  and 
strengthen land rights.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
