Hiroshi Nakaso: Financial crises and central banks’ “Lender of Last 
Resort” function 
Remarks  by  Mr  Hiroshi  Nakaso,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Executive 
Forum “Impact of the financial crises on central bank functions”, hosted by the World Bank, 
Washington DC, 22 April 2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
The financial crisis that originated in the United States spilled over into the global financial 
system in the summer of 2007, and its breadth and potency rapidly increased following the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  the  autumn  of  2008.  The  crisis  again  reminded  us  of  the 
inherent instability of the financial system and the vicious compounding of problems between 
the financial system and the real economy. In response, central banks around the world took 
action,  including  cuts  in  interest  rates,  the  provision  of  ample  liquidity,  and  so-called  non-
traditional  or  unconventional  measures.  Among  these,  the  “lender  of  last  resort”  (LLR 
hereafter)  function  was  the  most  critical  that  was  carried  out  by  central  banks  amidst  the 
deepening crisis. The importance of the LLR function is underscored by history, and this time 
around, forceful actions by central banks contributed significantly to avoiding a meltdown of 
the global financial system and the collapse of real economic activity. 
The concept of LLR came to be widely recognized thanks to Walter Bagehot, who was the 
editor  of  the  London  Economist.1  According  to  his  formulation,  one  of  the  most  basic 
principles was that the central bank should be prepared to lend to any “solvent but illiquid” 
bank so as to prevent the unsettling of the financial system. This view came to be criticized in 
recent years by some contemporary economists. They thought that Bagehot’s principle was 
the offspring of an age when financial markets were not as sophisticated, and that it was no 
longer  applicable  in  the  current  market  environment  where  market  participants  have 
considerable ability to collect and process information. This view was founded on the belief 
that, in an efficient market, market participants should be able to distinguish clearly between 
solvency and liquidity issues confronted by their counterparties, which entailed that solvent 
banks  would  never  face  liquidity  constraints,  negating  the  need  for  the  central  bank  to 
provide LLR functions to individual banks. 
Such an optimistic view, however, proved to be too cavalier. With the deepening of financial 
markets  and  globalization,  the  LLR  function  of  central  banks  not  only  transmuted  but  also 
increased in importance. Today, in the time allotted to me, I will reflect on the experiences of 
the  recent  financial  crisis,  and  begin  by  summarizing  the  changes  in  central  banks’  LLR 
function. That will be followed by a discussion of a few issues pertaining to the LLR function 
that have become apparent. I will then conclude by reflecting on the roles the central bank 
should play in order to safeguard the stability of the financial system and the real economy. 
The transmutation of the LLR function 
II. 
The purpose of the LLR function is to prevent the manifestation of systemic risk, that is, the 
risk  that  a  problem  in  one  part  of  the  financial  system  spreads  to  the  whole  system  in  a 
domino-like fashion. The classic description of systemic risk focuses on contagion, where a 
bank  run  could  affect  other  domestic  banks  in  the  system  through  a  decline  in  funding 
liquidity.  In  contrast,  the  recent  financial  crisis  revealed  that,  in  the  light  of  deepening 
financial  markets  and  globalization,  systemic  risk  can  (a)  be  magnified  through  mutually 
                                                 
1  Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1924), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market, London: John Murray. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reinforcing declines in funding and market liquidity; and (b) spill over across national borders 
and  have  a  global  dimension.  Central  banks’  LLR  function  has  evolved  in  response, 
encompassing the roles of “market maker of last resort” (MMLR hereafter) and “global lender 
of last resort” (GLLR hereafter). 
MMLR 
From  the  summer  of  2007,  market  liquidity  dried  up  in  the  U.S.  and  European  interbank 
market  as  the  problems  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  sector  spilled  over  into  other  sectors, 
which in turn increased the precautionary demand for liquidity and heightened counterparty 
risk.  At  the  same  time,  investors’  risk  appetite  plunged,  resulting  in  a  decline  in  market 
liquidity not only in the securitization markets but also in markets for risky assets in general. 
Financial  institutions  that  had  accumulated  such  assets  on  their  balance  sheets  were 
increasingly hard pressed to finance such positions even for the short term. With liquidity in 
the  interbank  market  severely  impaired,  funding  became  ever  more  difficult,  and  financial 
institutions were forced into stepping up their sales of safe assets, whose markets remained 
relatively liquid. This, in turn, eroded the liquidity in the markets for relatively safe securities 
and prevented the functioning of repo markets that used those securities as collateral. It was 
a vicious cycle – a “market run” – where the decline in market liquidity impacted the funding 
liquidity of financial institutions, which then further eroded market liquidity (Chart 1). 
When market liquidity is impaired, markets will seriously struggle to perform their role of price 
discovery in line with fundamentals. In such an environment, central banks in the advanced 
economies first provided liquidity to the interbank market as an unwavering counterparty. In 
addition, they provided liquidity directly to market participants who were straining to obtain 
funding  in  the  severely  constricted  capital  markets.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve 
introduced measures to provide funds to issuers of commercial paper (CP) and holders of 
asset-backed securities (ABS).Meanwhile, the Bank of Japan purchased CPs, asset-backed 
commercial  papers,  and  corporate  bonds  in  response  to  the  rapid  deterioration  of  market 
liquidity in those markets, which funded large non-financial corporations directly impacted by 
the financial crisis. In the euro area, when the sovereign spread of the so-called peripheral 
countries  against  Germany  widened,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  purchased  bonds 
issued by the peripheral countries through the Securities Markets Programme (SMP), judging 
that the widening of the spreads was due not to deteriorating solvency but to impairment of 
market  liquidity.  Such  provision  of  liquidity  by  central  banks,  which  in  effect  turned  central 
banks into market makers, aided the recovery of market functioning. In this regard, central 
banks played the role of MMLR. 
GLLR 
When the intermediation functions of financial institutions are conducted solely in their home 
currency,  home  central  banks  can  respond  to  liquidity  crises  through  their  LLR  function. 
However,  with  the  deepening  of  globalization,  financial  institutions  have  increasingly 
broadened  their  intermediation  activities  into  non-home  currencies,  and  as  a  result  it  has 
become increasingly difficult for central banks to put an end to liquidity crises on their own if 
financial  institutions  are  confronted  with  liquidity  issues  in  non-home  currencies.  In  such 
cases,  troubled  financial  institutions  may  not  be  able  to  obtain  liquidity  directly  from  the 
issuing central bank in a timely manner, due to operational constraints. 
During the recent financial crisis, U.S. dollar liquidity became an acute concern, especially 
among  European  financial  institutions,  which  had  expanded  their  dollar  intermediation 
activities.  Consequently,  the  ECB  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank  each  entered  into  swap 
arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve  to  obtain  dollars  and  provided  dollars  to  financial 
institutions  operating  in  the  respective  markets  (Chart  2).  After  the  collapse  of  Lehman 
Brothers,  the  scope  of  swap  arrangements  broadened,  with  other  major  central  banks, 
including the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan, establishing swap arrangements with 
the Federal Reserve. In addition, when global financial markets came under heavy strain in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
2011  on  the  back  of  the  sovereign  debt  problems  in  Europe,  six  major  central  banks 
established bilateral liquidity swap arrangements, as a contingency measure, so that liquidity 
could be provided in each jurisdiction in any of their currencies, if needed. Such a provision 
of non-home currencies under central bank cooperation can be called GLLR. 
New issues regarding the LLR function 
III. 
The  transmutation  of  the  LLR  function  of  central  banks  raises  a  set  of  new  issues.  In  the 
following, focusing on MMLR and GLLR, I will discuss (a) the relationship between monetary 
and financial stability policies, (b) the limits to liquidity provision and support by governments, 
(c)  the  financial  trilemma  and  cooperation  among  central  banks,  and  (d)  the  relationship 
between foreign reserves policy and the GLLR function. 
Relationship between monetary and financial stability policies 
When one groups the functions of central banks into monetary policy and financial stability 
policy,  MMLR  falls  under  the  heading  of  financial  stability  policy,  if  one  emphasizes  the 
aspect of mitigating systemic risk. At the same time, the function can be labeled as monetary 
policy, albeit of the non-traditional sort. Given that monetary policy works through the money 
and  capital  markets,  the  prolonged  impairment  of  market  functioning  resulting  from  the 
erosion of liquidity will negatively impact the effectiveness of monetary policy. In this regard, 
efforts  by  central  banks,  acting  as  MMLR,  to  restore  liquidity  in  the  money  and  capital 
markets can be deemed as part of monetary policy. 
Instruments deployed as MMLR by central banks are complementary. Take for example the 
ECB’s case. In the euro area, as the area’s crisis deepened beginning in 2010, increasing 
selling pressure from non-domestic investors in the sovereign bond markets of the peripheral 
countries  resulted  in  the  fragmentation  of  financial  markets  within  the  currency  area  and 
impeded bank financing (Chart 3). In response, the ECB, through its operations, in particular 
the Longer-term Refinancing Operations (LTROs), provided funds in unlimited quantities to 
the financial institutions of peripheral countries, which had difficulties in funding themselves 
in the interbank market. In the meantime, the ECB worked to alleviate the fragmentation of 
financial markets through its purchases of peripheral sovereign bonds under the SMP. In the 
peripheral  countries,  financial  institutions  increased  their  holdings  of  domestic  sovereign 
bonds and used such bonds as collateral when obtaining funds from the ECB. In this regard, 
the absence of either LTROs or SMP would have been detrimental to achieving the stability 
of the financial system and prices – or more precisely the effective transmission of monetary 
easing.  In  the  same  vein,  in  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  provided  funds  to 
primary dealers secured by agency bonds and agency mortgage-backed securities under the 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility and at the same time purchased the same securities. In this 
case, LLR and MMLR functions were complementary. 
These  examples  show  that,  in  times  of  crises,  the  relationship  between  financial  stability 
policy  and  monetary  policy  becomes  more  intertwined  than  ever.  Non-traditional  monetary 
policy measures adopted during the crisis are beneficial to the stabilization of the financial 
system. At the same time, measures adopted with a view to stabilizing the financial system 
maintain and reinforce the transmission channels of monetary policy. Given that both policies 
aim to influence the economy and prices through financial markets and financial institutions, 
not  only  are  their  effects  complementary,  but  so  are  also  their  “inputs”:  information  and 
analyses provided for one policy may be employed to increase the effectiveness of the other. 
Having said this, as we saw during the euro area crisis, when a crisis develops as a result of 
a loss of liquidity in the sovereign bond market reflecting concerns over the solvency of the 
sovereign,  other  problems  may  arise.  If  the  central  bank  attaches  greater  weight  to  the 
stability of the financial system, it has to continue purchasing government paper as MMLR 
and expand its balance sheet at the expense of increased uncertainty regarding the future 
path of prices. On the other hand, if the central bank chooses to avoid the expansion of its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
balance sheet and attaches greater weight to price stability, it may become difficult to restrain 
the decrease in the liquidity of the market for government paper, as the bank’s purchase of 
such paper is reduced. Thus, if such a tradeoff is to be avoided, trust in the sustainability of 
government finances is a prerequisite. 
Limits to liquidity provision and support by Governments 
In  a  situation  where  the  central  bank  provides  funds  to  a  “solvent  but  illiquid”  financial 
institution as LLR, the funding liquidity of that institution will be ensured. On the other hand, 
when  the  central  bank  steps  in  to  provide  liquidity  as  MMLR,  market  liquidity  will  not 
automatically improve. As a result, the central bank will face a difficult decision as to how far 
it is prepared to go. Depending on its own actions as MMLR, not only will those actions affect 
the stability of the financial system and the effectiveness of monetary policy, but they will also 
endogenously  influence  the  central  bank’s  own  financial  soundness.  If  the  central  bank’s 
actions as MMLR are able to set in motion a process of reviving market liquidity, the market 
prices  of  the  assets  that  the  central  bank  had  purchased  or  accepted  as  collateral  will 
stabilize,  thus  safeguarding  its  equity  capital.  If,  in  contrast,  the  central  bank  attempts  to 
defend its balance sheet – and hence the confidence in the central bank – and limit its capital 
exposure by holding back on liquidity provision as MMLR, market liquidity might continue to 
decline,  which  would,  in  turn  undermine  the  value  of  the  assets  that  the  central  bank  had 
purchased or accepted as collateral, eventually risking a hit to its equity capital. 
An erosion of the central bank’s financial soundness resulting in a loss of its credibility may 
compromise its ability to implement monetary policy and ultimately the effectiveness of such 
policy. In addition, losses incurred by the central bank would hurt taxpayers as transfers to 
the government are reduced and its actions as MMLR would inevitably impinge upon micro-
level resource allocation, which implies that they are quasi-fiscal measures (Chart 4). At the 
same  time,  however,  it  is  also  undesirable  to  see  the  central  bank  not  acting  sufficiently 
forcefully as MMLR in order to minimize hits on its balance sheet. In this context, when the 
Federal Reserve introduced the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility so as to restore 
liquidity in the ABS market, it was agreed that the U.S. government would shoulder losses up 
to a certain level. In the case of the Asset Purchase Programme of the Bank of England, this 
is based on the agreement that any losses will be borne by the U.K. government. In the case 
of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  when  it  decided  to  embark  on  a  program  of  purchasing  corporate 
financing  instruments  in  2009,  the  Japanese  government  noted  at  the  Monetary  Policy 
Meeting that it intended to consult with the Bank of Japan in the context of closing its books 
at the end of accounting periods if the risks had materialized. 
The financial trilemma and cooperation among central banks 
With  regard  to  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  under  deepening  globalization,  an 
important perspective is provided by Schoenmaker: the “financial trilemma” (Chart 5).2 That 
view  holds  that  it  is  impossible  to  simultaneously  achieve  financial  stability,  financial 
integration (capital mobility), and national financial policy. Let me apply this framework to the 
LLR function. 
If, against the background of deepening global financial integration, the LLR function of the 
central  bank  is  confined  to  providing  liquidity  in  the  domestic  currency  –  that  is,  its  role  is 
limited  to  national  financial  policy  –  stability  of  the  global  financial  system  cannot  be 
achieved. Under a different combination, if financial stability is to be pursued with national 
financial policy (i.e., domestic currency LLR), financial integration – globalization – must be 
curbed  through  the  regulation  of  capital  flows.  Alternatively,  in  order  to  attain  financial 
stability  under  global  financial  integration,  some  sort  of  supra-national  financial  policy  is 
                                                 
2  Dirk Schoenmaker (2011), “The Financial Trilemma,” Economics Letters, 111, 57–59. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
necessary,  including  an  international  framework  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision. 
GLLR  realized  through  central  bank  cooperation  might  be  regarded  as  an  element  of  the 
safety net in the broad context of the third combination. 
There are many proposals for an international safety net other than central banks acting as 
GLLR. For example, one suggestion calls for the establishment by national central banks of 
credit  lines  in  domestic  currencies  to  the  IMF  –  the  IMF  will  then  manage  the  money  and 
provide  liquidity  to,  and  monitor  the  policies  of,  central  banks  in  need  of  liquidity.  Another 
scheme attempts to make use of SDRs. There is also a plan to collectively manage a pool of 
national foreign exchange reserves. All of these will require an agreement on cost allocation 
before they can become a reality. 
In view of the fact that liquidity and solvency tend to deteriorate in tandem during times of 
crisis,  extending  financing  to  troubled  financial  institutions,  central  banks,  or  governments 
carries credit risk. With regard to cost allocation when such risks materialize, given that risks 
to  financial  stability  can  easily  cross  borders  and  are  therefore  mutually  dependent  in  a 
globalized financial system, there may be little disagreement on the view that some sort of 
international policy coordination is necessary. Nevertheless, reaching political agreement on 
concrete  proposals  for  cost  allocation  is  inherently  difficult.  At  the  same  time,  in  order  to 
persuade the public that the costs are appropriate, it is essential to establish mechanisms to 
ensure that any costs are minimized; in other words, it is essential that an effective system of 
regulation and supervision at a global level is put in place. The ongoing discussion over a 
banking union in the euro area is highly instructive in this regard. 
The relationship between foreign reserves policy and the GLLR function 
The figures for cross-border financing at banks in the advanced economies during the recent 
financial crisis reveal some interesting trends (Chart 6). First of all, in the second quarter of 
2008,  cross-border  liabilities  to  banks  shrank  as  transactions  declined  in  the  interbank 
market.  In  the  following  quarter  (3Q),  cross-border  liabilities  to  non-banks  fell,  probably 
reflecting the reluctance of banks to maintain credit lines in the light of the shrinking interbank 
market and also the draw-downs of deposits by non-financials. Then, in the fourth quarter, 
liabilities  to  official  monetary  authorities  dropped  off.  The  liabilities  exclude  the  U.S.  dollar 
funds  supplied  to  banks  by  central  banks  under  the  Federal  Reserve  swap  facilities,  and 
consist mainly of dollar deposits taken in from overseas monetary authorities managing their 
foreign exchange reserves. Before the crisis, monetary authorities of emerging market and 
commodity  producing  economies  had  built  up  significant  balances  of  dollar  deposits  at 
banks,  mostly  European  ones.  This  resulted  in  increasing  liabilities  to  official  monetary 
authorities at advanced economy banks, which trend was reversed as the crisis deepened. 
The  withdrawal  of  foreign  exchange  reserve  money  by  overseas  authorities  increased 
markedly, especially vis-à-vis European banks, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the 
autumn  of  2008,  and  again  towards  the  end  of  2011,  when  the  European  sovereign  crisis 
began to spill over into the financial system. Although overseas authorities did not pull the 
trigger, their actions were one element that exacerbated the disruption. It can be seen that 
the LIBOR-OIS spread, which is a signal of risk premiums in the short-term money markets, 
was closely correlated with the behavior of authorities. 
Looking at the ebb and flow of currency and deposits attributed to the management of foreign 
exchange  reserves,  authorities  of  emerging  economies  withdrew  funds  from  financial 
institutions in 2008 and the second half of 2011, whereas the behavior of the authorities of 
advanced  economies  had  not  materially  changed  (Chart  7).  The  main  reason  for  this 
behavior seems to be that, as international financial markets became increasingly unstable 
from the summer of 2007 and funds began to flow out of emerging markets, those authorities 
withdrew significant amounts of dollar deposits from advanced economy banks, where they 
had parked their foreign exchange reserves, and intervened in the foreign exchange market 
defending their currencies, selling dollars and purchasing domestic currency. The withdrawal 
by  overseas  authorities,  mainly  emerging  market  authorities,  was  massive,  amounting  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
about  $800  billion  during  2008.  A  significant  share  of  this  was  covered  by  the  dollars 
provided  under  the  central  bank  swap  arrangements,  the  outstanding  amount  of  which 
increased by about $500 billion in the corresponding period (Chart 8). 
It was perfectly rational for individual emerging market authorities to draw down their foreign 
exchange  reserves  in  order  to  insulate  their  respective  economies  from  the  turbulence  in 
international financial markets. Nevertheless, aggregated across emerging economies, such 
actions had the effect of reducing funding liquidity at banks of advanced economies. When 
this  prompted  more  deleveraging  by  the  banks,  it  resulted  in  further  capital  outflows  from 
emerging  market  economies  –  the  “fallacy  of  composition.”  In  other  words,  the  pursuit  of 
national financial policies to protect against the crisis exacerbated the instability of the entire 
financial system, which again underscores Schoenmaker’s “financial trilemma” (see previous 
Chart 5). 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
Central banks’ LLR function is necessary because the world we live in is full of uncertainties. 
While the advances in financial and information technologies of recent years have enabled 
us  to  statistically  and  numerically  describe  developments  in  financial  markets  which  were 
only understood intuitively before, these descriptions are inevitably approximations. Events 
that cannot be predicted through probabilistic methods or past experience do happen. There 
are black swans swimming around us. There is a need for backstops to prevent the whole 
system from disintegrating when a black swan appears, and the LLR function is one of them. 
In  a  financial  landscape  characterized  by  deepening  globalization,  where  market-driven 
financial  intermediation  proliferates,  it  seems  almost  inevitable  that  the  LLR  function  of 
central banks has to be broadened, if the stability of the financial system is to be maintained. 
During  the  recent  crisis,  as  I  have  noted  today,  central  banks  have  succeeded  to  some 
extent in meeting a number of challenges. Nevertheless, there are unresolved issues. While 
appropriate responses by individual central banks are no doubt important, it is essential to 
enhance the coordination and division of labor between central banks and governments as 
well  as  cooperation  among  central  banks  and  fiscal  authorities  with  a  view  to  building  an 
international safety net. 
Furthermore, the vantage point of crisis prevention is just as important as crisis response. 
One  difficult  issue  here  is  that  the  existence  of  an  LLR,  and  the  growing  role  that  central 
banks’  LLR  function  has  come  to  play,  could  encourage  excessive  risk-taking  by  market 
participants; in other words, the issue of moral hazard needs to be taken into account. In this 
regard, one must stress the role played by regulation and supervision in order to prevent the 
accumulation  of  financial  imbalances.  It  is  also  necessary  to  go  another  step  forward  and 
incorporate macroprudential perspectives in central bank actions. Given that globally relaxed 
monetary conditions are expected to be maintained for the near future, central banks must 
strive to answer how this is to be realized in the future conduct of their policy. 
We must also pay attention to the fallacy of composition in the global financial system. In the 
context of ever-growing global financial integration with free capital flows, individual central 
banks,  in  their  pursuit  of  maintaining  the  stability  of  their  domestic  economies,  have  the 
choice of either conducting an independent monetary policy or focusing on the exchange rate 
(i.e., maintaining a fixed exchange rate). Whatever choice individual central banks make for 
themselves, the effects of their policies do not necessarily add up globally to guarantee the 
stability  of  the  global  economy  (Chart  9).  For  example,  if  there  are  externalities  to 
stabilization policies, such policies are likely to be synchronized across countries, which may 
amplify  fluctuations  in  the  world  economy  and  destabilize  the  global  financial  system.  The 
policy  issues  confronting  central  banks  in  this  problem  of  “fallacy  of  composition”  are 
probably more intractable than the trilemma described by Robert Mundell. Monetary policy in 
a  globalized  economy  may  also  be  affected  by  feedback loops  in  unexpected  ways,  since 
nationally granular foreign reserves policies (accumulation of precautionary reserves against 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
capital  flight)  or  national  financial  policies  could  amplify  international  capital  flows  or 
concentrate  capital  flows  into  economies  with  the  laxest  regulations.  Such  interactions 
between Mundell’s and Schoenmaker’s trilemmas would complicate the policy conundrum. 
“This time is different” has become synonymous with our follies. Nevertheless, we should not 
fall into the trap of defeatism. There are many things we can do to reduce the chances of 
another crisis. Although the bar is high for central banks in building up ideal and foolproof 
arrangements,  we  know  that  “even  the  longest  journey  begins  with  a  single  step”  –  a 
Japanese proverb equivalent to “Rome was not built in one day.” It is important to enhance 
coordination and cooperation among central banks and governments wherever possible, and 
such steps taken, however small, will enable us to eventually reach a goal that seems to be 
far away.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
