K C Chakrabarty: Financial consumer protection 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Reserve Bank of India – Bank of France Seminar on “Consumer protection”, organized at 
the College of Agricultural Banking, Pune, 22 March 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Shri D G Kale in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Madam  Anne  Le  Lorier,  First  Deputy  Governor,  Banque  de  France,  Senior 
executives from the Banque de France, Shri G. Padmanabhan and Smt. Deepali Pant Joshi, 
Executive Directors and my other colleagues from the Reserve Bank of India, Principal and 
the  staff  at  College  of  Agricultural  Banking,  Pune,  participants  to  the  seminar,  ladies  and 
gentlemen! At the outset, I extend a warm and hearty welcome to all of you, and especially to 
our guests from France, I say “bienvenue”. I am pleased to be here this morning to flag off a 
journey  of  joint-learning,  discovery  and  exploration  by  RBI  and  BdF  on  a  subject  that  has 
engaged  the  time  and  attention  of  governments,  regulators,  policy-makers,  academics, 
NGOs, consumers, etc. for the past three years and more and which quite aptly is also the 
theme of this Seminar – “Consumer Protection”. We are privileged to have the First Deputy 
Governor, Madam Anne Le Lorier here and are sure that the seminar deliberations would be 
enriched by her presence. The seminar has been structured to cover various dimensions of 
consumer  protection  with  separate  sessions  on  building  consumer  awareness,  customer 
rights and duties, emerging regulatory approach for consumer protection (Twin Peaks), legal 
aspects of consumer protection, etc. In view of the growing use of IT in the financial sector, 
the seminar would also devote time to deliberate on consumer protection issues in retail and 
electronic  payment  systems  and  the  impact  of  information  technology  on  consumer 
protection.  We  also  have  sessions  devoted  to  the  co-operative  sector  and  to  linkages 
between  financial  inclusion  /  literacy  and  consumer  protection.  Keeping  in  mind  the 
exhaustive seminar schedule, I feel that my role here today is to set the tone for the Seminar 
and  this;  I  intend  to  do  by  presenting  a  few  random  thoughts  on  various  dimensions  of 
consumer protection. 
Introduction 
2. 
It is, indeed, deplorable that in spite of access to financial services being universally 
recognized  as  an  important  ingredient  to  the growth  and  prosperity  of  people  and  nations, 
over half the adult population in the world remains “unbanked”. In the wake of the Financial 
Crisis and widespread discontent among the poor and the vulnerable sections of the society, 
access to financial services, their governance and their development have emerged as the 
prime  objective  for  policy  makers  in  rich  and  poor  countries  alike.  We  must  appreciate, 
however, that the dimensions of consumer protection in the rich and poor countries are very 
different. While the focus in developed countries is more on protection of consumers’ rights, 
in  the  developing  world,  provision  of  access  to  financial  services  to  the  consumers  is  the 
immediate priority. Consumers are not some endangered species in need of protection and 
the issue of consumer protection is not limited to specific acts of consumption. The consumer 
as depositor, saver, and borrower is not just another link in the chain, but the central actor in 
the financial marketplace and as such, he is most impacted by the ill-effects of macro- and 
micro-economic problems that have gripped the financial sector. 
3. 
Let me raise a fundamental issue here. The financial services sector is essentially 
driven by commercial intent and the actions of service providers and the issue of consumer 
protection should be taken care of by competitive market forces. Why are we then discussing 
the issue of financial consumer protection? It is because the barriers to entry for the service 
providers  in  the  financial  sector,  especially  banking,  are  quite  stiff.  In  view  of  regulatory 
restrictions on number of market players, consumers are forced to receive services from a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
limited  set  of  service  providers.  Furthermore,  in  view  of  rampant  information  illiteracy,  the 
self-regulating market  behaviour  does  not  work especially  for the  poor  and  vulnerable  and 
hence, ensuring consumer protection becomes a regulatory obligation. 
4. 
In addressing the issue of financial consumer protection, the important thing is to be 
able  to  identify  the  section  of  consumers  who  are  most  vulnerable.  Who  are  these 
consumers  and  what  is  consumer  vulnerability?  The  Consumer  Affairs  Victoria,  a 
Government agency in the state of Victoria, Australia has explained consumer vulnerability 
as  the  “exposure  to  the  risk  of  detriment  in  consumption  due  to  the  interaction  of  market, 
product and supply characteristics and personal attributes and circumstances”. 
5. 
While this definition highlights a number of vulnerability elements that a consumer is 
confronted with, I feel that Information Vulnerability is the key challenge faced by consumers. 
The other vulnerability elements are more of an outcome of the information asymmetry that 
exists  between  the  providers  of  financial  services  and  the  consumers.  This  information 
asymmetry gives rise to opportunities for consumer exploitation and hence, creates a need 
for protecting consumers. Let me emphasize that the problem of information vulnerability has 
multiple dimensions. The most common manifestation is the lack of access to information, 
which results in sub-optimal decision making. Information vulnerability can also arise due to 
limited  ability  of  consumers  to  analyze  the  information  available  to  them.  This  problem  is 
greatly accentuated in case of the uneducated and excluded sections of the population, who 
neither possess the tools nor the skills to effectively utilize the available information. Another 
dimension  is  the  problem  of  information  overload,  wherein  the  consumer  is  unable  to 
distinguish  the  “message”  from  the  “noise”,  thereby  prompting  him/her  to  ignore  the  entire 
information and end up in a state of what I call, “analysis-paralysis”. 
Addressing causes of consumer vulnerability 
6. 
The possible solution to insulate consumers from vulnerabilities is by ensuring that 
the  financial  service  providers  treat  their  customers  fairly.  The  financial  institutions  must 
understand  what  fair  and  equitable  treatment  of  customers  means  and  then  align  their 
business practices to achieve the desired outcomes. The fair treatment to customers is seen 
as being synonymous to consumer satisfaction and following a consumer-centric approach. 
Simply  put,  fair  treatment  of  customers  involves  ensuring  that  the  products  and  services 
offered  by  financial  institutions  are  suitable  for  the  customers  and  appropriate  to  their  risk 
profile,  pricing  is  transparent  and  non-discriminatory  and  that  the  service  is  delivered  in  a 
speedy,  safe  and  secure  environment.  For  instance,  while  banks  are  justified  in  levying 
reasonable  charges  for  services  provided,  are  they  justified  in  levying  charges  without 
providing  any  specific  service  (e.g.  customers  not  conducting  any  transaction  in  the 
account)? An attendant aspect of consumer protection in the financial services industry is the 
provision of efficient grievance redressal machinery which should be “quick” and “just”. I will 
return to this aspect a little later. 
7. 
A documented Treating Customers Fairly (TCF) policy seeks to regulate the design 
and marketing of financial products and services, the system of information dissemination, 
facility  for  after-sales  support  and  the  grievance  redressal  procedure.  Effectiveness  of  the 
TCF framework in organizations would depend upon the extent to which it is integrated into 
the organization’s DNA. At the individual level, effective implementation of TCF requires that 
the  TCF  goals  are  embedded  into  the  employee  performance  measurement  and  rewards 
systems. 
8. 
Ensuring fair treatment to consumers would also mean that behavioural and cultural 
changes would have to be brought about in organizations. This cannot be achieved merely 
by  ring-fencing  consumer  protection  within  the  compliance  function.  Instead,  the  entire 
institution – right from the Board to the frontline managers – have to be responsive to this 
objective. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Need for a credible and effective regulatory regime 
9. 
The  presence  of  a  credible  and  effective  regulatory  regime  acts  as  a  source  of 
confidence and comfort in the financial system. This helps in attracting more participants to 
the market place, thereby making the financial system inclusive and efficient. The experience 
from the global financial crisis is that self-regulation, often, does not work. The presence of a 
strong,  intrusive  and  hands-on  regulator/  supervisor  gives  the  confidence  that  markets  will 
operate as per sound principles and would be free from unfair and unethical practices. This 
trust forms the basis of functioning of the entire financial system and any dent in this trust 
can  have  a  significant  destabilizing  influence.  The  series  of  measures  initiated  by  global 
standard setting bodies and individual regulators in the aftermath of the financial crisis clearly 
underscore 
imperative  of  having  a  credible  and  effective  regulatory  regime. 
Consequently,  the  effort  is  on  to  leverage  these  regulatory  initiatives  to  rebuild  trust  and 
confidence in the global financial system. It is now globally accepted that in order to earn the 
trust of the consumers/ market participants, it is important that the regulatory system is seen 
and perceived to be fair and transparent. 
the 
Twin peaks approach to financial sector regulation and supervision 
10. 
The pre-crisis financial sector regulatory and supervisory architecture across various 
jurisdictions placed overarching emphasis on the financial strength and soundness of banks. 
Commentators  generally  presumed  that  there  were  strong  synergies  between  prudential 
regulation and consumer protection and, therefore, an integrated supervisor could take care 
of both objectives. However, the crisis highlighted that the integrated supervisors are more 
likely  to  give  precedence  to  safety  and  soundness  mandates,  as  these  are  closely 
intertwined with financial stability, rather than focusing on consumer protection issues. The 
Twin  Peaks  Approach  helps  in  resolving  this  conflict.  The  Market  Conduct  Regulator  is 
focused  on  ensuring  that  the  institutions  design  the  products  and  services  in  line  with  the 
customers’  needs,  maintain  integrity  of  the  markets  and  conduct  their  businesses  keeping 
the primacy of the customers’ interests in the forefront. 
Product design, financial innovation and consumer protection 
11. 
One  of  the  reasons  for  the  perpetuation  of  the  global  financial  crisis  was  that 
financial  innovation  resulted  in  creation  of  products  that  were  not  suited  to  consumer 
requirements.  Also,  these  products  had  risk  profiles  that  were  not  fully  understood  by 
consumers or financial market participants. The crisis was an instance of financial innovation 
growing  beyond  consumer  expectations  and  hence,  contributing  to  financial  system 
vulnerability. Let me emphasize that the basis of all product design and financial innovation 
should be consumer need. Products and processes should be created only to meet specific 
expectations  of  consumers.  The  ability  to  orient  the  products  and  services  to  consumer 
expectations would determine the success and sustainability of organizations and markets. 
12. 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  very  often  financial  engineering  creates  complex  products 
out  of  inherently  simple  products. This  is  very  common  in  the  world  of structured financial 
derivatives,  where  the  payoff  profile  and  risks  inherent  in  the  structure  are  significantly 
different  from  those  of  its  underlying  constituents. When  such  product  design  is  combined 
with aggressive sales practices led by perverse compensation systems, it leads to mis-selling 
to  gullible  consumers.  The  end  result  is  a  slew  of  consumer  disputes,  resulting  in  loss  of 
reputation for the financial service providers. 
13. 
attributes for financial products to be classified as “simple” viz. 
• 
The  Sergeant  Review  of  Simple  Financial  Products  in  the  UK  has  identified  four 
The products should help consumers benchmark and compare with other products 
in the market. 
The product must be understandable and accessible to the mass market. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 The product must not be tailored to meet individual needs, but provide consumers 
with  confidence  that  the  product  will  meet  their  basic  needs  and  offer  them  a  fair 
deal; and 
The product will be a viable commercial proposition for the provider. 
• 
14. 
Financial  sector  regulators/  supervisors  and  consumer  protection  bodies  need  to 
keep a close watch on product design and financial innovation in order to ensure that these 
are  oriented  towards  consumer  needs  and  expectations.  Market  intelligence  mechanism 
should  also  focus  on  identifying  products  which  could,  potentially,  expose  consumers  to 
unintended  outcomes.  Individual  financial  service  providers  should  also  have  internal 
frameworks for vetting new product offerings so as to ensure that they are in alignment with 
regulatory requirements and consumer expectations. In fact, an assessment of the financial 
products  and  services  for  their  reasonableness  and  suitability  to  customers  is  going  to  be 
one of the main planks for the Financial Conduct regulators under the Twin Peaks structure. 
How to ensure that the consumer voice is heard 
15. 
Though consumers are the core around which the entire financial services business 
revolves,  the  consumers’  voice  is  the  feeblest  and,  very  often,  not  heard.  This  inability  to 
understand  the  consumer  and  his  needs  is  the  genesis  of  all  consumer  protection  issues. 
There are a number of ways in which the consumer voice in the financial regulatory system 
could be strengthened, not just in the interests of the consumer, but also in the interests of 
the sustainability of the financial system. 
• 
We have to encourage a culture of openness towards consumers, their aspirations 
and expectations. Our products and processes should have the inherent flexibility to 
adjust  to  changing  consumer  needs.  Successful  consumer-focused  organizations 
inculcate the ability to constantly learn and improve, both at the individual level and 
at the organizational level. Success in the mission of customer service depends on 
the  flexibility  demonstrated  by  service  providers  in  constantly  re-learning  and  re-
orienting  their  business  operations  based  on  evolving  market  dynamics  and 
customer expectations. 
As  I  briefly  touched  upon  earlier,  having  an  effective  communication  strategy  is 
important, including for regulators, to regain the confidence of consumers and the 
financial system. Importantly, we need to leverage the power of the media, including 
the  newer  channels,  to  get  across  our  message  of  consumer  awareness  and 
protection.  The  media  needs  to  be  seen  as  an  ally  in  generating  consumer 
awareness and in implementing an effective framework for consumer protection. 
The  institutions  must  have  their  ears  to  the  ground  so  as  to  get  a  feel  and 
understanding of evolving trends and practices. For commercial institutions, having 
this  ability  lends  them  a  competitive  edge  over  others  as  they  can  evolve  their 
product offerings in line with changing trends. For regulators, this is a vital input in 
anticipating build-up of risks and taking proactive measures. 
  The holy trinity – financial inclusion, financial education and consumer protection 
16. 
Post  the  global  crisis,  financial  sector  regulators  and  policy  makers  have  been 
focusing  on  the  objective  of  “financial  stability”  to  bring  back  sanity  and  normalcy  to  the 
global financial system. That financial inclusion, financial education and consumer protection, 
form  the  three  essential  pillars  on  which  financial  stability  rests,  has  been  universally 
endorsed  and  accepted.  Banking  the  unbanked,  providing  access  to  financial  services, 
educating the consumers and creating a sense of safety in their minds are necessary for the 
governments and regulators alike, both in India and elsewhere. With nearly 4.5 billion people 
on this planet owning a mobile phone, there is a very strong likelihood of financial inclusion 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial  activity 
limits  market  exchanges, 
being pushed through the mobile phone and mobile payments medium. This is likely to be 
more  so  in  the  developing  countries  where  mobile  phone  penetration  is  8  –  10  times  the 
penetration of the basic bank account. The lack of formal financial services infrastructure and 
widespread 
increases  risks  and  curtails 
opportunities to save. Without access to formal financial services, the households are forced 
to  rely  on  informal  sources  that  are  high  costs.  The  protection,  safety  and  security  of  this 
important  class  of  customers  cannot  be  wished  away.  In  this  context,  the  regulators  and 
governments  can  play  an  important  role  by  providing  an  efficient  infrastructure  for  mobile 
payments.  This  framework  might  include  regulation  of  low  –  risk  money  transfer  services, 
enabling non-bank organizations to facilitate low-risk / low value transactions and wherever 
possible, implementing regulations at the system level (without interfering with the customer 
interface). On the part of banks, rather than treating mobile payments as a threat, they need 
to  see  it  as  an  opportunity  to  access  otherwise  unprofitable  low-income  segments  market. 
Banks  will  need  strong  partners  and  a  strong  platform  to  succeed.  In  India  also,  we  have 
been  proactively  pursuing  the  three  objectives  and  are  even  exploring  the  possibility  of 
enshrining  financial  inclusion  in  the  Code  of  Banking  Practices  (in  India  referred  to  as  the 
Code of Commitments). 
17. 
In terms of financial education, while the thrust would continue to be on the basics in 
terms of products, services, risk profile and suitability, we need to think ahead and look at the 
scenario where self – service banking is on the rise. The evolution of ATMs in India is only 
the beginning of the self-service menu. We are yet to witness the full range of products and 
services  where  the  customers  will  be  helping  themselves  (and  of  course  the  banks)  with 
gadgets  and  apps  that  they  may  not  be  very  familiar  or  comfortable  with.  So,  welcome 
customer education and hand holding! 
Retail distribution of financial products 
The  retail  distribution  of  financial  products  and  services  was  subject  to  review  in 
18. 
Australia and United Kingdom alike and the issues thrown up by these reviews have great 
lessons for consumer protection. The retail distribution, as is now being carried out, may not 
necessarily  be  in  the  best  interest  of  the  consumers. There  are  certain  issues,  particularly 
from the perspective of incentive structures for sale of financial products, monitoring of AML 
requirements, risks of mis-selling, inadequate understanding of risks by the sales persons, 
etc. that make it important that financial service providers and regulators to have a close look 
at the practices followed in retail distribution of financial products. 
19. 
As regards regulating the activities of the financial advisers, it is very important that 
the  people  with  small  means  get  proper  advise  at  the  right  time  and  at  least  cost.  The 
regulators,  perhaps,  have  to  take  this  responsibility  upon  themselves  with  a  view  to 
empowering the consumers and helping them protect their life savings. 
Regulation and market failure 
20. 
There have been a number of essays, writings and chronicles on the global financial 
crises of 2008. Nobel Laureate Dr. Joseph Stiglitz also extensively covered these events in 
various articles which have been compiled and published as a book under the title “Price of 
Inequality”. In his essay on “Regulation and Market Failure”, Dr. Stiglitz says and I quote “It 
is  clear  that  our  regulatory  structure  failed.  Evidently,  there  was  market  failure,  but 
there was also government failure. The primary reason for the government failure was 
the  belief  that  markets  do  not  fail,  that  unfettered  markets  would  lead  to  efficient 
outcomes,  and  that  government  intervention  would  simply  gum  up  the  works. 
Regulators  who  did  not  believe  in  regulation  were  appointed,  with  the  inevitable 
outcome that they did not do a very good job of regulating”. This has, perhaps, been 
one of the most significant lessons from the financial crisis and is reflected in the fact that 
there  is  a  global  clamour  for  tightening  regulation  and  supervision  of  markets  and  market 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
practices.  The  evolving  regulatory  and  supervisory  initiatives  are  expected  to  have  a 
significant positive impact on protection of consumer interests. 
Compensation schemes and redress mechanism 
21. 
The  financial  services  industry  must  have  well  articulated  and  clearly  defined 
compensation  schemes  that  are  easy  to  access,  adequate  in  quantum  and  effective  in 
implementation.  The  roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  consumers  and  service  providers  in 
different  situations  need  to  be  spelt  out  up-front.  I  always  believe  that  to  err  is  human  but 
from an institutions’ point of view, to confess is divine. If an institution is in the wrong, why 
should it wait for the consumer to approach it for compensation? Would it not be righteous if 
the  bank  or  financial  institution  on  its  own  initiates  actions  to  undo  the  wrong  inflicted  on 
customers,  some  of  whom  may  have  not  even  complained?  Imagine  the  impact  such  an 
approach would have on the faith and confidence consumers have on the financial system. 
22. 
Another  important  aspect  is  the  existence  of  a  robust,  responsive  and  reliable 
grievances redress mechanism in the banking / financial services industry, something I have 
alluded to earlier. The credibility of the banks’ redressal systems needs to be reinforced by 
constant follow up by the regulator. The very fact that often bank customers find it safer and 
simpler  to  get  their  grievances  resolved  by  routing  them  through  the  regulators  or  the 
Ombudsman Offices is a reflection on the quality and effectiveness of redress mechanism 
put in place by banks. We have a long way to go to improve the credibility of the system. 
People  will  access  the  redress  mechanism  only  when  they  are  assured  of  an  impartial 
outcome.  It  requires  a  lot  of  courage,  persistence  and  knowledge  to  pursue  and follow  up 
grievances with banks / financial institutions. It will be in our own interest to usher in a culture 
where  people  are  encouraged  to  complain  if  anything  is  amiss.  The  felt  attributes  of 
consumer protection are a result of the customer care policies that banks promise to have in 
place. But, many a times, the same are not implemented at the ground level mainly due to 
ignorance  and  lack  of  sensitivity  on  the  part  of  the  frontline  managers.  Skill  building  and 
knowledge  enhancement  of  bank  staff  is  necessary,  if  we  wish  to  have  a  pro-active 
consumer protection policy in the banking industry. 
Conclusion 
23. 
As  a  part  of  my  inaugural  speech  I  have  tried  to  set  the  tone  of  the  Seminar,  by 
touching upon different facets and attributes of consumer protection, drawing from the global 
as well as the Indian experience. I am tempted to refer here to the comments made by the 
World  Bank  –  IMF  team  in  its  report  on  the  Financial  Sector  Assessment  for  India  (2012) 
about  consumer  protection:  “India  has  comprehensive  policies  and  compliance 
mechanisms for the protection of banking consumers, and is ahead of most countries 
in this area. Going forward, including nonbanking financial companies (NBFCs) in the 
mandates  of  the  Banking  Codes  and  Standards  Body  of  India  and  of  the  Banking 
Ombudsman  System  (BOS),  ensuring  consumer  protection  of  the  entire  financial 
system,  and  devising  a  strategic  consumer  awareness  program,  will  further 
strengthen the system”. I accept this feedback with all the humility at my command, and I 
am fully aware that much more needs to be done to improve the consumers’ lot. Even in a 
free  market  economy  with  competition  as  the  necessary  pre-condition,  it  is  not  necessary 
that the consumer is treated as the king. But what we must strive to bring about is a culture 
where the consumer is treated as a good human being by focusing on the values of fairness, 
transparency, and non-discrimination. Going forward, customer-centricity  will be a must for 
the  regulators  and  the  regulated  entities  alike  in  the  wider  interest  of  financial  stability,  an 
essential cornerstone of which is consumer protection. 
24. 
I hope that this joint seminar between the Banque de France and the Reserve Bank 
of  India  lays  down  the  foundation  of  a  long  and  fruitful  partnership  between  the  two 
institutions and that such seminars become a regular event. Considering the impressive list 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of experts from both institutions who are scheduled to speak over the course of the next two 
days, especially Madam First Deputy Governor, I am sure that the Seminar will prove to be 
very  useful  in  sharing  of  knowledge  and  experience  among  the  participants.  I  wish  the 
Seminar all success and hope that our guests from the Banque de France have a pleasant 
stay  in  India  and  do  find  time  to  get  a  feel  of  the  rich  cultural  cocktail  that  this  country 
presents. 
Ladies and gentlemen thank you for your patience. Merci. 
Selected references 
• 
    Cartwright, Peter: The Vulnerable Consumer of Financial Services: Law, Policy and 
Regulation 
Kopke, Kerry : A fair bit of confusion: Treating Customers Fairly in South Africa 
http://www.bowman.co.za/News-Blog/Blog/treating-customers-fairly-in-south-africa 
Lumpkin,  Stephen:  Consumer  Protection  and  Financial  Innovation:  A  few  basic 
propositions. 
Sergeant Review of Simple Financial Products – Interim Report 
http://www.eacg.co.uk/sergeant-review-of-simple-financial-products-interim-report 
Farnish, Christine: The Silent Majority 
http://www.icaew.com/en/technical/financial-services/regulation-guidance/the-silent-
majority 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
