Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Uganda’s financial sector at 50 – 
achievements, challenges and expectations for the future 
Remarks  by  Mr  Emmanuel  Tumusiime-Mutebile,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the 
annual general meeting of the Uganda Institute of Banking and Financial Services, Kampala, 
14 June 2013. 
 The Board Chairperson of the Uganda Institute of Banking and Financial Services Members 
of the Board of Directors of the Institute, 
Members of the Institute present, 
CEOs of Financial Institutions and all Bankers Present, 
Invited Guests in your respective capacities, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  address  this  AGM  of  the  Uganda  Institute  of  Banking  and 
Financial  Services.  I  will  begin  by  thanking  the  Board  and  members  of  the  Institute  for 
arranging  the  AGM  and  for  their  choice  of  theme:  “Uganda’s  financial  sector  at  50; 
Achievements, Challenges and Expectations for the future” which is clearly very pertinent for 
everyone involved in the sector. 
In keeping with this theme, I want to share with you my thoughts on what I believe are the 
most pressing challenges facing the financial services industry in Uganda today. These are 
challenges  which  must  be  confronted  if  the  industry  is  to  contribute  fully  to  our  efforts  to 
transform the structure of the economy and move it towards middle income status. I would 
like  to  highlight  three  issues  in  particular;  the  need  to  reduce  interest  rate  spreads  in  the 
banking industry; strengthening the financing of small and medium scale enterprises and the 
diversification of our financial sector. 
The  regional  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program,  which  was  conducted  in  May  of  this 
year, showed that bank interest rate spreads in Uganda are the highest in the East African 
region after Burundi and among the highest in the world. The interest rate spread in Uganda 
in  2012  was  15  percent,  compared  to  less  than  12  percent  in  both  Kenya  and  Tanzania. 
Spreads  are  high  mainly  because  of  heavy  overheard  costs  and  high  profits  earned  by 
banks. Overheads and profits before tax accounted for 42 percent and 28 percent of banks’ 
gross  income  respectively  in  the  12  months  ending  in  March  of  this  year.  Unless  we  can 
reduce spreads, it will be very difficult to bring bank lending rates down to levels which are 
more affordable for borrowers. 
To reduce interest rate spreads it will be necessary for banks to cut overheads as a share of 
their income, by becoming more efficient. The banking industry is very profitable in Uganda: 
the  average  return  on  assets  earned  over  the  last  12  months  was  3.6  percent.  But  banks 
should also recognize that high lending rates, although they enable large profits to be made 
in the short run, may damage the long run prospects for the banking industry if they stifle the 
growth of bank lending to the private sector. 
Since  the  turn  of  the  millennium,  bank  intermediation  has  grown  dramatically  in  Uganda. 
Credit to the private sector has risen from 6 percent of GDP in 2000 to 14 percent of GDP 
today. This is an important achievement which demonstrates that the banking industry has 
strengthened its contribution to the broader economy. Nevertheless, there are still important 
gaps in the credit market which will have to be closed. In particular, many small and medium 
scale enterprises still struggle to obtain the finance they need, in the forms which are most 
appropriate,  to  support  their  business  activities  and  investment  requirements.  Part  of  the 
reason for this lies with the borrowers themselves, especially with regard to poor business 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
management. But banks also have a contribution to make in enhancing access to credit by 
small  and  medium  scale  enterprises;  for  example  by  strengthening  their  capacities  for 
evaluating the business prospects and creditworthiness of loan applicants and by developing 
new ways of securing loans to business enterprises. 
Although the financial sector in Uganda has grown strongly since the turn of the millennium, 
less progress has been made in terms of diversification. The growth of the non bank financial 
sector, with the exception of NSSF, has been rather disappointing. Our insurance industry, 
for example, is only a fifth of the size of its counterpart in Kenya in terms of assets. As our 
economy  expands  and  becomes  more  sophisticated,  I  believe  that  demand  for  non  bank 
financial  products,  such as  life  insurance,  will  increase.  Consequently,  unless  the  financial 
sector can diversify its product range to meet this demand, customers in Uganda might be 
forced to look to firms elsewhere in the region to purchase financial services. 
I  hope  that  the  forthcoming  amendments  to  the  Financial  Institutions  Act,  which  will  allow 
banks  to  undertake  bancassurance  in  partnership  with  insurance  companies  and  to  offer 
Islamic financial products to their customers, together with the liberalization of the pensions 
industry, will help to stimulate the diversification of our financial sector. 
With  these  remarks,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Management  and  Board  of  Directors  of  the 
Uganda Institute of Banking and Financial Services for giving me an opportunity to speak at 
this year’s AGM. I also want to wish all of the stakeholders in the financial services industry 
the best of luck for the next fifty years. We have together overcome enormous challenges in 
the first fifty years of independence, especially in the 1970s and 1980s when the economy 
collapsed. The industry hung on and survived during the economic turmoil of those years and 
then rose, Phoenix like, to recover in the 1990s. With the same spirit of enterprise, hard work 
and  cooperation  we  can  help  to  ensure  that  the  next  half  century  is  one  of  prosperity, 
sustainable growth and structural transformation for the Ugandan economy. 
Thank you very much for listening. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
