Peter Pang: Promoting and maintaining financial stability in Asia through 
cross-border co-operation 
Remarks by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at 
the Hong Kong Monetary Authority – Bank of Thailand Joint Press Conference on the launch 
of US dollar – Thai Baht PvP link, Hong Kong, 15 July 2013. 
 Deputy Governor, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Bank of Thailand for co-hosting this press conference with the Hong 
Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA). It is my great pleasure to join Deputy Governor Mr. Krirk 
Vanikkul  to  announce  the  implementation  of  the  payment-versus-payment  (PvP)  link 
between the Thai Baht Real Time Gross Settlement (RTGS) system in Thailand and the US 
dollar RTGS system in Hong Kong. 
This PvP link sets another excellent example of central bank cooperation to provide solutions 
to enhance regional financial stability and to meet market needs. In particular, it will make a 
significant contribution to addressing the current principal risk in the USD-Thai Baht foreign 
exchange (FX) transactions that arises from buyers of USD paying Thai Baht in Asian time 
ahead of receiving US dollar in US time the next day. For technical people in the payment 
field, this is often referred to as the “Herstatt” risk which brought down the Herstatt Bank in 
Germany in 1974. The new PvP link will eliminate this principal risk by enabling the Thai Baht 
delivered in Thailand and the US dollar delivered in Hong Kong to be done at the same time 
in a coordinated manner within the Asian time zone. 
The  linkage  of  the  two  RTGS  systems  will  enhance  integration  of  the  financial  markets  in 
Thailand and Hong Kong, and provide a win-win solution that will bring significant benefits to 
the banks on both sides. For the banks in Thailand, the USD RTGS system in Hong Kong, 
with its low cost and operating hours that are fully synchronized with its Thai counterpart, will 
provide a highly flexible and cost-effective solution for them to manage the settlement risk of 
their  US  dollar  FX  transactions.  There  are  more  than  90  participating  banks  in  the  USD 
RTGS  system  in  Hong  Kong,  of  which  18  have  significant  presence  in  Thailand.  This 
extensive  network  will  provide  ample  USD  liquidity  and  easily  accessible  correspondent 
banking service to the Thai banks for the PvP service. For banks in Hong Kong, the link will 
provide them with new correspondent banking opportunities of serving Thai banks in settling 
their  US  dollar  FX  transactions  in  Hong  Kong.  Over  time,  this  new  relationship  will  also 
create opportunities for commercial cooperation on other fronts. 
The implementation of this PvP link comes at an opportune time in view of the need to better 
manage  the  increased  settlement  risk  due  to  the  rapid  growth  in  FX  transactions  and  to 
assist financial institutions, in particular banks, to comply with the standards recommended 
by the international standard setting bodies. 
Driving the rapid growth in FX activities of the regional currencies has been Asia’s expanding 
share in global trade and investment flows. In the past decade, trade between Asia and the 
rest of the world had grown tremendously. Asian economies’ export of goods and services, 
as a percentage of the world total, increased significantly from 29% in 2002 to 38% in 2012, 
amounting  to  US$8.5  trillion.  Asian  economies’  total  imports  also  increased  significantly  in 
the same period from 32% to 47%. Meanwhile, the investment flows between Asia and other 
regions  have  also  intensified.  Supported  by  the  robust  trade  performance  and  increasing 
capital flows, activities in the regional FX market have increased significantly. According to 
the  latest  triennial  survey  on  global  FX  market  activity  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements (BIS), the average daily turnover in FX transactions involving Asian currencies 
increased by 172% from US$354 billion equivalent in 2001 to US$962 billion equivalent in 
2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Against  this  backdrop  of  rapid  growth  in  global  FX  activities,  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking  Supervision  issued  an  updated  guidance  on  management  of  FX  risk  in  February 
2013.  The  Committee  cautioned  that  many  banks  underestimate  their  principal  risk  by  not 
taking into account the duration of exposure between trade execution and final settlement, 
which may create significant concerns during times of market stress. A key recommendation 
of  the  Committee  is  that  banks  should  reduce  its  principal  risk  as  much  as  practicable  by 
settling FX transactions through the use of financial market infrastructures that provide PvP 
arrangements.  Banking supervisors  worldwide  are  incorporating  the  updated guidance  into 
their  supervisory  requirements.  For  example,  banking  supervisors  in  Hong  Kong  are  now 
bringing  their  supervisory  manuals  in  line  with  the  guidance,  and  have  reminded  banks  to 
take actions to address any gaps and deficiencies. The decision of the Bank of Thailand to 
implement  the  PvP  link  will  certainly  facilitate  banks  in  Thailand  to  meet  the  Basel 
Committee’s recommended standards in good time. 
The new PvP link will be the third cross-border PvP link for Hong Kong’s USD RTGS system. 
The  successful  experience  of  the  established  links  with  Malaysia  and  Indonesia  clearly 
indicates that the arrangement can be fully integrated into the operation of the partner RTGS 
systems,  tailored  to  meet  local  requirements  and  made  easily  accessible  by  local  users. 
Since  2010  when  both  links  have  been  in  operation,  the  combined  average  daily  turnover 
has almost doubled, equivalent to an annual growth rate of close to 20%. Last month, the 
daily  turnover  generated  by  the  two  existing  PvP  links  reached  a  new  record  of 
US$4.1 billion. Given the proven track record of the two existing links, I am confident that the 
new link with the Thai Baht RTGS system will similarly be able to deliver reliable service to 
the banks in Thailand. 
As  always,  the  HKMA  stands ready  to  explore with  our  Asian  neighbours  opportunities for 
further  collaboration  in  the  area  of  financial  infrastructure  to  promote  regional  financial 
integration and to help our markets cope with the challenges posed by the rapidly changing 
landscape  of  the  global  financial  system.  The  implementation  of  this  new  PvP  link 
demonstrates that both the Bank of Thailand and the HKMA fully recognise the merits and 
importance  of  cross-border  co-operation  to  the  promotion  and  maintenance  of  financial 
stability  in  the  region.  I  believe  that  the  solid  partnership  developed  out  of  this  project  will 
open up new horizons for further cooperation between the Bank of Thailand and the HKMA 
in the future. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
