Grant Spencer: Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s perspective on housing 
Speech  by  Mr  Grant  Spencer,  Deputy  Governor  and  Head  of  Financial  Stability  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  to  Employers  and  Manufacturers  Association,  Auckland, 
8 April 2013. 
 The housing market is once again highly topical. When house prices move we get interested, 
and for good reason: the home is usually the single largest asset that a family owns; and a 
mortgage  is  often  the  single  largest  financial  transaction  undertaken  by  a  household.  The 
housing market is also a major driver of the macro-economy and of the financial sector. As 
such, housing market developments are very relevant for the Reserve Bank’s two key policy 
objectives: price stability and financial stability. 
Today I will discuss current developments in the New Zealand housing market, the risks that 
are emerging, and the policy responses that may be appropriate to address these risks. 
The importance of housing 
How  important  is  housing  to  the  typical  New  Zealand  household?  And  how  important  is 
housing to New Zealand’s economy and financial sector?  
Table 1: Household assets and liabilities for Australia and New Zealand 
(as at December 2012) 
Note: Consumer durables are excluded from household assets. For New Zealand, net worth deducts 
student  loans.  The  share  of  housing  assets  is  somewhat  overstated  because  the  data  excludes 
assets such as equity in unincorporated and unlisted businesses. See Briggs (2012) for more details 
on these excluded assets.1  
Source: RBA, RBNZ calculations/estimates. 
 The most recent data on household balance sheets is shown in Table 1. Two observations 
are key: first, the value of housing is a large share of total household assets in New Zealand 
compared to Australia (and the United States) where financial assets play a much greater 
role in saving for retirement. Consequently, house price movements in New Zealand have a 
relatively  large  impact  on  household  confidence  and  spending  compared  to  many  other 
developed  countries  where  the  state  of  the  financial  markets  plays  a  larger  role  in  driving 
consumer confidence and spending.  
Second,  debt  is  not  evenly  distributed  across  households.  On  average,  gearing  of  New 
Zealand  households  is relatively  low,  with  housing  debt  equal  to around  27  percent  of  the 
value of the housing stock. And overall mortgage interest payments only account for around 
                                                 
1   http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/research/bulletin/2012_2016/2012Dec75_4briggs.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
9 percent of total household disposable income in New Zealand. However, some households 
have very high levels of debt, and interest payments consume a large portion of their income. 
A first-home buyer borrowing 90 percent of the value of a house could have debt servicing 
costs of 35 percent of disposable income, even at today’s low interest rates. 
Add to this the fact that mortgage credit is by far the biggest asset class of the New Zealand 
banking system, making up just over half of total banking system lending, and it becomes 
clear that housing is a significant source of risk to both the household sector itself, and the 
New Zealand banking system. 
Housing cycles in New Zealand can have important macroeconomic effects. Figure 1 shows 
long-term house price cycles against GDP growth and the exchange rate. 
Housing has often been associated with real activity cycles, and is even more correlated with 
financial cycles, as represented by changes in credit demand and the exchange rate. 
Figure 1: House price inflation, GDP growth and the exchange rate 
  Source: Property IQ, Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ. 
Note: House price inflation and GDP growth are annual averages.  
In  the  housing  boom  of  2003–07,  for  example,  housing  had  a  significant  impact  on  the 
growth  of  aggregate  demand  and  GDP  through  a  number  of  channels:  wealth  and 
confidence effects where people felt richer, making them willing to spend and borrow more; 
direct  effects  on  investment  as  higher  house  prices  improved  the  return  to  residential 
construction;  and  financial  accelerator  effects  where  increased  collateral  values  supported 
increased spending through credit expansion. The latter channel has created a strong link 
between  house  prices  and  the  financial  cycle.  During  the  boom  that  link  was  accentuated 
with the emergence of widespread housing investment activity, bringing with it rapid credit 
growth,  a  high  volume  of  offshore  borrowing  and  upward  pressure  on  the  NZD  exchange 
rate.  
Consequently,  housing  can  be  highly  relevant  for  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Monetary  and 
Financial Stability policies. 
Monetary policy responds to house price pressures when these are seen as a clear driver of 
inflationary pressure through stronger domestic demand. This can occur when wealth effects 
push consumption ahead of income growth and households borrow against housing capital 
gains. That process was prevalent in 2003–07 and a key reason why monetary policy leaned 
against the housing boom – with mortgage rates being pushed up to just under 11 percent by 
2008.  It  is  also  why  asset  prices  are  explicitly  mentioned  in  the  new  Policy  Targets 
Agreement between the Governor and Minister of Finance, even though house prices do not 
enter the Consumer Price Index (CPI) directly. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On the financial stability side of Reserve Bank policy, the dominance of residential property 
as  the  banking  system’s  single  largest  sectoral  exposure  underpins  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
prudential focus on housing lending risk. We pay considerable attention to the housing risk 
models  used  to  determine  banks’  capital  requirements  and  have  generally  adopted  a 
conservative  approach,  with  higher  risk  weights  relative  to  international  norms.  Consistent 
with this approach, we are currently reviewing the scale of housing risk weights in relation to 
loan-to-value ratios. 
We are also focussing on the additional housing-related systemic risk that might arise from 
credit  cycles  in  our  new  macro-prudential  policy  regime  that  is  currently  out  for  public 
consultation. While as yet untested in New Zealand, such policies are deployed in Canada, 
Switzerland,  Sweden  and  Hong  Kong,  for  example.  Macro-prudential  policies  draw  on 
existing prudential tools to limit financial system risk arising from excessive credit and asset 
price  movements.  Practically,  this  means  that  additional  prudential  requirements  may  be 
applied for a period during credit up-cycles and then removed during down-cycles. The tools 
operate directly to improve the resilience of bank balance sheets and indirectly to moderate 
the extremes of the credit cycle. 
Sources of pressure in today’s housing market 
We  are  again  facing  a  strong  housing  market  with  median  house  prices  having  risen  by 
8 percent over the past year. So far, the nature of the current market is different to the boom 
of  2003–07.  As  seen  in  Figure  2,  the  current  house  price  pressures  are  concentrated  in 
Auckland  and  Christchurch.  House  price  inflation  in  the  rest  of  the  country  is  less 
pronounced,  around  4  percent  over  the  past  12  months,  although  there  is  considerable 
variation among districts. 
Figure 2: House price inflation by region 
(annual percent change) 
Source: REINZ, RBNZ estimates. 
 Supply constraints in Canterbury and Auckland and pent up demand from first-home buyers 
are  important  factors.  There  is  an  element  of  investor  demand  and  of  new  foreign  buyers 
entering the market in Auckland, but these factors – at least as yet – are not as influential as 
they were back in 2003–07. 
The  relevance  of  housing  supply  constraints  has  been  discussed  in  earlier  Reserve 
Bank/Treasury  reports  and,  most  recently,  in  the  Productivity  Commission’s  report  on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
housing affordability.2 Contributing to the current national housing shortage has been the low 
level  of  residential  construction  activity  in  recent  years.  From  2007  to  2011,  residential 
investment as a share of GDP fell by 2-and-a-half percentage points.  
In Christchurch, the general shortage of accommodation is reflected in median house prices 
up 12 percent, rents up 16 percent, and the cost of building up 10 percent over the year to 
December 2012. These pressures are likely to persist for some time despite the insurance 
industry’s plans to finance 10,000 new houses over the next three to four years. 
In Auckland the situation is more complex – and more uncertain. The Auckland Council puts 
the current shortfall at around 20,000 to 30,000 homes, with an additional 13,000 per year 
needed going forward. However, the current rate of building is hardly making a dent in that, 
with  residential  building  consents  for  new  dwellings  in  Auckland  currently  running  at  just 
4900 per annum. The Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment estimates that land 
ready for subdivision in Auckland has the capacity for 14,500 new homes. But, while zoning 
and utilities infrastructure may be complete for those subdivisions, only 2000 sites are ready 
to  build  on  –  with  utilities  actually  connected  and  consents  approved.  These  numbers 
reinforce the complexity of supply constraints noted by the Productivity Commission. It is not 
just  a  zoning  or  Metropolitan  Urban  Limit  issue.  The  cost  and  the  duration  of  subdivision 
development and house construction are also major constraints, particularly for the supply of 
“affordable” homes to first-home buyers. 
On  the  demand  side  of  the  housing  equation,  the  two  key  drivers  historically  have  been 
migration flows and interest rates. Permanent and long-term migration inflows have not been 
exceptional  in  the  post-global  financial  crisis  (GFC)  period,  averaging  7000  per  annum, 
compared  to  18,000  per  annum  on  average  during  the  2003–07  boom  period  (Figure  3). 
Internal migration to Auckland from Christchurch and other areas could be contributing to the 
Auckland housing shortage. However, while our data on internal migration flows is sketchy, 
this factor does not appear to be a strong driver of the current Auckland market. 
Figure 3: House prices, net migration, and mortgage rates 
  Source: Property IQ, Statistics New Zealand, RBNZ. 
The  role  of  mortgage  interest  rates  in  current  market  pressures  is  much  clearer.  Current 
“best in market” rates are around 4.8–5.0 percent. These are down half a percent over the 
past year due to lower funding costs on international markets. They are the lowest mortgage 
rates on offer since the 1960s. While there are good reasons for this – low CPI inflation and 
very low international interest rates – the cost of credit is now only slightly above average 
                                                 
2   http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monpol/about/2452274.pdfhttp://www.productivity.govt.nz/sites/default/files/Final 
percent20Housing percent20Affordability percent20Report_0_0.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rental yields of 4.5 percent per year. Added to this, credit has become easier to obtain, with 
banks competing aggressively to gain or protect their mortgage market shares.  
An increasing proportion of new mortgage lending is going out at high loan-to-value (LVR) 
ratios:  now  around  30  percent  of  new  lending  is  at  LVRs  over  80  percent,  compared  to 
around 25 percent of lending in late 2011-early 2012. Annual growth in housing credit is just 
over 4 percent and has been running at higher rates over recent months.  
Easy credit conditions, combined with the upward trend in house prices, are strengthening 
the  incentive  for  renters  to  become  first-home  buyers  and  for  existing  owner-occupiers  to 
upgrade. With new construction still at a slow pace, this excess housing demand increases 
house price pressures.  
Movements in rents tend to support this interpretation. Compared to Christchurch, average 
rents  in  Auckland  have  been  growing  at  a  more  moderate  annual  rate  of  4  to  5  percent, 
although  still  somewhat  stronger  than  for  the  rest  of  the  country  (Figure  4).  This  suggests 
that the physical housing shortage in Auckland is less acute than in Christchurch and that 
credit factors have been an important driver of escalating house prices in Auckland.  
Figure 4: Inflation in rents by region 
(annual average percent change) 
Source: Department of Building and Housing 
 Reserve Bank policy perspective 
As mentioned earlier, the Reserve Bank views housing from a monetary policy perspective 
and from a financial stability perspective. Considering monetary policy first, the key question 
for us is whether the housing market buoyancy will lead to wider inflationary pressures. An 
important factor in this regard is whether we begin to see a reversal of the trend increase in 
the household savings rate that has occurred over recent years. This general deleveraging 
process, where many households have reduced debt and sold up investment properties, has 
moderated household demand in recent years and reduced the official interest rate settings 
needed to keep inflation pressures in check. 
Our  projections  in  the March  Monetary  Policy  Statement  suggest  that  household  spending 
will generally pick up in line with stronger incomes. We assume that the boost to spending 
arising from perceived increases in housing wealth will not be pronounced and that housing 
market activity does not encourage a rise in speculative investment that could extend house 
price pressures to the rest of the country. So while new home owners will continue to take on 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
new debt, we assume that existing home owners will continue to conserve or increase the 
equity in their properties, rather than seeking to “gear up” existing housing assets. 
There is a risk of course that our assumptions turn out to be wrong: that the housing market 
continues  to  gather  momentum  and  that  households  return  to  their  pre-GFC  ways  of 
borrowing  and  spending  in  excess  of  incomes.  The  recent  fourth  quarter  GDP  numbers, 
which  showed  expenditure  GDP  growth  of  1.4  percent  and  private  consumption  growth  of 
1.6 percent over the quarter, remind us that this alternative outlook for household behaviour 
is a real risk.  
Turning  to  financial  policy,  we  have  been  encouraged  by  the  general  improving  trend  in 
household  (and  business)  balance  sheets  since  the  GFC.  However,  the  improvement  in 
household  debt  ratios  has  been  gradual  relative  to  the  rapid  escalation  of  debt  during  the 
pre-GFC boom (Figure 5) 
Figure 5: Household debt to household disposable income 
Source: RBNZ. 
 The chart shows a very recent uptick in household debt to household disposable income. If 
that uptick becomes a reversal of the recent downward trend, then household balance sheets 
will become increasingly stretched, making them vulnerable to future economic shocks, such 
as increases in interest rates or unemployment. 
The  trend  in  the  banking  system  since  the  GFC  has  also  been  one  of  deleveraging  and 
general risk reduction. Problem loans are reduced and stronger capital and liquidity buffers 
are  in  place.  This  trend  has  been a  key  theme  of  our  Financial  Stability  Reports in  recent 
years.  
But  if  households  become  more  stretched  financially,  then  the  banks’  balance  sheets  will 
also become more risky. That is the prospect we now face as a result of debt levels rising 
faster than incomes and the increased proportion of high LVR lending that has been evident 
since early 2012.  
We have concerns that the current escalation of house prices is increasing risk in the New 
Zealand  financial  system,  by  increasing  both  the  probability  and  potential  effect  of  a 
significant  downward  house  price  adjustment,  that  could  result  from  a  future  economic  or 
financial shock. Unlike many other countries, New Zealand did not experience a major house 
price  correction  during  the  GFC  and  the  median  house  price  is  now  12  percent  above  its 
end-2007  level.  This  has  left  us  with  house  prices  that  are  already  high  relative  to 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
international  norms.  For  example,  in  a  recent  international  study  of  housing  affordability, 
median  New  Zealand  house  prices  (relative  to  disposable  incomes)  were  the  third  highest 
amongst  comparable  countries.3  The  more  that  house  prices  continue  to  overshoot  their 
long-run  sustainable  levels,  the  greater  the  prospect  of  an  eventual  significant  downward 
correction.  We  have  seen  in  those  countries  most  affected  by  the  GFC  the  significant 
damage that can result from sharp declines in house prices, both in terms of financial system 
losses and the economic stresses placed on borrowers. The impact of such an adjustment 
could be worsened by existing economic headwinds in the form of an overvalued exchange 
rate, drought affected agriculture and the government’s significant fiscal consolidation. 
We  are  not  the  only  ones  concerned.  This  view  of  increasing  housing  risk  in  the  New 
Zealand  financial  system  is  shared  by  the  International  Monetary  Fund  in  their  recent 
“Article IV” assessment4 and was voiced during the recent OECD mission to New Zealand. It 
is also shared by Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s in their most recent risk assessments of 
the New Zealand banking system. 
What can be done to reduce the imbalances? 
An  important  medium-  to  long-term  policy  response  is  to  work  on  alleviating  the  housing 
supply constraints, particularly in Auckland. That means freeing up land for subdivisions and 
also  reducing  the  time  and  cost  barriers  faced  by  developers.  As  recommended  by  the 
Productivity Commission, there is also a need to promote/facilitate productivity improvements 
in the building sector itself, in order to bring unit costs more into line with international norms. 
The Government is working on measures to address many of these supply constraints, but 
we know it could take many years to correct the supply/demand imbalances through supply 
measures alone.5 For example, recent Motu research on a regional housing model for New 
Zealand concludes:  
“The over-arching conclusion across all simulations is that housing markets are 
very slow to adjust to disequilibria, such that exogenous shocks have very long 
lasting effects on prices and the housing stock.” (Grimes et al, 2013)6 
In  the  short-to  medium-term,  we  want  to  ensure  that  the  banking  system  is  adequately 
capitalised for the risks associated with mortgage lending and also avoid demand pressures 
that could exacerbate a house price overshoot that is in no-one’s best interest. A continued 
escalation  of  house  prices  would  frustrate  first-home  buyers;  it  would  risk  drawing  more 
investors into the market which would reinforce the price overshoot; it would likely reverse 
the recent improvement of household debt relative to income; and it would add a further layer 
of risk to the banking system. 
From a Reserve Bank monetary policy perspective, if the house price and credit expansion 
begin to fuel excessive consumption spending and inflationary pressures, a monetary policy 
response  would  become  more  likely.  The  Reserve  Bank’s  flat  interest  rate  outlook  in  our 
recent Monetary Policy Statement would need to be revisited.  
In the financial policy area we are currently consulting on a potential increase in bank capital 
requirements  against  high  LVR  lending.  We  also  expect  to  soon  have  in  place  a  macro-
prudential policy framework that could be used to increase resilience in the banking system 
against a future housing downturn while having a moderating influence on credit expansion 
                                                 
3   http://www.demographia.com/dhi.pdf 
4   http://www.imf.org/external/np/ms/2013/031813b.htm 
5   http://www.treasury.govt.nz/publications/informationreleases/housing/pdfs/ha-202689.pdf 
6   http://motu-www.motu.org.nz/wpapers/13_02.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
to  the  housing  sector.7  Macro-prudential  policy  is  primarily  aimed  at  enhancing  financial 
stability, but it may also contribute to achieving monetary policy objectives. It is not seen as a 
replacement for monetary policy and it is not expected to be as powerful a tool as monetary 
policy. Macro-prudential policy could nevertheless have a stabilising impact on credit supply 
decisions by the banks as well as credit demand decisions by households. 
Conclusion 
I  have  talked  about  the  importance  of  housing  to  New  Zealanders,  certainly  from  an 
economic  and  financial  perspective,  and  also  from  an  emotional  perspective.  This  often 
makes  housing  a  major  force  behind  economic  and  financial  cycles,  and  a  very  relevant 
factor in the Reserve Bank’s monetary and financial policy considerations. 
Current  housing  market  pressures  are  centred  in  Christchurch  and  Auckland  where 
significant  supply  shortages  are  apparent,  for  quite  different  reasons.  In  Christchurch  the 
imbalance is being addressed through a major four to six year rebuilding programme, funded 
largely by Government and the insurance sector.  
In Auckland the housing imbalance is more complex and uncertain. There are clearly supply 
constraints and high costs of development that need to be worked on over the medium- to 
long-term.  However,  there  are  also  escalating  demand  pressures  in  the  Auckland  market, 
particularly arising from low interest rates and an easier supply of credit. It is important that 
these  pressures  moderate  in  order  to  avoid  a  destabilising  overshooting  of  house  prices 
while additional supply is gradually brought on stream.  
New Zealand needs to avoid another housing boom, which could potentially be more costly 
than the last, particularly at a time when the economy faces headwinds from an overvalued 
exchange rate, drought and a substantial programme of fiscal consolidation. 
                                                 
7   http://www.rbnz.govt.nz/finstab/macro-prudential/5166933.pdf 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
