Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 February 2013. 
 Today, on 27 February 2013, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved the monthly Monetary Policy Report. Based on the latest monetary and economic 
developments in Albania, and following discussions on their future outlook, the Supervisory 
Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, at 3.75%. 
The Supervisory Council deems that the monetary conditions are adequate to comply with 
the  medium-term  inflation  target,  providing  the  necessary  monetary  stimulus  to  boost 
domestic demand. 
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Annual inflation was 2.7% in January. Higher food prices were the major contributor, about 
75%, to  inflation formation.  In this  regard,  unprocessed foods,  which  recorded  double-digit 
growth rates, contributed the most to this formation. The prices of the other consumer basket 
items fluctuated narrowly, maintaining their low contribution to inflation. 
In  the  macroeconomic  aspect,  inflation  was  formed  by  the  presence  of  spare  production 
capacities, while supply-side shocks were absent. The slow growth of production costs and 
low profit margin for businesses were reflected in low core and headline inflation rates. 
In  addition,  the  stable  exchange  rate,  anchored  inflation  expectations  and  low  monetary 
expansion contributed to maintaining price stability. 
The  Albanian  economy  is  estimated  to  have  grown  below  its  potential  in  2012.  Recent 
economic and monetary data confirm, overall, our earlier assessment for the presence of a 
negative  output  gap.  On  the  demand  side,  economic  growth  was  driven  mainly  by  net 
exports growth, whereas domestic demand is estimated to have provided low contribution. 
Data  on  trade  in  goods  during  the  fourth  quarter  show  that  exports  increased  12%  and 
imports fell 9.5%, year on year. Subsequently, the nominal trade deficit narrowed 20.1%, in 
annual  terms,  boosting  aggregate  demand  in  this  quarter.  On  its  side,  domestic  demand 
remains weak, due to consumers and businesses hesitation to consume and invest. 
Lending  standards  continue  to  be  tight  as  banks  are  more  prudent  about  lending.  Budget 
expenditure fell about 0.3%, year on year, owing mainly to contracting capital expenditure. 
Collected  revenue  was  also  downward,  eventually  reducing  the  budget  deficit  by  1.2% 
compared  to  2011.  However,  the  fiscal  policy  was  stimulating  during  the  fourth  quarter, 
materialising  in  35%  expansion  of  the  budget  deficit  for  this  period.  Though  at  low  rates, 
public expenditure is expected to have positive contribution to economic activity in 2013. 
The  monetary  policy  eased  further  in  January,  through  the  key  interest  rate  cut  to  the 
record  low  of  3.75%.  The  easing  was  transmitted  into  the  interbank  market  interest  rates 
during February, while it is expected to be transmitted into other segments of the financial 
market. 
Low government demand for borrowing has exercised downward pressures on government 
securities yield. 
Overall, monetary and financial developments point to low inflationary pressures and liquidity 
risk.  Monetary  indicators  continued  to  slow  down  in  December,  as  well.  Annual  money 
supply  growth  fell  to  5.0%.  Developments  in  the  external  sector  were  the  main  drivers  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
money growth, whereas domestic demand for money was low. The relatively low demand of 
the  government  for  borrowing  and  higher  demand  of  households  to  invest  in  public  debt 
securities reflected in reduced funding of the budget deficit by the banking system. Similarly, 
credit to the economy recorded low annual growth rates both for businesses and households. 
The domestic currency prevailed over foreign currencies in the credit market, hence enabling 
better transmission of the monetary policy signals to the economy. 
Recent information reconfirms our projections for future economic developments. 
In the period ahead, economic growth will be driven by economic developments in the global 
setting  and  in  our  trading  partners,  the  fiscal  policy  nature  and  enhanced  productivity.  In 
2013,  economic  activity  is  expected  to  remain  weak  and  will  continue  to  be  driven  by  net 
exports  growth,  although  at  lower  rates  from  2012.  The  forecast  is  based  on  a 
non-encouraging  economic  outlook  for  our  trading  partners.  It  also  reflects  the  low 
diversification  of  Albanian  exports.  Domestic  demand  is  expected  to  remain  at  low  levels, 
reflecting the sluggish private consumption and investments and the positive contribution of 
the public sector. Taking into account the available information, the Bank of Albania deems 
that,  with  90%  probability,  the  consumer  price  inflation  is  expected  to  range  between  
0.8–3.8%, after 12 months. 
This assessment takes into account our projections for the continued negative output gap, 
low pressures from global market prices, and anchored expectations of economic agents. 
Concluding,  the  Bank  of  Albania  expects  the  inflationary  pressures  to  remain  weak  in  the 
medium run. 
 At  the  end  of  the  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  keep  the  key 
interest  rate  unchanged  at  3.75%.  The  Bank  of  Albania  will  continue  to  implement  a 
stimulating  monetary  policy  for  as  long  as  inflationary  pressures  will  remain  weak. 
Stimulating  monetary  conditions  support  aggregate  demand  growth  and  full  utilisation  of 
production capacities, creating, therefore, the premises for complying with the medium-term 
inflation target.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
