Anand Sinha: Approach to regulation and supervision in the post crisis 
world 
Keynote address by Mr Anand Sinha, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
program  “Supervisory  effectiveness  in  the  post  crisis  world”,  organized  by  the  Centre  for 
Advanced Financial Research and Learning (CAFRAL), Mumbai, 4 February 2013. 
 Inputs  provided  by  Ajay  Kumar  Choudhary,  Ms.  Anupam  Sonal  Rajnish  Kumar  and  Jayakumar  Yarasi  are 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms.  Usha  Thorat,  Director,  Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and  Learning 
(CAFRAL),  Mr.  Aristobulo  de  Juan,  a  veteran  supervisor  and  an  international  consultant, 
Mr. Pierre  Yves  Thoraval,  former  Deputy  Secretary  General  of  the  French  Banking 
Commission,  Mr.  Chris  Cardoza,  Program  Director  at  the  Toronto  Centre,  Ms.  Shyamala 
Gopinath, former Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India and all the esteemed delegates of 
the conference. It is my privilege to address you all in this conference today. 
The Conference is quite aptly themed “Supervisory Effectiveness in the Post Crisis World”. 
The  policy  makers  and  supervisors  are  trying  to  grapple  with  the  havoc  the  crisis  has 
wreaked.  So  much  ink  has  been  spilt  and  so  many  reams  of  papers  have  been  used  in 
describing the what, why and how of the crisis. New regulations have replaced old ones and 
new  theories  have  come  to the forefront  debunking the  old  and  crisis-battered  beliefs.  But 
one question still remains. Have we really come out of the crisis and entered the post-crisis 
world? Is the crisis now a thing of the past and is it firmly behind us? It does not appear to be 
so. If one looks at the latest IMF update on World Economic Outlook (WEO-Jan 2013), the 
growth rates have been revised downwards, though marginally, to 3.5% for 2013 and 4.1% 
for 2014 and it specifically notes that the Euro area continues to pose a large downside risk 
to the world economy. 
If  we  look  at  the  history  of  financial  crises,  they  have  never  been  far  away.  The  earliest 
recorded crisis dates back to 13th century when there was a default by England. We have 
had so many crises in the more recent past such as, Great Depression of 1929, stock market 
crash of 1987, Asian crisis of 1997, banking crises in several countries in 80s and 90s and 
the dot com bubble of 2000, etc., the latest being the global financial crisis of 2007 and the 
very recent and continuing sovereign debt crisis. However, all these crises (other than the 
global financial crisis) have been of smaller magnitude in comparison to the great depression 
of 1929. The global financial crisis of 2007, certainly, is of a very large magnitude and has 
had a devastating impact on the global economy. As it is said of peace that it is an interlude 
between two wars, perhaps, looking at the regularity of crises in the recent times, one would 
say, a calm period is an interlude between two crises. Such has been the history of financial 
crises in the past. 
How was the global financial crisis different? 
If the financial history is checkered with crises, then why is it that the current global financial 
crisis has assumed such a gigantic proportion in terms of coverage and impact? The very 
famous  book  “This  time  is  Different  –  Eight  centuries  of  financial  folly”,  suggests  that  all 
crises have, more or less, similar origins and only that we do not take cognizance of them. 
However, looking at the significantly large and unparalleled dimension of the current crisis, 
one will have to assume that there must have been other serious contributory factors. In fact, 
if  you  recollect,  the  crisis  originated  in  a  small  segment  of  the  US  financial  system  –  the 
subprime  market  –  and  many  were  generally  sanguine  and  had  even  dismissed  the  crisis 
initially as a small and localized one which did not have enough potential to spread to, and 
impact other segments. However, the crisis soon exploded into a major crisis impacting not 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
just the US financial system but the entire globe. Therefore, one could surely agree that there 
were very many fundamental weaknesses in the system which exacerbated the crisis. 
Let  me  give  you  some  details  regarding  the  magnitude  of  the  crisis.  I  am  quoting  from 
Andrew  Sheng’s  book  “From  Asian  to  Global  Financial  Crisis”  where  he  refers  to  a  text 
message which made rounds in December 2008. “1 year ago RBS paid USD 100 billion for 
ABN AMRO. Today that same amount would buy: Citibank USD 22.5 billion, Morgan Stanley 
USD 10.5 billion, Goldman Sachs USD 21 billion, Merrill Lynch USD 12.3 billion, Deutsche 
Bank USD 13 billion, Barclays USD 12.7 billion, and still have USD 8 billion change … with 
which you would be able to pick up GM, Ford, Chrysler and the Honda F1 Team.”. This was 
the dimension of the crisis which shows how the valuation of banks and financial institutions 
plunged at the height of the crisis. 
Economies  go  through  business  cycles,  i.e.  upturns  and  downturns,  or  booms  and 
recessions, and come out rather quickly but when they are hit with financial crises, they take 
longer  to  come  out.  History  suggests  that  recessions  following  financial  crises  are  bigger 
than  normal  recessions  with  output  losses  being  2–3  times  larger  and  recovery  from 
recession following financial crises being slower, as we are witnessing now. The core reason 
for this is the leverage that gets built up in the run-up to the crisis which acts as a drag on the 
economy and slows down the recovery. It is for this reason that, despite massive quantitative 
easing by central banks and fiscal stimuli by sovereigns, the global economy is yet to recover 
significantly from the global crisis. 
The crisis has impacted the world in a major way, both financially and non-financially. While 
the financial impact is recorded in terms of huge output losses, increase in unemployment 
and erosion in wealth, the non-financial impact is no less. Crisis has shaken the very roots of 
long held beliefs and convictions. Just when we thought we knew all the answers, the crisis 
posed  new  questions  forcing  us  to  find  out  new  answers.  That  reminds  me  of  physics,  in 
which  I  graduated  and  which  remains  my  favourite  subject.  During  the  turn  of  the  last 
century, physicists came to the conclusion that they had found out all that they needed to 
know about the laws of nature. All that remained was to apply these rules to find out answers 
to some of the questions. Then there were two major experiments which changed the entire 
scenario  resulting  in  the  development  of  radically  different  theories  to  explain  the 
phenomena.  Similar  things  have  happened  in  the  financial  world  –  may  not  be  of  similar 
magnitude – that have shaken the intellectual foundations and left us groping for answers to 
new questions. There has been a paradigm shift in the thinking on regulatory philosophy and 
approach,  especially  in  areas  of  systemic  risk  and  efficient  market  hypothesis;  on  several 
aspects of macroeconomic thought, for example, role of monetary policy in ensuring financial 
stability, incorporation of banking and financial system dynamics in macroeconomic models 
and  realising  that  macroeconomic  stability  is  a  necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition  for 
ensuring financial stability. 
A lot of work was initiated in the aftermath of the crisis to address risks that were identified to 
have  caused  or  exacerbated  the  crisis.  The  approach  to  regulation  and  supervision  has 
changed  in  a  significant  way  drawing  lessons  from  the  crisis.  Before  I  expound  on  the 
revamped approach to regulation and supervision in the post crisis world, let me step back a 
little  and  briefly  touch  upon  the  genesis  of  crisis.  This  not  only  helps  in  putting  things  in 
perspective, but as we deliberate on the reasons underlying the crisis, the solutions would 
automatically flow. 
The genesis 
Several  factors  were  responsible  for  the  crisis.  However,  at  the  core  of  the  crisis  was  the 
inadequate understanding and measurement of risks and funding of assets with shorter term 
liabilities on a large scale. There was aggressive easing of monetary policy in the US after 
the bursting of dotcom bubble leading to very low interest rates. The long term yields in the 
US  were  also  depressed  on  the  back  of  global  imbalances  as  the  huge  reserves  built  by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
countries,  specifically  China,  found  their  way  back  to  the  US  treasuries.  An  era  of  Great 
Moderation  followed:  there  was  steady  growth  in  advanced  economies  and  accelerated 
growth  in  emerging market  economies  along  with  low  and  stable  inflation. This  resulted  in 
policy makers believing that they had found the holy grail of high growth with low inflation. 
Underlying this belief was the notion that markets had become mature and sophisticated and 
had the wherewithal to distribute risks and provide efficient hedging instruments to those who 
needed.  Low  interest  rates  triggered  a  massive  search  for  yield  which  led  to  financial 
innovation  that  was  socially  suboptimal.  The  innovation  was  aided  by  the  progress  in 
quantitative  finance  and  modelling  and  technological  developments.  While  we  cannot 
disregard the utility of financial models – they are certainly very useful – overreliance on such 
models proved to be disastrous. The financial models, in contrast with the models used in 
physics, are not governed by immutable laws of nature but by the human behaviour – the 
herd  mentality,  irrational  exuberance  and  pessimism,  greed  and  fear,  which  cannot  be 
modelled with any accuracy. Hence, these limitations need to be factored in while using the 
models. 
Low  interest  rates  prior  to  the  crisis  enabled  build  up  of  leverage.  In  fact,  if  we  observe 
closely, leverage happens to be the major contributing factor to most crises. Let me explain 
in brief. When times are good, there is a feel good factor, there is plenty of liquidity which is 
cheap, the asset values and collateral values are high and the banking system losses are 
low,  leading  to  lower  provisioning  and  lower  capital  requirements.  These  factors  lead  to 
higher demand for credit from the households and corporates. From banks’ perspective, as 
the provisioning and capital requirements are lower, they have surplus capital and raising of 
capital is also easy. This leads to a greater incentive to lend and expand the balance sheet. 
Therefore, the increased credit demand from the borrowers and the increased incentive to 
banks to lend, results in the build up of leverage. When the cycle turns, pessimism sets in, 
losses increase, value of assets and collaterals diminish and liquidity dries up and becomes 
costlier. These erode the financial health of banks, households and corporates who become 
risk averse. The demand for credit by households and corporates as also the supply of credit 
by banks slows down. Banks also deleverage to preserve their capital. All these exacerbate 
the downturn. Leverage is an amplifier in as much as it amplifies the profits during upturn and 
exacerbates losses during the downturn: higher the leverage, more severe is the downturn. 
This amplification is also called procyclicality. Prior to the crisis, the regulatory policies did 
not  effectively  address 
risks  arising  out  of  procyclicality  and 
interconnectedness. 
Lack of appreciation for systemic risks and the absence of suitable regulatory framework to 
address such risks was one of the major reasons for exacerbation of the crisis. The thinking 
prevailing  prior  to  the  crisis  was  that  strong  individual  institutions  make  a  strong  system, 
which  did  not  turn  out  to  be  true.  The  crisis  brought  home  the  fact  that  even  when  the 
institutions are individually strong, when each one of them tries to pursue and preserve their 
own self interest, their actions could lead to instability of the system. 
The credit risk transfer mechanism was also highly flawed. Securitisation, which  was once 
considered to be a very useful financial innovation in enabling efficient transfer of risk – and I 
still think it is a very useful tool – was not handled properly as perverse incentives took over. 
There were also serious gaps in the regulatory and supervisory framework and philosophy. 
Let me quickly go through some of the regulatory and supervisory gaps that contributed to 
the crisis. Most importantly, the capital maintained by banks, was inadequate both in terms of 
quantity  as  well  as  quality.  Liquidity  buffers  were  also  insufficient  as  financial  institutions 
operated on the assumption that markets would continue to provide liquidity at all times and 
hence they financed their long term assets with much shorter term liabilities. The outstanding 
Repurchase  Agreements  (repos)  tripled  between  2001  and  2007  with  particularly  rapid 
growth  of  overnight  repos.  The  financial  firms  were  also  excessively  leveraged,  with  the 
leverage  for  many  commercial  and  investment  banks  significantly  going  up  from  2003 
onwards. High leverage could be built up by financial institutions while being compliant with 
the  systemic 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
to 
the 
the  capital  adequacy  requirement,  pointing  to  serious  deficiencies  in  risk  measurement 
methodologies  and  models.  For  example,  two  large  Swiss  banks,  which  were  among  the 
best capitalised, also came under stress during the crisis. 
Lack of transparency in the OTC markets was another major factor which led to build up of 
risks in the system. Information about the position building was not available even with the 
regulators,  leave  alone  the  counterparties.  The  insurance  giant,  AIG  wrote  huge  credit 
protection (to the tune of USD 400 billion) collecting huge premium in return, believing that it 
would not be required to settle claims of protection buyers. The quantum of protection sold 
by AIG was not known to the market participants due to which they  went on buying credit 
protection from AIG. When the system came under severe stress and AIG was required to 
post higher margins, it found itself in deep trouble and had to be eventually bailed out by the 
Federal Reserve. 
Burgeoning  under/unregulated  shadow  banking  system  added 
forces  which 
exacerbated  the  crisis.  In  the  run  up  to  the  crisis,  there  was  rapid  growth  in  the  shadow 
banking system. In the US, at the peak of credit boom, financing from this sector was much 
larger than that from the regulated banks. In many advanced economies including the US, 
the  shadow  banking  system  is  still  larger  than  the  regular  banking  system.  The  hands-off 
approach to the shadow banking system from a regulatory perspective was based on a few 
assumptions and beliefs. One, the touching faith in market discipline and self regulation, – It 
was  believed  that  shadow  banks  would  be  constrained  by  market  discipline  i.e.  discipline 
imposed by banks and other market participants, and also by their own self regulation. Two, 
it was believed that only banks were important from the financial stability perspective as they 
held  deposits  and  were at  the  core  of  the  payment  and  settlement  systems. Three,  it  was 
assumed that if banks’ exposure to shadow banking system was regulated, it was easy to 
contain  risks  in  the  shadow  banking  system.  Four,  it  was  also  believed  that  regulation  of 
shadow banking system would be very costly, reduce innovation and impede risk transfer. 
The  compensation  structure  in  financial  institutions  was  also  seriously  flawed  as  it 
encouraged perverse incentives and, therefore, was another major reason attributed for the 
outbreak  of  the  crisis.  Participants  were  paid  large  bonuses  on  the  basis  of  short  term 
performance  even  though  the  embedded  risks  could  be  high  which  would  crystallise  later. 
The compensation structure encouraged private sharing of profits while socializing the losses 
by taxing the exchequer. 
The  entire  regulatory  approach  in  the  pre-crisis  period  was  veering  towards  light  touch 
regulation. There was a touching faith in the efficient market hypothesis which made many 
believe that markets are self correcting. This belief ignored the well known herd and irrational 
behaviour of the financial markets. If we look at any risk distribution, there are always fat tails 
which are on account of irrationality. The negative fat tails are due to excessive pessimism 
while the positive fat tails are due to exuberance. 
As far as supervision is concerned, it had its own share of flaws in the pre-crisis period. The 
role of supervision is to ask questions, when things are going very well. When the financial 
system  or  individual  entities  are  not  doing  well,  supervisors  will  obviously  intervene.  But 
supervisors  need  to  be  proactive  and  ask  questions  when  the  going  is  good.  It  must  be 
confessed, however, that asking questions during good times is difficult as you will be seen 
as  a  spoilsport.  It  is  a  difficult  task.  Supervisors  have  unenviable  job  on  hand.  With 
commercial  banks  having  some  smart  people,  regulators  need  to  be  smarter  to  question 
them and that is where the issues of skills and technology come in. In the run-up to the crisis, 
it  was  observed  that  the  supervisors  were  staying  on  the  sidelines  and  not  intruding 
sufficiently into the affairs of participants. They were not being proactive in dealing with the 
emerging  risks  and  in  adapting  to  changing  environment.  There  was  a  lack  of  capacity  to 
identify, or to act on identification. For example, supervisors could not see the risks building 
up  when  banks  started  dealing  in  very  complex  products  or  when  banks  started  relying 
excessively  on  short  term  funding  sources  for  their  operations.  Supervision  was  not 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
comprehensive  and  even  when  supervisors  found  some  anomaly,  it  was  not  taken  to 
conclusion. 
The effect of crisis on India was, however, relatively muted, as there was no direct exposure 
to sub-prime assets and the indirect exposure to failed institutions and stressed assets was 
very  small.  The  Indian  growth  was  largely  driven  from  within  based  on  domestic  demand 
and, more importantly, some of the features of macroprudential regulations were already in 
place.  We  have  been  alert  to  dealing  with  systemic  risks,  both  procyclicality  and 
interconnectedness,  at  least  4–5  years  prior to the global  crisis. We  had  also  put  in  place 
robust OTC  market  infrastructure  and central  counterparty  mechanisms. We  were  lucky  to 
have put in place some of the regulations, based on our own perception, that have now been 
designed  internationally.  The  approach  to  these  issues  today  is,  however,  much  more 
structured. 
Review of regulatory framework 
After giving you a background of what caused the crisis, let me now turn to the reforms in 
regulation  put  in  place globally,  drawing  lessons from the crisis.  Every  weakness  and flaw 
that  I  have  mentioned  has  been  tried  to  be  corrected.  The  Basel  III  regulations  stipulate 
enhanced  quality  and  quantity  of  capital.  The  component  of  tier  I  capital  as  part  of  total 
capital has been raised to 6% (out of total 8% CRAR), requirement of equity capital has been 
raised  very  substantially  to  7  %  (including  2.5%  of  capital  conservation  buffer)  from  the 
earlier  2%.  There  was  no  concept  of  capital  conservation  buffer  earlier,  though  there  is 
something similar in pillar II of Basel II. Pillar II deals with two kinds of risks: (a) the pillar I 
risks which are not covered under pillar I such as concentration risk and interest rate risk in 
the  banking  book,  and  (b)  the  impact  of  a  stress  situation  on  banks  and  estimation  of 
additional capital required for banks to withstand the stress. 
During the crisis, it was observed that the losses in the trading books of banks were several 
times the losses as computed by the VaR models. As regards the counter party credit risk, it 
was found that most losses arose from the mark to market losses due to deterioration in the 
credit  quality  of  the  counterparties  rather  than  due  to  outright  default.  The  Basel  III 
regulations have, therefore, expanded the risk coverage, specially, in the trading book and of 
risks relating to counterparties. 
As regards liquidity, a global framework has been built for the first time in several years, both 
in terms of the requirement for banks to have adequate high quality liquid assets to withstand 
a  stress  situation  over  a  30  day  horizon  and  also  from  the  perspective  of  avoiding  asset 
liability mismatch by requiring banks to fund long term assets with stable funds. 
In my view, the most important lesson from the crisis is the recognition of systemic risks and 
the development of a framework to deal with that. I would touch upon these issues briefly, as 
there is a full session on systemic risk during the course of your conference. Systemic risk 
has 
little  earlier,  and 
interconnectedness.  One  interesting  feature  of  interconnectedness  which  is  different  from 
knockout effect (impact from one interconnected institution to others in the system), is that it 
can  play  simultaneously,  or  near  simultaneously  on  a  large  number  of  institutions  through 
common exposures to an asset or an asset class. For example, if multiple institutions have 
exposure to an asset and if one of the institutions begins a fire sale of the asset, say, due to 
a  temporary  liquidity  stress,  the  consequent  fall  in  the  asset  prices  would  force  other 
participants, who are otherwise liquid and solvent, to sell that asset to avoid mark to market 
losses. This would lead to further erosion in the value of that asset resulting in further losses 
and more fire sales. Therefore, the rational actions of individual institutions to preserve their 
self interest could turn out to be a collectively irrational action. 
As  regards  procyclicality,  since  banks  face  large  losses  which  crystallize  during  downturn, 
they have to make larger provisions and provide additional capital. This would constrain their 
lending activities which in turn would have an adverse impact on economic recovery. Basel 
two  dimensions  –  procyclicality 
I  have  explained  a 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
committee has, therefore, prescribed building up of countercyclical capital buffers. Banks are 
expected to build capital buffers during the upturn which could be used during downturn so 
as to maintain their lending activities which would cushion the impact of a downturn on the 
economy. 
Basel Committee has suggested “credit to GDP” ratio as a metric to calibrate countercyclical 
capital buffers. The model assumes that deviation from the trend is cyclical and hence should 
trigger build up (or release) of buffers. While this model could work for advanced economies, 
it may not work effectively for emerging market economies like India since, in our context, the 
deviation in the “credit to GDP” ratio may not only be cyclical but may have large structural 
components.  EMEs  have  large segments  of  population  which  are  still  financially  excluded. 
Financial inclusion initiatives which are being taken in these economies would bring a large 
segment of such populace into formal banking fold, which would result in a sharp jump in the 
credit to GDP ratio, which could be misinterpreted as cyclical deviation. Further, especially in 
India,  we  had  taken  a  big  leap  in  transforming  from  an  agrarian  economy  to  a  service 
oriented economy. With the current initiatives to invigorate manufacturing and infrastructure 
sectors which are highly credit intensive and are employment generating, the credit to GDP 
ratio would show a sharp spurt, not necessarily indicating any cyclical trend. We have been, 
therefore, following a sectoral approach, as a countercyclical policy, modulating risk weights 
and provisioning requirements for certain sensitive sectors which show signs of overheating. 
Our approach has been fairly successful, though not equally well in all the sectors that we 
targeted. While the Basel Committee has not considered the sectoral approach, the Bank of 
England has considered it as one of the tools in formulation of its macroprudential policies. In 
the  foreseeable  future,  the  Reserve  Bank,  in  all  likelihood,  would  continue  to  follow  the 
sectoral  approach  for  dealing  with  procyclicality.  This  deviation  from  the  prescribed 
methodology  would  be  permissible  within  the  Basel  Committee’s  “comply  or  explain” 
framework.  However,  the  downside  here  is  that  the  deviation  from  the  laid  down 
methodology may be interpreted by markets as non-compliance. To guard against this, we 
will have to improve and sharpen our communication. 
Building up of provisioning buffer during good times based on expected loss methodology to 
deal  with  procyclicality  is  another  important  regulatory  construct  under  Basel  III.  However, 
the progress in this area has been very slow and it is still work in progress. As an interim 
measure,  we  propose  to  implement  a  provisioning  methodology  similar  to  the  Spanish 
“dynamic provisioning”, shortly. 
The  countercyclical  policies  assume  a  lot  of  importance,  more  so  for  developing  countries 
like  India  because  of  the  economic  conditions  of  these  countries.  While  the  gains  from 
growth  take  longer  time  to  percolate  to  all  strata  of  the  society,  the  pains  of  instability 
permeate and percolate immediately. Also, costs, in terms of increase in poverty are higher if 
output falls, than the gains from reduction in poverty for an equivalent rise in output. Financial 
stability,  therefore,  assumes  great  importance  for  emerging  markets.  Perhaps  this  is  the 
reason why macroprudential policies have been practiced in EMEs well before the advent of 
crisis while the advanced economies have only now begun to practice these policies in the 
wake of Basel III regulations. I would also like to mention here that while the Reserve Bank is 
complimented for steering the country safely out of the crisis, it is also, often considered to 
be very cautious. I believe that we cannot afford to be less cautious as we do not have the 
wherewithal to sustain or absorb the high costs of misadventure. That is the reason why we 
became alert and started implementing countercyclical policies much before the onset of the 
crisis and do not encourage use of exotic financial products. 
To  deal  with 
issue  of 
interconnectedness,  the  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (SIFIs)  have  been 
brought  into  focus.  Global  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (G-SIFIs)  and 
Domestic  Systemically  Important  Financial  Institutions  (D-SIFIs)  are  the  entities  that  could 
potentially create larger negative externalities to the financial system if they were to get into 
trouble  and  fail.  Therefore,  it  is  necessary  to  stipulate  greater  loss  absorbency  for  these 
the  cross  sectional  dimension  of  systemic  risk 
the 
i.e. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
entities,  subject  them  to  more  intense  supervision  and  put  in  place  stronger  resolution 
regime. SIFIs are identified based on a metric which takes into account factors such as their 
global  activity,  their  size,  interconnectedness  with  other  segments  of  the  system,  their 
substitutability  and  the  complexity  of  their  operations.  G-SIFIs  have  to  maintain  additional 
capital  in  a  range  of  1%  to  2.5%  depending  upon  their  systemiticity.  The  reason  for 
stipulating higher capital is twofold. One, the higher loss absorption capacity would reduce 
the probability of G-SIFI’s failure and in the event of their failure, reduce the impact of their 
failure. Second, higher capital requirements would act as an inbuilt incentive for G-SIFIs to 
reduce their systemiticity. The framework for D-SIFIs is similar but less structured and with 
larger national discretion. 
For  any  regulatory  regime  to  be  effective,  robust  supervisory  framework  is  absolutely 
necessary. Increasing the intensity and effectiveness of supervision for SIFIs in particular is a 
key  component  for  reducing  the  moral  hazard  and  negative  externalities  posed  by  these 
institutions. Towards this, the Basel Core Principles (BCPs) on Effective Supervision – the 
global  standards  against  which  supervisors  are  assessed  as  part  of  the  IMF-World  Bank 
Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  (FSAP)  –  have  been  recently  revamped.  The  Joint 
Forum  has  published  Principles  for  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates.  Several  other 
issues i.e. model risk, management, enhanced scrutiny of Boards and senior management, 
more  emphasis  on  adoption  of  strong  controls  by  SIFIs,  horizontal  review,  stress  testing, 
supervisory colleges, macroprudential surveillance and examination of risks associated with 
business models are being addressed. 
Resolution framework for SIFIs is another critical aspect that is under development. A robust 
resolution framework needs to be put in place with a view not to burden the Government with 
the task of bailing out large and systemically important institutions, if they were to fail. A well 
defined  resolution  regime  enables  separation  and  continuation  of  core  activities  from  non-
core activities followed by an orderly resolution. In this context you must have heard of living 
wills.  FSB  is  also  consulting  on  guidance  on  recovery  and  resolution  planning  for  making 
operational the “Key attributes of effective resolution regimes for financial institutions” which 
it  has  published  earlier.  In  the  US,  under  the  Dodd-Frank  Act,  an  orderly  resolution 
framework has been put in place. 
There is also a serious debate on revamping the banking models especially in the context of 
concerns regarding systemically important and complex institutions. There is an increasing 
realization that the retail part of the banking system, which offers core services to the people 
in terms of deposits and retail credit, should remain safe. There are three well known reports 
in  this  regard;  Vickers’  report  in the  UK  proposes  ring fencing  the  retail  business from  the 
investment banking activities. The Volker rule under the Dodd-Frank Act in the US proposes 
restrictions  on  proprietary  trading  with  some  exceptions  and  puts  limitations  on  banks 
sponsoring Hedge funds, Venture Capital funds and Private Equity funds. A recent addition is 
the Liikanen report for the Euro zone which is on somewhat similar lines. 
The need to provide oversight to the shadow banking system is another major lesson from 
the  crisis. The  shadow  banking  system grew  phenomenally  in  the  run-up  to  the  crisis  and 
overshadowed the regular banking system in many jurisdictions. The risks originated in the 
lightly,  or  unregulated  shadow  banking  system,  spread  to  the  regular  banking  system  and 
exacerbated  the  crisis.  Oversight/regulation  of  shadow  banking  system  was,  however,  not 
immediately taken up by the Basel committee as the Committee was preoccupied with the 
work  related  to  banking  regulation  which  itself  was  very  onerous. With  the  work  regarding 
revamping of banking regulations largely complete, the FSB and the Basel committee have 
now focused on putting in place a robust framework for oversight/regulation of the shadow 
banking system. Improving the oversight/ regulation of the shadow banking system assumes 
all the more importance with the tightening of banking regulations as the widened regulatory 
gap between the two systems would lend a scope to increased regulatory arbitrage with risks 
flowing  from  the  more  regulated  banking  system  to  the  less  regulated  shadow  banking 
system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
the 
“Initial 
leverage.  FSB  has  published 
Regulating shadow banks poses a dilemma. It may not be appropriate to impose bank like 
regulation on them as it may stifle flexibility and innovation which the sector is known for. At 
the same time, having widely divergent approach towards this sector which performs bank 
like credit intermediation would create huge arbitrage opportunities and give rise to systemic 
risks. There is a two pronged approach that is recommended in this regard: casting the net 
wide  to gather  data  on all  non-bank  credit  intermediation  activities  and  then  narrowing  the 
focus on those non-bank credit intermediaries that have the capacity to pose systemic risk on 
account  of  maturity/liquidity  transformation  and  leverage.  There  are  broadly  four  graded 
approaches  for  oversight/regulation  of  credit  intermediaries.  One,  indirect  approach  which 
involves regulating banks’ exposure to shadow banking system. Second, a direct approach 
where macroprudential measures are taken to address risks in securities lending and repo 
transactions. The third approach is regulation of shadow banking activities through disclosure 
obligations and restrictions on activities and the fourth approach is the regulation of shadow 
banking  entities,  i.e.  imposing  bank  like  regulation  on  these  entities,  limiting  maturity 
transformation  and 
Integrated  set  of 
recommendations to strengthen oversight and regulation of shadow banking” and the related 
responses  received.  When  the  final  standards  are  brought  out,  which  is  likely  in  the  near 
future, countries will have to take cognizance of that and build their systems for dealing with 
shadow banks. 
In India, about 50 per cent of the shadow banking system consists of Non-Banking Financial 
Companies (NBFC) which is regulated by the Reserve Bank. The other components largely 
include insurance and mutual fund participants which are regulated by other regulators i.e. 
IRDA  and  SEBI  respectively.  The  regulation  of  the  NBFC  sector  has  been  progressively 
tightened over time. Initially, the regulatory focus was confined to deposit taking NBFCs. But 
in 2005–06, the focus shifted to non-deposit taking NBFCs which are systemically important 
due  to  their  interconnectedness.  The  regulatory  regime  for  such  NBFCs  was  made 
significantly vigorous. We believe that the tighter regulation of NBFC sector did stand us in 
good stead during the crisis though it is difficult to argue counterfactually. 
Improving  transparency  in  the  OTC  market,  standardization  of  OTC  products  and  their 
migration  to  Central  Counter  Parties  (CCPs)  to  contain  the  risk  of  interconnectedness  are 
major  reform  agendas.  The  criticism  of  this  initiative  is  that  by  migrating  OTC  products  to 
CCPs, there is a possibility of warehousing all risks in a few entities leading to systemic risk 
buildup and adding more “too important to fail” entities. There is also a serious debate over 
whether  the  CCPs  that  have  become  systemically  important  need  to  be  provided  central 
bank liquidity support. While there are strong arguments for providing such facilities to them 
given  their  criticality  in  the  financial  system,  the  issue  of  moral  hazard  needs  to  be 
adequately addressed while providing such support. There are also quite a few areas where 
work is in progress such as counterparty credit risk, capital for exposures to CCPs, etc. 
Some dilemmas and debates 
Having given a broad overview of regulatory reforms, let me now touch upon some of the 
concerns,  misgivings  and  apprehensions  over  the  implementation  of  new  regulations.  The 
most  important  concern  relates  to  the  adverse  impact  of  higher  capital  requirements  on 
growth,  more  so  in  the  case  of  EMEs.  This  is  a  very  valid  concern.  As  the  capital 
requirements go up, the cost of operations would increase because equity is costlier. Banks 
can react to this situation in many ways and in various combinations. They may sell off non-
core businesses, reduce their balance sheet by selling off assets, reduce lending operations 
and increase the cost of lending, etc. Some banks may enhance their operational efficiency 
and improve their competitiveness by absorbing the higher cost of capital. But most likely, 
the  reaction  by  the  majority  of  banks  would  be  to  cut  down  on  lending  and  increase  the 
lending rates which would adversely impact economic growth. 
The Basel Committee had set up a Macroeconomic Assessment Group (MAG) to assess the 
impact  of  regulations  on  growth.  The  Group  after  an  extensive  study  involving  about 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
100 simulations had concluded that if Basel III requirements are implemented over a longer 
period  of  time  (35  quarters),  the  impact  on  growth  would  be  minimal  (0.03  per  cent  per 
annum  below  its  baseline  level  during  this  period)  and  there  would  be  recovery  in  growth 
towards baseline after this period. This is considered to be affordable because the long term 
benefits  of  stability  will  far  outweigh  the  costs  of  instability.  That  is  the  reason  why  the 
implementation period is so long (6 years). 
Let me now turn to a few structural issues. One issue that is being debated is the optimal 
level of financial activity. We found that, prior to the crisis the financial world had acquired a 
life  of  its  own,  dissociated  from  the  real  sector.  There  was  too  much  of  complexity.  The 
lessons from the crisis emphatically point to the fact that finance should serve the needs of 
the  real  sector  and  be  subservient  to  the  needs  of  real  economy.  There  have  also  been 
concerted  efforts  to reduce  the  complexity  of  financial  products.  One  such  measure  is  the 
moving  of  OTC  products  to  exchanges  by  standardizing  them  and  settling  them  through 
central counterparties (CCPs). While there would always be a place for customized (OTC) 
products, regulators and supervisors will have to ensure that these products do not become 
unduly complex. 
There is another line of research that is gaining prominence in the recent times. The issue is 
whether too much of finance is good for growth. Recent analysis shows that at low levels a 
larger financial system goes hand in hand with higher productivity growth but there comes a 
point where more banking and more credit are associated with lower growth. This happens 
essentially  due  to  the  diversion  of  resources  –  physical  and  human  –  away  from  the  real 
sector to the financial sector. 
Another  issue  relates to  the  dilemma  whether  we  need  larger  banks. The  lesson  from the 
crisis is that very large institutions (SIFIs) pose significant risks to the financial system. But 
some argue that to remain competitive, banks need to grow larger to achieve the benefits of 
economies  of  scale  and  scope.  Therefore,  the  question  is  of  the  optimal  size  a  financial 
institution should be allowed to grow to. How large is really large? I do not think anyone has 
a  categorical  answer  to  that.  One  alternative  could  be  to  focus  not  on  size  but  on  the 
structure of the institutions and discourage complex structures. The problem I find with the 
metric used for measuring the systemiticity of financial institutions is that it is not an absolute 
metric but a relative metric. It calculates the systemiticity of a bank in relation to the global 
sum of various metrics. In this relative approach, there is always a possibility that a bank, 
despite growing rapidly, and becoming riskier, might escape the SIFI regulation, if the entire 
banking system also becomes riskier due to which its “score” remains unchanged. I must add 
that the methodology devised by the Basel Committee is the best available at the moment. 
To take care of the developments in the banking system, such as the one I have mentioned, 
the methodology provides for periodic review every three years. However, having a metric 
that  computes  systemiticity  as  an  absolute measure  would  be  much  better  and  is  an  area 
that needs further research. 
The role of monetary policy in dealing with asset bubbles is another actively debated issue. 
Earlier the prevailing notion was that monetary policy neither had the mandate nor the ability 
to contain asset bubbles. All that it was expected to do was to mop up the debris after the 
bubble  burst.  But  post  crisis,  there  is  an  increasing  consensus  that  monetary  policy  does 
have a more symmetric role in dealing with asset bubbles and it must work in tandem with 
the macro prudential policies for ensuring financial stability. Since both monetary policy and 
the  macroprudential  policies  work  towards  ensuring  similar  outcomes  and  they  both  affect 
the same variables i.e., the volume of credit and the price of credit, the cost to the economy 
would be higher, if both the policies were to work at cross purposes with each other. Pure 
inflation  targeting  which  was  the  prevailing  orthodoxy  prior  to  the  crisis  is  getting  modified 
and now it is accepted by many that pure inflation targeting is not the ideal approach in the 
context of financial stability. The debate, however, by no means, is fully settled. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
thing 
there 
is  no  such 
in  macroprudential  policies.  The  success  of 
Another  question  that  crops  up  in  this  context  is  that  who  should  have  the  mandate  for 
financial stability. Should it be the central bank or should it be the government or should it be 
an independent outside agency. Post crisis, several models have evolved and most of them 
are collegial, with participation from the central bank, the government and other regulators. 
There is another view that supports vesting the financial stability responsibility  with central 
banks. This is the case with some countries, for example, UK and Malaysia. The reasons are 
not very difficult to see. As I mentioned earlier, monetary policy and macroprudential policies 
need to work in tandem to ensure financial stability. Monetary policy is the domain of central 
banks.  Further,  central  banks,  by  virtue  of  their  mandate  for  conducting  monetary  policy, 
have a handle on macro economy and financial markets. Central banks have fair knowledge 
of the financial institutions also to a large extent, even in cases where they are the not the 
regulators  and  supervisors.  Therefore,  Central  banks  appear  to  be  the  ideal  choice  for 
ensuring financial stability or at least play a vital role in a collegial approach. 
Unlike inflation targeting where a single number is fixed to measure the effectiveness of the 
policies, 
the 
macroprudential  policies  cannot  be  established  based  on  counterfactuals.  Therefore,  to 
ensure proper accountability, a clear communication of objectives and methodology for fixing 
accountability is extremely necessary. 
As regards liquidity risk, while the framework for Liquidity Coverage Ratio is in place, there 
are issues regarding interaction between LCR and monetary policy. These issues are being 
examined. 
The  implementation  of  Basel  III  itself  is  generating  a  debate.  It  was  earlier  planned  to  be 
implemented from 1st January 2013. Though our financial year commences on 1st April, for 
the sake of converging our implementation schedule with the international schedule, we had 
proposed to implement it effective 1st January 2013. But the two most important jurisdictions 
viz.,  the  US  and  the  Euro  zone  that  are  expected  to  be  in  the  forefront  in  implementing 
Basel III, could not adhere to the schedule. We have, therefore, shifted our implementation 
date to April 1, 2013 which suits us better. I feel that for smoother implementation of Basel III, 
it  would  be  helpful  if  the  US  and  the  Eurozone  could  announce  a  firm  date  for 
commencement  of  implementation  with  no  change  in  the  final  date  of  implementation  i.e. 
December 31, 2018. 
The increasing complexity of regulations has raised an interesting debate as to whether more 
complex regulations are necessarily more effective and whether they achieve their regulatory 
objectives. There is an interesting paper by Andrew Haldane, Executive Director of Bank of 
England, “The Dog and the Frisbee” which makes the point that the increasing complexity of 
regulations is actually counterproductive. He has argued that simple leverage ratio has been 
a  more  effective  predictor  of  stress  in  the  system  during  the  crisis  than  the  complex  risk 
weighting  system  and  therefore  simple  risk  measures  should  be  preferred  over  complex 
measures  for  regulatory  purposes.  Another  problem  with  risk  weighting  is  that  similar  or 
identical  portfolios  are  found  to  show  very  divergent  capital  requirements  reflecting  the 
fallibility of risk models. My personal view in this regard is that since financial systems have 
become very complex, simple risk measures may not suffice. Further, no single metric would 
be sufficient as it would likely be gamed. My conjecture is that if the evidence shows that the 
simple leverage ratio was a more effective predictor of stress in banks, it could, perhaps, be 
because it was not a closely watched metric. The moment regulations are built around one 
metric, there would be incentive to game it. Further, the downside of simple leverage ratio is 
that there would be strong incentive for banks to have riskier portfolios for a given amount of 
capital.  The  solution,  therefore,  would  lie  in  combining  the  leverage  ratio  with  risk  based 
measures and making the models more robust and transparent. 
Consolidation  is  another  issue  that  is  extremely  important  but  has  not  received  adequate 
focus so far. Specifically, while dealing with SIFIs, a consolidated/group based approach is 
adopted to assess the overall risk but the crisis has shown that laws relating to consolidation 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
have been inadequate. In most jurisdictions, consolidation is based on accounting rules and 
the accounting rules need not be the best solution for prudential requirements. Based on the 
lesson from crisis, there was a need to better align the accounting rules for consolidation with 
the prudential objectives. In fact, the IASB has revised the consolidation standards through 
IFRS 10. Even though IFRS 10 has been introduced, much work needs to be done from a 
prudential perspective framing consistent consolidation guidelines. Let me briefly touch upon 
major  changes  in  the  new  accounting  guidelines  related  to  consolidation.  The  definition  of 
control  has  been redefined  in  the  revised  accounting guidelines.  So far,  control  was  being 
largely defined in terms of having more than 50% of voting power through equity holdings or 
otherwise.  In  IFRS  10,  control  is  defined  from  a  different  perspective  in  recognizing  the 
possibility that even an investor holding less than a majority of the voting rights could have 
control.  Illustratively,  IFRS  10  recognizes  a  situation  where  an  investor  with  less  than  a 
majority of voting rights may have the practical ability to direct the relevant activities of the 
investee unilaterally if the size of his/her vote-holding is relatively large in comparison to the 
other vote-holders and the vote-holding of the others is so widely dispersed that several of 
them would need to act together to outvote this investor. 
Large  exposures  is  another  important  area  where  Basel  committee  has  set  up  a  working 
group. The regulatory practices regarding large exposures are quite divergent. For example, 
many jurisdictions allow for collateral adjustment while computing the exposure while others, 
including  India  do  not.  The  exposure  limits  also  vary  considerably.  There  is  a  need  to  set 
standards. 
Let  me  now  deliberate  on  supervision  and  the  recent  thinking  and  changes  in  this  area. 
Supervision has to be central to any effort to make the financial system safer and has to be 
effective for any regulatory initiative to succeed. Writing rules (regulation) is tough, but it is 
tougher  to  make  the  financial  institutions  adhere  to  those  rules,  for  which  a  very  effective 
supervisory  mechanism  is  needed.  What  are  the  important  components  of  effective 
supervision?  Let  me  quote  from  an  IMF  Staff  Position1  which  very  lucidly  explains  the 
attributes  of  effective  supervision.  Good  supervision  has  to  be  intrusive.  As  I  mentioned 
earlier,  supervisors  need  to  ask  the  right  questions  when  the  going  is  good.  Good 
supervision  has  to  be  sceptical  but  proactive,  implying  that  the  supervisor  should  not  take 
things  for  granted.  Good  supervision  is  comprehensive:  while  dealing  with  a  bank, 
supervisors need to look holistically at the group level. Good supervision is adaptive: as the 
financial  system  is  very  dynamic  and  fast  moving  and  innovations  happen  all  the  time, 
supervisors  need  to  be  alert  to  the  developments  and  be  updated.  Good  supervision  is 
conclusive:  supervisors  need  to  take  their  findings  to  logical  conclusion  through  further 
probing or deliberations and discussions. On top of these attributes, the IMF note mentions 
two features that signify good supervision. One, the ability to act and second, the will to act. 
Ability to act is based on the legal authority and the necessary resources both in numbers as 
well as quality. Availability of skills is an extremely important factor. This requires an efficient 
HR  planning  in  terms  of  skill  building  and  good  compensation  policies.  Ability  to  act  also 
hinges  on  effective  working  relationships  with  other  regulators  especially  for  supervising 
entities that have cross border presence. The willingness to act, on the other hand, hinges on 
factors  such  as  a  clear  and  unambiguous  mandate,  operational 
independence, 
accountability, a healthy relationship with the industry etc. 
The other actively debated issue about supervision is whether it should be vested with the 
central  bank.  Different  jurisdictions  have  different  practices.  There  are  jurisdictions  where 
supervision is the sole responsibility of Central bank, while there are other jurisdictions where 
the responsibility is shared among multiple agencies and in some other cases, supervision is 
fully outside of central bank. FSA model which was based on unified approach to supervision 
                                                
1   The making of good supervision: Learning to say “No”; Jose Vinals and Jonathan Fiechter, IMF Staff Position 
Note, SPN/10/08. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
outside of central bank gained a lot of respectability in the period prior to crisis. However, our 
own experience and the experience gained during the crisis have driven home the point that 
there is a lot of merit in vesting the supervisory responsibility for the banking system in the 
central bank. The carving out of Prudential Regulatory Authority (PRA) from the FSA in UK 
and the PRA becoming a subsidiary of the Bank of England is a case in point. 
Post  crisis,  there  has  been  a  shift  towards  risk  based  supervision  (RBS)  away  from  the 
erstwhile CAMELS approach. CAMELS is essentially a scorecard based approach which is 
more of a backward looking methodology and transaction testing model operating with a lag. 
The RBS, on the other hand, is a forward looking approach inasmuch as it assesses the risk 
buildup in banks. RBS also enables conservation of supervisory resources. I am a votary of a 
combined approach. I feel that even while following the CAMELS approach, the distribution 
of  risk  and  its  direction  should  be  assessed  which  would  result  in  a  more  comprehensive 
assessment of banks. Under the RBS, supervisors essentially rely on the inputs provided by 
banks’ risk management systems. Therefore, the RBS can only be as effective as banks’ risk 
management systems. The RBS can be supplemented by thematic assessments which can 
address  risks  arising  through  common  exposures  and  common  causes.  Supervisory 
methodology  is  under  considerable  focus  and  it  needs  to  be  constantly  evaluated  and 
improved upon to make the financial system safer as only framing regulations will not suffice. 
Lastly,  let  me  mention  the  importance  of  stress  testing.  The  risk  models  have  their  own 
limitations,  due  to  behavioural  aspects,  as  I  have  mentioned  earlier.  Stress  testing  is  an 
important risk management tool to enable the supervisors to know what happens in the tails. 
I  would  end  my  address  by  a  quote  I  came  across  recently  “In  every  crisis  there  is  a 
message. Crises are nature’s way of forcing change – breaking down old structures, shaking 
loose negative habits so that something new and better can take their place”2. Let us carry 
the message and lessons offered by crisis and move forward in building a more robust and 
resilient financial system. 
Thank you. 
References 
Cecchetti, Stephen G and Kharroubi, Enisse (2012), “Reassessing the impact of finance on 
growth”, BIS Working Papers No. 381 
Haldane, Andrew G and Madouros, Vasileios (2012): “The Dog and the Frisbee”, speech at 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s 366th economic policy symposium 
International Monetary Fund, WEO update (Jan 2013) 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2007):  “India’s  Financial  Sector  Reforms:  Fostering  Growth  while 
Containing Risk”, Speech, Reserve Bank of India 
Sheng, Andrew (2009): From Asian to Global Financial Crisis 
Reddy, Y V (2011): Global Crisis, Recession and Uneven Recovery 
Vinals, Jose and Feichter, Jonathan (2010): “The Making of Good Supervision: Learning to 
say ‘No’”, IMF Staff Position Note, SPN/10/08. 
                                                
2   Susan L. Taylor. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
