William C Dudley: Reflections on the economic outlook and the 
implications for monetary policy 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at Fordham Wall Street Council, Fordham University Graduate 
School of Business, New York City, 23 September 2013. 
 Thank  you,  Dean  Gautschi,  for  that  kind  introduction.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today  at 
Fordham  University  and  I  thank  the  Fordham  Wall  Street  Council  for  hosting  me.  This 
morning my remarks will focus on the U.S. economic outlook.  
I am also going to discuss a new tool that the New York Fed will begin to test – an overnight, 
fixed-rate full allotment reverse repo facility. I want to dispel any misconceptions about why 
we are doing this testing. The introduction of this facility is not a precursor to a change in the 
stance of monetary policy. Instead, the goal of this new facility is to improve our control over 
overnight interest rates to aid us in the implementation of monetary policy.  
As always, what I have to say today reflects my own views and opinions and not necessarily 
those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Federal Reserve System. 
Let me start by summarizing my main points regarding the economic outlook. In my view, the 
economy is slowly healing. But, while significant progress has been made since the end of 
the recession, there remain a number of headwinds that have offset the improvement in the 
underlying  fundamentals.  As  a  result,  we  have  yet  to  see  any  meaningful  pickup  in  the 
economy’s forward momentum.  
The most notable recent headwind, of course, has been the large amount of fiscal drag this 
year from the payroll and income tax increases and the budget sequester. Also noteworthy is 
the tightening of financial market conditions that has occurred since May. As we move into 
2014, the fiscal headwinds should abate somewhat. As that occurs, the improving underlying 
fundamentals of the economy should begin to dominate, pushing up the overall growth rate.  
But this is just a forecast, it has not been realized yet. That is one reason why I supported the 
FOMC’s  decision  last  week  to  maintain  the  current  pace  of  our  Treasury  and  mortgage-
backed  security  purchases.  In  my  view,  the  economy  still  needs  the  support  of  a  very 
accommodative  monetary  policy.  Adjustments  to  that  policy  need  to  be  anchored  in  an 
assessment  of  how  the  economy  is  actually  performing,  how  financial  conditions  are 
evolving, and how this affects the longer-term outlook and the risks around it. Our decisions 
on how to adjust our policy tools – for example, the pace of asset purchases and forward 
guidance with respect to the level of short-term rates – must be rooted in the ongoing flow of 
information  that  informs  our  judgments  about  the  prospects  for  a  sustainable  recovery. 
Decisions on the pace of asset purchase and forward guidance must be based on what is 
most  appropriate  to  achieve  our  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable 
employment in a context of price stability. 
Economic outlook 
Let’s  dig  a  bit  deeper  into  the  tug-of-war  between  improving  fundamentals  and  the  drag 
exerted by fiscal policy and tighter financial conditions.  
Starting with the improving underlying fundamentals, one important aspect is the household 
sector and its balance sheet. In a number of dimensions, households have made significant 
progress in repairing their finances. Prior to the recession, households took on an excessive 
amount  of  debt  –  much  in  the  form  of  residential  mortgages.  The  process  of  deleveraging 
and reducing this debt overhang is now well advanced. For example, household debt relative 
to disposable income has declined substantially since it peaked in the third quarter of 2007, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
bringing it back to levels last seen in early 2003. Delinquency rates on mortgages, auto loans 
and  credit  cards  continue  to  decline.  In  addition,  household  wealth  relative  to  disposable 
income has recovered from the steep decline following the crisis and is now near its 20-year 
average. Reflecting this improvement, credit standards are beginning to ease, which should 
support consumer spending on durable goods. 
Another  sector  in  which  the  fundamentals  have  improved  is  the  housing  sector.  Most 
importantly,  the  excess  supply  of  housing  created  during  the  boom  appears  to  have  been 
largely worked off. As a result, house prices are now rising in most areas of the country and 
homebuilding  activity  has  strengthened.  Moreover,  there  is  further  scope  for  gains  in 
homebuilding. After all, the current annualized rate of housing starts – around 900,000 – is 
considerably below the rate consistent with the country’s underlying demographic trends and 
the expected long-run rate of household formation. By these metrics, housing starts should 
ultimately climb back to about a 1.5 million annualized rate. 
The underlying fundamentals supporting business investment are also good. Profit margins 
have been high and cash flows strong for some time. Credit availability has been gradually 
improving. For example, the Federal Reserve’s Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey indicates 
that  banks  are  continuing  to  gradually  ease  their  lending  standards  for  commercial  and 
industrial loans.  
However, against these improving economic fundamentals, we have two important offsets. 
The first offset is the unusually high degree of fiscal drag, which the Congressional Budget 
Office  (CBO)  estimates  at  about  1¾  percent  of  potential  GDP  in  2013.1  The  two  most 
important components of this restraint are the end of the payroll tax holiday and the increase 
in  income  tax  rates  this  past  January,  and,  more  recently,  the  government  spending  cuts 
resulting from budget sequestration.  
Another  new  source  of  drag  for  the  economy  is  the  sharp  rise  in  long-term  interest  rates, 
especially residential mortgage rates – that has occurred since May. So far we don’t have 
much hard data on how this is affecting the housing sector. But data through mid-September 
generally indicate that the rise in rates has cut into the upward momentum of the housing 
sector. 
Currently,  improving  economic  fundamentals  versus  fiscal  drag  and  somewhat  tighter 
financial conditions are pulling the economy in opposite directions, roughly cancelling each 
other. The economy continues to grow and payrolls are rising, but there is little evidence of a 
pickup  in  the  economy’s  forward  momentum.  For  example,  real  GDP  growth  is  still  stuck 
close  to  the  2.2  percent  average  annualized  growth  rate  that  has  prevailed  since  the 
beginning of the expansion.  
But, as the degree of fiscal drag and other headwinds lessen, the tug-of-war should begin to 
shift  in  favor  of  higher  growth.  Absent  additional  fiscal  restraint,  a  further  tightening  of 
financial  conditions,  or  some  adverse  external  shock,  I  expect  the  economy  to  grow  a  bit 
faster in 2014. 
So, how compelling is this narrative? In big picture terms, it certainly seems quite reasonable 
to  me.  However,  no  forecast  is  inevitable  and  there  are  some  reasons  to  remain  wary.  In 
particular, although the fiscal drag will likely lessen in 2014, I expect it will still be significant, 
and  the  outcome  of  the  current  federal  budget  and  debt  ceiling  debates  may  affect  this 
assessment.  Moreover,  when  one  drills  down  and  looks  at  the  recent  performance  and 
outlook for the economy’s major sectors, additional caution seems warranted.  
Turning first to the outlook for fiscal policy, there are two points worth making. First, the CBO 
projects that significant fiscal drag will persist into 2014. Second, the fact that the degree of 
                                                 
1   This number refers to the change in the high-employment budget deficit for fiscal year 2013 as estimated by 
the CBO in March. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
restraint lessens next fiscal year could understate the actual impact on the economy because 
the  full  impact  of  some  of  this  year’s  cuts  may  not  yet  have  been  fully  felt.  For  example, 
consider university research spending that depends, in part, on federal grants. As the grant 
budget  falls  under  sequestration,  this  will  eventually  squeeze  university  budgets  over  time 
and likely lead to additional belt-tightening.  
Next, let’s take a deeper look at how the major sectors of the private economy that might 
play  a  role  in  the  strengthening  story  are  doing  currently:  consumption,  housing,  business 
investment and trade. When we’re done, I think you’ll agree that there still are some reasons 
for caution. 
Turning first to consumer spending, such spending has remained fairly subdued outside of 
interest  rate-sensitive  consumer  durables.  In  July,  for  example,  real  personal  consumption 
expenditures were flat, and it is unlikely that third quarter consumption growth will be much 
above a 2 percent annual rate.  
Moreover, the drivers of consumer spending do not look particularly supportive. In particular, 
real disposable income growth has grown at less than a 1 percent annual pace since March. 
Furthermore, the recent data do not yet clearly indicate a firming in the income growth rate, 
or the two important components of labor income growth – hours and compensation. 
The conundrum for consumers is a simple one: if consumer spending growth is to exceed 
2 percent annualized on a sustained basis at a time when real disposable income growth is 
below 2 percent then this would require the household saving rate to decline persistently. But 
there is little reason to expect such a decline given that the current saving rate is at a level 
consistent with current level of household wealth relative to income. 
We  have  a  chicken-egg  problem.  If  the  saving  rate  remains  stable,  then  stronger 
consumption growth will require a pickup in income growth. But for income to rise, demand 
must  increase.  This  suggests  that  there  may  need  to  be  an  impetus  to  growth  from  other 
sectors of the economy to generate a boost in consumer spending growth.  
One possible source is the housing sector. As noted earlier, housing starts are still quite low 
relative to what the country’s demographics should support in the long run. But there are two 
difficulties here. First, the strength of the housing recovery may be blunted by the recent rise 
in  mortgage  rates.  For  example,  before  last  week’s  partial  reversal,  the  30-year  fixed 
mortgage rate had risen by about 120 basis points since May to more than 4½ percent. For a 
household considering buying a house and financing the purchase with a $100,000 30-year 
fixed-rate  mortgage,  this  rise  in  mortgage  rates  would  increase  their  annual  payments  by 
more  than  $800.  The  increase  in  financing  costs  and  the  rise  in  home  prices  has  made 
housing considerably less affordable than it was earlier in the year. This is illustrated by the 
National Association of Realtors’ affordability index which has declined by 25 percent over 
the six months ending in July. 
Second, housing activity has already been contributing significantly to growth. For example, 
over  the  past  two  years,  real  residential  investment  swung  from  a  drag  of  1.1  percentage 
points  of  GDP  to  a  contribution  of  0.4  percentage  points.  Together,  this  suggests  that  the 
impetus to growth from housing may moderate rather than strengthen.  
Perhaps, the economy can get a boost from business fixed investment. After all, most of the 
evidence  points  towards  further  improvement.  First,  as  I  noted  earlier,  profit  margins  and 
cash  flows  are  high,  and  credit  availability  is  improving.  Thus,  those  businesses  with 
successful  track  records  should  be  able  to  readily  finance  new  investments.  Second, 
business fixed investment is not very high as a share of GDP and overall industrial capacity 
has been expanding only slowly. This suggests that this sector is not over extended. Third, 
the drop in U.S. energy costs relative to the rest of the world should spur more investment in 
the U.S. in energy intensive activities such as petrochemicals manufacturing.  
However,  there  are  also  some  negatives  here  as  well.  In  particular,  despite  the  positive 
factors  I  have  cited,  the  growth  in manufacturing  output  has  been  only  moderate,  with  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
overall manufacturing capacity utilization rate still below its pre-recession level. Thus, outside 
of the energy intensive sectors, there still appears to be little near-term motivation for firms to 
invest  in  order  to  increase  their  productive  capacity.  Businesses  seem  to  be  waiting  for 
stronger demand before they significantly increase their investment outlays. Thus, we have a 
second chicken-egg problem.  
On the trade side, the news is mixed. Although Japanese and European economic activity 
has picked up recently, the sustainability remains in question. Even as Europe emerges from 
its  recession,  growth  is  likely  to  be  anemic  at  best  over  the  next  year,  constrained  by 
continued  fiscal  consolidation  and  tight  credit  conditions  as  their  banks  continue  to 
deleverage. In Japan, the consumption tax is scheduled to increase significantly next year, 
which is likely to constrain domestic demand.  
Moreover, the recent improvement in Europe and Japan has been offset by slowing in some 
emerging market economies. In fact, some emerging market economies are under pressure 
because  they  are  running  large  current  account  and  trade  deficits.  Any  forced  correction 
among these countries on trade is likely to be a drag on global growth and on U.S. exports 
over  the  near  term.  On  balance,  my  outlook  is  that  growth  in  the  rest  of  the  world  will  be 
roughly  the  same  in  2014  as  it  is  this  year,  so  that  the  contribution  of  trade  to  growth  will 
likely remain quite small. 
Putting all these factors together, I still conclude that there is a basis for a pickup in growth 
as  fiscal  restraint  lessens,  but  the  impulse  is  not  likely  to  be  a  particularly  powerful  one 
without  some  unanticipated  impetus  to  growth  that  solves  the  chicken-egg  problems, 
especially in the near term.  
On the inflation side of the ledger, inflation remains below the Federal Reserve’s 2 percent 
longer-run objective for the personal consumption expenditure (PCE) deflator. The year-over-
year  change  in  the  total  PCE  deflator  was  1.4  percent  in  July.  This  has  created  some 
concern that inflation is “too low,” raising real interest rates and making monetary policy less 
accommodative.  I  acknowledge  this  concern,  but  I  believe  it  will  abate  as  inflation  moves 
gradually back up towards a 2 percent annualized rate over the next few years.  
A number of considerations inform my view. First, a decomposition of core inflation reveals 
that the most recent slowing in inflation has been largely confined to core goods, whereas 
the rate of increase of core services has been relatively steady. Such was not the case in 
2010 – the previous instance of a significant slowing of inflation. This suggests that the fall in 
inflation partly reflects idiosyncratic factors that are not likely to be sustained.  
Second, the recent data suggest that the downtrend in the inflation rate may be coming to an 
end. For example, the core personal consumption expenditures deflator rose at a higher rate 
over the past three months than during any other 3-month period since mid-2012.  
Third, measures of longer-term inflation expectations, whether discerned from financial asset 
prices  or  from  surveys  of  households  or  professional  forecasters,  remain  well  anchored  at 
levels  consistent  with  our  2  percent  objective.  This  is  important  because  inflation 
expectations  are  a  major  determinant  of  the  inflation  process.  As  long  as  inflation 
expectations stay well-anchored, it will be hard for inflation to fall further.  
Putting these factors together along with my forecast of a gradual pickup in real economic 
activity,  my  outlook  is  for  inflation  to  drift  back  toward  our  2  percent  objective  over  the 
medium  term.  However,  much  like  the  case  of  the  real  growth  outlook,  there  is  significant 
uncertainty around this forecast. 
Monetary policy 
So  what  does  this  all  imply  for  monetary  policy?  As  you  are  aware,  at  last  week’s  FOMC 
meeting we made no changes to our monetary policy. In particular, the Committee decided to 
continue to purchase long-term Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
at  a  monthly  pace  of  $45  billion  and  $40  billion,  respectively.  The  FOMC  statement 
reaffirmed  the  Committee’s  intention  “to  continue  its  purchases  of  Treasury  and  agency 
mortgage-backed  securities,  and  employ  its  other  policy  tools  as  appropriate,  until  the 
outlook for the labor market has improved substantially in a context of price stability.”2 
We  also  reaffirmed  our  forward  guidance  with  respect  to  the  federal  funds  rate.  The 
statement notes that the Committee, “currently anticipates that this exceptionally low range 
for  the  federal  funds  rate  will  be  appropriate  at  least  as  long  as  the  unemployment  rate 
remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be 
no more than a half percentage point above the Committee’s 2 percent longer-run goal, and 
longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored.”3 
Several questions have emerged following the meeting. Most noteworthy was – given that 
market  expectations  were  skewed  towards  anticipating  the  beginning  of  a  taper  at  this 
meeting – why the Committee did not begin to reduce the pace of asset purchases. Although 
I can’t speak for the Committee, I can provide some reasons for my own decision.  
To begin to taper, I have two tests that must be passed: (1) evidence that the labor market 
has shown improvement, and (2) information about the economy’s forward momentum that 
makes me confident that labor market improvement will continue in the future. So far, I think 
we have made progress with respect to these metrics, but have not yet achieved success.  
With respect to the first metric, we have seen labor market improvement since the program 
began  last  September.  Over  this  time  period,  the  unemployment  rate  has  declined  to 
7.3 percent from 8.1 percent.4 However, at the same time, this decline in the unemployment 
rate overstates the degree of improvement. Other metrics of labor market conditions, such as 
the hiring, job-openings, job-finding rate, quits rate and the vacancy-to-unemployment ratio, 
collectively indicate a much more modest improvement in labor market conditions compared 
to  that  suggested  by  the  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate.  In  particular,  it  is  still  hard  for 
those who are unemployed to find jobs. Currently, there are three unemployed workers per 
job opening, as opposed to an average of two during the period from 2003 to 2007. 
With respect to the second metric – confidence that the economic recovery is strong enough 
to generate sustained labor market improvement – I don’t think we have yet passed that test. 
The economy has not picked up forward momentum and a 2 percent growth rate – even if 
sustained  –  might  not  be  sufficient  to  generate  further  improvement  in  labor  market 
conditions. Moreover, fiscal uncertainties loom very large right now as Congress considers 
the issues of funding the government and raising the debt limit ceiling. Assuming no change 
in my assessment of the efficacy and costs associated with the purchase program, I’d like to 
see economic news that makes me more confident that we will see continued improvement 
in the labor market. Then I would feel comfortable that the time had come to cut the pace of 
asset purchases.  
A  few  other  points  with  respect  to  monetary  policy  are  worth  emphasizing  following  last 
week’s FOMC meeting. First, as I have noted in earlier remarks, a decision to reduce the rate 
of  asset  purchases  is  not  a  tightening  of  monetary  policy.  If  we  are  purchasing  additional 
securities we are simply adding accommodation at a slower pace.  
Second, any decision to cut the pace of asset purchases should not be taken as signaling an 
early exit from this period of unusually low short-term rates. We have established a threshold 
of  6.5  percent  for  the  unemployment  rate  as  long  as  we do  not  expect  inflation  to  exceed 
                                                 
2   Federal Open Market Committee statement, September 18, 2013. 
3   Federal Open Market Committee statement, September 18, 2013. 
4   The  8.1  percent  unemployment  rate  refers  to  the  August  2012  unemployment  rate  that  was  the  latest 
information available to the Committee at its September 2012 meeting. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
2½ percent at a one-to-two year horizon and inflation expectations remain well-anchored. It 
is likely to take a considerable amount of time to reach the 6.5 percent unemployment rate 
threshold. Moreover, because the 6.5 percent unemployment rate is a threshold, and not a 
trigger,  depending  on  the  economic  circumstances,  we  might  wait  a  long  time  after  we 
breach the threshold before we begin to raise our federal funds rate target.  
The point I wish to emphasize is that any decisions on the pace of asset purchases (the rate 
at which we are adding accommodation) versus liftoff in terms of the federal funds rate (a 
tightening of monetary policy) should be viewed as largely independent of one another. One 
does  not  foreshadow  the  other  –  certainly  not  in  any  mechanical  way  or  with  a  definitive 
timeframe.  As  Chairman  Bernanke  noted  in  last  week’s  press  conference,  our  actions  are 
data dependent and how the data will evolve is uncertain. 
In addition, it is worth explaining why we anticipate the federal funds rate is still likely to be 
quite low relative to what Committee participants consider normal over the longer run, even 
as the Committee gets close to its employment and inflation objectives. For example, in the 
September  Summary  of  Economic  Projections,  the  median  projection for  the  federal  funds 
rate in the fourth quarter of 2016 is 2 percent, far below the median long-run federal funds 
rate projection of 4 percent, at the same time that the unemployment rate and inflation are 
close to the Committee’s long-run objectives.  
How  does  one  explain  this?  As  noted  by  Chairman  Bernanke  in  last  week’s  press 
conference, the still low federal funds rate projections for 2016 reflect the fact that economic 
headwinds – such as tight credit standards and ongoing fiscal consolidation – are likely to 
take  a  long  time  to  fully  abate.  As  a  result,  monetary  policy  will  have  to  keep  short-term 
interest  rates  very  low  for  a  sustained  period  in  order  for  the  Committee  to  achieve  its 
objectives.  
My view is that the neutral federal funds rate consistent with trend growth is currently very 
low.  That’s  one  reason  why  the  economy  is  not  growing  very  fast  despite  the  current 
accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy.  Although  the  neutral  rate  should  gradually 
normalize over the long-run as economic fundamentals continue to improve and headwinds 
abate, this process will likely take many years. In the meantime, the federal funds rate level 
consistent  with  the  Committee’s  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  in  the 
context of price stability will likely be well below the long-run level. 
Fixed-rate, full allotment overnight reverse repo facility 
Before  I  conclude,  I  want  to  discuss  a  new  tool  that  the  Open  Market  Trading  Desk  (the 
Desk) at the New York Fed will be testing and developing in coming months. The new tool is 
a fixed-rate, full-allotment overnight reverse repo facility that would be available to a broad 
range  of  counterparties  –  not  just  open  to  the  primary  dealers  through  which  we  have 
historically  conducted  our  open  market  operations.5  By  being  available  to  a  much  broader 
array  of  counterparties, this  should allow  the  Fed  to  tighten  its  control  over  money  market 
rates. 
I’ll first explain in plain English what this facility is. Then I’ll explain why we are testing it and 
what having such a facility in place might accomplish.  
A  fixed-rate,  full  allotment  overnight  reverse  repo  facility  is  a  facility  in  which  the  Federal 
Reserve  posts  a  fixed  interest  rate  and  accepts  cash  from  counterparties,  which  include 
banks, dealers, money market funds, and some government sponsored enterprises (GSEs), 
                                                 
5   The Desk has been conducting operational readiness exercises for the use of reverse repurchase agreements 
since late 2009. At the most recent FOMC meeting last week, the FOMC authorized the Desk to begin another 
testing  program  which  begins  today.  See  the  Desk’s  September  20  announcement  of  the  next  round  of 
testing. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on  an  overnight  basis  in  return  for  a  security.  If  implemented,  the  facility  would  be  “full 
allotment” – that means the facility would have no cap on the amount of funds accepted from 
any of its counterparties at the posted overnight interest rate.6 The repo facility is “reverse” 
because the direction in which the funds and securities move – participants are lending funds 
to the Fed rather than vice versa. Users of the facility are making the economic equivalent of 
an  overnight  collateralized  loan  of  cash  to  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  amount  of  funds 
invested  in  the  facility  is  likely  to  be  sensitive  to  the  posted  interest  rate.  The  higher  the 
interest rate relative to comparable money market rates, the greater the participation is likely 
to be and vice versa.  
There are several reasons motivating our interest in developing such a facility. First, such a 
facility  should  enable  the  Federal  Reserve  to  improve  its  control  over  the  level  of  money 
market  rates.  By  offering  a  new,  essentially  risk-free  investment,  one  would  expect  that 
anyone with access to such a facility would generally be unwilling to lend instead to someone 
else at a rate below that posted for the facility. This should help to establish a floor on the 
level  of  overnight  rates.  Right  now,  most  short-term  rates  trade  between  0  and  25  basis 
points, but occasionally T-bill and repo rates go negative, for example at quarter-end or when 
financial stresses increase the demand for very safe assets. The full allotment element of the 
reverse repo facility would increase the availability of a risk-free asset, satisfying the demand 
when  the  appetite  for  safe  assets  increases.  This  should  help  tighten  the  relationship 
between these and other money market rates. These reverse repos would be available to an 
expanded  set  of  counterparties  that  includes  many  of  the  money  market  lenders  who  are 
ineligible to earn the interest on excess reserves (IOER),  such as GSEs and a number of 
money market funds. Depending on the facility rate, these lenders who cannot earn the IOER 
rate might get a better rate by investing in the overnight RRPs compared to lending to banks 
or  to  broker  dealers.  This  competitive  effect  could,  in  and  of  itself,  put  a  stronger  floor  on 
money market rates. 
Second, this new facility is also likely to reduce the volatility of short-term interest rates. If a 
lender that cannot earn the IOER rate has an unexpectedly large amount of funds to invest, 
this lender currently may have to accept an unusually low interest rate. But with the overnight 
reverse repo facility in place, this lender could lend as much funds as desired to the facility at 
a  fixed  rate  and  this  should  reduce  the  downward  pressure  on  money  market  rates.  By 
tightening  control  and  reducing  the  volatility  of  short-term  rates,  such  a  facility  should 
reassure investors that the Federal Reserve has sufficient tools to manage monetary policy 
effectively even with a very large balance sheet. 
I  have  told  you  what  this  facility  is  for.  Now  let  me  emphasize  what  the  testing  and 
development  of  this  facility  does  not  foreshadow.  The  testing  and  the  development  of  the 
facility is not being undertaken to facilitate or expedite exit from our large balance sheet and 
should not be considered to be an element of the exit process. The purpose of the facility is 
to establish a floor on money market rates and to improve the implementation of monetary 
policy even when the balance sheet is large. Even if our balance sheet increases significantly 
further and stays very large for many years, it will be useful to have this facility available to 
improve monetary policy control. 
In coming months we will test the facility with two goals in mind. First, we want to be assured 
that  there  are  no  glitches  operationally  with  somewhat  higher  transaction  volumes  than  in 
previous tests, that we can accept cash from a larger array of counterparties, post collateral 
in the tri-party repo system and reverse the transactions each day smoothly. Second, while 
the limited size of the operations during this exercise will prevent the operations from having 
a  significant  impact  on  market  rates,  we  will  observe  how  the  facility  impacts  individual 
                                                 
6   During  the  testing  phase,  a  ceiling  will  be  placed  on  the  maximum  amount  that  can  be  invested  per 
counterparty. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
investor demand relative to other market rates. Additionally, we can see how sensitive that 
demand is to changes in market conditions such as quarter-end that increase the demand for 
safe assets. These observations will give us some insight into how the facility could affect the 
entire constellation of money market rates. Only by testing and learning will we be able to 
assess how best to use the facility.  
In conclusion, let me turn back to the economic outlook and the role of monetary policy. I do 
believe  that  we  are  making  progress  towards  our  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable 
employment in the context of price stability. The economic fundamentals are improving and I 
expect that the healing process will continue in the coming months and years. At the same 
time, it is important to recognize that the financial crisis generated significant headwinds that 
are only slowly abating. We must push against these headwinds forcefully to best achieve 
our objectives.  
Thank you for your kind attention. I would be happy to take a few questions.  
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
