Patrick Honohan: “Garret’s Europe and Ours” 
Address by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the UCD Garret 
FitzGerald Spring School, Dublin, 8 February 2013. 
 When  Brian  Nolan  very  kindly  invited  me  to  speak  at  this  second  UCD  Garret  FitzGerald 
Spring  School  with  its  title  “Ireland  in  Europe  after  40  Years”  I  thought  back  to  the  first 
occasions I met Garret in a European context, and then other memories flooded back of my 
knowledge of Garret and Europe over a forty year period: overlapping with but starting just a 
bit earlier than the 40 years in the Spring School title. I knew that I would want to talk about 
Garret’s Europe, and ours. 
One way of narrating Garret’s life is as a sequence of rail, sea and air timetables as if he was 
determined to verify that the trains, ships and planes really did work on time. European travel 
was, of course, at the heart of this, and his ministerial role in the 1970s also resulted in his 
horizons broadening to the Middle East and Africa where he travelled for Europe. 
But  Garret’s  family  links  with  European  travel  go  back  much  further.  Indeed,  his  parents 
spent the first two years of married life in France – or to be more precise, in Brittany. And 
even further back than that. I would also like to be able to tell the story of the cow that, in an 
even earlier era, was transported to Marseille to ensure availability of good Irish milk during 
one of Garret’s ancestor’s French holidays. I heard scraps of this story from him a few times, 
but  I  could never  quite figure  out  exactly  who  the  ancestor  was,  or  even  whether the  cow 
went by rail or sea. Perhaps Garret didn’t know.  Anyway, details will have to await further 
research. 
Whatever about the traveling dairy, it is clear that, long before the era of Ryanair, or even 
before the era of direct car ferry services to the Continent, the family in which Garret grew up 
moved  in  a  world  of  easy  interaction  with  France,  and  other  countries  on  the  European 
mainland.  Of  course  his  parents’  story  also  has  important  episodes  in  Britain  also,  but, 
despite  the  dominant  influence  of  Britain  and  America  on  Ireland’s  view  of  the  rest  of  the 
world before membership of the EEC, it would be a mistake to neglect the strong links with 
the  Continent  enjoyed  by  many  middle  and  upper  middle  class  Irish  families  before  the 
Second World War. 
Garret  being  Garret,  though,  we  do  have  to  acknowledge  a  combination  of  intellectual 
competitiveness  and  fascination  with  the  structures  of  government,  whether  republican  or 
monarchic,  that  led  him  to  becoming  an  indefatigable  student  of  European  history  and 
administration.  At  the  age  of  8  (in  1934),  he  tells  us  in  his  autobiography,  he  was  once 
wrong-footed  by  finding  himself  less  well-informed  than  his  schoolmates  about  the  recent 
assassination  in  Marseille  (again)  of  King  Alexander  of  Yugoslavia  and  French  Foreign 
Minister Barthou. The idea that some other children – girls at that – would know more about 
such a matter was the cause of sufficient annoyance to make sure it never happened again. 
As anyone who has been on the receiving end of that kind of one-upmanship from Garret 
can  testify  (I  recall  the  humiliation  of  mixing  up  in  his  presence  the  dates  of  Cardinals 
Richelieu and Mazarin) we can be fairly sure that he was not often caught out again. 
Then  again,  Garret’s  UCD  degree  was  in  French  (first  class  honours),  History  (first  class 
honours) and Spanish (second class honours – that was, of course, before grade inflation). 
For the rest of his life, Garret’s favourite holiday destination was France. 
This gave him a strong foundation for what he would in later years always regard as the best 
and most enjoyable part of his career, namely the years in which he was Minister of External 
Affairs. 
In  this  role,  Garret  was  in  at  the  ground  floor  in  Ireland’s  membership  in  the  European 
Community. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
He was Minister for External Affairs almost from the word go in Ireland’s EEC membership. 
He used his knowledge of French (and Spanish), but also his formidable consciousness of 
the  history  of  European  governments,  to  work  for  an  evolution  of  what  it  is  not  politically 
correct to call the supranational view of Europe over the intergovernmental. 
He liked to talk about incidents where he acted to restrain the exercise of national powers 
through  the  Council  (often  these  stories  featured  British  ministers,  and  I  will  mention  an 
example in a minute). 
He advanced Ireland’s interests by advancing a coherent vision of European integration in 
which  the  public  good  was  best  served  by  an  evolution  that  promoted  European  decision 
making structures (where needed) over intergovernmental bargaining in which the short-term 
or narrow interests of the largest and strongest states might prevail. 
His  quick  ability  to  size  up  the  interaction  between  interpersonal  relationships  and 
international  deal  making  made  him  both  a  popular  and  effective  participant  in  European 
political  circumstances.  Take  for  instance,  his  story  of  a  deadlocked  1973  Helsinki 
conference, where he suddenly found himself become the acting chair, because others had 
left  for  the  airport.  Would  another  have  so  quickly  sized-up  and  seized  the  opportunity 
suddenly  suggested  by  a  Russian  official  and  pulled-off  a  diplomatic  coup  by  quickly 
ramming through a compromise draft before the remaining delegates could regroup and find 
reason to quibble? 
Again,  probably  few  of  his  peers  could  have  talked  down  British  Foreign  Secretary  Roy 
Hattersley so effectively and without generating rancour as Garret did in 1975, when Ireland 
held  the  Presidency  and  went  ahead  of  normal  practice  in  pre-negotiating  a  deal  with  the 
Arab League in the hope and correct expectation that he could use force of personality to 
bounce  it  through  the  Council.  “It’s  53  years  too  late”,  he  observed,  when  Hattersley 
complained about the unorthodox procedure, “for a British minister to be telling a member of 
the Irish government in Dublin Castle what he could or could not do”. 
Garret’s approach to dealing in and with Europe was not based on a laboured or academic 
understanding of negotiation techniques or game theory. Practice and intuition led theory. To 
the  extent  that  he  formed  theories  about  such  things,  they  were  arrived  at  inductively  and 
through experience. 
Thus  I  remember,  as  a  callow  undergraduate,  challenging  him  on  what  is  essentially  a 
straightforward  application  of  the  theory  of  externalities.  Europe,  he  seemed  to  argue  in  a 
panel contribution to a meeting organised by the Irish Council of the Economic Movement 
(the  only  such  meeting  I  attended,  I  hasten  to  say),  Europe  could  ensure  efficiencies  in 
collective  European  endeavours  by  achieving  a  central  control  of  costs,  and  proceeded  to 
illustrate with some characteristically complicated example about a group of people ordering 
in a restaurant. “Surely, the cocky undergraduate voice from the audience protested, if the 
total  meal  bill  is  going  to  be  shared,  then  each  diner  will  order  to  optional  extra  prawn 
cocktail.” This overly theoretical consideration was not the sort of thing that he would allow to 
stand in the way of his advocacy. 
In  fact,  of  course,  it  is  a  free-rider  problem  of  this  type  that  has  almost  felled  monetary 
cooperation in Europe, and which presents, and is understood to present, the most serious 
challenge to a quick and successful resolution of the financial crisis of the euro area. I will 
come  back  to  this  topic  later,  but  first  permit  me  to  develop  some  other  dimensions  along 
which  there  has  been  both  change  and  continuity  between  the  first  years  of  Garret’s 
encounter with official Europe and our own time today. 
Size and collegiality of Europe 
When  Ireland  first  held  the  Presidency  of  the  European  Council,  the  number  of  member 
states  was  nine.  During  the  current  presidency,  the  number  is  27  with  a  28th  –  Croatia  – 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
already  attending  as  an  observer  in  anticipation  of  its  imminent  accession.  If  Garret  was 
struck by the already large attendance at Council meetings in the 1970s, how much more 
would  he  be  bemused  to  attend  one  today.  Every  6  months,  the  Finance  Ministers  and 
Central Bank Governors meet in what is ludicrously termed an Informal Ecofin meeting in the 
Presidency  Country.  Such  a  meeting  is  scheduled  for  Dublin  Castle  in  April.  Informality  is 
hard  to  achieve,  however,  with  70  participants  around  the  table,  surrounded  by  around 
150 accompanying officials in the room. And that is not all. At a recent such meeting which I 
attended, the chair announced that, because of the sensitivity of one of the agenda items, 
the discussion on that item would not be relayed to the overflow room. It is, of course, still 
possible  to  be  on  first-name  terms  with  one’s  counterparts  in  all  27  countries.  But  the 
potential for a truly inclusive single conversation must certainly be impaired relative to what is 
possible with 9 countries. The interests of each of eight interlocutor countries can be sized-
up and considered together; it is a different matter with 27. 
One change in the atmosphere of EU decision making as between Garret’s time and ours 
may  be  a  creeping  monoculture  in  debate.  In  the  1970s  issues  arose  that  triggered  quite 
different  political  alignments.  It  wasn’t  always  the  case  that  the  same  usual  suspects 
appeared as coalition partners on issue after issue. Even where key Irish economic interests 
were at stake, the alignments depended on what sector the discussion was about. Two of the 
biggest economic negotiations in which Garret was involved were on Fisheries Policy and the 
Regional Fund. The fisheries issue was something inherited from the era of the six, and as 
such  pitted  Ireland,  UK  and  Denmark,  keen  to  establish  privileges  for  national  fishermen 
against the others, who claimed incumbency. 
The  Regional  Fund  issue  centred  around  how  much  this  would  be  weighted  towards  the 
lower income countries and as such had Ireland and Italy on one side, with UK, Denmark 
and France, for example, on the other. And there were many other issues which generated 
quite different combinations of natural alliances. I expect that scholars have explored in detail 
the way in which the potential for log-rolling could be and was exploited in those days as the 
many disparate issues offered the potential for wider consensus building and deal-making. 
The ease with which a cordial and collegial atmosphere could be maintained may have been 
greater  then,  even  though  we  know  of  many  spectacular  rows.  (Some  of  these  rows  of 
course related to the famous exceptionalism of the UK’s relationship with Europe; but that 
too may have helped cement relations among the others). 
The larger the number of member countries and the more the big structural issues have been 
settled in an ever more comprehensive Acquis Communautaire, arguably the shallower the 
and fewer the remaining big structural issues that come up for debate leaving more and more 
of  the  divergences  of  interest  coming  down  to  straightforward  issues  of  what,  in  Garret’s 
earlier days, was called £sd. The increasing coincidence in recent years, of the dividing line 
between the advocates and critics of the major policy issues and the broad and persistent 
fosse  between  habitual  borrowers  and  structural  lenders,  has  coloured  decision-making  in 
the European Union to a large extent. This has created a different environment for decision-
making than existed in the 1970s. 
Weighted  voting  is  of  course  one  of  the  important  mechanisms  for  facilitating  decision-
making in such a large group and Garret was an early enthusiast for finding ways of avoiding 
veto situations and employing majority and qualified majority decision rules, which are much 
more widely applicable today.1[1] The veto has not vanished, though. 
Nowadays,  then,  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  protracted  economic  slow-down 
seems  to  have  widened  the  long-lasting  and  recurrent  divide  between  creditor  and  debtor 
countries. The identity of which are creditors and which debtors has not changed much of the 
                                                 
1  The ECB Governing Council still works mostly on a simple one-member one vote system.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
decades,  but  the  dominance  of  these  grand  financial  and  cross-country  redistributional 
issues has surely increased in our time. 
Arguing for Ireland and Europe 
Thanks  not  only  to  Garret  of  course  but  to  numerous  persistent  politicians  and  dedicated 
public servants, Ireland did relatively well in the various negotiations of the early years. And 
of  course  it  started  with  the  great  advantage  that  the  Common  Agricultural  Policy,  with  its 
high  price  approach  to  protecting  the  farm  sector  in  Europe,  was  (on  balance)  hugely 
advantageous to Ireland. 
But  in  addition,  Irish  negotiators  were  quick  to  understand  the  dynamics  of  European 
integration and saw that development of the European Union through from the 70s to the 90s 
was  something  that  could  be  good  for  all,  but  especially  good  for  Ireland,  and  so  it  was. 
Garret  wrote  “The  benefits  accruing  to  Ireland  from  EC  membership  were  immense  –  far 
greater in relation to the size of the economy than was the case for any other member state. 
This was true in relation to the impact on agriculture and the net flow of Structural Funds, but 
most of all in relation to the expansion of exports”. It would be hard to disagree. 
Already by 1990, though the tendency for Irish political debate to take Europe for granted, 
and to focus more and more on the scale of net fiscal transfers to Ireland as the measure 
and goal of Ireland’s diplomatic interaction with European partners degraded the quality of 
public  discourse  in  Ireland  about  Europe  and  the  stridency  of  Irish  demands  began,  in 
Garret’s  view,  to  grate  on  some  other  European  leaders.  Though  Garret  was  firing  on  all 
cylinders when, for example, he worked to ensure a formula for Regional Fund allocations 
that would not channel so much of the money back to the core countries, the Béal Bocht was 
nowhere in his approach. 
Too little, in his view, was done, to explain to the Irish electorate the benefits of the Union 
and  in  particular  the  traps  and  false  directions  that  had  been  avoided  in  the  design  of 
successive Treaty amendments (a favourite rhetorical device this of Garret’s “if it hadn’t been 
for the Treaty of X – or the budget of Y – things would have been completely different and 
much worse!”) 
Given  the  change  in  the  size  and  character  of  discussions  today,  the  challenge  for  those 
wishing to further national interests in Europe is thus rather different to what it used to be. A 
naïve approach confined to a battle over the redistribution of economic resources risks being, 
not even a zero sum game, but destructive all around. Now, more than ever, policymakers 
need to look to the collective prosperity of the Union as a whole, as well as to the individual 
components of which it is formed. 
Centralisation or intergovernmentalism 
This, of course, was already the modus operandi of Garret and the early Irish negotiators in 
Europe. And in Garret’s case it took the form of a consistent advocacy of the supranational 
executive mechanisms of the EEC, in particular the Commission, over the intergovernmental, 
as represented most evidently in the Council of Ministers and then in the European Council. 
Convinced that the Commission has generally been guided in its preparation of legislation by 
a sense of the European common good, Garret wrote in 2002 that he could not “in fact recall 
any case where … Ireland’s interests have been seriously prejudiced by proposals brought 
forward by the Commission, and [he could] recall many cases where our interests have in 
fact been safeguarded by that body”. From the start, for Garret, preventing the emergence of 
a Directoire of the largest countries dominating agenda setting and decisions for the Union 
was a firm objective. Given the recent fashion in some quarters of denigrating the elaboration 
of the structures of Europe, and of calling for an unwinding back to intergovernmentalism, it 
is worth bearing Garret’s perspective in mind. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
It was, for Garret, not just a question of restraining the largest countries. There was also the 
consideration that Summit meetings are not technically efficient or safe as ways of reaching 
complex decisions. In the 1980s, the European Council, Garret wrote, could be “chaotic and 
ultimately very dangerous”. 
To  be  sure,  some  early  initiatives  aiming  at  strong  central  decisions  were  impractical  and 
unnecessary,  and  were  sensibly  rolled  back  whether  in  the  name  of  subsidiarity  or  the 
principle of mutual recognition. (This is often referred to as the principle of Cassis de Dijon – 
a key component not only of European trade law, but also of one of Garret’s favourite pre-
dinner  drinks,  Kir  Royale).  The  First  Banking  Directive,  for  example,  hoped  to  resolve 
disputes  on  bank  licensing  by  establishing  the  principle  that  each  member  state’s  bank 
regulation system was to be taken as good enough to allow cross-border banking into any 
member state from any other. 
Somewhat  ironically,  it  was  at  Maastricht  that  subsidiarity  was  enshrined  in  the  Treaty. 
Ironically,  because  Maastricht  also,  of  course,  introduced  that  most  centralising  of  Treaty 
structure, the single currency, rather over-grandly dubbed Economic and Monetary Union. 
While  Maastricht  retained  the  national  central  banks,  and  built  a  structure  where  the 
Governors of the national central banks would have a structural majority in the main decision 
making  bodies  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  idea  of  moving  from  numerous  state 
currencies  to  a  single  non-state  currency,  tightly  constrained  to  remain  at  a  distance  from 
national governments, was clearly a move in the opposite direction. 
Garret had a lot to say about everything, but (in relative terms) surprisingly little to say about 
the single currency. Actually I think that money and banking was not a topic that interested 
him  very  much.  Consistent  with  his  general  view  about  centralised  institutions  he  did, 
however,  at  the  time  of  the  Maastricht  Treaty  foresee  the  euro  as  something  which  would 
restrain the dominance of the largest economy. (Perhaps this reminds us that not all of his 
long-term forecasts have worked out as expected.) Back in the 1970s of course, Ireland was 
part of another currency union, that with Britain, from which we imported the rapid inflation 
(peaking at well over 20 per cent) of those years. (It was characteristic of Garret’s approach 
to such matters that, fearing an excessive surge in wages through price indexation in 1975, 
he  engineered  a  liberalisation  of  potato  imports  for  a  few  months,  which  was  sufficient  to 
keep consumer prices below a particularly relevant threshold for the inflation rate; this was 
the sort of measure in which he delighted!) 
But  perhaps  that  is  the  biggest  difference  of  all  between  Garret’s  Europe  and  ours:  the 
preoccupation with money, banking and debt. I do not want today to elaborate on what went 
right  and  what  has  gone  wrong  with  the  Eurosystem.  Nor  do  I  want  to  discuss  now  more 
specifically  what  went  wrong  with  the  operation  of  government  and  financial  supervision 
policies against the novel background of a single currency regime.  Clearly some countries 
continued on traditional policy paths – in terms of fiscal policies and cost competitiveness – 
that  were  in  fact  unsustainable  without  the  safety  valve  of  devaluation.  Others  saw  their 
overly-deregulated banking systems succumb to the temptations of easy private finance in 
the explosion of debt of the 2000s. And the system as a whole lacked the mechanisms to 
make  a  quick  recovery  when  the  financial  crisis,  sparked  off  in  the  United  States,  swept 
through the common currency area, shaking it to its foundations. 
What I do want to do is consider some aspects of the path ahead for the financial aspects of 
the  union.  Despite 
into 
intergovernmentalism in finance, the Union has firmly determined on greater centralisation as 
a foundation for the way forward. Not only the Commission, but the Council, the Parliament 
and the ECB have, through their Presidents, called for a closer union including on fiscal and 
growth policies, as well as the Banking Union, all underpinned by a stronger political union. 
Each of these dimensions calls for greater centralisation and therefore a relative reduction in 
the  role  of  distributed  decision  making  or,  specifically,  intergovernmentalism.  But  will  it  all 
work. How big are the potential benefits and can it all be made workable? 
that  some  strident  voices  argue 
for  a  retreat 
fact 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
To  answer  those  questions  would  take  me  well  beyond  my  competence.  Instead  let  me 
confine  myself  to  some  observations  about  the  Banking  Union  and  in  particular  the  single 
supervisory mechanism. 
Banking Union 
As we work at breakneck speed to construct what is undoubtedly a most ambitious project, 
European Banking Union, it is good to stop from time to time and take stock of what we are 
hoping to achieve and what might stand in the way of success. As I have already pinned my 
flag to the mast as an enthusiastic supporter of banking union, I may be permitted to dwell a 
little longer on the pitfalls, with a view to exploring how we can best work around them. 
But let us start with the potential, and here I will list four hopes that I have for the project. 
First, I hope that it will go some distance to removing politics from the enforcement of bank 
supervision.  Second,  I  hope  that  it  brings  emotional  detachment  to  the  process  of 
supervision. Third, I hope that it manages to lever the diversity of supervisory experience and 
aptitude  across  Europe  to  provide  multiple  cross-checks  on  bank  soundness,  while  not 
limiting  into  straitjacket  bank  behaviour.  Fourth,  I  hope  it  is  effective  in  breaking  the  link 
between sovereign and banks, not only to protect the sovereign but to allow banks to operate 
effectively and have access to European funding markets on a basis that is not subject to a 
sovereign risk-add on, but depends only on the bank’s own creditworthiness and standing. 
As to pitfalls, let me mention four here also. 
First, I hope that it doesn’t get bogged-down in overly complex layering of decision-making 
structures.  Second,  I  hope  that  the  huge  task  of  transferring  knowledge  to  the  centre  and 
building new communications channels between national supervisors and the central team 
does  not  result  in  process  overwhelming  product  in  an  interim  period  with  the  result  that 
some problems remain undetected, hidden by the dust kicked-up by the creation of the new 
structure.  Third,  I  hope  that  the  decision-making  bodies  are  truly  communautaire  and  not 
simply  an  amalgamation  of  national  interests.  Fourth,  I  hope  that  moving  decisions  to  the 
centre and away from national authorities in what can be a very sensitive area will not result 
in divisive clashes between broad European and national interests. 
Hopes: removing politics 
Politics and banking don’t fit well together but they seem to have a magnetic attraction for 
one  another.  Although  the  most  vivid  examples  here  come  from  developing  countries,  or 
from times long gone, 
Yet  who  can  doubt  that,  in  some  circumstances,  the  political  prominence  on  the  national 
stage of some bankers can result in implicit pressures to hesitate or second-guess regulatory 
action.  It  is,  I  believe,  only  a  mild  over-simplification  to  say  that  international  experience 
shows that the best form of regulation for delivering the common good is technocratic and 
wholly  insensitive  to  national,  regional  or  local  politics.  That  can  best  be  delivered  by  a 
regulator who lacks an understanding of, and interest in, such politics – outsiders will often fit 
this description very well. 
Note  that  the  outside  (central)  regulator  still  needs  to  relay  on  the  nose  of  the  local 
supervisors  for  the  assembly  of  the  relevant  information.  It  is  chiefly  in  making  the  final 
decision  on  regulatory  interventions  that  the  need  for  political  distance  becomes  evident. 
Indeed, it is not so much in supervision, as in resolution that these issues become decisive – 
pointing  of  course  to  the  need  to  complement  to  single  supervisor  with  a  single  resolution 
authority. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Emotional detachment 
Perhaps  an  even  bigger  challenge  is  to  creating  what  I  can  call  emotional  detachment 
between the banking system and the regulator. In contrast to the political issues, which will 
often  relate  to  isolated  firms,  what  I  have  in  mind  here  is  the  problem  of  the  waves  of 
euphoria  and  over-optimism  which  have  a  tendency  to  sweep  through  financial  systems, 
often driven by – and driving – property bubbles (and I am not just saying that because of the 
national experience of Ireland in recent years). If the entire banking system, and the property 
market  gurus,  and  the  beneficiaries  of  the  spin-off  economic  activity  and  stock  market 
appreciation  all  become  cheerleaders  for  the  continuation  of  credit-fuelled  bubbles  on  the 
ground that “this time it will be different” the regulator may still stand in opposition.  All too 
often, however, the regulator does not sufficiently suffer from professional deformation and a 
sneaking  suspicion  that  the  market  may  be  wrong  is  weakened  or  drowned-out  by  the 
plausible chorus of boosters to which the local regulator is daily exposed.  Here again one 
can hope that the outsider will bring untarnished to the party the scepticism that is natural for 
all regulators. 
This  hope  is  to  be  tempered,  of  course,  by  the  thought  that  globalisation  of  ideas  and 
fashions  means  that  booster-ism  is  not  reliably  confined  by  national  borders.  Indeed  the 
great  financial  crisis  from  which  we  are  emerging  has  been  an  example  of  cross-border 
contagion  of  booster-ism.  Look  again  at  the  Irish  case,  where  external  assessors  of  the 
quality of Irish financial supervision and regulation provided fulsome endorsement as late in 
the bubble as 2006 certainly alerts us to the fact that the external eye is not a panacea. 
Diversity of experience 
This hope is more tentative and a bit more speculative. It derives from the observation that 
supervisory practice differs quite significantly in Europe. No doubt every supervisory agency 
thinks it does the job better than every other one, but this is of course impossible. It’s much 
like asking men to rank their driving skills – everyone is above average. 
To  be  sure,  supervisors  have  been  talking  to  each  other  in  Europe  and  internationally  for 
years  in  the  Basel  Committee,  in  Europe’s  CEBS  and  now  in  the  EBA.  Much  has  been 
codified. Yet there is no agreed supervisory manual. The banking union will inevitably result 
in further moves in that direction: after all, the SSM will itself embody a single methodology. 
Of  course,  a  single  manual  does  not  mean  that  banks  shall  be  treated  in  the  same  way 
regardless of the macroeconomic context they are working in – as fretted by some – it means 
that similar risks should be approached with the same tools, and stringency, everywhere in 
the union. 
At the Central Bank of Ireland, we have recently rolled out a nifty computerised tool (called 
PRISM)  for  guiding  and  recording  supervisory  engagement.  We  think  it  provides  a  great 
advance especially for dealing in a systematic way with the supervision of financial firms to 
which an impact factor below the very highest has been applied. Even though we are very 
happy with this, and think it embodies much of the accumulated experience that has been 
gained over the years (good and bad) I am sure there are aspects that could benefit from a 
different approach. It is beyond unlikely that there is any agency has nothing to learn from 
the others. 
But by mixing and cross-referencing the practical experience of many different systems, the 
combined forces of the supervisory agencies of Europe will surely have the potential to spot 
and make early detection of novel risks. 
The  SSM  should  develop  into  best  practice  drawing  on  the  diversity  of  experience  across 
Europe. Of course we don’t want that to ossify: supervisory methods and models should not 
be rigidly codified, they should evolve, drawing on the disparate experience of all. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Sovereign and banks 
My fourth hope relates to an entirely different but well-worn aspect of Banking Union. This 
relates to breaking the pernicious feedback loop between sovereign and banks. Perhaps I do 
not  have  to  say  too  much  about  this.  Though  I  note  that  various  observers  have  different 
interpretations about how this would work. What all can agree upon is that the Irish syndrome 
cannot be allowed to recur. Features of the Irish case were (i) banks which accumulated vast 
exposures  to  the  Irish  property  bubble  financed  with  cross-border  wholesale  funding; 
(ii) Government stepping in to guarantee the funding (in ignorance of the hidden exposure to 
crippling  loan-losses);  (iii) central  bank  financing  of  the  outflows  that  occurred  when 
wholesale  markets  lost  confidence  in  the  guarantor;  (iv) the  Sovereign  having  to  have 
recourse  to  official  financing  to  spread  out  the  cash  repayment  of  the  indebtedness 
accumulated as a result of meeting the loan losses and the bank recapitalisation. Not only do 
I  hope  that  the  Banking  Union  will  be  (i) more  effective  in  preventing  unsound  banking 
practices on this scale, with interventions that pre-empt a slide into insolvency, but that there 
will be (ii) a resolution law and institutional arrangements that make bail-out of bank creditors 
a  thing  of  the  past  (because  of  sufficient  bail-in-able  debt  even  to  cover  cases  where 
supervision is insufficient to prevent insolvency); (iii) therefore no risk to the Sovereign from 
banking weakness; and (iv) where needed, a public financial backstop at European level to 
top up depleted capital for viable banks who have lost some of their capital. 
When it becomes evident that a bank has had made pervasive loan underwriting errors, the 
market naturally fears the worst, as it can take quite a while for the true extent of the losses 
to  emerge.  With  no  backstop  other  than  the  State,  this  pall  of  uncertainty  has  hung  over 
Ireland since the scale of the problem became evident as the initial tranches of loan losses 
were  uncovered  during  2010.  Only  gradually  has  the  Irish  Sovereign  been  recovering  the 
confidence of the market. The process could have been greatly accelerated had there been a 
backstop mechanism at European level to provide some form of insurance (at expected cost) 
to  absorb  the  risk  of  unexpectedly  high  losses.  Bit  by  bit  the  necessary  components  of  a 
European mechanism are being put together to obviate all of these deficiencies.  Even if it 
comes  too  late  to  avoid  what  happened  in  Ireland,  the  lessons  of  the  Irish  case  will  have 
helped protect other European countries in the next wave of crises, however far in the future 
they may be. 
Pitfalls: complex decision-making 
Let me be more brief on the pitfalls. One is clearly the challenge of delivering a streamlined, 
decisive  and  quick-acting  institutional  machine,  against  the  background  of  (i) a  legal 
underpinning (in the Treaty) which means that decision-making structures are being grafted 
onto a governance structure designed for monetary policy decision-making and not at all for 
banking  supervision;  (ii) the  need  to  delegate  much  of  the  work,  but  at  the  same  time 
maintain close lines of communication and authority between the central supervisory entity 
and  the  national  supervisors  (remembering  that  by  far  the  largest  fraction  of  supervisory 
resources will remain in the national agencies for the foreseeable future and (iii) the need to 
take regulatory actions from the centre which may in some cases require the use of national 
structures for implementation and enforcement. 
Interim period 
Setting up the Single Supervisory Mechanism is a major operational challenge. If we contrast 
the decade taken from the report of the Delors Committee to the start of the third stage of 
EMU  with  the  breakneck  speed  with  which  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  is  being 
constructed, it has to be acknowledged that avoiding operational risk in this interim set-up 
period is an important challenge. Observers of the Nordic banking crises of the late 1980s 
often  observe  that  it  occurred  during  the  bedding-down  period  of  new  supervisory 
mechanisms in that region. But even if we did not have that example before us, we certainly 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
are  going  through  a  very  complex  piece  of  engineering  without  being  able  to  remove  the 
fuses. 
Work in progress 
Creation of a supervisory mechanism is operationally the most demanding element of what is 
being undertaken, but it does need to be complemented – as has been widely discussed – 
by a sufficient resolution mechanism and resolution authority. One obvious pitfall then is that, 
while  the  SSM  is  being  developed  and  refined,  the  other  elements  of  the  Banking  Union 
proposal are not brought into operation, but left embryonic. 
Communautaire 
The ECB has managed, despite the pressures of the crisis, to deliver on its mandate as an 
agency  which  delivers  on  its  clear  euro-area  mandate  of  price  stability  for  the  common 
currency  area  as  a  whole  without  fragmenting  into  a  mere  clearing  house  for  mediating 
perceived  national  interests.  Can  that  exercise  of  –  dare  I  use  the  term  –  supranational 
decision-making be maintained for the single supervisory mechanism? It must be, for if not, 
then many of the gains I have spoken of above would be lost, and the mechanism become 
merely a costly overhead, if not in some instances counterproductive. Avoidance of this pitfall 
will call for decisive leadership and a determination by its governing bodies to be vigilant. The 
Governing Council will, no doubt, be especially reluctant to see any slippage here. 
Regulatory interventions are rarely popular, even when it is the national regulator takes the 
action.  If  not  well  managed,  intervention  from  a  centralised  regulatory  structure  in  Europe 
could  become  vulnerable  to  a  nationalistic  backlash  orchestrated  by  bank  managers  or 
owners in a way to which national regulators are not subject. This could be particularly so to 
the  extent  that  the  capitalisation  backstop  is  not  fully  in  place  with  the  result  that,  for 
example,  a  call  by  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  for  additional  capital  would  result  in 
pressure on the national government. Clearly this is a pitfall that needs to be guarded against 
by  means,  for  example,  of  good  communication  and,  of  course,  completion  of  all  of  the 
envisaged components of the Banking Union. 
* * * 
It is not that one bank or another failed in Ireland. It was that the whole system went into an 
ocean of indebtedness well beyond its ability to survive. The two worst-run banks did not just 
lose all of their capital. They lost almost half of the value of their balance sheets, and their 
losses have scarred the Irish economy in a way from which it will not fully recover for a long 
time.  We  have  been  painstakingly  rebuilding  institutional  reputation  and  working  hard  to 
ensure  that  the  banks  continue  and  complete  the  frustratingly  time-consuming  process  of 
ensuring the repair of the balance sheets of their borrowing customers. The banking system 
which for which we will surrender the primary responsibility to the SSM will be in much better 
shape than it was three years ago as we prepared our first estimates of loan loss. Not fixed, 
to be sure, but on its way. If my hopes for the Banking Union are realised, and the pitfalls 
avoided, a recurrence in any part of the Banking Union of a disaster as great as these banks 
brought to Ireland can surely be avoided.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
