Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Financing small and medium enterprises – 
strategies and challenges 
Keynote address by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at the 
Annual Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) Finance Conference & D-8 Workshop on 
Microfinance For Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), Lagos, 15 August 2013. 
 the  Developing-8 
(D-8)  Organization 
Protocol 
1. 
I welcome you all to this auspicious occasion of the Annual Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises  (MSMEs)  Finance  Conference  and  Entrepreneurship  Awards  holding  concurrently 
with 
for  Economic  Cooperation’s  Workshop  on 
“Microfinance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs)”. The similarity  between the theme of 
the Conference, which is “Strategies for Sustainable MSME Financing”, and the focus of the D-8 
Workshop, engenders the need for the search for a common solution to the challenges of access 
to finance for Micro, Small & Medium Entrepreneurs (MSMEs) – a critical sector usually excluded 
by the financial markets. 
2. 
The D-8 Organization for Economic Cooperation is an alliance made up of Bangladesh, 
Egypt,  Indonesia,  Iran,  Malaysia,  Nigeria,  Pakistan  and  Turkey  as  members,  which  aims  at 
improving  the  position  of  member  states  in  the  global  economy,  through  diversification  and 
creating  new  opportunities  in  trade  relations,  enhancing    participation  in  decision-making  at 
international level for economic development. The platform thus provides an avenue for members 
to  benchmark  each  other,  share  development  experiences,  closely  under-study  best  practice 
models,  and  apply  peer  pressure in  the implementation  of  agreed milestones. The five  priority 
areas of long-term cooperation among the members include trade, agriculture and food, industry, 
transportation, energy and minerals. 
3. 
A cardinal aspect of D-8 industrial cooperation is the promotion of SMEs. The emphasis 
in  this  regard  had  been  on  the  need  to  deepen  collaboration  through  technology  transfer  and 
cluster  development. This  workshop  on Microfinance for SMEs can, therefore,  be  viewed  as  a 
strategic  approach  by  the  D-8  to  address  the  financing  of  SME  in  member  countries.  The 
conference is also focused on financing of MSMEs because they are generally acknowledged to 
contribute  meaningfully 
income  and 
employment generation, and innovation. 
4. 
Your  Excellencies,  distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  2012,  Nigeria  had  about 
17.6 million MSMEs employing about 32.4 million people, and contributing about 46.54 per cent 
of nominal GDP. A recent survey by IFC and Mckinsey (2010) suggests that 80 per cent of these 
MSMEs are excluded from the financial markets. The state of MSMEs in the country underscores 
the  importance  of  this  conference.  Suffice  it  to  say  that  between  2003  and  2012,  commercial 
bank  loans  to  small  scale  enterprises  dropped  at  an  exponential  rate.  Analysis  of  the  annual 
trend in  the  share  of commercial  bank credit to small-scale  industries indicates  a  decline from 
about 7.5 per cent in 2003 to less than 1% in 2006 and a further decline in 2012 to 0.14 per cent. 
5. 
A  number  of  reasons  have  been  proffered  for  this  financing  gap.  The  banks  readily 
attribute their risk aversion stance for not lending to MSMEs to demand-side constraints, which 
include the lack of managerial capacity, inadequate collateral, and poor record keeping, amongst 
others. However, there also exist supply-side issues such as high transaction costs and lack of 
understanding by the banks of the nature and operations of MSMEs Other constraints plaguing 
the MSME  sub-sector in  Nigeria include infrastructure  deficit (especially,  power  and  transport), 
to  economic  development 
through  output  growth, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
policy  inconsistencies,  bureaucracy,  multiple  taxation  and  levies,  weak  intellectual  property 
protection and contract enforcement, and insecurity. 
6. 
Your  Excellencies,  distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  we  must  therefore  commit 
ourselves to the formulation and implementation of policies to strengthen the MSME sub-sector. 
The CBN on its own part has been working assiduously towards developing a robust regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  and  initiatives  for  improved  access  to  finance  for  the  sub-sector. 
Some  of  these  are  the  Revised  Microfinance  Policy,  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  Framework; 
Certification  Programme  for  MFBs;  Designated  Non-Financial  Businesses  and  Professionals 
(DNFBP);  Competency  Framework;  Payment  System  Transformation;  development  of  a 
Moveable  Collateral  Registry;  and  the  Financial  Ombudsman  Bill  currently  before  the  National 
Assembly. To further de-risk and encourage lending to the MSME sub-sector, the CBN has also 
intervened with a number of initiatives such as the Power and Airlines Intervention Fund (PAIF) to 
help  address  the  constraints  of  electricity;  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises  Credit  Guarantee 
Scheme  (SMECGS);  SME  Refinancing  and  Restructuring  Facility  (RRF);  Youth  Empowerment 
Programme  (Entrepreneurship  Development  Centres  (EDCs)  and  NYSC  Venture  Prize 
Competition), Financial Inclusion strategy and Tiered Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements. 
The  CBN  is  also  leading  the  efforts  of  the  Bankers’  Committee  to  set  up  an  industry-wide 
biometric  database  for  all  bank  customers  to  address  issues  of  KYC,  Anti  Money  Laundering 
(AML), and access to credit. This will help fast track use of channels such as biometric ATMs and 
POS terminals, etc. 
7. 
At  this  point  I  would  like  to  dwell  more  on  the  Competency  Framework.  In  order  to 
ensure that the banking industry has professionals with the requisite skills to maintain the stability 
of the financial system, an industry Competency Framework was developed and exposed in June 
2012 by the CBN. The objective is to guide banking operations and address issues relating to the 
quality  of  human  capital  in  leadership  positions.  The  framework  identifies  35  key  control 
functions,  in  which  significant  influence  is  exerted  on  the  conduct  of  a  financial  institution,  to 
define  and  standardize  the  necessary  skills  and competencies  required for  both  operators  and 
regulators  in  the  industry.  A  gap  analysis  on  industry  competency  using  the  framework,  was 
recently  conducted  which  revealed results  competencies  ranging from  3%  to  85%. The  results 
have  been  exposed  to  the  banks  and  remedial  actions  are  currently  being  proposed  to  focus 
those with low competency ratios to get them to an acceptable level. 
The CBN also recently released the National Financial Literacy Framework (NFIS). The Financial 
Literacy Steering Committee has been set up under my leadership in line with the NFIS. One of 
the  most  interesting  elements  of  this  project  is  a  requirement  for  the  Governor  and  Deputy 
Governors of the CBN and all bank CEOs to take time and teach financial inclusion to youths in 
secondary schools. I have already had my own baptism of fire from very intelligent students of 
Regent School, Abuja, Nigeria. In September 2013, I will also teach a class made up of up to 
100 students  drawn  from  3  (three)  public  schools  in  Abuja.  This  will  continue  on  designated 
Financial literacy Days. The classes and the questions and answers session will be broadcasted 
on national television and radios nationwide. Banks are also required to increase communication 
in indigenous languages to enhance financial literacy. 
8. 
In 2010 cautionary lending was the order of the day as a result of the global financial 
crises.  With  the  quantitative  easing  measures  of  the  CBN  and  the  intervention  of  AMCON, 
financial institutions began to recover from the effects of the crises. Specifically in agriculture, the 
CBN worked with the Federal Government to set up the Commercial Agriculture Credit Scheme 
(CACS),  and  the  Nigeria  Incentive-based  Risk-  sharing  System  for  Agricultural  Lending 
(NIRSAL).  Our  interventions  have  positively  impacted  the  economy  as  evidenced  by  the 
percentage of bank lending to agriculture as a proportion of total lending, which has increased 
from 1.4 per cent in 2009 to 4 per cent as at June, 2013. As of June 2013, the full amount of the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
CACS Fund  has  been  disbursed to  292  projects  along  the  agricultural  value  chain.  Out  of the 
total  number  of  projects  financed,  48  per  cent  and  41  per  cent  were  for  production  and 
processing  activities  respectively.  Average  capacity  utilization  of  projects  financed  by  CACS 
increased from 45 per cent in 2009 to about 75 per cent as at June 2013. 
9. 
Your  Excellences,  distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  in  addition  to  the  above,  the 
CBN  is  presenting  for  launch  today  the  N220Billion  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
Development Fund (MSMEDF). The Fund is designed to further enhance access to finance by 
MSMEs  with  the  following  major  objectives:  (i)  Provide  wholesale  financing  windows  for 
participating financial institutions (PFIs); (ii) Improve the capacity of the PFIs to meet credit needs 
of  MSMEs;  (iii)  Provide  funds  at  reduced  cost  to  PFIs;  (iv)  Enhance  access  of  women 
entrepreneurs to finance by allocating 60 per cent of the Fund to them; and (v) Improve access of 
NGOs/MFIs to finance. 
10. 
Permit me, Ladies and Gentlemen, to further state that these interventions are specific in 
scope and time and should be seen as stimulus for addressing financing gaps aimed at stirring 
the  market  dynamics  towards  MSME  development.  The  ultimate  responsibility  for  sustainable 
intermediation  for  the  subsector  lies  with  the  financial  markets.  Moreover,  these  interventions 
serve  to  integrate  the  micro-entrepreneurs,  the  low-income  earners,  farmers,  artisans  and  the 
active  poor  who  operate  in  the  informal  sector,  into  the  financial  system  to  improve  the 
effectiveness of public policy. 
11. 
officials, Members of Diplomatic Corps that have found time to attend this important event. 
12. 
Development Fund (MSMEDF). 
13. 
I thank you all. 
On  this  note,  I  hereby  launch  the  N220  Billion  Micro,  Small  and  Medium  Enterprises 
I wish to seize this opportunity to specially thank Your Excellences, Senior Government 
I wish you all fruitful deliberations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
