Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Workshop discussing Uganda’s 
Anti-Money Laundering Bill 
Opening remarks by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at 
a sensitisation workshop for the members of the Parliamentary Committee on Finance on the 
Anti-Money Laundering Bill No 13 of 2009, Entebbe, 3–4 December 2012. 
 The Honourable Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, 
The Honourable Chairperson of the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, 
Honourable Members of the Parliamentary Committee on Finance, 
Mr. Stewart Yikona from the World Bank, 
Mr. Fumbani Mhango from the Financial Intelligence Unit of Malawi, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to welcome you all to this workshop and thank you for finding the time in your 
very busy schedules to attend.  
I  would  especially  like  to  thank  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance  because,  without  her 
efforts,  it  would  not  have  been  possible  to  hold  the  workshop,  and  also  the  Honourable 
Members of Parliament on the Finance Committee for their support and cooperation. 
The objective of the workshop is to discuss the Anti-Money Laundering Bill which is currently 
before  Parliament. We  want  to  seek  the  views  of  Hon.  Members  on  the  legislation  and  to 
provide an opportunity for them to enhance their own understanding of the issues involved. 
Unfortunately, the passage of the Bill through Parliament has been long delayed since it was 
first  tabled  by  the  Hon.  Minister  of  Finance  in  2005,  and  these  delays  could  have  costly 
consequences for our country, as I will explain in these remarks. I very much hope that this 
workshop will help to clear up any remaining concerns or even misperceptions which Hon. 
Members  may  have  about  the  Bill,  so  that  its  passage  into  law  can  be  completed  without 
further delays. 
Money  laundering  involves  the  process  to  which  funds  which  have  been  acquired  through 
illegal means, such as drug trafficking or corruption, are subjected in order to conceal their 
illicit origin. Because of the large sums of money involved, money laundering often involves 
transactions in the financial system, although this is not always the case.  
For example, criminals may try to deposit illegally acquired money in bank accounts and then 
transfer it to other bank accounts, through a complex web of transactions. 
Money laundering has potentially serious and damaging consequences for the economy. It 
can  undermine  the  integrity  of  financial  institutions  and  thus  public  confidence  in  these 
institutions. It can undermine financial stability and cause highly destabilising financial flows 
across borders. The money which is laundered can also be used to corrupt public officials 
and  the  staff  of financial  institutions.  Hence the fight  against  money  laundering  is  also the 
fight against corruption. Money laundering is also used to support terrorist activities, because 
these activities require money which must be moved about in a clandestine manner. 
Organised crime often has transnational characteristics, and criminals have no qualms about 
moving  funds  across  international  borders  to  suit  their  own  ends.  Criminals  seeking  to 
launder money look for weak links in the global financial system. They find jurisdictions with 
weak or non-existent anti-money laundering legislation attractive, because such jurisdictions 
allow them to move money about and conceal their illegally acquired wealth without fear of 
detection.  The  failure  to  enact  anti-money  laundering  legislation  weakens  our  country’s 
capacity to combat financial crime, corruption and terrorism.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The  international  community  has  made  the  fight  against  money  laundering  a  priority.  The 
Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering (FATF) – an inter-governmental body – 
was established in 1989 to set standards and promote the implementation of legislative and 
other measures to combat money laundering. The FATF works closely with regional bodies, 
which include the Eastern and Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group (ESAAMLG), 
of which Uganda is a member. 
I  regret  to  say  that  Uganda  is  now  the  only  one  of  the  14  members  of  the  Eastern  and 
Southern Africa Anti-Money Laundering Group which has yet to pass anti-money laundering 
legislation.  Unsurprisingly,  this  does  not  impress  our  friends  and  colleagues  in  the  region, 
who  perceive  Uganda  as  a  weak  link  in  the fight  against financial  crime.  If  we  continue to 
delay  enacting  anti-money  laundering  legislation,  Uganda  will  also  risk being  added  to  the 
FATF’s  list  of  “High  Risk  and  Non  Cooperative  Jurisdictions”,  which  will  undermine 
international confidence in the integrity of our financial system. This will be very damaging for 
our economy, as I’m sure that you will appreciate. 
The  Anti-Money  Laundering  Bill  which  is  currently  before  Parliament  was  prepared  by 
Uganda’s Anti-Money Laundering Committee.  
The legislation is based on the International Standards on Combating Money Laundering and 
the Financing of Terrorism which are issued by the FATF and are generally referred to as the 
FATF 40 Recommendations. As such the proposed legislation is in line with best practise in 
the rest of the world. 
Given the transnational nature of money laundering, I don’t think that Uganda should settle 
for  anything  less  than  the  standards  which  are  in  force  elsewhere  in  the  world.  We  have 
provided  you  with  a  copy  of  the  FATF  40  Recommendations,  which  we  think  you  will  find 
useful as you discuss the merits of the proposed legislation. 
The Anti-Money Laundering Bill has provisions which: i) make it a criminal offence to launder 
the  proceeds  of  crime;  ii)  set  out  money  laundering  prevention  measures,  offences  and 
penalties; and iii) provide for the seizure, freezing and forfeiture of assets related to money 
laundering.  The  Bill  also  provides  for  the  creation  of  a  Financial  Intelligence  Unit  whose 
function  will  be  to  receive  and  analyse  reports  of  suspicious  transactions  from  banks  and 
other institutions, and to disseminate the results of the analysis to the relevant authorities. 
There are also provisions relating to international cooperation as well as national policies and 
a national coordination authority for such policies, a task which is currently performed by the 
Uganda Anti-Money Laundering Committee.  
This workshop will provide Hon. Members with the opportunity to discuss all of the provisions 
in  the  Bill.  To  facilitate  the  discussion,  we  have  invited  several  people  with  specialist 
expertise, including experts from Malawi and the World Bank, who will make presentations of 
different aspects of the legislation. 
I  now  wish  to  request  the  Honourable  Minister  of  Finance,  Planning  and  Economic 
Development to make her remarks and officially open the workshop. 
Thank you very much for listening to me.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
