Yaseen Anwar: Mobile banking in Pakistan 
Speech  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  the 
6th International Conference on “Mobile banking in Pakistan”, Karachi, 14 March 2013. 
 Good Morning Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am indeed delighted to be here today at this Conference on mobile banking. I would like to 
congratulate the organizers for arranging this important conference, which has now become 
an annual event to showcase the developments, and measure the progress made by mobile 
banking  in the country. Through these  annual conferences,  all  of  us  have  been  identifying 
various challenges and finding new solutions, and thus transforming branchless banking into 
vibrant and innovative industry in Pakistan. 
Let me first briefly talk about the significance of Mobile Commerce and then move on to the 
mobile banking, its role in promoting financial inclusion, and our responsibilities to strengthen 
mobile banking in Pakistan. 
Mobile  Commerce  is  generally  characterized  by  a  variety  of  business  partnerships  often 
involving a large number of organizations, from content providers to financial institutions to 
mobile network operators. After successful application of Mobile Commerce as an alternative 
channel  for  delivery  of  payment  services  in  developed  countries,  the  concept  is  now  also 
taking roots in developing countries. The usage of innovative and unconventional channels 
will dominate the conventional means of business and communication, as evidenced by the 
high  mobile  phone  subscription  witnessed  in  Pakistan.  The  number  of  mobile  phone 
subscribers has reached 120 million. 
Turning  now  to  the  use  of  mobile  technology  to  promote  financial  access,  there  is  an 
emerging consensus amongst policy makers around the world to improve access to financial 
services  for  poor  people,  through supporting the  safe  and  sound  spread  of  new  modes  of 
financial service delivery capable of reaching the poor. 
In  Pakistan,  Developments  in  branchless  banking  so  far  have  been  marvelous,  leaving 
nobody  in  doubt  about  the  potential  of  mobile  phone  banking  to  be  a  game-changer  in 
banking,  m-commerce,  and 
recent 
developments, we have been witnessing transformation in customers’ needs and behaviors, 
increased  competition,  technological  innovation,  new  business  models,  and  regulatory 
proportionality.  Owing  to  these  developments,  international  development  agencies  and 
media have now been highlighting Pakistan for its market and institutional environment for 
branchless  banking.  In  an  article  a  few  months  back,  The  Financial  Times  counted 
branchless  banking  and  microfinance  initiatives  in  Pakistan  among  the  “hidden  forces  of 
resilience  offering  the  best  hope  for  the  country’s  future”.  Elaborating  further,  the  article 
highlighted Pakistan “being in perpetual motion at the grassroots with ceaseless creativity as 
people find affordable solutions to their basic needs”. 
Regulatory  approach  has  played  a  fundamental  role  in  the  development  of  branchless 
banking. The issuance of branchless banking regulations in 2008 was an outcome of SBP’s 
vision and strategy to develop a road map for financial inclusion through the use of mobile 
phone  banking.  With  these  regulations,  SBP  enabled  a  diverse  set  of  players  including 
banks,  microfinance  banks,  mobile  network  operators  (MNOs),  retailers,  and  technology 
firms  to  develop  partnerships  and  business  models,  while  safeguarding  stability  of  the 
banking  and  payment  system,  and  interest  of  customers.  In  accordance  with  these 
objectives, SBP allowed only the bank-led model for undertaking branchless banking. At that 
time, many thought that this was a “restrictive” approach, and would not work out. They were 
proved wrong by the subsequent phenomenal growth of branchless banking in Pakistan. As 
inclusion.  Broadly  describing 
financial 
these 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
a result of our market developments, SBP’s regulatory approach and experience was cited 
as an example for other countries to follow. 
According to a recent CGAP publication, “Pakistan serves as an example of how public and 
private  institutions  together  can  move  a  country  towards  a  digital  financially  inclusive 
system”.  The  report  further  notes  that  “Government  and  public  actors  have  created  the 
enabling  environment  and  provided  seed  funding,  while  private  actors  are  developing  the 
infrastructure, services and a long-term business case”. 
Since the issuance of branchless banking regulations in 2008, several  branchless banking 
models  have  been  deployed.  UBL’s  Omni  and  Tameer  bank’s  EasyPaisa  have  already 
gained  substantial  ground  and  have  established  themselves  as  market  leaders.  Two  new 
services  (MobiCash  and  Timepey)  have  just  launched  while  two  are  running  live  pilots. 
Moreover, all the four mobile network operators in partnership with some of the largest banks 
have  already  launched  their  branchless  banking  services  or  are  at  the  final  stages  of 
launching. As a result, the branchless banking current growth trajectory is expected to get 
further steeper in the years ahead. 
With  the  entrance  of  new  and  strong  players,  branchless  banking  has  already  seen 
acceleration.  The  number  of  agent  network  servicing  branchless  banking  customers  has 
reached  42,  000.  Therefore,  the  basic  financial  services  can  now  be  accessed  in  the 
remotest parts of the country through any of these agents. A total of 194 million transactions 
have  been  carried  out  worth  813  billion  rupees.  More  than  2  million  m-wallets  have  been 
opened  till  date,  and  these  numbers  will  improve  significantly.  Along  with  the  tremendous 
growth in the branchless banking sector, the infrastructure of payment systems and branch 
network  is  also  showing  an  increasing  growth  trend.  The  ATMs  network  has  increased  to 
6,232 whereas branch network has reached 11,600. 94 percent of our branches are now real 
time  on-line.  Similarly,  the  number  of  plastic  cards  has  increased  to  20  million  and  the 
number of POS machines has increased to 34,000 units. This is a significant achievement, 
and  this  also  demonstrates  the  opportunity  to  bring  the  benefits  of  this  infrastructure  to 
millions of the unbanked population. 
Branchless  Banking  has  also  proved  to  be  an  effective  instrument  in  channelizing  the 
Government  to  Persons  (G2P)  payments  in  trying  times  like  serving  Internally  Displaced 
Persons (IDPs), and devastating floods for the last two years. The Benazir Income Support 
Programme beneficiaries are also being served effectively through the same mechanism. In 
the coming days, this channel is expected to continue playing an important role towards the 
promotion  of  financial  inclusion  and  the  management  of  Government  to  Person  (G2P) 
Programs like Salaries Disbursements, Pensions, BISP, Watan Cards, Pakistan Cards and 
tax collections services, etc. The existing Branchless Banking deployments can cater to the 
needs of over 10 million potential beneficiaries of G2P payments in Pakistan. 
Branchless banking is going to dominate the retail banking landscape in the long-term. Whilst 
we seek to encourage the introduction of innovative instruments for payments, we also need 
to ensure that high levels of standards are maintained for safety, security and protection of 
consumers’ interests. The central policy objectives of SBP are to ensure safety, soundness 
and  efficiency  of  the  banking  system,  and  to  protect  the  interest  of  consumers.  Since 
branchless banking is becoming a vital component of the national payment grid, it is prudent 
for  all  stakeholders  to  ensure  that  appropriate  measures  are  in  place  to  mitigate  inherent 
risks  associated  with  it  like  access  by  un-authorized  persons/  criminals  such  as  hackers, 
money launderer, terrorist financiers etc. This can only be achieved when our technologies 
are robust and secured, and agents are comprehensively trained and effectively monitored 
by  the  banks.  In  this  regard,  the  importance  of  a  comprehensive  agent  development 
framework  cannot  be  ignored.  I  am  sure  that  our  banks  would  not  simply  jump  on  the 
bandwagon without sufficient agent development mechanisms including their hiring, on-going 
training and monitoring. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Building public confidence on these innovative payment solutions is critical. A single failure of 
branchless  banking  deployment  can  erode  the  public’s  confidence  in  the  system  which  in 
turn  may  jeopardize  the  whole  sector.  Being  fully  cognizant  of  the  risk  factors  involved  in 
such unconventional modes of banking, SBP has been proactively monitoring developments 
and associated risks both at system and entity level in order to take appropriate corrective 
measures in a timely manner. 
We must acknowledge that branchless banking has gained critical mass in a short period of 
time.  I  believe  that  the  market  has  to  start  shifting  transactions  from  first  generational 
services  (Person-to-person/Bills  payments)  to  second  generational  services  (account-to-
account  and  inter-bank  transfer).  The  players  need  to  expand  their  product  portfolio  by 
offering  new  products  and  services  for  their  target  market.  In  my  view,  this  is  part  of  an 
inevitable evolution  which will ensure the long-term sustainable development of the sector, 
encourage micro savings and help in meeting the demands for inclusive financial services of 
the target market. 
Let  me  mention  that  SBP  is  working  closely  with  key  stakeholders  of  the  mobile  and 
branchless banking industry. We have already constituted a national consultative group and 
its  various  working  groups  to  develop  a  common  understanding  on  the  challenges  and 
develop  a  proposal  for  policy  actions.  SBP  will  continue  its  engagement  with  the 
stakeholders to identify and undertake all necessary measures for developing an eco-system 
that would not only support mobile banking but would also contribute to the wider economy. 
I  trust  that  today’s  conference  will  help  us  understand  the  various  issues  relating  to  the 
growth  of  mobile  banking  systems  and  products,  and  m-commerce.  As  this  conference  is 
meant  to  create  awareness  on  mobile  commerce,  we  understand  that  developments  in 
m-banking and m-commerce will lead us to connect the unbanked segment of our population 
to financial services, thus contributing to their empowerment. 
Thank you all for being part of this forum and I look forward to your productive participation 
today. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
