Mario Draghi: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and 
Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Bratislava, 2 May 2013. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press conference. I would like to thank Governor Makúch for his kind hospitality and express 
our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of  today’s  meeting  of  the 
Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting, during which we 
took a number of decisions on key ECB interest rates, liquidity provision and possible ways 
forward  to  enhance  the  provision  of  credit.  The  meeting  was  also  attended  by  the 
Commission Vice-President, Mr Rehn. 
First,  based  on  our  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  we  decided  to  lower  the 
interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing  operations  of  the  Eurosystem  by  25  basis  points  to 
0.50% and the rate on the marginal lending facility by 50 basis points to 1.00%. The rate on 
the deposit facility will remain unchanged at 0.00%. These decisions are consistent with low 
underlying  price  pressure  over  the  medium  term.  Inflation  expectations  for  the  euro  area 
continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. In keeping with this picture, monetary and loan dynamics 
remain subdued. At the same time, weak economic sentiment has extended into spring of 
this year. The cut in interest rates should contribute to support prospects for a recovery later 
in  the  year.  Against  this  overall  background,  our  monetary  policy  stance  will  remain 
accommodative for as long as needed. In the period ahead, we will monitor very closely all 
incoming information on economic and monetary developments and assess any impact on 
the outlook for price stability. 
Second, we are closely monitoring money market conditions and their potential impact on our 
monetary  policy  stance  and  its  transmission  to  the  economy.  In  this  context,  we  decided 
today  to  continue  conducting the  main  refinancing  operations  (MROs)  as fixed  rate  tender 
procedures with full allotment for as long as necessary, and at least until the end of the 6th 
maintenance period of 2014 on 8 July 2014. This procedure will also remain in use for the 
Eurosystem’s special-term refinancing operations with a maturity of one maintenance period, 
which will continue to be conducted for as long as needed, and at least until the end of the 
second quarter of 2014. The fixed rate in these special-term refinancing operations will be 
the same as the MRO rate prevailing at the time. Furthermore, we decided to conduct the 
three-month  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  to  be  allotted  until  the  end  of  the 
second quarter of 2014 as fixed rate tender procedures with full allotment. The rates in these 
three-month  operations  will  be  fixed  at  the  average  rate  of  the  MROs  over  the  life  of  the 
respective LTRO. 
Third, the Governing Council decided to start consultations with other European institutions 
on  initiatives  to  promote  a  functioning  market  for  asset-backed  securities  collateralised  by 
loans to non-financial corporations. 
In the meantime, it is essential for governments to intensify the implementation of structural 
reforms at national level, building on progress made in fiscal consolidation and proceeding 
with bank recapitalisation where needed. Furthermore, they should maintain the momentum 
towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union, including the swift implementation of the 
banking union. 
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Real GDP contracted by 0.6% in the fourth quarter of 2012, following a decline of 0.1% in the 
third quarter. Output has thus declined for five consecutive quarters. Overall, labour market 
conditions remain weak. Recent developments in short-term indicators, notably survey data, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
indicate that weak economic sentiment has extended into spring of this year. Looking ahead, 
euro area export growth should benefit from a recovery in global demand and our monetary 
policy stance should contribute to support domestic demand. Furthermore, the improvements 
in  financial  markets  seen  since  last  summer  should  work  their  way  through  to  the  real 
economy. At the same time, necessary balance sheet adjustments in the public and private 
sectors  will  continue  to  weigh  on  economic  activity.  Overall,  euro  area  economic  activity 
should stabilise and recover gradually in the second half of the year. 
The  risks  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  for  the  euro  area  continue  to  be  on  the 
downside.  They  include  the  possibility  of  even  weaker  than  expected  domestic  and  global 
demand and slow or insufficient implementation of structural reforms in the euro area. These 
factors have the potential to dampen confidence and thereby delay the recovery. 
According  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  1.2%  in  April 
2013, down from 1.7% in March. This decline in the annual inflation rate reflects a significant 
fall in energy prices, but is also due to a sizeable transitory effect coming from the annual 
rate  of  change  in  services  prices  on  account  of  the  timing  of  Easter.  Inflation  rates  could 
remain subject to some volatility throughout the year. Looking further ahead, underlying price 
trends  should  persist  and,  over  the  medium  term,  inflation  expectations  remain  firmly 
anchored in line with price stability. 
Taking into account today’s decisions, risks to the outlook for price developments are broadly 
balanced  over  the  medium  term,  with  upside  risks  relating  to  stronger  than  expected 
increases in administered prices and indirect taxes, as well as higher commodity prices, and 
downside risks stemming from weaker economic activity. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, recent data confirm that the underlying pace of monetary 
expansion  continues  to  be  subdued.  Annual  growth  in  broad  money  moderated  in  March, 
standing  at  2.6%,  after  3.1%  in  February. The annual  growth  rate  of  the  narrow  monetary 
aggregate,  M1,  increased  slightly  further  to  7.1%  in  March,  reflecting  the  continued 
preference for the most liquid instruments in M3. Deposits with the domestic money-holding 
sector continued to grow further in most stressed countries in March. 
The annual growth rates of loans (adjusted for loan sales and securitisation) to non-financial 
corporations and households have now remained broadly unchanged since the turn of the 
year,  standing  in  March  at  –1.3%  and  0.4%  respectively.  To  a  large  extent,  weak  loan 
dynamics  reflect  the  current  stage  of  the  business  cycle,  heightened  credit  risk  and  the 
ongoing  adjustment  of  financial  and  non-financial  sector  balance  sheets.  The  recent  Bank 
Lending Survey (BLS) confirmed weak demand for loans in the euro area. While some signs 
of stabilisation are emerging, the Survey on the access to finance of small and medium-sized 
enterprises (SMEs) in the euro area indicates continued tight credit conditions, particularly for 
SMEs in several euro area countries. Moreover, the available information indicates high risk 
perception on the part of banks. 
In  order to  ensure  adequate transmission  of monetary  policy  to  the financing  conditions  in 
euro  area  countries,  it  is  essential  that  the  fragmentation  of  euro  area  credit  markets 
continues to decline further and that the resilience of banks is strengthened where needed. 
Progress has been made since last summer in improving the funding situation of banks, in 
strengthening the domestic deposit base in stressed countries and in reducing reliance on 
the Eurosystem as reflected in repayments of the three-year LTROs. Further decisive steps 
for  establishing  a  banking  union  will  help  to  accomplish  this  objective.  In  particular,  the 
Governing Council emphasises that the future Single Supervisory Mechanism and a Single 
Resolution  Mechanism  are  crucial  elements  for  moving  towards  re-integrating  the  banking 
system and therefore require swift implementation. 
To sum up, taking into account today’s decisions, the economic analysis indicates that price 
developments should remain in line with price stability over the medium term. A cross-check 
with the signals from the monetary analysis confirms this picture. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
With  regard  to  fiscal  policies,  the  spring  2013  deficit  and  debt  data  notifications  by  euro 
area  countries  indicate  that  the  average government  deficit  declined from  4.2%  of GDP  in 
2011 to 3.7% in 2012. Over the same period, the average government debt rose from 87.3% 
to 90.6% of GDP. In order to bring debt ratios back on a downward path, euro area countries 
should  not  unravel  their  efforts  to  reduce  government  budget  deficits  and  continue,  where 
needed,  to  take  legislative  action  or  otherwise  promptly  implement  structural  reforms,  in 
such a way as to mutually reinforce fiscal sustainability and economic growth potential. Such 
structural reforms should target improvements in competitiveness and adjustment capacities, 
as well as aim to increase sustainable growth and employment. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
