Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Financial capability as a 21st century life skill 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the Citi-FT Financial Education Summit, Makati City, 5 December 
2012. 
 Mr. Michael Zink, Head of ASEAN and Singapore Citi Country Officer; Mr. Sanjiv Vohra, Citi 
Country Officer for the Philippines; Secretary Imelda Nicolas, Chairperson, Commission on 
Filipino Overseas; Ms. Brandee McHale, Chief Operating Officer, Citi Foundation; Mr. David 
Pilling, Financial Times Asia Editor; Ms. Kathy Hurley, Executive Vice President, Education 
Alliances, Pearson Foundation; distinguished resource persons; experts and practitioners in 
financial  education;  friends  who  have  traveled  from  other  countries;  my  colleagues  in  the 
BSP; ladies and gentlemen, good morning everyone!  
Finally, this annual financial education summit is in the Philippines. Now on its 9th year, it 
continues  to  enjoy  such  high  level  of  interest  and  support  for  its  relevance  to  the  times. 
Congratulate and thank Citi and FT and the other sponsors and organizers of this gathering. 
For starters, its forum theme “Financial Capability as a 21st Century Life Skill” is an outright 
declaration that financial capability is a must-have-skill. I agree with this statement. 
Indeed, the ability to make sound financial choices and decisions is essential to ensure one’s 
financial well-being. And yet, most people are sorely lacking in this necessary skill. 
The  summit’s  keynote  session  pushes  the  envelope  further:  it  raises  the  social,  economic 
and moral imperatives of bridging the financial capability gap. Discussions are also bound to 
be thought-provoking on the topic “The Ultimate Financial Education Challenges – Impact, 
Scale and Sustainability.” 
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  The  organizers  of  this  summit  have  brought  together  world-class 
finance  education  experts  and  advocates  to  tackle  these  important  issues.  The  Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas is therefore pleased that it is a host partner in this Financial Education 
Summit.  
For  your  information,  the  BSP  was  also  co-host  in  the  last  two  days  of  the  Asia  and  the 
Pacific  Regional  Meeting  on  Child  and  Youth  Finance  organized  by  the  Child  and  Youth 
Finance, International. 
And  three months  ago, the  BSP  co-hosted  with  the  OECD  in  Cebu  the  Asian  Seminar  on 
Financial Literacy and Inclusion.  
It must be obvious, financial education is important to the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas. Both 
Mr.  Zink  and  Mr.  Pilling  have  given  us  a  useful  and  comprehensive  background  on  the 
objectives, issues, efforts being made towards expanding financial education and inclusion. I 
would like to tell you about our experience at the BSP. 
The  vision  of  the  BSP  as  the  country’s  monetary  authority  and  supervisor  of  the  banking 
system  is  to  be  a  catalyst  for  a  globally  competitive  economy  and  a  financial  system  that 
delivers a high quality of life for all Filipinos. While financial education may not immediately 
be considered a core function of a monetary authority or a supervisor of the banking system, 
it  is  actually  quite  intrinsically  linked  to  our  overarching  goal  and  vision.  To  us,  financial 
education empowers people to manage their resources with prudence, instills the discipline 
of saving regularly, and safely grow their money. 
Thus,  we  believe  that  financial  education  empowers  the  citizenry  to  become  effective 
partners of the BSP as productive economic agents and improves people’s lives. 
With the importance we attach to financial education, the Bangko Sentral is implementing a 
nationwide economic and financial learning program. We follow a multi-dimensional strategy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
covering  1)  the  learning  sector  including  schools,  public  and  private  sector  research  work, 
and 2) the transacting public.  
For the “learning” sector, we created Economic and Financial Learning Centers at our head 
office,  three  regional  offices  and  18  branches  across  the  country.  These  are  our  primary  
in-house  communication  channels  and  the  public’s  focal  point  of  contact  in  the  BSP  on 
information concerning economic and financial matters. 
The BSP also conducts outreach activities, such as targeted seminars and expos to promote 
greater awareness and understanding of essential economic and financial issues. 
For the transacting public, the BSP created the Financial Consumers Affairs Group (FCAG), 
a unit dedicated to assisting consumers who have concerns related to banking and financial 
services. 
We have also forged partnerships to broaden and deepen our reach.  
Among others, we are in partnership with the Department of Education for the integration of 
lessons on saving and money management into the elementary education curriculum of our 
14 million elementary pupils.  
Parallel  to  this,  we  forged  partnerships  with  the  Bank  Marketing  Association  of  the 
Philippines for the development of affordable child-friendly bank products including savings 
account with a minimum opening balance of P100 or less than US$3.00. 
We have also partnered with international organizations to help us benchmark our practices, 
share our learnings and exchange ideas. These include:  
1) 
the  International  Network  for  Finance  Education  (INFE)  created  by  OECD  to 
promote and facilitate international cooperation on global financial education issues; 
and 
the  Group  of  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  which  counts  as  members 
policy makers and regulators in the developing world who are committed to financial 
inclusion. 
2) 
Ladies and gentlemen. In scaling up its activities for consumer protection, the BSP is also 
intensifying  its  information  campaign  to  ensure  that  intended  benefits  actually  accrue  to 
financial consumers.  
For  instance,  we  have  been  working  on  enhancing  transparency  in  credit  transactions  to 
make  sure  people  are  not  overcharged  with  “flat”  interest  rates  and  similar  misleading 
methods.  To  ensure  proper  and  immediate  dissemination  of  such  consumer  protection 
measures,  no  less  than  our  deputy  governors  explain  the  issues  through  mass  media, 
including radio. 
This  may  not  mean  much  to  some,  but  for  tricycle  drivers,  for  instance,  who  pay  their 
motorcycles on instalment, the right to demand correct pricing translates to higher income for 
him and his family. 
It is not enough therefore to craft responsive policies. We need to communicate and educate 
the people on what these means for them. On the other hand, we also need our people to be 
responsible and vigilant in protecting their rights. 
Indeed, financial capability is a life skill that can lead to a better life. 
I wish all of you therefore a fruitful and successful financial education summit.  
Thank you and Mabuhay!  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
