Andreas Dombret: Europe’s way forward 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  on  the  occasion  of  the  change  of  the  Head  of  the  Bundesbank’s  New  York 
Representative Office, New York, 2 July 2013 
 Introduction 
Governor Powell 
Excellencies 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is a pleasure for me to welcome you to the Bundesbank’s reception in New York. Many 
thanks for taking the time to attend tonight. 
Today is a special day for two reasons: 
First,  today  is  a  good  day  for  international  financial  stability.  This  morning  the  Fed  Board 
approved a final rule implementing Basel III in the United States. This demonstrates the joint 
determination of the global regulatory community to deliver on the financial reform agenda. 
As  I  have  said  numerous  times  before,  I  have  never  doubted  the  Fed’s  commitment  to 
Basel III. 
Second,  on  a  more  local  scale,  we  bid  farewell  to  our  Chief  Representative  Mr  Joerg 
Stephan. He did an excellent job for which I  wish to thank him on behalf of the Executive 
Board of the Bundesbank. And today, we inaugurate his successor Ms Claudia Stirböck. But 
before doing so, let me make a few remarks on the current situation on the European side of 
the Atlantic. 
Forging a banking union 
Europe is currently very busy. Busy forging a banking union. This banking union represents 
the  largest  integration  step  since  the  euro  came  into  being  in  1999.  A  single  market  for 
banking  is  the  logical  complement  to  the  single  currency.  And  a  highly  integrated  banking 
system is positive news for the real economy. Thus, a banking union is an excellent project 
and it is actively supported by the Bundesbank. 
Of  course,  we  need  to  get  it  right.  To  be  successful,  any  banking  union  needs  strong 
institutions. This is why we need a thorough asset quality review as soon as possible with 
credible national backstops. Joint supervision of banks and resolution of insolvent institutions 
are both critical in this respect. 
The planning for a joint banking supervision, for the so-called single supervisory mechanism 
– or SSM for short – is taking shape. It will be established under the roof of the European 
Central Bank and will operate in close cooperation with the national central banks of the euro 
area,  including  the  Bundesbank.  A clear  separation  within  the  ECB  between  the  monetary 
policy  function  and  the  banking  supervision  function  will  be  needed  to  ensure  that  the 
independence of monetary policy is properly protected and conflicts of interests are avoided. 
All  of  this  is  a  major  project  and  quality  should  not  be  compromised  to  the  detriment  of 
speed. I expect the SSM to start its operation in the second half of next year. 
I  am  certain  that  the  SSM  will  be  a  reliable  partner  for  US  regulators  and  supervisors. 
Therefore, in my view, the SSM deserves just as much trust as US supervisory authorities 
are granted by their transatlantic partners. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Planning  for  the  second  critical  institution  in  a  banking  union,  the  common  resolution 
framework, is less advanced. Ideally, the single resolution mechanism would be in place at 
the same time as the SSM. However, it looks as if this is unlikely to happen. Things are still 
in flux. For a start we  will probably have a network of national arrangements with national 
resolution authorities and national resolution funds endowed by the banking industry. These 
national institutions will have the same design and will apply common rules. 
But  as  we  all  know:  banking  is  global.  When  it  comes  to  supervision  –  and  particularly 
resolution – of large international banks, it will not be enough to have a European framework. 
Global financial markets call for global regulations. Coordination and cooperation with other 
jurisdictions – especially the US –, therefore, is of the utmost importance. The goal must be 
to  head  towards  a  more  international,  not  towards  a  more  national  approach.  By 
implementing a global level playing field, we have to avoid regulatory arbitrage likely to result 
from different regimes. 
We should keep in mind that the success of the G20 reform agenda for strengthening the 
resilience  of  the  global  financial  system  hinges  upon  the  consistency  of  various  initiatives. 
There are two different aspects. The first is cross-sectoral consistency. That is  why it’s so 
important to keep shadow banking on the agenda. The second issue is consistency between 
the rules in different jurisdictions. That is exactly why international cooperation is of such high 
importance when reforming the financial sector. 
But let me get back to the European reform agenda. Even a European banking union based 
on sound institutions will not be able to meet expectations if it is not underpinned by prudent 
macroeconomic policies. Many European countries are currently making progress in cutting 
public  expenditures,  strengthening  competitiveness,  and  improving  their  current  account. 
They  very  much  have  to  hold  their  course,  since  there  is  no  alternative  to  those  efforts. 
Structural reforms are essential to bring back growth. 
Central banks: The “only game in town”? 
Some expect central banks to be the ones that can bring back growth. And indeed, over the 
past few years, many central banks have taken on more and more tasks. Monetary policy 
nowadays seems to be urged to promote short-term financial stability or to facilitate public 
borrowing.  Evidently,  these  developments  have  to  be  seen  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
financial  and  sovereign  debt  crises  of  the  past  six  years.  For  sure,  there  have  been  good 
reasons  why  central  banks  helped  contain  the  crises  through  additional  policy  measures. 
Central  banks  can  do,  and  are  doing,  a  lot  to  prevent  tail  events  and  are  buying  time  for 
politicians  to  undertake  the  reforms  needed  to  tackle  the  root  of  the  crisis.  But  I  am 
concerned to see central banks being pushed into the role of an all-purpose weapon of sorts. 
This will not do anybody any favours. 
In his Andrew Crockett Memorial Lecture held at the Bank of International Settlements a few 
days  ago,  Professor  Raghuram  Rajan  from  the  University  of  Chicago’s  Booth  School  of 
Business described the situation quite well: “When the central banker offers himself as the 
only game in town, in an environment where politicians only have choices between the bad 
and the worse, he becomes the only game in town.” 
But we should not let politicians lean back. We are not the only game in town. And if we find 
ourselves alone on the field, we need to bring the other relevant players back and remind 
them  of  their  responsibilities.  Central  banks  cannot  solve  the  crisis.  And  we  should  avoid 
overburdening monetary policy by trying. 
Federal Reserve and Bundesbank 
Turning to today’s event, it is my pleasure to have Jerome Powell from the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors with us. He needs no introduction. Jerome is going to deliver a speech 
on,  among  other  things,  international  cooperation  among  central  banks.  How  mutually 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
beneficial and fruitful such a cooperation can be is shown, for instance, by the long-lasting 
collaboration between the Fed and the Bundesbank on so many different levels. 
The Representative Office of the Deutsche Bundesbank in New York is a good example of 
this close relationship. And I am sure that Ms Stirböck will contribute to a further deepening 
of this relationship, just as Mr Stephan did over the last four years. Being a valued partner for 
discussion not only for our colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank, but for all our contacts in 
New York, Mr Stephan – and now Ms Stirböck – help to ensure this important dialog between 
the Bundesbank and the financial centre New York. Ms Stirböck, I wish you all the best for 
your new position. 
A speaker should exhaust his topic, not the audience. Therefore, two final things – first: thank 
you for your attention, and second: Jerome, the floor is yours.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
