Lim Hng Kiang: Increasing and broadening private sector participation in 
infrastructure development 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of 
the  World  Bank-Singapore 
Infrastructure Finance Summit, Singapore, 29 May 2013. 
the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at 
 Ms Sri Mulyani Indrawati, Managing Director of the World Bank Group 
Mr Cesar Purisima, Secretary of Finance of the Philippines 
Mr Sergey Storchak, Deputy Finance Minister of Russia 
Mr Areepong Bhoocha-Oom, Permanent Secretary of the Ministry of Finance of Thailand 
Distinguished guests 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Introduction – infrastructure financing is crucial to maintain sustainable growth for 
countries 
A very good morning to all of you. It gives me great pleasure to join you at the opening of this 
year’s  World  Bank-Singapore  Infrastructure  Finance  Summit.  Let  me  extend  a  warm 
welcome to all our guests, and especially to our overseas guests. 
This  is  our  fourth  meeting,  and  we  are  meeting  under  more  stabilised  circumstances. 
Emerging  market  economies  have  experienced  a  strong  rebound  in  capital  inflows  post 
global  financial  crisis.  McKinsey  estimates  that  some  US$1.5trn  in  foreign  capital  went  to 
emerging markets in 2012. These flows are due in part to institutional investors’ hunt for yield 
in the shorter term, and in part also to the longer-term shift in liquidity from the advanced to 
the emerging world. 
The G30 Working Group on Long-term Finance has estimated that infrastructure spending 
must increase nearly 15% for countries to achieve even moderate levels of economic growth. 
The  scale  of  spending  required  is  significant;  it  raises  questions  on  whether  and  how  our 
financial system can deliver the required financing. 
Policy-makers  recognise  this;  international  fora  such  as  the  G20  and  APEC  have  made 
long-term investment a priority agenda topic this year. A key challenge is how we can better 
channel  capital  flows  towards  infrastructure  development,  a  major  element  in  countries’ 
pursuit of sustainable, equitable growth. 
To address this challenge, we must pursue enhancements in three areas – first, to catalyse 
private sector involvement in project financing; second, to optimise the project delivery value 
chain; and third, to build capabilities in both the public and private sectors. 
Private sector investment in infrastructure is critical, and solutions must be created to 
support a necessary shift in sources of financing over time 
Let me first turn to private sector investment in infrastructure. At present, governments drive 
about 60% of infrastructure spending globally. But growing fiscal pressure means that public 
balance sheets will not be able to sustain the current or even higher level of spending that is 
needed. 
Bank  lending  has  been  the  other  main  source  of  infrastructure  financing,  but  this  is 
increasingly constrained by macroeconomic factors and potentially regulatory developments. 
The global project finance bank loan market registered a 7% fall y-o-y in 2012. The Eurozone 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
crisis saw many prominent project financing banks deleverage and become more selective 
with  clients  and  transactions,  while  Basel  III  may  lower  the  volume  and  raise  the  costs  of 
project finance loans. 
Hence  the  balance  of  financing  sources  will  eventually  have  to  shift.  Policy  makers  have 
recognised  the  need  for  broader  private  sector  participation.  Long-term  investors  such  as 
insurance companies, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds can be alternative sources 
of financing, as the life cycles of infrastructure assets match their long-term liabilities. 
However,  these  investors  are  not  participating  actively  enough  in  the  infrastructure  space, 
especially in debt financing. I am sure we all recognise that there are many reasons including 
a lack of familiarity with the asset class and bespoke nature of infrastructure projects. Some 
see  higher  perceived  political  risks  in  Asia,  and  a  limited  range  of  investment  instruments 
relating to infrastructure. To catalyse broader private sector participation to complement the 
traditional bank lending space, a few things could be considered. 
Firstly,  we  recognise  that  investors  have  varying  risk  appetites,  and  that  the  expertise  to 
evaluate and undertake greenfield project risks still resides mainly with banks. Banks should 
therefore consider bringing in different types of capital at different stages as the risk profile of 
a project changes over time. For instance, transactions could be structured such that banks 
finance the construction stage of projects using their balance sheets, and the bank loan is 
then refinanced in the bond market post-construction. This way, institutional investors gain 
exposure to a steady stream of cash flows from operating projects, while banks can recycle 
capital to lend to new greenfield projects. 
There  have  been  precedents  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Last  year,  the  Topaz  Solar  Farm 
project  in  California  was  structured  with  a  US$1.2b  debt  package  featuring  US$850m  of 
bonds.  Banks  took the construction  risks,  and  the  loans  were  subsequently  refinanced  via 
bond issuances. 
In the Asian context, there may be additional considerations in refinancing bank loans via the 
capital markets, given the greater reliance on bank lending in this region. Project sponsors 
need to get more comfortable accessing the bond markets instead of relying solely on their 
relationship banks. Credit or risk guarantees provided by multilateral development banks or 
export credit agencies may also need to be adapted for use in the capital markets. Banks 
need  to  be  innovative  and  develop  a  broader  suite  of  financing  instruments  beyond  bank 
lending in order to meet the financing needs of their clients. 
MDBs/ECAs are important risk mitigants and could explore new ways to make efficient 
use of their funds 
This brings me to the next point – the role of multilateral development banks, or MDBs, and 
export credit agencies in catalysing broader private sector participation. Given the scale of 
financing required for infrastructure, discussions at international fora have started to focus on 
how the multilaterals can further support the sector. For example, part of the G20 agenda for 
2013 involves getting multilaterals to increase their lending capacity. 
Post global financial crisis, these entities have in fact stepped up and filled project financing 
gaps when bank liquidity is constrained. Between 2009 and 2012, they doubled their lending 
to infrastructure projects globally from US$22b to US$44b. 
However, is more lending the solution? Despite a doubling of their lending in the last three 
years,  they  only  contributed  16%  of  project  debt  financing  volumes  globally  in  2012. 
Conceptually, a more efficient way to utilise their financial resources may be in the form of 
risk  mitigants  such  as  credit  or  risk  guarantees.  The  G30  Working  Group  on  Long-Term 
Financing  has  in  fact  recommended  that  governments  and  MDBs  should  provide  risk 
mitigation  instruments  to  help  lower  the  higher  risks  involved,  especially  during  the  early 
phases of long-term projects. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This is definitely worth considering. Given their status, MDBs and export credit agencies are 
seen as very credible counterparties that can provide risk mitigants. It is probably harder for 
the  private  sector  to  play  such  a  role,  especially  given  the  long  tenor  of  project  finance.  I 
would  add  that  MDBs  and  export  credit  agencies  already  have  guarantee  products  that 
mitigate credit and political risks for project loans. The issue at hand is how to extend these 
products to say capital market instruments to “crowd in” participation by a broader group of 
institutional  investors.  For  instance,  the  Credit  Guarantee  &  Investment  Facility  or  CGIF, 
established by the Asian Development Bank and ASEAN+3 nations, recently completed its 
first guarantee transaction on a 3-year Thai baht bond issuance by Noble Group. 
There must also be a concerted effort by project developers to make project delivery 
more cost-efficient, productive and financially viable to mitigate risks for investors 
While  considerable  attention  has  been  focused  on  increasing  the  supply  of  infrastructure 
financing,  we  also  need  to  think  about  how  we  can  “get  more  for  less”  by  optimising  the 
project delivery value chain. 
Improving project implementation processes 
McKinsey has estimated that productivity of the infrastructure value chain could be increased 
to achieve 40% savings, if project sponsors globally adopt proven best practices. This would 
translate  to  an  average  of  US$1tn  per  annum  in  infrastructure  cost  savings  over  the  next 
18 years. Such best practices may include having processes in place to select projects that 
best  address  infrastructure  needs,  finding  innovative  ways  to  structure  and  execute  these 
projects, as well as maximising the use of existing capacity. 
This is not just a regulatory or public sector issue. On the part of project developers, greater 
attention  has  to  be  paid  to  productivity  improvement  across  the  entire  value  chain.  Put 
simply, project developers must find ways to deliver projects on time and on budget, boost 
asset utilisation and undertake proper maintenance. If investors have confidence that there is 
“less  leakage” from  cost  overruns,  this  will  help  to  reduce financial  buffers  and  in  turn  the 
required hurdle rate. 
There are various ways in which sponsors can enhance their delivery of projects. They could 
invest in project design at an early stage to avoid costly subsequent changes. They could 
invest  in  technology  and  leaner  construction  methods  to  lower  costs.  For  example, 
prefabrication  and  modularisation  techniques  enabled  14  bridges  in  the  US  state  of 
Massachusetts to be replaced over just 10 weekends. 
These improvements across the entire value chain will ultimately make infrastructure projects 
more  “bankable”  and  less  costly  to  finance.  This  will  create  a  virtuous  cycle  of  enhanced 
efficiency leading to lower costs for governments, the project sponsors and the financiers. 
Capability building can help improve PPP standards and the “bankability” of projects, as well 
as assist companies in developing their talent pool across the infrastructure value chain 
Capability building for governments 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  knowledge  sharing  and  capability  building.  Formalising 
public-private  partnership  (PPP)  frameworks  is  an  important  pre-requisite  in  enhancing 
project  delivery.  Given  the  long-term  nature  of  infrastructure  investments,  private  investors 
also have to be assured that projects have been properly evaluated on economic viability, 
that there is strong political commitment to PPP, and that the broader legislative frameworks 
beyond PPP are conducive to investments. MDBs have actively supported countries on this 
front, in efforts to formalise project selection and approval processes, revenue models and 
concessions, and to encourage harmonisation of PPP standards in the region. 
At our inaugural Summit in 2009, we announced that the World Bank-Singapore Urban Hub 
partnership  has  been  established  to  leverage  Singapore’s  experiences  to  help  developing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
countries  structure  commercially  viable  infrastructure  projects.  This  was  followed  by  the 
setup of the Infrastructure Finance Centre of Excellence (IFCOE), which carries out capacity 
building and technical assistance to increase the success of PPP in the region. Last month, 
IE Singapore and the Asian Development Bank jointly launched a PPP initiative that will work 
with regional governments to structure infrastructure projects, and also explore using capital 
markets to finance these projects. 
Enhancing project development expertise 
Besides improving PPP processes and public sector expertise, we also need to enhance the 
human capital in the private sector. There is already a growing base of professional services 
in  Singapore  with  practices  in  infrastructure  development,  financing  and  public-private 
partnerships in Asia. 
Singapore  could  explore  whether  there  is  a  need  to  help  companies  develop  their  project 
development  talent  pool,  so  they  can  harness  opportunities  in  the  regional  infrastructure 
space. This could be done by supporting on-the-job training to accelerate talent development 
through more project experience, and creating specialised programmes to train talent to be 
equipped  with  knowledge  across  the  project  development  process  –  from  business 
development, to PPP structuring, to financing. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude by outlining again three key priorities in increasing 
and broadening private sector participation in infrastructure development – first, to catalyse 
private  sector  involvement  in  project financing;  second,  to  enhance  delivery  of  projects for 
better financial viability; third, to build up capabilities in both public and private sectors. These 
are  necessary  to  help  countries  achieve  their  economic  growth  targets  in  an  equitable 
manner, resulting in job creation and other positive social outcomes. 
The real economy, financial sector and public sector players all have complementary roles to 
play. Conferences such as this are an excellent opportunity to bring together stakeholders in 
order to foster the exchange of ideas. 
On that note, I wish you all fruitful discussions today. Thank you very much.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
