Barry Whiteside: Lifting financial literacy levels in Fiji 
Speech by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch of the Be 
Money Wise (BMW) Program, Suva, 20 August 2013. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen and, most importantly, all the children present 
here today.  
Introductory remarks  
A very warm welcome to you all.  
I am delighted to be present here today at the official launch of this important initiative – the 
“Be  Money  Wise”  (BMW)  Program.  This  launch  marks  another  milestone  in  our  journey 
towards lifting financial literacy levels in Fiji.  
Background  
Please allow me to share with you the concept of the Be Money Wise Program which has 
evolved out of the work being carried out in our capital market for a number of years now.  
The  objective  of  this  Program  is  to  teach  our  children  “money  smart”  principles  by  using 
creative  fun-filled  activities.  In  time  we  expect  that  this  will  lead  to  the  development  of  a 
culture of financial prudence in our children, preparing them well for their adult working life. 
The activities planned within the program are focused on the importance of acquiring good 
money management skills so our children will learn how to save and understand the concept 
of investing in the various financial products available in Fiji. The program will run from 2013 
to  2020  as an  important  part  of the  Reserve  Bank’s  National  Capital Markets  Master  Plan 
2020.  
The  BMW  Program  is  intended  to  complement  what  children  learn  in  school  through  the 
national Financial Education Program.  
I would like to now address our children in particular at this time.  
Girls and boys, we have used the Bee in the Be Money Wise logo so that you can identify 
with the program easily – just as some of you already do with our financial literacy mascot, 
“Vuli” the vonu.  
The Honey Bee in the logo represents the hard working and productive nature of the Bee. 
The  Bee  is  well  known  for  being  a  very  productive  insect.  If  you  watch  a  swarm  of  bees 
working at their hive you will notice that each bee has a particular job to do. Bees also plan 
for  the  long  term.  Honey  is  produced  by  bees  as  a  food  source.  In  cold  weather  or  when 
fresh food sources are scarce, bees use their stored honey as their source of energy.  
In  the  same  way,  the  BMW  Program  aims  to  remind  you  to  always  work  hard  and  to  be 
productive and creative in managing your money and in making financial decisions. Always 
think and plan for your future, just as the bee does. And just as the honey produced by the 
Bee has many uses, so does the knowledge that you will gain through this program.  
You  will  see  that  the  body  of  the  Bee  in  the  logo  is  a  light  bulb  with  the  dollar  sign 
representing the knowledge and understanding that you will gain from the program.  
Now to all the parents out there, let me stress that the earlier we start to save and put money 
aside  for  future  plans,  the  earlier  we  are  able  to  achieve  our  financial  goals  and  enjoy 
financial  security  for  our  children  later  in  life.  Investing  in  our  children’s  future  must  begin 
today.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  financial  literacy  principles  of  saving  and  investing  are  important  to  both  the  financial 
security of individuals and the financial security of our nation.  
The  task  of  imparting  these  principles  to  the  children  of  Fiji  will  require  the  support  of  all 
stakeholders and most importantly, parents and guardians. Parents and guardians are in the 
best position to ensure that their children continue to save, budget, plan and practice good 
money management habits. We need to share and talk frankly with our children about money 
matters  and  teach  them  by  example  of  the  little  things  we  can  do  to  improve  their  money 
management skills.  
Today’s  BMW  program  has  a  series  of  activities  organised  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  in 
collaboration  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Education,  Fiji  Police  Force,  Land 
Transport Authority, Yellow Ribbon Project, Goodman Fielder, Fire Authority of Fiji, UNICEF, 
and the University of the South Pacific.  
To all the children registered for today’s program or watching this on TV, make the most of 
this opportunity. Learn all you can and ask questions of the RBF staff or the stakeholders in 
our main tent if you do not understand anything you’ve heard today. And when you go home, 
I urge you all to talk about what you have learnt with your family and all your friends. You are 
more than welcome to visit the Reserve Bank if you wish to know more.  
I also thank all the commercial banks and other financial institutions for sponsoring the prizes 
for  our  schools  competition,  and  to  all  other  stakeholders  who  have  provided  prizes  for 
activities throughout that day. Your commitment to the BMW Program is greatly appreciated.  
Lastly,  I  thank  the  Hibiscus  Event  Group  for  allowing  the  Reserve  Bank  to  organize  this 
special day and to launch our program.  
With  these  words,  I  have  much  pleasure  in  launching  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji  Be  Money 
Wise Children’s Program and wish you all a very enjoyable day.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
