Yves Mersch: The single market and banking union 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the European Forum Alpbach 2013, Alpbach, 29 August 2013. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today at the Alpbach Forum. The topic of my remarks will 
be Banking Union, and in particular the role of Banking Union in supporting the Single Market 
in Europe. 
Governments  have  recognised that certain  powers  need to  be  at  the  European  level  for  a 
Single Market to function. But what we have seen in the crisis is that we do not yet have the 
right powers at the European level to support a Single Market in capital. When placed under 
stress, financial markets in Europe have renationalised, with negative effects on the Single 
Market in goods and services as well. 
We see Banking Union, therefore, not only as a necessary complement of monetary union 
but  also  as  a  way  of  putting  in  place  the  necessary  institutions,  rules  and  instruments  to 
sustain a genuinely single financial market. These include a single supervisory mechanism 
(SSM)  –  and  a  single  resolution  mechanism  operating  under  a  harmonised  resolution 
framework.  And  I  would  like  to  use  the  main  part  of  my  remarks  today  to  highlight  three 
specific channels where I think Banking Union can be strongly positive for the Single Market. 
First, by encouraging greater cross-border banking integration. 
Second, by increasing confidence in banks’ balance sheets. 
Third, by helping to break the bank-sovereign nexus. 
Channel 1: Encouraging cross-border banking integration 
Starting with the first channel, we expect Banking Union to play an important role in boosting 
financial market reintegration in Europe and the creation of a truly European banking sector. 
Ideally,  we  would  like  to  see  a  situation  where,  if  the  Spanish  SME  cannot  borrow  at 
reasonable  rates  from  a  Spanish  bank,  it  would  be  able  to  borrow  from  an  Austrian  bank 
instead. This is what a Single Market in capital means. 
Banking Union can facilitate this by creating the same standards for banks across Europe. 
Let me point to three developments which may encourage banks move out of their domestic 
markets. 
First, we are harmonising technical approaches to supervision, which will reduce compliance 
costs  for  banks  and  increase  comparability  across  borders.  Every  bank  that  is  part  of  the 
SSM  will  be  supervised  according  to  a  single  supervisory  model  and  use  the  same  data 
reporting template. 
Second, we are building a single supervisory culture, which will provide a basis for genuinely 
European banks. It will take time, but we are moving from a system where we have multiple 
different  supervisory  cultures,  with  multiple  different  philosophies,  to  a  system  where  we 
have only one. 
Third, we expect supervision to be practiced with a European view as stated explicitly in the 
regulation,  which  will  make  liquidity  between  countries  more  fungible.  We  saw  during  the 
crisis  that  some  supervisors  required  their  banks  to  match  national  assets  with  national 
liabilities,  which  had  the  effect  of  fragmenting  the  Single  Market.  But  in  the  SSM,  national 
borders would simply be the wrong frame of reference. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Some of you may be wondering whether these changes will really support the Single Market, 
or  simply  create  a  “market  within  a  market”,  with  countries that join  the  SSM  divided  from 
those that do not. I do not see this as a real risk. 
The introduction of the Single Currency did not impair the Single Market either. And that was 
a far more radical change than establishing a single supervisor. 
With respect to the SSM, the European Banking Authority (EBA) has a crucial role to play in 
ensuring that there is a level playing field across the whole EU, and I am confident that the 
SSM will in fact reinforce its ability to do so. 
To begin with, the EBA will remain responsible for developing regulatory policy and technical 
standards that will form the basis of a single rulebook for banks across Europe. The creation 
of the SSM should help this process, as having a significant number of countries participating 
in  the  SSM  will  reduce  the  scope  for  coordination  failures,  thus  making  the  EBA’s 
coordination function easier. 
The EBA is also currently developing a supervisory handbook which reflects best supervisory 
practices  across  the  EU.  The  ECB  is  cooperating  with  the  EBA  to  ensure  that  its  own 
supervisory manual and the EBA handbook are consistent. Here again, the existence of the 
SSM has the scope to help the EBA’s work, as all SSM members will naturally converge in 
their supervisory practices. 
In short, when I talk about a genuinely European banking sector, I see this as consistent with 
the  Single  Market.  And  in  any  event,  I  hope  that,  over  time,  such  a  distinction  will  not  be 
necessary as most EU countries will join Banking Union. 
Channel 2: Increasing confidence in banks’ balance sheets 
Turning to the second channel where I see that Banking Union can help support the Single 
Market,  investor  confidence  has  been  damaged  by  the  perception  that  some  supervisors 
have not been tough enough with their domestic banks. The average price-to-book ratio of 
large and complex banking groups in the euro area, for instance, is currently only 0.5, which 
implies  that  investors think  banks  are  overvaluing their  assets,  will  not  meet their  required 
rates of return, or will require new capital. And trust tends to be lower in some jurisdictions 
than  others,  creating  fragmentation,  as  shown  by  certain  banks’  lack  of  access  to  market 
funding. 
How will Banking Union help restore confidence across countries? In general, we hope that 
the SSM will bring about a regime change in supervision and increase trust by creating more 
stable banks. But this is more a forward-looking consideration. The immediate challenge is to 
address the concerns about banks’ balance sheets that are already there. And this is why the 
ECB is putting a great deal of importance on the balance sheet assessment we are required 
to conduct for those banks that we will directly supervise. 
The  methodology  for  this  assessment  is  currently  being  designed  and  we  want  it  to  be 
rigorous.  We  also  expect  to  use  external  consultants  to  ensure  a  credible  exercise.  It  is 
essential for us that at the end of the assessment we have a clear picture of the real situation 
in  the  sector  –  both  to  allay  market  concerns,  and  to  be  able  do  our  job  properly  as 
supervisor. 
I will not go into greater detail at this stage on the methodology or timing, as many decisions 
can only be made when the SSM Regulation is approved by the European Parliament and 
the  SSM’s  Supervisory  Board  is  appointed.  But  let  me  add  one  qualification:  the  exercise 
may  reveal  capital  shortfalls,  and  we  need  to  know  how  they  will  be  filled.  Without  solid 
backstops in place, I fear markets will not see the exercise as credible as they will expect the 
results to be fudged. While I am pleased that the European Council in June acknowledged 
this issue, it called for backstops to be in place before the assessment is completed, which 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Parliament  adopts 
leaves too much room for uncertainty. Backstops need to be in place before the assessment 
has begun. Put simply, if there are no backstops, there will be no assessment. 
If  as  we  hope 
its  plenary  session  on  
9–11 September, the Supervisory Board should be established as soon as possible, and we 
have to overcome bureaucratic hurdles. If it takes until the first quarter of next year to have 
the full-fledged Supervisory Board in place it will be quite challenging to have the SSM itself 
operational one year after the entry into force of the legal act, the earliest date foreseen by 
the regulation. 
the  Regulation  at 
Channel 3: Breaking the bank-sovereign nexus 
Let me now turn to the third channel where I think that Banking Union can support the Single 
Market in capital, and that is by – at least partially – breaking the bank-sovereign nexus. 
This  nexus  has  a  number  of  aspects,  but  the  most  relevant  for  the  Single  Market  is  the 
connection between the fiscal strength of the sovereign and the funding costs of banks. In 
general,  banks  with  stronger  sovereigns  can  fund  more  cheaply  as  they  benefit  from  an 
implicit  sovereign  guarantee.  This  leads  to  lower  borrowing  costs  for  firms  located  in  that 
territory. 
The  key  to  creating  a  level  playing  field  in  Europe  is  therefore  to  reduce  the  capacity  of 
sovereigns  to  intervene  in  failing  banks  –  while  allowing  those  banks  to  fail  in  an  orderly 
manner. And this has now been set in motion with the agreement by the EU Council on the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive, which provides a harmonised legal framework for 
resolution across the whole EU. 
This Directive – which still needs to be agreed with the European Parliament – makes bail-in 
rather than bail-out the first line of defence if a bank does not manage to recapitalize via the 
market.  Sovereigns  will  not  be  allowed  to  step  in  when  resolving  a  bank  until  private 
investors have first taken a hit. Specifically, under the Council agreement, banks can only be 
recapitalised  with  resolution  financing  arrangements,  such  as  a  resolution  fund,  after  a 
minimum level of bail-in equal to 8% of total liabilities has been imposed on shareholders and 
creditors. 
I  welcome  this  focus  on  bail-in,  as  it  should  encourage  investors  in  all  banks  to  price  risk 
properly, rather than expecting only reward. But there are also some details about the use of 
bail-in in the Council agreement where I am more critical, mainly because I fear they will slow 
down the process of reducing fragmentation. 
First, bail-in would only be available in January 2018 at the latest, which in my view is too 
late. As the Directive will enter into force in January 2015, it means there would be a gap of 
up to three years where a key resolution tool cannot be used. The risk is that this leads to ad 
hoc national solutions which create unevenness across the Single Market. 
Second,  the  possibility  for  discretionary  exclusions  from  bail-in  is  too  great.  The  ECB  has 
taken the position that categories of liabilities that could be excluded from bail-in should be 
well-defined  upfront,  with  limited  discretion  to  take  into  account  financial  stability  and 
macroeconomic  concerns.  But  the  Council  agreement  allows  considerably  more  discretion 
for national resolution authorities. This creates a possibility for those authorities to exclude 
certain creditor classes due to national political economy concerns, creating uncertainty for 
investors about how bail-in will in fact be applied. 
To  ensure  consistency  in  the  Single  Market,  in  my  view  only  two  options  for  applying  the 
resolution framework are really possible. Either we have national resolution authorities taking 
decisions  with  very  limited  discretion;  or  we  have  a  central  resolution  authority  taking 
decisions with some discretion. I see the current agreement – decentralisation plus discretion 
– as the wrong combination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One solution to this, at least for countries that participate in the SSM, is the creation of the 
Single  Resolution  Mechanism  (SRM) 
to  centralise  resolution  decision-making.  The 
Commission recently released its proposal for such a mechanism based on Art. 114 TFEU, 
and  the  ECB  supports  the  main  elements  of  this  proposal.  In  particular,  it  meets  what  we 
consider to be the three essential requirements for a credible SRM: a single system, a single 
authority, and a single resolution fund. And we strongly support the timeline put forward by 
the Commission, which would see the SRM entering into force in January 2015. 
On  the  key  issue  of  how  the  SRM  takes  decisions,  we  support  the  Commission’s  idea  to 
establish a central resolution Board based on majority voting. To be effective in dealing with 
cross-border banks, and to be consistent across different countries, the resolution authority 
must  be  able  to  make  independent  decisions  in  the  European  interest,  and  this  is  not 
possible  if  national  vetoes  remain.  We  agree  with  the  Commission  that  all  this  can  be 
achieved without a change to the Treaty. 
This generally  positive  assessment  notwithstanding,  there  are some  areas  where  we  think 
the proposal could still be improved. 
First,  in  our  view,  determining  when  a  bank  is  failing  or  likely  to  fail  should  be  the  sole 
competence of the supervisor. Under the current proposal, the Commission can also decide 
to trigger resolution on its own initiative. We think that the new system should have a clear 
allocation of responsibilities. 
Second, we disagree with the proposal to put a voting member of the ECB in the Board of 
the  SRM.  It  is  better  to  maintain  a  clear  functional  separation  between  supervision  and 
resolution and avoid potential conflicts of interest. 
Third,  the  State  Aid  framework  is  important  in  defining  common  parameters  for  national 
public  support  within  the  context  of  bank  resolution  across  the  Union.  But  its  application 
should not unduly delay or supersede resolution measures, by which financial stability could 
be at risk. We have to bear in mind that once the SRM is fully operational, resolution decision 
will be taken at Union level, thus preserving a level playing field and respecting the single 
market. Let us also keep in mind that we operate in principle with the funds from the private 
sector. 
Fourth, indeed only in exceptional cases do we see temporary access to fiscal resources as 
a helpful element of the SRM’s backstop arrangements. Remember the proposal from last 
year’s Four Presidents’ Report on a Genuine EMU, which suggested a credit line from the 
European Stability Mechanism (ESM) as a possible option for euro area countries while fiscal 
neutrality will be respected in principle. 
How does ESM direct bank recapitalisation fit into this framework? The answer is that it is the 
very last line of defence: it can only be used after bail-in has been exhausted, and only when 
going  via  the  national  budget  would  seriously  damage  a  country’s  fiscal  sustainability.  As 
such, it helps break the bank-sovereign nexus, but once agreed will operate within the new 
bail-in  framework.  The  “new  normal”  remains  that,  wherever  possible,  the  private  sector 
pays. 
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. 
A  successful  policy  regime  is  based  on  an  effective  accord  of  rules,  institutions  and 
instruments. We have this for the Single Market in goods and services, where the rules are 
laid down by EU legislation, the Commission oversees them, and it has various instruments, 
like infringement proceedings, to enforce its decisions. 
And we now need to build a similarly effective regime for the Single Market in capital. We 
already have some new rules in place, for instance on capital requirements. We are on the 
verge of agreeing to a new mechanism for supervision. But now we need to make sure that 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
we have a strong authority for resolution, and that it has proper instruments to do its job, like 
the bail-in tool from 2015. 
Willy Brandt once said that “what we want is a Europe of daily reason and of common sense, 
and we must be prepared to state this and, where necessary, to act.” It is my conviction that 
Banking Union is one of the clearest examples of where elevating powers to the European 
level is common sense: it brings benefits for citizens, who have a safer banking sector; for 
banks, who have a more consistent environment; and for governments, who are less liable 
for bailing-out. 
And so act we must. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
