K C Chakrabarty: India-OECD-World Bank regional conference on 
“Financial education” 
Welcome address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  India-OECD-World  Bank  Regional  Conference  on  “Financial  education”,  New  Delhi, 
4 March 2013.  
 1. Dr. D. Subbarao, Governor, Reserve Bank of India; Mr. Onno Ruhl, Country Director, the 
World  Bank;  Ambassador  Richard  Boucher,  Deputy  Secretary  General,  OECD;  delegates 
from  the  OECD,  the  World  Bank  and  from  countries  across  the  world;  colleagues  from 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  other  regulatory  bodies  and  agencies  involved  in  disseminating 
financial education in India; ladies and gentlemen. It is my proud privilege to welcome you all 
to  India’s  capital  city  of  New  Delhi,  a  city  of  rich  cultural  and  historical  traditions,  on  the 
occasion of this Regional Conference on Financial Education jointly organized by RBI, OECD 
and the World Bank. As you might be aware, this conference is a part of a series of events 
organized  to  disseminate  information  about  the  activities  of  the  Russia/OECD/World  Bank 
Trust Fund on Financial Literacy and Education. Two other conferences in this series were 
held recently in Cartagena and Nairobi. We at the Reserve Bank of India, are indeed very 
proud to co-host this landmark conference, as it brings together all key stakeholders who are 
central  to  India’s  crusade  for  achieving  universal  financial  literacy.  We  believe  this 
conference  provides  an  ideal  platform,  not  only  for  us,  but  also  for  delegates  from  other 
jurisdictions  in  particular,  the  Asia  Pacific  Region,  to  exchange  views  and  learn  from  the 
experiences of peers. We are also very happy and grateful, to have the World Bank and the 
OECD  as  partners  for  this  conference;  two  organizations  which  have  made  immense 
contribution  to  spreading financial  literacy  and  leveraging the financial  systems  to  improve 
the quality of lives of the marginalized groups across the world. 
2. Over the next three days, the participants can look forward to stimulating and enriching 
deliberations involving global experts having rich and varied practical experiences and learn 
from their experiences of implementation of financial literacy initiatives in different parts of the 
world. The conference sessions have been structured with focus on all the important pieces 
which  constitute  the  jigsaw  of  financial  education.  For  instance,  keeping  in  view  the 
importance  of  a  well-articulated  national  level  framework  for  financial  education,  an 
interactive panel discussion on experiences in developing National Strategy documents for 
Financial Education, has been planned. Further, in view of the need for assessing existing 
financial  literacy  levels  in  order  to  identify  priority  areas  while  rolling  out  a  National  level 
strategy,  the  conference  includes  a  session  dedicated  to  use  of  surveys  for  evaluating 
financial literacy levels  and ground level feedback from such measurement exercises. The 
conference also seeks to emphasize on certain focus groups such as the youth and women 
with  separate  panel  discussions  dedicated  to  these  groups.  All  sessions  have  been 
structured  to  involve  sharing  of  experience  by  implementation  experts  from  across 
jurisdictions and would encourage free participation by all delegates, in order to optimize the 
learning experience. 
Need for financial education/literacy 
3. Having given a brief outline of the Conference let me briefly touch upon the theme of the 
Conference.  Over  the  past  few  years,  particularly  in  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial 
crisis, the importance of Financial Education and Financial Literacy has come to be widely 
acknowledged.  This  recognition  has  led  countries  to  initiate  programmes  to  disseminate 
financial literacy among its citizens. As the OECD’s definition of financial literacy indicates, it 
is  “a  combination  of  financial  awareness,  knowledge,  skills,  attitude  and  behaviours 
necessary  to  make  sound  financial  decisions  and  ultimately  achieve  individual  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
wellbeing”. I would argue that financial literacy is not only important for financial well-being of 
the masses; it is also a sine qua non for the economic well-being of the nation as a whole. 
4. Financial Illiteracy is not limited to the poor or to the less developed economies alone, it 
pervades  all  levels  of  society  and  economic  strata.  Only  the  manifestation  of  financial 
illiteracy  varies  depending  upon  the  stage  of  development  of  the  economy,  and  within  the 
same country, upon the economic profile of the individual. I am a firm believer that everyone 
associated with the financial system needs to be financially literate. This includes the users 
of  financial  services;  the  providers  of  services;  and  even  the  policy  makers  and  the 
regulators.  For  countries  which  successfully  roll  out  financial  education  programmes,  the 
benefits are significant: 
For the individual… 
5. At an individual level, financial literacy/education is important because it helps in building 
financial capability. It makes people better informed, educated and more confident, able to 
take greater control of their financial affairs and to fully harness the benefits of accessing the 
formal financial system. People who understand their financial circumstances are more likely 
to  make  sensible  choices  and  ensure  adequate  provision  for  their  future.  They  are  more 
likely to have an appropriate level of insurance and reach retirement age with comfortable 
pension plans. They won’t pay more interest than they need to when borrowing, or settle for 
less than they should when saving. People with basic financial awareness would understand 
risk  return  trade-off  and  take  better  investment decisions,  thereby  being  less  vulnerable  to 
frauds  and  dubious  schemes.  Financial  education  can  help  reduce  levels  of  debt,  poverty, 
repossessions,  stress,  illness  and  even  crime.  In  sum,  financial  education  improves  the 
quality of people’s lives and financial affairs and provides them peace of mind, by instilling in 
them a sense of confidence and security about matters of money. 
For the macro economy…. 
6.  From  a  macro  perspective  also,  financial  literacy/  education  has  important  implications. 
Financial  Literacy,  together  with  Financial  Inclusion  and  Consumer  Protection  form  a  triad 
which, collectively, has an important bearing on Financial Stability. The three legs of the triad 
have  strong  inter-linkages,  with  each  element  having  a  vital  bearing  on  the  others.  The 
absence of any one would make it difficult to attain the remaining goals. Financial Literacy 
aids  financial  inclusion  initiatives  as  it  creates  awareness  about  the  benefits  of  connecting 
with the formal financial system and hence, creates demand for financial products. Financial 
literacy supports consumer protection as it helps consumers better understand the features 
and  risks  inherent  in  financial  products,  thereby  reducing  the  risk  of  mis-selling.  It  also 
generates awareness and willingness to approach the grievance redressal system available, 
in case of disputes. 
7. At a macroeconomic level, the cost of financial illiteracy  is significant and is manifested 
through scourges such as unemployment, poverty, high personal indebtedness and financial 
exploitation  through  mis-selling.  It  results  in  avoidable  leakages  and  wastages,  which  any 
resource-scarce  country  can  ill-afford. The  savings  habit,  which  can  be  inculcated  through 
financial education, can help channelize household savings into productive activities, thereby 
supporting  economic  growth.  The  increased  demand  for  financial  services,  created  as  an 
outcome of financial education efforts, can help bring depth and diversification to the financial 
markets. 
How are we doing in India? 
8. In India, financial education has been identified as a policy priority and a massive effort 
involving  the  Government,  various financial  sector  regulators, financial  institutions  and  civil 
society  is  underway.  The  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC),  which  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
chaired by the Union Finance Minister, is mandated, inter alia to focus on spread of financial 
inclusion and financial literacy. Under the aegis of the FSDC, the draft National Strategy for 
Financial  Education  (NSFE)  for  India  has  been  prepared.  Further,  we  are  focusing  on 
financial education for school children and are involving various national curriculum setting 
bodies  in  order  to  seamlessly  integrate  financial  literacy  material  into  the  existing  course 
curriculum,  without  making  it  burdensome  for  the  children.  Over  the  course  of  this 
conference, my colleagues from the Reserve Bank and other agencies will be presenting the 
nuances of India’s push towards universal financial literacy. We look forward to your views 
and suggestions on where we can do it differently, and better. 
Conclusion 
9. As I mentioned before, Financial Illiteracy is a global problem and the challenge before us 
is  enormous.  It  calls  for  a  collaborative  partnership  involving  all  stakeholders  and  all 
countries.  While  the  experiences  in  individual  jurisdictions  would  vary,  there  are  important 
learning  points  that  we  can  pick  up  from  each  country’s  journey.  I  hope  this  conference 
succeeds  in  valuable  sharing  of  knowledge  and  experience  among  such  a  wide  array  of 
experts from across the world. I do believe that with our collective efforts towards universal 
financial  education,  individuals  and  institutions  would  be  empowered  to  make  informed 
financial choices and in the process, the global financial marketplace would become a more 
stable arena, much less vulnerable to financial crisis, such as the one we are facing today. 
That is the ultimate goal of building Financial Capability in any society! 
I  wish  the  conference  great  success  and  hope  that  you  have  extremely  enriching 
deliberations over the course of the Conference. I once again welcome you all and wish you 
a pleasant and enjoyable stay in New Delhi. Thank you!  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
