Daniel Mminele: Financial market and reserve management challenges in 
South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
7th  Annual  Financial  Markets  Department  Cocktail,  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  Pretoria, 
30 May 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good evening and welcome to the South African Reserve Bank. 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all  to  the  7th  annual  cocktail  function  of  the 
Financial Markets Department. As usual there are two reasons for this function tonight. The 
first one is to update you on the Financial Market Department’s (FMD) market operations and 
to inform you about the progress made with regard to various initiatives we are involved in, 
which  are  aimed  at  developing  our  markets  and  making  them  more  efficient.  The  second 
reason is to thank you for your co-operation during the past financial year and to provide an 
opportunity to exchange notes and interact with one another. 
You will be glad to know that I am the only speaker, the rest of the programme should be fine 
and  entertaining.  I  will  try  and  be  relatively  brief,  because  they  say  it’s  best  to  leave  your 
audience before your audience leaves you. Allow me to formally introduce the new Head of 
the FMD, who is well known to most of you. Leon Myburgh joined the Bank on 1 March 2013, 
to take up this very challenging but rewarding role, and we wish him every success. I have 
no doubt that he can count on your support and cooperation. 
I don’t think it would be appropriate to address a Financial Markets cocktail function and not 
at  least  touch  on the  latest  developments. I  would  like  to  spend  just  a  few  minutes  taking 
stock of the economic and financial market landscape, before turning to matters related to 
the Department and market development initiatives. 
When we last met in May 2012, the key challenges we faced related mostly to an uncertain 
and fragile global economic and financial markets environment, in particular the euro zone 
crisis and the US fiscal situation. Even if we can’t quite declare victory, the global economy 
and financial markets have witnessed some improvement since then, as continued action by 
the  world’s  major  central  banks  to  provide  the  necessary  liquidity  to  sustain  the  global 
economic recovery has largely removed the “tail risks” that unsettled global markets. While 
these actions have removed acute financial stability risks, the transmission mechanism into 
the  real  economy  remains  generally  impaired,  resulting  in  what  continues  to  be  a  slow, 
unbalanced and fragile recovery. As you are aware, possible risks attached to the timing and 
pace of the reversal of these extraordinary measures, are the subjects of intense debate at 
the moment, including the possible impact on higher yielding assets of emerging economies, 
such as South Africa. 
Unfortunately,  despite  the  easing  in  some  global  risks,  the  challenges  in  the  domestic 
environment have intensified. The rand has been on a depreciating trend, partly explained by 
the  recent  strengthening  of  the  US  dollar  and  the  decline  in  commodity  prices.  The  rand 
exchange  rate  has  steadily  underperformed  the  currencies  of  its  commodity-producing  or 
emerging  market  “peers”  over  the  past  year.  This  trend,  which  contrasted  with  the  more 
stable  pattern  of  the  rand  versus  its  peers  in  earlier  years,  clearly  indicates  a  growing 
sensitivity of the currency to domestic factors such as concerns about the funding of a wider 
current account deficit, as well as broader socio-economic issues illustrated by increasingly 
violent labour conflicts in the mining and other sectors. 
While an adjustment of the currency to changing economic fundamentals represents one of 
the  benefits  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate,  excessive  currency  volatility  and  vulnerability  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
investor  sentiment,  increasingly  risk  complicating  the  tasks  of  both  monetary  and  fiscal 
policy.  The  most  recent  exchange  rate  movements,  including  today’s,  are  somewhat 
exaggerated. The SARB continues to be committed to a flexible exchange rate and does not 
have an exchange rate target. This commitment should not be misread to suggest that any 
abrupt and disorderly movements in the exchange rate would not be of concern to us. 
For most of the past year and until recently, the bond market had shown little sensitivity to 
the currency’s depreciating trend, as it was underpinned by a combination of “push and pull” 
factors: Global investors’ search for higher returns; the inclusion of SA bonds in Citi’s World 
Government  Bond  Index;  and  a  relatively  benign  domestic  inflation  environment  which  led 
market participants to reduce the probability attached to an early start of the eventual policy 
tightening cycle. In April, in particular, one witnessed a flattening of the bond yield curve, with 
larger  declines  seen  in yields  of  longer  dated  bonds, those  very  maturities  where  National 
Treasury  had  just  been  increasing  its  issuance  levels.  The  most  recent  episode  of  rand 
weakness has not left the bond market untouched, however, and the sell-off has been more 
pronounced at the long end. The equity market clearly reflects the challenges present, and 
although the Alsi is up almost 7 per cent year to date, the mining, platinum and gold sectors 
have witnessed hefty declines, while in US dollar terms, the MSCI for South Africa is almost 
13 per cent lower. 
Financial market operations 
2. 
Over the past year domestic money market operations have continued in an orderly manner. 
The money market shortage increased from R20.6 billion in March 2012 to over R24.0 billion 
in March 2013. This increase was largely due to a 14 per cent or R13.0 billion rise in notes 
and  coin  in  circulation  to  R103.1  billion,  and  a  R2.6  billion  increase  in  the  cash  reserve 
balances  of  banks  to  R66.1  billion.  These  actions  were  somewhat  offset  by  declines  in 
outstanding  debentures,  longer-term  reverse  repos  and  CPD  balances  with  the  Bank. 
Foreign  exchange  swaps,  both  for  liquidity  management  purposes  and  to  sterilise  foreign 
exchange purchases amounted to R43.7 billion as compared to R53.9 billion in March 2012. 
Swaps  previously  conducted  to  sterilise  foreign  exchange  purchases  amounting  to 
R16.2 billion were matured, which increased the level of gross reserves, but were offset by 
sizeable  valuation  adjustments  during the  year  emanating from the  appreciation  of the  US 
dollar against other major currencies and the decline in the gold price. As such, the country’s 
gross reserves declined marginally from US$50.7 billion to US$50.0 billion between March 
2012 and 2013, increasing marginally to US$50.3 billion in April 2013. 
From  time  to  time  the  Bank  reviews  its  operations  in  the  money  market  with  the  aim  of 
enhancing their effectiveness. The last enhancements to the Bank’s market operations were 
implemented  in  March  2012. The  changes  were  implemented  successfully,  but  there  were 
also some unintended consequences. Since the introduction of the enhancements, the main 
repo auctions have reflected tendencies of commercial banks overbidding so as to ensure 
adequate allocation of funds. While this overbidding is not indicative of any stresses in the 
market, it does interfere with the signalling mechanism and would make it more difficult for 
the  Bank  to  detect  any  possible  stresses  in  the  market  should  they  arise.  The  Bank  is 
currently looking at various options by  which it  can ensure that such overbidding does not 
continue. 
The  Bank  is  also  currently  investigating  the  efficient  functioning  of  the  interbank  money 
market,  the  over-utilisation  of  the  automated  standing  facilities  and  the  averaging  on  the 
banks’ cash reserves for the daily end-of-day square-off. In addition, one of the key strategic 
focus areas for the Financial Markets Department is a comprehensive review of the Bank’s 
monetary policy implementation framework, and the money market shortage as it relates to 
achieving the intended purpose of ensuring that decisions of the Monetary Policy Committee 
are transmitted effectively through the interbank market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
from  enhancements  and 
formalisation,  more  specifically 
Financial market development 
3. 
Well-developed  and  smoothly  operating  financial  markets  promote  investment,  growth  and 
job creation and contribute to a healthier and more efficient economy. During the past year 
the  FMD  has  continued to  work  closely  with  the  Financial  Markets  Liaison  Group (FMLG), 
which  is  a  consultative  forum  between  the  Bank  and  market  participants,  meant  for 
information  sharing  and  identification  and  management  of  challenges  facing  the  South 
African financial markets in the interest of efficiency and further development. 
One of the major projects undertaken during the past year was the review of reference rates, 
and  specifically  the  Johannesburg  Interbank  Agreed  Rate  (Jibar)  which  was  completed 
successfully, with the co-operation of many people here tonight. This project was part of the 
normal work programme of the Money-Market Subcommittee (MMS) of the FMLG which had 
already commenced in 2011. However, the events that took place in the international market 
regarding  the  manipulation  of  the  Libor  heightened  the  urgency  of  the  Jibar  project.  On 
16 November  2012,  the  Bank  published  two  documents.  The  first,  “A  review  of  the  rate-
setting process of the Johannesburg Interbank Agreed Rate as an interest rate benchmark”, 
presented  the  findings  and  recommendations  that  emanated  from  the  review  of  the  Jibar. 
The  review  indicated  that  while  there  were  no  fundamental  concerns  around  the  Jibar 
determination  process,  and  no  trends  and  patterns  of  anomaly,  certain  aspects  of  the 
process  could  benefit 
the 
governance  process.  The  second  document,  “The  Johannesburg  Interbank  Average  Rate 
(Jibar): Code of Conduct, Governance Process and Operating Rules” released together with 
the  review  document,  was  for  public  comment.  The  Code  of  Conduct,  implemented  on 
1 March  2013,  formalised  the  recommendations  of  the  review  project  and  is  important  to 
ensure the integrity and reliability of the determination process of the Jibar. 
The Bank is responsible for ensuring overall compliance with the Code of Conduct, and does 
so through the Reference Rate Oversight Committee (RROC). The RROC had its inaugural 
meeting earlier this week and will serve as an interim arrangement pending the finalisation of 
the  legislation  relating  to  the  Twin  Peaks  model  of  financial  regulation,  after  which  this 
function,  given  that  it  relates  to  market  conduct,  will  likely  be  transferred  to  the  market 
conduct regulator. 
Since  the  Libor  scandal,  many  institutions  (including  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore, 
The  European  Security  and  Markets  Authority,  the  European  Banking  Authority,  and  the 
Bank  for  International  Settlements)  have  undertaken  reviews  of  their  reference  rates  and 
FMD  continued  to  monitor  these  reviews  and  recommendations  for  relevance  to  our 
endeavours regarding the publication of credible reference rates. 
Currently, the MMS is working on a review of the South African Benchmark Overnight Rate 
on deposits (SABOR) and will report back to the FMLG its findings and recommendations. 
This work will feed into another project being undertaken by the Fixed Income & Derivatives 
subcommittee of the FMLG, namely, the development of the South African Overnight Index 
Swap1  (rand  OIS).  A  well-developed  rand  OIS  market  would  have  many  risk management 
benefits.  Market  participants  predominantly  use  the  OIS  market  for  hedging  activities,  to 
hedge either their funding costs or their exposure to short-term interest rate movements, and 
to alter the term structure of a portfolio. The fixed-rate portion is also used by some market 
participants to derive market expectations of the Bank’s future policy rate changes. This work 
will  culminate  in  an  industry-wide  consultation  to  deliberate  on  the  format  of  a  rand  OIS 
                                                
1   An interest rate swap involving the floating rate being exchanged for a fixed interest rate. An overnight index 
swap is a particular form of interest rate swap, whereby parties agree to swap a floating interest rate – based 
on compounded overnight interest rates (eg EONIA, SONIA) – for a fixed interest rate (ie, the OIS rate). The 
overnight index is considered to be a good indicator of the interbank credit markets, and less risky than other 
traditional interest rate spreads. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
product that would enable South Africa to be on par with its developed market peers, and to 
be part of a handful of emerging markets to deliver a more sound derivatives pricing and risk 
management  landscape.  The  central  banks  of  most  jurisdictions  play  a  key  role  in  the 
collation  of  information  and  the  publication  of  the  overnight  reference  rates,  which  are 
subsequently used in the OIS markets and in other money-market indices. Much work still 
has to be done to develop a fully-fledged rand OIS market, but the working group is making 
good progress. 
The Foreign Exchange Subcommittee has embarked on a project to formalise a rand fixing at 
prescribed intervals during trading hours. This project is necessitated by the need for local 
foreign-exchange  market  players  to  have  a  local  fixing  page  for  the  rand.  With  the 
development of the currency futures market, it would provide quicker dissemination of fixing 
information across the market. A daily rand fixing will also enhance market transparency and 
can  be  used  as  an  objective  and  verifiable  reference  rate  for  the  settlement  of  foreign 
exchange transactions. 
Through the FMLG and its subcommittees, a Liquidity Forum has been established, whose 
mandate is to deliberate on market liquidity including the viability of a collateralised interbank 
market. This Forum will address other liquidity challenges and settlement issues that could 
arise. 
Another  area  of  important  consultation  and  co-operation  between  the  Bank,  through  FMD 
and the Banking Supervision Department, has been the operationalization of the Committed 
Liquidity  Facility  (CLF)  as  part  of  Basel  III  implementation.  In  May  2012,  the  Banking 
Supervision released a guidance note on the CLF, which would be made available to banks 
to  assist  with  meeting  the  Basel  III  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  (LCR).  Since  then,  market 
consultations on the outstanding issues around the CLF have been concluded and the Bank 
Supervision Department is finalising a revised Guidance Note, which will be issued together 
with an updated Operational Notice from FMD dealing with collateral arrangements for the 
CLF. 
Reserves management 
4. 
The  Bank  has  continued  to  make  good  progress  in  enhancing  its  reserves  management 
operations. During the past year the Bank has faced numerous challenges in managing and 
maintaining high quality  liquid foreign reserves portfolios in a low-yield environment, which 
was  compounded  by  the  on-going  European  sovereign  debt  crisis  and  numerous  ratings 
downgrades.  The  Bank  did,  however,  benefit  from  the  increase  in  liquidity  and  the 
improvement in the credit risk profile of its investments as the euro zone authorities and the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) have enhanced their efforts in solving the financial crisis. 
The  Bank  remained  prudent  and  risk-averse  in  its  investment  strategies  and  the  Bank’s 
holdings continued to be dominated by government bonds, supranational agency debt and 
high quality and short-term money market securities. 
The  Bank  benchmarked  and just  recently  completed  a review  of  its  Investment  Policy  and 
also  reviewed  the  Strategic  Asset  Allocation  (SAA),  to  take  into  account  the  current  low-
yielding  environment  and  expectations  of  future  monetary  policy  actions  by  major  central 
banks. The new SAA will encompass a wider variety of investments, in order to improve the 
diversification of reserves, while not abandoning the basic principles of portfolio construction 
based on our traditional objectives of capital preservation, liquidity and return enhancement 
within  clearly  defined  risk  parameters.  Included  in  this  is  the  investment  in  the  onshore 
Chinese  interbank  bond  market.  Apart  from  ensuring  that  the  currency  composition  of 
reserves better reflects underlying shifts in trade patterns, investing in the Chinese markets 
will provide an opportunity to familiarise ourselves with this market, given the expected major 
role  that  the  Renminbi  is  going  to  play  in  the  future.  The  Bank  is  finalising  operational 
arrangements pertaining to this investment. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  March  this  year,  the Reserves  Management Unit  started  trading  in  interest  rate futures, 
which  allows  for  more  efficient  portfolio  management,  and  in  particular  as  a  hedging 
mechanism  to  more  optimally  manage  the  risk  of  negative  returns  in  a  rising  interest  rate 
environment. 
The Bank reviews its external fund management programme approximately every three and 
a half years. We are busy with this process at the moment and expect to appoint external 
fund managers and implement the programme by September 2013. 
The  FMD  is  currently  also  reviewing  its  custodial  arrangements  alongside  a  Systems 
Renewal Project which commenced in 2011. Much progress has been made on both fronts, 
and it is expected that the final system selection will be completed in August 2013, with the 
implementation of new custodial arrangements taking place soon thereafter. 
Conclusion 
5. 
As you can tell, the Financial Markets Department has had an incredibly busy year with many 
projects on the go simultaneously, both internally as well as with market participants. All of 
this can only be achieved with committed, dedicated and passionate people, who understand 
the importance of their role. I would like to extend thanks to the Department, its management 
and staff, for the hard work, professionalism and commitment shown. The fact that many of 
these projects, which by no means are small projects, are near completion and moving into 
implementation  phase  is  a  reflection  of  this.  Thank  you  also  to  the  colleagues  from  other 
departments within the Bank, who work closely with the Financial Markets Department and 
contribute to the success of the Department. I also thank all market participants for your co-
operation and willingness to work with the Bank and helping develop South Africa’s financial 
markets.  I  would  also  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  congratulate  all  the  winners  of  the 
Financial Mail 2013 rankings of broking firms and analysts, well done to you all! 
Finally,  to  the  staff  of  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Conference  Centre,  thank  you  for  once  again 
arranging this function for us. They have agreed that, because my colleagues from the FMD 
are your hosts tonight, they will take care of liquidity management operations tonight. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
