Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas at 20 – past 
progressive, future perfect 
Speech by Mr Amando M Tetangco, Jr, Governor of Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas (the central 
bank of the Philippines), at the 20th Anniversary of BSP, Manila, 3 July 2013. 
 Magandang umaga sa inyong lahat! 
And Happy Anniversary to everyone! 
Fellow  BSPers,  today  marks  the  20th  year  since  the  creation  of  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng 
Pilipinas. And the theme for our simple celebration is “Past Progressive, Future Perfect.” This 
echoes the familiar saying of our wise forefathers. Ang sabi nga ng ating matatanda: “Ang 
hindi marunong lumingon sapinang-galingan, hindi makara-rating sa paro-roonan.”1 
Today’s  occasion  therefore  is  not  only  a  tribute  to  the  history  of  central  banking  in  the 
Philippines; it is also an invitation for us to reflect on what we have accomplished together 
and how to move team BSP forward. 
A clean slate2 
Central banking in the Philippines dates back to 1949 with the creation of the Central Bank of 
the Philippines or the CBP. It was given several mandates: to conduct monetary policy; to 
supervise  financial  institutions;  to  foster  credit  and  exchange  conditions  conducive  to 
economic growth; and to administer special development financing programs to help promote 
economic activity. 
In the 1980s, the CBP bore the staggering cost of restoring market confidence from a severe 
balance of payments crisis; losses from the administration of special development financing 
programs for  what  were  considered  priority growth  sectors;  and  the  difficulties  of  high  and 
rising inflation amid ballooning government budget deficits. 
It was then that policy makers realized that macroeconomic stabilization will be better served 
if the central bank is not burdened with too many mandates. 
Thus, in 1993, Republic Act No. 7653 created the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas and mandated 
it to pursue one primary objective: to maintain price stability, consistent with the promotion of 
balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth.  In  addition,  the  BSP  was  given  fiscal  and 
administrative autonomy. 
The country reaped early dividends from the change. Under its monetary aggregate targeting 
framework  in  the  1990s,  the  BSP  ensured  that  liquidity  and  credit  remained  adequate  to 
support  economic  activity.  This  was  complemented  with  initiatives  to  further  deregulate 
financial markets and liberalize bank branching. 
Consequently,  GDP  growth  accelerated  steadily,  while  inflation  eased  gradually  from  the 
double-digit rates of the seventies and eighties. And the Philippines started to be recognized 
as one of the new tiger economies of Asia. 
But the good times did not last. In 1997, the Asian Financial Crisis came. Fortunately, the 
Bangko  Sentral  had  instituted  structural  and  banking  reforms  by  then.  These  reforms 
sustained Philippine banks through the crisis in spite of higher problem loans. 
                                                
1 
2  Various CBP and BSP Annual Reports; Lamberte, M. (2002) “Central banking in the Philippines: Then, now 
“He who does not look back to where he came from will never see his destination.” 
and the future”. PIDS Discussion Paper 2002–10. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
The 1997 crisis taught the BSP three important lessons: one, that a transactional approach 
to  banking  supervision  that  emphasizes  individual  bank  compliance  to  regulations  is  not 
sufficient  to  mitigate  system-wide  risks;  two,  that  interest  rate  deregulation  and  financial 
innovations eroded the traditional link among money, output and inflation; and three, that a 
strong financial system needs to be supported by an efficient payment system. 
Thus, in the years that followed, the Bangko Sentral pursued with great vigor more banking 
and structural reforms. These have resulted in what we now know as risk-based supervision, 
inflation targeting and real-time gross settlement or the Philpass. 
Fast forward to 2013, and we see just how far the Bangko Sentral and our economy have 
come. The economy has more than doubled in size from 20 years ago. In the first quarter 
this year, the economy expanded at a rate of 7.8 percent – the fastest in the region. At the 
same time,  inflation  has fallen  to  historic  lows  and  within-target  levels  for four consecutive 
years now. The gross international reserves at more than $82B can now cover almost one 
year of imports of goods and services. The banking system’s NPL ratio is less than 2 percent 
and capital at 17 percent is more than double the international standard of 8 percent. The 
payment  system  is  robust,  processing  an  average  of  P1.5T  worth  of  transactions  daily, 
11 times more than the daily value just 10 years earlier. 
In  addition,  the  Bangko  Sentral’s  financial  inclusion  and  financial  education  program 
continues  to  inform,  protect  and  empower  Filipinos.  In  fact,  our  regulatory  framework  and 
various  initiatives  for  microfinance  continue  to  earn  recognition  as  among  the  best  in  the 
world.3 Meanwhile, our economic and financial learning programs reach out to the general 
public, including our OFWs and the youth, to encourage them to save, invest and become 
financially secure. And by the way, similar programs on personal finance are being offered to 
BSPers. 
Given the stakes involved, your management continues to make investments in our people, 
infrastructure,  processes  and  technology.  As  approved  by  the  Monetary  Board,  support  is 
given to BSPers for further studies here and overseas as well as international professional 
accreditation  to  develop  required  competencies  and  increase  our  corps  of  world-class 
experts. 
The  program  to  improve  the  work  environment  of  BSPers  across  the  country  continues  to 
show visible results. I also hear of many success stories concerning our health and wellness 
programs. 
And we are proud that we continue to align our internal process with global best practices. 
For  instance,  we  now  have  25  BSP  units  whose  management  systems  are certified  under 
ISO standards. 
Fellow central bankers, we have been able to achieve all these as a result of the collective 
work of each and every employee of the Bangko Sentral, past and present. 
For  this,  let  us  thank  the  two  Governors  who  came  before  me.  Individually,  they  were 
recognized  as  among  the  world’s  best  governors.  Together,  they  strengthened  the 
foundation  that  has  allowed  us  to  develop  the  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  into  what  it  is 
today.  Fellow  BSPers,  let  us  salute  and  honor  Governor  Gabriel  Singson  and  Governor 
Rafael Buenaventura. 
                                                
3  For  four  years  in  a  row  (2009–2012),  the  Economist  Intelligence  Unit’s  global  survey  has  ranked  the 
Philippines  as  number  one  in  the  world  in  terms  of  policy  and  regulatory  framework  for  microfinance.  The 
Philippines is also consistently ranked at the top ten for having a good microfinance business environment. 
The  survey  also  noted  the  initiative  of  the  microfinance  industry  to  establish  Microfinance  Data  Sharing 
System (MiDaS), which is a microfinance credit bureau that identifies delinquent borrowers with the ultimate 
objective of client rehabilitation. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Let  us  also  thank  the  Members  of  our  Monetary  Board  for  their  wisdom,  patience  and 
admirable  sense  of  fairness:  Finance  Secretary  Cesar  Purisima;  Alfredo  Antonio;  Ignacio 
Bunye; Peter Favila; Felipe Medalla; and Armando Suratos. 
Let us also recognize our inspiring and brilliant Deputy Governors: Nestor Espenilla from the 
Supervision  and  Examination  Sector;  Diwa  Guinigundo from the  Monetary  Stability  Sector; 
and Vicente Aquino and his immediate predecessor Juan de Zuñiga, Jr. from the Resource 
Management Sector. 
Finally, I thank all of you my fellow BSPers for doing your work with responsibility, integrity 
and tenacity. Whatever we have achieved, we achieved as members of team BSP. 
Fellow BSPers. As we continue our journey amid constant shifts in the national and global 
landscape, the path before us seem challenging. Nevertheless, with the lessons learned and 
the  expertise  we  have  gained  in  our first  20  years, I  am  confident that we  will  continue  to 
deliver on our mandate. 
This is the reason why I accepted a second term as your Governor, two years ago. I have 
faith  in  the  capability  of  BSPers.  At  that  time,  I  laid  out  before  you  a  6-point  agenda  that 
would  enhance  the  BSP’s  credibility  and  effectiveness  as  a  monetary  authority  and  with  it 
help  chart  a  smoother  course  for  the  economy  to  sustain  balanced  growth.  How  have  we 
fared? Well, we have achieved some measure of success in each of these, as evidenced by 
our strong macrofundamentals. 
Nevertheless, these tracks remain relevant; we should continue to work on them. Briefly, our 
6-point agenda is as follows: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
A well-informed and grounded monetary policy framework. 
A responsive and adaptive banking regulatory and supervisory framework. 
An efficient and effective payment and settlement infrastructure. 
An  empowering  and  sustainable  financial  inclusion  program  that  includes  relevant 
financial  access,  wide-reaching  financial  education  and  strong  financial  consumer 
protection. 
Thought leadership in the regional and international fora; and 
Operational efficiency and effectiveness. 
5. 
6. 
Ladies and gentlemen. The environment we operate in is not static; it is dynamic. 
Among  others,  we  are  faced  with  the  unwinding  of  easy  monetary  policy  in  advanced 
economies,  which  if  it  becomes  disorderly  could  have  serious  spillover  effects  on  our 
economy.  At  the  same  time,  the  threat  of  unbridled  market  exuberance  could  create 
imbalances  in  asset  markets  that  could  adversely  impact  the  banking  system’s  ability  to 
effectively intermediate funds. On the other hand, advances in information technology have 
encouraged the emergence of newer payment channels such as mobile banking, that if not 
regulated  properly  could  undermine  the  credibility  of  our  payments  and  settlements 
infrastructure. 
Meanwhile,  population  growth  continues  to  challenge  our  programs  on  financial  inclusion, 
education and consumer protection. The challenge before us is to translate our gains at the 
macro level down to the grassroots. 
Fellow BSPers, all these measures and courses of action are bound to weigh heavily on the 
resources of the Bangko Sentral. We need therefore to find more efficient ways to use our 
resources in the pursuit of our mandate. 
More fundamentally, some of the provisions of our Charter could be revisited to make it more 
relevant and responsive to present conditions. The BSP will continue to work with Congress 
in this regard. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Looking ahead 
Fellow  BSPers.  Our  journey  has  not  been  without  its  challenges,  but  together  we  have 
managed to transform the BSP closer into a truly world-class central bank. The signs say we 
are  on  the  right  path:  Just  this  April,  the  BSP  was  hailed  at  the  Asian  Banker  Leadership 
Achievement Awards as the Best Macroeconomic Regulator in the Asia Pacific Region. 
Of  course,  our  pursuit  of  excellence  is  not  motivated  by  public  recognition  or  awards. We 
pursue excellence because it is THAT level of public service that will help improve the lives 
of Filipinos, our ultimate stakeholders. 
Tama ba?! I am glad you agree. 
And now, for my final question. BSPer ka ba? 
Ako rin. I am a proud BSPer. 
To me, BSPer stands for Bangkero Sa Pilipinas na Excellent and Resilient! 
Ladies and gentlemen. You all make me proud to be a BSPer. 
On behalf of my wife Elma, and the rest of our family I thank all of you for making my journey 
as a BSPer truly worthwhile and deeply fulfilling. 
Mabuhay ang Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas! Mabuhay ang ating mahal na bansang Pilipinas! 
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat!  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
