Már Guðmundsson: Sovereign risk – a world without risk-free assets? 
Remarks  by  Mr  Már  Guðmundsson,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Iceland,  in  a  policy 
panel  at  a  seminar  on  “Sovereign  risk  –  a  world  without  risk-free  assets?”,  Bank  for 
International Settlements, Basel, 8–9 January 2013. 
 I would like to cover three issues in my remarks. First, I will reflect a bit on the title of the 
seminar  and  some  of  the  more  specific  questions  directed  at  this  panel.  Second,  I  will 
discuss  the  nexus  between  sovereign  risk  and  banking  fragility,  using  Iceland  as  a  case 
study – after all, the Icelandic experience is probably the reason that I am taking part in this 
interesting seminar in the first place. Third, and again with reference to the Icelandic case, I 
will  reflect  on  the  connection  between  sovereign  ratings  of  advanced  countries  and  actual 
sovereign defaults. 
The  title  of  this  seminar  is  Sovereign  risk:  a  world  without  risk-free  assets?  As  has  been 
repeatedly pointed out, there is, strictly speaking, no such thing. The default probabilities of 
even the strongest sovereigns are not zero, and they increase as the horizon gets longer. 
Furthermore, the real income stream of nominal government bonds is uncertain. The same 
applies to the FX income stream facing foreign investors, and then there are risks such as 
the possible introduction of capital controls, which will not count as defaults as long as debt is 
serviced on time in the  domestic currency of the sovereign without discrimination between 
domestic and foreign investors. 
Although it is important to bear all this in mind, it is nothing new. Furthermore, it does not 
constitute  a  major  problem  for  the  functioning  of  capital  markets  as  long  as  the  default 
probabilities of sovereigns seen to be providing so-called risk-free assets are perceived to be 
so low at the relevant maturities that they can largely be ignored. The question we are faced 
with is whether this is still the case and what the future will bring in this regard, given that 
both the market and the rating agencies perceive an increase in sovereign risk. The jury is 
still  out,  but  my  current  prediction  is  that,  in  the  foreseeable  future,  the  supply  of  risk-free 
assets according to this definition will be very significantly greater than zero. 
Advanced countries with grade-A ratings are and will be issuing a lot of debt in the near term, 
and the high price that the best-perceived sovereign debt is carrying is a reflection of strong 
demand  rather  than  weak  supply.  In  spite  of  everything  we  have  gone  through,  there  has 
been  no  sovereign  default  of  any  advanced  country  apart  from  Greece  since  the  interwar 
period. Yes, many of these countries have been downgraded lately, but what that means in 
terms  of  actual  default  probabilities  is  not  clear  to  me  at  this  point,  although  it  might  be 
somewhat  clearer  after the  next  session. The fact  of the matter  is that  advanced  countries 
have both considerable means and strong incentives to avoid default. Even Iceland was able 
to avoid a default after the collapse of 90% of its financial sector and its deepest recession 
since the interwar period. So, for the post-war period, Walter Wriston has been largely right so 
far, in saying that “countries don’t go bust” – as far as advanced countries are concerned – 
although he was wrong as regards all countries. And what holds for advanced countries in this 
respect does so increasingly for the more important and advanced EMEs. 
I am not denying that sovereign risk has increased, more broadly speaking. Higher deficits 
and debt levels and weaker growth prospects bear witness to this. But the degree to which 
this translates into higher default probabilities in the narrow sense is not clear. My prediction 
is that default probabilities will remain low for most advanced countries. 
What,  then,  about  the  reaction  of  rating  agencies  and  markets?  Here  again,  we  have  the 
question of what rating agencies are actually trying to measure. I have long experience of 
dealing with them in my current and past jobs, and I have the sense that they are measuring 
something  more  than  default  probabilities.  Partly,  therefore,  a  downgrade  by  one  or  two 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
notches within an investment-grade category could be consistent with my view. Then, on top 
of that, there is a significant amount of evidence to suggest that ratings do not see through 
the cycle. So the rating agencies and the markets are probably overestimating sovereign risk 
at the current juncture, in the same way that they underestimated it prior to the crisis. There 
is  one  important  proviso  to  this  statement,  however:  the  negative  feedback  loop  between 
sovereign risk and bank fragility, which in historical terms has been particularly severe in the 
recent  period.  Thus,  for  some  countries,  the  markets  might  be  factoring  in  further 
socialisation  of  private  sector  losses.  Therefore,  in  addition  to  medium-term  fiscal 
consolidation, a weakening of the nexus between sovereign risk and banking fragility is key. 
And that is where Iceland comes in. 
The  collapse  of  Iceland’s  three  cross-border  banks  in  early  October  2008  was  the  most 
noticeable  event  in  the  unfolding  of  the  financial  crisis  that  hit  the  country  that  year.  The 
combined balance sheets of these banks was 10 times Iceland’s GDP, and their combined 
bankruptcy, measured in terms of balance sheets, ranks second in size in the international 
history of corporate failures, only after Lehman Brothers. And this happened in a country that 
ranks among the smallest in the world. We are still dealing with the complications that this 
entails,  as  can  be  seen  in  our  overblown  and  unbalanced  IIP  and  the  controls  on  capital 
outflows. 
Before  the  collapse,  the  banking  system  had  expanded  very  rapidly,  growing  in  just  five 
years  from  a  combined  balance  sheet  of  less  than  2  times  GDP  (at  the  end  of  2003)  to 
almost  10  times  GDP  (in  mid-2008).  Most  of  this  expansion  was  cross-border,  and  a 
significant  part  of  it  was  really  off-border,  having  very  little  to  do  with  Iceland,  as  both 
financing and investment took place abroad. 
In  the  panic  that  gripped  global  financial  markets  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers, 
these banks were faced  with a  wholesale run on their foreign currency liabilities and  were 
therefore heading towards a default on those liabilities in the absence of LOLR assistance in 
foreign  currency.  However, given  the  size  of  the  balance  sheets,  it  was  impossible for the 
Icelandic  authorities  to  provide  such  assistance  on  their  own,  and  it  could  have  been 
catastrophic for the credit of the sovereign if they had made a full-scale attempt to do so. 
The Icelandic authorities’ actions were based on the assumption that the banks were solvent, 
which in turn was based on published financial accounts and the analysis of the supervisor. 
On  that  premise,  the  authorities  tried  to  build  defences  against  potential  foreign  currency 
liquidity problems at the banks by negotiating swap lines and tapping foreign capital markets, 
in  both  cases  with  limited  success.  Now,  however,  we  know  that  there  were  hidden 
vulnerabilities in the banks’ capital positions. 
There was also a failed attempt to nationalise one of the banks in late September 2008. It 
was  indeed  fortunate  that  it  did  fail,  as  nationalising  the  bank  would  have  turned  a  bank 
foreign  currency  refining  problem  into  a  sovereign  problem,  with  the  serious  risk  that  the 
sovereign might have defaulted on such foreign currency payments. 
In  this  light,  and  given  the  lack  of  international  cooperation,  the  Icelandic  authorities  were 
forced to consider radical solutions. Although they were not necessarily articulated fully at the 
time,  these  solutions  entailed  several  goals:  preserving  a  functioning  domestic  payment 
system, ring-fencing the sovereign in the case of bank failures, limiting the socialisation of 
private sector losses, and creating the conditions for rebuilding a domestic banking system. 
In essence, the adopted solution saved the domestic operations of the banking system by 
splitting  up  the  banks  and  allowing  the  international  part  to  go  into  a  resolution  process. 
Furthermore, in order to stop an incipient run on domestic deposits, all deposits in Iceland 
were  declared  safe  and  all  deposits  in  Icelandic-headquartered  banks  were  given  priority 
over other unsecured claims. As a result of these measures, the domestic payment system 
functioned more or less seamlessly throughout, and common citizens had continuous access 
to their deposits. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There are still a number of misconceptions about this process in international discussions. 
There have been claims that Iceland allowed its banking system to collapse, with what now 
seem reasonable results, and that others should consider doing the same. The fact is that 
Iceland  kept  the  domestic  part  of  its  banking  system  running  throughout;  otherwise,  the 
consequences would have been dire. Some have claimed that the banks were nationalised. 
They were not. The old banks are private companies. They are in winding-up proceedings 
governed by law; they are not under the control of the Government. The Government has a 
majority stake in only one of the new banks. Others have claimed that Iceland defaulted and 
got away with it. The opposite is true. The credit of the sovereign was preserved, and all debt 
obligations  have  been  paid  on  time.  Moreover,  the  investment-grade  credit  ratings  from 
Moody’s and S&P were preserved throughout the crisis. This is why the sovereign has been 
able to tap international capital markets twice so far since the crisis struck. 
So  the  bottom  line  is  that  a  sovereign  default  was  avoided  in  spite  of  an  almost 
unprecedented financial collapse and the worst economic recession since the interwar years. 
A  key  to  that  result  was  the  ring-fencing  of  the  sovereign  from  the  collapse  of  the  private 
banks. All debt service payments on sovereign debt, in both domestic and foreign currencies, 
have been made in full and on time. But the avoidance of default during the crisis does not 
come without the willingness to use the means available to avoid that outcome, even in very 
adverse  situations,  and  the  ability  to  endure  the  temporary  hardship  that  comes  with  it.  In 
addition,  Iceland  –  like  Ireland,  probably  –  was  helped  by  a  relatively  good  fiscal  position 
prior to the crisis. The fiscal consolidation that began in 2010 and has already resulted in a 
significant  primary  surplus  was  subsequently  an  important  factor  in  restoring  external 
confidence,  which  fell  to  what,  in  retrospect,  seems  an  unjustifiably  low  level.  In  Iceland’s 
case,  the  overall  effort  was  made  easier  by  the  outside  assistance  of  the  IMF,  the  Nordic 
countries, and Poland. The same consideration applies to the hardest-hit EU countries and 
should be kept in mind when assessing their probability of default. 
Finally, let me say a few words about credit ratings and market perceptions in the Icelandic 
saga, which broadly conforms to more general patterns. Both the sovereign and the private 
Icelandic banks were assigned triple-A ratings by Moody’s for a period prior to the crisis (the 
sovereign  from  October  2002  to  May  2008  and  Kaupthing  Bank  from  February  2007  to 
April 2007). In the case of the banks, the stated argument was that the Government would 
stand behind them in times of difficulty. We now know that this was nonsense, given the size 
of the banks and the scale of their international activities. In case of the sovereign, this rating 
was not so bad after all! 
The bank ratings then started to fall in early 2008 and then plunged to sub-investment grade 
after the banks had collapsed. The sovereign rating, however, although it fell over the course 
of  2008,  never  fell  to  sub-investment  grade  with  Moody’s  and  S&P,  and  it  only  fell  below 
investment grade with Fitch Ratings after the president sent the so-called Icesave deal to a 
referendum in January 2010. It is now back to investment grade with all three agencies. 
It  is  interesting  to  see  how  both  ratings  and  market  perceptions  evolved  around  two  key 
dates  in  September/October  2008,  when  decisions  were  taken  that  could  drastically  affect 
sovereign risk. The first date was 29 September, when an announcement was made of the 
Government’s  intention  to  take  a  75%  ownership  stake  in  one  of  the  three  cross-border 
banks, an action that should increase sovereign risk. The other date was 6 October, when 
Parliament  passed  the  so-called  Emergency  Act,  which  severed  the  nexus  between  the 
sovereign and the private banks and drastically  reduced objective sovereign risk. Both the 
rating  agencies  and  the  market  got  the  sign  of  the  first  event  right:  S&P  downgraded  the 
sovereign by one notch and Glitnir by one notch the day after; Fitch downgraded them the 
next day by two and three notches, respectively; and Iceland’s sovereign CDS spread shot 
up to almost 600 in the first two days after the announcement, from around just over 300 in 
the days prior. But both the rating agencies and markets got the sign of the second event 
completely wrong, with further downgrades and the CDS peaking at 1473 on 10 October. It 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
took them a while to correct this, and the CDS was down to around 180 by the end of 2012. 
To be sure, there were other things going on at the time, but still! 
Let me conclude by saying that the Icelandic case seems to support the conclusion that it is 
premature to state that we are in or heading towards a world without risk-free assets in the 
narrow sense. It will take policy mistakes of gigantic proportions in several parts of the world 
to get there. But the risk is not and never has been zero.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
