Louis Kasekende: Uganda’s financial sector at 50 – achievements, 
challenges and expectations for the future  
Speech  by  Dr  Louis  Kasekende,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  at  the  Uganda 
Institute of Banking and Financial Services Annual Dinner, Kampala, 1 March 2013. 
 Chief Executive Officer, Uganda Institute of Banking & Financial Services  
Chief Executives of Commercial Banks  
Invited Guests  
Ladies & Gentlemen  
I would like to begin by thanking the Uganda Institute of Banking and Financial Services for 
graciously  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  occasion,  where  we  will  celebrate  50  years  of 
achievements by the banking and financial services industry in Uganda and look ahead to 
the  challenges  that  the  industry  will  confront  in  the  future.  I  also  want  to  commend  the 
Institute  for  the  excellent  work  it  is  doing,  especially  through  professional  training  of  staff; 
training  which  is  critical  to  helping  the  industry  meet  the  exacting  demands  of  a  modern 
economy in which technology and markets are evolving at a rapid pace.  
In  these  remarks  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  most  notable  achievements  of  the  banking 
industry since the start of the millennium and then go on to identify what I believe are some 
of the most pertinent challenges that the industry must face in the years ahead. The banking 
industry  in  Uganda  can  take  pride  in  four  major  achievements  since  the  start  of  this 
millennium; achievements which have brought important benefits for the wider economy and 
the Ugandan public.  
The  first  achievement  I  want  to  highlight  is  the  dramatic  increase  in  the  intermediation  of 
funds;  the  extent  to  which  banks  convert  the  deposits  that  they  mobilise  into  loans  to  the 
corporate  and  household  sectors.  In  the  1990s,  Uganda  was  a  very  low  intermediation 
banking system. At the end of the year 2000, commercial bank credit to the private sector 
was only six percent of GDP and banks only lent out 54 percent of their deposit base to the 
private sector. By the end of 2012, 80 percent of the banks’ deposit base had been lent out 
to the private sector and private sector credit as a share of GDP had risen to 15 percent. In 
the twelve years since the end of 2000, bank lending to the private sector has risen five fold 
in real terms.  
The second impressive feature of the performance of the banking industry in recent years is 
the  expansion  of  the  branch  network.  In  the  year  2000,  there  were  129  bank  branches  in 
Uganda. At the end of last year this had risen to 495, a four fold increase. In the last five 
years,  Uganda  has  seen  an  average  of  60  new  branches  a  year  opened  for  business. 
Furthermore,  banks  are  spreading  their  operations  around  the  country;  there  are  now 
270 bank branches outside of Kampala. The expansion of the branch network also reflects 
greater  competitive  pressures  within  the  banking  market,  with  banks  aiming  to  attract  new 
customers by expanding into areas where they did not previously have a presence.  
Thirdly,  the  phenomenal  growth  of  mobile  money  services  has  brought  access  to  basic 
payment  services  within  reach  of  millions  of  Ugandans  who  do  not  have  ready  access  to 
bank  branches  or  own  a  bank  account.  There  are  currently  8.9  million  registered  mobile 
money customers in Uganda, more than one quarter of the entire population. Mobile money 
transactions totalled Shs 11.7 trillion in 2012, a 211 percent increase over the total in 2011. 
Furthermore, mobile banking offers enormous potential for further expansion, especially by 
broadening the type of service which can be provided to customers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Fourthly, the Ugandan banking system – and I am here referring to the system as a whole 
rather than individual banks – has remained in a very sound financial state despite all of the 
challenges  it  has  faced  in  recent  years  emanating  from  the  impact  of  the  global  financial 
crisis, the rise in domestic interest rates and the slowdown in economic growth. The basic 
indicators with which we measure financial soundness are all positive. The total capital of the 
banking  system  is  a  very  healthy  22  percent  of its  risk  weighted  assets and  the  quality  of 
bank  capital  is  very  good  with  core  capital  comprising  86  percent  of  the  total  regulatory 
capital of Ugandan banks. The banking system is profitable, with an annual return on assets 
of around four percent. Non performing loans were only just over four percent of total loans 
at the end of 2012; hence the rapid increase in intermediation that I have just mentioned has 
not been brought about at the expense of loan quality. These ratios justify a high degree of 
public confidence in the safety and stability of the financial system and are also testimony to 
the prudent risk management of commercial banks in Uganda.  
The banks in Uganda can take pride in these important achievements and the contribution 
they  have  made  to  the  development  of  the  economy  since  the  1990s.  The  growth  in  the 
intermediation of funds, the expansion of the branch network and the development of new 
products has enabled the financial sector to generate average real growth of 10 percent per 
annum since 1999/2000; it has been one of the fastest growing sectors of the economy in 
this period. However, I think we must also be very honest in recognising that there are some 
aspects of the performance of the banking industry which arouse concern among the public 
and policymakers in this country.  
The first issue of concern which I want to discuss is that of interest rate spreads and margins, 
which are very high in Uganda. The average net interest margin (which is calculated as total 
interest income minus total interest expense, divided by total earning assets) of the Ugandan 
banking industry in 2012 was 12.7 percent. This is much higher than the average for sub-
Saharan  Africa  which  was  7.5  percent,  which  is  in  itself  much  higher  than  in  most  other 
regions of the world. Equally worryingly, the progress which had been made by banks in the 
mid  2000s  in  reducing  their  interest  margins  has  been  reversed  in  the  last  two  years.  Net 
interest margins fell from 14 percent in 2005 to just over 10 percent during 2008–2010, but 
they have subsequently crept back up by more than two percentage points.  
The reasons for the very high net interest margins in Uganda are complex. I do not dispute 
that  the  high  costs  of  doing  business  in  Uganda  are  a  major  contributor  to  this  problem. 
Nevertheless, I don’t think that this is the only reason why margins are so high in Uganda. 
The rise of two percentage points in net interest margins which occurred in the last two years 
was accompanied by an increase of about 10 percentage points in the share of profits before 
tax  in  banks’  net  interest  income.  In  other  words,  bank  profits  have  risen  faster  than  their 
costs in the last two years and it is higher profits which account for most of the increase in 
net interest margins which took place in 2011 and 2012. Bank operating costs as a percent 
of  their  total  assets  have  actually  fallen  slightly  since  2009,  from  around  5  percent  to 
4.4 percent in 2012.  
Looking ahead, I believe that it is imperative that the banking industry makes serious efforts 
to  reduce  its  interest  rate  spreads,  thereby  allowing  lending  rates  to  be  lowered  and, 
eventually,  more  remunerative  deposit  rates  to be  offered  to  savers.  The  Bank  of  Uganda 
intends to use its monetary policy to target a core inflation rate of 5 percent over the medium 
term, and we are confident that this target can be delivered. This implies that, with nominal 
commercial bank lending rates currently averaging nearly 25 percent, borrowers are paying 
real lending rates which average almost 20 percent. I find it inconceivable that average real 
lending  rates  of  this  magnitude  are  sustainable  over  the  long  term,  because  most  private 
sector  businesses  will  not generate  sufficiently  high  real  returns  to  enable  them  to  service 
their  debt.  Therefore,  if  we  want  to  see  continued  growth  of  bank  lending  to  creditworthy 
borrowers,  it  is  unavoidable  that  bank  lending  rates  and,  therefore,  interest  rate  spreads, 
must  be  reduced  substantially.  If  banks  are  to  narrow  their  net  interest  margins  without 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reducing  their  profits,  they  must  become  more  efficient  and  control  their  operating  costs, 
perhaps by exploiting economies of scale and scope.  
The second area where I think there is some justifiable concern about the performance of 
banks  is  the  sectoral  composition  and  characteristics  of  bank  lending.  I  have  already 
highlighted  the  very  impressive  growth  in  aggregate  bank  lending  since  the  start  of  the 
millennium.  However,  most  of  this  lending  is  extended  to  the  non  traded  goods  sectors, 
especially  trade,  construction  and  telecommunications,  and  to  the  household  sector.  The 
traded goods sectors of the economy, such as agriculture and manufacturing, receive only 
21 percent of total bank credit to the private sector. The low share of lending extended to the 
traded  goods  sectors  is  a  concern  because  it  is  the  growth  and  diversification  of  these 
sectors  which  are  the  principal  drivers  of  technological  upgrading  and  thus  economic 
development over the long term. A developing economy can often generate rapid spurts of 
economic growth over the short term based on investment in services and construction, but 
long term growth and structural transformation is almost always led by the export sectors.  
The  Ugandan  economy  is  not  attracting  anywhere  near  enough  private  investment  in  the 
traded goods sectors in which it has a comparative advantage on world markets and which 
could,  therefore,  drive  export  led  growth;  sectors  such  as  commercial  agriculture,  agro-
processing, light industry and tourism. The lack of private investment in these sectors is also 
reflected  in  the  relative  paucity  of  bank  financing  for  them.  I  am  not  trying  to  claim  that  a 
shortage of bank lending is the only binding constraint to higher investment in these sectors, 
because there are clearly many other serious constraints; weak business and technological 
skills,  the  high  costs  of  doing  business,  poor  transport  logistics  and  infrastructure,  for 
example.  However,  the  creation  of  a  customs  union  and  a  common  market  in  the  East 
African  Community  will  expand  market  opportunities  for  Ugandan  traded  goods  industries 
and thus should enhance incentives for private investment in these industries.  
If we are to begin to build dynamic traded goods industries in Uganda we have to find ways 
of  channelling  more  finance  to  these  industries,  both  for  capital  investment  and  working 
capital.  I  appreciate  that  lending  to  these  industries,  especially  when  it  involves  non 
traditional  exports,  is  often  much  more  risky  than  lending  to  the  services  and  construction 
sectors, but that should not be an insurmountable obstacle if banks can upgrade the skills 
they need to evaluate borrowers and develop innovative products to help mitigate the risks. 
The need to channel more credit to the traded goods sectors also underlines the urgency of 
reducing real lending rates in Uganda. Industries which sell their products and services on 
competitive global markets cannot normally expect to earn very high rates of return to capital; 
this inevitably limits their capacity to borrow at real lending rates in the region of 20 percent, 
as is currently the case in Uganda.  
I  would  also  like  to  signal  a  note  of  caution  about  the  rapid  build  up  of  foreign  currency 
lending  by  the  banks,  which  stands  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  stagnation  of  Shilling 
denominated lending. The ratio of foreign currency denominated loans  to total outstanding 
loans has risen sharply since mid 2011, from 25 percent to the current level of 38 percent. 
Most of this increase is not attributable to the depreciation of the exchange rate which has 
occurred in the last few months because the dollar value of these loans has itself risen by 
27 percent over the last 12 months and by over 60 percent in the last 18 months. I am not 
worried  about  the  foreign  exchange  market  risk  carried  by  the  banks,  because  their  net 
foreign exchange exposure is very small, but I am concerned about the liability dollarization 
of  the  real  sector,  which  could  translate  into  future  credit  risk  if  real  exchange  rate 
depreciation raises its real debt burden.  
The sector which has experienced the fastest growth in foreign exchange borrowing over the 
last  two  years  is  construction,  mortgages  and  real  estate;  this  sector  now  accounts  for  a 
quarter of all foreign exchange borrowing from the banking system. It is a sector where the 
underlying demand for the services provided is derived from domestic residents rather than 
export markets and hence the ability to generate revenues to pay for these services must be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
the 
affected by changes in the real exchange rate. Similar considerations are relevant to foreign 
exchange  borrowing  by  other  sectors,  such  as  most  of 
trade  sector  and 
telecommunications  which  account  for  a  further  quarter  of  foreign  exchange  borrowing.  I 
hope that banks will be very careful about extending foreign currency loans to borrowers who 
do not have a strong foreign currency revenue stream from which to service their debt and 
which might, therefore, be vulnerable to adverse shifts in the real exchange rate.  
To conclude I would like us to take pride in the achievements of the banking industry over the 
last decade; it has become one of the most dynamic sectors of our economy. But I also want 
you to think about how the industry needs to evolve in the years ahead so that it can best 
meet the needs of its customers and the Ugandan economy.  
Thank you for listening.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
