H R Khan: Financial inclusion and payment systems – recent trends, 
current challenges and emerging issues 
Detailed version of the presentation by Mr H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank 
of India, at the BANCON 2012, organised by the Bank of Maharashtra and the Indian Banks’ 
Association, Pune, 25 November 2012. 
 The speaker acknowledges with thanks the contributions of Shri Simanchala Sahu, Shri G Srinivas & Shri Surajit 
Bose of the Reserve Bank of India. 
Shri. Narendra Singh, CMD, Bank of Maharashtra, Shri. K R Kamath, CMD, Punjab National 
Bank & Chairman, Indian Banks’ Association, Shri Raghuvir Singh, Executive Director, Bank 
of  Maharashtra  and  Chairmen-Managing  Directors  &  Executive  Directors  of  banks, 
distinguished  delegates,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  indeed  a  pleasure  to  be  here  in 
BANCON 2012 organised by the Indian Banks’ Association. I am especially happy to share 
my thoughts on financial inclusion & payment systems in this conference hosted by the Bank 
of Maharashtra which has been a pioneer in implementing Information Communication and 
Technology (ICT) based financial inclusion. I am particularly reminded of a reference made 
by the bank to the Reserve Bank of India way back in late 60s’ seeking permission to use 
agents for  providing  banking  services  &  the  opinion  given  by  the  Legal  Department  of the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  which  formed  the  basis  for  allowing  Business  Correspondents  to 
expand banking outreach with ICT support in 2006 as recommended by the Internal Group 
on Rural Credit & Microfinance set by the Reserve Bank of India in 2006. 
Financial inclusion as a concept, process and business proposition is not new for the banking 
sector of India and, in fact, it dates back to the phase of nationalization of banks and even 
beyond that when the Imperial Bank was nationalized to become the State Bank of India in 
1955 and its subsidiaries were formed following the recommendations of the All India Rural 
Credit  Survey  Committee  (AIRCS)  in  1954.  One  of  the  objectives  of  nationalization  was 
aimed at taking banking to the masses. Financial inclusion, thus, has been and continues to 
be  at  the  centre  of  the  policy  priority  of  the  country.  With  passage  of  time  the  means  of 
achieving deeper and sustainable financial inclusion has shifted towards innovative methods 
and  adoption  of  technology-led  products.  In  this  changed  environment,  Payment  Systems 
(PS) have become a critical component of financial inclusion for bringing the unbanked into 
the formal banking channels, particularly as we move towards the second phase of financial 
inclusion that aims to cover the villages with population of less than 2000. I am therefore very 
happy to have got this opportunity to speak on the payment system and financial inclusion in 
this  conference  which  is  focused  on  “innovating  to  unlock  the  next  decade  of  banking”.  I 
intend  to  highlight  the  recent  trends,  the  current  challenges  and  the  emerging  issues  in 
fostering new payment methods and instruments with focus on the inter-linkages between a 
robust payment system and a sustainable financial inclusion. 
Role of payment systems in financial inclusion 
Global Partnership for Financial Inclusion (GPFI), a forum of G20, defined financial inclusion 
as “a state in which all working age adults have effective access to credit, savings, payments 
and  insurance  from  formal  service  providers.”  “Effective  access”  involves  convenient  and 
responsible product and service delivery channels at a cost affordable to the customer and 
sustainable  for  the  service  provider  so  that  the  financially  excluded  population  uses  the 
formal financial services rather than the informal channels that provide convenient but costly 
services  on  near  24x7  basis.  An  efficient  and  ready-for-future  payment  and  settlement 
system is expected to act as a catalyst to ensure this effective access and increase the pace 
of financial inclusion. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Payment System Vision 2012–15 
The  Payment  System  Vision  Document:  2012–15  of  the  Reserve  Bank  envisages  to 
proactively  encourage  electronic  payment  systems  for  ushering  in  a  less-cash  society  in 
India.  The  vision  is  to  ensure  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  country  are  safe, 
efficient, interoperable, authorised, accessible, inclusive and compliant with the international 
standards.  Payment  systems  would  be  driven  by  customer  demands  for  convenience, 
ease-of-use and access that will propel the necessary convergence in innovative e-payment 
products and capabilities. Integration of various systems through unified solution architecture 
and  current  technology  would  lead  to  adoption  and  usage  of  resilient  payment  systems. 
Regulations would enable channelizing innovations and competition to meet these demands 
consistent  with  international  standards  and  best  practices.  The  overall  regulatory  policy 
stance  would  be  oriented  towards  promoting  a  less-cash/less-paper  society,  in  a  way  a 
“green”  initiative.  The  emphasis  would  be  on  the  use  of  electronic  payment  products  and 
services that can be accessed anywhere and anytime by anyone at affordable prices. Thus, 
the seven cornerstones of financial inclusion, i.e., Accessibility, Availability, Affordability, 
Awareness,  Acceptability,  Assurance  and  Appropriateness  have  been  incorporated  as 
basic  principles  to  enable  payment  system  to  play  a  role  of  catalyst  in  furthering  financial 
inclusion. 
Payment system as catalyst and enabler for financial inclusion 
The  process  of  financial  inclusion  is  influenced  by  both  demand  and  supply  side  factors. 
Demand  side  factors  include  financial  literacy  and  awareness,  felt  need  for  the  products, 
credit  absorption  capacity,  etc.  On  the  other  hand  factors,  such  as,  product  availability, 
delivery methods, service providers, etc. influence the supply side. Payment systems have 
the  potential  of  acting  as  a  catalyst  on  the  supply  side  of  financial  inclusion  by  way  of 
appropriate designing and efficient delivery of products, processes and systems. In one of 
the  recent  surveys  of  the World  Bank,1  more  than  100  countries  reported  nearly  170  plus 
innovative  retail  payment  instruments  and  methods  being  used  for  enhancing  financial 
inclusion.  Some  of  the  common  products  involved  Person  to  Business  (P2B),  Person  to 
Person  (P2P)  and  utility  bill  payments  and  a  small  proportion  also  reported  tapping  the 
payment  system  for  transfer  of  government  benefits.  It  was  observed  that  innovative 
payment instruments & methods were drivers of financial inclusion in nearly 14 per cent of 
the countries surveyed. 
In  sync  with  the  international  developments,  India  has  also  been  witness  to  some  efficient 
and effective innovations – both in the field of access channels and products. In the payment 
system  landscape  of  the  country,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  acts  as  regulator,  supervisor 
and, also at times, as a service provider. Certain major payment systems initiatives, such as, 
ECS, NEFT and RTGS have been game changers that have helped millions of people to use 
electronic  medium  for  faster  transfer  of  money  from  one  place  to  another,  and,  to  a  large 
extent, the Reserve Bank played a critical role in the development of these products. It has, 
however,  been  observed  that  benefits  of  these  facilities  have  not  yet  reached  the  vast 
segments  of  the  population  who  are  unable  to  access  formal  banking  channels.  The 
Business Correspondent (BC) based business model using low cost ICT has opened up an 
opportunity  for  the  banking  sector  to  provide  appropriate  payment  system  products  at 
affordable  cost. The continuous  shrinking  of  prices  of ICT  based  solutions  can  be  used to 
provide  the  financial  services  using  multiple  delivery  channels,  such  as,  ATMs,  kiosks, 
mobile  phones,  internet  and  contact  and  contactless  cards  through  PoS.  Innovations  in 
product  design  and  delivery  channels  have  provided  a  fillip  to  the  process  of  financial 
inclusion and the need for deeper and search for sustainable financial inclusion has paved 
                                                
1   World Bank Global Payments Survey, 2010 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
way for many innovations. Traditional payment services no longer make a business case for 
large volume of small ticket transactions. This has led to many innovations, such as, special 
bank  accounts  or  pre-paid  accounts,  use  of  BCs,  use  of  technology  for  initiating  and 
authenticating transaction,  etc.  At the  same  time,  it  is  important  to realize  that  innovations 
have  taken  place  and  have  been  successful  due  to  initiatives  of  all  the  stakeholders, 
partnerships of banks and non-banks and creation of an enabling business environment by 
the  regulator  and  in  the  process  have  opened  up  new  avenues  for tapping  the  unreached 
markets. 
International approach 
Some  of  the  international  experiences  in  this  regard  are  worth  mentioning  to  draw  useful 
lessons  that  can  be  implemented  in  our  country  in  the  existing  policy  environment  for 
financial inclusion. Countries like China, Brazil, South Africa, Mexico, Kenya and Philippines 
have  implemented  various  technology-based  financial  inclusion  programmes  and  their 
success stories have been replicated in various countries albeit with modifications based on 
local  needs.  Internationally,  there  are  different  approaches  towards  delivery  of  payment 
services  to  the  unbanked  and  under-banked  customers  using  innovative  methods.  For 
example, the BC model with traditional PoS devices and cards is used in Brazil and China. 
The  Mobile  based  payments  are  extensively  used  in  Kenya,  South  Africa,  Philippines  and 
Mexico.  A  few  countries  like  the  USA  and  China  use  pre-paid  payment  cards  as  an 
instrument  to  provide  payment  and  banking  services  to  the  unbanked  population.  Broadly 
there are three models: (i) bank-led model (e.g. Brazil/South Africa), (ii) non-bank led model 
(e.g. Kenya), and (iii) hybrid model (e.g. Philippines). These models have evolved taking into 
account  the  factors  like  banking  penetration  in  a  country,  levels  of  literacy,  availability  of 
necessary  eco-system,  etc.  In  the  context  of  technology-enabled  financial  inclusion  the 
success  stories  of  Brazil,  Kenya  and  Philippines  are  often  quoted.  Let  me  briefly  mention 
about their business models. 
Brazilian banking correspondent model 
Brazil adopted a “correspondent” banking model to expand the reach of banking services to 
its remote areas. The success of this model can be gauged by the fact that while there were 
63,509 agents in 2000, their number had grown to 132,757 by January 2010. This enabled 
the spread of banking and financial services to even the far-flung areas of Brazil. The PoS 
devices  with  cards  are  used  for  providing  a  wide  range  of  services  from  deposit  taking, 
money transfers, opening accounts, bill payments, verifying and forwarding documentation to 
provide credit, etc. This wide network has also helped in the delivery of government benefits 
to  families  covered  under  the  Bolsa  Família  programme.  It  enables  the  beneficiaries  to 
withdraw  their  benefits  locally,  without  having  to  travel  long  distances  and  has  resulted  in 
reducing the transaction costs to the government in providing social payments. 
Kenyan non-bank MNO model 
In  2006  one  of  the  leading  mobile  operators  of  Kenya  launched  M-Pesa,  an  m-commerce 
payment service, aimed at the unbanked. M-Pesa enables customers to exchange cash in 
return for an e-money account which is stored on the server of a non-bank, such as, a mobile 
operator or an issuer of stored-value cards. The balance can be used for making payments, 
storing funds for future use, transferring funds or converting back to cash, etc. In Kenya, the 
latest available data shows that the number of M-Pesa mobile phone money transfer service 
users is around 14 million. Its agent network has also increased to close to 28,000 outlets. 
The  M-Pesa  model  has  been  a  major  success  in  providing  mobile  payment  services, 
especially  for  remittances  to  the  Kenyan  citizens.  In  neighbouring  countries,  however,  the 
quest  to  replicate  the  model  has  proved  to  be  quite  challenging  and  has  not  been  as 
successful. One of the primary reasons attributed to the difference in the levels of success in 
Kenya as compared to other neighbouring countries is the existence of only one dominant 
Mobile Network Operator (MNO) in the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Philippines hybrid model 
SmartMoney was launched as a remittance product by an MNO (viz. Smart) in partnership 
with  a  commercial  bank  (viz.  Banco  d’Oro).  While  the  MNO  managed  the  brand  and 
execution of the service, the underlying product was akin to a pre-paid account of the bank. 
This was a classic example of bank-supported model where the MNO assumed product and 
marketing  leadership.  Unlike  SmartMoney,  the  fundamental  difference  in  G-Cash,  another 
product launched in Philippines, was that the G-Cash model did not have a bank to assume 
direct liability for the deposits of customers. This was due to the fact that G-Cash was itself 
the issuer of the mobile money account. In other words, this was a non-bank led model. The 
retail accounts were actually held by a wholly owned subsidiary of the MNO, and, therefore, 
somewhat  ring-fenced  from  the  operational  cash  flows  of  the  MNO  although  in  reality  the 
MNO was assuming liability for a type of deposit. The aggregate balances of G-Cash would 
however be held as deposits in banks that are regulated by the central bank of the country. 
The above examples illustrate the use of different methods to further the goals of financial 
inclusion. While in the case of the Brazil it is the PoS device along with the card (a somewhat 
traditional  mode)  with  the  business  correspondent  which  is  enabling  financial  inclusion  in 
Kenya and Philippines, it is the mobile technology which is driving this effort. As can be seen 
from  these  examples,  policymakers  and  regulators,  especially  in  developing  countries  and 
emerging  markets,  are  adopting  different  models  to  reach  to  unbanked  and  under  banked 
customers taking into account the regulatory comforts based on financial sector eco system 
and security in providing safe payment systems using different technologies. 
The Indian reality and the policy approaches 
If  we  consider  our  own  banking  eco-system,  it  has  about  95,000  branches,  about  equal 
number of ATMs across the country and 278 million debit cards. Yet a large proportion of our 
population  remains  financially  excluded.  Data  indicates  that  only  about  40  percent  of  the 
adult population in the country has a bank account; only 25,000 plus villages have a bank 
branch out of the 600,000 villages in the country. Only 13 percent of the people have a debit 
card and only two percent have a credit card. The same low level of penetration is seen for 
both life and non-life insurance products. The select indicators of financial inclusion (Table) 
also  prove  that  India  has  a  long  way  to  go  in  achieving  the  desired  levels  of  financial 
inclusion. 
 
As the Indian financial system is pre-dominantly led by banks, the financial inclusion policy 
orientation  has  naturally  been  biased  towards  the  bank-led  model.  The  non-bank  entities, 
however,  play  an  important  role  in  providing  necessary  support  to  expand  the  reach 
particularly for the banks, crossing the proverbial last mile. The issue is given the geographic 
spread of the unbanked and the low level of financial literacy, how do we step up the public 
policy objective of financial inclusion? One eminently feasible way to overcome the challenge 
is  by  tapping  existing  and  innovative  technologies,  especially  in  the  realm  of  payment 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
transfer 
the  moves  of 
to  electronically 
the  Government 
systems. This can be accomplished by providing access to the formal banking channel for 
activities,  such  as,  remittances.  Another  method  could  be  to  provide  alternate  payment 
instruments,  other  than cash, for  both  P2P  and P2B  payments,  such  as,  prepaid  payment 
instruments (PPI). The payment systems, thus, can be considered as effective tools working 
on the supply side of financial inclusion by providing products and systems for fulfilling the 
payment needs of the financially excluded while the demand side is propelled by the desire 
of  the  excluded  segment  to  make  use  of  formal  banking  channel  for  their  banking  and 
payment needs. The Reserve Bank of India and the Government has been working to create 
an enabling environment for providing payment system infrastructure and services as supply 
side response to emerging demands for deeper financial inclusion arising out of heightened 
awareness, requirement of the Financial Inclusion Plans (FIP) being implemented by banks 
& 
large  number  of 
benefits/entitlements to the citizens. 
Use of business correspondents (BCs) 
One of the major experiment as the supply-side enabler for financial inclusion has been the 
Business Correspondent (BC) model. The BC model is meant to be a low cost alternate to 
the brick and mortar banking network with an ability to reach the unbanked/ under-banked 
population. In spite of the difficulties faced while implementing the first phase of FIP, as on 
September  30,  2012  banks  could  open  1,58,159  BC  outlets  providing  access  to  financial 
services  in  1,99,702  villages  in  the country.  This  initial  period  of test  and  learn  phase  has 
made  the  stakeholders  understand  the  issues  involved.  The  experience,  thus,  gained  has 
enabled  evolution  and  further  rationalization  of  the  policy  framework.  There  are,  however, 
constraints which have to be addressed effectively for the successful implementation of the 
BC  model.  I  would  not  dwell  on  them  here  except  to  state  that  all  the  stakeholders  are 
determined  to  overcome  them  as  they  gear  up  to  meet  the  challenge  as  we  embark  on 
second phase of financial inclusion under which all villages with the population of less than 
2000 would be covered. Going forward, the challenges would be leveraging the products & 
processes  now  available  or  on  the  anvil  (e.g.  integration  of  financial  inclusion  server  with 
CBS server, implementation of inter-operable micro ATMs, resource sharing with other banks 
and non-banks, use of RFID technology, expanded usage of Aadhaar enabled infrastructure, 
etc.) and adapting the innovations that can not only enhance the FIP but also prove to be a 
sustainable  business  model.  This  would  require  answers  to  questions,  such  as,  whether 
banks  need  to  innovate  by  tapping  their  own  infrastructure  and  resources  or  is  there  a 
business  case  in  setting  up  shared  infrastructure. I  am  sure that  innovations  through  such 
collaborations would definitely unlock the immense business potential that the Bottom of the 
Pyramid (BoP) customers offer through the ICT based BC model. 
Aadhaar-enabled unified payment infrastructure 
Here  I  would  like  to  specifically  touch  upon  the  Aadhaar-enabled  unified  payment 
infrastructure. The issue of direct transfer of subsidies (DTS) and electronic benefit transfer 
(EBT)  from  the  Government  to  the  intended  beneficiaries  has  been  in  focus  of  the 
policymakers in the recent times. Both the schemes are based on an innovative approach of 
using Aadhaar based platform as a unique financial address for transferring financial benefits 
to the accounts of beneficiaries and helping them to withdraw/use such benefits as per their 
convenience. The mechanism involves tapping the existing banking channels including the 
BC  network  to  route  all  payments  electronically  to  the  accounts  of  the  beneficiaries  using 
Aadhaar  as  an  authentication  mechanism.  BCs  would  be  equipped  with  micro-ATMs  and 
undertake transactions on the basis of Aadhaar number and bio-metric authentication. The 
financial 
the  Aadhaar  Payments  Bridge.  The 
Aadhaar-enabled Payments System (AEPS) using micro-ATMs enables the beneficiaries to 
operate  these  accounts  for  withdrawal,  deposit  and  remittance  purposes.  The  volume  of 
transactions  that  are  likely  to  be  routed  through  the  AEPS  is  expected  to  register  an 
exponential  growth.  The  report  of  the  Task  Force  on  Direct  Transfer  of  Subsidies  (DTS) 
(Chairman:  Shri  Nandan  Nilekani)  highlights  the  huge  business  potential  this  eco-system 
transactions  are 
through 
routed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
presents  to  the  stakeholders  with  electronic  benefit  transfer/DTS  payments  adding  upto 
roughly  3.5  per  cent  of  the  GDP  and  another  ₹one  trillion  estimated  as  business 
opportunities in the form of domestic remittances. Given such large numbers, we are looking 
at huge transaction volumes. The issue, however, is whether the industry is geared for this 
expected  surge  in  volumes  by  pro-actively  taking  measures  to  upgrade  the  processing 
capacities, mapping Aadhar with beneficiary account numbers and working in collaboration 
with Central and State Governments to digitize the data bases in quickest possible time. 
Mobile penetration 
Given the high level of acceptance and penetration of the mobile telephone in India, there is 
a case to further leverage this for providing banking services to the people at the bottom of 
the pyramid. Worldwide it has been recognised that the mobile telephony has the potential to 
universalise access to banking and payment services in a low-cost and seamless manner to 
the  existing  and  potential  customers.  Latest  data  released  by  the  Telecom  Regulatory 
Authority of India (TRAI), the mobile subscriber base of the country as at end-October 2012 
is 904.23 million with the urban subscribers accounting for 62.68 percent (566.81 million) and 
the rural subscribers for 37.32 percent (337.42 million). Available data indicates that the use 
of  mobile  banking  services  amongst  this  huge  base  of  subscribers  is,  however,  very  low. 
Even amongst the existing bank customers, less than one per cent are covered under the 
mobile banking services. Notwithstanding the existing low base of customers, the growth in 
mobile  banking  transactions  has  shown  an  increasing trend.  For  example,  in the month of 
October  2012,  4.44  million  transactions  amounting  to  ₹4.97  billion  were  processed  as 
compared to 2.25 million transactions amounting to ₹1.61 billion processed in October 2011 
–  an  increase  of  about  197  per  cent  in  volume  and  approximately  308  per  cent  in  value 
terms. It is, however, evident that the potential of mobile banking technology is yet to be fully 
exploited,  even  though  the  numbers  may  look  impressive.  It  is  also  evident  that  mobile 
banking  is  yet  to  gain  the  critical  take-off  stage  that  would  propel  it  to  provide 
banking/payment  services  at  a  cheaper,  secure  and  seamless  manner  to  the  existing  and 
potential customers. 
Interbank Mobile Payment Systems 
The Interbank Mobile Payment Systems (IMPS) is a mobile based payments system and is 
owned  and  operated  by  the  National  Payment  Corporation  of  India  (NPCI).  The  IMPS 
facilitates  access  to  bank  accounts  and  transfer  of  funds  through  mobile  phones.  The 
system,  launched  in  November  2010,  provides  real  time  transfer  of  funds  between  the 
customers of different banks on 24x7 basis. Initially enabled only for P 2 P remittance, NPCI 
has  been  given  approval  to  use  this  innovative  payment  system  for  Person-to-Merchant 
(P 2 M) payments as well. This is expected to give a fillip for IMPS usage. Pilots are on to 
use  IFSC  code  and  bank  account  number  or  the  Aadhaar  number  of  the  beneficiary  for 
money transfer using IMPS. This important development is expected to make it easier for the 
customers to use IMPS as it is no longer a requirement that the beneficiary mobile number is 
registered with the destination bank and there is no requirement for a Mobile Money Identifier 
(MMID) for the beneficiary customer. IMPS has also been enabled for usage over ATM and 
internet  banking.  The  existing  two  factor  authentication  for  both  these  channels  have  to 
invoked while making payments through IMPS, viz. card plus PIN for ATM and user ID plus 
net  banking/transaction  password  for  internet  banking.  In  view  of  its  multi-channel 
capabilities  it  has  now  been  rechristened  as  IMmediate  Payment  Service.  NPCI  is  now 
attempting to provide frontend consolidation to banks in the form of common Unstructured 
Supplementary  Service  Data  (USSD)  platform  to  enable  the  users  to  use  low  end  mobile 
handsets that do not require any specific application to do mobile payments/banking. These 
innovations in IMPS are expected to promote mobile banking transactions in the country in a 
big way. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  all 
Electronification of KCCs 
The smart card linked, mobile based and Aadhar enabled KCC, popularly known as m-KCC, 
was  launched  in  July  2012  and  is  seen  as  a  great  example  of  harnessing  the  latest 
technology  for  user  friendly  applications  for  financial  inclusion  of  farmers.  Anecdotal 
evidence, however, indicates that banks are yet to launch the product in a big way. Another 
similar experiment relates to the Rupay Kisan Credit Card launched by the NPCI. The banks 
certified to issue such cards are found to be issuing only ATM cards and not Rupay debit 
cards. The PoS terminal network which has crossed 0.6 million has low acceptance of Rupay 
cards. The lack of infrastructure is causing limited use and acceptability of Rupay cards. It is 
rather surprising to note the lackluster response of the banks and their inability to identify the 
business potential in such innovative products. 
Access criteria 
To  facilitate  wider  access  to  payment  systems  both  centralised  (viz.  NECS,  NEFT  and 
RTGS)  and  decentralised  (viz.  MICR,  ECS,  RECS),  membership  criteria  have  been 
rationalised  and  made  open 
licensed  banks.  An  alternate  mechanism  of 
sub-membership  has  also  been  opened  for  accessing  centralised  payment  systems  for  all 
licenced  banks  like  the  Regional  Rural  Banks  and  Co-operative  banks  which  have  the 
capabilities but are not participating in centralised payment systems on account of either not 
meeting  the  access  criteria  or  because  of  cost  considerations.  The  sub-membership  route 
has been provided to expand the reach to all banks even those located in smaller centres. 
This  is  expected  to  deepen  the  reach  of  the  electronic  payment  systems  and  provide  the 
benefit of modern electronic payments to people in smaller centres as well. 
Domestic money transfer 
Relaxations  in  domestic  money  transfer  guidelines  have  been  made  to  provide  remittance 
facilities  in  a  safe,  secure  and  efficient  manner  targeting  particularly  the  large  migrant 
population.  Three  schemes  involving  cash  pay-out/cash  pay-in  and  card-to-card  transfers 
have  now  been  made  available.  These  schemes  are;  (a)  cash  pay-out  arrangement  for 
amounts being transferred out of bank accounts to beneficiaries not having a bank account 
with  a  transaction  cap  of  ₹10,000  subject  to  an  overall  monthly  cap  of  ₹25,000  per 
beneficiary; (b) facility for walk-in customers not having bank account (e.g., migrant workers) 
to transfer funds to bank accounts (of say, family members or others) subject to a transaction 
limit of ₹5,000 and a monthly cap of ₹25,000 per remitter; and (c) facility of transfer of funds 
among domestic debit/credit/pre-paid cards subject to the same transaction/monthly cap as 
at  (b).  The  first  two  schemes  involve  a  bank  account  at  one  end  of  the  transaction  for 
facilitating  fund  transfers.  Simultaneously,  the  customer  charges  have  been  rationalised, 
especially for amounts upto ₹10,000 in NEFT & the same has been now capped at ₹2.50. 
Taking  advantage  of  these  policy  measures,  one  of  the  banks  has  implemented  a  “green 
channel card” for walk-in customers who regularly send money to a particular account. Under 
the scheme, details of name and address of a walk-in customer alongwith the beneficiary’s 
name,  account  number  and  the  IFSC  code  of  the  beneficiary’s  branch  are  captured  on  a 
mag-stripe card. The cardholder can swipe the card at a branch/ATM/kiosk of the bank and 
remit money to an account holder of any other branch of the bank. This mechanism helps in 
avoiding repetitive filling up of forms by a walk-in customer & lowering the operational risk 
involving transactions based on inaccurate data in a cost effective manner. 
Rationalisation of Merchant Discount Rate (MDR) for debit cards 
Debit cards in India far outnumber the number of credit cards in India. Their usage, however, 
reflects  that  they  are  predominantly  used  at  ATMs  to  withdraw  cash  and  not  used  at 
merchant establishments probably due to the lack of depth of penetration of PoS, terminals, 
especially  at  smaller  merchant  locations.  This  is  on  account  of  the  fact  that  the  MDRs  for 
debit and credit cards were uniform and acted as a disincentive. This was somewhat strange 
given that a debit card is a secured product while a credit card is part of the unsecured credit 
product  portfolio  of  the  banks.  To  encourage  the  acceptance  of  debit  cards  at  smaller 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
merchant  terminals,  Reserve  Bank  has  introduced  a  differential  MDR  for  debit  card 
transactions. A lower MDR is expected to act as an incentive to even the smaller merchants 
to  accept  card  payments  as  the  fee  payable  by  them  to  the  acquiring  bank  would  be 
relatively  small.  As  the  policy  measure  has  been  recently  unveiled,  the  Reserve  Bank  is 
keenly watching the market for further developments. 
Rationalisation of PPI guidelines 
To provide a boost to cash-less transactions and bolster the issuance of semi-closed PPIs, 
the five categories of semi-closed PPIs have been replaced with three broad categories. The 
first category of instruments up to ₹10,000 can be issued in electronic form with minimum 
details of the customer. Total outstanding at any point of time and total value of reloads in a 
month  cannot  exceed  ₹10,000,  the  second  category  of  instruments,  which  can  vary  from 
₹10,001 to ₹50,000, can be issued in electronic but non-reloadable form by accepting any 
“officially  valid  document”  defined  under  Rule  2(d)  of  the  Prevention  of  Money  Laundering 
Act and in the third category instruments upto ₹50,000 can be issued with full KYC and can 
be reloadable in nature. We have taken these measures in order to deepen the semi-closed 
PPI  market  in  the  country  and  facilitate  small  value  transactions  without  involving  bank 
accounts. Consequent upon such relaxations, all the three categories of PPIs can be used 
for domestic money transfers. There is thus tremendous scope for the non-bank PPI issuers 
and banks to work together to facilitate domestic funds transfer. The issue, however, is if the 
banks  and  non-bank  issuers  of  PPIs  are  in  a  position  to  forge  meaningful  partnerships. 
Without  such  partnerships  taking  root,  domestic  remittances  through  this  channel  will  not 
materialise to the extent that they should. In such a scenario, the PPIs will continue to be 
used  for  the  limited  purposes  that  they  are  being  used  today  and  would  not  really  aid  in 
financial inclusion. 
Role of non-banks 
Subsequent  to  the  enactment  of  the  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Act,  2007  the 
Reserve Bank has authorised non-banks to enter the retail payment space. The non-banks 
have  pre-dominantly  gravitated  towards  PPI  issuance  and  it  is  hoped  that  the  recent 
rationalisation of the PPI guidelines, as mentioned earlier, will spur their efforts in increasing 
non-cash transactions in the economy. Given that semi-closed PPIs can be used for funds 
transfer, we are keenly awaiting the developments in this area. Non-banks have now been 
allowed to set-up and operate ATMs under the scheme of White Label ATMs (WLAs). This 
has  been  done  to  increase  the  penetration  and  deployment  of  ATMs,  especially  in  the 
smaller Tier III to Tier VI centres, thereby extending anytime, anywhere banking facility to a 
wider  segment  of  population.  But  for  this  venture  to  succeed  there  has  to  be  a 
complementarity  between  the  banks  and  non-banks.  Unless  the  financially  excluded  are 
brought into the ambit of banking and cards are issued the infrastructure in the form of ATMs 
will remain unutilised. Further, the ATMs, existing & those in the pipeline, need to have the 
facilities for multiple utilities so as to reduce the demand for cash & provide value added & 
cost effective services to the customers. 
Policy measures on the anvil 
I shall now briefly touch upon some of the policy measures which are on the anvil to fasten 
the process of financial inclusion through supply side payment system enablers. As I have 
mentioned earlier, one of the key variables as one can notice in our Payment System Vision 
document  is  the  emphasis  on  promoting  access  and  inclusion.  To  this  end,  the  Reserve 
Bank  has  indicated  an  intention  to  provide  a  regulatory  framework  for  the  introduction  of 
technology based innovative products for the use of all. Reserve Bank has also noted the 
need for ensuring the availability of low-cost and safe domestic remittances to large number 
of  unbanked  population  and  migrants  through  appropriate  technology  and  affordable  cost 
has also been emphasized. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  proposed  introduction  of  International  Bank  account  Number  (IBAN)  /Basic  Bank 
Account Number (BBAN) is expected to result in efficiency in the system through introduction 
of  a  single  parameter  (i.e.,  the  account  number)  that  would  replace  different  types  of 
bank/branch  codes  (e.g.,  IFSC,  BSR  code,  MICR  code,  SWIFT  BIC  code,  etc.).  IBAN's 
primary  purpose  would  be  to  facilitate  (i)  domestic/cross-border  inter-bank  electronic 
payment,  (ii)  avoid  routing  errors  in  domestic/cross-border  payments,  (iii)  facilitate  straight 
through  processing  and  (iv)  enable  making  payment  in  a  reliable  manner  as  remitter  can 
validate the beneficiary account number. . This is being studied by a committee (Chairman: 
Shri Vijaya Chugh) which is looking at the entire gamut of bank account number system. A 
committee  has  also  been  constituted  (Chairman:  Shri.  G.  Padmanabhan)  to  recommend 
feasibility  of  paper  based  and  electronic  GIRO  payment  system,  dove-tailing  the  existing 
payment  system  infrastructure. The  GIRO  is  a payment  instruction  effected  by  a  payer for 
credit to payees account through any bank branch. It is akin to anytime anywhere payment. 
In the case of cheque GIRO, the model is essentially to facilitate customer of one bank to 
deposit  cheques  drawn  on  another  bank  at  the  counters  of  the  branch  of  a  third  bank  for 
collection/realisation  of  proceeds  through  the  existing  clearing  infrastructure.  Providing  an 
organizational  framework  for  proliferation  of  PoS  so  as  to  expand  the  card  acceptance 
infrastructure  is  another  priority  area  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India.  The  regulatory  stance 
thus  would  continue  to  facilitate  innovations  to  achieve  the  goals  of  inclusion,  accessibility 
and  affordability  while  remaining  technology  neutral.  Convergence  in  innovation  would, 
however, be the key area of focus. 
Emerging issues for the banks: The 7’C framework 
Having  highlighted  some  of  the  current  challenges  in  tapping  the  payment  systems  for 
deeper and sustainable financial inclusion, I shall now highlight a few issues that need to be 
addressed  by  banks  if they  have  to  unlock the potential  of  an  efficient business  model for 
meaningful financial inclusion. I shall now use a 7’C framework to put forth my views. The 7C 
framework  comprises:  Cost,  Convenience,  Confidence,  Convergence,  Commitment, 
Consumer Protection and Communication – all of them critical for both the payment system 
and the financial inclusion. 
Cost 
Cost  is  an  important  component  to  ensure  affordability  of  modern  electronic  payment 
systems  to  the  financially  excluded.  Stakeholders  need  to  leverage  technology  to  create 
efficient  systems  and  processes  to  reduce  transaction  costs  so  that  the  products  can  be 
accepted and accessed by more number of people creating volume. The cost of transactions 
needs to be based on trade-off between affordability for the user and sustainability for the 
provider. The benefit of reduction in transaction costs should be passed on to the customers, 
especially at the BC outlets. The corollary to the increase in the number of transactions is 
that it would make the BC outlets viable. It is, therefore, necessary that appropriate plans are 
put in place for effective technology deployment in payment systems and products to reduce 
costs. 
Convenience 
It is important to ensure the convenience and comfort of the customers when they are offered 
payment products. For reaching the unbanked people, simple innovative solutions, such as, 
providing text and voice facility in local languages, standardized coloured icons of ATMs for 
easy recognition, standardised layout of ATM screens, biometric authentication, etc. would 
enable  greater  acceptability.  Further,  the  number  of  BC  outlets  needs  to  be  increased  to 
provide  easy  access  to  people.  Banks  may  consider  having  exclusive  BCs  to  handle 
remittance  by  appointing  more  number  of  merchant  establishments  in  urban  areas  where 
migrants can  avail  of  remittance  service facilities.  One  of the  difficulties faced  by  migrants 
undertaking a remittance transaction is providing/writing the IFSC code. Banks ad BC outlets 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
should proactively help the customer in getting and filling up the code, particularly for the less 
educated customers. 
Confidence 
The primary component of acceptability of any financial product, particularly when it is an ICT 
based  product,  is  the  level  of  confidence  of  the  user.  Confidence  is  built  by  providing  a 
secure and robust banking and payment system with very high standards of integrity. Zero 
liability  to  inculcate  confidence  in  electronic  transactions  is  an  option  which  should  be 
explored and implemented early. Robustness of the system can be ensured through regular 
Business Continuity Plan (BCP) and Disaster Recovery (DR) exercises. Systems should be 
put in place to arrest number of phishing and identity theft cases pertaining to card, mobile 
and  internet  banking.  IT  security  systems  like  redundancy,  firewalls,  anti-virus  updation, 
role-based  access  system  should  be  reviewed  at  frequent  intervals  to  fight  the  attacks. 
Banks may  tap  the  services  of  Mobile  Banking Security  Lab  (MBSL)  set  up  by  Institute of 
Development & Research for Banking Technology (IDRBT) to test security of mobile banking 
platform  and  products.  Some  banks  have  implemented  the  system  of  sending  alerts  and 
confirmations  using  SMS  on  the  status  of  the  payment  processing  during  the  transaction 
life-cycle  of  an  electronic  payment  initiated  by  a  customer.  This  has  been  very  well 
appreciated  by  the  customers.  In  short,  technology  along  with  appropriate  simplified 
processes would help people to repose confidence in electronic payment system. 
Convergence 
Convergence is the key to provide payment system and banking services through different 
delivery channels. Collaboration between the MNOs and the banks would enable leveraging 
strength  of  each  other  in  facilitating  financial  inclusion  at  less  cost.  Convergence  of 
technologies like interoperability of various delivery channels and processes would result in 
reduction in costs in providing services and would provide wider choices to the users. The 
usage of shared infrastructure like cloud computing in some of the low ticket size but high 
volume  transaction  handling  areas  would  help  banks  to  stay  competitive.  Congruence  in 
products  and  processes  shall  bring  in  uniformity  across  the  banks  and  help  in  creating 
standardized products that can be easily understood by the consumers. Convergence among 
banks  in  the  processes  and  technology  would  provide  facilities  to  customers  to  do 
transaction  at  any  branch  of  any  bank  irrespective  where  a  person maintains  the  account, 
leading to universal banking experience. 
Commitment 
Although  technologies,  products,  policies  and  processes  help  in  creating  enabling  eco 
systems for financial inclusion, commitment at the top to take the process forward is the need 
of  the  hour. The  commitment  at the  top  should  be  reflected  in  growth  of  business  volume 
from  the  targeted  group  and  increase  in  accessibility  to  the  banking  and  payment  system 
services  to  the hitherto financial  excluded  groups. The ICT  based  BC model  as  a  delivery 
channel  stands  on  three  pillars  e.g.  branch  manager/  BC/CSP  and  the  technology  service 
provider.  Lack  of  commitment  at  any  one  level  will  not  sustain  the  delivery  channel. 
Therefore,  the  Top  Management  of  the  banks  have  to  continuously  review  systems  and 
processes  to  ensure  the  three  pillars  are  in  alignment  with  each  other.  The  persons  who 
provide services at the last mile (viz. BC/CSP) matter a lot in the entire business chain. They 
are to be, therefore, taken on board by providing adequate remuneration and incentives to 
motivate them to deliver the services at the doorsteps of the customers besides appropriate 
training on products, processes and customer service. 
Consumer protection 
With increasing complexities of technologies, products and processes that are being offered 
to  the  consumers,  consumer  protection  has  assumed  critical  importance.  Apart  from  the 
creating environment for informed decision making, the consumer protection policies need to 
provide protection against unfair and deceptive practices, enable consumers to easily access 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the recourse mechanisms to resolve disputes, and ensure maintenance of privacy/secrecy of 
personal  information  by  the  service  providers.  Therefore,  a  cost  effective  and  accessible 
consumer  grievances  redressal  mechanism  particularly  as  we  add  more  &  more  less 
informed BOP customers to our fold needs to be integrated into all products, processes and 
business models of the banks instead of leaving it to the regulators alone. People should feel 
assured  of  getting  timely  redressal  of  their  grievances  without  much  of  a  hassle. 
Simultaneously,  technology  should  be  used  extensively  for  resolving  and  monitoring 
grievances without waiting for getting a complaint from customer. 
Communication 
Establishing communication channel with the targeted people on products and services plays 
an important role in advancing financial inclusion. Consumer awareness on risks and reward 
attached to various banking and payment system products including its proper usage has to 
reach to the people in the language which they can relate to and understand. Banks need to 
build  skill  sets  of  their  employees  and  BCs  on  matters  like  convincing  people  to  use  ICT 
based  banking  services  and  subscribe  to  different  payment  system  products  to  make  the 
financial  inclusion  a  viable  proposition.  The  security  aspects  and  the  responsibility  of  the 
users  in  respect  to  each  product  should  form  a  part  of  the  consumer  communication 
programme. The financial outreach, town hall events and roadshows organised by  various 
entities  including  the  Reserve  Bank  are  positive  steps  in  this  direction.  The  mass  media 
should also be suitably exploited to create consumer awareness. To popularize the electronic 
payment  products  among  the  stakeholders  like  merchants  and  consumers,  Electronic 
Banking Awareness and Training (e-BAAT) programmes are being planned by the Reserve 
Bank along with the banks. Banks have to very clearly focus on the communication aspect if 
they have to reap the benefit of modern payment system products & processes which have 
to be understood & then used by the wider segments of the population. 
Concluding thoughts 
Given  the  extent  of  financial  exclusion  in  our  country,  both  in  terms  of  quality  &  quantity 
aspects,  financial  inclusion  efforts  have  to  be  vigorously  pursued  by  all  the  stakeholders. 
Many  challenges,  however,  still  remain.  Banks  need  to  think  differently  to  bring  more 
innovations to realize the aim of a financially inclusive society. Payment systems being one 
of  the  main  building  blocks  of  the  financial  inclusion  all  the  stakeholders  need  to  work  on 
technologies,  processes  and  products  to  achieve  the  desired  goal  of  providing  access  to 
formal financial services to the unbanked/under-banked population in a time bound manner 
to  match  the  growing  aspiration  of  people.  Simultaneously,  it  is  critical  to  recognize  that 
financial services provided under financial inclusion plans do not jeopardise the stability to 
the  financial  sector,  ensure  integrity  in  transactions  and  provide  adequate  consumer 
protection. Reaching the unbanked areas through agents like BCs using technology and by 
offering suitable payment products to keep the business model sustainable is a challenge. 
This  challenge  has  to  be  squarely  met  to  further  the  public  policy  goal  of  sustainable  and 
meaningful financial inclusion through constant endeavours to address the emerging issues 
of  Cost,  Convenience,  Confidence,  Convergence,  Commitment,  Consumer  Protection 
and Communication. 
The  greatest  challenge  that  beckons  the  banks  is  how  do  they  bring  out  innovations  in 
processes & products that are people friendly, in other words, focus has to be on “grounded 
innovation”.  Lars  Erik  Holquist,  Principal  Research  Scientist  at  Yahoo  Labs  Eco  says  “An 
innovation  is  more  than  just  a  great  idea….  Innovation  requires  attention  to  other  people: 
what they value and what they will adopt. It must contribute to transformation in a society and 
be  adopted  by  users.”  Grounded  innovation  “is  an  approach  that  aims  to  balance  the  two 
axes of inquiry: understanding how the world works and invention. Today we are living in a 
world where we have to consider both technology and users as drivers of innovation. Simply 
put, grounded innovation is when your technology meets utility”. In today’s context, we are 
probably  at  the  inflexion  point  of  grounded  innovation  as  far  as  financial  inclusion  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
payment  systems  are  concerned.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  to  unlock  the  next  decade  for 
people at the bottom of the pyramid waiting to be financially included. All the stakeholders, 
therefore, need to think differently to bring more innovations for universal financial inclusion 
by harnessing the developments in the payment system. 
Thank you all for patient hearing. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
