Philip Lowe: The journey of financial reform 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Chamber of Commerce in Shanghai, Shanghai, 24 April 2013. 
 I would like to thank Patrick D’Arcy and Michelle Wright for assistance in the preparation of this talk. 
It is a great pleasure to be here in Shanghai today. I would like to thank AustCham Shanghai 
for the invitation to speak at this lunch. 
As  you  may  know,  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia’s  head  office  is  located  in  Sydney.  I 
mention this because Shanghai and Sydney share a number of similarities. Both cities are 
vibrant  and  cosmopolitan  places  to  live.  Both  host  their country’s  main  stock  exchange  as 
well as futures markets. They are both also centres of banking and funds management and 
are important financial hubs in the Asia-Pacific region. 
It is this financial link that provides the cue for my remarks today. The financial sector plays a 
critical role in both our economies and the financial linkages between our two countries are 
gradually  deepening.  These  stronger  financial  linkages  hold  the  promise  of  significant 
benefits for both our countries over the years ahead, just as the stronger trade linkages have 
benefited us both greatly over the past two decades. 
This afternoon, I would like to begin by highlighting how the financial linkages between China 
and  Australia  have  grown  over  recent  times  and  the  potential  for  these  linkages  to  grow 
substantially further. One of the factors that will obviously influence the speed with which that 
happens  is  the  pace  of  reform  in  the  Chinese  financial  system  itself.  As  Australia’s 
experience  illustrates,  the  journey  of  financial  reform  can  be  a  difficult  one.  But  our 
experience  also  suggests  that  it  is  a  journey  that  is  well  worth  taking.  In  particular,  it  is  a 
journey  that  can  promote  the  efficient  allocation  of  savings  in  the  economy  and  enhance 
overall living standards. In many respects, the issues that China faces are similar to the ones 
that we confronted. So I thought it might be useful to share with you some of the details of 
our own journey of financial reform. 
A deepening financial relationship 
As is now well understood, Australia and China enjoy a very strong trade relationship. China 
is  Australia’s  largest  export  destination,  and  it  is  also  the  largest  supplier  of  imports  into 
Australia. In the most recent year, 26 per cent of Australia’s exports went to China and 15 per 
cent  of  our  imports  came from  China  (Graph  1).  From the  Chinese  perspective,  Australia  is 
also an important trading partner, accounting for around 5 per cent of total Chinese imports 
and a much higher share of some categories of imports, most notably iron ore. 
I recount these facts, because a strong trading relationship provides the basis for a strong 
financial  relationship.  As  history  shows,  finance  follows  trade.  As  trade  linkages  increase, 
firms require an increasing array of financial services. And a strong trading relationship helps 
businesses in both countries identify and develop investment opportunities in the other. 
There are five elements of the financial relationship between China and Australia to which I 
would like to draw your attention. 
RMB trade invoicing 
1.  
The  first  is  the  potential  for  a  substantial  increase  in  the  share  of  trade  between  our  two 
countries  that  is  invoiced  in  RMB.  The  latest  available  data  from  the  Australian  Bureau  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Statistics (ABS) suggest that currently the RMB is not widely used as an invoice currency for 
trade between China and Australia.1 At the same time though, many Australian businesses 
are beginning to explore this possibility. This is evident in a recent survey organised by the 
Reserve Bank of Australia as part of the inaugural Australia–Hong Kong Renminbi Trade and 
Investment Dialogue held in Sydney a couple of weeks ago. 
From this survey it is clear that many businesses are interested in using the RMB for trade 
settlement.2 They see it as a way of building relationships with their trade counterparties and 
reducing costs. There are, however, a number of factors that have been identified as slowing 
the uptake of invoicing in RMB. Perhaps the most important of these is the availability and 
pricing of instruments to hedge RMB currency risk. While these instruments have developed 
significantly over recent years, the relevant markets are not yet as deep and liquid as some 
others.  Another factor  constraining  uptake  of the  RMB  is  the  administrative  difficulties  that 
some companies have experienced in the settlement process. These difficulties arise not just 
from the exchange controls in China but also from processing problems that can occur during 
the transaction. A number of the Australian companies have also noted  that some of their 
Chinese counterparts have, to date, had only limited appetite for invoicing in RMB. 
In  time,  it  is  likely  that  these  constraints  will  be  overcome:  deep  and  liquid  markets  will 
develop,  settlement  processing  will  be  improved  and  the  appetite for  invoicing  in  RMB  will 
grow.  If  this  assessment  is  correct,  then  it  is  likely  the  RMB  will  become  the  invoicing 
currency of choice for many businesses on both sides of our trading relationship. 
Direct trading between the onshore RMB and AUD 
2.  
The second element of the financial relationship that I would like to draw your attention to is 
the announcement two weeks ago of direct trading between the Chinese renminbi and the 
Australian dollar in the onshore market. There are only two other major currencies – the US 
dollar and the Japanese yen – for which onshore direct trading with the renminbi (without the 
use of an intermediate third currency) is possible. Over time, this important initiative should 
promote trade invoicing in RMB and facilitate bilateral trade and investment. 
Swap agreement between PBC and RBA 
3.  
The third element is the swap agreement between the People’s Bank of China (PBC) and the 
Reserve  Bank  of  Australia  (RBA).  The  PBC  and  RBA  have  a  strong  and  cooperative 
relationship. The PBC has an office in Sydney. And the RBA has an office in Beijing. The 
swap agreement was signed in March 2012 and allows for the exchange of local currencies 
between the two central banks of up to A$30 billion or CNY200 billion, making it the fourth 
largest  RMB  swap  agreement.  In  the  event  that  this  swap  were  to  be  activated,  it  is  the 
RBA’s intention to make RMB available to all authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) in 
Australia through a standing facility, with ADIs being charged SHIBOR plus 25 basis points. 
ADIs would, of course, need to provide the RBA with Australian dollar collateral, in the same 
way that they do in our regular market operations. 
We  see  this  swap  agreement  as  another  important  piece  of  the  financial  infrastructure 
supporting trade and investment between China and Australia. Its existence provides market 
participants  with  greater  confidence  regarding  the  availability  of  RMB  liquidity  in  Australia, 
                                                
1   ABS data published in June 2012 show that the value of Australian merchandise trade settled in currencies 
other than the US dollar, Australian dollar, euro, New Zealand dollar, UK pound sterling and Japanese yen 
was around 1 per cent of total merchandise trade, indicating that the share of Australian merchandise trade 
invoiced in RMB in the June quarter 2012 was very small. 
2   For a summary of this survey, see ‘Corporate Attitudes Towards Renminbi Trade Settlement and Investment’ 
available at <http://www.treasury.gov.au/RMBDialogue>. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
particularly during times of stressed market conditions. In turn, this greater confidence should 
help build a solid platform for the growth in the RMB market in Australia. 
Investment of foreign currency reserves 
4.  
The  fourth  element  of  the  growing  financial  relationship  between  China  and  Australia  is  a 
recent decision by the RBA to invest some of our foreign currency reserves in China. 
This decision by the RBA represents the first time that the RBA will have invested directly in 
a sovereign bond market of an Asian country other than Japan. This decision does, however, 
build on our existing investments in the EMEAP Asian Bond Fund initiative, which were made 
in 2003 and 2005. 
Our  current  intention  is  to  hold  around  5  per  cent  of  Australia’s foreign currency  assets  in 
China.  The  PBC  has  approved  an  initial  investment  quota  and  we  are  currently  working 
through the necessary agreements prior to the investment being made. 
This  decision  to  invest  in  China  is  an  important  one.  It  reflects  the  broader  economic 
relationship between China and Australia and our increasing financial ties. It provides greater 
diversification  of  our  investments  and  will  help  with  our  understanding  of  the  Chinese 
financial markets. Over the long run, and particularly as capital account liberalisation occurs 
in China, the RMB is likely to become one of the major reserve currencies of the region. 
Bilateral investment flows 
5.  
The fifth and final element is an increase in other capital flows between our two countries, 
including direct investment, portfolio investment and banking flows. 
These  two-way  investment  flows  are  still  in  their  infancy,  but  they  have  grown  rapidly  in 
recent  years.  According  to  data  from  the  ABS,  Chinese  investment  in  Australia  has  risen 
more than fivefold since 2006, with the stock of investment reaching around A$20 billion as 
at end 2011 (Graph 2).3 Australian investment in China has also risen significantly over this 
period,  with  the  stock  reaching  A$17  billion  in  2011.  It  is  likely,  however,  that  these  data 
understate the size of bilateral investment, as some funds are intermediated through financial 
centres including Hong Kong. 
A significant share of the growth in Chinese investment in Australia thus far has been foreign 
direct investment. This has been largely in the resources sector, although recently there has 
been some diversification, including into the services and real estate sectors. 
Direct investment has also been an important component of Australia’s investment in China 
including  investments  in  financial  services.  In  recent  years,  Australian  banks  have 
increasingly facilitated Australian investment in China through their provision of cross-border 
banking services. 
All  of  Australia’s  major  banks  –  a  number  of  which  are  represented  here  today  –  have  a 
growing presence in China, as is evident in the foreign claims data (Graph 3). Although each 
bank has its own strategy, all recognise the opportunities that China offers, whether through 
servicing  new  Chinese  customers  or  through  supporting  Australian  businesses’  trade  with 
China. Other areas of the Australian financial services industry, including in insurance, are 
also  active  in  China,  although  the  size  of  their  investments  are,  at  this  stage,  limited  by 
various regulations. Conversely, three Chinese banks have opened branches in Australia in 
the  past  few  years,  joining  Bank  of  China  which  has  had  a  longer-standing  presence  in 
Australia. 
Looking  forward,  increased  two-way  investment  flows  have  the  potential  to  benefit  both 
countries.  Chinese  investment  in  Australia  can  help  to  fund  important  investment  projects 
                                                
3   Data for 2012 are due to be released by the ABS in the next week. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
and  support  the  long-term  trading  relationship.  It  can  do  this  through  direct  ownership  of 
projects  and  indirectly  through  the  capital  markets.  Conversely,  Australian  investment  in 
China  offers 
large  pool  of 
superannuation  savings,  particularly  in  long-term  infrastructure  assets,  which  are  a  good 
match  for  the  liabilities  of  retirement  funds.  There  are  also  benefits  from  sharing  financial 
expertise and technology. 
further  diversification  of  Australia’s 
the  possibility  of 
The reform journey 
Together, these five elements – RMB trade invoicing, direct trading between the RMB and 
AUD,  the  swap  agreement  between  the  PBC  and  the  RBA,  the  investment  of  foreign 
reserves in China and the increase in investment flows – are testimony to the maturing of the 
financial  relationship  between  our  two  countries.  The  financial  architecture  to  support  this 
relationship  is  incrementally,  but  inexorably,  being  put  in  place.  It  is  being  supported  by 
governments in both countries and by businesses, including those in the financial industry. 
There is still, however, a lot to be done. Both countries are still learning about the business, 
social and political environment in the other country. A deeper financial relationship requires 
businesses to gain experience in local markets so that they can recognise and benefit from 
investment opportunities. This takes time. Businesses also need to understand the regulatory 
environment,  which  continues  to  evolve  in  both  countries.  Over  recent  years,  the  Chinese 
authorities  have  taken  steps  to  liberalise  interest  rates  and  parts  of  the  capital  account, 
although the financial system is still highly regulated. Substantial capital controls remain in 
place. The Chinese currency does not float freely, notwithstanding the gradual widening in 
the trading band over recent years. And deep and liquid financial markets in the full range of 
investment and hedging instruments are still some way off. So there is much work ahead if 
the  depth  of  the  financial  relationship  is  one  day  to  match  the  depth  of  the  trading 
relationship. 
The pace of reform in China will have an important bearing on how this work progresses. As 
we  know  from  our  own  experience,  this  reform  process  is  a  difficult  one.  And  from  some 
perspectives, China faces an even more daunting challenge than the one we faced. Because 
of  China’s  sheer  size,  the  rest  of  the  world  is  watching  very  closely  and  it  has  a  strong 
interest in China “getting it right”. China is also facing the task of liberalisation at a materially 
lower level of per-capita income than was the case in Australia. It faces an existing financial 
sector much larger (relative to GDP) than was the Australian financial sector at the outset of 
our  liberalisation  process.  And  financial  systems  everywhere  are  more  globally  connected 
than  they  once  were,  so  the  potential  pressures  on  the  Chinese  system  are  greater  than 
when Australia went through reforms. 
From my perspective though, a number of the discussions that are occurring today regarding 
the Chinese financial system have a degree of familiarity about them.4 I would like to mention 
three of these. 
The  first  is  the  discussion  about  “shadow  banking”.  This  is  very  familiar.  In  the  1970s, 
Australia had a highly regulated banking sector – with regulations on interest rates, the rate 
of bank balance sheet growth and structure of those balance sheets. The result was rapid 
growth in other types of financial institutions. Indeed, by the early 1980s, the banks’ share of 
the financial system had fallen to 40 per cent from 70 per cent in the early 1950s. 
We made various attempts to restrict the activities of the “shadow banks”, but whenever we 
introduced new rules, other entities emerged. China is experiencing this today. Finance can 
be very flexible – those who want to borrow money seem to find a way of connecting with 
those who have money  to lend. In our case, the financial stability problems we had in the 
                                                
4   For discussions of the financial reform process in Australia see the list of references. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
1970s  were  in  those  parts  of  the  industry  that  grew  up  outside  the  regulatory  net.  This 
regulatory net also contributed to inefficiency in the financial system by limiting banks’ ability 
to respond to the needs of their customers. In particular, the various regulations limited the 
availability of credit to important parts of the economy. 
In the end, the only practical solution was to move to a more liberalised system. We had a 
number of public enquiries to guide the process, including the development of a regulatory 
framework that sought to strike the right balance between prudential regulation and market 
competition. Of course, this is an on-going endeavour and the journey is never ending. 
A second familiar discussion is that about the exchange rate and the openness of the capital 
account. In the decades leading up to the 1980s, Australia experimented with almost every 
type of exchange rate regime. We had a peg to the British pound (1931–1971), a peg to the 
US  dollar  (1971–1974), a  peg to  a  trade-weighted  index  (1974–1976)  and  then  a  crawling 
peg  against  a  trade-weighted  index  (1976–1983).  Ultimately,  none  of  these  proved 
sustainable. 
These various regimes were complemented with a range of capital controls, which provided 
some  degree  of  control  over  domestic  monetary  policy.  Over  time,  however,  people  got 
better at finding ways around these controls and true control over domestic monetary policy 
proved elusive. While the controls were gradually eased, the highly managed exchange rate 
regime with a partially open capital account was conducive to neither domestic nor external 
balance. 
After we had tried everything else, in the early 1980s we switched to a floating exchange rate 
and  an  open  capital  account.  This  decision  has,  perhaps,  been  more  important  than  any 
other single decision in promoting stability of the Australian economy. It has allowed Australia 
to run its own monetary policy, to tap into the gains that can come from the international flow 
of capital, and to benefit from the stabilising properties of a flexible exchange rate in a world 
where there have been very large shocks, including to our terms of trade. 
A third familiar discussion relates to the need to develop supporting financial infrastructure 
before  liberalisation  takes  place.  Those  who  wanted  a  slower  pace  of  financial  reform  in 
Australia  would  sometimes  argue  the  preconditions  were  not  right  –  that  now  was  not  the 
time to move; that banks didn’t have the necessary credit assessment skills; that the hedging 
instruments  didn’t  exist;  and  the  relevant  markets  were  neither  deep  nor  liquid.  What  we 
found, however, was that it was the restrictions themselves that were often preventing this 
supporting  infrastructure  from  developing.  A  highly  restricted  system  was  simply  not 
conducive  to  banks  building  the  relevant  credit  assessment  skills,  or  the  development  of 
hedging  instruments,  or  the  emergence  of  deep  and  liquid  markets. When  the  regulations 
were  lifted,  the  system  began  to  respond.  Allowing  prices  to  move  meant  that  markets 
developed. And, allowing banks to decide how much to lend, and to whom they would lend, 
saw them invest in credit assessment skills. 
It  is  important  though  to  point  out  that  the  process  was  far  from  smooth.  Mistakes  were 
made. Banks that had become used to lending to just the best-quality borrowers had trouble 
coping with a world in which they could lend to anyone and there were market pressure to 
grow rapidly. They took time to develop the skills to assess borrowers lower down the credit 
spectrum,  and  while  they  were  learning  they  made  a  lot  of  bad  loans.  The  regulatory  and 
supervisory  apparatus  was  also  too  slow  to  develop.  Like  the  bankers,  the  regulators  who 
learnt their craft under the highly regulated system took time to adjust. 
While  these  aspects  of  Australia’s  experience  have  some  similarities  with  the  current 
Chinese  experience,  China  needs  to,  and  is,  charting  its  own  course.  There  are  many 
possible paths of financial reform and each has advantages and disadvantages. The exact 
path taken by any country on the journey of financial reform will obviously depend upon its 
economic and financial conditions. China has seen the mistakes that others have made and 
it has been able to draw some lessons from these mistakes. China’s early adoption of some 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
of the new Basel regulatory requirements can clearly be seen in this light, as can the gradual 
liberalisation of the capital account and of domestic interest rates. 
The point I want to emphasise though is that having undertaken our own broad journey of 
financial reform, we are glad we did so. 
The reform process in Australia took many years. At the outset of the journey, as well as at 
critical points along the way, there was considerable concern about how things would work 
out.  It  was  often  two  steps  forward,  one  step  back.  And  even  some  decades  on,  the 
behaviour  of  financial  institutions  and  the  way  markets  function  still  raises  questions.  One 
current  example  of  this  is  related  to  the  very  high  value  of  the  Australian  dollar,  which  is 
clearly  making  for  difficult  conditions  in  certain  parts  of  the  Australian  economy.  The 
quantitative easing that has taken place in a number of countries is having a significant effect 
on exchange rates of freely floating currencies, and this is having ramifications for monetary 
policy in these economies. No doubt, other issues about the behaviour of markets will arise 
in the future. 
But  for  all  of  this,  the  financial  reform  journey  in  Australia  has  been  a  positive  one.  The 
challenges  of  managing  our  liberalised  financial  system  are  formidable.  But  they  are  less 
formidable  than  those  of  managing  a  system  in  which  key  prices  had  trouble  moving, 
markets  were  shallow,  the  terms  and  availability  of  credit  were  restricted,  and  almost 
everybody in the system had an incentive to find ways around the multitude of restrictions. 
In the end, the long process of financial reform in Australia has helped promote economic 
stability as well as the efficient allocation of domestic savings. It has improved the access by 
businesses  and  households  to  credit  and  improved  competition  and  innovation  in  the 
financial system. It also has allowed Australia to participate more fully in the global economy. 
And,  most  importantly,  it  has  helped  raise  the  average  standard  of  living  in  Australia.  I 
suspect that one day China will be able to make the same claims as it too continues with its 
own journey of financial reform. 
Thank you for your time this afternoon. 
References 
Battellino  R  (2007),  “Australia’s  Experience  with  Financial  Deregulation”,  Address  to 
China Australia Governance Program, Melbourne, 16 July. 
Battellino  R  and  N  McMillan  (1989),  “Changes  in  the  Behaviour  of  Banks  and  Their 
Implications for Financial Aggregates”, in I Macfarlane and G Stevens (eds), Studies in 
Money  and  Credit,  Proceedings  of  a  Conference,  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  Sydney, 
20 June. 
Davis K (2011), “The Australian Financial System in the 2000s: Dodging the Bullet”, in 
H Gerard  and  J  Kearns  (eds),  The  Australian  Economy  in  the  2000s,  Proceedings  of  a 
Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 15–16 August. 
Debelle  G  and  M  Plumb  (2006),  “The  Evolution  of  Exchange  Rate  Policy  and  Capital 
Controls in Australia”, Asian Economic Papers, 5(2), pp 7–29. 
Edey M and B Gray (1996), “The Evolving Structure of the Australian Financial System”, 
in M Edey (ed), The Future of the Financial System, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve 
Bank of Australia, Sydney, 8–9 July. 
Gizycki M and P Lowe (2000), “The Australian Financial System in the 1990s”, in D Gruen 
and S Shrestha (eds), The Australian Economy in the 1990s, Proceedings of a Conference, 
Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 24–25 July. 
Grenville  S  (1991),  “The  Evolution  of  Financial  Deregulation”,  in  I  Macfarlane  (ed),  The 
Deregulation  of  Financial  Intermediaries,  Proceedings  of  a  Conference,  Reserve  Bank  of 
Australia, Sydney, 20–21 June. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Graph 1 
 
Click to view larger  
 
 
Graph 2 
 
Click to view larger  
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Graph 3 
 
Click to view larger  
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
