Mario Draghi: Significant progress in 2012 and prospects for 2013 
Address  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  New  Year’s 
Reception  of  the  Frankfurt  Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Industry,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
22 January 2013. 
 Minister-President Bouffier,  
Lord Mayor Feldmann,  
President Müller,  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be here with you this evening, and I would like to thank the 
Chamber of Commerce and Industry very warmly for inviting me.  
I am pleased to meet many representatives of the business community and public life of the 
region  Rhein-Main  and  Frankfurt, the  city  in  which  the  ECB  is  so  well  hosted  and  where  I 
also feel personally very comfortable. 
A New Year’s reception is always the occasion to look back on what has happened in the 
past year and to look forward to what lies ahead. 
2012 was a year full of challenges. Yet it was also a year of surprises and new beginnings.  
We began the year in an environment of exceptional uncertainty. The euro area was faced 
with deep, even existential challenges.  
This  led  some  experts  to  make  bleak  predictions  about  the  future.  They  doubted  the 
resilience  of  our  economies.  They  worried  about  the  stability  of  our  single  currency.  They 
even questioned its future existence. 
To illustrate just how far some doubts went, let me quote the from the Economist’s annual 
publication “The World in 2012”, which in the autumn of 2011 said the following: 
“If  you  were  sitting  down  with  a  blank  sheet  of  paper,  you  would  advise  the  euro  zone  to 
complement  its  one-size-fits-all  monetary  policy  by  pooling  sovereignty  and  creating  new 
institutions.  You  would  set  up  a  European  mini-IMF  with  enough  funds  to  assist  troubled 
countries that adjust their economies. A pan-European banking regulator and a bail-out fund 
could ensure that large European banks were not at the mercy of their vulnerable sovereign 
borrowers.  […]  And,  to  stop  governments  from  exploiting  these  mechanisms,  euro-zone 
countries  would  agree  to  submit  their  fiscal  policies  to  the  say-so  of  everyone  else.  It 
amounts to a blueprint for the United States of Europe. And it is utterly beyond reach.”1 
If  we  look  back  at  2012,  on  virtually  all  of  these  issues,  Europe  is  moving  forward  or  is 
already there. So the ambition is not “utterly beyond reach”. Indeed, it bears out what Walter 
Hallstein, the first President of the European Commission, once said: that “anyone who does 
not believe in miracles in European matters is not a realist”.2 
Due to resolute actions by euro area governments and European institutions, the year 2012 
turned out quite differently than predicted. The darkest clouds over the euro area subsided. 
Countries  renewed  their  commitment  to  reforms.  The  euro  area  took  strides  forward  in  its 
common governance. 
                                                
1   The Economist: “The World in 2012”, 16/11/2011. 
2   Walter Hallstein: „Wer in europäischen Dingen nicht an Wunder glaubt, ist kein Realist“. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Europe’s policy-makers, including the European Central Bank (ECB) within its mandate, left 
no doubts about their commitment to our common currency and to its stability.  
We can  begin  2013  on a  more  confident  note, precisely  because  significant  progress  was 
made during 2012. 
importantly,  Europe’s 
Significant progress in 2012 
First of all, governments did their part to ensure stability. 
During the  last  year, an  important  change took place  “on the ground”  in  the  economies of 
Europe.  The  necessary  rebalancing  of  the  euro  area  economy  gathered  pace.  A 
comprehensive adjustment in the deficit countries is now taking place.  
Many  countries  are  making  solid  progress  in  bringing  their  public  finances  under  control. 
They are enacting structural reforms to increase competitiveness. This is especially true for 
the countries under an EU/IMF programme, where adjustment has been extensive. 
Reducing  the  imbalances  is  certainly  a  difficult  and  painful  process.  But  it  is  essential  to 
restore sustainable public finances and growth. The people in the countries concerned have 
broadly  understood  this  and  backed  this  course  of  action.  The  progress  made  deserves 
public recognition and respect. 
Governments  also  came  together  in  2012  to  strengthen  the  euro  area  and  its  ability  to 
prevent and react to crises. 
The European Stability Mechanism became active and provides a solid safety net if needed.  
The new rules for governing the euro area economy were applied to strengthen oversight of 
budgets and to monitor emerging imbalances more effectively. 
Member States agreed to put debt brakes in their national constitutions.  
Most 
to  be 
complemented by a financial union, a fiscal union, a genuine economic union and eventually 
a deeper political union. Discussions are underway with clear timelines in the months ahead. 
The  most  urgent  project  –  financial  union  –  is  now  taking  tangible  shape.  The  ECB  is 
expected  to  become  the  single  supervisor  for  the  biggest  part  of  the  euro  area’s  banking 
sector.  This  is  probably  the  most  significant  integration  step  since  the  Maastricht  Treaty. 
Advances  towards  a  common  resolution  framework  for  dealing  with  non-viable  banks  are 
also in the pipeline.  
Of course, the ECB also made a contribution in 2012, notably with our special measures. We 
have shown our commitment to do what is necessary within our mandate to safeguard the 
stability of the euro. Only a currency whose future existence is not in doubt can be a stable 
currency. 
Is the ECB still focused on price stability? And is it acting in full independence?  
I would like to state categorically that the answer to both of these questions is “yes”. 
Let  me  start  with  price  stability.  The  ECB  remains  steadfastly  committed  to  its  primary 
mandate of ensuring price stability. All of our measures are designed to achieve this goal. 
And looking at current and expected inflation rates, there is simply no evidence that could 
substantiate fears about any deviation from price stability. 
Last year, we saw a situation where fears about the future of the euro area were creating 
fragmentation  in  financial  markets. This fragmentation  had  very  tangible  consequences for 
the real economy: bank funding costs diverged significantly across countries, and this led to 
marked differences in bank lending rates to firms and households across the euro area.  
that  monetary  union  needs 
leaders  recognised 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In  some  countries,  reductions  in  ECB  interest  rates  were  fully  passed  on;  in  others,  bank 
lending rates declined only a little, if at all; and in some they even rose.  
Interest rates do not have to be identical across the euro area, but it is unacceptable if major 
differences arise from fragmented capital markets or unfounded perceptions about the long-
term  sustainability  of  the  euro.  In  an  economy  like  the  euro  area,  where  around  three 
quarters of firms’ financing comes from banks, fragmentation has very severe consequences 
for the real economy, for investment and employment and ultimately for price stability. 
We therefore acted to remove unfounded fears about the euro and to safeguard our ability to 
ensure price stability for the whole euro area. 
Let me explain how we safeguard our independence.  
In the summer of last year, passive inaction was no more an option because it would have 
posed  the  greatest  risks.  Therefore,  the  ECB,  learning  from  previous  experience  and  in 
compliance with its mandate, had to act - but it would only intervene within a framework that 
would ensure full fiscal compliance by the governments concerned. It is for this reason that 
there  is  a  requirement  of  countries  having  an  adjustment  programme  to be  considered for 
Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs).  Such  a  programme must  entail  conditionality  that 
ensures fiscal discipline.  
With  fiscal  discipline,  monetary  policy  cannot  become  captured  by  fiscal  dominance.  And 
therefore,  the  central  bank  can  continue  its  pursuit  of  safeguarding  price  stability  in  full 
independence. 
And there is one more important lesson from 2012 that we must keep in mind: measures to 
stabilise the euro area, particularly the OMTs, are not only essential for price stability. They 
also reduce Target2 balances and, because they foster the cohesion of the euro area, they 
reduce possible risks for German taxpayers.  
To sum up, the facts support an ultimately more confident review of 2012.  
Prospects for 2013 
As regards the coming year, I would like to suggest three things we need to focus on in 2013:  
First of all, we need perseverance. 
Despite the good progress so far showing that adjustment is happening, reform efforts need 
to  be  sustained.  Adjustment  is  inherently  difficult  and  will  remain  with  us  for  some  time  to 
come.  Politicians  and  their  populations  will  need  to  persevere,  especially  on  structural 
reforms  that  improve  competitiveness.  Countries  need  competitiveness  to  sustain  growth. 
They must move away from debt-financing. There is no possibility of sustained growth based 
on  permanent  debt  accumulation;  and  by  the  way,  there  is  no  social  fairness  based  on 
permanent debt accumulation. 
Second, we need continued ambition.  
Relative calm in financial markets should not lead to a lowering of our ambitions to fix the 
structural flaws in the governance framework of the euro area. After the many advances that 
have  been  made  in  creating  new  rules  and  institutions,  this  coming  year  should  focus  on 
implementation.  
Third, we need patience. 
I am very well aware that for many people in the countries under adjustment, the personal 
economic  situation  can  be  very  difficult.  But  there  is  simply  no  alternative  to  the  path  of 
reform. 
The crisis has several facets that are of different importance in different countries: there is a 
debt  crisis  that  needs  fiscal  consolidation;  there  is  a  competitiveness  crisis  that  needs 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
structural reforms; there is a banking crisis that needs a strong financial union; and there is a 
confidence crisis that needs strong commitment by all policy-makers, including by the central 
bank expressed through our programme of OMTs.  
The social consensus behind the reforms will need to be maintained. These reforms are not 
undertaken to please Brussels or Frankfurt or Washington but for the deep self-interest of the 
economies concerned and of the whole euro area. They will make the economies function 
better, more efficiently and, yes, also more fairly. 
Before  drawing  to  a  close,  let  me  say  a  word  on  the  prospective  single  supervisory 
mechanism and the role that the ECB shall take on.  
Later this year, once the legal texts have been adopted, the ECB will assume a major new 
responsibility to prepare for becoming the new euro area banking supervisor, as home and 
heart  of  the  single  supervisory  mechanism.  This  will  be  a  major  organisational  challenge. 
Internal work is already underway. You can rest assured that we will work hard to ensure that 
the ECB will deliver on its responsibilities to the highest possible standard. 
In the first press conference on this matter, when the single European supervisor had not yet 
been decided, I said that if it were to be the ECB, the following five principles would need to 
apply: 
• 
• 
• 
the framework for supervision had to be effective and ensure coherent oversight;  
supervisory decision-making and monetary policy had to be clearly separated;  
national  supervisors  had 
decentralisation;  
the Single Market had to be preserved for countries that did not join; and finally, 
there had to be full democratic accountability.  
through  appropriate 
to  be  properly 
involved 
 Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The establishment of the supervisory function in Frankfurt is a further tribute to the city as a 
financial centre. The ECB will also continue to contribute to the cultural life of the city, not 
least  through  the  ECB  Cultural  Days  that  we  organise  every  year  and  which  this  year  will 
focus on Latvia. And in the eastern part of the city, we will see the Großmarkthalle emerge in 
its former glory together with our new tower that is scheduled for completion next year. 
Let  me  conclude. We  begin  2013  with  more  confidence  than  we  had  in  January  one  year 
ago. This confidence is to a large extent built on the progress that all of us – governments, 
parliaments,  the  EU  and  the  ECB  –  have  been  able  to  make  during  2012.  But  it  is  also 
crucially built on the expectation that progress will persist.  
The ECB for its part will be there to continue, as it has done successfully now for 14 years, to 
safeguard price stability.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
