Barry Whiteside: Brief comments on Fiji’s economy 
Opening address by Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the launch 
of BSP Life’s new “Bula Elite” product, Suva, 13 June 2013. 
 Mr. Robin Fleming, Chief Executive Officer, BSP Group 
Mr. Kevin McCarthy, BSP Fiji Country Manager 
Mr. Malakai Naiyaga, Managing Director, BSP Life Limited 
Members of the Board, Management and Staff of BSP Life Limited and Bank South Pacific 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory comments 
Bula vinaka and a very good evening to you all! 
I am delighted to be here this evening at yet another key BSP event, this time to launch BSP 
Life’s new Bula Elite product. Thank you, Malakai, for your kind invitation. 
Since  establishing  its  presence  in  Fiji,  the  BSP  Group  has  elevated  the  standards  of 
innovation  for  financial  products  and  services  in  both  banking  and  insurance,  and  has 
become a leading player in both industries. The launch of another Life product is a further 
endorsement  of  the  success  of  the  BSP  Group  and  the  key  role  it  plays  in  Fiji’s  financial 
system. 
We  at  the  Reserve  Bank  are  seeing  the  flow-on  effects  of  such  business  success  in  our 
domestic economy, through increased positive sentiments and actions by the private sector. 
Let me therefore make some comments on the economy. 
Economic update & outlook 
We all know that Fiji is a small OPEN economy – so what happens globally will generally find 
its  way  back  to  us  in  one form  or the  other. While  global  growth  is  trending  upwards,  it  is 
really being pulled along by growth in the major emerging economies (or the BRICS as we 
refer to them). 
In contrast, slowdowns are forecast for most of our trading partners in 2013, with much of the 
Eurozone in recession and having been there for the last 4 to 6 quarters. 
But all this has not dampened our own recent domestic output and the forecasts we have set 
for the near term. 
On the domestic front, GDP growth this year is forecast at 2.7 percent, a little improvement 
on the 2.5 estimated for 2012. An important takeaway is that our growth is broad- based with 
almost all sectors making a positive contribution. In 2013, growth is being led by agriculture, 
manufacturing, the finance and construction sectors. 
While we know that investment is the “driver” of growth, it is the Private Sector that is the 
recognized “engine”. This, however, was clearly not the case in 2010 when the private sector 
contributed  just  3.5  percent  to  the  overall  13.5  percent  Investment-to-GDP  number.  I  am 
pleased  to  say  that  we  have  seen  a  turnaround  through  2012  and  now  into  2013.  Our 
indicators  are  showing  high  growth,  led  by  greater  lending  by  financial  institutions  for 
investment  purposes  as  well  as  strength  in  building  and  construction  activity.  Look  around 
you when you are travelling through Suva and other areas on Viti Levu and you will see the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
evidence. Talk to business people and they exude more positive vibes. Our own Business 
Expectations Survey, where we survey 243 businesses on a semi-annual basis, is reflective 
of this. 
This  year,  the  Investment-to-GDP  ratio  will  be  around  25  percent,  of  which  the  private 
sector’s share is forecast at 13 percent. Clearly this is a  vote of confidence by the private 
sector in the Fijian economy. 
Through  all  this  our foreign  reserves  have  been  holding  steady  and  are  currently  at  $1.62 
billion (worth the equivalent of around 4.7 months of imports), while inflation was 1.5 percent 
at the end of May. 
The  challenge  moving  forward  is  to  keep  this  positive  momentum  going  –  and,  on 
Government’s part, to ensure its Reform programmes gain ground, and that the deadlines to 
Parliamentary elections continue to be met. 
The BSP Fiji Group 
Let me come back to why we are here this evening. 
It is evident that the BSP Group has lifted the game in banking services, and I am assured it 
will  continue  to  be  at  the  forefront  of  product  and  technology  innovation  as  it  grows  its 
presence in Fiji. It is most pleasing to see that, so far, the profits it has made here are being 
ploughed back into the country in raising that presence. 
From  a  product  innovation  standpoint,  Bank  South  Pacific  has  been  a  market  leader  in 
providing  access  points  of  financial  services.  I  understand  it  now  has  the  largest  ATM 
network  and  the  second  largest  number  of  EFTPOS  machines.  It  was  also  the  first  to 
introduce  SMS  banking  here.  The  Bank’s  website  also  provides  24-  hour  on-line  banking 
services, 7 days of the week. 
On the insurance business, BSP Life, as a brand, has been in the market for just over two 
years,  having  taken  over  from  Colonial  Life.  The  Company  has,  however,  achieved 
significant success in a short period of time. 
I would like to highlight some of these major accomplishments:  
• 
The enhancement to its life product offering through the launch of the Bula Prime 
product in 2011. 
The re-branding of Dominion House to BSP Life Centre, which now accommodates 
all of BSP Life’s operations. 
The  opening  of  a  new  Customer  Services  centre  on  the  ground  floor  of  BSP  Life 
Centre. I am told that walk-in customers are averaging 2,000 per week, double what 
they were before the office opened. 
The  opening  of  a  Lautoka  office,  to  complement  the  Nadi  branch  and  to  provide 
greater service to customers in the West. 
The rollout of new medical products earlier this year, including the introduction of an 
India Evacuation product at very affordable premiums. 
    I  understand  that  BSP  Life  has  partnered  with  the  world  renowned  Apollo  chain  in  India 
which  provides  a  broad  range  of  specialist  medical  services.  Access  to  India  is  now 
seamless via Hong Kong or Seoul and the quality of services at Apollo, I am told, is world 
class. In 2012 Apollo treated over 60,000 international patients at their Delhi facility alone. I 
think these numbers provide some indication of the acknowledgement of the quality of the 
treatment available. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  In so far as investments go, the BSP Life portfolio has grown to $323 million. Most of 
this  money  is  invested  in  Fiji,  helping  to  provide  employment  for  our  people  and 
helping to grow our economy. 
I also note the strong financial standing of the business as publicly declared in the 
Company’s  recent  Key  Disclosure  Statement for  2012. This  augurs  well  for future 
growth and ongoing returns to BSP Life policy holders. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  a  significant  investment  in  marketing  by  the  BSP  Group  to  create 
awareness  of  the  need  to  invest  and  protect  our  financial  future.  With  the  take-up  of  life 
insurance  at  less  than  15  percent  of  our  population,  BSP  Life  has  taken  a  lead  role  in 
creating awareness of the critical need for us to have insurance and protect our loved ones. 
BSP Life and BSP Bank have also been key partners, along with other stakeholders, in the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji’s ongoing efforts to promote financial inclusion and financial literacy in 
Fiji. 
Launch of Bula Elite and concluding remarks 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  clear  that  BSP  Life  has  strongly  established  itself  in  life  and 
health insurance in the Fiji market over such a short period of time. 
Tonight  is  another  special  milestone  in  the  Company’s  growth  as  a  major  player  in  Fiji’s 
insurance industry. 
I  understand  that  the  Bula  Elite  product  has  been  developed  following  extensive  market 
research and is designed to provide exceptional value for clients. It is an insurance product 
that  will  meet  both  short  and  long  term  investment  needs  whilst  simultaneously  providing 
peace  of mind  with  insurance  protection for  loved  ones. This  is  again  a testament  to  BSP 
Life’s  focus  where  products  and  services  are  developed  to  provide  strong  value  for 
customers. 
I wish you, Malakai, and your team, the very best with the rollout of this new product. Without 
further ado, it is my pleasure to officially launch BSP Life’s latest product, Bula Elite. 
Vinaka vakalevu. 
 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
