Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: The state of the Thai economy and 
macroeconomic policy 
Speech by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor for Monetary Stability of the Bank 
of Thailand, on behalf of Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the 
Joint Foreign Chambers of Commerce (JFCCT), Bangkok, 28 May 2013. 
 Opening remarks 
Your Excellencies,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all, on behalf of the Governor, I would like to thank the Joint Foreign Chambers of 
Commerce for the invitation. Thailand and the members of JFCCT have a long-established 
relationship, in some cases spanning over several decades. The Chambers’ work and efforts 
over  the  years  have  contributed  significantly  toward  the  economic  development  and 
prosperity  here  in  Thailand.  I  hope  that  our  economic  partnership  and  cultural  ties  will 
continue to thrive as we further our cooperation in the future. 
Let  me  share  with  you  today  my  views  on  Thailand’s  economic  assessment  and  how 
monetary  policy  can  help  address  some  of  the  immediate challenges facing  the  economy. 
Later in my talk, I will also touch on longer-term structural challenges which monetary policy 
may  have  little  bearing on,  but  are  nonetheless  crucial for  sustaining  economic  prosperity. 
But first, let me begin by reviewing current economic conditions and medium-term economic 
outlook. 
Economic outlook and monetary policy 
The  economic  expansion  in  2012  at  6.4  percent  proved  to  be  stronger  than  most  had 
anticipated,  driven  mainly  by  robust  domestic  demand  amid  post-flood  reconstruction 
spending. The broad strength of private spending also testified to inherently sound economic 
fundamentals,  including  rising  income,  low  unemployment,  and  robust  private  sector 
confidence.  At  the  same  time,  additional  support  from  accommodative  macroeconomic 
policy, both fiscal and monetary, helped maintain economic momentum throughout last year. 
Notwithstanding  a  somewhat  lackluster  economic  performance  in  the  first  quarter  of  this 
year,  many  of  the  supportive  factors  are  expected  to  remain  in  place.  Forward-looking 
indicators suggest both businesses and consumers continue to hold positive outlook on the 
economy. Fiscal stimulus related to the large-scale public investment in infrastructure should 
begin to phase in from the latter part of this year, potentially generating positive crowding-in 
effects  on  private  spending.  Financial  conditions  also  continue  to  be  supportive  of  growth, 
with policy interest rate staying low and private sector credit growth expanding at a double-
digit rate. Longer-term interest rates and borrowing costs have been low and stable, affording 
both businesses and households relatively easy access to finance. In fact, if anything, a high 
pace of credit growth may have raised risks of overheating in some sectors, with potential 
implications  for  financial  stability.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  has  flagged  this 
risk several times since last year, and will continue to monitor the situation closely. 
On  the  other  hand,  there  remains  an  important  drag  to  growth,  largely  stemming  from  a 
protracted global recovery. In some parts of Asia, the first quarter growth has turned out to 
be  lower  than  expected,  as  a  result  of  slowing  global  trade.  In  Thailand,  Q1  growth  has 
similarly been subdued, expanding 5.3 percent as both private consumption and investment 
moderated. Part of this pullback may have been a natural reversion to a lower pace of growth 
after  an  unusually  strong  expansion  last  year.  Lingering  uncertainty  about  global  demand 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
may  have  also  caused  some  export  firms  to  delay  planned  investment.  Consumption  may 
have been held back by farm income in the midst of low global commodity prices, and an 
accumulation  of  household  debt,  which  is  now  at  78  percent  of  GDP.  Set  against  this 
weaker-than-expected domestic demand, is relatively resilient exports which expanded more 
than 8 percent. 
Given the still weak global demand on the one hand, and already easy financial conditions 
on  the  other,  monetary  policy  must  carefully  weigh  the  merits  of  providing  growth  support 
against  financial  stability  concerns.  Policy  interest  rate  is  not  the  only  available  tool  to 
address these multiple objectives. Macroprudential measures, in particular, are also part of 
the policy tool kit. The MPC will continue to exercise its best collective judgement as to what 
course  of  action  and  policy  mix  are  deemed  most  appropriate  to  ensure  maximum 
sustainable growth for the Thai economy. 
Challenges from capital flows and exchange rate volatility 
Let me now turn my discussion to a topic that has attracted a lot of attention recently, namely 
the issue of capital flows and exchange rate. The appreciation of the Thai baht this year up to 
late  April  has  raised  some  concerns.  During  this  period,  the  baht  strengthened  nearly 
7 percent  against  the  US  dollar,  and  10  percent  against  our  trading  partners’  currencies. 
What has caused such movement in Thai baht? 
There  is  little  disagreement  that,  over  a  long  period  of  time,  exchange  rates  tend  to 
appreciate in economies with better growth prospects, strong external balances and overall 
sound fundamentals. Over the past decade, currencies in Thailand and other parts of Asia 
have  followed  gradual  appreciation  trends,  broadly  consistent  with  their  respective 
fundamentals.  What  sets  this  recent  episode  apart  is  the  pace  with  which  the  baht  has 
appreciated. Part of the appreciation could be interpreted as a ‘catch-up’ move, following a 
tepid  period  of  last  year  when  the  baht  underperformed  many  in  the  region.  Meanwhile, 
several currencies in the region were also subject to their domestic issues. In South Korea, 
geopolitical factors resurfaced. In Malaysia, a looming election curbed risk appetite until mid-
May. In Indonesia, current account balance remains in deficit, for example. 
But even if one takes these factors into account, sharp movements in Thai baht in March and 
April are still difficult to justify by fundamentals alone. Our internal analysis has shown that 
the baht has, at times, deviated from its range of equilibrium or fair values. Elements of self-
fulfilling  prophecies  were  likely  at  work,  encouraged  by  market  speculation  that  the  policy 
makers  were  adopting  a  hands-off  approach  regarding  exchange  rate.  We  welcome  signs 
that the market has abandoned this misguided belief. The baht has been depreciating since 
late April, reducing the year-to-date appreciation against the dollar to about 3 percent. The 
correction  is  also  evidence  that  under  flexible  exchange  rate  regime,  unwarranted 
overshooting inevitably will be corrected by market forces. 
The  fact  is  that  although  the  exchange  rate  is  not  the  BOT’s  main  policy  tool,  or  an 
intermediate  policy  target,  it  is  an  integral  part  of  our  macroeconomic  analysis  and  policy 
deliberation.  Beyond  aggregate  statistics,  it  is  also  recognized  that  sharp  exchange  rate 
volatility can have significant impact on small businesses with less capacity to adjust. Thus, 
while  exchange  rate  is  allowed  to  play  an  active  automatic  stabilizing  role  under  current 
framework,  the  MPC  constantly  monitors  the  impact  of  baht  movements  on  the  overall 
economy.  To  supplement  this  baseline  analysis,  the  BOT  staff  also  conducts  projections 
under  different  degrees  of  baht  appreciation.  In  a  recent  joint  forecast  exercise  with  the 
Ministry of Finance and the Office of the National Economic and Social Development Board 
(NESDB), the BOT’s estimate of growth impact of baht appreciation in fact proved to be the 
largest among the three, testifying to our conservatism. In broad terms, however, the three 
agencies’  analyses  agree  that  baht  appreciation  alone  should  not  derail  the  underlying 
momentum of the economy. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The MPC continues to be prudent, and vigilant about the potential adverse impact of extreme 
exchange  rate  volatility.  The  committee  recognizes  that,  in  the  current  environment  where 
growth  prospects  differ  wildly  across  regions  and  monetary  policy  in  advanced  economies 
remains  ultra-loose,  pressure  from  capital  inflows  may  persist  in  the  medium  term.  All 
available  policy  options  are  therefore  open to  considerations.  Substantial  preparation  work 
has been ongoing to ensure that the right measures can be readily implemented should the 
situation warrant. Investors seeking long-term presence in Thailand should be reassured that 
productive  capital  inflows  are  still  highly  valued,  and  any  introduction  of  measures  will  be 
carefully  designed  to  minimize  unintended  consequences.  After  all,  the  goals  of  these 
measures are to preserve the financial and economic integrity, the very reason that attracts 
investors to Thailand in the first place. 
Structural Impediments 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Macroeconomic  stabilization  and  demand  management  policy  can  only  get  us  so  far.  The 
ultimate determinants of long-term growth are tied to the supply side of the economy, namely 
the deployment of effective capital and labour inputs. It is a pity that the supply-side issues 
are often overlooked in policy discussion, and action is often limited to structural ‘reform’ that 
comes  too  late.  By  addressing  the  structural  issues  early  and  preemptively,  the  long-run 
growth  benefits  are  likely  to  be  more  substantial.  So  let  me  venture  out  of  my  familiar 
territory, and devote the rest of my talk to discuss one key structural issue facing the Thai 
economy – the labour shortage. 
Unemployment  is  persistently  low  in  Thailand,  and  is  not  very  sensitive  to  the  business 
cycles. One underlying cause is the low labour force, which limits the supply of workers. The 
total size of workforce may further decline with the secular demographic trend, an important 
issue  I  will  come  back  to  in  a  moment.  But  the  low  degree  of  cyclicality  of  unemployment 
suggests  that  there  may  be  factors  keeping  the  labour  market  tight  other  than  demand 
pressure.  Through  our  business  contact  and  recent  surveys,  the  labour  shortage  has 
repeatedly come up as one of the top concerns, alongside competitiveness and production 
costs  among  others,  yet  pressure  on  wages  is  largely  absent.  What  labour  market 
imperfections  are  responsible  for  the  structural  shortage  of  labour  supply,  or  equivalently, 
persistent excess demand for labour? 
A long standing issue is that of education and skills mismatch. The manufacturing industry, 
for  example,  often  reports  difficulties  in  hiring  workers  with  vocational  training,  which  is  in 
shorter supply relative to university graduates.  
There  are  also  reports  of  under-supply  of  graduates  in  science,  relative  to  social  science. 
One reason may be the firms’ reluctance to adjust wage upwards, resulting in shortage of 
supply  at  the  going  wage.  This  reluctance,  in  turn,  may  be  caused  by  low  marginal 
productivity of labour, which is a consequence of subdued capital formation over the years, 
resulting  in  low  capital-to-labour  ratio.  Escaping  this  vicious  cycle  of  low  wage  and  labour 
shortage,  involves  an  improvement  in  labour  productivity  via  higher  investment  in  physical 
capital. Several strategies have been proposed. Some argue that raising the minimum wage, 
despite its costs, can potentially promote investment and improves labour productivity. Some 
prefer to provide direct fiscal incentives for firms to invest. Others see public investment as 
holding the key. 
The jury is still out as to how successful these approaches will prove to be in catalyzing an 
investment  up-cycle,  and  ultimately  alleviating  the  labour  market  issue.  Fortunately,  the 
currently  conducive  macroeconomic  environment  is  already  providing  ample  incentives  for 
businesses  to  invest.  Financing  costs  are  currently  low.  Strong  baht  facilitates  imports  of 
capital goods. Firms stand to gain more from AEC integration if they carry out their planned 
investment  in  a  timely  manner.  Collective  efforts  by  all  will  also  generate  positive 
externalities, and can go a long way in easing the labour shortage problem for all parties. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
One fundamental force that may exacerbate the labour shortage problem is the demographic 
change.  Slowly  but  inexorably,  the  Thai  society  is  aging,  as  the  total  fertility  rate  is 
consistently lower than the replacement rate. The number of people aged 65 and above will 
double in less than 10 years. As projected by NESDB, by 2030 the working-age population 
will fall from the current rate of 68 percent to just over 60 percent, making Thailand’s old age 
dependency ratio slightly higher than the Asian average. The government can help manage 
this  demographic  transition  by  speeding  up  the  reform  of  immigration  policy,  and  simplify 
registration  procedure.  The  initiatives  can  also  fit  in  with  the  broader  agenda  of  ASEAN 
integration,  to  leverage  on  regional  resources  and  promote  regional  economic  integration 
simultaneously. 
Closing remarks 
Let me close my remark by thanking all of you once again for your invaluable contributions to 
the Thai economy. The Bank of Thailand will continue our work of ensuring a stable financial 
and  economic  environment,  so  that  businesses  can  continue  to  thrive  and  individuals  can 
enjoy better standards of living on a sustainable basis. I hope that Thailand will continue to 
be  a  destination  of  choice  for  your  investment,  and  a  country  of  shared  opportunity  and 
prosperity for us all. 
Thank you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
