Luis M Linde: IV Meeting – Financial System Reform 
Speech  by  Mr  Luis  M  Linde,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  inauguration  of  the 
meeting on “Financial System Reform” organised by Expansión, Madrid, 9 July 2013. 
 Introduction 
It is an honour for me to participate in the inauguration of this meeting on “Financial System 
Reform”, organised by Expansión. 
Given the agenda and the list of participants, this meeting will be an excellent opportunity for 
players  in  the  Spanish  financial  system  to  review  the  latest  developments  and  to  assess, 
from the standpoint of their own institutions, the more immediate future. 
The future of our financial system and of our banks will necessarily be framed within the new 
international  regulatory  system,  whose  design  has  been  under  way  since  the  international 
economic and financial crisis broke six years back, in 2007. 
This  crisis,  whose  consequences  have  clearly  not  yet  been  overcome,  has  given  rise  to 
numerous  initiatives.  Various  international  financial  organisations,  public  and  private  alike, 
including the International Monetary Fund and the Bank for International Settlements, have 
been involved in studying and addressing such initiatives. 
But we should mention, above all, the establishment of new institutional frameworks. These 
include most notably the creation of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which was promoted 
by the G20 and has assumed a key role in designing and coordinating international financial 
reform. 
We  have  also  seen  the  main  economies  create  institutions  entrusted  specifically  with 
overseeing the financial system from a macroprudential perspective. Notable examples are 
the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  United  States,  the  UK  Financial  Policy 
Committee and the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) in the EU. 
I  shall  focus  in  my  address  on  the  proposals  by  the  FSB  and  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision, which has worked under its guidelines. I shall refer to four broad issues 
which I consider to be most important in the new regulatory framework being designed. 
Firstly,  the  entry  into  force  of the  new  capital  rules  known  as  Basel  III, the  basic  thrust  of 
which, as we all know, is to strengthen banks’ capital; second, the new treatment of systemic 
banks  and  the  new  banking  resolution  frameworks.  Here,  I  shall  comment  on  potential 
reforms to banking business models, which we normally call “structural reforms”. And finally, 
I shall refer to outstanding accounting issues, with significant consequences 
for  bank  balance  sheet  management,  geared  to  achieving  the  sought-after  convergence 
between  US  Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  rules  and  the  International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) criteria applied in Europe. 
The entry into force of the new Basel III capital accord 
One of the key elements of the new regulatory framework is the amendment of the prudential 
rules governing the banking sector by means of the agreement we refer to as “Basel III”. The 
adaptation of this accord to the European arena came about just a few days ago  with the 
approval of the new Capital Requirements Directive. 
Among other things, the application of Basel III will entail an increase in the minimum level of 
core capital, which will rise from 2% to 4.5%, and the creation of a capital conservation buffer 
of  2.5%.  Accordingly,  banks  must  at  all  times maintain  a  level  of  high-quality  capital  of,  at 
least, 7% of risk-weighted assets. In addition, there will be a countercyclical capital buffer of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
up  to  2.5%,  which  for  the  first  time  introduces  a  macroprudential  component  into  the 
regulation of capital levels, whose ultimate aim is to smooth the fluctuations in credit over the 
course of the cycle. 
The new Basel III framework further includes other important additions. These include most 
notably the introduction of a leverage ratio in which assets will not be risk-weighted and the 
introduction, for the first time, of liquidity requirements. On one hand, the liquidity coverage 
ratio will require banks to hold a sufficient volume of liquid assets to withstand scenarios of 
tension. On the other, the introduction of a net stable funding ratio is envisaged, whose aim 
is to limit maturity mismatches. 
The  new  regulation  envisages  that  these  new  standards,  to  which  the  changes  in  the 
definition  of  capital  must  be  added,  will  be  applied  progressively,  such  that  the  transition 
period will finalise in 2019. The aim is to prevent the strengthening of banks’ solvency from 
being  achieved  at  the  expense  of  a  reduction  in  the  financing  that  banks  provide  to  the 
economy as a whole. 
However, there is pressure in the markets for banks to comply ahead of schedule with the 
requirements  laid  down  in  Basel  III.  In many  countries, moreover,  a  weak macroeconomic 
scenario  contributes  to  increasing  bad  debts,  making  a  case  for  sufficient  buffers  being  in 
place to absorb the losses that may materialise. 
Bank  should  therefore  use  the  room  for  manoeuvre  they  have  to  strengthen  their  capital, 
dispelling  any  existing  doubts  about  their  ability  to  comply  with  the  new  requirements  on 
schedule. But it should also be said that the early full application of the new requirements in 
the  short  term,  in  an  economic  environment  such  as  the  present  one,  would  prove 
excessively procyclical. 
The regulation of systemic banks 
The second key aspect of the regulatory reform promoted by the FSB has been the creation 
of a new framework for the treatment of “systemically important” banks. 
Systemically important banks are those whose bankruptcy might trigger serious problems in 
the  global  financial  system  owing  to  their  size,  complexity  and  interconnectedness.  The 
problem  they  pose  arises  from  the  fact  that,  in  the  absence  of  an  appropriate  legislative 
framework, the threat of their bankruptcy often leaves no other option to the authorities than 
to bail them out, which may involve major costs for taxpayers. 
In response to this problem, the FSB designed a framework for the treatment of these banks. 
Its starting point was the definition of a methodology to identify them and the publication in 
November 2011 of a list drawn up in accordance with this methodology. 
This was followed by regulatory capital requirements additional to those applicable to the rest 
of the sector. The latest FSB list, which includes two Spanish banks (Santander and BBVA), 
establishes different tranches, depending on the capital surcharges they must meet, which 
range between 1% and 2.5%. 
Under the Basel III framework, these additional requirements will begin to be applied in 2016 
and full implementation must be attained by 2019. 
The need for effective resolution frameworks 
Another  key  ingredient  of  the  new  framework  for  the  treatment  of  systemic  banks  is  the 
obligation for them to draw up effective recovery and resolution plans, and the introduction of 
legislative arrangements that allow their effective application. 
In 2011 the FSB published a set of so-called Key Attributes with which the resolution regimes 
of each jurisdiction must comply. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
towards 
institutions,  which  marks  a  crucial  advance 
In  Spain,  Law  9/2012  of  14  November  2012  on  the  restructuring  and  resolution  of  credit 
institutions  introduced  a  regime  which  brings  forward  several  of  the  resolution-related 
elements required by the FSB. 
More recently, just some days back, the Ecofin reached agreement on the draft Directive on 
the  resolution  of  credit 
the 
implementation across Europe of the FSB’s resolutions. 
This draft Directive, which is still pending approval by the European Parliament, seeks to give 
national  authorities  the  powers  and  instruments  for  heading  off  banking  crises  and  for  the 
orderly  resolution  of  any  credit  institution.  The  draft  Directive  establishes  an  array  of 
instruments with which to tackle banking crises in three phases or stages: in the preventive 
stage, in the case of early intervention and in the case of resolution. 
In the preventive phase, banks must draw up recovery plans in the event that their situation 
should  significantly  worsen.  The  authorities  will,  in  some  cases,  be  empowered  to  appoint 
managers  at  banks.  The  principal  resolution  measures  would  be  the  sale  of  part  of  the 
business; the establishment of bridge banks for the temporary transfer of healthy assets to a 
bank  controlled  by  the  public  sector;  the  segregation  of  assets  through  the  transfer  of 
impaired  assets  to  a  management  vehicle;  and  measures  that  impose  losses  on 
shareholders  and  uninsured  creditors,  known  as  a  bail-in  as  opposed  to  a  bail-out,  which 
involves or usually involves the assumption of losses by the public sector. 
The  bail-in  tool  will  allow  the  resolution  authorities  to  cancel  or  convert  into  capital  the 
entitlements  of  the  shareholders  and  creditors  of  banks  that  are  insolvent  or  close  to 
insolvency.  Under  the  decision  by  Ecofín,  the  deposits  of  individuals  and  of  small  and 
medium-sized enterprises, along with liabilities to the European Investment Bank, will have 
preference over uninsured creditors and over the deposits of large corporations. The Deposit 
Guarantee Fund will at all times make good any guaranteed deposits, i.e. those of less than 
€100,000, which will have greater seniority or preference over other deposits. In any event, 
the bail-in will exclude, inter alia, insured deposits, i.e. deposits of less than 
€100,000; secured liabilities, such as covered bonds; and liabilities arising from participation 
in  payment  systems,  along  with  interbank  liabilities  with  an  original  maturity  of  less  than 
seven days. 
The draft Directive further requires Member States to set up ex-ante resolution funds. These 
funds  will  be  used  to  temporarily  support  banks  under  resolution  by  means  of  loans, 
guarantees, asset purchases or capital for bridge banks. They will also be used to fund what 
may be called an “element of flexibility” of the Directive, which I shall refer to in a moment. 
Over the next 10 years these funds must be built up to a volume equivalent to at least 0.8% 
of  the  insured  deposits  of  the  country’s  credit  institutions.  In  this  connection,  banks  must 
make  annual  contributions  based  on  their  liabilities.  The  draft  Directive  leaves  to  the 
discretion  of  the  Member  States  the  matter  of  whether  resolution  funds  and  deposit 
guarantee funds are merged or kept separate. 
Finally, as I said earlier, the Ecofin agreement introduces an “element of flexibility” so that 
national resolution authorities, in certain exceptional cases and subject to strict criteria, may 
fully or partially exclude any category of liabilities from the bail-in, and use the resolution fund 
to finance this exclusion. However, as a general rule, they may only resort to such flexibility 
after losses have been imposed on shareholders and creditors for a minimum amount of 8% 
of the total liabilities of the bank subject to resolution. Moreover, the possible contribution of 
the resolution fund in substitution of other creditors may not exceed 5% of the bank’s total 
liabilities. 
The  draft  Directive  is,  in  general  terms,  satisfactory.  Firstly,  it  establishes  a  relatively 
harmonised  resolution  framework  which  has  been  non-existent  to  date.  Secondly,  while  it 
was  necessary  to  introduce  the  above-mentioned  “element  of  flexibility”  in  order  to  reach 
agreement, the room for manoeuvre will be limited. Thirdly, the 8% of total liabilities that will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
be subject initially to the bail-in, is liable to be covered relatively comfortably by capital and 
subordinated  debt.  Finally,  the  agreement  affords  security  to  deposits.  Deposits  of  over 
€100,000  would  only  be  subject  to  bail-in  once  they  reach  13%  of  a  bank’s  total  liabilities 
and, even then, they might not be affected, given the possibility of funding by the European 
Stability Mechanism envisaged in the draft Directive. 
In short, along with the Single Supervisory Mechanism, this greater harmonisation of national 
resolution regimes is one of the fundamental pillars of the future European Banking Union. 
To  conclude  on  the  treatment  of  global  systemic  banks,  it  will  be  necessary  to  create,  for 
each  of  them,  Crisis  Management  Groups.  It  is  envisaged  that  these  Groups  will  conduct 
before  2014  an  initial  review  of  the  viability  of  the  resolution  plans  of  the  systemic  banks 
included in the November 2011 list. 
Structural measures 
As a complement to the efforts to date regarding systemic banks, the authorities in several 
countries  have  adopted  or  are  considering  adopting  reforms  involving  changes  to  banking 
business models, with legal restrictions on the size of credit institutions or the activities they 
may  pursue.  Examples  of  this  are  the  Volcker  rule,  introduced  in  United  States;  the 
measures considered by an independent commission chaired by John Vickers in the United 
Kingdom; and the proposals of a group of experts chaired by the Governor of the bank of 
Finland, Erkki Liikaanen, in the European Union. 
Broadly,  these  measures  seek  to  restrict  the  size  of  banks  or  to  simplify  their  structure, 
segregating specific activities which are considered essential, such as taking deposits, from 
potential losses in other banking business areas, especially those related to trading. These 
reforms might help reduce the complexity and size of banks, and their interconnectedness 
with  the  so-called  shadow  banking  system.  They  would  thus  contribute  to  facilitating  bank 
management and supervision, and, where necessary, to simplifying bank resolution. 
However, these proposals and the measures considered have so far remained outside the 
coordination of the Financial Stability Board. As a result, the main jurisdictions have drawn 
up their proposals in isolation, and there are significant differences between them. 
For instance, there is no consensus on the boundaries of the activities to be segregated or 
on  the  legal  procedures  to  do  so.  While  US  deposit-taking  institutions  may  continue  to 
engage  in  market-making  activities,  European  Union  and  UK  proposals  would  make  it 
necessary  for  some  separation  of  these  lines  of  business.  And  there  are  various  legal 
formulas to ring-fence the different activities, ranging from mandatory total separation in the 
United States to the obligation to create financially independent subsidiaries within the same 
group in the proposal being discussed in the European Union. 
There  are  indeed  doubts,  which  the  Banco  de  España  considers  reasonable,  about  the 
advisability of implementing these initiatives, at least under their current design. 
First, interaction with the other regulatory processes under way should be carefully analysed. 
The objectives of the structural measures largely coincide with those of the FSB’s work on 
the treatment of systemic banks. 
Second,  consideration  should  be  given  to  the  consistency  of  the  reforms  proposed  at  the 
international level. In this respect, the new structural reform measures should be prevented 
from  introducing  unwarranted  differences  in  the  treatment  of  similar  activities.  Accordingly, 
the  debate  on  these  types  of  measures  should  be  global  in  scale  rather  than  national  or 
regional, possibly taking place within the framework of the FSB discussions. 
There  is  also  a  risk  that  divergences  in  structural  reform  models  may  lead  to  a  greater 
fragmentation – or, if you will, to a certain re-nationalisation – of financial activity. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Lastly, the possible implications of these measures for the structure of the financial system 
should be taken into account. In particular, their application should not entail a shift of the 
riskiest activities to the shadow banking system. 
In  sum,  before  introducing  new  structural  measures,  their  costs  and  benefits  should  be 
evaluated from a global perspective, bearing in mind progress in other areas of regulatory 
reform,  especially  those  concerning  new  resolution  frameworks  and  the  treatment  of 
systemic banks. 
In  any  event,  it  seems  reasonable  to  observe  the  principle  that  regulation  should  impose 
stricter requirements on the riskiest activities. A clear distinction should be drawn between 
banks  whose  trading  volume  is  relatively  small  and  geared  chiefly  to  providing  services  to 
their customers, and those other banks with a more marked risk profile. 
Strengthening of and convergence in accounting standards 
The last issue I wished to address concerns accounting rules. In April 2009, the G20 called 
on  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  and  the  US  Financial  Accounting 
Standards  Board  (FASB)  to  adopt  measures  to  strengthen  and  more  closely  align  their 
respective  standards.  As  a  result,  the  treatment  of  business  combinations  and  the 
consolidation  of  financial  statements  have  been  reviewed,  with  particular  emphasis  on  the 
specific features of special-purpose vehicles. Work has also been done on defining fair value 
and on the criteria to be taken into account in its determination. 
However, accounting standards-setters have not yet reached agreement on the treatment of 
impaired  financial  assets  (through  credit  risk  provisions,  as  they  are  traditionally  called). 
Following  lengthy  debate,  the  International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  and  the 
Financial  Accounting  Standards  Board  (FASB)  have  issued  two  separate  “expected  loss” 
models, which are currently being deliberated on. 
There is one significant change: compared with the current “incurred loss” model, both opt for 
earlier recording of losses and accept considering estimated or expected losses. To calculate 
them,  they  include  reasonable  forecasts  of  economic  conditions  and  future  events.  The 
discrepancy does not therefore lie in the amount of the estimated losses, but in the time at 
which they are recognised. The IASB proposal defers recognition of a portion of the losses to 
the  time  at  which  a  significant  impairment  in  the  credit  quality  of  the  assets  becomes 
apparent,  whereas  the  FASB  proposal  limits  banks’  discretionality,  obliging  them  to 
recognise  all  the  expected  losses  that  may  reasonably  be  estimated.  At  the  Banco  de 
España,  we  understand  that,  in  principle,  the  latter  proposal  responds more  closely  to  the 
requirement  of  the  G20,  which  has  expressed  concern  about  the  procyclical  nature  of  the 
current regulations. 
Conclusions 
Allow  me  to  conclude  by  highlighting the  unprecedented  effort  being made  in  international 
coordination  of  financial  regulations  and  the  role  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  the 
Basel  Committee.  Throughout  the  crisis  there  have  been  signs  of  a  re-nationalisation  of 
financial  markets,  and  some  supervisors  have,  at  specific  times,  adopted  protectionist 
measures  entailing  little  or  no  coordination  with  other  supervisors.  Admittedly,  though,  the 
bulk of the regulatory initiatives have come from the reinforced international cooperation led 
by the FSB. 
It is essential that this cooperative approach should be maintained in the future. Otherwise, 
we would run the risk of seeing the degree of integration of financial systems slip backwards, 
and that, along with the trade protectionism we have so far managed to avoid, would be a 
most negative consequence of the crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
