Fabio Panetta: Credit and the financing of firms 
Address  by  Mr  Fabio  Panetta,  Deputy  Director  General  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the 
Federazione delle Banche di Credito Cooperativo Lazio Umbria Sardegna, “Reload Banking. 
La Banca del domani per un nuovo sviluppo dell’Italia”, Rome, 21 June 2013. 
 The macroeconomic environment and the credit market 
1. 
Euro-area GDP continued to contract in the first quarter of 2013, with the cyclical weakness 
spreading across countries. Domestic demand is reflecting the impact of private and public 
sector deleveraging and the worsening of credit conditions. Exports declined for the second 
successive quarter.  
The  cyclical  indicators  have  shown  a  small  improvement  in  recent  months,  although  the 
levels are still low. According to Eurosystem forecasts, GDP will fall by 0.6 per cent over the 
year as a whole. 
In  Italy  the  economic  situation  shows  little  sign  of  improving.  In  the  first  quarter  of  2013 
output contracted more than in the rest of the area, mainly owing to the decline in domestic 
demand. For the first time in four years exports decreased, in response to the reduction in 
demand  from  the  other  euro-area  countries  and  a  slowdown  in  sales  outside  Europe. 
Industrial production declined further in April before picking up slightly.  
Analysts  expect  the  decline  in  GDP  to  ease  during  the  present  quarter;  economic  activity 
seems likely to stabilize in the second half of the year. According to OECD forecasts, GDP in 
Italy will fall by 1.8 per cent on average this year; this would bring the cumulative contraction 
since 2007 to around 8.5 percentage points, larger than that recorded during the Depression 
of the 1930s.  
Credit market conditions are one of the most critical aspects of the macroeconomic situation 
in Italy. In the first four months of this year lending to firms diminished by just under 4 per 
cent on an annual basis; lending to households also contracted, although to a lesser degree. 
The reduction in borrowing costs came to a halt last autumn, and lending rates are still above 
the euro-area average. Small and medium-sized enterprises face increasing difficulties. 
The  decrease  in  lending  reflects  the  weakness  of  demand  for  loans,  which  in  turn  is 
associated  with  the  reduction  in  investment,  the  deterioration  in  consumer  confidence  and 
the weakness of the property market.  
But  the  reduction  in  bank  credit,  and  the  increase  in  its  cost,  can  also  be  ascribed  to  the 
tightening  of  supply  conditions.  Evidence  pointing  in  this  direction  comes  from  surveys  of 
banks  and  businesses  alike.  Our  estimates  indicate  that  the  deterioration  in  lending 
conditions, considering both the rise in loan rates and the diminished availability of credit, cut 
1 percentage point from GDP growth in 2012.  
The main obstacle to loan supply is the increase in credit risk as the recession drags on. In 
the first quarter of 2013 the annual default rate rose to 2.8 per cent for total lending and to 
4.5 per cent for lending to businesses. According to the leading indicators, the flow of bad 
debts will remain high for the rest of the year. 
The  present  state  of  the  credit  market  is  a  well-known  case  in  the  economic  literature:  a 
situation in which uncertain economic outlook, high default risk and difficulty of assessing the 
soundness  of  individual  borrowers  generate  adverse  selection  and  heighten  banks’  risk 
aversion,  prompting  restrictive  lending  policies.1  Unlike  the  pattern  seen  in  the  past,  the 
                                                
1  J.  Stiglitz  and  A. Weiss,  “Credit  Rationing  in  Markets  with  Imperfect  Information”,  The  American  Economic 
Review (1981).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
reduced availability of credit is also affecting, albeit to a lesser extent, large firms and firms 
with balanced financial positions. 
The credit  market  will  continue  to  experience  supply-side  tensions  in  the  months to  come. 
Past  experience  has  shown  that  loan  quality  tends  to  continue  deteriorating  long  after  the 
cyclical  upswing  has  begun.  Moreover,  while  the  new  regulations  on  banks’  capital  and 
liquidity ratios will bring stability to the financial system once they are fully operational, in the 
short term they may act as a brake on loan growth. And market pressure on banks to reduce 
their  reliance  on  wholesale  funding  also  spurs  banks  to  reduce  the  size  of  their  balance 
sheets in a pro-cyclical manner.  
The first step towards setting the lending cycle in motion again – in the interest of firms and 
banks alike – is a firm commitment on the part of the banks to adopt lending policies that 
take fully into account their customers’ growth prospects. Each bank should be aware of the 
negative externalities for the whole Italian economy, and for itself, of an indiscriminate credit 
squeeze.  
Given  the  severe  tensions  that  have  emerged  on  the  international  financial  and  Italian 
sovereign debt markets in recent months, the capital strengthening prompted by the Bank of 
Italy’s  supervisory  action  has  allowed  Italian  banks  to  maintain  investor  confidence  and 
attract  external  finance  at  low  cost.2  However,  this  may  not  be  sufficient,  on  its  own,  to 
overcome the credit supply bottlenecks.  
The “market failure” underlying the malfunctioning of the credit channel must be tackled by 
strengthening public guarantees in favour of firms without making the taxpayer shoulder too 
much of the associated risk and creating unfair advantages for the banks.  
The  Government’s  decision  to  reinforce  the  Guarantee  Fund  for  small  and  medium-size 
enterprises  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  In  implementing  the  measures,  the  Fund’s 
intervention must be made conditional on the actual disbursement of new loans, and more 
favourable  conditions  must  be  given  to  banks  that  demonstrate  stronger  growth  in  overall 
lending. Eligible beneficiaries must include firms with competitive potential and sound growth 
prospects,  even  if  they  are  under  financial  strain.  The  guarantee  must  lead  to  a  real 
improvement  in  the  conditions  applied  to  loans,  and  firms  themselves  must  be  allowed  to 
apply  directly  for  the  Fund’s  intervention.  The  effects  on  lending  could  be  substantial:  a 
€3 billion  increase  in  the  Fund’s  capital  would  allow  guarantees  to  be  provided  for  some 
€40 billion worth of new loans.  
The financing of firms 
2. 
The  credit  market  tensions  have  highlighted  once  again  the  main  weakness  of  Italy’s 
financial system: firms’ overdependence on bank credit and their inability to raise sufficient 
funds  directly  on  the  markets.  The  stock  market  is  underdeveloped  even  compared  with 
other  bank-centred  systems.  The  insufficient  development  of  capital  markets  affects  firms’ 
financial  structure,  which  is  marked  by  a  fairly  high  proportion  of  debt  provided  mainly  by 
banks; the weight of other financial instruments is correspondingly low. 
The recession is putting this model of financing under considerable strain. The reduction in 
business  volumes  means  that  firms  are  less  able  to  finance  investments  with  internally 
generated funds. Their reliance on the banks increases the tensions caused by the tightness 
of  lending  standards.  In  other  countries,  bond  issuance  serves  to  counterbalance  the 
                                                
2 
In  order  to  minimize  the  pro-cyclical  effects,  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  asked  the  banks  to  increase  internally 
generated  funds  while  continuing  to  reduce  operating  costs,  dividends  and  directors’  and  executives’  pay 
according  to  their  profitability  and  capital  base.  For  banks  requiring  stronger  adjustment  measures,  a 
contribution must come from the sale of non-strategic assets. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
shortage of loans.3 In Italy, this option is only available to a few large corporations: €35 billion 
worth of bonds were issued in 2012, of which only €320 million by small and medium-sized 
firms.  
The stock exchange and equity capital 
2.1 
The underdeveloped stock exchange does not reflect a lack of firms eligible for listing. Italy 
has a large number of unlisted firms that fulfil the listing requirements as to size, capital and 
profitability.4  
On  a  previous  occasion  I  argued  that  the  small  number  of  companies  participating  in  the 
capital  market  is  above  all  the  result  of  the  decisions  taken  by  entrepreneurs.5  Firms  are 
reluctant to open up: growing in size and gaining access to the markets entail costs in terms 
of greater visibility to the tax authorities, supervisors and minority shareholders, in a situation 
of excessively heavy taxation, redundant and inefficiently applied administrative regulations 
and  poorly  flexible  goods  and  labour  markets.  In  the  eyes  of  entrepreneurs,  going  public 
seems to imply a fixed cost in terms of transparency that outweighs the advantages of being 
able to source funds at competitive conditions from a broader range of investors.  
The small number of listed companies inhibits the development of financial instruments and 
services such as bonds and syndicated loans – financing techniques rarely used by unlisted 
companies,  which  by  nature  are  less  transparent  and  have  only  a  small  number  of 
shareholders.  Instead,  once  listed,  Italian  companies  resort  to  bond  issuance  as  often  as 
companies listed in other countries: once they have covered the fixed cost of listing, Italian 
firms do not seem to have any difficulty turning to the capital market.  
Several  attempts  have  been  made  in  the  past  to  increase  the  number  of  initial  public 
offerings  by  offering  tax  relief  for  stock  exchange  listing  or  share  issuance.6  Their  lack  of 
success has been due, at least in part, to their temporary nature and their inability to offset 
the permanent cost of stock exchange listing.  
Tax  incentives  that  favour  equity  capital  raising  and  listing  can  be  effective  if  they  are 
sufficiently  large  and,  above  all,  permanent.  The  provision  of  the  Allowance  for  Corporate 
Equity (ACE) can be supplemented in this direction: the tax deductibility of new equity capital 
invested in a company could be increased to eliminate the remaining tax advantage of debt.7 
Additional  incentives  could  be  introduced  for  newly  listed  companies,  creating  a  sort  of 
                                                
3  See “Structural Issues Report 2013: Corporate Finance and Economic Activity in the Euro Area”, forthcoming 
in the European Central Banks’ Occasional Papers. 
5 
4  See  the  “Documento  tecnico  programmatico”  circulated  by  the  Working  Party  on  the  listing  of  small  and 
medium-sized  firms  set  up  by  Consob  with  Borsa  Italiana  and  other  public  and  private  associations  and 
institutions.  
“Banche, Finanza Crescita”, paper given at the conference “Oltre la crisi: quale futuro per le banche italiane?”, 
organized  by  Associazione  per  lo  Sviluppo  degli  Studi  di  Banca  e  Borsa  in  collaboration  with  Università 
Cattolica  di  Milano  (2013).  See  also    M.  Pagano,  F.  Panetta  and  L.  Zingales,  “Why  Do  Companies  Go 
Public?”,  Journal  of  Finance,  (1998)  and  F.  Panetta,  A.  Generale  and  F.  Signoretti,  “The  Causes  and 
Consequences of Going Public. Firm-Level Evidence from Twelve European Countries”, paper given at the 
Bocconi-Consob conference (2013). 
6  Fiscal measures in favour of equity capital and stock exchange listing were introduced under the Visentini Law 
of 1983, the Tremonti Law of 1994, the Dual Income Tax (DIT) Law of 1997, and the “Tecno-Tremonti” Law of 
2003.  
7  To  eliminate  the  tax  benefits  associated  with  debt  it  might  be  enough,  under  certain  conditions,  to  set  the 
notional ACE rate equal to the long-term risk-free rate. See  R. Boadway and N. Bruce, “A General Proposition 
on the Design of a Neutral Business Tax”, Journal of Public Economics (1984) and R. De Mooij, “Tax Biases 
to Debt Finance: Assessing the Problem, Finding Solutions”, Fiscal Studies (2011).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
“Super  ACE”;8  available  studies  indicate  that  such  a  measure  would  have  a  considerable 
impact without necessarily crimping revenue significantly.9  
The growth of the stock exchange would improve the efficiency of the entire Italian capital 
market, enhancing firms’ ability to finance medium- and long-term investments. 
Non-bank finance 
2.2 
So  far,  the  recent  abolition  of  the  tax  measures  discouraging  unlisted  firms  from  bond 
issuance has had limited effects.10 The few placements made to date have been by medium-
sized  firms,  largely  to  replace  outstanding  loans.  This  could  reflect  not  only  a  traditional 
reluctance  to  enter  the  capital  market,11  but  also  the  fact  that  the  smallest  firms  are  still 
largely unaware of the new opportunities. Placements may therefore increase over time.  
The characteristics of the loans also act as a brake on issuance. Even once the system is 
fully  operational,  the  small  size  of  potential  borrowers  will  tend  to  translate  into  bond 
placements of low amount, low liquidity, high risk and high return. These features make the 
individual  operations  unattractive  to  institutional  investors,  as  well  as  to  the  issuers 
themselves.  
These problems can be overcome, or mitigated, by using suitable operators and techniques 
to  diversify  the  idiosyncratic  risks  of  debt  instruments  issued  by  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises.  In  Italy  emerging  credit  market  tensions  have  led  to  the  launch,  in  recent 
months,  of  several  initiatives  for  investing  in  bonds,  financial  paper  and  loans  of  unlisted 
companies,  most  of  them  based  on  the  closed-end  fund.  In  general,  these  credit  funds 
envisage a careful assessment of the issuers and active management of the portfolio over a 
medium-to-long horizon. The experience of other countries bears out the enormous potential 
of such funds.12  
Securitization is another means of aggregating loans to small firms, helping to facilitate their 
indirect access to the markets. For banks, this instrument is essential in disposing of part of 
their assets and freeing up funds for new loans.  
The  success  of  such  initiatives  depends  on  a  high  level  of  transparency,  enabling  final 
investors  to  manage  the  associated  credit  risk  more  efficiently  than  in  the  case  of  direct 
investment 
limited  maturity 
transformation  are  essential.  In  the  case  of  securitizations,  there  are  advantages  to  be 
gained from Italy’s past experience, which has been extremely positive.13  
issues.  Simple  structures, 
leverage  and 
in  single 
low 
                                                
8  The  Super  ACE  would  be  equivalent to  the  Super  DIT,  which  offered  listed  firms  additional  incentives  with 
respect to the ordinary DIT. 
9  See A. Franzosi and E. Pellizzoni, “Gli effetti della quotazione. Evidenza dalle mid & small caps italiane”, BIt 
Notes (2005); G. Giudici and S. Paleari, “Should Firms Going Public Enjoy Tax Benefits?”, European Financial 
Management (2003); M. Geranio and E. Garcia, “Come sarebbe l’Italia con 1.000 società quotate?” (2012), 
mimeo, Bocconi.  
10  The Decree on Development abolishes the limit on the deductibility of interest payments on bonds and the 
20 per cent withholding tax for non-resident holders, banks and institutional investors.  
11  The new rules also entail greater transparency for the issuing company as, for the tax benefits to be granted, 
the securities must be listed (if they are not listed, they must circulate among qualified investors). In the case 
of  financial  paper  the  issuer  must  submit  to  auditing;  small  and  medium-sized  firms  must  have  a  sponsor 
(bank, asset management company, investment firm) who is required to report the issue’s rating. 
12  For example, in January this year Ireland’s National Pensions Reserve Fund announced the creation of new 
funds for investment in small domestic firms amounting to € 850 million. 
13  See  U.  Albertazzi,  G.  Eramo,  L.  Gambacorta and  C.  Salleo,  “Securitization  is  not  that  evil  after  all”,  Banca 
d’Italia, Temi di discussione, No. 741 and BIS Working Paper, No. 341 (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
There is considerable scope for institutional investors to expand their investments in private 
bonds, securitized loans and credit funds. Listed bonds of non-financial companies account 
for a very small share of the total portfolio of open-end investment funds, and the proportion 
of  unlisted  securities  is  well  below  regulatory  limits;  immediately  accessible  resources  are 
estimated to amount to between €6 billion and  €10 billion; much larger amounts would be 
available with a liquid market for securities. Moreover, large-scale investments may also be 
made by insurance companies, pension funds and closed-end funds.  
Without a sufficient supply of securities of Italian firms, many institutional investors could well 
turn to foreign markets.  
Mutual banks 
3. 
Italy’s 394 mutual banks and 3 mutual-bank central credit institutions account for 10 per cent 
of loans to households and firms, a bigger share than the third largest Italian banking group. 
This role of mutual banks is even more important in the case of small firms, accounting for 
almost 20 per cent of total lending.  
The mutual banks had greatly expanded their activity prior to the recession. From 1995 to 
2008  their  market  share  of  lending  rose  by  nearly  9  percentage  points  for  small  firms, 
5 points for large firms and 3 points for households. As emphasized on previous occasions,14 
underlying this expansion are knowledge of the local markets, experience in assessing the 
creditworthiness of small borrowers, and an ability to meet customers’ needs promptly and 
efficiently.  
Mutual banks stabilized the supply of loans even during the 2008–09 recession: their sound 
capital base and stable funding enabled them to provide financial support to the small and 
medium-sized firms subjected to rationing by the large banks.  
More  recently,  the  unfavourable  economic  situation  and  financial  market  tensions  have 
altered this scenario. The mutual banks are now experiencing difficulties. In the second half 
of 2011 their liquidity situation suffered the backlash of the sovereign debt crisis: in October 
their overall net interbank position turned negative for the first time. The tensions eased in 
2012  following  central  bank  intervention,  to  which  the  mutual  banks  had  made  ample 
recourse; the good performance of deposits also contributed.  
The growth in lending has progressively weakened in recent months, turning negative at the 
beginning of this year, partly as a result of the tightening of supply conditions. Mutual banks 
are experiencing a deterioration in loan quality. In 2012 the stock of bad debts rose by 25 per 
cent,  that  of  other  non-performing  loans  by  almost  a third;  non-performing  loans represent 
14.4  per  cent  of  total  lending,  compared  with  13.5  per  cent  for  the  banking  system  as  a 
whole.  The  difficulties  are  severe  for  the  smallest  mutual  banks  and  for  those  that  have 
expanded  rapidly  in  recent  times;  the  problems  have  become  widespread  in  a  number  of 
regions such as Calabria and Veneto. 
These trends have a particularly serious impact on mutual banks, which derive most of their 
earnings  from  traditional  banking  activity.15  Because  of  their  local  vocation,  they  are  deeply 
aware of the need to choose between supporting the local economy – of which they are part – 
by  continuing  to  provide  loans  to  firms  in  temporary  difficulty  and  adopting  more  selective 
supply policies in order to safeguard their own stability. 
                                                
14  See  the  address  by  the  then  Governor  Mario  Draghi  “Solidarietà  nella  crisi  Il  credito  cooperativo  nelle 
economie  locali”  given  on  the  occasion  of  the  50th  anniversary  of  Crediumbria,  Città  della  Pieve, 
December 2009.  
15  In the last four years net interest income has accounted for 70 per cent of gross income, 15 percentage points 
more than the average for the banking system. In 2012 interest on loans was unchanged from the previous 
year while funding costs and loan loss provisions increased.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
The  recession  has  brought  to  light  the  weaknesses  of  the  mutual  banks’  business  model: 
rigid costs, reliance on income from traditional intermediation, loan concentration. Even the 
growth  strategies  pursued  in  the  past  that  allowed  them  to  greatly  expand  the  areas  and 
customer segments served16 have been shown in recent years to amplify risk.  
The size and the quality of mutual banks’ capital are still fairly high. However, the decline in 
profitability reduces their self-financing, virtually the only channel by which mutual banks can 
increase their own funds. The gap with respect to the largest banks, a competitive advantage 
that the mutual banks have long enjoyed, is gradually narrowing.  
To achieve the necessary efficiency gains and keep profitability and capitalization levels high 
over the long term the organizational structures and business models of these banks need to 
be overhauled. Incisive action must be taken to reduce costs, as is being done in the other 
banks. In the last four years administrative costs have risen by 5 per cent and staff costs by 
9 per cent. These trends are at odds with the prospects of income growth.  
Business  models  must  be  found  that  respect  the  banks’  local  roots  but  can  diversify  their 
sources of income towards services, thus avoiding overdependence on lending to the local 
economy.  Given  the  small  size  of  mutual  banks,  this  strategy  should  make  use  of  their 
association  network.  It  is  essential  to  maximize  the  potential  synergies  created  by  this 
network  comprising  the  national  federation  and  local  federations  and  by  the  industry’s 
structures – three central credit institutions and the various specialized companies.  
The services provided by the local federations vary greatly in scope, quality and efficiency. In 
some  areas,  the  assistance  offered  to  member  banks  is  inadequate;  problems  of 
organization  of  the  federations  can  hinder  the  resolution  of  bank  crises.  The  industry’s 
network  is  also  plagued  by  inefficiencies  associated  with  the  highly  fragmented  supply 
structure; there is a very pressing need in particular for more highly integrated information 
systems. 
Action  must  be  taken  to  preserve  mutual  banks’  patrimony  of  knowledge  and  their  role 
serving the local economy, to which they are tied by a profound community of interests. The 
Bank  of  Italy  has  already  underscored  the  need  to  raise  the  levels  of  efficiency  and  has 
urged the coordination structures of the mutual banks’ associations and industry network to 
play a more active role.17 
It is crucial to strengthen the system’s cohesiveness. The Institutional Guarantee Fund must 
represent  a  decisive  step  in  that  direction.  The  project’s  complexity  has  necessitated 
preparatory action on several fronts both within the Fund and as part of a dialogue with the 
Bank  of  Italy.  The  testing  phase  is  about  to  begin,  to  devise  and  put  in  place  effective 
organizational and operating mechanisms and efficient links with the supervisory authorities. 
Once the project is fully operational, it will still require a strong commitment to ensure that its 
objectives are actually achieved in terms of improved crisis prevention, strengthening of the 
network and dissemination of best practices.  
In November Governor Visco, in commenting on the appropriateness of a reorganization of 
the  mutual  banking  network,  stressed  that  the  Fund  project,  though  innovative,  could  not 
represent a point of arrival.18 The need to make the system more cohesive calls for projects 
                                                
16  From 2000 to 2008 a fifth of the growth in lending concerned customers acquired in new districts; moreover, 
loans to firms with over 20 employees rose from 46 to 61 per cent of the total (a proportion that has since 
stabilized). 
17  See  the  speeches  “Il  credito  cooperativo:  le  sfide  di  un  modello”  and  “Il  credito  cooperativo  del  domani: 
sviluppo, efficienza e solidarietà” by the then Deputy Director of the Bank of Italy, Anna Maria Tarantola, to, 
respectively,  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Italian  Federation  of  Mutual  Banks  (November  2009)  and  the 
XIV National Congress of Mutual Banks (December 2011). 
18  Ignazio  Visco,  “Borghi,  distretti  e  banche  locali”.  Presentation  of  the  volume  Civiltà  dei  borghi:  culla  di 
cooperazione”, Rome, 20 November 2012. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
of  broad  conception  that  take  account  of  the  experiences  of  the  mutual  and  cooperative 
banking  systems  in  Europe,  which  are  characterized  by  a  high  degree  of  integration.  The 
Bank of Italy is open to a discussion of the different options, including as regards regulation. 
Conclusion 
The Italian economy is at a difficult passage in which cyclical  weaknesses are overlaid on 
unresolved  structural  problems.  The  country’s  growth  potential  is  diminishing;  the  loss  of 
jobs,  particularly  among  younger  persons,  and  the  reduction  in  households’  purchasing 
power are breeding discouragement and depleting human capital.  
There is no room to support growth through deficit spending. The large burden of the public 
debt and the tensions in the financial markets do not allow it. 
Some  measures,  discussed  in  the  Governor’s  Concluding  Remarks  to  the  Bank  of  Italy’s 
Annual  Meeting,  can  assist  a  struggling  productive  economy  and  bolster  the  prospect  of 
cyclical upswing. 
But  above  all  we  must  resume,  with  the  contribution  of  all  the  country’s  best  talents  and 
resources, the reform programme begun in the last two years. We can no longer postpone 
modernizing our productive structure, our education and research system, the functioning of 
public administration. The obstacles to competition and innovation must be extirpated in all 
sectors.  The  rationalization  of  public  expenditure,  its  reallocation  towards  more  productive 
uses, must permit a sharp reduction in the tax burden on our economy. 
The banking system must play its part. There can be no enduring recovery without adequate 
financial  support  to  firms.  The  effects  of  the  recession  on  banks’  balance  sheets,  on  the 
availability of credit, must be counteracted with vigorous action to rationalize costs, innovate 
business  models,  strengthen  the  ability  to  select  sound  firms  with  competitive  business 
projects. 
The tensions in credit supply increase the incentives for firms’ to access and make greater 
use of the capital market. The diversification of sources of financing demands an important 
commitment  from  entrepreneurs  to  make  financial  statements  transparent,  open  up  to 
outside investors, strengthen the equity capital base. The markets would be unwilling today 
to support opaque or undercapitalized initiatives. 
The development of the capital markets is in the interest of the banks themselves. By offering 
advisory  services  for  direct  financing,  they  can  reinforce,  not  weaken,  their  customer 
relationships with firms and their own role within a more diversified financial system. And in 
this way they can trace the path for returning to growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
