Ignazio Visco: Overview of Italy’s economy and banking system 
Address  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of the Bank  of Italy,  at  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the 
Italian Banking Association, Rome, 10 July 2013. 
 The economic climate and outlook 
In  the first  half  of  2013 Italy’s  GDP  again  diminished,  largely  owing  to  the  fall  in  domestic 
demand;  exports  also  declined.  Our  forecasts,  which  will  be  published  in  the  Economic 
Bulletin  in  a  week’s  time,  put  the  contraction  of  GDP  this  year  at  close  to  two  per  cent. 
Economic  activity  is  expected to  begin to  expand  at  a moderate  pace from the  end  of  the 
year,  with  overall  growth  of  more  than  half  a  percentage  point  in  2014.  In  the  short  term, 
domestic  demand  will  have  to  be  buoyed  by  the  timely  payment  of  general  government 
commercial debts. 
The level of uncertainty is high. The timing and strength of the recovery are subject to the 
risk of a slowdown in the global economy, in particular in the emerging economies, together 
with the risks inherent in financial market developments. Italy’s large public debt and weak 
growth  prospects,  as  well  as  the  uncertainties  over  European  governance,  make  risk 
premiums on government securities highly sensitive to swings in market confidence, as has 
been  shown  recently  by  the  wide  fluctuations  in  interest  rate  spreads  relative  to  German 
Bunds. A deterioration would further narrow the scope for fiscal policy measures and would 
have repercussions on banks’ funding and hence on the availability and cost of credit to firms 
and households. 
We cannot risk losing investors’ confidence, which is fragile and exposed to the changeable 
evaluations  of  analysts.  Budgetary  policies  must  continue  to  be  responsible;  the  reforms 
already  decided  and  those  still  to  be  implemented  should  be  set  within  a  comprehensive 
design and the aims clearly defined. 
Monetary policy will sustain the recovery. On 4 July the ECB Governing Council announced 
that monetary conditions would continue to be accommodative for as long as necessary. It 
adopted innovative communication procedures, specifying that it expects official rates to be 
kept at or below their current levels for an extended period of time given the subdued outlook 
for  inflation,  the  weakness  of  economic  activity  and  modest  monetary  growth  in  the  euro 
area. 
The Italian banking system has been under severe strain from the financial crisis, the double-
dip recession and sovereign debt tensions. The banks’ income-producing capacity has been 
reduced;  in  the  absence  of  an  adequate  response  it  would  be  further  undermined  by  the 
persistence of the crisis or the occurrence of new adverse shocks. 
Credit 
The contraction of lending to firms intensified in the first half of this year, to an annual pace of 
over 5 per cent in the three months ending in May. The decline in lending to households was 
less  severe,  amounting  to  1.6  per  cent.  The  average  interest  rate  on  new  business  and 
house  purchase  loans  remained  the  same  as  at  the  start  of  the  year,  at  just  over  3.5  per 
cent. The spread over the euro-area average did not change significantly, hovering around 
three quarters of a percentage point. 
The  cyclical  downswing  is  squeezing  credit  demand.  It  is  aggravating  debtors’  repayment 
difficulties: in the first quarter the new bad debt ratio for business loans was around 4.5 per 
cent, which was high in historical terms; other impaired loans are also increasing sharply. 
Heightened risk is weighing on banks’ credit supply policies, discouraging lending and driving 
up interest rates. This can be seen in the surveys conducted with banks and firms alike. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
strains  will  continue  over  the  next  few  months;  past  experience  indicates  that  the 
deterioration in loan quality tends to continue beyond the start of a cyclical upturn. 
Above all, the difficulties affect small firms, which have less opportunity to access the capital 
markets. The Government’s recent changes to the workings of the Guarantee Fund for small 
and medium-sized enterprises are a step in the right direction. The implementing provisions 
should allow firms with good growth prospects to apply to the Fund, even in the face of a 
temporary  recession-induced  deterioration  in  their  accounts.  The  guarantees  should  be 
made conditional on the effective granting of loans, with more favourable terms provided for 
banks showing better overall credit growth. The availability of guarantees must translate into 
an  actual  improvement  in  credit  terms,  enabling  firms  themselves  to  apply  directly  to  the 
Fund. 
On 1 July the Italian Banking Association and the country’s trade associations signed a new 
agreement  allowing  firms  in  difficulty  to  obtain  a  temporary  suspension  of  repayments  of 
medium-  and  long-term loans  and  an  extension  of  loan  maturities,  and  to  be  granted  new 
loans  if  they  increase  their  capital.  The  Bank  of  Italy  will  make  sure  that  the  moratorium 
provides support for deserving firms without concealing the actual riskiness of the loans. Past 
experience in this regard has been positive. 
Italian  banks  must  guard  themselves  against  the  risk  of  a  worsening  of  their  funding 
conditions. The supply of assets eligible for use in Eurosystem refinancing operations is now 
very substantial thanks in part to a large volume of public guarantees on bank bonds, which 
will mature in the next few years, however. Going forward, the supply must be maintained by 
increasing the share of eligible assets, among other things by adding new types. Great care 
must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  loan  granting  procedures  meet  the  requirements  for 
Eurosystem refinancing. In the coming weeks we will call on the banks for an examination of 
the steps to be taken. 
In several cases Italian banks not only provide finance, they also participate directly in the 
capital of firms. This can lead to a more accurate assessment of a firm’s growth prospects 
and  a  better  evaluation  of  its  financial  needs.  However,  a  participating  interest  can 
sometimes distort lending decisions; as the size of shareholdings and loans increases, there 
is the risk of collusion or of actions designed to delay the surfacing of difficulties. 
The banks’ governing bodies must properly safeguard against these risks: to maintain loan 
quality  and  keep  banking  profitable,  in  the banks’  own  interest;  to  protect  the value  of  the 
savings  entrusted  to  them,  in  the  interest  of  their  customers;  and  above  all  to  ensure  the 
efficient allocation of savings and boost the competitiveness of the productive economy. 
In  January  the  legislation  on  related-party  transactions  came  into  force.  It  aims  to  protect 
banks  from  potential  conflicts  of  interest  with  closely  connected  parties;  it  provides  a 
necessary counterweight to the European rules easing the restrictions on the links between 
banks and industry. The limits on exposure to each related party are calculated in relation 
both  to  the  amount  of  credit  granted  and  to  the  size  of  the  bank’s  shareholding  in  the 
company. The decision-making process on these matters must be transparent and correct 
and the outcome suitably motivated. 
The banks must be scrupulous in applying the new rules. The Bank of Italy will evaluate the 
effectiveness  of  the  measures  they  adopt;  when  necessary,  it  will  intervene,  possibly  by 
setting stricter limits and conditions for related-party transactions. 
The  difficulties  besetting  the  credit  system  highlight  once  again  firms’  overdependence  on 
bank lending. By international standards Italian firms are undercapitalized, make very limited 
use of the capital market, and tend to limit scrutiny by investors. 
The credit market tensions will persist in the months to come. Bank loans cannot be the sole 
source of external finance, as they are at present for most firms. The financing of investment 
must also tap new resources as well. It is in the banks’ interest to encourage this process by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
seeking  to  maintain  a  balance  between  loans  and  deposits,  sharing  the  risks  of  financing 
customers with the markets, and carefully avoiding potential conflicts of interest. 
Above all, it is necessary for firms to increase their equity. The tax deductibility of new equity 
capital  invested  in  a  company,  which  was  introduced  in  2011  under  the  rules  on  the 
Allowance  for  Corporate  Equity  (ACE),  could  be  increased,  in  order  to  eliminate  the 
remaining tax advantage of debt. The financial soundness of firms and their ability to finance 
medium- and long-term investments would benefit significantly. 
Asset quality and capital 
International analysts’ fears about the soundness of Italian banks’ balance sheets should not 
be underestimated, even though they are not always well justified. The policies undertaken to 
curb costs, improve risk management and strengthen banks’ capital base must continue. Our 
ongoing intervention concerning the adequacy of provisioning for non-performing loans aims 
to ensure a satisfactory level of risk coverage; it will enable the banks to preserve investor 
confidence  and  attract  low-cost  external  financing.  It  is  essential  in  order  to  guarantee  a 
satisfactory flow of credit to households and firms. 
The stock  of  impaired  assets,  which  reached  14  per  cent  of  total  loans  in  March,  remains 
high  in  part  owing  to  the  slowness  of  credit  recovery  procedures.  Another  factor  is  the 
exceptionally  long  time  it  takes  for  loan  write-downs  to  become  tax  deductible.  By 
international  standards,  the  representation  of  loan  quality  on  balance  sheets  reflects  a 
prudent definition of impaired assets. 
In  the  mid-1990s,  when  the  ratio  of  bad  debts  to  loans  was  higher  than  it  is  now,  the 
reduction  in  the  stock  of  impaired  loans  was  favoured  by  the  development  of  a  market  in 
these  assets,  with  the  participation  of  foreign  investors.  Initiatives  of  this  sort  could  be 
successful today, provided that transparency is guaranteed and that the mechanisms of risk 
transfer  from  banks  to  investors  are  fully  consistent  with  prudential  rules  and  accounting 
standards, permitting the definitive cancellation from banks’ balance sheets of the impaired 
assets transferred. 
Over the last few difficult years the Italian banking system has strengthened its capital base 
considerably. Banks’ ability to withstand adverse shocks has improved. The increase in high-
quality capital needed to satisfy the capital adequacy requirements envisaged by the Basel III 
rules that will be phased in by 2019, which was €35 billion at the end of 2010, dropped below 
€9  billion  last  December;  already  today  most  of  the  largest  intermediaries  would  meet  the 
new prudential requirements. 
Still, capital strengthening must continue. While this may automatically reduce the return on 
capital,  at  the  same  time  it  favours  its  stability.  By  increasing  banks’  ability  to  withstand 
adverse shocks it boosts investor confidence and lowers the cost of external funding. 
Exposure  to  the  public  sector  has  increased  significantly  since  the  beginning  of  2012. 
Contributory factors included the high risk of loans, the objective of expanding the supply of 
collateral  eligible  for  refinancing  operations  with  the  central  bank,  and  the  high  yields  on 
government  securities.  Widespread  among  banks,  these  purchases  were  concentrated  in 
securities  with  an  original  maturity  of three  years  or  less  and  were  mostly  recorded  in  the 
banking book. Economic recovery and a return to normal conditions in the credit market will 
enable  fund  allocation  policies  to  return to  what  they  were  before the crisis  and  permit  an 
expansion of lending to households and firms. 
Banks’  stability  is  also  founded  on  appropriate  risk  management  and  control  systems: 
organizational shortcomings prevent the correct allocation of capital, encourage the unwitting 
assumption  of  risks,  render  the  institution  vulnerable  to  violations  of  internal  norms  and 
procedures, and expose intermediaries to potentially severe reputational damage. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
In  recent  days  the  Bank  of  Italy  has  issued  new  supervisory  provisions  on  banks’  internal 
control systems. The new rules require that governing bodies be fully involved in the design 
of  risk  management  and  control  systems,  the  determination  of  “tolerated  risk”  and  the 
approval  of  key  decisions,  such  as  offering  new  products,  undertaking  new  business  or 
entering  new  markets.  They  also  underscore  the  need  to  ensure  the  independence  and 
authority of the control functions. The banks will be granted sufficient time to adapt and must 
inform the supervisory authorities of the measures they intend to adopt. 
Profitability and governance 
The events of recent years have depressed banks’ profitability and their ability to generate 
the resources needed to increase capital and thereby support the financing of the economy. 
In the banking industry, which is labour-intensive, wage levels and dynamics must be made 
fully consistent with the objective of preserving banks’ stability. Careful consideration must be 
given to measures, possibly temporary, aimed at significantly reducing staff costs in relation 
to revenues. There must be full awareness of the constraints stemming from the difficulties 
that the banking system currently faces, a change of pace to deal with contingent difficulties 
for  intermediaries,  including  with  a  view  to  safeguarding  employment.  The  effort  to  adapt 
productive factors and distribution channels to the opportunities offered by new technology 
must be stepped up. 
In  recent  years  banks  have  become  aware  of  the  importance  of  corporate  governance. 
Ahead of global regulatory developments, the Bank of Italy has issued rules on governance 
and  stiffened  them  over  time.  It  has  urged  the  adoption  of  best  practices  and  intervened 
repeatedly with corrective actions. 
Progress  in  this  direction  must  continue.  A  number  of  unresolved  problems  remain  to  be 
tackled.  I  addressed  two  –  the  role  of  the  banking  foundations  and  the  governance  of 
cooperative  banks  –  in  my  concluding  remarks  last  May.  Here  I  would  like  to  offer  some 
further considerations. 
In  most  cases  the  presence  of  the  foundations  among  banks’  shareholders  has  fostered 
stability. During the crisis, in the absence of other large investors, some of them underwrote 
very substantial capital increases. 
At this point foundations should be encouraged to diversify their investment portfolios, so as 
to loosen their sometimes excessive dependence on the performance of their reference bank 
and  prevent  interference  in  banks’  governance  and  business  choices.  This  would  be 
conducive to the inclusion of new investors in the banks’ shareholder base. 
Analyses  of  banks’  bylaws,  shareholder  pacts  and  shareholders’  behaviour  at  general 
meetings  have  shown  that  some  foundations  tend  to  interpret  shareholders’  prerogatives 
very  extensively  indeed.  This  has  produced  excesses,  at  times  impeding  the  necessary 
turnover within the governing bodies and causing directors to be chosen according to criteria 
other than professional qualifications. 
Episodes of this sort have an adverse effect on banks’ performance, limiting their ability to 
finance  the  economy.  Measures  to  prevent  their  recurrence  must  be  taken  as  soon  as 
possible. 
The Charter adopted by the association of savings banks and foundations in 2012 calls for 
transparency  in  the  criteria  and  procedures  for  appointing  the  members  of  foundations’ 
decision-making  bodies.  It  establishes  waiting  periods  and  incompatibility  conditions  with 
respect  to  previously  held  political  positions.  It  sets  experience  and  independence 
requirements  for  the  top  officers  of  foundations  and  also  of  the  banks  in  which  they  hold 
stakes. These indications must be made fully effective. They must also be strengthened by 
prohibiting passage from top positions in foundations to those in banks. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  ban  on  controlling  stakes  to  which  the  largest  foundations  are  subject  must  be  fully 
observed, if necessary by redefining control in such a way as to cover its exercise on a de 
facto basis or jointly with other shareholders. Adequate measures for enforcement of the ban 
must  be  instituted.  Incompatibility  with  other  positions  and  stricter  requirements  for  bank 
directors also need to be provided for. 
The imminent  application  of  the fourth revision  of  the capital  adequacy  directive  offers the 
occasion for reinforcing the standards of experience, independence and reputation for banks’ 
corporate officers and enabling the supervisory authorities to intervene, when the situation so 
requires, including by removal from office. The application of the rules on transactions with 
related parties, which I mentioned earlier, will also help to guarantee the independence of the 
banks against undue interference and influence. 
The cooperative banks, in recent years, have experienced a healthy process of membership 
renewal.  The  increase  in  widespread  share  ownership  and  the  greater  presence  of 
institutional investors have strengthened their capital. These changes now require a review 
of  the  cooperatives’  governance  arrangements,  which  were  originally  conceived  for  small, 
local  banks  and  are  not  suited  to  today’s  large  institutions  with  a  substantial  national 
presence and a broad membership base or stock exchange listing. 
For  the  largest  of  these  banks  the  rigid  application  of  some  of  the  rules  typical  of 
cooperatives  –  one  person  one  vote,  share  ownership  ceilings,  approval  clauses  for  new 
members  –  may  have  negative  effects  on  the  quality  of  governance  and  the  capacity  for 
capital  strengthening.  In  the  absence  of  adequate  counterweights,  a  fragmented  and 
dispersed  shareholder  base  is  likely  to  result  in  low  attendance  at  meetings  and  a  lack of 
incentive to monitor the performance of the directors. 
Within our powers, we have intervened in respect of cooperative banks’ bylaws to encourage 
an  increase  in  the  number  of  proxies  that  may  be  conferred  on  a  member,  to  limit  the 
fragmentation of holdings and to remove the obstacles to institutional investors’ presentation 
of  candidates  when  governing  bodies  are  renewed.  Important  as  they  may  be,  however, 
these actions cannot resolve the structural governance problems of the cooperative banks, 
especially the largest ones. 
It  is  necessary  to  embark  on  a  course  of  gradual  but  incisive  reform.  Considering,  among 
other  things,  the  prospect  of  banking  union  and  the  changeover  to  a  single  supervisory 
mechanism, the more noticeable and unjustified are the differences vis-à-vis the other large 
banks, the more sudden could be the call for change. 
The revision of governance structures can be pursued in two directions. First, shareholders’ 
control  of  management’s  activity  must  be  enhanced  and  the  injection  of  capital  by  new 
members encouraged. The transparency and effectiveness of management must be ensured 
by  increasing  shareholders’  awareness  of  risk-taking,  by  combating  potential  conflicts  of 
interest. Expectations of sure profits and, for unlisted cooperative banks, of easy disposal of 
shares  must  not  be  engendered.  Institutional  investors,  whose  presence  confers  stability 
thanks to their long investment horizon, must be given adequate representation in the bodies 
charged  with  supervisory  functions.  Sound  and  prudent  management  demands  that  the 
presence of current and former employees in the shareholding structure should not influence 
management policies and decisions. 
Second,  there  should  be  no  hesitation  to  change  the  bank’s  legal  form.  International 
authorities and investors concur that the limited share company is the model most consistent 
with  the  characteristics  of  large  banks,  encouraging  contributions  of  capital  and  fostering 
transparency  of  ownership  structures  and  governance.  The  larger  cooperative  banks  must 
open up to this transformation, easing the way by setting realistically achievable quorums for 
their general meetings. 
The  revision  of  governance  is  essential  to  ensuring  informed  risk  management,  a  correct 
allocation of credit to the economy and an efficacious management of conflicts of interest. By 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
removing  the  obstacles  to  capital  strengthening,  it  will  reassure  investors  as  to  the  banks’ 
ability to cope with the difficult macroeconomic context and growing competition. 
The banking union 
The  work  to  create  a  single  supervisor  in  the  euro-area,  consisting  of  the  ECB  and  the 
national  authorities  is  proceeding  expeditiously.  Starting  out  from  the  national  authorities’ 
store of technical knowledge, the new institution will have to ensure a supranational vision 
based on best practices in supervisory methodologies, modelling and assessment of banking 
risks. The transition to the single supervisory mechanism will give stability to the euro area, 
helping to counter the trend towards the segmentation of the financial markets along national 
lines, which we have seen during the crisis. It will facilitate comparisons between the banks 
and systems of the different countries. 
On 20 June the Eurogroup reached an agreement on the possibility of using the resources of 
the  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  to  recapitalize  banks  directly  under  certain 
stringent conditions for a maximum of up to €60 billion. This will be conditional on the launch 
of the single supervisory mechanism, which in turn will have to be preceded by a balance 
sheet assessment of the banks subject to centralized supervision at European level and, in 
particular, by an asset quality review. 
In the following days the Ecofin Council reached a general agreement on the rules for the 
recovery and resolution of banks in crisis. The procedures whereby creditors are to share the 
costs  of  a  banking  crisis  were  decided,  with  entry  into  force  scheduled  for  2018.  These 
so-called  bail-in  mechanisms  are  consistent  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Financial 
Stability Board aimed at curbing opportunistic behaviour and limiting the costs of bank crises 
for taxpayers. 
The agreement specified the bank liabilities covered by a creditor bail- in and the order in 
which  they  will  be  called  on  to  participate.  At  national  level,  a  minimum  share  of  liabilities 
able  to  ensure  sufficient  loss-absorbing  capacity  will  be  established  for  each  bank.  In 
addition,  it  was  decided  to  set  up  national  resolution  funds  financed  by  the  banks 
themselves; within ten years these funds must have an endowment equal to 0.8 per cent of 
the  deposits  covered  by  the  respective  deposit  guarantee  schemes.  Only  if  a  number  of 
conditions are met and if there are severe risks for the system’s financial stability may public 
funds also be used. 
Recourse  to  the  resolution  fund  −  allowed  when  the  bail-in  process  makes  available 
resources equal to at least 8 per cent of the bank’s liabilities − enables account to be taken of 
national specificities, such as the widespread use of retail bond funding in Italy. The work to 
establish  the  fund  must  proceed  rapidly,  with  appropriate  negotiations  with  national  and 
Community authorities. The transition phase must be completed well before the time limit of 
ten  years  indicated  in  the  agreement,  while  assessing  the  scope  for  synergies  with  the 
entities  already  in  place.  When  the  fund  is  fully  operational,  the  availability  of  adequate 
resources  will  allow  the  cost  of  crises  to  be  divided  between  the  bank’s  creditors  and  the 
banking system as a whole, with advantages for the cost of banks’ funding. 
The agreements reached are an important step towards banking union but they do not break 
the  vicious  circle  between  the  conditions  of  sovereigns  and  banks  or  eliminate  the 
fragmentation of financial markets along national lines. 
A European resolution mechanism must be created as soon as possible, based on a single 
resolution  authority  and  pooled  resources,  able  to  cope  with  systemic  crises  and  prevent 
contagion. The possibility of using ESM funds to recapitalize banks directly has in practice 
been postponed for many months, since it depends on the entry into operation of the single 
European supervisor. There remains the possibility of using such funds indirectly, by means 
of ESM loans to member states, but recapitalizing banks in this way bears on the public debt 
of the countries concerned. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The asset quality review of euro-area banks that will be carried out in the coming months will 
make heavy demands on the participating countries’ supervisory authorities. It will have to be 
based on common rules and methodologies and valuation methods that are uniform across 
countries.  We  are  confident  of  the  outcome  of  this  exercise,  aimed  at  eliminating  doubts 
about banks’ solidity. In Italy analyses of this kind are routinely part of both on- and off-site 
supervision. The inspections carried out recently at twenty intermediaries made it possible to 
assess  the  adequacy  of  their  loan  loss  provisions  and  to  request  corrective  action  where 
necessary. The same action is now being taken at other intermediaries. The methods used 
provide an example of how such analyses can be conducted. 
Any capital shortfall that emerges for some European intermediaries will be met in the first 
place with private-sector resources. Prompted by supervisory authorities, banks will have to 
take appropriate action to meet their needs, such as restricting the distribution of dividends or 
disposing  of  non-strategic  assets.  The  definition  of  an  adequate  financial  back-stop,  to  be 
established ex ante, will be necessary to prevent deleveraging. 
The asset quality review will be followed, in 2014, by stress tests conducted by the European 
Banking Authority and the ECB to assess banks’ ability to withstand low-probability extreme 
shocks. The similar exercises performed by the IMF under its Financial Sector Assessment 
Program (FSAP) show that, all told, the capital of the Italian banking system is well above the 
regulatory minimum and meets the capital requirements established for the Basel III phase-in 
period. However, given the low level of profits, in extreme circumstances capital buffers could 
be  rapidly  depleted.  These  results  confirm  the  need  to  carry  on  the  process  of  capital 
strengthening. 
 The Italian economy remains in a difficult transition phase. To pass through it successfully 
requires a universal effort. The banking system must play its part. There cannot be a lasting 
recovery in the absence of sufficient financial support for firms. 
To  counter  the  effects  of  the  recession  on  their  accounts,  banks  must  press  ahead  with 
measures to improve their profitability and strengthen their capital. To ensure an adequate 
flow of funds to the real economy, they must take account of their clients’ growth prospects. 
Intermediaries must be fully aware of the positive effects of this on the Italian economy and 
of the advantages for themselves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
