Jörg Asmussen: The global monetary policy stance – what are the risks? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Bruegel Annual Meeting, Brussels, 10 September 2013. 
 Dear Chairman, dear Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  recent  years  have  been  challenging  for  monetary  policy  makers  around  the  world, 
including  in  Europe.  The  economic  and  financial  crisis  that  broke  out  in  late  2008  turned 
central banks into “unconventional” market players and forced them to be creative. 
Since 2007, central banks have adopted a wide range of unconventional policies to repair the 
transmission  mechanism  and  provide  additional  accommodation  at  the  zero  lower  bound. 
These policies have been different across economic areas and depended on central banks’ 
operational frameworks, mandates and country specific challenges. 
Within our mandate, we at the ECB, at the be-ginning under the leadership of Jean-Claude 
Trichet, acted strongly to prevent a credit crunch and reduce financial fragmentation in the 
euro area: 
• 
We provided unlimited liquidity to banks, extending the maturity of our operations to 
3 years, and allowed our collateral rules to adjust to the new environment. These 
measures prevented a more severe contraction in credit and reduced divergences 
across countries caused by bank funding risk. 
We  introduced  the  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMT)  to  remove  financial 
fragmentation  caused  by  currency  redenomination  risks  that  had  surfaced  due  to 
unfounded  fears  of  a  euro  break  up.  The  OMT  has  calmed  markets  leading  to 
significantly  improved  financing  conditions.  As a  result, Target  2  imbalances  have 
declined by 1/3 since their peak. Let me also say that the OMT is a policy for the 
euro area as whole. By reducing financial fragmentation, the OMT contributed to the 
normalisation of those yields that were excessively compressed by market fears. 
 While unconventional monetary policy actions were necessary, we also need to pay attention 
to  the  related  risks.  Let  me  briefly  discuss  them  together  with  broader  challenges  for 
monetary policy. 
One risk is complacency. Monetary policy can only gain time for other policy makers to tackle 
structural  problems.  This  is  particularly  important  in  Europe  where  governments  need  to 
continue  implementing  structural  reforms  to  boost  growth  potential  and  employment, 
especially  among  the  youth,  to  consolidate  public  finances,  and  to  strengthen  domestic 
banking systems. 
Another risk relates to the side effects of globally low yields, which has already been widely 
debated in international fora. Risks of capital misallocations, stemming from low risk premia 
and yields, are not confined to domestic economies. Large capital flows moved to emerging 
markets  searching  for  yield.  As  Christine  Lagarde  recently  recalled  at  the  Jackson  Hole 
Economic Symposium, since 2008, cumulative net flows to emerging markets have risen by 
$1.1 trillion, which is large from an historical point of view. 
A third risk relates to exit strategies from monetary accommodation. Exit risks are now taking 
centre stage in the debate. (But to be clear: for us in the euro area it is too early to start the 
exit.)  On  this  front,  I  would  like  to  recall  a  similar  episode  from  which  we  can  draw  some 
lessons: the 1994 exit of the Federal Reserve. 
In early 1994, when the US recovery gained strength, the Fed started a tightening cycle and 
bond markets crashed not only in the US but al-so around the world. If spill-overs were large 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
in 1994, we can expect them to be even larger to-day in an even more deeply interconnected 
world. 
One  striking  feature  of  the  1994  bond  market  crash  is  that  yields  actually  overreacted  to 
macroeconomic news, while they did not react strongly to Fed interest rate hikes. 
For example, 8 of the 10 largest daily in-creases in the 10 year US Treasury yields in 1994 
were related to the release of better than expected economic data. 
Anecdotal evidence also suggests that inflation fears contributed to the spike in yields. 
Indeed, in 1994, the political pressure on the Fed to slow the tightening cycle was high. All 
Reserve Bank Presidents were invited to explain their views before the House and Senate 
banking  committees,  which  was  unprecedented.  According  to  commentators,  this  public 
dispute damaged the credibility of the Fed, contributing to the inflation scare. 
In my view, two important lessons seem to emerge from the 1994 episode: 
• 
First:  Clarity  regarding  central  banks’  “reaction  functions”  is  crucial  to  avoid  sharp 
movements  in  yields.  This  is  because  the  impact  of  economic  developments  on 
yields depends on markets’ expectations on how the central banks will react. 
Second:  Inflation  fears  amplify  the  impact  of  economic  developments  on  yields. 
There-fore, it is important that inflation expectations remain well anchored. 
 While central banking and the functioning of capital markets have changed since and new 
challenges and complexities have emerged, the lessons from the 1994 episode remain valid 
and might help in addressing these challenges. 
The first challenge is that monetary policy is currently in unchartered territory. Policy choices 
of  central  banks  are  not  any  more  limited  to  the  single  interest  rate  instrument.  As  a 
consequence,  communicating  exit  strategies  is  more  complex  than  in  previous  tightening 
cycles. 
At the ECB, the exit is made easier by the policy instruments used. Security holdings of the 
SMP will be held until maturity. Excess liquidity is sterilised with reverse operations. Banks 
can pay back long term loans before maturity as market conditions normalise. At the same 
time, the ECB remains ready to act if conditions deteriorate. 
The new role of central banks in preserving financial stability is another challenge. Following 
the crisis, the prevailing view suggested to as-sign new powers to central banks, in the form 
of stronger involvement in bank supervision and macro-prudential policies. Some observers 
argue that conflicts between financial stability functions and the primary goal of preserving 
price stability might emerge. To safeguard the credibility of the monetary policy function and 
of the supervisory function we  will adopt a governance structure that strictly separates the 
two.  And  the  hierarchy  of  goals  is  clearly  set  and  communicated  at  the  ECB:  our  primary 
objective is and will remain price stability. 
For  example,  a  central  bank  might  find  itself  in  a  difficult  situation  if  an  interest  rate  hike 
necessary to avert risks to price stability would at the same time impact adversely on some 
banks.  Allegedly,  this  could  undermine  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank.  In  this  context, 
communicating clearly and designing appropriate institutional frameworks is crucial. 
We  in  Europe  are  very  much  aware  of  these  challenges.  At  ECB,  the  preparation  of  the 
single supervisory mechanism (SSM) is progressing. The asset quality review of banks to be 
carried out before the SSM becomes operational will ensure that “hot potatoes” will not be 
handed over to the SSM. To complement the institutional architecture, we also need a strong 
commitment  towards  an  effective  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  along  with  efficient  and 
credible backstops. The latter two elements are a necessary complement to the SSM and will 
ultimately increase its credibility. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Finally, threats to credibility and independence  might also make the job of central bankers 
more  difficult.  Central  banks  have  fulfilled  their  man-dates  and  proven  successful  through 
their  measures  and  interventions.  As  a  result  of  the  earned  credibility,  politicians  and  the 
general public have now higher expectations as to central banks’ ability to manage crisis and 
the  economy.  This  might  overburden  central  banks  and  make  them  more  involved  in 
sensitive areas. 
The new challenges and complexities of today’s environment make clear that communication 
strategies will play an increasingly important role in the dialogue between central banks and 
markets.  In  this  regard,  I  want  to  conclude  by  mentioning  two  recent  developments  at  the 
ECB: 
The first  one  is forward  guidance.  Forward  guidance  is  central  bank  communication  about 
future  policy  intentions,  not  a  new  monetary  policy  strategy.  It  involves  two  elements  of 
communication: an assessment of the central bank’s view of the future, and in-formation on 
how the central bank may act in response. 
In  July,  the  Governing  Council  announced  that  it  expects  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  to 
remain  low  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  on  the  basis  of  the  outlook  for  inflation  and 
against  the  background  of  economic  weak-ness.  The  ECB’s  forward  guidance  is  a 
pronouncement  to  reassert  and  clarify  the  strategy  of  the  ECB  and  its  assessment  of  the 
state of the economy. 
In our case the forward guidance is geared to reach two objectives: to reduce the volatility in 
the corridor, in which we have succeeded so far, and to make sure that economic data do not 
cause overreactions in the market interest rates. On this ground we have been moderately 
successful. It is still early days and it remains to be seen how this evolves in an environment 
of improving economic data and a generalised increase in global long-term rates. 
The  second  one  is  the  discussion  regarding  the  publication  of  the  minutes  of  Governing 
Council meetings. The increasing role of central banks in crisis and economic management 
requires greater accountability, which calls for more transparency. The Governing Council is 
evaluating how to enrich the communication strategy of the ECB. I believe that publishing the 
minutes  of  Governing  Council  meetings  would  be  an  important  element  of  a  richer 
communication  strategy.  In  my  personal  view  the  minutes,  summarising  the  main  policy 
discussions,  should  include  who  voted  for  what,  and  the  reasoning  behind  that  vote. 
Publishing the minutes in such a way will sharpen our mandate, because the ECB will then 
have to explain why its decisions are in line with its European mandate. 
One should not overestimate the risk that pressure is exercised of members of the Governing 
Council, especially governors of national central banks. In my view someone who takes up 
such a position should be able to withstand such pressure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
