Ravi Menon: Introducing Agustín Carstens 
Introductory  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  Lecture  2013,  Singapore,  5  February 
2013. 
 Dr Agustin Carstens, 
Emeritus Senior Minister Goh Chok Tong, 
Ambassadors, distinguished guests, friends and colleagues, good morning. 
1. Welcome to seventh MAS Lecture. 
2.  Since  its  launch  in  March  2000,  MAS  Lecture  has  provided  platform  for  distinguished 
members of international financial community to offer perspectives on significant economic 
and financial issues of the day. 
3. And today, we are honoured to have as our speaker, Dr Agustin Carstens, Governor of the 
Banco de Mexico. Dr Carstens has an outstanding record of service and achievement in his 
country as well as on the international scene. 
4. He was a Deputy  Managing Director at International  Monetary Fund  between 2003 and 
2006.  From  2006  to  2009,  he  was  Mexico’s  Minister  for  Finance.  And  in  2009,  he  was 
appointed Governor of Banco de México, returning to an institution where he had started his 
career and served with distinction in several key positions. 
5. Dr Carstens’ topic today is The Quest for Successful Policy Responses to Sovereign 
Crises. It is a topic that he is eminently qualified to expound upon. 
6.  As  a  former  Minister  for  Finance,  he  would  be  familiar  with  issues  related  to  sovereign 
debt and fiscal policy. And as a life-long central banker, he has dealt with crises first-hand. 
Mexico’s  transformation  from  a  nation  racked  by  repeated  financial  crises  to  one  enjoying 
healthy  economic  growth,  low  inflation,  and  remarkable financial  stability  owes  in  no  small 
part  to  tireless  efforts  of  Dr  Carstens  and  his  colleagues  in  central  bank  and  Mexican 
government. 
7. I have had the privilege of interacting with Agustin at many international meetings over the 
last two years, at the BIS, IMF, FSB, and others. When Agustin speaks, people listen. His 
interventions at meetings are always insightful – balanced, thoughtful, and reasonable. He is 
an articulate spokesperson for the challenges and concerns of emerging market economies. 
And  occasionally  a  well-meaning  and  constructive  critic  of  policies  in  the  advanced 
economies. And Agustin does all this with an abundance of grace, courtesy, and respect for 
everyone around him – a gentleman even by the high standards of central bankers. 
8. Ladies and gentlemen, please join me in warmly welcoming Dr Agustin Carstens. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
