Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Navigating through volatility with long-term 
focus 
Speech by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Association of 
International Banks (AIB) Dinner Speaker Series, Bangkok, 29 July 2013. 
 Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Association of International Banks for inviting me to give a talk this 
evening.  It  is  my  honor  and  pleasure  to  be  here  for  the  prominent  institution  that  has  its 
presence  in  Thailand  since  1996.  The  association’s  work  and  efforts  have  contributed 
significantly towards the strength of the Thai banking system as well as economic prosperity 
here in this country. For this special evening, I would like to share with you my views on the 
recent  economic  and  financial  challenges,  as  well  as  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  role  in 
safeguarding economic and financial stability. 
Navigating through volatility 
Over the past few years, we have gone through many economic surprises. Last year alone 
the  Thai  economy  had  to  face  several  challenges,  both  inside  and  outside  Thailand  – 
recovering  from  the  devastating  floods  and  coping  with  fragile  global  economy.  And  just a 
few months ago we only just started talking about a pick-up in global growth, driven mainly 
by robust demand in emerging markets. Today, circumstances have changed, and we are 
facing with unexpected slowdown in emerging markets as well as the prospect of Fed QE 
tapering. 
As far as global economic environment is concerned, I think we are going to see a lot more 
surprises.  The  world,  in  my  view,  is  now  obsessed  with  just  a  few  things.  I  would  like  to 
highlight them in turn. 
First, the prospect of QE tapering is having wide implications for financial markets. We have 
already  seen  a  sell-off  of  emerging  market  debts  and  equities,  and  a  reversal  of  foreign 
capital flows that had rushed into the region earlier this year. With uncertainty in the amount 
of global liquidity provided by major central banks like the Fed, we will likely see more volatile 
capital flows, exchange rate and commodity prices going forward. 
Second, financial markets are watching closely Abe’s plan to revive the Japanese economy. 
Its effectiveness, especially of its third-arrowed plan of structural reform, will be significant for 
global outlook and the degree of risk aversion in general. If the third arrow has failed before it 
even properly began, the economic momentum running by the previous arrows – monetary 
and fiscal stimulus – would be weakened. 
Third, signs of Chinese economy and emerging markets slowdown have already started to 
affect  world  growth.  With  prolonged  recovery  in  G3  countries,  the  last  hope  for  global 
recovery seems fading. China’s aim to tame its real estate boom and inflation resulted in the 
economy  slowing  more  quickly  than  initially  hoped.  So  the  slowdown  of  China  will 
undoubtedly be a key risk to the global economy. 
Consequences for the Thai economy 
Along  with  weaker  global  outlook,  the  Thai  economy  this  year  started  out  with  much 
moderation. Growth in the first quarter has been subdued as domestic spending, both private 
consumption and investment is weaker-than-expected. Part of this pullback may have been a 
natural reversion to a more normal pace of growth after an unusually strong expansion last 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
year.  At  the  same  time,  on  the  external  side,  a  drag  on  the  overall  Thailand’s  trading 
partners’ growth continues to weigh on Thai exports. 
Going  forward,  however,  many  of  the  supporting  factors  remain  in  place.  High  level  of 
employment  and  strong  private  sector  confidence  should  provide  an  enabling  environment 
for growth. Fiscal stimulus related to large-scale infrastructure investment should also begin 
to  phase  in  from  the  latter  part  of  this  year.  This  would  potentially  generate  a  positive 
crowding-in effects on private spending. For this, I would expect the economy to return to its 
normal path in the third and fourth quarter of this year. 
Apart  from  slower  growth,  a  potential  threat  to  financial  stability  has  increased,  stemming 
from  development  in  household  indebtedness.  Currently,  household  debt  is  rising  to  over 
70 percent of GDP. International evidence suggests that a prolonged period of rapid credit 
growth could lead to a build-up of financial imbalances, worsen households’ debt servicing 
ability and loan quality, as well as sow a seed for asset price bubbles. 
The need for long-term focus 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Having  said  all  of  the  above,  I  may  seem  to  paint  the  picture  that  the  Thai  economy  is 
slowing down recently, largely as a result of weaker global growth. But I would like to point 
out that the Thai economy has not just slowed down recently. In fact, it has been growing 
slower  for  more  than  a  decade,  both  in  terms  of  quantity  and  quality  of  growth.  Without 
enough quantity and quality of growth, we will not be able to grow sustainably and it will be a 
long way until Thailand can get out of the middle-income trap. The problem is that we are 
now caught in the middle- unable to compete with either low- or high-income countries. If this 
trend continues, it will prevent us from reaping the full benefits of future economic integration. 
Part of this may stem from structural changes in Thailand’s endowment. Labor is now scarce, 
increasingly  mismatched  and  becoming  more  expensive.  So,  labor-intensive  driven  growth 
strategy  is  no  longer  applicable  to  Thailand.  It  is  important  that  we  create  new  sources  of 
growth. To achieve this goal, an improvement in technology, education and labor productivity 
via higher investment in physical and human capital are needed. 
Another  thing  I  would  like  to  note  is  that,  as  in  most  developing  economies,  economic 
development is often associated with rising income inequality and social exclusion. Thailand 
is  no  exemption.  In  fact,  the  economy  has  been  growing  unevenly.  But  growth  without 
inclusiveness  is  not  sustainable,  because  it  can  lead  to  deterioration  of  social  solidarity, 
political  uncertainty  and  finally  affect  economic  growth.  Thailand’s  economic  development 
should, therefore, properly address the issue of equitable growth going forward. 
The Bank of Thailand’s role 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
This leads us to the second part of my talk this evening. Although short-term volatility has 
often caught us by surprise, there is a pressing need to consider longer-term issues. And to 
support  long-term  perspective,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has  set  economic  and  financial 
environment to support such goal. 
The Bank of Thailand always attempts to strike the right balance between economic growth 
and  macroeconomic  stability.  Monetary  policy  decision  via  interest  rate  setting  has  always 
been made while taking into consideration growth, inflation and financial stability dimensions. 
However,  there  are  limitations  that  monetary  policy  cannot  achieve.  A  single  instrument, 
namely,  the  policy  interest  rate  cannot  target  multiple  objectives  such  as  price  stability, 
financial  imbalances,  exchange  rate  and  capital  flow  simultaneously.  The  policy  choices 
inevitably  involve  trade-offs  between  different  objectives.  Policymakers  will  have  to  weigh 
carefully the costs and benefits of a policy decision. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although  exchange  rate  is  not  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  main  policy  tool,  or  an  intermediate 
policy  target,  sharp  exchange  rate  volatility  can  have  significant  impact  on  exporters  and 
small  businesses  with  less  capacity  to  adjust.  The  Bank  of  Thailand,  therefore,  constantly 
monitors  the  impact  of  baht  movement  on  the  overall  economy  and  stands  ready  to  use 
policy  instruments  to  prevent  and  manage  dysfunctional  market  conditions  and  excessive 
speculation. Nevertheless, in the long-run, exchange rate should be determined by market 
mechanism  and  serve  as  an  important  price  signal  and  catalyst  for  structural  changes. 
Despite more exchange rate volatility ahead, we could seize this opportunity to strengthen 
the fundamentals of the economy and reap long-term benefits that are likely to be greater 
than short-term costs of adjustment. 
For  the  banking  sector,  having  a  competitive  and  efficient  banking  sector  is  of  extreme 
importance  in  the  world  where  competition  is  borderless.  For  this,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  is 
ready to provide an enabling environment for the Thai financial sector. Today, the Bank of 
Thailand has embarked on several important measures to enhance efficiency, strength and 
access of the Thai banking system. 
New banking licenses were granted, including new subsidiary license for foreign commercial 
banks  who  want  to  operate  their  businesses  in  Thailand.  This  should  further  increase 
competition,  thereby  raising  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system.  In  addition,  the  Bank  of 
Thailand has liberalized the opening of branches of Thai banks to allow them more flexibility 
in managing branch network and reducing costs. Further financial liberalization to facilitate 
regional  integration  is  also  considered.  The  ASEAN  central  banks  are  negotiating  the 
common  standard  of  Qualified  ASEAN  Banks  (QABs).  This  will  allow  awarded  banks  to 
operate on a region-wide basis. And along with more liberalization, the Bank of Thailand has 
ensured  that  financial  institutions  are  stable.  So  even  though  the  Thai  banking  sector  is 
already  well-equipped  with  capital  and  sound  positioning,  the  Bank  of  Thailand  has 
strengthened  their  capital  bases  earlier  this  year,  following  Basel  III,  and  in  line  with 
international standard. 
As we already know, the payment and settlement systems are the backbone of the modern 
economy. In this regard, the Bank of Thailand has laid down financial market infrastructure to 
facilitate  business  operations.  This  year  the  Imaged  Cheque  Clearing  and  Archive  System 
(ICAS)  coverage  will  be  expanded  across  the  country  to  speed  up  the  provincial  cheque 
collection  and  clearing.  This  will  help  promote  a  more  efficient  payment  system,  enabling 
fast, safe, and secure financial transactions. The Bank of Thailand also encourages the use 
of electronic payment by coordinating with relevant parties to build infrastructure to facilitate 
this process. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Despite  many  roles  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand  plays  in  ensuring  economic  and  financial 
stability,  I  would  like  to  say  that  the  Bank  of  Thailand’s  policy  alone  cannot  ensure 
sustainable economic growth. Given Thailand’s structural shortcomings, there is the need to 
improve Thailand’s infrastructure and productivity, by improving technology and innovation. 
The well-being workforce and quality of education and training are also crucial to increasing 
competitiveness.  For  this,  long-term  coherent  vision  and  concerted  efforts  among  all 
stakeholders, both public and private, are needed. 
Let me close by leaving you with some final thoughts. 
Thailand  is  now  challenged  by  both  external  and  internal  risks.  These  are  not  necessary 
unfavorable, as they also come with opportunities to urge us to prepare ourselves collectively 
to cope with uncertainty in the global economy. In an increasingly volatile world, we must do 
more. Our efforts should not be just about coping with short-term fluctuations, but also about 
laying  long-term  foundation  for  Thailand’s  future.  That  requires  a  forward-looking  plan  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
action by all stakeholders. The Bank of Thailand, for our part, will continue to ensure a stable 
financial  and  economic  environment,  so  that  businesses  can  continue  to  thrive  and 
individuals can enjoy better standards of living on a sustainable basis. 
Thank you and wish you all an enjoyable evening. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
