Norman T L Chan: Three questions on the nature and management of 
risk 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Norman  T  L  Chan,  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority-Global  Association  of  Risk  Professionals 
(GARP) Global Risk Forum Opening Dinner, Hong Kong, 28 May 2013. 
 Richard (Apostolik), Ladies and Gentlemen, 
1. It is my great pleasure to welcome you all to this dinner gathering tonight. I would like to 
take this opportunity to thank GARP for co-hosting tomorrow’s Global Risk Forum with the 
Hong Kong Monetary Authority. 
2. This is the third in a series of joint fora which GARP have organised with regulators, and 
follows similar events in New York and London, focusing on risk and risk management from a 
global perspective in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis. 
3. In contrast to the two previous host cities, Hong Kong (and indeed Asia more generally) 
has been fortunate not to have borne the full brunt of the recent Crisis. But, we have had our 
own fair share of crises in the past and, speaking as someone who was tasked with tackling 
aspects  of  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis  in  somewhat  unconventional  ways,  I  can  assure  you 
that  we  are  only  “all  too  well  aware”  of  the  severe  economic  and  social  disruptions  that 
financial  crises  can  and  do  cause.  Hence,  we  are  likewise  engaged  in  a  degree  of  “soul-
searching”  on  the  nature  of financial  risk  and  how  it  might  best  be  managed  and  how  the 
management of that risk might best be regulated. And we certainly have “bought-in” to the 
global  regulatory  reform  agenda  spurred  by  the  Global  Financial  Crisis.  Clearly  Asian 
banking  systems  and  Asian  markets  do  not  operate  in  isolation  from  global  markets  and 
hence, we are all in this together! 
4. With this in mind, I would like to take this opportunity to pose a couple of questions, the 
answers to which would have fundamental relevance to the nature and shape of the global 
financial system going forward – 
a. 
To  what  extent  is  the  mainstream thinking,  that financial  or  systemic  risks  can  be 
assessed  and  forecast  through  the  use  of  the  financial  models  that  have  been 
developed in the last two decades, still valid? 
The  financial  markets  have  become  very  complex  and,  as  we  now  know,  have 
generated  huge  risks  for  the  global  financial  system.  Is  the  current  international 
effort  on  regulatory  reform  adequate  in  addressing  the  risks  arising  from  this 
complexity? and 
The  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  is  undertaking  major  reform  in 
upgrading global standards on the quality and quantity of the capital, and introducing 
global  standards  on the  liquidity  that  banks  have  to  hold  in  order to  improve  their 
resilience  to  risks  and  shocks.  Some  countries  have  already  implemented  these 
standards but some advanced economies have not yet done so. Does this create an 
unlevel  playing  field  that  might  compromise  fair  competition  as  well  as  the 
soundness of the banking system? 
b. 
c. 
Need to rethink the nature and management of financial risks? 
5. Mainstream thinking in recent years has been to see risk in terms of probabilities of events 
that can be quantitatively expressed and forecast with statistical models. However, if we did 
not  know  before  we  certainly  know  now,  that  some  of  these  models  make  strong 
assumptions,  such  as  “normally  distributed  returns”  or  other  not  sufficiently  fat-tailed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
distribution  assumptions,  which  are  usually  not  supported  by  empirical  evidence.  These 
quantitative models underestimate the likelihood of the “tail events” and the amount of losses 
that would occur in such events. As we now know, the highly improbable event, or the “tail 
risk”, has occurred all too frequently and with highly disruptive, if not devastating, impact on 
financial as well as macroeconomic stability. 
6. This has been on the cards for a while. According to the account by Roger Lowenstein in 
his book “When Genius Failed”, the ill-fated Long Term Capital Management, LTCM, in one 
of its investor newsletters back in 1994, suggested that its VaR analysis showed that, “only 
one year in fifty should it lose at least 20% of its portfolio.” LTCM also calculated that losing 
all of its capital within one year  was a 10-standard-deviation event. This suggests that the 
probability of such an event occurring would be no more than once in 300 years under even 
the very conservative assumptions. But the event had occurred within five years of LTCM’s 
birth. 
7. It is natural, and indeed probably inevitable, that, in seeking to predict the probability of an 
event  occurring,  we  tend  to  look  to  past  experience.  However,  as  we  all  dutifully  warn 
investors  when  selling  investment  products,  “past  performance  is  no  guarantee  of  future 
performance” and so we must stand ready to admit that there are fundamental limitations in 
our existing risk management tools. That is, the predictive powers of models are inherently 
restricted by historical experience. Where we encounter something new, such as innovative 
products  or  business  model  changes  resulting  in  different  forms  of  connectedness  and 
creating  different  and  new  transmission  channels,  the  models  face  significant  difficulty  in 
accurately  estimating  risk.  Furthermore,  even  if  one  could  find  better  models,  any  models 
must  inevitably  assume  market  behaviour  remains  constant to  some  degree,  yet  we  know 
too  well  that  uncertainty  and  panic  may  and  do  engender  irrational  or  herd-like  behaviour 
which a model struggles to accommodate. So, if the model’s findings can be “misguided”, too 
great a reliance on them, or too limited an understanding of what the model actually tells us, 
may result in a significant misjudgement of risk. 
8. All of this prompts the question of how far we should reflect on the efficacy of our methods 
for assessing, measuring and managing risks in the financial system. How can we avoid the 
temptation  to  see  model  output  as  the  only  crystal  ball  for  the  future?  How  can  we  equip 
management, board members and regulators and supervisors to overlay model output with 
informed expert judgement which can look to surrounding circumstances, be more forward-
looking and take into account possible behavioural responses to events? 
9. Tomorrow one of the panel sessions will be on stress-testing and the work in this area I 
think offers a significant opportunity, both at the bank and supervisory level, to examine risk 
and  test  the  “what  if”  scenarios  which  the  models  cannot  reach,  and  to  “think  the 
unthinkable”. 
Adding complexity to the financial markets and regulation? 
10. Apart from the widespread use of models in risk management, the financial innovation of 
the  past  two  decades  and  the  globalisation  of  our  markets  have  greatly  increased  the 
complexity  of  financial  markets  and  their  inter-linkages.  The  Global  Financial  Crisis 
demonstrated  all  too  clearly  that  certain  types  of  financial  innovation,  resulting  in  the 
emergence of a vast variety of highly complex and opaque financial derivative instruments 
(even if originally designed to repackage and diversify risk), in fact led to greater, rather than 
less, financial instability that neither the firms nor their regulators fully foresaw or understood. 
11. To address the risk arising from this increasing complexity  in the financial system, the 
regulatory  framework  has  also  become  more  complex.  For  example,  the  Basel  I  Capital 
Accord has about 80 pages in total. For Basel II, it runs to 333 pages plus another 76 pages 
for Basel 2.5. As for Basel III, insofar as it covers capital (and not liquidity), it is 562 pages 
(including as it does Basel II and 2.5 on the capital side). In the USA, the Dodd-Frank Act 
runs to over 800 pages with probably in excess of 10,000 pages of subsidiary rules expected 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
eventually.  Haven’t  we  hit  the  limit  here  of  what  might  be  considered  optimal  or  indeed 
sensible? Should we rethink whether adding complexity to the regulatory system is the only 
effective way of reducing the risks of complexity in the financial system? Is there any room to 
inject  an  element  of  a  more  principle  based,  common  sense,  approach  in  bank  regulation 
and supervision? I know that the main proponents of “Less is More”, such as Andy Haldane, 
are  not  here  today,  but  I  hope  there  will  be  some  discussion  of  this  important  issue  of 
complexity at the Forum tomorrow. 
Need to avoid a race to the bottom? 
12. Apart from reflecting on risk management and the increasing complexity of regulation, I 
would also like to invite you to join me in rethinking what the banking industry is really about. 
To  me,  banking  is  all  about  trust  and  confidence.  Our  citizens  entrust  their  hard-earned 
savings  to  banks  and,  as  a  society,  we  allow  banks  to  use  depositors’  money  to  fund 
productive enterprises and other investments. In theory, the safety and soundness of a bank 
should be a key factor for customers in choosing the bank with which they want to entrust 
their  money.  Again,  in  theory  a  bank  with  a  large  capital  cushion  should  (all  things  being 
equal) have a competitive edge in gaining customer confidence as compared to other banks 
with  a  weaker  capital  position.  This  being  the  case,  banks  should  have  an  incentive  to 
maintain higher capital levels. However, incentives have become somewhat distorted in more 
modern  times,  thanks  to  formal  safety  nets  extended  by  deposit  protection  schemes  and 
informal safety nets characterised by implicit government guarantee arising from the “too big 
to fail” consideration. 
13. In the run up to the Global Financial Crisis, it was common for the big banks to maximise 
their Return on Equity (RoE) by optimising the level of their capital base and by leveraging up 
their  balance  sheets. This  resulted  in  a  steady  reduction  in  the  levels  of  capital,  and  as  a 
result in the loss absorbancy capability, of banks in relation to the size of the risks taken by 
them on and off balance sheet. Even now, there is still a view amongst some banks that the 
Basel  Accord  serves more  to  indicate  “optimal”  levels  of  capital  or  liquidity  rather than the 
absolute  bare  minimum  standard.  Some  banks,  including  a  few  here  in  Hong  Kong,  have 
argued  that  the  late  adoption  of  Basel  III  by  some  advanced  economies  creates  or 
constitutes an uneven playing field, placing them in a competitively disadvantaged position. It 
will  be  even  worse,  according to  the  banks  advocating this  level  playing  argument,  if  their 
national  supervisor  imposes  capital  or  liquidity  requirements  that  exceed  the  international 
standards. 
14. Pillar 2 of the Basel Accord was of course introduced, at least in part, to do just this by 
enabling  supervisors  to  make  adjustments  in  minimum  required  levels  of  capital  to  reflect 
individual bank risk profiles, but even here we are met with “level playing field” arguments – 
complaints that other jurisdictions don’t use Pillar 2 to the same extent – or at all – and so we 
should not use Pillar 2 aggressively or else we will “damage” or “ham-string” our banks. But if 
this  is  the  case,  then  if  all  banks  seek  to  maximise  their  profits,  by  pushing  down  or 
“optimising” their capital and liquidity levels and taking on more risk – focused on the Basel 
standard as the ultimate benchmark – then do we not risk the standard actually encouraging 
a “race to the bottom”? Is it a race that may lead to higher profits or RoE for banks and their 
shareholders only in the short term? Is it a race that could create, in the longer term, serious 
problems for the safety and soundness of the banks concerned and financial vulnerabilities 
for society as a whole? 
15.  I  don’t  profess  to  know  all  the  answers  to  the  questions  I  have  just  raised.  No  matter 
what, there is a clear and indisputable need to enhance the resilience and robustness of the 
global financial system. The Basel Committee has done a great deal in upgrading capital and 
liquidity  rules.  Under  the  direction  of  G20,  there  is  long  list  of  other  regulatory  reforms, 
including those dealing with the moral hazard problem arising from “too big to fail” and the 
risks observed in the OTC derivative markets. Some national authorities have introduced, or 
plan  to  introduce,  measures  that  would  separate  core  retail  and  commercial  banking  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
investment banking. Although, as I have said,  very few people  would dispute the need for 
urgent reforms, there are differences in views on whether the reforms that are underway are 
indeed adequate or entirely appropriate. 
16.  I  hope  that,  at  tomorrow’s  Forum,  you  will  have  the  opportunity  to  discuss  these  and 
other  pertinent  issues  as  we  continue  seeking  to  re-evaluate  both  the  nature  of  risk 
management and the role of regulation and supervision in the wake of the Global Financial 
Crisis. Once again let me welcome you all and wish you Bon Appétit! 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
