Gill Marcus: The economic and financial outlook for the South African 
economy 
Address by Ms Gill Marcus, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the workshop 
on “The outlook for financial markets, for their governance and for finance”, Cernobbio, Italy, 
8–9 March 2013. 
 Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  speak  to  you  in  this  beautiful  environment.  It  is  hard  to 
believe that we are in the epicentre of a global financial crisis that is now entering its sixth 
year,  and  that  Italy  itself  is  grappling  with  what  appears  to  be  a  period  of  Italian  political 
instability against a backdrop of an economy that contracted by around 2,4 per cent in 2012, 
and within a challenging Eurozone environment.  
The  continued  synchronized  downturn  in  the  major  advanced  economies  –  the  US, 
Eurozone, Japan and the UK – will impact on the global outlook for some considerable time. 
It  is  to  the  United  States  that  we  look  to  build  on  its  slow  recovery  and  begin  to  lead  the 
advanced  economies  out  of  this  very  difficult  economic  environment.  And  we  all  need  to 
recognise the way in which the global financial crisis has mutated and that, even if there is no 
further deterioration in the outlook, it is going to take many years to recover.  
While the crisis originated in the advanced economies, the impact differed across countries. 
The nature and scale of the spillover effects have been dependent on the extent of trade and 
financial linkages. The crisis and the continued weakness in the advanced economies have 
also underlined the need for emerging economies to diversify traditional trade and financial 
relationships. This is part of the rationale underlying the formalisation of the BRICS grouping 
(Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa), as well as the reorientation of South Africa’s 
trade relations towards the rest of the African continent.  
Growth in sub-Saharan Africa, apart from South Africa, was remarkably resilient during the 
crisis.  Although  most  countries  experienced  lower  growth,  mainly  due  to  lower  commodity 
prices, in general they managed to avoid recession. Unlike South Africa, the trade channel 
was less important because of the predominance of intra-regional trade, and stronger trade 
links with Asia.  
Most sub-Saharan African countries have returned to pre-crisis growth rates due in large part 
to the recovery in commodity prices. This positive trend is expected to be sustained in most 
of  the  region.  According  to  the  latest  World  Economic  Outlook,  economic  growth  in  sub-
Saharan Africa is expected to average 5,8 per cent in 2013 and 5,7 per cent in 2014. Oil-
exporting  countries,  of which  Nigeria  and  Angola  are  but  two,  are  expected  to  continue  to 
grow at rates in excess of 6 per cent.  
South  Africa  has  been  able  to  benefit  from  these  favourable  developments  and  we  have 
seen significant shift in trade patterns in recent years. In 2007, 38 per cent of South African 
manufactured exports went to Europe, with 25 per cent going to Africa. By 2012 the picture 
had reversed, with 25 per cent going to Europe, and 38 per cent going to Africa. The impact 
of the recession in Europe, for example, has been felt particularly hard in the motor vehicle 
export  sector.  However  the  decline  in  exports  to  Europe  in  2012  was  more  than 
compensated for by a 19 per cent increase in vehicle exports to Africa in that year.  
The focus of South Africa’s regional interactions has not only been on the trade side. Foreign 
Direct Investment in the region grew from less than US$1 bn in 1990 to almost US$40 bn in 
2012. South African companies have been very active in this respect and have increasingly 
made  their  presence  felt  on  the  continent  in  mining,  the  retail  sector,  construction, 
telecommunications, agri-business and banking in particular. According to a recent Ernst & 
Young survey (Building Bridges: Ernst & Young’s 2012 attractiveness survey: Africa), South 
African companies featured in the top 5 investors in FDI in Africa in 10 of the 14 sub-Saharan 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
African  countries  surveyed.  By  2011  the  value  of  South  African  FDI  in sub-Saharan  Africa 
amounted to 6 per cent of South African GDP. South African-based banks have subsidiaries 
in 16 countries in the region, and according to the IMF, in 11 of those countries South African 
subsidiaries are among the five largest banks.  
These  growing  regional  ties  have,  however,  only  partially  insulated  the  South  African 
economy  from  the  global  slowdown.  Following  a  brief  crisis-induced  recession  in  2009, 
economic growth recovered, but at lower levels than were the case in the few years prior to 
the crisis. The economy grew by 3,5 per cent in 2011, but moderated to 2,5 per cent in 2012. 
The  output  gap  remains  negative,  and  with  growth  expected  to  remain  below  potential 
(3,5 per  cent)  this  year,  the  gap  is  not  expected  to  be  closed  within  the  Bank’s  forecast 
period  ending  2014.  The  Bank’s  latest  forecast  is  for  growth  of  2,6  per  cent  in  2013  and 
3,8 per  cent  in  2014.  The  more  favourable  outcome  for  next  year  is  predicated,  to  a 
significant degree, on a stronger recovery in the advanced economies, particularly in Europe. 
Therefore this forecast is subject to downside risk.  
Part  of  this  disappointing  growth  story  has  been  due  to  weak  global  demand  for  South 
Africa’s exports, combined with the impact of low advanced economy interest rates on the 
exchange rate. The consequent global search for yield contributed to the appreciation of the 
currency  for  an  extended  period  until  around  April  2012  which  negatively  affected  South 
Africa’s  competitiveness.  This  adverse  trend  was  reinforced  by  domestic  factors  including 
higher  input  costs  of  electricity,  transport  and  labour,  as  well  as  a  decline  in  the  terms  of 
trade  since  2010.  These  factors  contributed  to  the  widening  of  the  current  account  of  the 
balance of payments from 2,8 per cent of GDP in 2010, to 6,4 per cent in the second and 
third quarters of 2012. The value of merchandise exports declined by 6,6 per cent between 
the  fourth  quarter  of  2011  and  the  third  quarter  of  2012,  while  the  value  of  merchandise 
imports increased by 4,4 per cent. Net exports have contributed negatively to recent growth.  
South Africa has been seen as a particularly attractive investment destination because of its 
well-developed  financial  system,  including  its  foreign  exchange  and  capital  markets. 
Furthermore, the depth and liquidity of the foreign exchange market, with a daily turnover of 
about US$17 billion, made it attractive for hedging emerging market risk, which contributed to 
the volatility of the exchange rate.  
While  other  emerging  markets  were  implementing  measures  to  stem  these  inflows,  such 
measures were not seen to be appropriate in the South African case given these structural 
features.  Although  we  did  not  intervene  directly  to  prevent  the  appreciation,  we  did  take 
advantage of these circumstances to add to our holding of foreign exchange reserves, with 
gross  reserves  increasing  from  US$34  billion  in  2008  to  current  levels  of  around 
US$50 billion.  
For  most  of  the  2000s,  portfolio  investment  into  South  Africa  was  dominated  by  equity 
inflows,  while  inflows  into  the  bond  market  were  relatively  small.  However,  as  emerging 
economy bond markets became more attractive, this pattern changed. Inflows into the bond 
market  were  given  additional  impetus  with  South  Africa’s  inclusion  in  the  Citibank  World 
Government  Bond  Index  in  2012,  when  bond  flows  totaled  R88  billion  (compared  with 
R47 billion in 2011) , more than offsetting a net outflow of equities to the value of R3 billion. 
While  bond  inflows  also  declined  in  the  last  two  months  of  2012,  both  bond  and  equity 
inflows have resumed on a moderate scale, and totaled R18 billion in the first two months of 
this year. Non-resident investors now hold 36 per cent of South African government bonds, 
up from 13 per cent in 2008.  
In  response  to  these  inflows,  the  rand  appreciated  by  almost  30  per  cent  against  the  US 
dollar between the beginning of 2009 and March 2012, although around a volatile trend. For 
much  of  the  period,  the  rand  moved  in  line  with  other  liquid  emerging  market  currencies, 
particularly the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real. These currencies were highly sensitive 
to  the  so-called  “risk-on”  and  “risk-off”  scenarios,  particularly  relating  to  risk  perceptions  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  Eurozone.  This  co-movement  in  effect  indicated  that  the  underlying  movements  of  the 
rand were determined to a large degree by external rather than internal factors.  
Since  April  2012,  however,  domestic  factors  have  come  more  to  the  fore.  The  rand  has 
decoupled from its emerging market counterparts and has depreciated by about 15 per cent 
against the US dollar and by a similar amount against the Mexican peso. The rand initially 
depreciated in response to the widening of the deficit on the current account of the balance 
of  payments  but  depreciated  further  largely  as  a  result  of  a  rising  risk  premium,  following 
protracted  labour  disputes  in  the  mining  and  agricultural  sectors  in  particular,  as  well  as 
downgrades by the three main ratings agencies. 
While the depreciation should help to reduce the current account deficit, the adjustment will 
not  be  easy  given  the  slow  or  negative  growth  in  the  advanced  economies.  The  deficit  is 
expected to persist for some time, although at a narrower, more sustainable level in the face 
of the import-intensive nature of South Africa’s infrastructural investment expenditure. Such 
expenditure  is  seen  as  growth  enhancing,  and  therefore  sustainable  on  an  inter-temporal 
basis.  
The underlying reasons for capital flows to emerging markets remain, and are likely to persist 
for some time. Furthermore, with increased certainty about the domestic policy framework, 
the risk premium is expected to decline. However, as financial markets are highly sensitive to 
changing  developments,  sentiment  can  change  very  quickly,  and  so  too  the  direction  and 
quantum of flows as can be seen from the financial markets’ reaction to the recent FOMC 
minutes that were interpreted as a signal of an earlier-than-expected reversal of quantitative 
easing.  
The main export sectors of the South African economy therefore face a challenging outlook, 
from both external and internal sources. Commodity prices, apart from the gold price, have 
not  generally  recovered  to  pre-crisis  levels.  At  the  same  time  input  costs,  particularly 
electricity  and  wage  costs,  have  risen  significantly,  contributing  to  the  contraction  in  the 
sector  in  2012.  Furthermore  the  sector  is  beset  by  an  increasingly  difficult  labour relations 
environment, which resulted in protracted industrial action in the final months of 2012. The 
manufacturing sector remains vulnerable to the continued weak demand from Europe while 
its import and export competitiveness was also adversely affected by the appreciation of the 
currency in 2010/11. Following the recent depreciation of the rand the outlook for the sector 
is more positive, but nevertheless fragile.  
Where do South Africa’s short term growth prospects lie? Investment by the private sector, 
which accounts for around two-thirds of gross fixed capital formation, remains constrained by 
relatively  low  levels  of  capacity  utilisation  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Electricity  supply 
constraints  are  also  an  impediment  to  investment growth,  and  are  likely  to  remain  so  until 
new capacity, currently under construction, comes on stream during 2014.  
The  main  impetus  to  growth  is  likely  to  come  from  infrastructure-related  investment 
expenditure  by  the  state-owned  enterprises,  which  have  a  particular  focus  on  power 
generation,  road  and  rail  transport,  as  well  as  port  efficiencies  and  capacity.  The  National 
Treasury estimates that R827 billion will be spent on infrastructure over the next three years. 
A  significant  portion  of  this  will  be  on  electricity  generation  as  well  as  the  development  of 
transport infrastructure, where rail transport is particularly lacking. A focus on infrastructure 
not only provides a boost for job creation, but also helps overcome some of the constraints to 
growth, improves economic efficiencies and increases the potential output of the economy.  
Scope for further macroeconomic accommodation is relatively constrained. The fiscal space 
achieved  by  prudent  fiscal  policies  prior  to  the  crisis  allowed  for  a  counter-cyclical  fiscal 
policy stance, but this space has been eroded. The budget deficit in the past fiscal year is 
estimated  to  have  expanded  to  5,2  per  cent  of  GDP,  compared  with  an  initial  estimate  of 
4,5 per  cent,  mainly  a  result  of  lower-than-expected  tax  revenues.  Nevertheless  the 
government  remains  committed  to  achieving  a  fiscal  consolidation  path,  and  expects  the 
deficit to GDP ratio to decline to 3,1 per cent by 2015/16 . At the same time the net debt to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
GDP ratio is expected to stabilise at around 40 per cent over the same period. These trends 
constrain the room for further stimulus.  
As is the case in many countries, the lack of fiscal space inevitably raises expectations for 
further  monetary  accommodation.  Monetary  policy  in  South  Africa  is  conducted  within  a 
flexible  inflation  targeting  framework,  with  an  inflation  target  band  of  between  3  and  6  per 
cent,  set  by government.  Although  our  nominal policy  rate  at  5  per  cent  is  above  those  in 
most  advanced  economies,  the  real  policy  rate  is  currently  negative.  Inflation  averaged 
5,6 per cent in 2012, and our forecast is that inflation is likely to temporarily breach the upper 
end of the inflation target range in the third quarter of 2013. We see the risks to the inflation 
outlook to be on the upside, coming primarily from the exchange rate depreciation and higher 
unit  labour  cost  pressures. The  relatively  subdued  growth  outlook  and  the  negative  output 
gap have meant that we have been more tolerant of inflation at the upper end of the target 
range.  However,  our  room  for  further  accommodation  is  constrained  by  the  need  to  keep 
inflation within the target over a reasonable time horizon.  
The main challenge facing the economy remains the high level of unemployment, currently 
25 per cent, with youth unemployment about double that. It is cold comfort that we are now in 
the same company as countries such as Spain and Greece, or that rising unemployment has 
become  a  major  issue  in  many  advanced  economies.  The  persistence  of  the  high  rate  of 
unemployment  indicates  that  in  South  Africa  it  is  a  structural  phenomenon,  and  therefore 
beyond the scope of monetary policy. The current low growth scenario is also insufficient to 
appreciably  reduce  unemployment. The government,  together  with  all  opposition  parties  in 
Parliament, has committed itself to a recently developed National Development Plan as the 
framework for growth going forward, which provides a coherent approach to help overcome 
some  of  the  structural  constraints  in  the  economy.  The  main  elements  of  the  plan  include 
various measures to increase employment creation; to increase the efficiency and capacity of 
the state; and initiatives to improve the quality of education.  
It is perhaps appropriate at this point to make a few comments about the outlook for South 
Africa’s  banking  sector  in  the  light  of  global  regulatory  changes.  According  to  the  World 
Economic  Forum  Competitive  Survey  2012/13,  South  Africa  was  ranked  third  in  terms  of 
financial  sector  development  and,  within  this  category,  the  banking  sector  was  ranked 
second in terms of soundness.  
South  Africa’s  banking  system  remains  strong,  and  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  we 
implemented Basel III. But the new global rules are not without their challenges. Our concern 
has been that changes to the Basel Committee rules, to which South Africa subscribes, are 
intended to solve problems in the banking systems of some of the advanced economies, but 
apply equally to countries such as South Africa that did not experience a banking crisis or 
regulatory failures, and could in fact cause unnecessary difficulties for the banks and for the 
broader  macro  economy.  Nevertheless  we  are  committed  to  complying  with  the  Basel  III 
requirements.  
The  Basel  III  Accord  provides  for  higher  capital  ratios  in  order  to  ensure  that  banks  are 
adequately  capitalised.  Currently  South  African  banks’  capital  adequacy  ratios  stand  at 
15,84 per cent, with a Tier 1 capital adequacy ratio of 12,55, which is well above the Basel III 
requirement of 4,5 per cent (and the domestic requirement of 6,0 per cent). Our banks also 
have a relatively low leverage multiple of 13,35 per cent.  
Other  provisions,  however,  will  be  more  challenging.  The  liquidity  coverage  ratio  (LCR) 
requires banks to have sufficient high-quality liquid assets to survive a month-long significant 
stress scenario. Studies by the Bank for International Settlements showed that South African 
banks  generally  would  be  short  of  such  liquid  assets  by  virtue  of  their  dependence  on 
wholesale, short-term funding. The Basel III liquidity framework does however give discretion 
to national supervisors to make available to banks a committed liquidity facility (CLF) at a fee 
against acceptable collateral. South Africa introduced such a facility for an amount of up to 
40 per cent on any particular bank’s net cash outflows under stressed scenarios. This facility 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
should prevent excessive increases in the cost of funding of banks and possible distortionary 
effects on the domestic financial markets.  
We are, however, still concerned about the impact of the proposed net stable funding ratio 
(NSFR) which is expected to be implemented in 2018. Again, the structural features of our 
financial system may pose a challenge, given that most long-term saving in the economy is 
done through the non-bank financial institutions, which in turn provide short term deposits to 
the banks. However, we are not the only country with such concerns, and discussions with 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision are ongoing.  
Although  our  banking  system  emerged  relatively  unscathed  from  the  crisis,  with  no 
extraordinary measures needed to protect the banks or the financial system, we cannot be 
complacent.  There  is  ongoing  work  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  architecture  with  a  move 
towards a twin peaks model of financial regulation. This approach will see the consolidation 
of  all  prudential  regulation  of  financial  institutions  within  the  Bank,  while  market  conduct 
regulation of the financial sector will be consolidated within the Financial Services Board.  
In  conclusion,  significant  advances  have  been  made  over  the  past  18  years  in  alleviating 
poverty in South Africa by providing essential services to the poor and through an improved 
social  security  system.  According  to  the  recent  census,  marked  improvements  have  been 
made, for example, with respect to the provision of housing, water and electricity with 85 per 
cent  of  South  Africa’s  population  now  having  access  to  electricity,  while  78  of  our  citizens 
now live in formal housing.  
The OECD’s Survey of South Africa 2013 – released earlier this week – characterises South 
Africa  as  progressing,  with  good  institutions  and  generally  favourable  momentum  in 
important  areas.  However  it  also  recognises sluggish  economic growth coupled  with  rising 
inflation and an entrenched structural unemployment and inequality challenge.  
South Africa is an extraordinary country of great contrasts. The Atlantic and Indian Oceans 
meet at the most southerly tip of the continent. The cold water current of the Atlantic and the 
warm  water  current  of  the  Indian  oceans  perhaps  reflect  the  contrasts  that  epitomise  our 
country:  
A  country  of  great  wealth  and  extreme  poverty;  of  gold,  diamonds,  platinum  and  other 
mineral wealth that has contributed to the wealth of many nations; a country where the first 
heart  transplant  was  performed,  whose  skills  and  expertise  lead  many  fields  of  science, 
space, finance, business and the search for global and regional peace. It is a vibrant country 
full  of  hope  and  promise,  but  a  country  that  has  to  rebuild  its  values  in  keeping  with  a 
constitution that entrenches democratic principles and respect for human life and dignity. The 
economy  needs  to  grow  faster  and  more  inclusively,  taking  account  of  regional  and 
continental opportunities. This is what we are committed to, and success will be in all of our 
interests as together we seek ways to break the stranglehold that the prevailing global crisis 
has on many parts of the world.  
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
