K C Chakrabarty: Financial inclusion in India – journey so far and way 
forward 
Keynote address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Finance Inclusion Conclave, organised by CNBC TV 18, New Delhi, 6 September 2013. 
 Assistance provided by Ms. Sushma Vij and Ms. Mruga Paranjape, is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Mr. M Narendra, Chairman, Indian Overseas Bank; Mr. Y M Deosthalee, CMD, L&T 
Finance;  Mr.  Arun  Tiwari,  ED,  Allahabad  Bank,  Ms.  Shereen  Bhan,  Managing 
Editor,CNBC-TV18, delegates to the conclave; friends from the media fraternity; ladies and 
gentlemen! It is a pleasure for me to be present here today at the Conclave organized by 
CNBC TV 18 on the very topical subject of financial inclusion. I am particularly happy that a 
business news channel which has built up a credible reputation for its reportage and analysis 
of the financial markets is taking this initiative to lend its voice to the needs and expectations 
of the unbanked and excluded, yet silent mass of our population. Considering the power of 
the media and its unique ability to influence public opinion and generate awareness, there is 
immense potential for initiatives such as this to galvanize financial inclusion efforts in India. I 
heartily congratulate CNBC TV 18 for this creditable endeavor and hope that this is the first 
in a series of many such initiatives in the days to come. 
in 
Introduction 
2.  
Poverty and exclusion continue to dominate socio-economic and political discourse 
in  India  as  they  have  done  over  the  last  six  decades  in  the  post-independence  period. 
Poverty reduction has been an important goal of development policy since the inception of 
planning 
India.  Various  anti-poverty,  employment  generation  and  basic  services 
programmes have been in operation for decades in India. The ongoing reforms attach great 
importance to removal of poverty and to addressing the wide variations across states and the 
rural-urban  divide.  Though  the  Indian  economy  recorded  impressive  growth  rates  until 
recently, its impact has sadly not fully percolated to the lowest deciles. Despite being one of 
the ten fastest growing economies of the world, India is still home to one-third of the world’s 
poor. Further analysis shows that poverty is getting concentrated continuously in the poorer 
states. 
3.  
In  developing  economies  like  ours,  the  banks,  as  mobilisers  of  savings  and 
allocators  of  credit  for  production  and  investment,  have  a  very  critical  role.  As  a  financial 
intermediary, the banks contribute to the economic growth of the country by identifying the 
entrepreneurs with the best chances of successfully initiating new commercial activities and 
allocating credit to them. At a minimum, all retail commercial banks also provide remittance 
facilities and other payment related products. Thus, inherently, the banking sector possesses 
a tremendous potential to act as an agent of change and ensure redistribution of wealth in 
the society. 
4.  
However, it  is disheartening to note that the number of people with access to the 
products and services offered by the banking system continues to be very limited even years 
after introduction of inclusive banking initiatives in the country through measures such as the 
cooperative  movement,  nationalization  of  banks,  creation  of  regional  rural  banks,  etc.  As 
Nobel  Laureate  Prof.  Amartya  Sen  has  also  noted,  “the  thrust  of  developmental  policy  in 
India has undergone a paradigm shift from an exclusive focus on efficiency to one on equity; 
from the rate and pattern of growth, and on inequalities, distribution of income and wealth to 
the extent to which people are deprived of the requirements for leading a fulfilling life and 
suffer “capability deprivation”. Over the past five years, Reserve Bank of India, as also other 
policy  makers  have  resolutely  pursed  the  agenda  of  financial  inclusion  and  achieved 
discernible progress in improving access to financial services for the masses. However, the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
progress  is  far  from  satisfactory  as  evidenced  by  the  World  Bank  Findex  Survey  (2012). 
According  to  the  survey  findings,  only  35%  of  Indian  adults  had  access  to  a  formal  bank 
account and 8% borrowed formally in the last 12 months. Only 2% of adults used an account 
to receive money from a family member living in another area and 4% used an account to 
receive payment from the Government. The miniscule numbers suggest a crying need for a 
further push to the financial inclusion agenda to ensure that the people at the bottom of the 
pyramid join the formal financial system, reap benefits and improve their financial well-being. 
5.  
The importance of financial inclusion has been emphatically underlined in the wake 
of the financial crisis. As we all know, the crisis has had a significant negative impact on lives 
of individuals globally. Millions of people have lost their livelihoods, their homes and savings. 
One  of  the  prominent  reasons  for  the  crisis  was  that  the  financial  system  was  focused  on 
furthering its own interests and lost its linkage to the real sector and with the society at large. 
The crisis also resulted in a realization that free market forces do not always result in greater 
efficiency in the financial system, particularly while protecting the interests of the vulnerable 
sections of society. This is due to the information asymmetry working against these sections, 
thereby  placing  them  at  a  severe  disadvantage.  In  wake  of  the  Crisis,  therefore,  Financial 
Inclusion has emerged as a policy imperative for inclusive growth in several countries across 
the globe. However, though much lip service has been paid to Financial Inclusion, the actual 
progress has remained far from satisfactory. As I always mention, it is regrettable that the 
entire debate surrounding financial inclusion has generated significant heat and sound, but 
little light. 
6.  
In my address today, I intend to recount some of the measures taken by Reserve 
Bank of India, dwell on progress achieved and also highlight the way forward in conquering 
the challenges that hinder our quest for universal financial inclusion in the country. 
Objectives of financial inclusion 
7.  
Let me begin with what we in RBI seek to achieve as part of our financial inclusion 
drive. We have defined Financial Inclusion as the “process of ensuring access to appropriate 
financial  products  and  services  needed  by  all  sections  of  the  society  in  general  and 
vulnerable  groups  such  as  weaker  sections  and  low  income  groups  in  particular,  at  an 
affordable  cost  in  a  fair  and  transparent  manner  by  regulated,  mainstream  institutional 
players”.  We  consider  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial  Literacy  as  twin  pillars  where 
Financial Inclusion acts on the supply side i.e. for creating access and financial literacy acts 
from the demand side i.e. creating a demand for the financial products and services. 
8.  
Unrestrained access to public goods and services is the sine qua non of an open 
and  efficient  society.  Banking  services  are  essentially  for  welfare  of  the  public.  It  is 
imperative,  therefore,  that  the  availability  of  banking  and  payment  services  to  the  entire 
populace without discrimination is the avowed objective of public policy. In our considered 
view, providing access to basic banking services is the first phase of the financial inclusion 
process.  We  are  also  convinced  that  only  the  mainstream,  regulated  financial  players  are 
capable of bringing about meaningful financial inclusion as they have the ability to make the 
necessary  investment  in  the  build  up  phase  and  also  cross-subsidize  the  services  in  the 
initial stages till they become self-sustaining. Our focus on banks as the principal vehicle for 
financial inclusion also stems from the fact that only they can offer the entire suite of products 
that would facilitate meaningful financial inclusion. 
9.  
Let me now turn to how Financial Inclusion can help the society and the economy. 
Financial  Inclusion  has  the  ability  to  generate  positive  externalities:  it  leads  to  increase  in 
savings, investment and thereby, spurs the processes of economic growth. It also provides a 
platform  for  inculcating  the  habit  of  saving  money,  especially  amongst  the  lower  income 
category that has been living under the constant shadow of financial duress, mainly because 
of absence of savings, which makes them a vulnerable lot. Presence of banking services and 
products aims to provide a critical tool to inculcate the savings habit. It also creates avenues 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of  formal  credit  to  the  unbanked  population  who  are  otherwise  dependent  on  informal 
channels of credit like family, friends and moneylenders. Availability of timely, adequate and 
transparent  credit  from  formal  banking  channels  will  allow  the  entrepreneurial  spirit  of  the 
masses to increase outputs and prosperity in the countryside. It will open the doors of formal 
remittance facilities to the low income and unbanked populace who, presently, are forced to 
use all kinds of informal and costly ways of sending money from one place to another. As we 
all know, Financial Inclusion has now been viewed as a remedy to plug gaps and leaks in 
distribution  of  government  benefits  and  subsidies  through  direct  benefit  transfers  to 
beneficiaries’  bank  accounts  rather  than  through  subsidizing  products  and  making  cash 
payments. Thus, on the whole, Financial Inclusion has the potential to bring in the unbanked 
masses into the formal banking system, channelize their savings, stoke their entrepreneurial 
ambitions by making available credit and thus give a fillip to the economy. 
Approach to financial inclusion 
10.  
Let me now turn to RBI’s approach towards Financial Inclusion. We have adopted a 
structured, planned and integrated approach towards FI by focusing on both the demand and 
supply side constraints. Some of the defining features of our approach to FI are: 
 
We have adopted a bank-led model for FI, but have permitted non-bank entities to 
partner banks in their FI initiatives. 
As a philosophy, we have always encouraged banks to pursue FI as a commercial 
activity  and  to  not  view  it  as  social  service  or  charity.  The  self-sustainability  and 
commercial viability of the FI initiatives are important if banks have to scale up their 
operations to cover more unbanked areas. 
We  have  encouraged  banks  to  leverage  technology  to  attain  greater  reach  and 
penetration  while  keeping  the  cost  of  providing  financial  services  to  the  minimum. 
While  we  remain  technology  neutral,  we  require  banks  to  seamlessly  integrate 
whatever technology they choose, with their CBS architecture. 
We have advised banks to adopt innovative business models and delivery channels 
to expand their FI efforts. There is a need for banks to develop new products and 
design  new  delivery  models  that  are  customized  to  the  unique  needs  of  the 
financially excluded population, both in the rural and urban areas. 
Considering  that  financial  Literacy  is  an  important  adjunct  for  promoting  financial 
inclusion, consumer protection and ultimately financial stability, RBI has adopted an 
integrated  approach  wherein  efforts  towards  Financial  Inclusion  and  Financial 
Literacy  would  go  hand  in  hand.  Besides  the  various  initiatives  taken  by  RBI 
individually  to  encourage  financial  literacy,  a  National  Strategy  for  Financial 
Education (NSFE) has also been finalized under the aegis of the Financial Stability 
and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  to  co-ordinate  efforts  of  various  stakeholders 
involved in this process. 
The Reserve Bank has been playing a supportive role in FI by creating a conducive 
regulatory environment and providing institutional support to banks in their FI efforts. 
Importantly, we have provided banks the freedom and the space to determine their 
own  strategies  for  rolling  out  FI  and  have  encouraged  them  to  identify  their  own 
goals and targets through their respective Financial Inclusion Plans. 
     Robust institutional mechanism 
11.  
Our strength lies in the fact that we have created a robust institutional mechanism to 
support the roll out of banking services across the country. This was essential considering 
the enormity of the task in terms of the number of excluded people and the geographical size 
of the country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
    India is one country where the FSDC has a specific mandate for financial inclusion 
and  financial  literacy.  There  is  a  separate  Technical  Group  on  Financial  Inclusion 
and  Financial  Literacy  under  the  aegis  of  FSDC  with  representation  from  all  the 
financial sector regulators. 
In order to spearhead efforts towards greater financial inclusion, RBI has constituted 
a  Financial  Inclusion  Advisory  Committee  (FIAC)  under  the  Chairmanship  of  a 
Deputy Governor from RBI. The FIAC has few Directors from the Central Board of 
RBI and experts drawn from NGO sector/other civil society representatives, etc. as 
members. The collective expertise and experience of the members is expected to be 
leveraged  to  explore  issues  such  as  developing  viable  and  sustainable  banking 
services  delivery  models  focusing  on  accessible  and  affordable  financial  services, 
developing products and processes for rural as well as urban unbanked consumers. 
At the state level, we have State Level Bankers Committees (SLBC) in all the states. 
Going  further  down,  we  have  Lead  District  Managers  in  all  the  659  districts,  with 
recent inclusion of the metropolitan areas into the Lead Banks Scheme. 
About  700  financial  literacy  centres  have  been  set  up  by  banks.  There  are  Rural 
Self-Employment Training Institutes (R-SETI), working towards capacity building for 
taking up self employment ventures. 
RBI’s policy initiatives to foster financial inclusion 
12.  
further the Financial Inclusion in the country. 
Let me now turn to some of the supporting policy initiatives that RBI has taken to 
Reach 
Branch expansion in rural areas 
(a) 
(i) 
Branch  authorisation  has  been  relaxed  to  the  extent  that  banks  do  not  require  prior 
permission to open branches in centres with population less than 1 lakh, which is subject to 
reporting.  To  further  step  up  the  opening  of  branches  in  rural  areas,  banks  have  been 
mandated to open at least 25 per cent of their new branches in unbanked rural centres. 
In  the  Annual  Policy  Statement  for  2013–14,  banks  have  been  advised  to  consider 
frontloading (prioritizing) the opening of branches in unbanked rural centres over a three year 
cycle  co-terminus  with  their  FIPs.  This  is  expected  to  facilitate  the  branch  expansion  in 
unbanked rural centres. 
(ii) 
In January 2006, the Reserve Bank permitted banks to utilise the services of intermediaries 
in  providing  banking  services  through  the  use  of  business  facilitators  and  business 
correspondents.  The  BC  model  allows  banks  to  do  “cash  in  –  cash  out”  transactions  at  a 
location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing the last mile problem. 
(iii)  
The idea is to have a combination of physical branch network and BCs for extending financial 
inclusion,  especially  in  geographically  dispersed  areas.  To  ensure  increased  banking 
penetration and control over operations of BCs, banks have been advised to establish low 
cost  branches  in  the  form  of  intermediate  brick  and  mortar  structures  in  rural  centres 
between the present base branch and BC locations, so as to provide support to a cluster of 
BCs (about 8–10 BCs) at a reasonable distance of about 3–4 kilometers. 
Combination of branch and BC structure to deliver financial inclusion 
Agent banking – business correspondent/ business facilitator model 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Access 
(b) 
Relaxed KYC norms 
 
  Know Your  Customer (KYC) requirements have been simplified to such an extent 
that  small  accounts  can  be  opened  with  self  certification  in  the  presence  of  bank 
officials. 
RBI has allowed “Aadhaar” to be used as one of the eligible documents for meeting 
the KYC requirement for opening a bank account. 
Roadmap for banking services in unbanked villages 
 
In the first phase, banks were advised to draw up a roadmap for providing banking 
services in every village having a population of over 2,000 by March 2010. Banks 
have successfully met this target and have covered 74398 unbanked villages. 
In  the  second  phase,  Roadmap  has  been  prepared  for  covering  remaining 
unbanked villages i.e. with population less than 2000 in a time bound manner. About 
4,90,000 unbanked villages with less than 2000 population across the country have 
been identified and allotted to various banks. The idea behind allocating villages to 
banks was to ensure availability of at least one banking outlet in each village. 
(c) 
Products 
Bouquet of Financial services 
In  order  to ensure  that all  the  financial  needs of  the  customers  are  met,  we  have  advised 
banks to offer a minimum of four basic products, viz. 
 
 
 
 
A savings cum overdraft account 
A pure savings account, ideally a recurring or variable recurring deposit 
A remittance product to facilitate EBT and other remittances, and 
Entrepreneurial  credit  products  like  a  General  Purpose  Credit  Card  (GCC)  or  a 
Kisan Credit Card (KCC) 
(d)  
Transactions 
Direct Benefit Transfer 
The recent introduction of direct benefit transfer, leveraging the Aadhaar platform, will help 
facilitate  delivery  of  social  welfare  benefits  by  direct  credit  to  the  bank  accounts  of 
beneficiaries.  The  government,  in  future,  has  plans  to  route  all  social  security  payments 
through  the  banking  network,  using  the  Aadhaar  based  platform  as  a  unique  identifier  of 
beneficiaries. In order to ensure smooth roll out of the Government’s Direct Benefit Transfer 
(DBT) initiative, banks have been advised to: 
 
Open  accounts  of  all  eligible  individuals  in  camp  mode  with  the  support  of  local 
Government authorities. 
Seed the existing and new accounts with Aadhaar numbers. 
Put  in  place  an  effective  mechanism  to  monitor  and  review  the  progress  in 
implementation of DBT. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Financial Inclusion Plan of banks 
Financial Inclusion Plan 2010–13 
14. 
We have encouraged banks to adopt a structured and planned approach to financial 
inclusion  with  commitment  at  the  highest  levels,  through  preparation  of  Board  approved 
Financial Inclusion Plans (FIPs). The first phase of FIPs was implemented over the period 
2010–2013. The Reserve Bank has sought to use the FIPs as the basis for FI initiatives at 
the bank level. RBI has put in place a structured, comprehensive monitoring mechanism for 
evaluating  banks’  performance  against  their  FIP  plans.  Annual  review  meetings  are  being 
held  with  CMDs  of  banks  to  ensure  top  management  support  and  commitment  to  the  FI 
process. 
A snapshot of the progress made by banks under the FIPs (April 10 – March 13) for 
What has been achieved so far? 
15.  
key parameters, during the three year period is as under: 
 
  Nearly 2, 68, 000 banking outlets have been set up in villages as on March 13 as 
against 67,694 banking outlets in villages in March 2010 
About 7400 rural branches opened during this period 
Nearly  109  million  Basic  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Accounts  (BSBDAs)  have  been 
added, taking the total no. of BSBDAs to 182 million. Share of ICT based accounts 
have  increased  substantially  –  Percentage  of  ICT  accounts  to  total  BSBDAs  has 
increased from 25% in March 10 to 45% in March 13 
With the addition of nearly 9.48 million farm sector households during this period, 
33.8 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit as at 
the end of March 2013 
With  the  addition  of  nearly  2.25  million  non  farm  sector  households  during  this 
period, 3.6 million households have been provided with small entrepreneurial credit 
as at the end of March 2013. 
About 4904 lakh transactions have been carried out in ICT based accounts through 
BCs during the three year period 
16. 
It is important to analyse this progress against the some disconcerting trends that 
were  noticed  in  the  run  up  to  the  structured  Financial  Inclusion  initiatives  that  the  banks 
launched since 2010 onwards. First, the number of banked centres in the country between 
1991 and 2007 had actually come down (from 35236 to 34471). Second, the number of rural 
branches  during  the  same  period  had  also  declined  significantly  (from  35206  to  30409). 
Against this backdrop, the progress made during 2010–13 is certainly remarkable. 
  Financial Inclusion Plan 2013–16 
17.  
In order to continue with the process of ensuring access to banking services to the 
excluded, banks have now been advised to draw up a fresh 3 year Financial Inclusion Plan 
for the period 2013–16. Banks have also been advised that the FIPs prepared by them are 
disaggregated and percolated down up to the branch level. The disaggregation of the plans 
is being done with a view to ensure involvement of bank staff across the hierarchy, in the FI 
efforts and also to ensure uniformity in the reporting structure under the Financial Inclusion 
Plan. The focus is also now more on the volume of transactions in new accounts opened as 
a part of the financial inclusion drive. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Challenges and way forward 
18.  
The  current  policy  objective  of  inclusive  growth  with  financial  stability  cannot  be 
achieved  without  ensuring  universal  financial  inclusion.  Our  experience  suggests  that  the 
banks alone will not be able to achieve this unless an entire support system partners them in 
this  mission.  Only  the  support  of  policymakers,  regulators,  governments,  IT  solution 
providers,  media  and  the  public  at  large  can  bring  about  a  decisive  metamorphosis  in  our 
journey towards universal financial inclusion. 
Financial  Inclusion  of  the  unbanked  masses  is  expected  to  unleash  the  hugely 
19.  
untapped potential of the sections of the society that constitute the bottom of the pyramid. 
However, in pursuing the FI mission, the normal banking model has been found wanting in 
terms of cost, scalability, convenience, reliability, flexibility and continuity. To ensure that the 
banks give adequate attention to financial inclusion, they must view this as a viable business 
proposition rather than as a corporate social responsibility or a regulatory obligation. For the 
business  to  remain  viable  it  would  be  important  to  focus  on  increasing  usage  of  existing 
banking infrastructure which would happen only if the banks can offer an entire bouquet of 
products  and  services  to  the  holders  of  the  large  number  of  basic  bank  accounts  opened 
during the last three years as also to the new customers that the banks acquire. 
20.  
Our past experience and FIP review meetings with the banks have highlighted that if 
the dream of universal and a meaningful financial inclusion has to be turned into reality, then 
going forward, we would need to focus on the following issues: 
(a)  
 
 
 
(b)  
 
 
 
(c)  
 
 
(d)  
 
 
 
(e)  
 
 
 
Increasing Reach 
Ensuring coverage of all unbanked villages in next 3 years  
Emphasis on increasing rural branches  
Opening of bank accounts for all eligible individuals  
Increasing transactions 
Leveraging on DBT  
Delivery of credit products through BCs  
Hassle free Emergency credit (In built OD)  
HR Structure 
Banks to review HR policy in view of FI requirements  
Examining appointing of a separate cadre of staff for cost optimization  
Fine-tuning the BC Model 
Stabilizing the BC delivery model  
Encouraging innovations in remittances model  
Review of Cash Management for BC operations  
Spreading Financial Literacy 
Implementing National Strategy for Financial Education  
Creating Dedicated Website- Inclusion in School Curriculum  
Organizing Financial Literacy Camps  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Conclusion 
21.  
While the task before us is daunting, I am sure that a collaborative approach can 
definitely help in successfully overcoming this challenge. Though we expect the commercial 
banks to play a significant role in ensuring financial inclusion and promoting financial literacy, 
I want to emphasize that the banks alone would not be able to achieve this ambitious goal 
and that other stakeholder groups also need to contribute their mite towards this cause. For 
banks,  the  focus  has  to  be  on  building  a  sustainable,  scalable  and  cost-efficient  business 
delivery model by leveraging upon technology. 
22.  
I would like to conclude by saying that financial inclusion and inclusive growth are no 
longer just policy choices, but are policy imperatives, which would determine the long-term 
financial stability and sustainability of the economic and social order, going forward. We need 
to ensure that all of us are collectively willing to walk that extra mile to ensure that our fellow 
countrymen get easy access to the financial system and are able to leverage this access to 
improve their economic and social well-being. Please remember that the rich would not be 
able to sleep peacefully if the economic and social divide is allowed to grow any bigger. As I 
mentioned at the beginning, in view of their reach and coverage, electronic and print media 
has an important role in not only supporting our financial inclusion mission but in leading the 
initiative by spreading our message far and wide. Today’s event is a glowing testimony to the 
support being extended by the media to the cause of Financial Inclusion and I firmly believe 
that this support would act as a catalyst and further invigorate the efforts being made by the 
governmental and non-governmental agencies. 
23. 
I once again thank CNBC TV 18 for inviting me to share my thoughts today and do 
hope that the conclave succeeds in throwing up several new practical ideas and strategies 
which  can  be  implemented  by  banks  and  other  financial  sector  participants  to  further  the 
objective of Financial Inclusion in the days to come. 
Thank you! 
 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
