Andreas Dombret: Systemic risk, too big to fail and resolution regimes 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank,  at  the  Salzburg  Global  Seminar  “Out  of  the  shadows:  should  non-banking 
financial institutions be regulated?”, Salzburg, 19 August 2013. 
 Introduction 
1 
Good afternoon, ladies and gentlemen 
It’s a great pleasure to take part in this Salzburg Global Seminar. Many thanks for inviting me 
back.  Over  the  next  twenty  minutes,  I  would  like  to  share  my  views  on  how  to  deal  with 
systemic risk and moral hazard. 
While  concepts  have  been  developed  to  initiate  regulatory  reforms,  it  troubles  me 
tremendously  to  have  to  state  that  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem  still  remains  unresolved. 
Market  participants  continue  to  anticipate  that  governments  will  rescue  systemically 
important financial institutions – or SIFIs – in the event of their failure. 
The resulting refinancing advantage is reflected in so-called rating “uplifts”. Rating agencies 
usually calculate two different ratings for banks. One is a “stand-alone” rating that measures 
a  bank’s  genuine  creditworthiness.  The  other  is  the  “all-in”  rating  which  includes  the 
likelihood and extent of external support available for the bank’s debt. 
The  difference  between  these  two  ratings  is  the  “uplift”.  It  delivers  a  proxy  for  funding 
subsidies, which are benefiting SIFIs. Although these uplift factors have recently shrunk to 
some  degree,  they  unfortunately  remain  substantial.1  This  could  be  taken  as  an  indicator 
supporting my claim that the “too-big-to-fail” problem remains unresolved. 
However, in this regard we need to achieve two objectives at the same time. First, taxpayers 
should not have to foot the bill for bank failures and, second, systemic disruptions must be 
avoided. The experiences following the Lehman collapse five years ago show how important 
financial stability is – and how fragile. So, what can we do about the “too-big-to-fail” problem? 
2 
Solving the “too-big-to-fail” problem 
How to make bank failures less likely 
2.1 
I  am  convinced  that  overcoming  the  “too-big-to-fail”  problem  will  require  a  multi-track 
approach. The main goal is to make SIFIs less likely to fail by increasing their loss-absorbing 
capacity. Basel III represents a landmark change in this respect. These rules are much more 
rigorous than any previous regulation, both in quantitative and qualitative terms. On top of 
this, global SIFIs face additional capital requirements, known as SIFI surcharges. Combined 
with other measures, such as more intensive supervision, these changes will enable banks to 
better cope with stress situations. 
I am aware of a somewhat disconcerting discussion about the perceived shortcomings of the 
new capital standards. Some argue that they are still not rigorous enough. Others argue that 
they  are  too  complex.  Yet  neither  of  these  criticisms  is  convincing.  Basel  III  substantially 
                                                
1  OECD, S Schich and S Lindh, Implicit guarantees for bank debt – Where do we stand?, 2012. Schich and 
Lindh  define  “uplift”  as  the  difference  between  the  “all-in  credit  rating”  (AICR)  and  the  “stand-alone  credit 
rating” (SACR). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
raises capital requirements, and impact studies were carried out before the rules were finally 
endorsed.2 Now we should let Basel III take effect. 
Looking at the issue of complexity, it is true that risk measurement will never be perfect and 
that  relying  on  internal  models  hampers  comparability,  among  other  things.  However, 
simplicity can come at a cost, too, as it disregards the overarching need for risk sensitivity. 
Therefore, we need to strike a balance between risk sensitivity, simplicity and comparability.3 
But  the  spirit  of  the  Basel  rules,  particularly  regarding  risk  sensitivity,  should  not  be 
compromised, nor must their full implementation be called into question. 
How to make bank failures less systemic 
2.2 
While  it  is  necessary  to  increase  banks’  resilience,  that  alone  is  not  enough  to  solve  the 
problem.  There  is  a  second  broad  goal  which  is  now  increasingly  recognised:  we  have  to 
ensure that SIFIs can be resolved without disrupting the financial markets. 
But  before  discussing  more  specifically  how  to  create  effective  resolution  regimes,  let  me 
briefly touch on some suggestions for separating commercial from investment banking. As 
you know, the main argument in favour of such proposals is to avoid or restrict contagion. 
Proponents  of  this  approach  believe  that  separating  deposit-taking  and  lending  from 
investment banking would prevent spill-over effects. The idea is to create a category of rather 
traditional  banks  whose  customers  would  be  protected  by  deposit  insurance  schemes.  On 
the other hand, those banks engaged in riskier and more volatile business could not rely on 
deposits, nor would they be rescued at the taxpayers’ expense. In addition, the separation 
could  simplify  group  structures.  This  would  facilitate  risk  management  and  supervisory 
scrutiny as well as resolution, if need be. 
However, as the boundaries between various banking activities are fluid it is difficult to draw 
a clear line between them. Consequently, structural interventions in banks’ business models 
must be carefully designed. They might help to solve the too-big-to-fail problem, but they are 
by no means a magic bullet. 
3 
How to resolve a SIFI 
for 
financial 
Key attributes of effective resolution regimes for financial institutions 
3.1 
Without  any  doubt,  we  need  effective  resolution  regimes 
institutions. 
Unfortunately,  the  crisis  has  revealed  a  significant  lack  of  suitable  resolution  instruments, 
especially in a cross-border context. This is why the G20 leaders, back in 2011, endorsed the 
Financial  Stability  Board’s  “Key  Attributes  of  Effective  Resolution  Regimes  for  Financial 
Institutions” as a reference point for national resolution regimes. 
They set out core elements of national resolution regimes on a global level. For instance, in 
future  every  G20  country  is  to  entrust  restructuring  and  resolution  functions  to  appointed 
authorities.  Recovery  and  resolution  planning  will  become  mandatory  in  every  resolution 
regime. 
Jurisdictions around the globe are currently contemplating their preferred resolution strategy 
for  systemically  important  banks.  Two  stylized  models  have  recently  been  set  out  by  the 
Financial Stability Board: a Single Point of Entry- and a Multiple Point of Entry-strategy. The 
                                                
2  FSB/BCBS, Macroeconomic Assessment Group: a) “Assessing the macroeconomic impact of the transition to 
stronger capital and liquidity requirements”, Dec 2010 and b) “Assessment of the macroeconomic impact of 
higher loss absorbency for global systemically important banks”, Oct 2011 
3  BCBS, The regulatory framework: balancing risk sensitivity, simplicity and comparability – discussion paper, 
July 2013, http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs258.htm 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
question  behind  these  strategies  is  whether  resolution  tools  will  be  applied  by  a  single 
authority at the top level of a failing bank or whether they will be applied in a coordinated 
manner by more than one authority at the level of regional or national units of the bank. 
Another matter of priority is that resolution instruments, including the bail-in tool, have to be 
codified in national laws. 
The Key Attributes are quite a step forward. Implementing them will gradually align national 
resolution  regimes.  I  am  hopeful  that  this  will  significantly  curtail  the  ability  of  financial 
institutions to hold taxpayers to ransom. 
It  is  now  up  to  governments  to  transpose  the  Key  Attributes  into  national  legislation.  The 
Financial  Stability  Board  is  closely  monitoring  this  process.  A  recent  peer  review  by  the 
Financial  Stability  Board4  showed  that  implementation  is  still  at  an  early  stage  in  many 
G20 countries. 
Implementation efforts therefore have to be treated as an urgent matter in all jurisdictions. 
We would have to pay dearly for any delay. To summarise, we cannot accept any excuse for 
deviations from timely implementation. 
Europe’s implementation of resolution rules: key issues 
3.2 
In  Europe,  the  implementation  of  resolution  rules  has  been  carried  out  through  ECOFIN’s 
agreement of 27 June 2013.5 The Council adopted its general approach on the draft directive 
for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms. 
I welcome the general thrust of the Recovery and Resolution Directive – or RRD. And I hope 
that the trilogue process with the European Parliament can be completed swiftly, as planned. 
Please allow me to look in more detail at three key issues relating to the RRD. 
First,  the  bail-in  tool:  this  enables  resolution  authorities  to  write  down  the  claims  of 
shareholders  and  write  down,  or  convert  into  equity,  the  claims  of  creditors  of  institutions 
which are failing or likely to fail. 
As  predictability  is  crucial  when  it  comes  to  allocating  losses,  I  very  much  agree  with  the 
Council’s general approach stipulating a clear pecking order. Shareholders will be the first in 
line  to  bear  losses,  followed  by  clearly  defined  classes  of  creditors.  Very  few  classes  of 
liabilities are permanently exempted from any bail-in, with covered deposits being the most 
important category. 
I  also  broadly  agree  with  the  Council’s  list  of  permanent  exemptions  –  with  only  one 
reservation. Excluding all inter-bank liabilities  with an original maturity of fewer than seven 
days could have far-reaching consequences, as it may well foster an unwanted bias towards 
short-termism.  I  would  therefore  argue  that  these  liabilities  should  be  shifted  from  the 
permanent  to  the  discretionary  category  of  exemptions.  In  general,  the  bail-in  tool  should 
enter into force in parallel with the other resolution tools, that is, in 2015. 
Second, I welcome the minimum requirement for own funds and so-called eligible liabilities. 
This will ensure that each institution has sufficient loss-absorbing capacity based on its size, 
risk and business model. 
Third,  I  wish  to  comment  on  resolution  funds.  As  a  general  rule,  the  draft  RRD  requires 
member states to set up resolution funds, which are to be funded ex-ante by banks. Within 
ten  years  they  should  reach  a  target  level  of  0.8%  of  covered  deposits.  For  the  sake  of 
compromise,  the  draft  directive  contains  an  exemption  to  the  mandatory  creation  of  a 
                                                
4  FSB, 
on 
Thematic 
review 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_130411a.htm 
resolution 
regimes 
–  Peer 
review 
report,  April 
2013; 
5  http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ecofin/137627.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
separate resolution fund. In this case the member state would have to raise at least the same 
amount  of  financing  from  mandatory  contributions  and  make  it  available  to  the  resolution 
authority upon its request. 
In my view, this mixing of public and private funds for resolution funding purposes is against 
the spirit of the RRD. Moreover, and to be frank, I wonder how this exemption can be applied 
in practice. 
All  in  all,  the  draft  RRD  is  quite  close  to  striking  a  sound  balance  between  the  conflicting 
objectives  of  harmonisation  and  flexible  rulemaking.  A  high  degree  of  harmonisation  is 
needed to ensure both predictability and a level playing field. However, a certain degree of 
flexibility is necessary in order to tailor resolution measures to the specific crisis situation. 
Where  do  we  go  from  here?  On  10  July  2013,  the  European  Commission  presented  its 
proposal for a single resolution mechanism for the banking union. 
I  firmly  believe  we  should  entrust  a  newly  established  European  institution  with  resolution 
powers  as  laid  out  in  the  RRD.  It  must  become  a  strong  and  independent  body  with  full 
decision-making powers. If we agree this to be the objective, let’s find constructive ways to 
bridge an interim period until this can be realised. A transitional phase is probably inevitable, 
so  as  to  allow  the  SRM  to  become  effective  more  or  less  in  parallel  with  the  Single 
Supervisory  Mechanism.  This  is  essential,  as  the  SSM  and  the  SRM  will  be  highly 
intertwined and we should not launch the banking union half-heartedly. 
Concluding remarks 
4 
In summary, effective resolution regimes which also work in cross-border crises are crucial 
for  solving  the  still  unresolved  too-big-to-fail  problem.  This  will  require  international 
cooperation and adherence to standards. The fragmentation of markets and regulation under 
protectionist pressure must be reversed. Although we have made some progress, especially 
conceptually, much more remains to be done, in particular in terms of implementation. 
Incentives and expectations are mutually reinforcing. Markets must be convinced that even a 
large, internationally active bank that runs into trouble can and will be resolved should there 
be a need to do so. Markets must be convinced that shareholders, creditors and the banking 
industry will pick up the bill and not the taxpayer. 
In short: the bail-in is “in” and the bail-out is “out”! I am aware that this is easier said than 
done. It will require firm political will. But it is very much worth the effort. 
Thank you very much for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
