Kerstin af Jochnick: Monetary policy and the current economic situation 
Speech by Ms Kerstin af Jochnick, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, to the 
County Administrative Board, Kalmar, 22 August 2013. 
 It has become something of a tradition for a member of the Executive Board of the Riksbank 
to hold a speech on the current economic situation at the end of August. I think this is a good 
idea;  starting  off  the  new  term  by  summarising  what  has  happened  during  the  summer.  I 
appreciate being given the opportunity to come here to Kalmar to talk about the economic 
situation. Kalmar is part of a region where economic developments are greatly affected by 
cyclical  fluctuations.  Kalmar  and  Kronoberg,  together  with  Blekinge,  are  the  counties  that 
have  experienced  the  largest  fluctuations  in  growth  since  the  early  1980s.  One  reason  for 
this, of course, is that a large share of the companies in the region comprises subcontractors 
to the cyclically-sensitive manufacturing industry.  
Today I intend to start off with the economic assessment we made in July and in particular to 
describe my view of developments at that time and of the monetary policy we have decided 
on. The main message in July was that the Swedish economy is heading for a recovery. But 
we  decided  to  hold  the  repo  rate  at  a  low,  unchanged  level  to  help  the  economy  along. 
Personally, I think the decision was a reasonable balance as it means that inflation will attain 
the target in around two years’ time, while we take into consideration the risks linked to the 
high level of household debt.  
One  important  issue  that  I  would  like  to  discuss  in  greater  depth  today  is  how  monetary 
policy 
the  emerging 
macroprudential  policy  can  play.  Macroprudential  policy  is  more  suitable  than  monetary 
policy for managing financial imbalances, such as a high build-up of debt in the household 
sector, and it is therefore essential that it is implemented as soon as possible.  
into  account  household  debt  and  what 
important  role 
takes 
Well-balanced monetary policy in July  
At the most recent monetary policy meeting in July we noted that growth would be weaker 
than normal this year, both in Sweden and abroad. However, developments in the Swedish 
economy  were  divided.  At  the  same  time  as  the  household  sector  looked  strong  and 
consumption  was  growing,  companies  were  being  affected  by  the  weak  demand  abroad, 
which was leading to lower export and investment. Moreover, the inflation rate was still low. 
But our assessment at the meeting was that there were signs that the recovery in Sweden 
and abroad was gradually strengthening.  
Uneven but gradually strengthening recovery abroad  
Economic prospects have for some time now looked different in different parts of the world, 
but on the whole our assessment in July was that economic activity would gradually improve 
in the coming period. However, I personally thought there were a number of factors in the 
global  economy  that  made  the  forecast  unusually  uncertain.  Prior  to  the  meeting  in  July, 
there had been considerable fluctuations in the financial markets, which were largely due to 
the uncertainty over when the Federal Reserve will begin phasing out its quantitative easing. 
There  was  also  uncertainty  over  what  effects  the  problems  in  the  Chinese  banking  sector 
would have on the Chinese economy and also, as has been the case for a long time now, 
over developments in the euro area.  
Economic  developments  in  the  euro  area  are  still  marked  by  the  need  for  the  private  and 
public sectors to reduce their debt, which is a process that will of course take a long time. 
However, compared with one year ago, developments had been in the right direction in most 
of the problem countries and a number of measures had been taken that led to interest rates 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
falling to lower levels. Our assessment in July was based on the assumption that the reform 
process would continue and the forecast was that GDP growth in the euro area would remain 
weak but gradually increase. However, the slow recovery means that GDP will not reach the 
same level as prior to the decline in 2009 until 2015. This shows what enormous costs the 
global financial crisis has entailed, not only in the form of capital injections to international 
banks and governments, but also in the form of loss of growth and welfare.  
In the United States, conditions for a continued recovery  were good, although growth was 
expected to be slow this year. There were several signs that households would soon have 
reduced  their  debts  to  more  sustainable  levels,  at  the  same  time  as  the  housing  market 
continued  to  improve,  with  rising  housing  prices  and  increased  turnover.  We  therefore 
assessed that GDP in the United States will grow by just over 3 per cent on average in 2014 
and 2015.  
The economic prospects for other regions looked rather mixed. In China, the high growth had 
slowed down at the beginning of 2013, while Japan had showed some positive signals after 
the new stimulus package. The United Kingdom and Denmark showed weak growth, partly 
due  to  problems  in  the  housing  market,  while  Norway  was  assessed  to  have  somewhat 
higher resource utilisation than normal. All in all, the economies in the countries important to 
the  Swedish  economy  were  expected  to  be  weaker  than  normal  this  year,  and  then  to 
gradually improve.  
Gradually brighter growth prospects in Sweden  
In July we pointed out that the weak developments in the euro area in particular affect the 
Swedish  economy,  partly  through  low  demand  for  Swedish  exports  and  investment.  We 
therefore assessed that GDP growth in Sweden would also be lower than normal this year, 
but would gradually strengthen in the coming period. However, developments in the Swedish 
economy  were  divided.  At  the  same  time  as  companies  in  the  manufacturing  industry  in 
particular showed a low level of confidence and investment declined, households’ finances 
were  relatively  strong.  Optimism  in  the  household  sector  had  begun  to  rise,  which  was 
reflected in higher house prices, as well as increased lending and consumption. However, we 
began to see some signs of a turnaround in activity in the manufacturing sector, too.  
Our assessment in July was that the demand for Swedish exports would rise as international 
demand  increased,  while  the  upturn  in  domestic  demand  was  expected  to  broaden. 
Household consumption and housing investment were expected to increase at a faster pace 
as household confidence strengthened further and the labour market improved. At the same 
time, companies are expected to increase their investment as demand rises. We therefore 
made the assessment that GDP growth in Sweden will rise gradually in the coming years and 
reach just over 3.5 per cent in 2015.  
The labour market saw an increase in both the number of people in the labour force and the 
number  of  persons  employed.  Our  assessment  was  that  unemployment  will  remain 
unchanged in the coming year and then begin to fall when the higher GDP growth causes 
employment to increase faster than the labour force.  
Low but gradually rising inflation  
Inflation in Sweden has been low for a long period of time and we devoted extra space to this 
fact  in  the  July  report.1  It  is  not  so  strange  that  inflation  has  been  low,  given  the  Swedish 
economy’s dependence on global economic activity. One of the main reasons is that prices 
of Swedish import goods have been low. This is largely due to global economic activity being 
weak  and  having  affected  global  export  prices,  but  the  stronger  Swedish  krona  has  also 
                                                 
1   A more detailed analysis of the development of inflation is included in the article “The development of costs 
and inflation” in the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy Report published in July 2013. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
contributed. Another reason is that companies have not raised their prices to the same extent 
as their costs have increased. The low price mark-ups are partly due to demand being lower 
than normal and to the considerable uncertainty over international developments.  
In  July  we  assessed  that  inflationary  pressures  would  gradually  increase  over  the  coming 
years, as Sweden and other countries recover. This means that CPIF inflation is expected to 
reach 2 per cent in 2015. CPI inflation is expected to be higher than the target of 2 per cent 
at the end of the forecast period, which is due to mortgage rates rising when the repo rate 
starts  to  increase  as  the  economy  improves.  Let  me  describe  in  more  detail  the  factors 
expected to contribute to the upturn in inflation.  
When global economic activity improves, global export prices are expected to rise. Initially, 
the krona is expected to strengthen somewhat in trade-weighted terms, which will dampen 
the impact on Swedish import prices in the near term. However, from the beginning of next 
year, we assess that the krona will no longer contribute to holding down import prices and 
they  will  then  rise  faster.  As  economic  activity  in  Sweden  strengthens,  the  rate  of  wage 
increase  will  also  rise.  At  the  same  time,  we  have  assessed  that  labour  productivity  is 
increasing, which means that unit labour costs will continue to grow by around 2 per cent a 
year  in  the  coming  years.  The  fact  that  import  prices  rise  faster,  at  the  same  time  as  unit 
labour  costs  continue  to  increase  at  a  normal  rate,  will  lead  to  companies’  total  marginal 
costs gradually beginning to grow at a more normal pace.  
We  also  predicted  in  July  that  the  demand  situation  would  improve  during  the  forecast 
period, partly thanks to higher demand from abroad and a continued expansionary monetary 
policy in Sweden. We are expecting that it will become easier for companies to raise their 
prices  when  demand  increases.  Companies’  profit  shares  will  also  increase  towards  more 
normal levels then. All in all, these factors – increasing unit labour costs, rising import prices 
and  higher  price  mark-ups  –  lead  to  the  assumption  that  inflation  will  rise  in  the  coming 
period.  
Continued low repo rate stimulates the Swedish economy  
We Executive Board members assessed that the repo rate needs to remain low to support 
economic activity and to ensure inflation rises towards the target. We therefore decided at 
the meeting in July to hold the repo rate unchanged at 1 per cent, and the repo-rate path 
shows a slow increase beginning during the second half of 2014.  
Monetary  policy  is  thus  very  expansionary.  However,  the  decision  to  hold  the  repo  rate 
unchanged also gives consideration to the risks linked to Swedish households’ high debts. 
Personally, I consider the repo-rate decision to comprise a reasonable balance. The forecast 
showed that CPIF inflation will attain the target in around two years’ time. An even lower repo 
rate could have led to inflation attaining the target slightly earlier, but the decision is about 
stepping  on  the  gas  just  enough.  A  lower  repo  rate  would  probably  also  lead  to  the  risks 
linked to household debt increasing further, particularly bearing in mind that the situation for 
households  was  relatively  favourable  to  start  with.  There  could  be  a  particularly  difficult 
situation if households expect the low interest rate to persist. This could lead to both house 
prices and debts increasing further, which can have very negative consequences in the form 
of sharply rising unemployment and difficulties in attaining the inflation target further ahead.  
There  are  numerous  discussions  in  Sweden  and  abroad  with  regard  to  how  much 
consideration monetary policy should give to various types of financial imbalance, such as 
high household debt. After the most recent financial crisis, which demonstrated how costly a 
crisis can be as a result of a large build-up of debt, the pendulum has swung towards the 
belief that monetary policy should to a greater extent lean against the wind, and take such 
imbalances into consideration. Personally, I think that as long as there are no other tools in 
place that can counteract the build-up of financial imbalances, monetary policy must take into 
account the risks the imbalances entail. Let me explain my view of these questions before I 
move on to summarise the information received during the summer.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Monetary policy and financial imbalances  
International  experience  shows  that  a  high  level  of  indebtedness  in  all  its  forms  can  pose 
major  risks  to  the  economy.  It  makes  the  economy  more  vulnerable  to  various  types  of 
shock,  such  as  a  fall  in  house  prices,  and  it  can  also  increase  the  risk  of  shocks  actually 
occurring. The flexible inflation targeting conducted by the Riksbank is compatible with giving 
consideration  to  this  type  of  financial  imbalance  in  our  monetary  policy  decisions.  Such 
imbalances ultimately risk jeopardising both the stability of the real economy and the inflation 
target. In a really bad scenario the imbalances could also entail risks for financial stability. As 
the Riksbank’s two main tasks are to attain price stability and financial stability, we must take 
these risks into account.  
Monetary policy needs a more long-term focus  
As I see it, we need to make it clear in the monetary policy analysis how monetary policy 
affects  the  risk  of  a  financial  crisis  arising  and  how  such  a  crisis  scenario  would  look.  As 
financial imbalances usually build up over a long period of time, this means that, in practice, 
we  need  to  look  beyond  the  three-year  perspective  that  normally  forms  the  base  for  our 
forecasts.  Monetary  policy  is  already  forward-looking,  but  with  a  more  long-term  focus  we 
could also include target attainment in the longer run.  
So, to what extent can monetary policy affect the probability of a crisis occurring? Well, it is 
mainly the effect of the repo rate on debt that is important in this context, as the probability of 
a financial crisis increases when indebtedness is high or when debt increase at a faster rate 
than normal.2 As the interest rate entails the cost of taking on debt, monetary policy has an 
effect  on  indebtedness.  In  the  short-term  perspective  it  seems  as  though  the  relationship 
between the repo rate and household debt is not very strong. However, if households expect 
the prevailing low interest rates to persist, and therefore increase their debts to unsustainable 
levels, the effects can be substantial.  
In the July report we describe a potential scenario in Sweden if house prices were to fall at 
the  same  time  as  indebtedness  is  high.3  Experiences  from  other  countries  show  that  this 
would probably mean that households increase their savings and reduce their consumption, 
which  would  subdue  demand  in  the  economy  and  push  up  unemployment.  The  effects  on 
GDP  and  unemployment  may  therefore  be  both  substantial  and  long  lasting.  Relevant 
examples here are Spain and Denmark. Experiences also show that the higher households’ 
debts are, the greater the negative consequences will be of a fall in housing prices.4 At the 
same time, there would probably be long-lasting difficulties in attaining the inflation target, as 
the uncertainty over future inflation increases significantly.  
Conducting a flexible inflation-targeting policy in this context involves taking into account the 
risk of a crisis occurring by balancing the effects within the normal forecast period against the 
long-term  risks  I  described.  There  is  of  course  considerable  scope  here  for  different 
assessments, for instance, to what extent monetary policy affects the probability of a crisis, 
as  well  as  how  a  crisis  scenario  would  play  out.  These  are  difficult  monetary  policy 
deliberations without easy answers. As Sweden is a small country with its own currency and 
strongly  dependent  on  other  countries,  it  is  particularly  important  that  we  do  not  create 
                                                 
2   See,  for  instance,  M.  Schularick  and  A.M.  Taylor  (2012),  “Credit  Booms  Gone  Bust:  Monetary  Policy, 
Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008”, American Economic Review 102, pp. 1029–61. 
3   A more detailed analysis is provided in the article “Financial imbalances in the monetary policy assessment” in 
the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy Report published in July 2013. 
4   See,  for  instance,  IMF  “World  Economic  Outlook”,  April  2012,  A.  R.  Mian,  K.  Rao  and  A.  Sufi  (2011), 
“Household  Balance  Sheets,  Consumption,  and  the  Economic  Slump”,  Chicago  Booth  Working  paper, 
November  2011  and  K.  Dynan,  (2012)  “Is  a  Household  Debt  Overhang  Holding  Back  Consumption?” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, spring edition. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
imbalances that can affect confidence in the country, the currency and the banking system. I 
consider the assessment we made in July to entail on the whole a good balance between 
these difficult questions.  
Macroprudential policy needs to be implemented without delay...  
At  the  same  time,  I  consider  it  important  to  emphasise  that  the  repo  rate  is  a  blunt 
instrument. Other policy areas have more effective tools for influencing household debt. One 
such  policy  area  is  macroprudential  policy,  which  entails  limiting  the  risks  in  the  financial 
system as a whole. If there were more effective tools available for managing and preventing 
financial imbalances, monetary policy would not need to take such risks into account to the 
same extent.  
At present, several countries and international organisations are working on producing and 
implementing a new framework for financial stability, where macroprudential policy will be in 
focus and the central bank will be given an important role. However, the design is slightly 
different in different countries. For instance, in the United Kingdom the central bank has been 
given the entire responsibility for macroprudential policy, while in Germany the responsibility 
has been given to a council, on which the central bank has a central position.  
It  is  important  that  a  small  country  like  Sweden  does  not  deviate  from  the  international 
pattern, but also that it makes efficient use of the existing resources and competence. Both 
the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  have 
important  competence  with  regard  to  conducting  effective  macroprudential  policy.  The 
Riksbank  has  considerable  knowledge  and  experience  of  analysing  the  risks  that  might 
threaten  the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  of  macroeconomic  analysis  and 
forecasting. It is therefore easier for us to understand the linkages between the financial and 
the  real  economies,  which  is  essential  for  a  successful  macroprudential  policy.  Moreover, 
there are clear points in common between macroprudential policy and monetary policy, as 
they  affect  the  conditions  for  one  another.  At  the  same  time,  Finansinspektionen  currently 
conducts  supervision  with  a  focus  on  individual  institutions  and  thus  has  important 
competence and experience for ensuring that macroprudential policy is effective.  
As  I  see  it,  there  are  two  main  principles  that  should  be  used  when  drawing  up 
macroprudential policy. Firstly, there should be a clear mandate covering accountability and 
the  requirement  for  insight.  Secondly,  it  is  important  that  the  authority  that  is  given 
responsibility for macroprudential policy is also equipped with the right tools, that is, given the 
possibility to intervene at an early stage when risks that could lead to negative effects on the 
Swedish economy have been identified. Sweden’s place in the global financial system and 
our domestic conditions mean that we cannot delay any longer in designing a framework for 
financial  stability  and  macroprudential  policy;  we  need  to  get  this  in  place  as  soon  as 
possible.  
...and we need an even better analytical base  
However, to be able to make the best possible analyses and thus design effective tools to 
counteract  the  risks  of  high  indebtedness,  we  also  need  to  have  better  statistics  on 
household  borrowing.  This  has  also  been  pointed  out  by  both  the  IMF  and  the  European 
Commission in their assessments of the Swedish economy.5  
As a preliminary step towards improving the analytical base we at the Riksbank have asked 
the Swedish banks to provide us with data on households’ loans. The data collected by the 
Riksbank  will  be  used  to  analyse  how  vulnerable  the  Swedish  households  are  and  how 
potential risks are distributed among the population. Finansinspektionen already makes good 
                                                 
5   “Sweden – 2013 Article IV Consultation: Concluding Statement of the Mission”, IMF, 31 May, 2013. “Council 
Recommendation (COM(2013) 377 final)”, European Commission, 29 May, 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
analyses  and  have  on  several  occasions  gathered  random  samples  among  newly-granted 
loans.  The  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  cooperate  in  the  analysis  of  the  mortgage 
survey, but these random samples entail a small selection and only capture the new loans 
granted by the banks. There is thus a need to go one step further to see how the debts are 
distributed and thus how large the risks in the entire banking system are, not merely those in 
the newly-granted loans.  
Another factor that affects household debt is residential construction. Not enough housing is 
being  built  in  metropolitan  regions  to  keep  up with  the  growth  in  population.  This naturally 
affects both housing prices and household debt and is a long-term problem that should be 
managed but that neither monetary policy nor macroprudential policy can affect.  
Developments during the summer  
While waiting for macroprudential policy to be established, we are continuing to work on our 
monetary policy analysis in the way I have described and at the beginning of September it 
will  be  time  for  a  new  repo-rate  decision.  Since  we  made  our  assessment  in  July  new 
information has been published that we will analyse and make an overall assessment of at 
our meeting in September, but I shall now summarise what has happened so far.  
Clearer guidance about future monetary policy  
During  the  summer  the  financial  markets  have  largely  focused  on  expectations  of  future 
monetary  policy,  in  particular  how  the  Federal  Reserve  is  expected  to  act  in  the  coming 
period. At the same time, both the European Central Bank and the Bank of England have 
stated  clearer  forward  guidance  in  order  to  increase  transparency  and  reduce  uncertainty. 
One  reason  for  the  need  to  increase  transparency  is  that  these  central  banks  have  come 
down to very low policy rates. This means there is a greater need for central banks to clearly 
communicate their views on future monetary policy. The Riksbank has long emphasised the 
importance of a central bank being transparent and giving clear guidance, which is why we 
started  publishing  a  repo-rate  path  and  forecasts  for  inflation  and  unemployment,  for 
instance, in connection with our monetary policy decisions back in 2007.  
The  uncertainty  on  the  global  financial  markets  has  declined  during  the  summer  and  the 
increased volatility which we noticed prior to the meeting in July in the stock markets as well 
as  the  bond  and  foreign  exchange  markets  has  also  decreased  somewhat.  Government 
bond yields in the United States and Europe have continued to increase while stock markets 
around  the  world  have  risen,  even  if  the  latter  fell  somewhat  during  the  last  week.  The 
Swedish  financial  markets  have  followed  the  international  developments  and  market  rates 
and  the  stock  market  have  risen  in  Sweden  during  the  summer.  The  Swedish  krona  has 
fluctuated  considerably  but  all  in  all  the  change  is  small  compared  to  the  level  at  the 
beginning of July. The Swedish krona has strengthened somewhat in trade-weighted terms, 
which is mainly due to a strengthening against the US dollar.  
Some improvement in the euro area  
Developments in the euro area have been relatively calm over the summer, despite some 
political uncertainty in Portugal, Spain and Italy. Moreover, there have been assessments of 
Ireland and Greece, for instance, that indicate the on-going reform work is progressing well. 
The  reform  work  in  both  countries  has  been  approved,  which  has  paved  the  way  for 
continuing  aid  payments.  But  the  problems  remain,  and  during  the  summer  both  Italy  and 
France had their credit ratings downgraded because of poor growth prospects.  
Perhaps  the  most  important  thing  is  that  new  statistics  show  that  the  euro  area  GDP  has 
begun to grow again. After being negative for six quarters in a row, GDP growth was 1.1 per 
cent in the second quarter of this year, according to preliminary figures and calculated as an 
annual  rate.  In  Germany,  which  is  very  important  to  Swedish  exports,  GDP  growth  was 
clearly above the average for the euro area as a whole. At the same time, indicators for the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
start  of  the  third  quarter  point  to  a  continued  improvement.  The  aggregate  purchasing 
managers’ index rose in July to just over 50, for the first time since the start of 2012, and 
consumer  confidence  also  began  to  rise.  New  labour  market  statistics  also  show  that 
unemployment  in  the  region  has  stabilised,  albeit  at  a  very  high  level.  All  in  all,  the  new 
information confirms the picture that the recovery in the euro area has begun.  
Mixed signals from the rest of the world...  
New US statistics indicate continued strength in the US economy. Preliminary figures show 
that  GDP  increased  in  the  second  quarter  by  1.7  per  cent,  calculated  as  an  annual  rate, 
compared with the first quarter of this year, which is in line with the assessment we made in 
July. At the same time as the new outcomes were published, the statistics authority released 
revised  GDP  figures  for  previous  periods.  These  show  that  GDP  growth  has  been  slightly 
higher since 2007, and that the fall in GDP during the financial crisis was thus not as large as 
indicated by earlier statistics. In the United Kingdom, GDP was slightly better than expected 
during  the  second  quarter.  The  indicators  for  July  also  point  to  a  gradual  recovery  in  the 
British economy.  
However,  in  Japan,  which  showed  positive  signals  at  the  start  of  the  year,  newly-received 
statistics  over  the  summer  have  not  been  as  clear.  GDP  growth  slowed  down  during  the 
second  quarter  and  the  recovery  in  both  the  household  and  corporate  sectors  appears  to 
have been dampened slightly further at the start of the third quarter. At the same time, data 
shows that emerging markets are slowing down somewhat. In China, preliminary figures for 
the  second  quarter  show  that  GDP  increased  by  7.5  per  cent  as  an  annual  percentage 
change, which was a slowdown compared with the previous quarter. Indicators for the other 
BRIC countries, that is, Brazil, Russia and India, show some slowdown. All in all, the new 
information  shows  some  signs  of  strength  in  the  recovery  in  advanced  economies,  but  a 
rather more subdued development in emerging markets.  
...but also in Sweden  
It was clear that international developments play an important role for the Swedish economy 
when the preliminary GDP figures for the second quarter were published. GDP fell by 0.2 per 
cent  when  calculated  as  an  annual  rate  compared  with  the  first  quarter  of  this  year.  The 
negative  growth  was  largely  due  to  a  fall  in  exports,  but  household  consumption  also  fell 
somewhat.  The  outcome  was  slightly  weaker  than  we  and  several  other  analysts  had 
expected.  But  as  the  figures  are  preliminary,  we  probably  should  not  draw  any  major 
conclusions from them. At the same time, new monthly statistics for the retail trade showed 
that sales were strong at the end of the second quarter.  
Indicators for the start of third quarter have given mixed signals. So far, the information is 
limited to the business tendency survey for July and the purchasing managers’ index for the 
same  month.  The  economic  tendency  survey,  which  includes  both  households  and 
companies,  rose  slightly  in  July  and  the  upturn  was  on  a  broad  front.  Confidence  in  the 
household  sector  is  now  at  its  historical  average.  The  purchasing  managers’  index  for  the 
manufacturing  industry  was  over  50  in  July,  for  the  third  month  in  a  row,  which  indicates 
growth in the manufacturing industry, but the most recent outcome showed a fall compared 
with the previous month. At the same time, however, the purchasing managers’ index for the 
service industries rose.  
According to new labour market data for June, the earlier positive trend continued for both 
the number of people in the labour force and the number of employed. Unemployment rose 
marginally in June, but monthly data is usually volatile and if one looks at the second quarter 
as a whole, unemployment fell somewhat more when compared with the first quarter than we 
had assessed in July. During the summer, inflation outcomes were published for June and 
July. CPI rose by 0.1 per cent in July, compared with the same month last year, at the same 
time as the underlying CPIF inflation rate was 1.2 per cent. This was somewhat higher than 
expected, mainly owing to an unexpectedly sharp rise in energy prices.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
During  the  summer,  new  financial  market  statistics  were  also  published  for  the  month  of 
June. The annual growth rate for lending to households was 4.7 per cent in June, that is, the 
same as in May. This means that the rate of increase in lending has remained more or less 
unchanged since last summer.  
Next monetary policy decision on 4 September  
A number of mixed signals have been received during the summer. While the volatility on the 
financial  markets  has  declined,  there  is  still  some  uncertainty  over  the  strength  of  the 
recovery in the real economy. There have been signs of a gradual improvement, for instance, 
in the euro area and the United States, but on the other hand the GDP outcome in Sweden, 
for  instance,  signalled  that  the  recovery  is  fragile.  At  our  monetary  policy  meeting  on  4 
September we will have to balance these factors against one another, and also take in the 
information received in the meantime. 
Until  macroprudential  policy  has  been  established,  we  will  continue  to  conduct  a  flexible 
monetary policy that enables us to take into account a number of different factors, such as 
household  debt.  At  the  Riksbank  we  are  busy  working  on  new  analyses  and  forecasts  on 
which to base the next repo-rate decision. We will return with a new overall assessment in 
connection with the monetary policy meeting in September. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
