William C Dudley: Brief remarks about the centennial “The Fed at 100” 
Exhibit 
Introductory remarks by Mr William C Dudley, President and Chief Executive Officer of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, at the Museum of American Finance, New York City, 
25 September 2013. 
 Thank you all for being here to commemorate the opening of the centennial exhibit for the 
Federal  Reserve  System  and  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  at  the  Museum  of 
American  Finance,  just  a  few  blocks  from  the  New  York  Fed’s  landmark  head  office  at 
33 Liberty Street. I would like to say thank you to our friends at the Museum for their work 
and interest in the Fed and for supporting us in organizing this event.  
Before  making  some  brief  remarks  about the  centennial,  I  would  also  like  to  acknowledge 
some  of  the  people  in  attendance  tonight. We  have  two  former  New  York  Fed  presidents 
here this evening: Jerry Corrigan and Bill McDonough.  
I met Jerry, the seventh president of the Bank, when I was still wet behind the ears. I was just 
out  of graduate  school  at  the  Board  of Governors  in Washington,  but Jerry  was  already  a 
force to be reckoned with and a part of Paul Volcker’s inner circle. Jerry’s tenure as president 
had many memorable moments, including the October 1987 stock market “break”. Jerry, of 
course,  was  instrumental  in  working  with  then  Chairman  Alan  Greenspan  in  devising  a 
response to provide liquidity to the market, and an episode that could have ended in financial 
crisis soon passed. Jerry also tackled many other difficult issues during his tenure, including 
the Latin-American debt crisis and the development of the first Basel accord.  
We  also  have  Bill  McDonough,  the  eighth  president  of  the  Bank,  who  built  on  the 
accomplishments of Jerry’s tenure, and made great strides in connecting the New York Fed 
to  the  broader  region.  At  the  same  time,  he  helped  ensure  that  the  Federal  Reserve  was 
prepared to face new, salient challenges presented by developments in the global economic 
and financial landscape. During his tenure, the city, the country and the Bank experienced a 
very  significant  crisis  on  September  11,  2001.  Under  Bill’s  leadership,  New  York  Fed  staff 
worked tirelessly on Liberty Street, supporting the efforts of first responders, while ensuring 
that  financial  markets  continued  to  operate  and  serve  their  vital  function  in  the  U.S.  and 
global economy.  
A number of the members of our Board of Directors, including Chairwoman Rafferty, are with 
us,  as  is  one  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s  friends  from  the  international  central  banking 
community:  Mervyn  King,  the  recent  head  of  the  Bank  of  England.  Mervyn  and  his  wife 
recently  moved  to  New  York  City,  so  we  should  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  them.  For 
Mervyn, I am guessing that one hundred years may not seem like a long time, given that the 
Bank of England is over 300 years old, but I am sure he will graciously allow us our moment. 
We are also joined by many other friends and associates of the New York Fed, and a great 
number of our current and former staff.  
For 100 years the Federal Reserve has been an essential contributor to American economic 
prosperity  and  stability  and  that  record  is  reflected  in  this  fascinating  exhibit.  Rather  than 
focus on its achievements during my brief remarks this evening, I thought I’d highlight what I 
think  makes  the  institution  that  I  have  the  honor  of  leading,  the  New  York  Fed,  such  a 
remarkable place within this extraordinary System.  
First,  we  are  a  bank  within  government.  That  means  we  not  only  have  researchers, 
supervisors  and  market  analysts,  but  we  also  provide  banking  services  and  possess 
significant operational capabilities. We accept deposits, make loans and operate the System 
Open Market Account for the Federal Open Market Committee. When exigent and unusual 
circumstances  require  extraordinary  operations,  be  it  in  a  financial  crisis  or  to  implement 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
unconventional monetary policies, we stand ready. Our operational capabilities complement 
our more conventional central bank policy role in a way that is, I think, very special within the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Second,  the  New  York  Fed  is  a  vital  component  of  the  international  role  played  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  System.  This  can  be  seen  in  our  Central  Bank  International  Account 
Services,  where  we  have  more  than  $3  trillion  in  foreign  assets  under  our  management. 
Some  of  those  assets  glisten  on  the  bedrock  of  Manhattan.  The  gold  vault  at  33  Liberty 
Street  remains  the  world’s  largest  depository  of  monetary  gold  held  on  behalf  of  foreign 
governments,  central  banks  and  official  international  organizations.  This  international 
orientation  was  also  very  much  in  evidence  during  the  crisis  as  we  negotiated  foreign 
exchange swap agreements with a number of foreign central banks and then operationalized 
the provision of dollar liquidity worldwide through a coordinated system of dollar auctions.  
Third, and perhaps most importantly, we have an unusually talented and dedicated group of 
people working at the Bank who are committed to promoting the mission of the institution and 
serving the public interest. While we may not, on occasion, be as nimble as we might like, 
the attitude of our staff is to always find a way, to do whatever it takes (within the law and the 
scope of our responsibilities, of course), and to not rest until we have come up with the best 
plan of action. That attitude was most clearly and publicly evident during the Bank’s response 
to  the  financial  crisis,  where  we  played  a  critical  role  within  the  System  in  preventing  a 
financial panic from turning into a world-wide depression. We continue to display that spirit 
each and every day at the Bank.  
And it is that attitude, ability and esprit de corps that will no doubt allow us and the System to 
meet  the  important  challenges  on  the  road  ahead.  I  will  focus  briefly  on  a  few  such 
challenges: 
The first will be on the monetary policy front. The Federal Reserve has engaged in a set of 
unconventional  monetary  policies  in  recent  years.  These  policies  have  been  necessary 
because  the  FOMC  could  not  ease  monetary  policy  further  by  conventional  means  –  the 
federal  funds  rate  was  constrained  by  the  so-called  “zero  lower  bound”.  Exit  from  these 
unconventional  set  of  policies  is  certainly  feasible  –  the  ability  to  pay  interest  on  excess 
reserves gives us a viable tool to manage monetary policy even  with an enlarged balance 
sheet, and the New York Fed is prepared to execute on this mission, as we always are. But 
we  do  have  to  be  a  bit  humble  about  what  we  don’t  know.  There  will  undoubtedly  be 
communications and operational challenges and unexpected consequences. We will need to 
be sufficiently agile so that we can best achieve our dual mandate of maximum sustainable 
employment in the context of price stability.  
The second challenge for us at the New York Fed, and within the regulatory community more 
generally,  will  be  in  staying  the  course  and  implementing  a  regulatory  regime  in  which  no 
institutions are “too big to fail” (TBTF). TBTF is wrong for several reasons. It creates an unfair 
disparity between large and small institutions. In addition to being unfair, it creates greater 
risks  to  financial  stability  by  encouraging  greater  size  and  complexity.  We  have  made 
considerable progress toward ending TBTF – raising capital and liquidity requirements for the 
largest, most systemic banks – but there is a ways to go. In particular, to paraphrase former 
New  York  Fed  President  Tim  Geithner,  while  the  single  point  of  entry  concept  “beats  no 
plan”,  significant  barriers  to  achieving  a  cross  border  resolution  remain,  and  there  are  still 
insufficient  incentives  in  place  for  firms  to  take  corrective  actions  early  on  to  prevent  their 
failure in the first place.  
The third challenge for the Federal Reserve is to put financial stability on par with monetary 
policy. As our experience from 2007 to 2009 has demonstrated, monetary policy cannot work 
properly when there is financial instability. When financial instability occurs, it disturbs market 
functioning  and  can  impair  bank  balance  sheets  in  a  way  that  disrupts  their  financial 
intermediation function, constraining the availability of credit for households and businesses. 
This, in turn, can lead to further reductions in aggregate demand that put additional stress on 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the  weakened  financial  system.  Financial  stability  cannot  be  subordinated  to  any  other 
priority.  
The fourth challenge is to sustain and enhance the capabilities of the New York Fed. This 
starts most obviously in continuing to attract, develop and retain the best people. But it also 
extends to tending to the so-called culture of the institution – for example, ensuring that good 
ideas  rise  to  the  top  no  matter  where  they  originate,  and  that  people  feel  comfortable  to 
challenge the conventional wisdom.  
These challenges are energizing, and that’s why being president of the New York Fed is the 
greatest job in the world. And I am confident that, because of the talent and dedication of our 
staff, the New York Fed will succeed in surmounting the challenges it faces now and will face 
over the next 100 years.  
And to drive home the point of our staff’s dedication, I would like to highlight the efforts of one 
person,  Rosemary  Lazenby,  who  has  made  this  exhibit  possible.  Rosemary  is  the  longest 
tenured employee at the Bank – 55 years – she is our resident historian and curator and she 
has  delayed  her  retirement  in  order  to  develop  this  centennial  exhibit.  Her  efforts  are  just 
another example of what really glistens at 33 Liberty Street (and I am not referring to the gold 
in  our  vault).  Thank  you  Rosemary,  and  thank  you  all  for  coming  out  this  this  evening  to 
enjoy the centennial exhibit. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
