Sayuri Shirai: Japan’s economic activity, prices, and monetary policy – 
monetary policy in the past and present 
Speech by Ms Sayuri Shirai, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Asahikawa, 13 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Good  morning.  It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  this  opportunity  to  visit  Hokkaido  and  meet 
representatives of the city of Asahikawa. It is my first time to visit this place, so I am really 
looking  forward  to  learning  from  you  about  this  region  through  an  exchange  of  views.  In 
addition, I would like to express my sincere gratitude for your cooperation with the activities 
of the Bank of Japan’s local office in Asahikawa and Sapporo Branch. 
As  you  may  know,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  monetary  policy  called  Quantitative  and 
qualitative  monetary  easing  (QQE)  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  (MPM)  held  on  April  3 
and  4,  2013.  And  I  would  like  to  examine  this  new  policy  here  today.  Let  me  first  briefly 
outline the sequence of my speech. In the next section, Section II, I will explain the Bank’s 
outlook for economic activity and prices in Japan on the basis of the Outlook for Economic 
Activity  and  Prices  (hereafter  the  Outlook  Report).  Then,  I  would  like  to  consider  QQE  
– whose expected effects are incorporated in the Outlook Report – by focusing on the main 
features of this new policy. In Section III, I will review the previous policy – Comprehensive 
monetary easing (CME) – to facilitate an understanding of the essence of QQE, and I will 
also introduce my related proposal, which was presented at the March MPM. In Section IV, 
I will discuss my views and suggestions on the Outlook Report. Following my speech, I am 
looking forward to receiving your candid opinions about the content of my speech as well as 
the situation of the local economy. 
Economic activity, prices, and the new monetary policy  
II. 
I will begin my presentation by describing the Bank’s outlook for economic activity and prices 
presented in the Outlook Report released in April. After that, I will explain the features of the 
new monetary policy and the transmission mechanisms.  
Outlook for economic activity and prices 
A. 
In  the  light  of  recent  developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices,  Japan’s  economy  has 
been picking up. It is likely to return to a moderate recovery path around mid-2013, mainly 
against  the  background  that  domestic  demand  remains  resilient  due  to  the  effects  of 
monetary easing as well as various economic measures, and that growth rates of overseas 
economies  gradually  pick  up.  Thereafter,  while  the  economy  will  be  affected  by  the  front-
loaded  increase  and  subsequent  decline  in  demand  prior  to  and  after  the  two  scheduled 
consumption  tax  hikes,  it  is  likely  to  continue  growing  as  a  trend  from  fiscal  2013  toward 
fiscal 2015, at a pace above its potential, as a virtuous cycle among production, income, and 
spending is maintained (Chart 1). 
Regarding prices, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI; all items 
less  fresh  food)  has  recently  been  around  0  percent  or  slightly  negative.  The  outlook  for 
prices  as  measured  by  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  –  excluding  the  direct 
effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes  –  is  expected  to  follow  a  rising  trend;  as  such,  it  will 
reflect factors such as the improvement in the output gap (the difference between actual and 
potential GDP) as well as the rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations. According 
to the “median” of the Policy Board members’ forecasts, the CPI inflation is likely to reach 
about 2 percent toward fiscal 2015 (Chart 2). Chart 2 indicates the rate of change in prices 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
with  and  without  the  effects  of  the  consumption  tax  hikes.1  The  output  gap  is  expected  to 
follow  a  moderate  improving  trend  (Chart  3).  Moreover,  as  a  tightening  of  labor  market 
conditions is expected to become evident, nominal wages are likely to see gradual upward 
pressure (charts 4 and 5). In addition, some indicators suggest a recent rise in medium- to 
long-term  inflation  expectations  (Chart  6).  These  expectations  are  likely  to  continue  on  a 
rising trend under QQE and the pace of increase may accelerate – especially after the actual 
rate of price change turns from negative to positive this year, gradually converging to around 
the 2 percent target. Import prices are also expected to continue rising during the projection 
period (fiscal 2013–2015), reflecting upward pressure for the time being from developments 
in the foreign exchange market and assuming that international commodity prices will follow 
a moderate rising trend in line with global economic growth. 
Upside and downside risks to Japan’s economy  
B. 
With  respect  to  the  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  Bank’s  aforementioned  baseline 
scenario for economic activity, the following five factors were examined: (1) developments in 
global financial markets; (2) performance of overseas economies; (3) firms’ and households’ 
medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations;  (4)  the  extent  of  the  front-loaded  increase  and 
subsequent  decline  in demand  prior  to  and  after  the  consumption  tax  hikes;  and  (5)  fiscal 
sustainability in the medium to long term. Following a review by the Bank, these risks were 
assessed as being “balanced,” although uncertainty remained high, including that regarding 
developments in overseas economies (Chart 7). As for upside and downside risks specific to 
prices,  the  following  uncertainties  were  examined:  (1)  developments  in  firms’  and 
households’ medium- to long-term inflation expectations; (2) the responsiveness of prices to 
the output gap; and (3) developments in import prices reflecting fluctuations in international 
commodity  prices  and  foreign  exchange  rates.  After  the  Bank  examined  these  matters,  it 
assessed  that  the  risks  on  the  price  front  as  “largely  balanced”;  however,  considerable 
uncertainty surrounds developments in medium- to long-term inflation expectations (Chart 7). 
Regarding these risk assessments, my personal views will be explained in Section IV. 
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Policy (QQE) 
C. 
Next, I would like to consider QQE, which was introduced at the MPM held on April 3 and 4. 
The  aforementioned  Outlook  Report  certainly  reflects  the  projected  effects  of  the  new 
monetary policy. QQE was adopted after analyzing the effectiveness and limitations of the 
previous CME, and the aim was to maintain the 2 percent price stability target adopted in 
January 2013 under CME. This will be explained in detail in Section III. Here, I would like to 
examine the four main aspects related to QQE. 
Aspect 1: Increase in purchases of Japanese Government Bonds (JGBs) and 
extension of their maturities 
The first characteristic of QQE is the purchase of JGBs as the most important tool toward 
achieving the 2 percent price stability target at the earliest possible time. The integration of 
JGB purchases under a regular purchase operation (informally called the Rinban operation) 
with the Asset Purchase Program was finally achieved, as explained in Section III. Moreover, 
the average remaining maturity of the Bank’s JGB purchases was decided to be extended 
from the current level of slightly under three years (after integrating the two operations) to 
about seven years (six to eight years) by purchasing JGBs with maturities of up to 40 years; 
this was done to exert further downward pressure on the whole yield curve (Chart 8). The 
                                                 
1   To measure the impact of the monetary policy, it is important to look at indicators other than the effects of the 
consumption tax hikes. This is because the impact of the  tax  hikes is effective only  during the first  year of 
implementation; it is thus temporary and should be analyzed separately from the effects of monetary easing. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
yearly pace of increase in the amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank was set at about 
50 trillion yen, and it will continue over two years, thereby doubling the amount outstanding 
from the end of 2012 to the end of 2014 (Chart 9). I believe that these changes constitute a 
considerable departure from previous practices both in terms of “quantity” (based on the size 
of the program) and “quality” (based on the maturity length). 
funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate 
Aspect 2: Increase in purchases of risk assets  
The  second  characteristic  of  QQE  is  an  increase  in  the  purchase  of  two  risk  assets  – 
exchange-traded 
trusts  (J-REITs). 
Considering  the  market  size  and  the  risk  volume  borne  by  the  Bank,  the  yearly  purchase 
amount was set at 1 trillion yen and 30 billion yen, respectively, over two years. This would 
double the amount outstanding of ETFs from the end of 2012 to the end of 2014. Regarding 
CP  and  corporate  bonds,  it  was  decided  to  maintain  the  amounts  outstanding  of  these 
holdings given the already low levels of risk premia (expected excess returns demanded by 
investors relative to safe assets) after the decision in January. 
investment 
Aspect 3: Emphasis on inflation expectations and adopting the “quantity” target  
Third,  QQE  emphasizes  the  expectations  of  markets,  firms,  and  households  –  particularly 
medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  –  as  one  of  the  most  important  channels  for 
achieving  the  2  percent  target.  This  feature  draws  a  clear  line  between  QQE  and  the 
previous CME. If firms and households expect inflation to rise in the medium to long term, 
that may positively affect the current levels of sales prices and wages. Moreover, as long as 
the  pace  of  increase  in  inflation  expectations  exceeds  that  in  long-term  nominal  interest 
rates, long-term interest rates in real terms will decline and thus support an accommodative 
monetary environment. I will touch on the concept of inflation expectations later. 
Let  me  add  a  few  more  comments  on  this  issue.  As  described  in  Section  III,  the  Bank 
previously held the view that it might take some time to achieve the 2 percent target; this was 
because  (1)  firms  and  households  are  accustomed  to  past  low-price  movements  and 
(2) collective  efforts  are  necessary  to  strengthen  potential  economic  growth  and  hence 
inflation expectations. I still take this view. The important point here, however, is that there is 
no  time  like  the  present.  For  example,  the  Japanese  government  has  adopted  stimulative 
measures  in  addition  to  making  ongoing  reconstruction  efforts  while  expressing  the  clear 
determination to raise potential economic growth through various strategies. Expectations of 
stronger  monetary  easing  since  the  end  of  2012  have  already  favorably  affected  some 
markets,  including  the  exchange  rate,  stock,  and  J-REIT  markets.  Firms  and  households 
have a more positive outlook for the economy. In this favorable environment, I believe that it 
may be possible to accelerate the pace of rise in medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
in a stable manner by adopting a bold monetary policy. At the same time, I honestly feel that 
the  Bank  should  maximize  its  monetary  easing  measures  to  demonstrate  its  strong 
determination to conquer deflation. 
The  next  question  is  how  to  raise  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations.  For  this 
purpose, the Bank decided to change the main operating target for money market operations 
from the uncollateralized overnight call rate (i.e., interest rates) to the monetary base (i.e., 
“quantity”). There are several reasons for adopting the monetary base, which comprises cash 
(banknotes  and  coins  in  circulation)  and  reserve  deposits  (financial  institutions’  current 
account  deposits  with  the  Bank).  Using  the  monetary  base,  it  is  intuitively  easier  for  the 
public and market participants to grasp the essence of monetary easing: an increase in the 
“quantity” can easily be connected to a large-scale supply of cash, thereby creating an image 
of inflation. In addition, the monetary base is often used in financial markets as a reference 
for measuring the scale of monetary easing across central banks. Moreover, the monetary 
base is a basic concept presented in macroeconomic textbooks, and so it is globally known. 
Finally,  changing  the  main  operating  target  effectively  signals  a  change  in  the  monetary 
policy framework. Thus, it was decided that the monetary base should rise at an annual pace 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of about 60–70 trillion yen over two years; this would double the amount outstanding from 
138 trillion yen at end-2012 to about 200 trillion yen at end-2013 and further to 270 trillion 
yen at end-2014 (Chart 9). The last figure would account for nearly 60 percent of nominal 
GDP – far above the levels of other advanced economies. 
Aspect 4: Effective communication strategies  
The  fourth  characteristic  of  QQE  is  that  the  Bank  uses  the  number  “two”  a  great  deal: 
2 percent  price  stability  target;  a  time  horizon  of  about  two  years;  doubling  the  monetary 
base and the amounts outstanding of JGBs and ETFs; and doubling the average remaining 
maturity  of  JGB  purchases.  The  Bank  does  so  to  send  a  clear  message  about  the  new 
framework  and  its  strong  determination  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target.  Indeed,  positive 
reactions have been received both domestically and abroad regarding the clarity of the new 
communication  strategy.  Nonetheless,  I  personally  believe  that  there  is  still  room  for 
improvement in terms of communication strategies, as described in Section IV.  
D. 
Transmission mechanism for achieving the 2 percent target under QQE 
Impact on economic activity and prices 
Regarding  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  easing  on  economic  activity  under 
QQE, several channels have been considered. With the first channel, the purchase of assets 
continues  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  long-term  nominal  interest  rates  and  the  risk 
premia  of  risk  asset  prices  (Chart  8).  This  channel  would  contribute  to  increasing  firms’ 
business investment, households’ durable consumption and residential investment by (1) a 
decline  in  the  funding  cost  of  firms  and  households,  (2)  improvement  in  firms’  balance 
sheets, and (3) the wealth effect.  
With the second channel, the continuation of JGB purchases by the Bank may encourage 
financial  institutions  as  well  as  institutional  and  individual  investors  to  shift  some  of  their 
portfolios  to  risk  assets;  they  would  do  so  in  the  process  of  adjusting  some  of  their  asset 
management  policies  away  from  deflation-oriented  strategies.  The  so-called  portfolio 
rebalance effect is intended to promote some degree of risk-taking among a wide range of 
financial institutions and investors, and it is necessary to energize Japan’s economy. Some 
of that risk money could be allocated to viable emerging, growing firms. The effects of the 
first  and  second  channels  are  expected  to  be  greater  than  those  envisaged  under  the 
previous monetary easing policy, CME. 
Regarding  the  third  channel,  increases  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  are 
expected  to  lead  to  a  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  in  real  terms,  thereby  increasing 
business investment by firms as well as residential investment and consumption of durable 
goods  by  households.  In  addition,  the  anticipation  of  higher  inflation  may  hasten  these 
investment and consumption activities. These three channels may lead to an expansion of 
aggregate demand, an improvement in the output gap, and a rise in medium- to long-term 
inflation expectations, thereby raising the rate of price changes. 
Impact on long-term interest rates 
So far, I have explained the transmission mechanisms of monetary easing with regard to the 
impact on economic activity and prices. Now, I would like to review the impact of QQE from 
the viewpoint of long-term interest rates. Generally, it is widely known that long-term interest 
rates can be decomposed into two components: (1) the risk premia (such as term premium, 
liquidity  premium);  and  (2)  the  expected  path  of  short-term  interest  rates,  as  shown  in 
Chart 8. Based on this understanding, the Bank’s JGB purchases are expected to generate 
downward pressure mainly on the risk premia and then on the expected path of short-term 
interest  rates  (this  latter  effect  is  called  the  ‘‘signaling  effect’’).  Moreover,  the  Bank’s 
commitment to continue with QQE as long as it is necessary for maintaining the 2 percent 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
price  stability  target  in  a  stable  manner  is  also  likely  to  enhance  the  downward  pressure. 
Meanwhile, an improvement in the economic outlook and a gradual rise in medium- to long-
term  inflation  expectations  may  lead  to  an  increase  in  the  expected  path  of  short-term 
interest  rates.  This  path  may  also  be  influenced  by  a  rise  in  overseas  long-term  interest 
rates, which reflects improvement in overseas economies. The downward pressure is also 
observed  in  other  countries,  including  the  United  States,  which  have  purchased  financial 
assets under the nontraditional monetary policy.  
Developments in long-term interest rates since the adoption of QQE reflect those downward 
and upward pressures. As for the outlook, even in the phase of intensified upward pressure, 
the  continuation  of  the  large-scale  asset  purchases  is  likely  to  maintain  that  downward 
pressure, and it may even reinforce that pressure with the cumulative growth of the amount 
purchased  –  in  addition  to  the  commitment  to  achieve  the  2  percent  target  in  a  stable 
manner.  These  effects,  together  with  a  gradual  rise  in  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations,  are  likely  to  be  reflected  in  long-term  interest  rates,  which  would  eventually 
stabilize  at  levels  consistent  with  the  2  percent  price  stability  target.  Moreover,  the  Bank 
continues  to  closely  monitor  market  developments  within  a  flexible  operational  framework 
and through discussions with market participants, and it expects that both short- and long-
term interest rates will move largely on a stable path. 
Why are inflation expectations so important? 
E. 
To achieve the 2 percent target, it is important to consider the positive relationship between 
the rate of price change and the output gap – a relationship known as the Phillips curve. It is 
expected  that  the  curve  will  steepen  and  shift  upward  as  inflation  expectations  rise 
(Chart 10).  As  these  expectations  grow,  firms  may  find  it  easier  than  before  to  reflect 
changes in the output gap and production cost in their sales prices, thereby contributing to a 
steepening  of  the  Phillips  curve.  At  the  same  time,  an  upward  convergence  of  inflation 
expectations toward the 2 percent level is likely to shift the curve upward. Currently, there is 
active debate among Japanese economists as to whether the curve will shift upward as the 
Bank expects or remain flattened, since flattening of the curve is observed in many advanced 
economies. This issue will be addressed in Section IV. 
Factors contributing to flattening of the Phillips Curve  
In the case of Japan, some have pointed out that deregulation (for example, in distribution 
and telecommunications), intensified competition in the domestic and foreign markets as well 
as the financial crisis and associated plunge in domestic demand since the second half of the 
1990s  have  exerted  constant  downward  pressure  on  corporate  margins  and  wages. 
Consequently, firms, supermarkets, and large discount stores began to set their sales prices 
according  to  their  competitors’  –  rather  than  in  response  to  the  output  gap  or  cost 
developments.  The  active  use  of  online  shopping  has  also  accelerated  this  kind  of  price-
setting behavior. The smaller the size of the firm, the lower is its capability to negotiate prices 
with its client firms, which makes it difficult to transfer the input cost to the final sales prices. 
This phenomenon is also evident in the Bank’s March 2013 Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
Survey of Enterprises in Japan). This can be referred to as firms’ price-setting behavior in a 
deflationary environment. 
Furthermore,  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  expectations  dropped  sharply  mainly  in  the 
1990s  (Chart  11).  There  is  a  view  that  the  long-standing  negative  output  gap  (or  demand 
shortage), limited structural reforms – particularly in various nonmanufacturing sectors – and 
slow  supply  responses  extended  the  period  of  sluggish  productivity  growth.  This  helped 
lower  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  expectations  of  firms  and  households,  thereby 
depressing  their  inflation  expectations  (Chart  6).  Moreover,  it  could  be  said  that  the 
prevalence of the zero lower bound, as explained in Section III, weakened the effectiveness 
of  monetary  easing  and  thus  contributed  to  lowering  medium-  to  long-term  inflation 
expectations.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Converging to the 2 percent medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
A  number  of  other  advanced  economies  successfully  lowered  their  medium-  to  long-term 
inflation  expectations  from  the  high  levels  in  the  1990s,  and  those  expectations  gradually 
converged  to  more  or  less  2  percent.  Such  a  decline  also  coincided  with  a  drop  in  actual 
inflation.  There  is  a  consensus  among  central  banks  that  this  phenomenon  is  closely 
associated with the establishment of central bank independence and the adoption of inflation 
targeting (or a framework to emphasize price stability). In the case of the United Kingdom, for 
example, the Bank of England (BOE) adopted inflation targeting in 1992, with the initial target 
being set in the range of 1–4 percent. The target was subsequently changed to 2.5 percent in 
1997 and further to 2 percent in 2004.2 Chart 12 shows that the medium- to long-term inflation 
expectations in that country converged to around 2.5 percent in the 1990s and have been 
around  2  percent  since  2004.  For  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States,  which  have 
been successfully stabilizing those expectations at around 2 percent, the current view is that 
expectations should be maintained at the current stabilized level. This issue will be brought 
up again in Section III. 
Given that inflation expectations remain low in Japan, what the Bank is trying to do is to raise 
those expectations toward around the 2 percent level, which is comparable to that of other 
advanced  economies.  In  this  process,  the  Phillips  curve  could  become  steeper  and  shift 
upward as inflation expectations and firms’ price-setting behavior change.  
III.  
The previous Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME) and my proposal at the 
March MPM 
What is a nontraditional monetary policy?  
A.  
So  far,  I  have  explained  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  as  well  as  the  new 
monetary policy, QQE. After listening to my remarks, you may wonder why the Bank adopted 
QQE, which represents a drastic leap from the previously adopted CME. To understand the 
essence of QQE, it is necessary, I believe, to review the effectiveness and limitations of CME 
as  well  as  the  factors  that  contributed  to  adopting  the  2  percent  price  stability  target  in 
January 2013 under CME. Moreover, I should explain clearly what factors and thoughts led 
to  my  proposal  at  the  March  MPM  and  how  they  are  related  to  QQE.  That  thinking  was 
substantially  influenced by  my  having  received  many  inquiries  and  responses  from  a  wide 
range of people domestically and abroad.  
In general, monetary easing in a recessionary phase is conducted mainly through a reduction 
in  a  very  short-term  nominal  interest  rate  –  namely  the  policy  interest  rate.  In  the  case  of 
Japan, this refers to the uncollateralized overnight call rate. There are some cases, however, 
where the policy interest rate drops to nearly zero, leaving limited room for further decline. 
Japan faced this situation immediately after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008.3  
Under such a situation, CME attempts to create an accommodative monetary environment 
by  exerting  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates,  which  remain  in  positive 
territory  despite  the  policy  rate  reaching  nearly  zero.  For  example,  yields  on  JGBs  often 
function  as  the  benchmark  for  measuring  the  long-term  fixed  interest  rates  related  to 
mortgages, loans, bonds, and so on. Therefore, downward pressure on JGB yields is likely to 
                                                 
2  
In 1997, the BOE achieved operational responsibility for setting interest rates and established the Monetary 
Policy Committee. Currently, inflation below 2 percent is judged to be just as bad as inflation above 2 percent. 
If actual inflation becomes more than 3 percent or less than 1 percent, the Governor of the BOE must write an 
open letter to the Chancellor, explaining the reasons for such a deviation and prescriptions for correcting it.  
3   Specifically, the Bank lowered its policy rate from around 0.5 percent to around 0.3 percent in October 2008 
and further to around 0.1 percent in December 2008. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
contain  funding  costs,  which  makes  it  easier  for  firms  and  households  to  increase  their 
economic activities. This policy – often called the  nontraditional monetary policy under the 
zero lower bound on interest rates – is also applied by other central banks, such as in the 
United  States  and  United  Kingdom,  where  very  short-term  interest  rates  have  declined  to 
nearly zero. 
Basic features of CME 
B. 
Under CME, which was introduced in October 2010, the policy rate was lowered from around 
0.1 percent to around 0–0.1 percent, which amounted to adopting the so-called virtually zero-
interest  rate  policy.  However,  as  already  mentioned,  the  main  element  of  CME  was  to 
generate  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates  by  purchasing  JGBs  (and 
Treasury  discount  bills  [T-Bills]),  and  not  on  short-term  interest  rates,  which  had  already 
declined significantly. In addition to the impact on the funding cost, the JGB purchases were 
expected  to  generate  downward  pressure  on  the  risk  premia,  thereby  supporting  the 
foundation of risk asset markets. In addition, the wealth effect and portfolio rebalance effect 
were  considered.  To  enhance  those  effects,  the  Bank  also  purchased  various  risk  assets 
directly.  
For this purpose, the Bank established the Asset Purchase Program (hereafter the Program) 
on its balance sheet to purchase various financial assets. The assets purchased under the 
Program  covered  JGBs  (with  remaining  maturity  from  one  to  three  years),  T-Bills,  CP, 
corporate  bonds,  ETFs,  and  J-REITs.  The  Bank  concentrated  its  purchases  of  JGBs  and 
T-Bills  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  longer-term  interest  rates  in  particular.  The  total 
amount outstanding of the Program was increased gradually from an initial 35 trillion yen to 
65 trillion yen at end-2012. The amount was scheduled to expand further to 101 trillion yen 
by end-2013 and to 111 trillion yen by end-2014. Thereafter, the amount of 111 trillion yen 
was to be maintained for an undefined period of time (Chart 13). 
On  the  issue  of  the  Program  after  2014,  I  would  like  to  provide  some  details.  In  January 
2013, the Bank introduced the open-ended asset purchasing method, which was to start in 
early 2014. This meant that the Bank would purchase financial assets of about 13 trillion yen 
monthly – comprising about 2 trillion yen on JGBs, 10 trillion yen on T-Bills, and 1 trillion yen 
on CP and corporate bonds – without setting any termination date. Based on this monthly 
purchase, the amount outstanding of the Program was expected to rise by 10 trillion yen to 
111  trillion  yen  in  2014.  The  amount  outstanding  of  111  trillion  yen  was  scheduled  to  be 
maintained  from  2015  onward  since  the  quantity  of  monthly  purchased  JGBs  and  T-Bills 
would roughly meet their maturing totals.4 Regarding CP and corporate bonds, the amount of 
1 trillion yen would be allocated from 2014 onward to roughly meet the maturing total. 
With my talking about the Program in this way, you may wonder whether the Bank attached 
more importance to the quantity of assets, rather than to exerting downward pressure on the 
yields and risk premia. Indeed, the Bank regarded both as equally important. In other words, 
although the Bank emphasized downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and the risk 
                                                 
4   The amount outstanding of JGBs held by the Bank was scheduled to increase to 44 trillion yen by end-2013 
and further to 48 trillion yen by end-2014. The amount of 48 trillion yen was scheduled to be maintained from 
2015  onward.  T-Bills  are  the  second-largest  assets  held  by  the  Bank,  and  the  amount  outstanding  was 
scheduled  to  grow  to  24.5  trillion  yen  by  the  end  of  2013  and  further  to  30.5  trillion  yen  by  end-2014. The 
amount of 30.5 trillion yen was scheduled to be maintained from 2015 onward.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
premia as the primary purpose of CME, in practice the Bank strengthened monetary easing 
by emphasizing the expansion of the quantity and committing to achieving that at any cost.5 
Adopting the 2 percent price stability target 
C. 
In  addition  to  introducing  the  open-ended  asset  purchasing  method,  an  equally  important 
policy decision was made in January 2013. Namely, the Bank finally adopted the 2 percent 
price stability target in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, and it committed 
to pursuing monetary easing to achieve this target as early as possible.  
Why was the 2 percent target adopted? 
Before January 2013, the Bank’s view on price stability – expressed as the price stability goal 
in the medium to long term – was defined as being in a “positive range of 2 percent or lower”; 
the  expression  “1  percent  for  the  time  being”  was  also  added.  So  why  did  the  Bank  not 
simply adopt the 2 percent target from the outset? This was because the expression had to 
cover diverging views (from lower to higher) of the Policy Board members with respect to the 
appropriate level of medium- to long-term inflation. Moreover, adopting such an expression 
was (1) to take into account past price movements (or price perceptions among households 
and firms); and (2) to accommodate the view that a longer-term goal could be achieved in 
conjunction with efforts to reinforce potential economic growth through various constituents, 
including  the  government,  the  Bank,  financial  institutions,  and  firms.  These  factors  implied 
that it might take time to achieve the 2 percent target. 
Therefore, the numerical value of 2 percent was not excluded – even before January 2013. 
Nonetheless, I retrospectively take the view that the word “goal” (especially the connotation 
of the related term medo, which was adopted in the Japanese version) and the ambiguous 
references  to  the  range  held  nuances  of  passiveness.  As  a  result,  the  public  and  market 
participants were not sure whether the Bank was ultimately pursing the 2 percent level or a 
lower one and whether the Bank was firmly determined to overcome deflation. Against this 
background, the adoption of the 2 percent target in January 2013 was very important since it 
meant  that  these  problems  were  finally  eliminated.  Furthermore,  from  the  beginning  of  my 
appointment as a member of the Policy Board, I have consistently advocated that medium- to 
long-term inflation should be well above 1 percent. Therefore, I regard the adoption of the 
2 percent  target  as  a  major  achievement  in  the  history  of  the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary 
policy. 
Why was the 2 percent value appropriate?  
Now,  some  of  you  may  wonder  why  2  percent  was  chosen  as  the  medium-  to  long-term 
target. Conceptually, price stability should refer to a situation of zero inflation or no change in 
general prices. Why then should the Bank need to seek higher inflation? The main reason is 
that, as explained in Section II, 2 percent is a widely shared goal among many central banks 
in  advanced  economies  as  the  medium-  to  long-term  inflation  target.  The  next  question  is 
thus why central banks should choose the value of 2 percent. It reflects the fact that central 
banks commonly believe it important to avoid the aforementioned zero lower bound situation, 
in which there is limited opportunity for a further decline in the policy rate. 
                                                 
5   This approach was taken because the Bank wished to underline the difference from the Quantitative monetary 
easing  (QE)  policy  adopted  from  2001  to  2006,  and  it  also  reflects  some  lessons  learned  during  that 
experience. Under QE, the size of reserve deposits – namely, the "quantity" of the liability of the Bank – was 
placed as the primary operational target; monetary easing was thus strengthened by expanding this quantity. 
Regarding the differences between QE and CME, please refer to my speech entitled "Japan's Monetary Policy 
in  a  Challenging  Environment,"  Speeches  at  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  the  Eurasia  Business  and  Economics 
Society Conference Held in Rome, Bank of Japan, 2013. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Global discussions on the 2 percent target  
For  your  reference,  I  would  like  to  briefly  introduce  recent  global-level  discussions  on  this 
issue.  In  2010,  Dr.  Olivier  Blanchard,  Economic  Counsellor  and  Director  of  the  Research 
Department of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), pointed out that the U.S. economy had 
been facing the zero lower bound since the global financial crisis began in 2008 and that it 
was  proving  costly.  If  the  U.S.  economy  had  begun  with  higher  average  inflation  and  thus 
higher short-term nominal interest rates when entering the recession, the Federal Reserve 
could  have  lowered  the  interest  rate  more  and  thereby  reduced  the  drop  in  output  and 
deterioration of fiscal positions. Dr. Blanchard subsequently suggested that a higher inflation 
target up to about 4 percent could be pursued in normal times and that medium- to long-term 
inflation  expectations  should  be  anchored  at  that  level  –  up  from  the  current  level  of 
2 percent.  Moreover,  new  research  results  have  been  released  on  this  issue,  and  they 
appear to support the higher inflation target.6 
Recognizing  this  debate,  at  Chairman  Bernanke’s  press  conference  held  after  the  Federal 
Open  Market  Committee  in  March  2013,  one  journalist  raised  the  issue  of  increasing  the 
inflation target from 2 percent to a higher level to allow a further decline in interest rates. The 
chairman then acknowledged that the U.S. economy faced the zero lower bound (despite the 
2 percent goal) and stressed 2 percent inflation, not zero inflation, as the appropriate price 
stability goal. He said, “if you have zero inflation, you’re very close to the deflation zone, and 
nominal  interest  rates  will  be  so  low  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  respond  fully  to 
recessions.  And  so,  historical  experience  has  suggested  that  2  percent  is  an  appropriate 
balance between the cost of inflation and the cost [of the zero lower bound].”7   
Moreover,  as  Dr.  Blanchard  and  Chairman  Bernanke  observe,  it  is  generally  viewed  that 
deflation is less desirable than inflation after considering the benefits and costs. If deflation is 
prolonged, the sales unit price and wages tend to decrease (or such a deflation expectation 
prevails), such that firms and households may find that funding costs are rising in real terms 
– notwithstanding very low long-term nominal interest rates. Consequently, investment and 
consumption activities supported by external funding could be discouraged, thereby possibly 
dampening  economic  growth.  Moreover,  in  the  context  of  Japan,  deflation  may  lead  to 
excessive  appreciation  of  the  yen,  sluggish  asset  prices,  and  shortages  in  tax  revenues; 
thus, a deteriorating fiscal balance results. 
Effectiveness and limitations of CME 
D. 
With  regard  to  the  effectiveness  of  CME,  JGB  yields  and  the  risk  premia  dropped  to  a 
significant  degree,  which  supported  the  economy.  On  the  other  hand,  I  have  to admit  that 
CME was not successful in conquering deflation – partly owing to a series of domestic and 
external situations, such as the Lehman shock, the European sovereign debt crisis, the Great 
East Japan Earthquake, and the Thailand floods of 2011, and the effects of developments in 
the relations between Japan and China. More importantly, I sensed that there was a growing 
opinion among the public and market participants that the 2 percent price stability target was 
not achievable with the previously announced monetary policy framework. This meant that 
                                                 
6   For example, one study pointed out that the incidence and effects of the zero lower bound could be greater 
than  previously  estimated  in  the  United  States.  Another  study  indicated  that  raising  the  inflation  target  in  a 
liquidity trap could have an expansionary effect on output. 
Interestingly,  Chairman  Bernanke  continued  to  comment  on  this  matter  by  stating  that  the  issue  of  an 
appropriate level for the inflation target was being debated in academic circles and that trying to quantify this 
target was an interesting question. He also acknowledged that hitting the zero lower bound has become more 
common,  although  it  was  a  very  rare  event  a  few  years  ago  (he  appears  to  have  referred  to  the 
aforementioned research results). These remarks give the impression that he does not exclude the idea of 
raising the inflation target if more research results point in this direction in the near future. 
7  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
the Bank’s framework was regarded as having limited credibility. My view is that the following 
three factors have contributed to the prevalence of such a perception. 
D–1. 
Complexity problem in the monetary policy framework: co-existence of the 
two operations 
First, the Bank’s monetary policy framework under CME gave an impression of complexity; 
consequently, the framework was not well understood compared with those of other central 
banks.  In  particular,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  the  most  serious  complexity  problem  arose 
from  the  fact  that  the  purchase  of  JGBs  was  conducted  through  two  types  of  operations: 
(1) one under the Program, and (2) the other as a regular JGB purchase operation (which, as 
noted  earlier,  is  informally  referred  to  as  a  Rinban  operation).  From  the  beginning  of  my 
appointment as a member of the Policy Board, I have repeatedly emphasized at the Bank 
that  it  should  integrate  these  two  operations  to  avoid  unnecessary  complexity  as  well  as 
other problems, which I will now explain. 
A Rinban operation aims at purchasing JGBs (on the asset side of the Bank) according to an 
increase in the banknotes issued (on its liability side). An increase in the amount outstanding 
of  JGB  holdings  under  the  Rinban  operation  was  limited  relative  to  that  of  the  Program  
– despite the large amount outstanding of 65 trillion yen at end-2012. However, the Rinban 
operation purchased a wide range of remaining maturity from slightly less than one year up 
to 30 years. This differed substantially from the Program, under which JGBs were purchased 
with a remaining maturity of only one to three years. Furthermore, the maximum amount of 
JGB holdings under this operation was set at the amount outstanding of banknotes issued. 
The imposition of a cap on JGB holdings – often called the Banknote Principle – reflected 
two purposes: one was to provide the so-called growth currency (seicho tsuka in Japanese) 
and the other was to avoid the misperception of monetization.  
Issues from the viewpoint of ‘‘growth currency’’ 
With  regard  to  the  first purpose,  the  Bank  positioned  the  Rinban  operation  as  a means  of 
providing growth currency so that this operation could be separated from that for monetary 
easing. The growth currency idea reflects the view that the amount outstanding of banknotes 
issued tends to rise in line with the size of the economy (i.e., nominal GDP). Since economic 
growth calls for a more or less proportionate growth in the amount outstanding of banknotes 
issued, those banknotes could be regarded as growth currency. Thus, banknotes could be 
considered a long-term liability of the Bank since they are related to the size of the economy; 
therefore, it was appropriate to purchase JGBs as a long-term asset according to the amount 
outstanding of banknotes issued. In such a situation, purchasing JGBs could be regarded as 
relatively  “neutral”  to  short-term  business  cycles  and  price  movements;  it  would  therefore 
have a limited impact on the JGB market. In other words, the purchase of JGBs to fulfill this 
long-term purpose did not constitute an operation for monetary easing. Indeed, other central 
banks such as the Federal Reserve and BOE engage in purchasing their treasury securities 
(including long-term ones) in “normal” times as a counterpart to the increase in the amount 
outstanding of banknotes issued; thus, a regular purchase operation similar to that of Rinban 
is normally adopted elsewhere.  
However, it seems that such a viewpoint no longer prevails in the downturn triggered by the 
global  financial  crisis  (Chart  14).  I  think  this  is  because  the  recent  increase  in  the  amount 
outstanding  of  banknotes  issued  is  caused  by  factors  other  than  economic  growth  
–  specifically,  aggressive  monetary  easing  and  its  effects.  For  example,  the  declining 
opportunity  cost  of  holding  banknotes  (and  coins)  caused  by  extremely  low  short-term 
interest  rates  may  have  led  to  higher  demand  for  banknotes  relative  to  the  growth  of  the 
economy.  This  may  lead  to  difficulty  in  differentiating  the  purchase  of  treasury  securities 
between that corresponding to the increase in the amount outstanding of banknotes issued 
and  that  related  to  monetary  easing.  Since  the  global  financial  crisis  began,  the  Federal 
Reserve and BOE have deviated from such  an operation temporarily  and have purchased 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
treasury  securities  (and  other  assets)  far  beyond  the  amount  outstanding  of  banknotes. 
Moreover, all those purchased assets are regarded as a result of monetary easing. In other 
words,  other  central  banks  have  maintained  the  same  purchasing  method  of  regular 
operations  by  switching  the  purpose  to  an  accommodative  monetary  policy  and,  in  some 
cases, lengthening the maturity of the purchase operation. 
Issues from the viewpoint of “monetization” and complexity 
The  Bank  differentiated  the  JGB  purchase  under  the  Program  from  the  regular  Rinban 
operation,  and  it  regarded  the  former  only  as  a  tool  of  ‘‘temporary’’  monetary  easing.  This 
action reflected the view that avoiding the misperception of monetizing the fiscal deficit was a 
priority.  
Since the establishment of the Program in October 2010, however, the duration of monetary 
easing  has  become  longer,  and  the  total  amount  of  JGBs  purchased  under  the  two 
operations  has  already  exceeded  the  amount  outstanding  of  banknotes;  this  has  virtually 
broken the Banknote Principle. In addition, the separation of the two operations has caused 
the problem of the true scale of monetary easing (as well as the average maturity length of 
JGBs  purchased)  to  be  underestimated  by  the  public  and  market  participants;  this  is  in 
contrast to the actions of the Federal Reserve and the BOE, which covered the total amount 
of  asset  purchases.  The  Bank  decided,  therefore,  in  August  2011  to  place  a  footnote 
describing  the  yearly  amount  of  JGB  purchases  under  the  Rinban  operation  in  the  public 
statements  on  monetary  policy  whenever  monetary  easing  was  increased.  Contrary  to  the 
initial  purpose,  however,  inserting  the  footnote  appears  to  have  amplified  perceptions  of 
complexity  without  promoting  an  understanding  of  the  Bank’s  intention.  Furthermore,  the 
Bank occasionally explained to the public and market participants that its scale of monetary 
easing was similar to that of other central banks by comparing the size of the Bank’s balance 
sheet  both  in  its  absolute  value  and  in  terms  of  GDP.  However,  this  behavior  may  have 
caused  some  kind  of  inconsistency  since  the  balance  sheet  reflected  the  results  of  JGB 
purchases under the two operations – despite the Bank’s declaration that only the Program 
constituted  monetary  easing.  To  deal  with  this  complexity  and  inconsistency,  I  therefore 
believed that there was a strong rationale for merging the two operations. 
For  separate  reasons,  I  also  strongly  believed  that  it  was  necessary  to  integrate  the  two 
operations  when  I  started  to  consider  a  maturity  extension  of  JGB  purchases  from  the 
maximum  three  years  to  about  five  years  in  late  2012.  This  was  because  lengthening  the 
maturity under the Program was likely to give a sense of overlap with the Rinban operation  
– given that, as of March 2013, the average maturity of the Rinban operation was about four 
years and that of the Program about two years.  
D–2.  Monetary easing perceived as a piecemeal approach and lack of boldness 
The  second  factor  contributing  to  the  perception  over  limited  credibility  was  related  to  the 
way the Bank conducted monetary easing. Since its introduction in October 2010, the size of 
the Program was increased nine times. If the total size of the increase under the Program is 
taken  into  account,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  Bank’s  monetary  easing  was  quite  substantial 
(Chart  13).  Nonetheless,  the  scale  of  increase  undertaken  each  time  was  in  the  range  of  
5–10  trillion  yen,  and  it  seems  that  many  people  viewed  such  a  piecemeal  approach  as 
lacking boldness. In addition, it was pointed out that the Bank’s communication strategy was 
not  so  effective,  and  the  perception  spread  domestically  and  globally  that  the  Bank  was 
being  passive  in  tackling  deflation.  Moreover,  there  are  deep-rooted  views  that  exiting 
accommodative monetary policies in the past – for example, the Zero interest rate policy in 
August 2000 and Quantitative monetary easing in March 2006 – was too early. Such past 
experiences appear to have added to the view that the Bank might not be determined to be a 
deflation fighter. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Limitation of monetary easing under the program 
D–3. 
The third factor contributing to a perceived lack of credibility was associated with the eroding 
effectiveness of monetary easing under the Program. The intensified purchase of JGBs up to 
a maximum remaining maturity of three years has already flattened the yield curve within that 
maturity zone, leaving limited room for further decline. The next possible move could then be 
considered as extending the maturity beyond three years. We may then recall the case of 
extending the maximum maturity from two years to three years in April 2012. At that time, 
market  expectations  over  the  maturity  extension  preceded  our  decision  –  based  on  the 
observation  that  the  increase  in  the  committed  amount  under  the  Program  was  gradually 
getting harder to achieve. With such expectations, extending the maturity not only reduced 
the effectiveness of monetary easing, but it also generated a sense that the Bank was being 
passive  with  respect  to  monetary  policy.  Since  the  early  part  of  this  year,  market 
expectations  about  the  maturity  possibly  being  extended  to  five  years  have  emerged,  and 
these mainly reflect a sense of deadlock under the Program. And such market expectations 
were already reflected in the yield curve. This experience suggested that it was necessary for 
the Bank to look for a completely different framework for purchasing JGBs. 
My proposal for integrating the two operations and monetary expansion 
E. 
As  already  mentioned,  I  was  a  long-term  advocate  of  integrating  the  two  operations  for 
purchasing JGBs. Since last year’s MPMs, I have also raised this issue – in addition to the 
need for further monetary easing. Consequently, I decided to summarize my arguments as a 
single package and present it as an official proposal. The content of the proposal, which was 
presented at the March MPM, can be roughly summarized as follows:  
First,  the  maximum  remaining  maturity  of  JGB  purchases  under  the  Program  should  be 
extended  to  30  years  by  integrating  the  operation  under  the  Program  with  the  Rinban 
operation  to  exert  downward  pressure  on  the  whole  yield  curve.  An  extension  of  up  to 
30 years would likely facilitate the Bank’s operations, enhance the effectiveness of monetary 
easing, and signal its firm determination to overcome deflation. 
Second, the monthly purchase of JGBs should increase from the current 4 trillion yen (after 
integrating  the  two  operations)  to  at  least  about  5  trillion  yen;  the  open-ended  asset 
purchasing method should be brought forward from early 2014 to the earliest possible date. 
In addition, my view was that the average remaining maturity of JGB purchases should be 
extended from the current level of slightly under three years (after integration) to over four 
years  by  increasing  the  purchase  of  JGBs  with  a  remaining  maturity  of  about  five  years. 
Regarding the zoning of the remaining maturity, I felt that it could be divided into the following 
four zones: up to three years; three to five years; five to ten years; and ten to 30 years. This 
was because the zones up to ten years include two years, five years, and ten years, whose 
maturity coincides with that of newly issued bonds, which tend to be more liquid than off-the-
run issues. However, since the scale of potential demand in each zone involves uncertainty, 
my proposal stated that such details should be determined based on input provided by the 
Bank’s staff. I was pleased to see integration of the Rinban operation with the Program finally 
being achieved under QQE in April.  
Similarities and differences between QQE and my proposal 
F. 
Common features between QQE and my proposal in March include the following: (1) placing 
JGBs as the most important financial asset purchased by the Bank in order to achieve the 
2 percent price stability target as soon as possible; (2) an emphasis on exerting downward 
pressure  on  the  whole  yield  curve;  and  (3)  integration  of  the  Rinban  operation  with  the 
Program.  
However, there are differences in the size of the purchase. QQE concentrates on purchasing 
JGBs of about 50 trillion yen (on a net basis) annually over two years. Converting the yearly 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
purchasing rate into the monthly pace and on a gross basis, QQE is scheduled to purchase 
7+ trillion yen monthly over two years – much greater than the amount of at least 5 trillion yen 
to be purchased through the open-ended asset purchasing method, as suggested under my 
proposal.  The  monthly  purchase  rate  of  about  5  trillion  yen  was  estimated  based  on  the 
assumption  that  monetary  easing  would  continue  for  longer.  However,  QQE  attempts  to 
achieve the 2 percent target at the earliest possible time and it includes a time horizon of 
about two years; thus, the purchase rate naturally becomes greater. Although I considered 
that the rate of about 5 trillion yen was a reasonable figure, after submitting my proposal in 
March, I began to believe that bolder action was necessary to send a strong signal about the 
Bank’s determination to achieve the 2 percent target. 
Furthermore, when QQE was introduced, I supported the monthly purchase rate of 7+ trillion 
yen based on two reasons. First, the amount appeared to hit the right balance between the 
amount  under  my  proposal  and  about  10  trillion  yen  (which  is  roughly  equivalent  to  the 
monthly issue of JGBs by the Ministry of Finance). If the amount had been closer to about 
10 trillion  yen,  the  market  may  have  misunderstood  this  as  an  operation  to  monetize  the 
fiscal deficit. Second, the scale of the operation is comparable to that of other central banks, 
including the Federal Reserve. In the past, the Bank’s monetary easing was not seen as bold 
as that of the Federal Reserve. Under QQE, the monthly purchase of JGBs by the Bank on a 
net basis amounts to about 4 trillion yen, whereas that of securities by the Federal Reserve is 
about  85  billion  U.S.  dollars  (of  which  45  billion  U.S.  dollars  is  accounted  for  by  U.S. 
Treasury securities and 40 billion U.S. dollars by mortgage-backed securities [MBSs]). Given 
that Japan is about 40 percent the economic size of the United States (in terms of nominal 
GDP),  Japan’s  purchase  amount  is  relatively  large.  In  addition,  extending  the  average 
remaining maturity of JGB purchases by the Bank to about seven years (six to eight years) 
has made it more or less comparable to that of securities purchases by the Federal Reserve 
(about nine years in the case of U.S. Treasury securities). 
My views and proposals on the outlook report 
IV. 
The Outlook Report mentioned in Section II attracted some attention among the public and 
market participants since it was the first time for the Bank’s views to be released since the 
introduction of QQE. Indeed, with the Outlook Report, the Bank introduced some changes to 
its  structuring  of  reports,  such  as  by  adopting  a  compact  style  of  writing.  Nonetheless, 
several divergent opinions, including my own, were expressed at the MPM held on April 26. 
Here, I would like to explain my views on the Outlook Report along with the content of my 
proposal.  
Reasons for extending the projection period by one year 
A. 
Before  proceeding,  I  would  like  to explain  why  the  projection  period  was  extended  by  one 
year to fiscal 2015 (i.e., a period of three years) in the April report. The most important point 
is  that,  at  the  MPM  held  on  April  3  and  4,  the  Bank  collectively  agreed  to  achieve  the 
2 percent target (excluding the effects of the scheduled hikes in the consumption tax rate) at 
the earliest possible time, and it set a time horizon of about two years with the introduction of 
QQE (which constitutes a new phase of monetary easing in terms of quantity and quality in 
the era after the promulgation of the new Bank of Japan Law). In such a case, I believe it is a 
central bank’s obligation to indicate the projected timing for achieving the 2 percent target to 
the  public  and  market  participants.  The  median  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  forecasts 
indicated  that  2  percent  inflation  would  be  achieved  in  fiscal  2015;  therefore,  it  was 
appropriate to state the projection period (Chart 2). At the same time, the Bank decided to 
double the monetary base as well as the amounts outstanding of its JGB and ETF holdings 
over two years, so it was appropriate to present the outlook up to fiscal 2015 by taking into 
account the lagging effects of monetary easing. Of course, further extension – for example 
up to fiscal 2016 – could also be considered. However, the degree of uncertainty tends to 
rise as the projection period lengthens. Chart 7 shows that the range of projected values is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
much  greater  for  fiscal  2015  than  for  earlier  periods;  thus,  further  extension  may  not 
necessarily be useful. Other central banks treat the projection period differently, but it seems 
that three years is often selected.8 
Clarification of the descriptions of risk factors 
B. 
Now, I would like to explain my views over the Bank’s risk assessments related to economic 
activity and prices, as described in Section II.  
My proposal on the impact of the consumption tax hikes as a risk factor to the 
economy 
The  Bank’s  overall  risk  assessment  related  to  the  economy  was  that  it  was  “balanced.” 
Although  my  view  is  roughly  in  line  with  this  assessment,  I  feel  that  the  Bank  should  pay 
greater  attention  to  an  analysis  of  the  risk  factors  associated  with  the  impact  of  the 
consumption tax hikes. Let me make it clear that I strongly believe that the consumption tax 
hikes  should  be  introduced  as  scheduled  with  a  view  to  maintaining  fiscal  soundness  and 
sustainability of the social security system. However, my concern lies in the possibility of the 
actual  inflation  projected  for  fiscal  2014  exceeding  the  level  of  inflation  anticipated  by 
households;  this  is  because  the  timing  of  the  tax  hikes  and  the  effects  of  large-scale 
monetary easing overlap. Therefore, unless households anticipate inflation as reflecting such 
impacts,  households  may  face  a  greater-than-anticipated  drop  in  real  disposable  income; 
consequently,  the  downside  forces  to  the  economy  may  become  greater  than  the  Bank 
estimates. 
Let  me  explain  my  concern  in  more  detail.  It  is  estimated  that  the  first  increase  in  the 
consumption tax rate in April 2014 from 5 percent to 8 percent will raise inflation for fiscal 
2014 by about 2 percentage points. The next hike from 8 percent to 10 percent in October 
2015 will lead to an increase by 0.6 percentage point for fiscal 2015. Through active media 
reporting, households and firms are already familiar with the 2 percent price stability target 
(with a time horizon of about two years) adopted by the Bank. Households, however, may not 
know  whether  the  2  percent  inflation  for  fiscal  2014  is  the  outcome  of  the  first  tax  hike  or 
monetary easing.  
If both effects are taken into account, actual inflation in fiscal 2014 could approach 4 percent. 
According to the median of Policy Board members’ forecasts (the Bank’s view), inflation for 
fiscal 2014 including the tax hike will reach 3.4 percent (2 percent driven by the tax hike and 
1.4 percent driven by such factors as monetary easing and import price increases), as shown 
in  Chart  2.  Are  households  really  anticipating  such  a  high  level  of  inflation  for  fiscal  2014  
–  well  above  the  2  percent  level?  That  would  mean  that  households’  “short-term”  inflation 
expectations  covering  the  period  of  fiscal  2014  should  be  approaching  at  least  around  3 
percent  (based  on  the  Bank’s  view);  however,  such  expectations  may  remain  at  around  2 
percent or less. Some indicators measuring short-term inflation expectations for fiscal 2014 
indicate  a  rising  trend,  but  they  appear  to  be  considerably  less  than  around  3  percent 
(Chart 15).  
In addition, recognition of the price increases including the tax rate hikes may spread quickly 
among  households  from  fiscal  2014,  only  after  the  actual  implementation.  Therefore,  I 
                                                 
8   The  Federal  Reserve  released  projections  five  times  (January,  April,  June,  September,  and  December)  in 
2012; of those, the first four issues provided projections for three years from 2012 and those in the longer run, 
while the last issue covered projections for four years and those in the longer run. The European Central Bank 
(ECB) releases four projections (March, June, September, and December) annually; of those, the first three 
issues cover projections of two years including the year concerned, whereas the final issue makes projections 
of  up  to  three  years.  The  BOE  provides  projections  for  three  years  using  the  "fan  chart"  without  specifying 
figures. 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
consider  the  possibility  of  a  greater-than-expected  decline  in  real  income  and,  thus, 
aggregated demand. 
In  light  of  these  considerations,  I  believe  that  the  following  description  on  the  possible 
outcome  of  the  tax  hikes  in  the  Outlook  Report  is  inappropriate:  “Fourth,  the  extent  of  the 
front-loaded increase and subsequent decline in demand prior to and after the consumption 
tax  hikes  may  differ  significantly  depending  on  developments  in  real  income  and  prices  at 
each point in time.” I therefore presented a proposal at the MPM held on April 26 to revise 
the above description by incorporating more fully the risk related to a potentially large drop in 
households’ real income. At the same time, I took the strong view that the Bank should start 
to communicate more effectively and immediately to the public and market participants on 
the outlook for prices with and without the effects of the tax hikes so that the impacts of those 
hikes and other factors would be incorporated in short-term inflation expectations; this would 
be in contrast to the Bank’s previous tendency to stress the price outlook without the effects 
of the tax hikes.  
Based  on  the  need  for  more  insightful  analysis,  my  proposal  was  meant  to  be  an 
improvement  over  the  description  given  in  the  Outlook  Report  together  with  the  call  for  a 
better  communication  strategy  with  the  public  and  market  participants.  This  proposal  was 
presented  together  with  other  suggestions  related  to  the  “two  perspectives,”  which  I  will 
explain  later.  However,  my  proposal  was  rejected  by  all  the  other  Policy  Board  members. 
Thereafter, I decided to withdraw that proposal and support the chairman’s proposal on the 
Outlook Report. I did this because it was not my intention to oppose the chairman’s proposal 
since  our  basic  views  do  not  diverge  significantly.  I  will  of  course  continue  to  watch 
developments of prices and inflation expectations closely.  
My view on price responsiveness to the output gap as a risk factor to prices 
Although I support the overall assessment of risks to prices as being “largely balanced,” as 
discussed in Section II, I feel that the risks are tilted somewhat to the downside, particularly 
with regard to the responsiveness of prices to the output gap. The Phillips curve may remain 
flat  owing  to  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  associated  with  the  aforementioned  issues 
related  to  the  consumption  tax  hikes,  especially  for  fiscal  2014  (Chart  10).  If  many  firms 
perceive  that  the  price  increase  triggered  by  the  tax  hikes  could  be  sufficiently  large  to 
constrain household domestic demand, they may partially postpone raising their final sales 
prices (those related to the effect of the output gap and others) beyond the increase related 
to the consumption tax hike after fiscal 2015 – not fully within fiscal 2014. In such an event, 
the  responsiveness  of  prices  to  the  output  gap  would  remain  limited  and  the  outcome  for 
prices in fiscal 2014 could be lower than that projected by the Bank.  
Meanwhile,  it  is  noted  that  the  environment  surrounding  firms  is  gradually  changing.  The 
depreciating trend of the yen since late 2012 has contributed to turning the rate of change in 
yen-based  export  prices  from  negative  to  positive;  it  has  also  had  moderating  effects  on 
inflows  of  some  inexpensive  import  products.  This  may  help  mitigate  the  deflationary 
pressure  prevailing  among  firms.  Moreover,  the  moderate  movements  in  foreign  currency-
denominated  commodity  prices  have  avoided  a  sharp  increase  in  import  prices;  this  is  in 
contrast  to  the  period  of  the  mid-2000s  that  accompanied  sharper  yen’s  depreciation  and 
commodity  price  surge.  Therefore,  firms  may  find  it  easier  to  raise  their  sales  prices  and 
wages  owing  to  the  healthier  prospects  for  profitability.  I  will  closely  watch  firms’  pricing 
behavior.  
My proposal regarding the “two perspectives” 
C. 
Next, I would like to explain my views about the structure of the Outlook Report. This report 
consists  of  three  sections:  Section  I  focuses  on  the  baseline  scenario  of  the  outlook  for 
economic activity and prices; Section II examines upside and downside risks; and Section III 
covers  the  “two  perspectives.”  The  first  perspective  examines  whether  the  outlooks  for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
economic  activity  and  prices  will  follow  a  path  of  “sustainable  growth  under  price  stability” 
over the next two years or so. The second perspective relates to various risks relevant to the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy,  including  (1)  the  overall  assessment  of  risks  to  the  economic 
activity and prices and (2) financial imbalances from a longer-term perspective. 
I have no objection to this framework. However, the description is not particularly clear and 
understandable  for  the  public  and market  participants,  and  there  is  a  need  to  improve  the 
structure of the report. For example, it is not easy to understand the connections between 
sections I and II and the two perspectives in Section III. In addition, I am not sure that using 
the  words  “perspectives”  without  any  explanation  in  the  Outlook  Report  is  appropriate. 
Consequently,  readers  would  easily  fail  to  understand  the  content  relating  to  the  two 
perspectives and thus not grasp the Bank’s intention. I have maintained such views about 
clarity  of  expression  ever  since  I  was  appointed  a  member  of  the  Policy  Board  and  have 
called  for  improvements  at  every  opportunity  within  the  Bank.  As  a  result,  I  submitted  my 
official  proposal  at  the MPM  held  on  April  26,  using  the  opportunity  of  the  Outlook  Report 
being  released  under  the  new  leadership.  My  proposal  called  for  completely  removing  the 
concept of the “two perspectives” from the report; instead, I suggested that what was written 
relating to the two perspectives in Section III be moved to appropriate sections throughout 
the entire report. My proposal consists of the following two points.    
First,  the  content  described  as  the  first  perspective  should  be  moved  to  the  last  part  of 
Section I. “Baseline Scenario of the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices in Japan” and 
placed there as a summary of the overall assessment.  
Second,  the  content  related  to  overall  risk  assessment  of  economic  activity  in  the  second 
perspective  should  be  moved  to  the  last  part  of  Section  II.A.  “Risks  to  Economic  Activity.” 
Similarly, the content related to prices should be moved to the last part of Section II.B. “Risks 
to Prices.” The content related to the assessment of financial imbalances should remain in 
Section III, but it should be moved to a place after the description of the future conduct of 
monetary policy. 
I do not exclude the possibility of using alternative description styles. In any case, I believe 
that  the  Bank  should  make  greater  efforts  to  promote  an  understanding  among  the  public 
and  market  participants  of  its  monetary  policy  and  pursue  more  effective  communication 
strategies. Improving the writing style in official documents including the Outlook Report is 
one of the first steps toward achieving that goal. I will continue to work on this issue. 
That  brings me  to  the  end  of  my  presentation. Thank  you very  much  indeed  for  your  kind 
attention. 
 
 
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Chart 1 
Outlook for economic activity (Real GDP) 
y/y % chg.
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
-2.5
-3.0
-3.5
-4.0
2.9
1.6
1.4
Actual
0.2
 
 
 
1.2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2006
07
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
Fiscal year
 
Note: The circles in charts 1 and 2 indicate the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts. 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
Chart 2 
Outlook for prices (CPI) 
y/y % chg.
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
 
-0.5
 
-1.0
 
 
-1.5
 
-2.0
 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
2006
07
With the consumption tax hikes
Without the consumption tax hikes
2.6
1.9
 3.4
Actual
0.0
-0.2 
1.4
0.7
08
09
10
11
12
13
14
15
Fiscal year
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
Chart 3 
Output gap 
 8
6
4
2
0
-2
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
1990
-10
92
-8
-6
-4
  94
96
98
2000
Year
02
04
06
08
10
12 13
Chart 4 
Real GDP and labor input 
y/y % chg.
3
2
1
Labor input (left scale)
Real GDP (right scale)
y/y % chg.
Projection
0
-1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
06
04
Fiscal year
 
Note: Labor input = number of employees × total hours worked. 
Sources: Cabinet Office; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. 
-3
1995 96
99 2000 01
07
08
14
98
02
05
10
11
12
13
15
03
09
97
-2
-2
-4
-6
 6
4
2
0
18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 5 
Prices and wages 
y/y % chg.
 Hourly cash earnings (left scale)
CPI (all items less fresh food, right scale）
y/y % chg.
Projection
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
1985
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare. 
99
2001
Fiscal year
05
09
89
03
95
87
91
93
97
07
11
13
15
Chart 6 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
 
 
y/y % chg.
3.0
Households' inflation expectations (over the next 5 years)
Market participants' inflation expectations (2 to 10 years ahead)
Break even inflation (BEI, longest)
 2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
2005
06
07
 
 
 
Sources: Bank of Japan; QUICK; Bloomberg. 
08
09
10
11
12
13
Year
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
Chart 7 
Forecast distribution charts of policy board members 
 y/y % chg.
(1) Real GDP 
 
4.5 
4.0 
 
3.5 
 
3.0 
2.5 
2.0 
 
1.5 
1.0 
 
0.5 
 
0.0 
 
-0.5 
 
-1.0 
 
-1.5 
-2.0 
 
-2.5 
 
-3.0 
 
-3.5 
 
-4.0 
 
(2) CPI (All items less fresh food [excluding the effects of the consumption tax hikes]) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fiscal year
y/y % chg.
2012
-0.5 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
13
14
15
Actual
-1.0 
-1.5 
 13
14
15
-2.0 
2012
Fiscal year
 
 
 
 
Notes:  1.  Based  on  the  aggregated  probability  distributions  (i.e.,  the  Risk Balance  Charts)  compiled  from  the  distributions  of 
individual Policy Board members, the Forecast Distribution Charts are compiled as follows. First, upper and lower 10 percentiles 
of the aggregated distributions are trimmed and second, colors indicated below are used to show the respective percentiles of 
those distributions. 
 
 
2. The circles in the bar charts indicate the median of the Policy Board members’ forecasts (point estimates). The vertical lines 
in the bar charts indicate the range of the forecasts of the majority of Policy Board members. 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
Upper 30 to 40%
& lower 30 to 40%
Upper 20 to 30%
& lower 20 to 30%
Upper 10 to 20%
& lower 10 to 20%
Upper 40% to lower 40%
     20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Chart 8 
Factors affecting long-term interest rates 
    JGB purchases by the Bank of Japan 
 Long-term 
interest rates 
 Risk premia 
 Expected path of short-term 
interest rates 
Liquidity of the JGB market,
 Improvement in the economic outlook, 
fiscal sustainability, 
medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
etc… 
(monetary base targeting), 
etc… 
Chart 9 
Expansion in the monetary base and JGB purchases 
tril. yen
Monetary base
JGB holdings
  300
250
200
150
100
50
End-2014
270 tril. yen
End-2013
200 tril. yen
End-2012
138 tril. yen
End-2014
190 tril. yen
End-2013
140 tril. yen
End-2012
89 tril. yen
Projection
0
2007
08
09
 
Source: Bank of Japan. 
10
Year
11
12
13
14
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21
   Chart 10 
Phillips Curve 
CPI all items less fresh food, y/y % chg.
1983/Q1-2013/Q1
C
2013/Q1
4
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
B
A
A: 1983/Q1-2013/Q1
y = 0.36x + 0.7
B: 1983/Q1-1995/Q4
y = 0.28x + 1.1
C: 1996/Q1-2013/Q1
y = 0.28x + 0.3
-3
-8 
-9 
-6 
-7 
-5 
 
 
 
 
Note: The output gap is estimated by the Bank of Japan.  
Sources: Bank of Japan; Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Cabinet Office. 
-2 
GDP gap (2-quarter lead, %)
-1 
-3 
-4 
0 
1 
2 
4 
3 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Chart 11 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations and the core CPI in Japan 
y/y % chg.
4
3
2
1
0
CPI (all items less fresh food)
Inflation expectations (6 to 10 years ahead)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources: Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications; Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts.” 
-3
1990
2000
Year
02
04
06
08
10
12
98
92
94
96
-2
-1
22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 12 
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations and the CPI in the United Kingdom 
y/y % chg.
 8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Medium- to long-term inflation expectations (6 to 10 years ahead)
Retail prices index excluding mortgage interest payments (RPIX)
CPI
 0
1990
92
 
 
 
Sources: Office for National Statistics; Consensus Economics Inc., “Consensus Forecasts.” 
Year
98
2000
06
96
94
02
04
08
10
12
Chart 13 
Size of the asset purchase program 
tril. yen
Maximum amount of the Program
Actual amount of increase
 Jan. 2013
111 tril.yen
Schedule
Dec.
101 tril.yen
Oct.
91 tril.yen
120
100
80
60
40
Sep. 
80 tril.yen
Apr.
70 tril.yen
Feb. 2012
65 tril.yen
Oct. 
55 tril.yen
Aug. 
50 tril.yen
Started in 
Oct. 2010
35 tril.yen
Mar. 2011
40 tril.yen
End-Dec. 
2014
111 tril. yen
9
12
3
14
6
9
12
20
9
6
12
3
11
9
2010
 
 
 
 
 
Note: Dates indicate the intended timescale for completing the increase.  
3
13
3
12
12
12
9
6
6
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23
Chart 14 
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
    Amount outstanding of banknotes issued and nominal GDP 
(1) Japan 
 
 
y/y % chg.
Nominal GDP
Banknotes
11
12
13
  2006
07
08
09
10
Year
(2) United States 
y/y % chg.
Nominal GDP
Banknotes
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
2006
07
08
09
Year
10
11
12
13
(3) United Kingdom 
y/y % chg.
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
2006
Nominal GDP
Banknotes
07
08
09
10
Year
11
12
13
Sources: Bank of Japan; Federal Reserve; Office for National Statistics. 
24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    Chart 15 
Short-term inflation expectations 
Households' inflation expectations (over the next year)
Households' inflation expectations (1 year from now, weighted average)
Market participants' inflation expectations (1 to 2 years ahead)
 y/y ％ chg.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
-2
-1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources: Bank of Japan; Cabinet Office; QUICK. 
2005
06
07
08
09
Year
10
11
12
13
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25
