Lars Rohde: Developments in the world economy, the Danish economy 
and in its mortgage credit system 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Rohde,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  annual 
meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks’ Federation, Copenhagen, 9 April 2013. 
 Since the autumn, the financial markets have seen positive development. Above all, tensions 
related  to  Southern  European  countries  have  eased,  which  has  been  reflected  in  falling 
interest  rates  and  inflows  of  private-sector  capital  into  these  countries.  Most  recently,  the 
turmoil in connection with Cyprus and Italy has had little effect on other EU member states. 
This  shows  that  the  financial  markets  have  become  more  resilient.  However,  the  positive 
trend is not yet reflected in the real economy of the euro area, which remains weak. At the 
same time, the USA and the rest of the world are in a moderate upswing. 
Growth has been negative in the euro area since late 2011, and a further decline is expected 
in the first part of this year. Unemployment is rising, but with considerable variation between 
the member states. The Southern European countries are burdened by high unemployment, 
including high youth and long-term unemployment. In fact, the situation is so bad that it has 
triggered social and political unrest. That gives cause for concern. Moreover, there is a risk of 
reform fatigue in these member states, which will make it more difficult to implement reforms 
e.g. in the labour market, even though there is not really any alternative. 
The negative growth in the euro area over the last year reflects falls in both investment and 
private  consumption.  Firms  are  consolidating  rather  than  investing.  This  also  applies  to  the 
financial  enterprises,  many  of  which  presumably  want  to  build  up  buffers  against  potential 
shocks. At the same time, credit conditions for households and the corporate sector have been 
tightened. The stricter regulatory requirements imposed by the authorities are likely to have a 
similar  effect  initially,  but  calculations  by  the  ECB  and  others  indicate  that  a  more  robust 
financial sector benefits society overall. At any rate, it is necessary to build up larger buffers in 
all parts of the economy in the wake of the financial crisis and the sovereign debt crisis. 
The USA is struggling with its own budget problems, and there is political disagreement on 
how to tackle them. Lack of will to compromise will result in relatively strong fiscal tightening 
this  year  as  automatic  tax  rises  and  cutbacks  come  into force.  But  perhaps  this  is  not  the 
worst that thing could happen in a long-term perspective. There is an urgent need to balance 
revenue and expenses, even if it results in a temporary reduction of growth; otherwise there 
is  a  risk  that  confidence  in  government  finances  weakens  considerably.  This  could  have 
drastic implications. 
On  the  bright  side,  consumer  price  inflation  remains  low  and  stable  in  the  advanced 
economies.  Although  the  central  banks  are  pumping  out  liquidity,  there  are  apparently  no 
immediate inflationary pressures. But there is a risk that the very low nominal interest rates 
continue for too long. This could lead to inappropriate risk behaviour in an attempt to achieve 
higher returns. Uncertainty about the growth outlook for the global economy has diminished 
as the euro area turmoil has abated. The European Commission, among others, expects that 
the euro area economy will still be characterised by weak domestic demand in 2013, partly 
due to the ongoing necessary fiscal consolidation in a number of member states. As a result, 
growth is likely to be negative this year and only moderately positive next year. On the other 
hand, US economic growth is expected to accelerate over the coming years and will be close 
to its potential level by the end of 2014 – despite the current budget problems. Conversely, 
the German economy, which has performed well for some time, slowed down towards the 
end  of  2012.  According  to  the  European  Commission’s  forecast,  growth  will  be  lower  in 
Germany than in Denmark this year. 
*** 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
the  economy 
the  overheating  of 
The Danish economy underperformed last year. Output fell by 0.5 per cent and is expected 
to  pick  up  only  slightly  this  year.  Throughout  2012,  households  reduced  consumption  and 
investment. Danish households have high gross debt relative to disposable income, but the 
ratio stabilised in 2012. That is positive. They also hold considerable assets in the form of 
pension savings and free financial wealth, besides their homes. 
Price  inflation  in  Denmark  has  declined  sharply  in  recent  months,  and  Danmarks 
Nationalbank  expects  inflation  to  land  at  1.3  per  cent  for  2013  overall.  That  is  below  the 
expected rate of wage increase. So despite low wage increases, the vast majority of wage 
earners  are  likely  to  see  a  small  increase  in  real  wages.  Combined  with  the  low  interest 
rates,  this  will  boost  disposable  income  and  hence  also  consumption.  However,  no  strong 
recovery is expected. A flat trend in employment and a still vulnerable housing market will put 
a  damper  on  growth.  Private  consumption  and  GDP  are  estimated  to  grow  by  only 
0.7 per cent and 0.8 per cent respectively this year. 
Unemployment has been virtually flat since 2010 at a level somewhat below that seen prior 
to 
in  2006–08.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  expects 
unemployment to rise a little towards the summer of 2014, after which it will decline as the 
economy picks up. 
At approximately 9 per  cent of GDP in 2012, the financial savings surplus of Danish firms 
and  households  is  very  high.  It  is  normal  for  the  private-sector  savings  surplus  to  reflect 
cyclical fluctuations, but this time around the pattern has been more pronounced than during 
previous  recessions,  also  when  compared  with  the  situation  in  Denmark’s  neighbouring 
countries. 
One of the reasons for the high savings surplus of Danish firms is the low investment activity, 
but  has  the  situation  evolved  into  an  actual  “investment  crisis”?  I  think  that  would  be  an 
overstatement. Business investment plunged during the crisis in 2008–09, and since then its 
share of gross value added has been below the average for the last couple of decades. But 
this is purely attributable to building and construction investment. The investment ratio for plant 
and equipment has risen over the last couple of years and by the end of 2012 it was close to 
the average since the mid-1990s. This is not the first time investment in plant and equipment 
responds  to  the  early  signs  of  an  upswing,  while  building  investment  follows  suit  at  a  later 
stage. So in Danmarks Nationalbank’s opinion the current low level of investment is to a large 
extent a natural cyclical phenomenon, not an indication of a structural investment crisis. 
In contrast, corporate savings are substantially higher than usual, also in a cyclical context. 
At some point, when confidence is restored, this could boost investment. The change could 
be  swifter  than  expected.  On  the  other  hand,  there  is  also  a  risk  that  foreign  growth  falls 
below expectations, with negative implications for the Danish economy. 
Obviously,  some  sectors  are  struggling  more  than  others,  but  that  is  unavoidable  in  a 
constantly changing world. Focus should be on creating attractive framework conditions for 
output in Denmark. 
Viewed  in  isolation,  weak  wage  increases  improved  competitiveness  in  2012.  The  recent 
strengthening of the effective krone rate has had the opposite effect, but nevertheless, the 
deterioration  of  Denmark’s  competitiveness  which  occurred  during  the  overheating  in  the 
2000s is being rolled back by the market forces. With unemployment only slightly above its 
structural  level,  wage  inflation  has  declined  notably,  and  perhaps  more  than  anyone  had 
believed it would. This underscores the value of a well-functioning Danish labour market and 
contrasts  with  the  situation  in  the  debt-ridden  Southern  European  countries,  where 
unemployment reached a very high level before wage inflation could be reduced. 
In other words, the Danish economy is adjusting to the situation and no political interference 
is required. Denmark is positioned for growth and demand is likely to normalise as the output 
gap gradually closes in the coming years. 
*** 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The negative sentiment in the housing market has curbed economic growth in Denmark for 
some  time.  But  now  we  are  seeing  the  first  budding  signs  of  improvement.  Prices  have 
stabilised over the last year and have begun to rise in some market segments – particularly 
owner-occupied flats in the cities, notably in Greater Copenhagen. Although the milder winds 
may also blow across other parts of the market, there are bound to be areas that will not feel 
them and where prices will continue their downward trend. The housing market is becoming 
polarised. This is to a large extent due to migration within Denmark, with parts of the country 
experiencing negative population growth and economic decline, while e.g. the Copenhagen 
area is prospering. 
In Danmarks Nationalbank’s assessment, house prices are below the level to be expected  
–  based  on  historical  evidence  –  given  the  current  levels  of  income,  taxation  and  interest 
rates. On the basis of these underlying conditions it is estimated that house prices will rise 
slightly  for  Denmark  overall  in  the  coming  years.  This  estimate  is  subject  to  considerable 
uncertainty.  The  difficult,  not  to  say  impossible,  part  is  to  predict  exactly  when  the  mood 
changes, irrespective of the underlying conditions. 
*** 
The Danish mortgage credit system is unique. No doubt about it. The system has proved its 
worth  during  the financial  crisis  and the  subsequent  sovereign  debt  crisis,  and  these  have 
been  genuine  stress  tests. In  spite  of the  odds, it  has  been  possible  to expand  lending  to 
households and corporates and sell bonds in the market – increasingly to investors abroad. 
All  along,  investors  have  had  confidence  in  the  credit  ratings  of  the  bonds  and  the  high 
liquidity in the mortgage credit market. Pension funds are large investors in mortgage bonds, 
and banks to a large degree use short-term mortgage bonds for liquidity management. 
Hence  it  is  hardly  surprising  that  the  Committee  on  Systemically  Important  Financial 
Institutions has identified the market for Danish mortgage bonds as systemically important. 
Actually, the Danish Mortgage Credit Act already provides for SIFI legislation in relation to 
mortgage credit. The Act lays down stringent rules for the relationship between lending by 
mortgage  banks  and  the  issuance  of  bonds  to  finance  the  loans.  The  aim  is  as  far  as 
possible  to  prevent  mortgage  banks  from  incurring  other  risks  than  the  credit  risk  on  the 
borrower. 
The mortgage credit system is a natural part of owning a home in Denmark. The various loan 
types on offer are familiar to homeowners, and conversion of loans has become a favourite 
pastime. As homeowners we have got used to a highly efficient lending system under which 
we pay a low market interest rate plus a fairly modest margin. We have become used to a 
choice of options – with or without amortisation, adjustable or fixed rates. 
In principle, freedom of choice is a good thing for the individual citizen, but it is up to you to 
ensure  that  this  does  not  jeopardise  financial  stability.  I  am  inclined  to  say  that  your  loan 
types have been a little too accommodative to customers. For example, it has been possible 
to  mortgage  up  to  80  per  cent  of  the  value  of  the  home  for  an  adjustable-rate  loan  with 
deferred  amortisation.  This  has  been  very  attractive  to  customers,  but  has  increased  the 
risks incurred by the mortgage banks. 
*** 
Firstly, the extensive use of adjustable-rate loans has introduced a refinancing risk which did 
not  exist  under  the  old  mortgage-credit  model  since  all  loans  were  “prefinanced”.  If  a 
mortgage bank which has issued fixed-rate loans only becomes distressed, it can stop new 
lending and avoid having to go to the market for financing. With adjustable-rate loans, the 
mortgage bank must go to the market regularly, “come hell or high water”. 
So as a result of the long-term adjustable-rate loans financed via bonds with much shorter 
maturities,  the  mortgage  banks’  balance  sheets  now  have  a  bank-like  characteristic  which 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
they  did  not  use  to  have.  The  mortgage  bank  might  experience  a  situation  resembling  a 
“run”. This type of risk did not exist previously. 
The  sector  has  worked  actively  with  this  issue,  e.g.  by  spreading  auctions.  Whereas  all 
adjustable-rate loans were previously refinanced at the same time, auctions now take place 
several times a year. Around half of the refinancing now takes place in other months than 
December. As far as I know, you are also working actively to move customers further along 
the yield curve, e.g. via changed price structures and advisory services. This is good news 
and will reduce the immediate risk of a doomsday scenario. 
But  there  is  another  potentially  destabilising  mechanism.  If  higher  interest  rates  on 
adjustable-rate loans undermine the borrowers’ ability to pay, rising interest rates may hit the 
mortgage  banks  like  a  boomerang  by  way  of  increased  losses  which  could  ultimately 
jeopardise their solvency. 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s analyses show that households would currently be resilient to fairly 
large interest-rate rises without any threat to financial stability. 
Nevertheless, the combination of credit risk and considerable refinancing risk can be toxic, 
given  the  popularity  of  adjustable-rate  loans.  A  negative  spiral  may  arise  if  there  is  the 
slightest doubt about the mortgage banks’ ability to meet their obligations to investors. 
In other words, the widespread use of adjustable-rate loans makes it necessary to structure 
the  mortgage-credit  business  with  a  view  to  retaining  investor  confidence.  This  can  be 
achieved  by  strengthening  the  robustness  of  the  mortgage  banks  to  losses  by  reducing 
loan-to-value  ratios,  increasing  earnings  –  i.e.  administration  margins  –  or  boosting 
capitalisation. In my opinion, reduction of the loan-to-value – LTV – ratio for adjustable-rate 
loans to, say, 60 per cent would be a good and simple way to address this challenge. And no 
legislation is required; it can be achieved completely voluntarily. 
*** 
Secondly,  issuance  of  covered  bonds  and  covered  mortgage  bonds  has  introduced  a  new 
risk type, since the LTV ratio must be kept at 80 per cent or less throughout the maturity of 
the  loan.  If  that  is  not  the  case,  you  must  pledge  top-up  collateral.  In  this  way  the  bonds 
become more collateralised as the LTV ratios must always be observed. That is positive – 
also in relation to refinancing risk. But the extra collateral must be financed, and it may turn 
out to be quite expensive. 
The solution is not to introduce the possibility of opting in or out of the obligations relating to 
covered  bonds  or  to  be  more  complacent  about  meeting  the  top-up  requirements  when 
housing  prices  fall.  That  could  dent  the  credibility  of  the  system.  If  doubts  arise  as  to  a 
mortgage  bank’s  willingness  and  ability  to  defend  the  status  of  a  capital  centre  issuing 
covered bonds, investors will perceive this as an increase in the credit risk on not only that 
capital centre, but also the rest of the mortgage bank. And to make things worse, the lack of 
confidence is likely to spread to the other mortgage banks too, thereby jeopardising financial 
stability. 
If a mortgage bank chooses to issue covered bonds, it must take on the responsibility linked 
to ensuring the robustness of its business, even if housing prices fall. It is possible to ensure 
this robustness within the existing legislative framework, e.g. by introducing lower LTV ratios 
for  loans  based  on  covered  bonds  or  by  ensuring  a  sufficient  buffer  of  capital  well  in 
advance. 
**** 
Thirdly, the first deferred-amortisation loans, which were introduced about 10 years ago, are 
due to expire soon. The 10-year limit was introduced to ensure that mortgage banks took the 
value of the underlying collateral into account. And that is indeed relevant today. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A deferred-amortisation loan may be the right choice for the individual homeowner. But since 
mortgage banks granted deferred-amortisation loans right up to the LTV ratio of 80 per cent 
in the boom years with soaring housing prices, it is hardly surprising that some homeowners 
now find that their properties cannot sustain the loans. 
This has triggered a debate on whether it is necessary to take steps to expand the existing 
framework for prolonging deferred-amortisation loans. I cannot recommend that. It would not 
support the robustness of the Danish mortgage credit system if homeowners do not reduce 
at least the peak of the loan that exceeds 80 per cent, especially since the rate of interest is 
currently  close  to  zero  –  much  lower  than  it  was  when  these  loans  were  raised.  And 
according to Danmarks Nationalbank’s calculations most homeowners are able to meet the 
extra costs of financing the remainder via a more expensive bank loan with amortisation. 
So all in all, I think you are able to address these challenges yourselves if you take a slightly 
more  conservative  approach  to  lending.  Avoid  going  right  to  the  limits  –  that  will  increase 
robustness. 
*** 
The first meeting of the Systemic Risk Council was held yesterday. The Council discussed 
the current situation and risks to financial stability in Denmark. 
I  am  pleased  that  the  Council  is  now  in  operation.  An  important  lesson  from  the  financial 
crisis has been that it is necessary to focus on systemic risk. The Council is to contribute to 
preventing and addressing future systemic financial risks, thereby shielding the real economy 
and  the financial  system  against  a  new  financial  crisis. Obviously  we  cannot  avoid  normal 
cyclical  fluctuations.  The  Council  will  regularly  monitor  risk  developments  and  issue 
observations, warnings and recommendations to the relevant authorities. 
We have a considerable task ahead of us and there are many important issues that I look 
forward to discussing – and learning more about. I have taken on the task of chairman with a 
great degree of humility. 
*** 
Thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
