Andrew Bailey: The evolution of insurance regulation – a shifting scope 
and new frontiers 
Speech  by  Mr  Andrew  Bailey,  Executive  Director  and  Member  of  the  Financial  Policy 
Committee, Bank of England; Managing Director of the Prudential Business Unit, Financial 
Services Authority, at the Nicholas Barbon Lecture, London, 6 February 2013. 
 Thank you for inviting me to give this Nicholas Barbon Lecture. And, thank you for giving me 
the opportunity to remind myself of the career of Nicholas Barbon – I say “remind myself” 
because a long time ago I was an economic historian. Barbon is certainly one of the founders 
– if not the founder – of the insurance industry in London in the late seventeenth century. He 
was first a builder, indeed, he wrote a tract called “an apology for the builder” in which he 
defended  new  construction  in  London  on  the  grounds  that  cities  created  employment  and 
wealth.  Barbon  was  probably  the  leading  builder  of  the  time  and  he  offered  an  integrated 
service because he pioneered house insurance. Indeed there are observations that Barbon’s 
business  was  to  build,  insure,  and  re-build  your  house  when  it  fell  down.  These  days  you 
would be in FSA enforcement if you tried that one. 
But  Barbon  was  also  one  of  the  early  economic  theorists  in  a  period  at  the  end  of  the 
seventeenth  century  when  economic  theory  flourished,  before  it  went  into  abeyance  until 
Adam Smith and David  Hume came onto the scene. Barbon developed the argument that 
wealth creates demand and he extolled conspicuous consumption: he wrote that “a poor man 
wants a Pound; a rich man a Hundred”. Clearly, Barbon never quite imagined that one day 
investment bankers would take his idea to a whole new level. 
And, finally on Barbon, he was around at the time of the founding of the Bank of England. 
Indeed,  the  records  suggest  that  he  very  much  wanted  the  Bank  of  England  not  to  be 
founded, and instead that his own idea of a national Land Bank should have received the 
favour of the Crown and Parliament. That did not happen, and so I guess that Barbon would 
not be happy on finding out that the Bank of England will, over three hundred years later, 
take on regulating his industry of insurance. But then his writings suggest that Barbon was no 
fan of regulation. 
From my perspective this is a very exciting time because after nearly three years of work on 
a wide range of subjects covering the legislation, the new model of prudential supervision, 
our staff, property, IT and other things, we can see the new Prudential Regulation Authority 
starting  to  take  shape  for  real.  We  are  in  the  process  of  moving  into  our  new  home  at 
20 Moorgate. There were several reasons why we chose a City location. One consequence 
is that it will bring us closer to the insurance industry, which for the most part resisted the 
appeal of Canary Wharf and stayed close to the roots that date back to Barbon. He would 
have approved, providing he could have built, insured, and rebuilt your building. Time will tell 
whether you will welcome having your prudential regulator near to your doorsteps, and as far 
as we know located in the City for the first time. 
I want to tackle a number of large issues today, which are closely connected. First, why do 
we think it makes sense to place prudential supervision of insurance in the PRA alongside 
banks and major investment firms? Second, what style of supervision will the PRA adopt and 
how will it affect insurers? And third, how do we think about the issue of systemic risk, and 
systemically important status for insurers? 
There are over 700 insurers in this country which will be subject to prudential supervision by 
the PRA and conduct supervision by the FCA (in addition, insurance brokers will be entirely 
supervised by the FCA). Why place prudential supervision of insurers in the PRA alongside 
banks? I am tempted to make one point here and conclude, namely that we asked to have 
one industry that caused us less trouble than banks. Of course, that would be on the basis of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
“please keep it that way”. It’s tempting to stop there, but in all honesty it would not be the full 
story. Banks and insurers have one crucial thing in common which distinguishes them from 
other  financial  services  providers,  namely  that  they  bring  the  funds  customers  deposit  or 
invest directly onto their balance sheets and therefore expose customers directly to the risk 
inherent  in  those  balance  sheets.  We  did  not,  however,  place  insurers  under  the  PRA 
because they are like banks, even though there are important similarities in the prudential 
approach we apply to both sectors. Why then? For me, the logic has to do with what we have 
learned about our role during the crisis. 
The  traditional  model  of  supervision  has  been  quite  industry  specific.  The  FSA  regime 
introduced  in  1997  created  a  single  authority,  but  within  the  FSA  the  framework  of  rules 
applied to insurance supervision is unique to the industry. It is true that in the run-up to the 
start  of  the  crisis,  and  for  some  time  thereafter,  the  FSA  mingled  insurance  and  bank 
supervision  in  terms  of  its  operating  units,  but  I  think  that  did  not  work  effectively  and  we 
have moved to a clear distinction with an insurance supervision directorate headed by Julian 
Adams. Insurance supervision is a skill of its own, and while our supervisors do move roles 
between insurance and banking in both directions, we want to ensure that we have groups of 
truly expert insurance and banking supervisors. 
The reason for locating insurance and banking in the PRA is in my view that we have learned 
during the crisis that our job as prudential supervisors is to ensure that the public and users 
of financial services, including the corporate sector, can be assured of continuous access to 
the critical services on which they depend. 
Many financial services may be regarded as critical by their users, but some are distinctive 
because it is hard for consumers to replace their provider with a substitute without accepting 
unacceptable  cost  and  loss.  Insurers  provide  critical  services  to  the  public  in  terms  of  risk 
transfer and very long-lived savings contracts. This last point draws out that insurance is not 
a single homogenous industry – general and life insurance are very different activities – and 
we recognise that in our supervision. It would be unacceptable to the public to have access 
to risk transfer through, say home or car insurance, or professional indemnity insurance, to 
name but a few, withdrawn in a disruptive and unannounced way. In the same way, savings 
contracts  that  are  long-lived  and  provided  by  life  insurers,  and  are  often  an  individual’s 
primary  pension  provision,  are  critical  financial  services  that  are  difficult  to  replace  without 
unacceptable cost. For me, there is therefore a common feature of banking and insurance in 
terms of continuity of access to critical financial services. 
This is not, however, the end of the story on the issue of why the PRA will regulate banks 
and  insurers.  What  I  have  started  to  describe  is  the  first  objective  that  the  new  legislation 
gives to the PRA, namely the safety and soundness of the firms we will supervise. But there 
is another important leg to the definition of the objective, namely that the underlying objective 
of our pursuit of safety and soundness is the stability of the financial system. For banks, this 
had led us to emphasise that we will be a proportionate supervisor, putting more emphasis 
on the large firms that have more scope to damage the stability of the system. We think we 
can  do  this  for  banks  because  the  depositor  is  protected  by  the  deposit  insurance 
arrangements  on  the  first  £85,000  of  deposits  provided  by  the  FSCS  for  all  banks  except 
branches from other EU countries (where the insurance comes from the home country), and 
because  as  a  consequence  of  the  crisis  the  resolution  regime  is  now  set  down  in  statute, 
though  we  clearly  have  work  to  do  to  make  the  larger  banks  resolvable  using  those 
resolution powers, supplemented we expect by future EU legislation. 
For  insurers,  the  legislation  gives  the  PRA  a  second  objective,  namely  the  protection  of 
policyholders. We do not have a comparable objective for depositors. Policyholder protection 
means in effect that our approach of proportionality in supervision cannot be the same for 
insurers. Why? This is a good question because the FSCS is set up to cover insurance. For 
me, the reason is that we have more work to do to develop the best tools to ensure continuity 
of access to critical insurance services. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Why do I think we are short of tools? To explain my view on this requires some background 
on  the  resolution  of  banks.  Statutory  special  resolution  regimes  for  banks  like  the  one 
adopted in the UK in 2009 have at their heart the power to alter property rights, the power to 
separate the business of a company from its owners, albeit with safeguards against unfair 
expropriation. It is a very powerful tool, and one that should be used carefully for that reason. 
For banks a typical use of the resolution regime is because depositors can lose confidence in 
their ability to have access to their funds, and thus a run can start which brings down the 
bank.  A  resolution  regime  can  bring  order  to  that  process.  For  insurers,  policyholders  are 
less likely run in the sense that they can withdraw their contract and take it somewhere else, 
though it is possible for some life contracts to be surrendered without penalty. Unlike money, 
insurance contracts are not fungible because the cover is specific to the contract. In the limit, 
a  bank  depositor  can  exchange  their  claim  on  the  bank  (commercial  bank  money)  for  a 
risk-free  claim  on  the  central  bank  (by  requesting  bank  notes).  An  insurance  policyholder 
cannot do this. 
Work is under way to determine whether insurance would benefit from a special resolution 
regime  that  overrides  normal  insolvency  rules  in  order  to  enhance  the  ability  to  ensure 
continuity  of  critical  contacts  through,  say,  the  transfer  to  business  to  another  firm.  I  will 
return to this subject later in this lecture because it is one that we should consider carefully. 
My general view is that the policyholder protection objective for insurance points to the need 
for  a  resolution  regime  for  insurers,  but  the  important  issue  is  to  be  clear  on  what  sort  of 
regime. 
There  is  one  further  area  of  insurance  that  for  me  clinches  the  case  for  the  policyholder 
protection  objective  in  the  PRA.  I  almost  mention  “With  Profits”  with  trepidation,  but  I  am 
afraid I must do so at this stage. With about £350bn of policy values outstanding, and policy 
maturities that can run into decades hence, With Profits is clearly a legacy that will be very 
much  with  us  for  a  good  while  yet.  Consequently,  I  do  think  that  the  industry  and  the 
authorities need to be alert to its inherent risks and complexities. 
In thinking about the implications of With Profits, let me step back for a moment. In broad 
terms,  I  can  see  two  distinct  types  of  financial  contract  involving  deposits  and  savings.  A 
deposit contract with a bank has at its core the promise that the bank will return the full value 
of the deposit at any time when it is contractually obliged to do so. Loss of confidence in a 
bank sets in when depositors fear that this may not happen. An asset management contract 
is  quite  different  because  the  promise  is  at  its  simplest  to  return  the  proceeds  of  the 
investment  strategy,  which  may  be  more  or  less  than  the  amount  invested.  It  is  cruel  to 
remember the Woody Allen jibe at this point that a stockbroker is someone who invests your 
money until it is all gone. Economists might call the deposit and asset management contract 
“corner solutions” in that they have a robust definition and lie at opposite ends of a range. If 
so, With Profits falls in between, and it is in this ground that issues can arise. 
The proposition was essentially to offer investors a blended exposure to cash, bond, property 
and  equity  return  with  some  degree  of  smoothing  of  overall  returns,  essentially  at 
management’s discretion, to reduce market timing risk. The marketing tended to make much 
of these products’ potential to earn above cash returns without the volatility of pure equity 
exposure; and this in turn conditioned policy holders’ expectations, a fact first acknowledged 
explicitly in the UK’s prudential solvency regime for insurers in 1967 (bear in mind that this 
was not the original prudential regime, which was introduced in 1870). 
The  essence  of  the  With  Profits  contact  as  I  understand  it  is  that  the  provider  offers  a 
guaranteed  minimum  return,  variously  structured  ,  plus  the  prospect  of  additional  returns 
derived  from  the  return  earned  on  a  pooled  fund  that  combines  many  contracts  including 
over different generations of policyholders. There is of course a logic to pooling returns, but 
for  the  policyholder  the  return  can  be  complicated,  and  sometimes  made  opaque,  by  the 
practice  of  pooling  different  generations  of  policyholders  who  may  have  different 
expectations  on  their  returns  (conditioned,  for  instance,  on  changes  in  the  external 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
to  ensure 
environment); and by the practices of smoothing returns and of charging differentially for the 
economic value of the guarantees. Additionally, problems have arisen because the funds are 
made up of many different groups of policyholders with different guarantees, some of which, 
essentially on the annuity side, became increasingly valuable as nominal interest rates fell 
from  the  mid  1990’s.  The  existence  of  these guarantees was  often,  at  best,  unclear  or,  at 
worst  not  disclosed  to  new  joiners  to  the  fund.  Bear  in  mind  also  that  these  contracts  are 
long-lived  with  maturities  typically  of  25  years  of  more;  and  that  the  With  Profits  insurers 
themselves have often built up over many years through the take-over or mergers of many 
smaller  providers,  each  with 
their  own  distinct  products,  associated  policyholder 
expectations, and administrative “legacy” systems. 
Suffice  to  say  that  in  the  last  two  years  in  which  I  have  been  involved  with  insurance 
supervision, some of the most difficult issues that I have faced have been in the area of With 
Profits.  For  that  reason,  I  think  it  is  appropriate  that  the  PRA  should  have  a  policyholder 
protection  objective  because  I  think  we  have  to  recognise  explicitly  the  contractual 
complexity that we inherit and the solvency risks this can generate. I should also add finally 
that it is not a coincidence that we have found this area to be the most challenging in terms 
of  creating  the  “twin  peaks”  model  in  which  the  FCA  will  have  responsibility  for  reaching 
judgements,  through  a  formal  determination  process  on  fairness  to  policyholders  and  the 
PRA  will  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that  those  judgements  are  compatible  with  the 
prudential  soundness  of  firms.  We  have  reached  a  satisfactory  conclusion,  with  specific 
language in the legislation, and a special With Profits MoU between the FCA and PRA; but it 
has  required  very  careful  consideration 
that  each  regulator’s  role  and 
responsibilities has been appropriately defined to avoid any “under-laps” and that the correct 
balance has been struck between them. 
Let me now move on to the second subject – what style of supervision will the PRA adopt 
and how will it affect insurers? Let me start by drawing the distinction between regulation and 
supervision  in  our  world.  Regulation  is  about  the  framework  of  rules  and  policies  against 
which we operate. Supervision is about how we apply that framework every day. They are 
not  the  same  thing.  Rules  are  for  the  most  part  in  our  world  the  product  of  international 
agreement,  eventually.  There  are  good  reasons  for  this  in  terms  of  seeking  to  ensure 
comparable  standards  of  protection  where  services  can  be  provided  across  borders,  and 
where encouraging free trade in services is consistent with open economies. 
When it comes to supervision the PRA will be applying judgement around the framework of 
rules.  This  is  important  for  a  number  of  reasons,  but  above  all  against  a  background  of 
inexorable increases in rule making we must have the determination to be focussed on the 
key risks that matter to our objectives. One of my commitments is that we must be focussed 
on  the  (I  hope)  small  number  of  big  risks  that  threaten  our  objectives  of  safety  and 
soundness and policyholder protection. I don’t have any difficulty with intensive and intrusive 
supervision where it is focussed and justified by the risks. We are not, however, substitute 
compliance officers – that is the job of firms, and one that we will expect to see in place and 
functioning along with risk and audit functions. 
Another key aspect of judgemental supervision is that it must be forward-looking to the risks 
that may arise. This is crucial, and was not properly incorporated into the pre-crisis regime of 
supervision. Let me give a few current examples of this for insurers. 
We  are  focussed  on  the  impact  of  very  low  interest  rates  staying  with  us  for  a  protracted 
time, and when I say this I am offering no view whatsoever on the likely course of monetary 
policy.  Likewise,  we  want  to  know  that  the  prudential  position  of  firms  also  captures  the 
possible impact of an unexpected upward shift in the slope of the yield curve, and again I am 
offering no view on monetary policy. My third example is different: we are watching the range 
of possible outcomes on flood insurance in this country for their prudential implications. 
Judgment in supervision is not, however, without its challenges when it comes to the practice 
of supervision. There are two large challenges I see. First, we have to balance the use of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
test  our 
judgements  against  a 
sensible  judgement  against  the  risk  of  creating  undue  uncertainty  in  our  behaviour  which 
damages  your  ability  to  do  business.  This  is  not  easy  I  accept.  It  requires  us  almost 
constantly  to  check  and 
framework  of  reasonable 
predictability. 
Also, it requires a greater degree of transparency from us to you, and I think from both of us 
to the public and investors. This is important to ensure that we can both be held to account 
for  applying  judgement  in  a  way  that  is  consistent  with  the  pursuit  of  our  objectives.  I  am 
conscious that achieving accountability in insurance supervision in the current environment is 
challenging  because  all  the  focus  is  on  the  banks.  No  visits  to  the  Treasury  Select 
Committee may seem like a blessing, but we have to ensure that the accountability still holds 
water. On that point, frankly, I think there should have already been more accountability for 
how  the  processes  of  the  European  Union  could  have  created  such  a  vast  cost  for  an 
industry for the implementation of a directive which has not even yet been finally agreed, and 
for  which  I  cannot  give  you  a  date.  Largely  unseen  in  the  banking  crisis  has  been  the 
shocking cost of Solvency II. 
The second challenge with the use of judgement in supervision is that elsewhere we have 
seen  a  preference  to  have  many  rules,  but  often  ones  which  can  then  be  gamed.  Paul 
Volcker put it nicely in his evidence to the Parliamentary Banking Commission. He said that 
people ask for clear and simple rules so that they can tell when they are in abeyance, but 
they typically fail to add that they want to know how to get round the rule too, but that is part 
of the deal. At the PRA we will apply judgement rigorously; sometimes you will agree with us, 
and sometimes you won’t. We will be clear and transparent in our judgements, and we will be 
accountable. 
Finally on the issue of the PRA’s approach to supervision, I want to assure you that we will 
take supervision of insurers just as seriously as we do the other lot. It is not in our nature to 
do  otherwise.  And,  we  are  putting  more  emphasis  on  senior  level  contact  in  the  new 
approach. We want to deliver key messages very clearly to senior management and boards, 
and we want to know how your governance works in practice. I will give one example of this 
approach  in  recent  months,  returning  to  Solvency  II.  It  was  clear  to  me  by  the  end  of  last 
summer that we were facing a long delay in the directive on top of a bill that, as I have said, 
was indefensible and ever rising. We have had extensive contact with chief executives and 
the Association of British Insurers in recent months, with the overarching objective that this 
cannot go on. I think we have reached a sensible conclusion which at least makes the best of 
where  we  find  ourselves.  Where  possible  and  sensible  we  will  use  the  work  done  on 
Solvency II to date to bolster our existing ICAS regime, though I should stress that we are 
quite comfortable with the core of ICAS and believe that we can use it as the framework to 
build the PRA approach until such time as Solvency II appears. I hope that this change of 
approach both alleviates the costs and helps to create a less pressured environment in which 
we can seek to obtain a better framework for prudential supervision of insurers in the future 
than  would  otherwise  be  the  case.  There  is  too  much  at  stake  for  the  industry  and  the 
economy to compromise on this objective. 
Let me turn to the third and final issue, namely how do we think about the issue of systemic 
risk, and systemically important status, for insurers? This is obviously topical in the context of 
the IAIS proposed policy measures for globally systemically important insurers. First of all, in 
my view the case for systemic importance for insurers has to be proved. It does not follow 
that  because  major  banks  are  systemically  important,  the  same  must  be  true  for  insurers. 
And, second, if a case can be made, it does not automatically determine what the response 
should be; in other words, it does not follow that the same capital treatment of systemic firms 
and/or  a  statutory  resolution  regime  are  needed  as  for  banks.  The  calibration  of  these 
responses will have to be proven, and the response will need to be consistent with mitigating 
the  cause  of  the  systemic  risk.  So,  let’s  put  banks  to  one  side,  but  only  after  making  one 
important  point,  that  whereas  systemic  risk  in  banking  is  dangerous  in  good  part  because 
that it is in the nature of banking that the confidence issue combined with a very high level of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
inter-connectivity of risk within the system creates systemic risk, this is not true to the same 
extent in insurance. 
Over  the  years,  re-insurance  has  come  under  the  spotlight  as  a  possible  cause  of 
intra-system connectivity and risk, but I have not yet seen a convincing demonstration of a 
major  systemic  issue  for  pure  reinsurance  of  idiosyncratic,  diversifiable,  non-financial  risks 
such as fire, weather, earthquake or liability. 
It is of course likely that within the insurance industry there are firms which because of some 
combination of complexity of risk and size pose more risks to the financial system, and as 
such our supervision should be proportional. Let me develop this theme drawing on, I should 
say, valuable input from my colleagues Paul Sharma and Julian Adams. 
The resolution challenge for non-life insurance involves ensuring short-term continuity of risk 
cover.  But  life  insurers  make  long-term  promises  to  their  policyholders  which  can  only  be 
matched  imperfectly  with  available  financial  instruments  (securities  and  derivatives).  This 
creates a vulnerability to shocks from financial markets such as the impact of the large fall in 
equity markets in 2002 to 2003. 
Life insurers do not close down by going into so-called solvent run-off in the same way as 
non-life  insurers,  and  bear  in  mind  that  the  term  solvent  run-off  is  the  expression  of  a 
probability of an outcome. A non-life insurer when it enters run-off typically ceases to collect 
new premiums. The risk in run-off here – and there is a risk that needs examination – is that 
near-term  claims  are  paid  out  to  the  detriment  of  unidentified  far-term  claims,  thereby 
creating  an  inequality  through  a  form  of  time  subordination.  In  contrast,  a  life  insurer  that 
enters  run-off  continues  to  collect  regular  premiums  on  its  existing  in-force  life  insurance 
policies. Moreover, it needs to continue to pay its obligations (e.g. annuities-in-payment) on 
the exact day contracted whereas a non-life insurer in run-off has some greater flexibility to 
pay claims to match its cash flow. Finally, a life insurer in run-off needs to honour contractual 
policy surrender rights. 
These  features  of  life  insurers  draw  out  the  difference  in  economic  interest  between 
near-term  and  far-term  policyholders,  and  one  who  has  a  right  of  surrender  and  one  who 
does  not.  Moreover  as  life  insurers  are  making  long-term  promises  to  policyholders,  they 
often  seek  to  match  those  commitments  dynamically,  using  short-term  derivatives,  and 
therefore rely on continued access to those derivatives and the willingness of counterparties 
to  take  such  exposures  to  a  firm  in  run-off.  These  derivative  positions  will  not  be  more 
idiosyncratic  like  traditional  insurance,  but  will  be  determined  by  the  overall  direction  of 
financial market prices, giving scope for more system-wide problems. 
I described earlier the issues I see with more traditional With-Profit contracts. The issues I 
highlighted were not so much to do with definite features of the contract between the insurer 
and  the  policyholder  but  with  the  uncertainty  around  the  contract  itself  arising  from  the 
substantial discretion afforded to the insurers’ management to determine final policy charges 
and returns. 
There is an argument that such uncertainty is helpful to the insurer because the promise to 
the  policyholder  is  cautious  in  terms  of  accrued  income  and  gains,  and  the  insurer  is  in 
control  of  the  investment  strategy  for  the  asset  pool.  The  issue  with  uncertainty  around 
contractual  terms  is  therefore  arguably  more  of  a  conduct  issue  to  do  with  fairness  in  the 
operation of the contract, but to be clear it will have prudential consequences if the scale of 
the fairness problem is large enough, as Equitable demonstrated. 
Compare  this  with  the  newer  life  insurance  products  in  some  jurisdictions  which  contain 
much more definitive promises, for example that at each valuation point the policyholder has 
a  commitment  such  that  if  their  asset-pool  is  valued  higher  than  the  previous  guaranteed 
amount, this new amount will feature in the minimum guaranteed return. 
This reduces uncertainty in one sense relative to With Profits but increases financial risk for 
the insurer – which is further increased where policyholders can switch instruments at each 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
valuation point and thus select against the insurer on the basis of a more definitive promise 
they have made on future returns. The insurer thus risks adverse selection against them. The 
risks in this type of contract are therefore more clearly prudential. 
Globally the scale of all of these promises is very large – the full extent is not clear, but it 
could be well over $1 trillion. In the UK these contracts are marked to market, which provides 
useful information, but that is not consistently the case globally. There is scope for problems 
in, for instance, the time-value of liabilities and the valuation of complex derivative positions. 
All of this tends to my mind to demonstrate that there is at least one part of the insurance 
industry  that  is,  globally,  large  and  complex,  and  UK  firms  are  an  important  part  of  this 
sector. That does not, to be clear, lead to a conclusion that therefore the approach and toolkit 
taken for globally important banks should apply to these insurers. It leads me to two initial 
conclusions.  First,  that  in  a  world  of  proportionate  supervision,  we  should  take  a  more 
enhanced and intensive approach for these large and complex firms. This is what the PRA 
will do, and it does not contradict our policyholder protection objective which, as I indicated 
earlier, gives us in my view a somewhat different objective in respect of small insurers versus 
small banks. 
Second, this degree of complexity inevitably raises important questions around our resolution 
tools where we face dealing with large-scale run-downs. In this context, I am aware that the 
PRA will need to be very clear how it interprets and puts into effect its policyholder protection 
objective in the context of insurers that enter run-off or require some other means to draw the 
business to a close. 
In conclusion, I hope this description has given you a sense of the PRA’s intended approach 
to supervising insurers, and some of the big issues that we see ahead. We have grown all 
too  accustomed  to  focusing  heavily  on  banks,  reflecting  their  capacity  for  damaging 
spillovers  and  externalities.  Whether,  or  how  much,  insurers  share  some  of  these 
characteristics  is  the  subject  of  extensive  debate.  I  am  yet  to  be  persuaded  that  the 
similarities  of  insurers  and  banks  are  more  important  that  the  differences.  But  I  am 
persuaded  that  insurance  is  a  critical  financial  service  provided  by  firms  that  have 
considerable  complexity  in  terms  of  financial  risks.  This  alone  demonstrates  why  we  care 
about the prudential supervision of insurers. I should stress that we are looking forward to the 
challenge. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
