Haruhiko Kuroda: The Bank of Japan’s Semiannual Report on Currency 
and Monetary Control 
Statement by Mr Haruhiko Kuroda, Governor of the Bank of Japan, before the Committee on 
Financial Affairs, House of Representatives, Tokyo, 19 June 2013. 
 Introduction 
The  Bank  of  Japan  submits  to  the  Diet  its  Semiannual  Report  on  Currency  and  Monetary 
Control in June and December. Most recently, the Bank submitted the report for the second 
half  of  fiscal  2012  on  June  14,  2013.  I  am  pleased  to  have  this  opportunity  to  talk  about 
recent  developments  in  Japan’s  economy  and  present  an  overall  review  of  the  Bank's 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
I.  
First, I will explain economic and financial developments in Japan. 
Japan’s economy has been picking up as exports and industrial production have continued to 
improve  against  the  background  that  domestic  demand  remains  resilient.  As  for  overseas 
economies,  while  the  manufacturing  sector  shows  a  lackluster  performance,  they  are 
gradually heading toward a pick-up as a whole. In this situation, exports have started picking 
up. Business fixed investment has been resilient in nonmanufacturing and appears to have 
stopped weakening on the whole. Public investment has continued to increase, and housing 
investment has generally been picking up. Private consumption has been resilient, assisted 
by the improvement in consumer sentiment. Reflecting these developments in demand both 
at home and abroad, industrial production has been picking up. 
With regard to the outlook, Japan’s economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery 
path, mainly  against  the  background  that  domestic  demand  increases  its  resilience  due  to 
the effects of monetary easing as well as various economic measures, and that growth rates 
of overseas economies gradually pick up, albeit moderately. 
Meanwhile,  financial  conditions  are  accommodative.  The  monetary  base  has  increased 
significantly as asset purchases by the Bank of Japan have progressed, and firms’ funding 
costs  have  been  hovering  at  low  levels.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  increase  in  the  amount 
outstanding of bank lending has been at around 2 percent, mainly due to increased demand 
for working capital and funds related to mergers and acquisitions. Issuing conditions for CP 
and corporate bonds have remained favorable on the whole. 
Financial  markets  have  shown  somewhat  volatile  movements  since  late  May,  largely 
reflecting  developments  in  overseas  markets.  Given  that  Japan’s  economy  is  on  a  steady 
path  toward  recovery,  however,  they  are  expected  to  gradually  regain  stability,  reflecting 
positive momentum in economic activity. 
On the price front, the year-on-year rate of change in consumer prices (all items less fresh 
food) has been negative, due to the reversal of the previous year’s movements in energy-
related  and  durable  consumer  goods.  The  rise  in  some  market  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations has come to a pause; however, indicators including the surveys conducted on 
households and economists suggest a rise on the  whole. In  May, the year-on-year rate of 
change  in  consumer  prices  in  the  Tokyo  metropolitan  area  registered  positive  for  the  first 
time  in  four  years  and  two  months.  Going  forward,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in 
consumer prices nationwide is likely to gradually turn positive. 
There  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  concerning  Japan’s  economy,  including  the 
prospects for the European debt problem and the growth momentum of the U.S. economy as 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
well  as  the  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  pay 
close attention to further developments, including those in financial markets. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
II.  
Next, I will explain the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
In April, the Bank introduced quantitative and qualitative monetary easing (QQE), aiming to 
achieve the price stability target of 2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in 
the consumer price index at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of about two years. 
QQE represents a new phase of monetary easing, both in terms of quantity and quality. More 
concretely,  first,  the  Bank  changed  its  main  operating  target  for  money  market  operations 
from  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate  to  the  monetary  base.  On  top  of  this,  it  will 
double  the  monetary  base  in  two  years.  Second,  the  Bank  will  purchase  Japanese 
government bonds (JGBs) so that their amount outstanding will increase at an annual pace 
of about 50 trillion yen. As a result, the amount outstanding is also expected to double in two 
years.  In  addition,  the  average remaining maturity  of the  Bank’s JGB  purchases  has  been 
extended  from  slightly  less  than  three  years  to  about  seven  years.  Third,  the  Bank  will 
purchase exchange-traded funds (ETFs) and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) 
so that their amounts outstanding will increase at an annual pace of about 1 trillion yen and 
about 30 billion yen, respectively. The Bank will continue with QQE, aiming to achieve the 
price stability target of 2 percent, as long as it is necessary for maintaining that target in a 
stable  manner.  It  will  examine  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  and 
prices, and make adjustments as appropriate. 
The transmission channels of QQE are as follows. First, the purchases of financial assets will 
exert influence on long-term interest rates and risk premia of asset prices. Second, a portfolio 
rebalancing effect, in which the investment behavior of financial institutions and institutional 
investors changes by increasing lending and/or shifting their portfolios to risk assets. Third, 
the clear commitment to achieving the price stability target at the earliest possible time and 
the  continuation  of  massive  purchases  of  assets  are  expected  to  drastically  change  the 
expectations of markets and economic entities. Through these channels, QQE will stimulate 
private  demand  and  contribute  to  raising  prices  by  improving  the  aggregate  supply  and 
demand balance and by raising inflation expectations. 
Such  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  the  Bank  will  support  the  positive  movements  in 
economic activity and financial markets, contribute to a rise in inflation expectations, and lead 
Japan’s economy to overcome the deflation that has lasted for nearly 15 years. The Bank will 
continue to conduct monetary policy as appropriate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
