William C Dudley: Lessons at the zero bound – the Japanese and US 
experience 
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York and Chairman of the Committee on the Global Financial System 
(CGFS), at the Japan Society, New York City, 21 May 2013. 
 It is a pleasure to have the opportunity to speak today at the Japan Society.1 Our countries 
have  very  close  relations  and  this  is  particularly  true  at  the  central  banker  level.  I  just  got 
back  from  the  BIS  last  week  where  I  had  a  chance  to  spend  some  time  with  Governor 
Kuroda. 
Today, I will discuss the challenge that we both have been working to solve – how best to 
conduct monetary policy when short-term interest rates are already pinned close to zero, but 
the  economy  is  still  operating  well  below  its  potential.  This  has  required  considerable 
learning. After all, until Japan’s experience began in the 1990s, no major country had actually 
faced this problem since the Great Depression of the 1930s. 
As the first nation to experience the zero bound in modern times, Japan was an early pioneer 
in developing unconventional tools and strategies. Its experiences, both good and bad, along 
with  lessons  from  other  periods  such  as  the  Great  Depression,  have  helped  to  inform  the 
policies adopted by the United States (U.S.) and other nations in recent years. The evolution 
of policy in Japan, in turn, has been informed, in part, by the experience of the U.S. and other 
nations. 
So what have we learned to date? Let me highlight six key points. 
First,  and most  importantly,  managing  expectations  is  critical  in  the  execution  of  monetary 
policy at the zero bound. This includes expectations about the central bank’s objectives for 
inflation and the economy, and expectations about how the central bank will use its tools in 
the future to achieve these goals. 
Second,  in managing  expectations, good communication  is  essential.  Expectations  will  not 
be well anchored when communications are muddled or inconsistent, or when a central bank 
acts in ways that are not consistent with its guidance. 
Third,  actions  speak  louder  than  words  alone.  Thus,  there  is  an  important  role  for  asset 
purchases that  ease financial  conditions  to  support growth  and  keep  inflation  expectations 
well anchored. 
Fourth, the policy instruments interact so that policy as a whole exceeds the sum of its parts. 
Fifth, at the zero lower bound, risk management becomes extremely important. In particular, 
because the costs of getting stuck in a liquidity trap with chronic deflation are high, a central 
bank should put substantial weight on avoiding this outcome. 
Sixth, the constraints imposed by the zero bound limit what monetary policy can accomplish 
by  itself.  This  increases  the  importance  of  complementary  fiscal,  financial,  and  structural 
policy  actions.  Credible  fiscal  policies,  actions  to  ensure  a  healthy  financial  system,  and 
structural reforms that lift the potential for growth are very important. 
As always, what I will say here today represents my own views and not necessarily those of 
the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, Committee) or the Federal Reserve System. 
                                                
1   Krishna Guha, Paolo Pesenti, Simon Potter, Jamie McAndrews, Jonathan McCarthy, Lorie Logan, John Clark, 
Eben Lazarus and others on my staff helped with the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Review of the experience in Japan and the United States 
Let me start by briefly reviewing the experience of Japan and the United States. As you all 
know, Japan’s rapid economic ascent and investment boom came to an abrupt halt in the 
early 1990s with the bursting of a gigantic bubble in equities and real estate. 
Asset price deflation resulted in a huge decline in wealth. This led to a sharp fall in demand, 
a  balance  sheet  squeeze  for  both  businesses  and  households,  and  a  large  increase  in 
problem loans for Japanese financial intermediaries. By some measures – such as the loss 
of  wealth  relative  to  the  size  of  the  economy  –  this  was  a  bigger  shock  than  the  U.S. 
experienced in 2008. Growth slowed sharply and inflation fell. 
The Bank of Japan (BoJ) responded by reducing overnight interest rates from a peak of more 
than 8 percent in early 1991 to ½ a percent by the fall of 1995.2 Most studies of this period 
suggest that policy was generally appropriate given economic forecasts at the time, but too 
tight  relative  to  the  actual  outcomes.3  Economic  forecasts  for  Japan  –  both  by  the  official 
community and by private sector agents – were consistently more optimistic than the actual 
outturns. It is noteworthy that as late as January 1995 – on the eve of deflation – 10-year 
Japanese Government Bond (JGB) yields were still at 4.7 percent. 
With the benefit of hindsight, we now understand that the disinflationary consequences of the 
asset price bust and financial stress where vastly more powerful than was widely realized at 
the  time.  As  we  later  saw  in  the  U.S.,  the  forces  of  contraction  and  disinflation  operated 
through  many  different  channels  –  not  just  directly  on  household  wealth,  for  example,  but 
also through the impact of the asset price bust on the health of financial intermediaries and 
the supply of credit to households and businesses. 
Over  time,  the  Japanese  banking  system  came  under  mounting  stress.  This  was  a  slow-
motion crisis, as the assets were mainly loans that were not marked-to-market. Accounting 
practices  and  regulatory  forbearance  allowed  banks  to  delay  charging  off  bad  loans  and 
recapitalizing at the cost of impairing the availability of credit to new potential borrowers. A 
full-blown banking crisis finally materialized in 1997. Although some banks were recapitalized 
in 1999, the full regulatory response took several more years. 
The monetary and fiscal stimulus that was provided helped Japan avoid a deep recession. 
But expectations about future nominal income growth for both households and businesses 
ground  lower  over  time.  With  inflation  expectations  sinking,  inflation-adjusted  real  interest 
rates rose, and Japan became mired in deflation. 
While  deflation  is  ultimately  a  monetary  phenomenon,  structural  elements  were  also 
important. Long-term demographic factors added to the deflationary pressures and structural 
rigidities,  and  credit  supply  problems  constrained  the  reallocation  of  resources  to  growth 
sectors. These structural factors made it substantially more difficult to escape the deflation 
trap. 
The Bank of Japan was active during this period. From the late 1990s onwards, it pioneered 
an  extremely  broad  array  of  innovative  tools  –  many  of  which  were  later  adopted,  in 
amended form, by the Fed and other major central banks. These included forward guidance 
on the future path of the policy rate, quantitative easing through purchases of government 
securities  and  private  assets  including  asset-backed  securities,  equities  and  real  estate 
investment  trusts  (REITs),  a  more  quantitative  inflation  objective,  and  funding  for  bank 
lending. 
                                                
2   Actual overnight rates; the Bank of Japan did not publish its rate target until 1998. 
3   See  “Preventing  Deflation:  Lessons  from  Japan’s  Experience  in  the  1990s,”  Alan  Ahearn,  Joseph  Gagnon, 
Jane Haltmaier, and Steve Kamin et. al., International Finance Discussion Papers, No 729, June 2002, Board 
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
From  my  perspective,  Japan’s  experience  with  forward  guidance  for  the  policy  rate,  asset 
purchases and a more formal inflation goal are particularly instructive, as this helped inform 
the later use of such tools in the United States. 
In  early  1999,  the  Bank  of  Japan  said  it  would  maintain  its  zero  interest  rate  policy  until 
“deflationary concerns” were “dispelled.” This commitment was lifted in August 2000, and the 
BoJ raised the policy rate by a quarter-point. However, the BoJ was subsequently obliged to 
reverse course, and reintroduced forward guidance in March 2001. This guidance was tied to 
the realization of a new inflation objective. 
With  deflation  intensifying,  the  Bank  of  Japan  embarked  on  a  quantitative  easing  (QE) 
program  in  2001  designed  to  increase  the  size  of  the  monetary  base.  The  Bank  of  Japan 
engaged  in  purchases  of  JGBs  that  were  large  in  scale,  but  confined  to  short-dated 
maturities.  This  reflected  a  view  that  such  purchases  primarily  acted  through  the  liabilities 
side of the central bank's balance sheet – pushing up the amount of reserves in the banking 
system.  Because  the  growth  of  the  monetary  base  was  deemed  the  goal  of  policy,  it  was 
logical to purchase short-dated assets, which could be allowed to run off once a sustainable 
recovery was in place. 
The downside of this approach was that the purchases did not change the composition of the 
private  sector’s  balance  sheet  very  much  because  the  policy  essentially  resulted  in  the 
exchange  of  one  short-term  risk-free  asset  for  another.  As  a  consequence,  the  purchases 
had only modest direct effects on financial conditions.4  
Starting in 2006, when the initial wave of QE ended, the BoJ began to formalize its inflation 
goal  in  numerical  terms.  This  was  initially  expressed  as  an  “understanding  of  medium-  to 
long-term price stability” based on individual policymakers’ views. The inflation objective went 
through several iterations before being defined in 2012 as a Committee “goal” of a positive 
range of 2 percent or lower, with a lower interim goal of 1 percent. 
Following  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis  in  2007–2008,  Japan  resumed  QE,  and 
gradually tightened the link between its policy actions and its objectives. By January 2012, 
the BoJ had committed to keep rates at the zero bound and to continue purchasing assets 
until the 1 percent goal was “in sight.” 
Several  prominent  Japanese  experts  have  argued  that  there  was  a  “start-stop”  aspect  to 
monetary  policy  during  the  1990s  and  2000s  with  reversals  in  policy  beginning  before 
deflationary  expectations  were  eliminated.5  Fiscal  policy  also  reversed  abruptly  on  several 
occasions before economic recovery was firmly established. While Japan did enjoy a period 
of respectable real per capita growth in the mid-2000s, escape from deflation proved elusive. 
More than a decade after Japan’s bubble burst, the U.S. housing bubble burst. This exposed 
extensive vulnerabilities in our financial system and triggered a global financial crisis.6 Unlike 
Japan, we had the advantage of being able to learn from another nation’s recent experience. 
We  applied  what  we  understood  to  be  the  lessons  from  Japan,  though  with  hindsight, 
perhaps not in every respect as completely as we could have. 
In particular, Japan’s experience reinforced the lessons of the Great Depression here in the 
U.S. and made us sensitive to the disinflationary force of an asset price bust and financial 
                                                
4   However,  research  suggests  that  the  purchases  did  reinforce  the  forward  commitment.  See,  for  example, 
“Policy commitment and expectation formation: Japan’s experience under zero interest rates” Kunio Okina and 
Shigenori Shiratsuka North American Journal of Economics and Finance, Vol 15, No 1, pp 75–100. 
5   See, for example, “Deleveraging and Monetary Policy: Japan Since the 1990s and the United States Since 
2007”, Kazuo Ueda, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol 26, No 3, Summer 2012, pp 177–202. 
6   Some commentators prefer the term “North Atlantic financial crisis” as the failure and near-failure of financial 
institutions was concentrated in the U.S. and Europe. However, the crisis was global in the sense that financial 
markets transmitted the shock throughout the world and this resulted in a severe global economic downturn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
crisis. We recognized that we had to be very aggressive to prevent deflation and deflation 
expectations from becoming well entrenched. 
The Federal Reserve reduced short-term interest rates to nearly zero by late 2008 – a little 
over a year and a half after the initial shock hit in August 2007. Immediately upon reaching 
the  zero  bound,  we  provided  additional  stimulus  by  expanding  our  balance  sheet  and 
deploying  forward  guidance  on  the  policy  rate.  These  actions,  in  the  context  of  a  strong 
commitment  to  both  our  inflation  and  employment  mandates,  succeeded  in  preventing 
deflation expectations from taking hold, even though real outcomes were disappointing. We 
also took steps to formalize our 2 percent inflation objective.7  
The Fed’s large-scale asset purchase programs differed from those originally undertaken in 
Japan  both  in  theory  and  in  practice.  They  were  concentrated  in  longer-term  securities  – 
Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities. This reflected a different perspective on 
how purchases affect financial conditions and the economy, as well as the different structure 
of our financial system. 
Our view is that asset purchases work primarily through the asset side of the balance sheet 
by transferring duration risk from the private sector to the central bank’s balance sheet. This 
pushes down risk premia, and prompts private sector investors to move into riskier assets. 
As a result, financial market conditions ease, supporting wealth and aggregate demand. The 
fact that such purchases increase the amount of reserves in the banking system and the size 
of the monetary base is a byproduct – not the goal – of these actions. 
The U.S. also moved relatively quickly to recapitalize core financial institutions – partly as a 
result of good judgment, but also because the intense pressures of a capital markets-based 
financial  system  forced  us  to  confront  these  issues.  The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program (SCAP) in early 2009 identified and addressed the potential capital shortfalls of the 
major U.S. bank holding companies in a stressed scenario. The SCAP forced the banks to 
recapitalize either through the use of private funds or the injection of government convertible 
preferred equity from the TARP program. 
However, our policy approach was far from perfect. Comparing actual growth to the growth 
projections by FOMC participants in the Summary of Economic Projections shows that we 
were consistently too optimistic about growth over the 2009–2012 period. As a result, with 
the benefit of hindsight, we did not provide enough stimulus. Perhaps, if we had paid more 
attention to the persistent divergence between growth forecasts and outturns in Japan in the 
1990s,  we  might  have  been  more  skeptical  about  the  prospects  for  a  strong  economic 
recovery, even with a more aggressive monetary policy regime. 
Also,  we  could  have  done  better  in  communicating  our  intentions  and  goals.  We  put  too 
much  emphasis,  too  early,  on  the  exit.  At  an  earlier  stage,  we  should  have  put  greater 
emphasis on our commitment to use all our tools to the fullest extent possible for as long as 
needed to achieve our dual mandate objectives. 
Our  policies  also  had  a  “start-stop”  aspect  to  them  that  may  have  undercut  their 
effectiveness. For example, until September 2012, our large-scale asset programs generally 
specified the total size of the program, with a purchase rate and an expected ending date. 
This created a void when the programs ended and made our policy response sporadic and 
hard to forecast. This limited the scope for market prices to adjust in anticipation of our future 
actions in ways that would help stabilize the economy. 
                                                
7   7  Committee  members,  through  their  submissions  to  the  Summary  of  Economic  Projections,  had  already 
indicated  that  their  inflation  objective  was  close  to  2  percent  as  measured  by  the  personal  consumption 
expenditures deflator; in January 2012 the Committee formalized the inflation objective as a 2 percent “longer 
run goal” (see http://www.federalreserve.gov/ newsevents/press/monetary/20120125c.htm). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Another shortcoming was in our use of forward guidance with respect to the path of short-
term interest rates. Although calendar-based guidance worked reasonably well in influencing 
expectations about the future path of short-term rates and thus the shape of the yield curve, 
it was clumsy in a number of respects. For example, if we moved the forward date guidance 
out in time, did this reflect a change in our reaction function, the amount of desired policy 
stimulus or greater pessimism about the outlook? 
Of course, as we have learned, we have acted to rectify these shortcomings. For example, 
our asset purchases are now outcome based, tied to the goal of substantial improvement in 
the  labor  market  outlook,  and  our  forward  guidance  on  short-term  rates  is  tied  to 
unemployment and inflation thresholds rather than to a calendar date. 
The Japanese authorities have also capitalized on our joint experiences and actions. Thus, 
we have witnessed a convergence in the monetary policy regimes of our two countries. 
Today, the two regimes are quite similar in three important respects. Both the Fed and the 
Bank  of  Japan  place  considerable  emphasis  on  an  explicit  inflation  objective,  commit  the 
central bank to use all available tools to achieve its objectives, and use forward guidance on 
interest rates and large scale purchases of long duration assets as the main tools to achieve 
these objectives. 
Although there are still some important distinctions in how policy is conducted, much of these 
relate  more  to  differences  in  legal  frameworks  and  the  current  starting  point  for  economic 
activity  and  inflation  rather  than  fundamental  differences  in  philosophy.  For  example,  the 
BoJ’s  asset  purchases  are  broader  than  the  Fed’s,  extending  to  equity  ETFs  (Exchange 
Traded Funds) and REITs. This option is not available to the Federal Reserve because the 
Federal Reserve Act sets tighter limits as to the types of assets that the Federal Reserve can 
purchase. 
Similarly,  current  circumstances  in  the  two  countries  are  different,  with  deflationary 
expectations  still  in  the  process  of  being  dislodged  in  Japan.  The  BoJ  needs  to  push  up 
inflation  expectations,  whereas  in  the  U.S.  the  current  level  of  inflation  expectations  is 
consistent  with  the  long-term  objective  of  the  Fed.  Therefore,  the  BoJ,  relative  to  the 
respective  sizes  of  the  two  economies,  has  adopted  a  purchase  program  that  is  more 
aggressive that the U.S. program. This is true whether measured in terms of the amount of 
duration being pulled out of the market or purchases as a share of total issuance. 
Lessons learned 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  there  have  been  at  least  six  major  areas  where  there  has  been 
significant learning, which has influenced the evolution of policy. Let me turn to them. 
The importance of managing expectations 
Managing expectations is always central to monetary policy. However, at the zero bound this 
is even more critical than usual. 
There  are  two  aspects  of  this.  First,  keeping  inflation  expectations  anchored  at  levels 
consistent  with  the  central  bank’s  medium-term  inflation  objective  –  2  percent  on  the 
personal consumption expenditures deflator in our case – is vitally important. Once deflation 
expectations  become  well  entrenched,  it  is  very  difficult  to  change  them.  And,  because 
inflationary  expectations  are  an  important  driver  of  actual  inflation  outcomes,  deflationary 
expectations  can  be  self-fulfilling  in  driving  actual  deflation  outcomes.  Also,  if  inflation 
expectations were allowed to fall, this would raise the level of expected real interest rates, 
making monetary policy less accommodative. 
Conversely, a central bank does not want medium-term inflation expectations to climb above 
levels  consistent  with  its  inflation  objective.  If  inflation  expectations  were  to  become 
unanchored to the upside, that could damage credibility and result in higher risk premia for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
financial  assets  and  tighter  financial  market  conditions.  Thus,  a  policy  that  maintains 
medium-term inflation expectations in line with our inflation objective is most consistent with 
our mandate.8  
Second, at the zero bound, the ability to provide credible forward guidance – both in terms of 
the future  path  of the  policy  rate  and  the future  path  of  the  balance  sheet  –  becomes  the 
predominant vehicle by which a central bank’s actions affect financial market conditions. If 
this  expectations  channel  did  not  work,  then  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  provide  additional 
monetary accommodation because short-term rates cannot be reduced materially. 
In the U.S., in recent months we have communicated that short-term rates are likely to stay 
very low for a long time; our balance sheet is likely to increase further in size and then stay 
large for a long time; and that we will not be overly hasty in tightening monetary policy once 
the recovery gets well established. By doing this, we are influencing expectations about the 
likely  future  path  of  short-term  rates  and  the  interest  rate  term  premium.  By  utilizing  the 
expectations channel in this way, we have been able to make policy more accommodative 
and generate easier financial market conditions. 
Good communication is essential 
To  manage  expectations  well,  both  credibility  and  good  communication  is  essential.  This 
means explaining clearly the policy framework, the relationship between the use of tools and 
the central bank’s mandated objectives at the zero bound, and how the use of these tools will 
evolve with changes in the outlook. 
In  this  regard,  a  central  bank’s  credibility  is  crucial.  Only  if  a  central  bank  does  what  it 
promises  to  do  will  expectations  be  solidly  anchored.  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean 
mechanically following a set policy trajectory regardless of how the outlook changes, but it 
does mean that the stance of policy over time must evolve in ways consistent with the criteria 
established in the guidance. 
It is important to communicate how policy will respond to changing economic circumstances 
over  time.  This  is  particularly  important  when  the  outlook  changes,  because  expectations 
about how policy will respond can be an important self-stabilizing element of monetary policy. 
In this regard, a framework that ties the use of policy tools explicitly to economic outcomes 
has many advantages. 
Good  public  communication  is  also  important.  For  example,  press  conferences  offer  an 
opportunity to ground the policy actions and stance in a framework that is explicit about how 
the central bank plans to achieve its mandated objectives. 
Asset purchases are an effective tool 
Credibility requires taking action in the present as well as providing guidance for the future, 
and we are fortunate to have learned that asset purchases can indeed be an effective tool to 
support  growth,  employment  and  inflation  expectations  at  the  zero  bound.  While  I  believe 
that  managing  expectations  is  crucial,  I  am  somewhat  skeptical  of  the  view  that  forward 
guidance on the policy rate alone is sufficient in these circumstances. This is particularly the 
case when guidance extends out several years in the future. Promises about future actions 
may  be  seen  as  not  fully  credible  given  the  potential  for  changes  in  a  central  bank’s 
leadership  and  policy  committee  and  the  degree  of  uncertainty  about  economic  conditions 
that will prevail far out in the future. 
                                                
8  
In addition to acting to manage inflation expectations, the central bank can also support expectations about 
the outlook for growth and job creation. This can be implemented by making it clear that, subject to medium-
term price stability, it will seek to stabilize the economy and has the means to do so even at the zero bound. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In 
recent  years,  we  have  developed  considerable  positive  experience  providing 
accommodation  through  changes  in  the  size  and  composition  of  the  central  bank  balance 
sheet.  Taking  interest  rate  risk  and  mortgage  prepayment  risk  out  of  private  hands  has 
proven to be effective in easing financial conditions, increasing wealth and lowering private 
sector  borrowing  costs.9  The  impact  of  purchases  may  be  attenuated  to  some  degree  by 
deleveraging and ongoing adjustments in markets such as real estate. But it is material even 
in these circumstances, and builds over time as these needed adjustments proceed. 
The sum is greater than its parts 
Another  important  insight  is  that  each  of  the  components  of  policy  –  the  current  stance  in 
terms  of  the  policy  rate  and  the  balance  sheet,  expectations  about  the  future  stance,  the 
degree of commitment to future policy, and the clarity of communications – all interact. Our 
tools  are  more  powerful  used  in  combination,  and,  when  their  use  is  explicitly  tied  to  the 
outcomes  we  seek  to  achieve.  As  a  result, the sum  is more  powerful  than  the  component 
parts. 
Risk management is particularly important 
Risk management is particularly important at the zero bound. At the zero lower bound, once 
you  are  caught  in  deflation,  it  is  very  hard  to  get  out.  Thus,  policymakers  need  to  put 
considerable weight on this risk and conduct monetary policy with sufficient aggressiveness 
to ensure that they avoid such an outcome. 
It is also true that we have less experience with the monetary policy tools used at the zero 
bound. As a result, there is greater uncertainty around the efficacy and costs of these tools. 
This pushes in the opposite direction of being more cautious. 
This means that risk management is essential – what are the costs of being wrong in either 
direction? Sometimes a cautious, incremental approach may not always be the right strategy. 
Limits to monetary policy 
At the zero bound, monetary policy encounters additional constraints. These fall into three 
broad buckets. 
First, there are costs associated with non-conventional tools. This means they cannot simply 
be used without limit, though the appropriate limit will vary based on the outlook and balance 
of risks. The most obvious example of this is our large-scale asset purchase program. As the 
balance sheet increases in size, the potential costs increase in terms of market functioning, 
risks to financial stability, and the path of future remittances to the U.S. Treasury. 
Second, there is a limit on how far the expectations channel can be exploited. As I discussed 
earlier,  since  the  current  FOMC  cannot  bind  future  FOMCs  and  the  economic  outlook  is 
highly  uncertain,  it  isn’t  reasonable  to  expect  that  policies  that  affect  expectations  many 
years in the future will have a powerful impact today. I believe that the effectiveness of the 
expectations channel decays as the length of the horizon extends. 
Third,  monetary  policy  is  only  one  leg  of  the  stool  necessary  to  generate  a  vibrant  and 
sustained  economic  expansion.  In  particular,  as  noted  earlier,  the  health  of  the  financial 
system  is  critical.  For  without  it,  the  monetary  transmission  channels  will  be  impaired  and 
monetary  policy  will  be  less  effective  in  influencing  the  cost  and  availability  of  credit. 
Similarly,  it  is  critical  that  fiscal  policy  be  set  appropriately.  This  means  the  short-term 
impulse needs to be properly calibrated to the current set of economic circumstances (not 
                                                
9   With respect to borrowing costs, this is particularly true in real terms. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
too much restraint) and the long-run budget trajectory needs to credible and consistent with 
fiscal  sustainability.  Finally,  removing  structural  impediments  that  hinder  growth  and 
economic rebalancing are also important. In the case of the U.S., this could include changes 
in  immigration  policy,  infrastructure  investments  that  remove  bottlenecks  and  job  training 
programs that improve the quality of human capital. 
Implications for U.S. monetary policy 
Undoubtedly,  we  will  continue  to  learn  as  we  seek  to  implement  monetary  policy  most 
effectively. 
Let  me  give  a  few  examples  of  how  my  own  thinking  may  evolve.  In  terms  of  our  asset 
purchase program, I believe we should be prepared to adjust the total amount of purchases 
to that needed to deliver a substantial improvement in the labor market outlook in the context 
of price stability. In doing this, we might adjust the pace of purchases up or down as the labor 
market and inflation outlook changes in a material way. For me, the base case forecast is not 
the sole consideration – how confident we are about that outcome is also important. 
Because  the  outlook  is  uncertain,  I  cannot  be  sure  which  way  –  up  or  down  –  the  next 
change  will  be.  But  at  some  point,  I  expect  to  see  sufficient  evidence  to  make  me  more 
confident about the prospect for substantial improvement in the labor market outlook. At that 
time,  in  my  view,  it  will  be  appropriate  to  reduce  the  pace  at  which  we  are  adding 
accommodation through asset purchases. Over the coming months, how well the economy 
fights its way through the significant fiscal drag currently in force will be an important aspect 
of this judgment. 
We are also learning about how best to prepare for the eventual normalization of monetary 
policy. For example, we may need to update our thinking with respect to the so-called exit 
principles  that  we  published  in  June  2011  in  order  to  bring  them  up  to  date  with 
developments  since  then,  and  ensure  they  do  not  unnecessarily  constrain  our  ability  to 
conduct policy in the most effective way today. 
Those exit principles stated that we would first stop reinvesting, then raise short-term interest 
rates,  and  finally  sell  agency  mortgage  backed  securities  over  a  three-to-five  year  period. 
This  seems  stale  in  several  respects.  In  particular,  how  does  one  time  the  end  of 
reinvestment given that we now have economic thresholds that govern the timing of liftoff? 
Also, the thresholds are thresholds, not triggers. Thus it is hard to link the timing of the end of 
reinvestment to the unknown liftoff date for short-term rates. 
More broadly, it may be desirable to update our thinking around the path and composition of 
the balance sheet over time, in light of our capacity to shape this path in a way that mitigates 
potential costs and risks. For example, the agency MBS portfolio is substantially larger today 
than it was when the original exit principles were devised. To the extent that the Committee 
wants to reduce the risk of disrupting market functioning during normalization, it could decide 
to  indicate  that  it  will  avoid  selling  the  MBS  portfolio  during  the  early  stages  of  the 
normalization process. Moreover, to the extent that the Committee wants to mitigate the risk 
of  a  sharp  increase  in  long-term rates,  it  could judge  that  it  would  prefer  not to  commit to 
agency MBS sales. Expectations about future MBS sales or actual sales have the potential 
to generate or amplify such an upward spike in long-term rates. If the Committee believes 
that it could be costly in terms of credibility to incur a period of no remittances to Treasury – a 
notion I am personally somewhat skeptical about – avoiding MBS sales would also reduce 
this risk. Indeed, the Committee might conclude that it was better on all three counts to allow 
the agency MBS securities to run off passively over time.10  
                                                
10   This would also provide additional stimulus at the margin, since the degree of accommodation provided by our 
balance sheet holdings is related to how long the public expects us to hold the assets. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
An important challenge for us will be to think carefully about what combination of actions and 
communications will best ensure that when we do eventually judge that it is appropriate to 
begin normalizing policy, the initial tightening of financial market conditions is commensurate 
to what we desire. There is a risk is that market participants could overreact to any move in 
the  process  of  normalization.  Indeed,  there  is  some  risk  that  market  participants  could 
overreact even before normalization begins, when the pace of purchases is adjusted but the 
level of accommodation is still increasing month by month.11 Not only could such responses 
threaten  financial  stability,  but  also  they  might  make  it  harder  to  calibrate  monetary  policy 
appropriately to the economic situation. We will need to think long and hard about how best 
to  develop  policy  in  a  way  that  enables  us  to  respond  flexibly  to  a  changing  economic 
outlook, but in a way that is not disruptive to the economy.12  
Based on what we have learned to date at the zero bound, I believe that it will be important 
for us to anchor all our communication around the core principle: The path of the policy rate 
and the size and composition of the balance sheet over time will be driven by our unbending 
commitment  to  our  dual  mandate  objectives  of  maximum  sustainable  employment  in  the 
context of price stability. 
As  you  can  see,  there  will  be  much  more  to  learn  as  we  go.  Thank  you  for  your  kind 
attention. I would be happy to take a few questions. 
                                                
11   The move to economic thresholds-based guidance for the federal funds rate should help in this regard. While 
the thresholds are certainly not triggers, they should help market participants adjust expectations about the 
likely  timing  of  lift-off  in  a  relatively  continuous  manner  and  guard  against  these  expectations  being  pulled 
further forward in time than is warranted by changes in the economic outlook. 
12   Indeed,  even  when  purchases  of  additional  longer-term  securities  cease,  the  enlarged  balance  sheet  will 
provide substantial ongoing stimulus. It is important to recognize that the Fed could remain in this posture with 
policy “on hold” for a significant period.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
