Takehiro Sato: Recent developments in economic activity, prices and 
monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Takehiro Sato, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting 
with business leaders, Gunma. 6 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
I. 
At the Monetary Policy Meeting (MPM) held on January 21 and 22, 2013, the Policy Board of 
the  Bank  of  Japan  decided  to  take  additional  steps  to  provide  monetary  accommodation 
decisively.  Specifically,  the  Bank  decided  to  introduce  (1)  the  “price  stability  target”  set  at 
2 percent in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) and 
(2) the “open-ended asset purchasing method” (i.e., to purchase assets without setting any 
termination date) under the Asset Purchase Program. The Bank also decided to release a 
joint statement with the government (Chart 1). 
As was already noted in the statement on monetary policy released on January 22, 2013, I 
voted against the 2 percent price stability target. However, since policy decisions are made 
by majority vote of the Policy Board members at the MPM, the aforementioned decisions at 
the January MPM were made accordingly. In my remarks today, I will reflect on the conduct 
of monetary policy in the future, taking note of the measures to achieve the 2 percent “price 
stability target” that has just been introduced. 
II. 
A. 
Recent conduct of monetary policy 
From the “price stability goal in the medium to long term” to the “price 
stability target” 
The “price stability target” – introduced by the Bank as a numerical value – is set at 2 percent 
in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI. This target replaces the “price stability 
goal in the medium to long term” introduced by the Bank in February 2012, which the Bank 
had judged to be in a positive range of 2 percent or lower in terms of the year-on-year rate of 
change in the CPI and 1 percent for the time being. 
The major changes to the expressions regarding price stability from February 2012 are as 
follows.  First,  the  Bank  deleted  the  phrase  “medium  to  long  term”;  and  second,  the  Bank 
changed  its  wording  from  “goal”  to  “target”  The  changes  reflect  a  situation  in  which 
awareness of the importance of flexibility in the conduct of inflation-targeting policy has been 
increasing. 
More  specifically,  even  inflation-targeting  countries  do  not  change  their  monetary  policy 
stance  mechanically  in  accordance  with  their  target  inflation  rates  (Chart  2).  This  reflects 
lessons learned from bitter experience in the past, when many credit bubbles grew under the 
perception  that  prices  had  been  stabilized,  which  created  a  large  downswing  in  economic 
activity  and  prices  after  the  bubbles  burst.  In  addition,  especially  after  the  Lehman  shock, 
many major countries have emphasized flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy by, for 
example,  publicly  articulating  the  importance  of  paying  due  attention  to  financial  system 
stability (Chart 3). 
Given these developments, the phrase “medium to long term” is no longer necessary and the 
difference between a “goal” and a “target” is no longer a substantive issue. 
Why has the price stability target been set at 2 percent? 
B. 
As indicated in the statement on monetary policy released on January 22, 2013, the Bank 
recognizes that an inflation rate consistent with price stability on a sustainable basis will rise 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
as  efforts  made  by  a  wide  range  of  entities  toward  strengthening  the  competitiveness  and 
growth potential of Japan’s economy make progress (Chart 4). The 2 percent target looks 
rather  high,  given  the  current  rate  of  inflation/deflation.  However,  the  Bank  decided  that  it 
was appropriate to set the target before confirming the product of the efforts made by a wide 
range of entities to strengthen the competitiveness and growth potential of the economy. The 
expected inflation rate of households, firms, and financial markets has been formed based on 
the past inflation rate that has been consistently lower than in other countries (Chart 5). As 
efforts made by the government, the Bank, and the private sector toward strengthening the 
growth potential of the economy make progress, the inflation rate will gradually increase and 
the expected inflation rate of households, firms, and the markets will likely rise accordingly. 
Furthermore, by setting a challenging target of 2 percent, the Bank expects to influence the 
expectations  of  a  broad  range  of  economic  entities  and  to  promote  efforts  toward 
strengthening the competitiveness and growth potential of the economy, thereby influencing 
the expected inflation rate of households, firms, and the markets. 
At the same time, should prices overshoot 2 percent, the Bank should be able to anchor the 
expected inflation rate by clarifying its target, and this will contribute to the achievement of 
price stability on a sustainable basis. 
Nevertheless, it is important for the Bank to continue to ensure credibility in its conduct of 
monetary policy in order to anchor the year-on-year CPI inflation rate at 2 percent. As the 
Governor of the Bank mentioned at his regular press conference after the January MPM, I 
dissented from setting the 2 percent price stability target with another Policy Board member, 
Mr.  Takahide  Kiuchi,  for  the  following  reasons.  First,  a  2  percent  CPI  inflation  rate  far 
exceeds the pace of price growth that is considered to be consistent with price stability on a 
sustainable basis. Second, it might impair the credibility of monetary policy to set the target 
before  the  efforts  made  by  a  wide  variety  of  entities  toward  strengthening  the  growth 
potential of the economy achieve progress. However, as I explained at the beginning of my 
remarks today, I am in a position to execute the Bank’s policy decisions and responsible for 
their  execution  as  a  member  of  the  Policy  Board.  The  Policy  Board  members,  including 
myself, are now facing the challenge of achieving the 2 percent price stability target as well 
as raising the credibility of the Bank’s goal. 
An inflation rate of 2 percent was very high in japan in the past 
C. 
What is the implication of the 2 percent inflation rate in Japan? Following the two oil shocks 
in the 1970s and 80s, an inflation rate above 2 percent in the Japanese economy was rather 
unusual.  The  times  when  the  inflation  rate  exceeded  2  percent  are  generally  regarded  as 
periods when the Japanese economy confronted a difficult situation on the whole (Chart 6). 
Excluding  the  effect  of  consumption  tax  hike,  the  economy  did  not  experience  an  inflation 
rate above 2 percent in the last quarter-century except for the period from April 1990 through 
December 1992 – when Japan faced a residual effect from the asset bubble economy in the 
late  1980s  –  and  the  period  from  July  through  September  2008  –  just  before  the  Lehman 
shock occurred. While the former period was marked by demand-pull inflation, this was due 
to the residual effect of the abnormal elevation of asset prices, whose collapse had produced 
the financial crisis of the late 1990s. This became a major cause of the protracted stagnation 
of the Japanese economy. The latter period was a time of typical cost-push inflation, which 
resulted  in  an  outflow  of  purchasing  power  due  to  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  and 
lowered  the  national  economic  welfare.  Therefore,  defining  and  aiming  at  an  inflation  rate 
that has rarely been achieved in the past two decades as the inflation rate consistent with 
price stability on a sustainable basis not only forces a substantial change in the Bank’s way 
of thinking but also imposes a challenge. 
As for the numerical expression for price stability, the Bank had not specified it up until the 
mid-2000s.  In  October  2000,  shortly  after  lifting  the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  the  Bank 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
released a document titled “On Price Stability”, in which it concluded that “it is not deemed 
appropriate to define price stability by numerical values”1 It was only in March 2006 that the 
Bank for the first time began employing a numerical expression for price stability: it indicated 
the  level  of  inflation  within  the  range  between  0  and  2  percent  as  a  union  of  ranges  of 
inflation  rates  that  each  member  of  the  Policy  Board  understood  as  being  consistent  with 
price stability over the medium to long term – namely, the “understanding of medium- to long-
term price stability”2 It was about six years later that the Bank in February 2012 introduced 
“the  price  stability  goal  in  the  medium  to  long  term”  –  rolling  out  a  specific  numerical 
expression that could represent the consensus among all the Policy Board members as the 
inflation rate judged to be consistent with price stability sustainable over the medium to long 
term,  instead  of  presenting  the  union  of  ranges  of  inflation  rates  of  each  Policy  Board 
member.3 
In  the  meantime,  the  Japanese  economy  has  remained  in  a  mild  deflationary  situation, 
although the degree has varied with time. The major reason why the Bank required time to 
formulate a numerical expression for price stability was due to the lack of a decisive measure 
to  elevate  the  inflation  rate  under  the  constraints  of  the  zero  lower-bound  on  the  nominal 
policy  interest  rate.  While  an  inflation-targeting  policy  is  generally  assumed  to  be  a 
framework  for  containing  a  higher  inflation  rate  within  the  targeted  level  in  overseas 
economies, it has long been recognized in Japan as a measure for raising the extremely low 
inflation rate to the targeted level. However, monetary policy conduct in a time of deflation is 
much more difficult than that under inflation, as expressed by the metaphor of “pushing on a 
string”. 
At  a  time  when  Japan  faces  rising  headwinds  such  as  population  aging  and  population 
decline, setting the price stability target at 2 percent is rather challenging. A decline in the 
total  working  population  at  an  annual  rate  of  a  little  less  than  1  percent  is  expected  to 
continue.  This  implies  that  Japan’s  GDP  will  drop  at  an  annual  rate  of  a  little  less  than 
1 percent, if nothing is done to overcome the headwinds. In such circumstances, in order to 
raise  the  output  gap  to  a  level  that  is  consistent  with  the  2  percent  inflation  rate,  it  is 
necessary  to  boost  demand  by  promoting  further  progress  to  strengthen  the  economy’s 
growth potential. Furthermore, we will have to face the reality of the flattening of the Phillips 
curve – the slower responsiveness of prices to the improvement of the output gap – due to 
globalization  and  the  progress  in  IT  (Chart  7).  Thus,  the  achievement  of  the  price  stability 
target becomes increasingly challenging. 
The need for a recovery in wages 
D. 
And yet, why has the Japanese economy consistently failed to exit from deflation for more 
than a decade? During the early phase of deflation in the late 1990s, this was mainly due to 
the  substantial  fall  in  asset  prices,  the  subsequent  credit  crunch  caused  by  the  financial 
crisis,  and  the  preservation  of  excess  supply  caused  by  the  delay  of  firms  with  poor 
productivity  in  exiting  the  market.  However,  since  the  Japanese  economy  has  already 
overcome problems in its financial system, deflation since the mid-2000s has entered a new 
phase. Stagnant wages have become the main factor behind deflation. 
Prices of goods and services are affected by the cost of production. Assuming that the cost 
of  production  consists  of  personnel  expenses  and  material  costs,  many  of  the  latter  are 
determined through cross-border competition. Therefore, their price fluctuations – excluding 
volatility due to developments in the foreign exchange markets – should equally affect the 
entire global economy, and thus material costs cannot be the main reason why Japan is the 
                                                 
1  See http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2000/k001013a.htm/. 
2  See http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2006/mpo0603a.htm/. 
3  See http://www.boj.or.jp/en/announcements/release_2012/k120214b.pdf. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
only advanced economy suffering from deflation. The real cause is another factor affecting 
the cost of production, namely, wages. 
In  fact,  consumer  prices  and  wages  are  closely  correlated  (Chart  8).  About  half  of  the 
components of the CPI are services in terms of weight, and prices of services are generally 
synchronized with wages in the services industry (Chart 8). This industry is labor intensive, 
and prices of services are easily affected by developments in wages. Accordingly, in aiming 
at the 2 percent price stability target in terms of the year-on-year rate of change in the CPI, it 
is  vital,  above  all,  to  seek  a  recovery  in  wages.  However,  the  level  of  annual  nominal 
compensation of employees in the “National Accounts” dropped by more than 10 trillion yen 
after the Lehman shock and has shown virtually no sign of recovery (Chart 9). In order for a 
recovery  in  wages  to  occur,  it  is  important  that  firms  maintain  their  labor  share  of  income 
distribution when they achieve an increase in their corporate profits, the source of wages. In 
fact, there was an opportunity in Japan for wages to recover in the mid-2000s. This occurred 
when  the  global  economy  overheated  –  triggered  by  growing  demand  in  emerging 
economies  and  supported  partly  by  the  credit  bubble.  At  this  time,  many  firms,  especially 
those in manufacturing, posted record highs in their corporate profits and were expected to 
increase their distribution of corporate profits to employees. However, they placed a higher 
priority  during  this  period  on  accumulating  internal  reserves,  and  thus  the  labor  share  of 
income  distribution  fell  (Chart  9).  As  major  labor  unions  did  not  strongly  oppose  this 
distribution policy, wages scarcely improved. Currently, given the situation in which firms face 
what have been called the “six headwinds”,4 the profits enabling firms to boost distribution are 
unlikely to rise, even if management wishes to increase the distribution to employees. This is 
due partly to the significant decline in the competitiveness of some sectors of manufacturing 
and the resultant halt in improvement in corporate profits, the source of wages. 
Differences in employment adjustment between the United States and Japan 
E. 
The difference in employment adjustment between the United States and Japan has some 
effect  on  developments  in  wages.  In  the  United  States,  when  firms  decide  to  adjust  their 
employment  policy,  they  aggressively  reduce  the  number  of  employees  instead  of  wages, 
which  often  results  in  a  rapid  retreat  from  unprofitable  businesses.  As  a  result,  nominal 
wages  continue  to  grow  at  a  rate  of  about  2–4  percent  irrespective  of  the  phase  of  the 
economic cycle, and the U.S. economy is unlikely to fall into deflation since excess supply is 
unlikely to continue. If we consider the Phillips curve – with the unemployment rate on the 
x-axis and the rate of wage inflation on the y-axis – we reach a similar conclusion (Chart 10). 
On  the  other  hand,  under  the  employment  practice  in  Japan  it  is  difficult  to  aggressively 
reduce the number of employees while maintaining the nominal wage growth in an economic 
recession. On the other hand, Japan’s unemployment rate is comparatively stable partly due 
to the difference in labor regulations between the two countries, but the sensitivity of wage 
inflation  to  the  unemployment  rate  is  rather  high.  This  makes  employment  adjustment 
through dismissal relatively limited even during a recession in Japan, and such employment 
adjustment,  if  any,  tends  to  be  executed  mostly  through  wage  reduction.  Consequently,  in 
Japan consolidation and reorganization of unprofitable businesses tend to take longer and 
the share of labor in income distribution tends to remain at a high level, and this slows the 
economy’s metabolism and allows excess supply to be preserved easily. In Japan the cost of 
employment  adjustment  is  shared  widely  among  workers,  and  this  type  of  employment 
practice  may  be  one  of  the  main  factors  making  it  difficult  for  the  economy  to  exit  from 
deflation. 
                                                 
4  The headwinds in Japan are generally characterized as (1) yen appreciation; (2) comparatively high corporate 
taxes; (3) delay in the creation of free trade agreements (FTAs); (4) tight labor regulations such as limitations 
on the employment of dispatched workers; (5) tighter environmental regulations; and (6) power shortages. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Going forward, if we see supply-demand conditions tighten in the labor market with economic 
expansion  in  Japan,  can  we  expect  wages  to  rise  in  line  with  the  correlation  I  have 
mentioned?  It  might  sound  pessimistic,  but  such  may  not  be  the  case,  as  some  firms  in 
Japan  have  recently  begun  to  lose  their  competitive  edge  and  profit-making  ability.  This 
might  reflect  a  gradualist  approach  to  the  streamlining  of  industries  and  unprofitable 
businesses, whose expected growth rates have worsened. The current situation in Japan – 
where  the  pricing  power  of  firms  has  weakened  and  firms  cannot  pass  on  the  rise  in 
purchase  prices  to  selling  prices  –  clearly  reflects  this  decline  in  Japanese  firms’ 
competitiveness (Chart 11). 
At  any  rate,  as  the  Bank  aims  at  the  2  percent  price  stability  target,  greater  fundamental 
strength of the economy is needed to generate a wage increase of approximately 4 percent. 
To  this  end,  a  wide  range  of  entities  is  expected  to  redouble  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
competitiveness and growth potential of the economy. 
What the central bank can do 
F. 
What  kind  of  contribution  can  the  Bank  make  from  the  monetary  policy  side,  in  order  to 
achieve the 2 percent price stability target? A well-balanced price hike should materialize in a 
situation where general prices rise in tandem with wages, as the result of a rising level of 
total economic activity and subsequent improvement in the output gap. Furthermore, such a 
price hike must be sustainable. Although the Bank has announced that price stability can be 
achieved through the efforts by a wide range of entities to strengthen the competitiveness 
and  growth  potential  of  the  economy,  both  the  government  and  the  Bank  have  also  been 
working to address the issue. At the same time, it is difficult to think that the 2 percent price 
stability target will be achieved merely by enhancing ongoing policy initiatives, and therefore 
both the government and the Bank must tackle this issue with much greater vigor. 
Generally speaking, when an economy faces a deflation trap with the constraints of the zero 
lower-bound  on  the  nominal  policy  interest  rate,  the  plausible  channels  for  economic 
stimulation  and  achieving  a  price  recovery  are  (1)  the  channel  through  foreign  exchange 
rates and (2) the channel through asset prices. 
In terms of the former, the Bank decided at the December MPM to increase the purchases of 
treasury  discount  bills  (T-Bills)  and  Japanese  government  bonds  (JGBs).  The  Bank 
considers that a stronger indirect influence on foreign exchange rates will be achieved from a 
further decline in interest rates – narrowing or reversing the interest rate differentials between 
Japan and other countries – while continuing with the payment of interest on excess reserve 
balances at 0.10 percent. The Bank’s decision at the January MPM to take additional steps 
to provide monetary accommodation by introducing the open-ended purchasing scheme will 
further strengthen this influence. 
Regarding this latter policy initiative, the Bank formally launched the Loan Support Program 
at the December MPM to vigorously support the increase in private bank lending in terms of 
fund provisioning. This policy initiative relies on the efforts of private banks to boost lending, 
and  what  the  Bank  can  do  is  to  support  these  efforts  by  the  private  sector.  In  a  situation 
where demand for funds has been weak for a long period of time and there is no bottleneck 
in the availability of funds at private banks, it has been widely observed that the effects of 
such a policy will be limited. Nevertheless, if such an increase in bank lending promotes real 
economic  activity  and  transactions  in  the  asset  markets,  some  positive  impact  can  be 
expected on general prices through an increase in asset prices. In particular, once upward 
momentum starts accumulating in the economy, the effects of the policy initiative are likely to 
be  more  pronounced.  In  addition,  if  private-sector  lending  promotes  cross-border  capital 
expenditures  or  mergers  and  acquisitions  by  firms  and  banks,  this  will  indirectly  induce 
depreciation  of  the  yen.  At  any  rate,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  exerting 
indirect influence on the foreign exchange markets and asset markets mainly by facilitating a 
further decline in interest rates. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
G. 
Policy measures indirectly influencing foreign exchange rates under the zero 
interest rate 
During the quantitative easing period from March 2001 through March 2006, the effects of 
monetary easing were likely to appear through depreciation of the yen, since Japan was the 
only  country  that  had  adopted  a  zero  interest  rate  policy  (Chart  12).  From  the  time  of  the 
Lehman shock up to the present, however, the Bank’s efforts have had limited effectiveness, 
given  that  interest  rate  differentials  between  Japan  and  other  advanced  countries  have 
narrowed in a situation where central banks in these countries have started to adopt the zero 
interest rate policy as well. Nevertheless, I believe that the interest rate channel might work 
in this situation, albeit to a limited extent. For example, the 3-month T-Bill rate, which had 
been  consistently  higher  than  that  in  the  United  States,  marked  a  recent  low  of 
0.093 percent, edging close to the rate in the United States, reflecting the Bank’s large-scale 
purchasing  of  T-Bills  as  part  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  even  though  the  Bank 
maintained  the  interest  on  excess  reserves  at  0.10  percent.  A  favorable  tailwind  is  also 
apparent  in signs  of  change  in  U.S.  monetary  policy.  For example,  in  December  2012  the 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  discussed  decreasing  the  size  of  its  asset 
purchase  or  suspending  it  in  the  course  of  2013.  Against  the  background  of  such 
developments, the Bank is closely monitoring the extent to which both short and long-term 
interest rates may decline further while continuing to employ the Asset Purchase Program. 
Meanwhile, steadily increasing the amount outstanding of the Asset Purchase Program is no 
easy  task.  If  the  asset  purchases  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  are  conducted 
smoothly  as  planned,  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  program  is  expected  to  surpass 
100 trillion yen from the current 65 trillion yen by the end of 2013 (charts 13 and 14). The 
provision of such a large amount of funds is unprecedented for the Bank, and there is a risk 
that  it  will  be  unable  to  increase  the  amount  outstanding  of  the  Asset  Purchase  Program 
smoothly  if  private  banks  grow  reluctant  to  boost  excess  reserves  at  the  Bank  to  avoid 
balance-sheet expansion due to their financial strategy or other reasons such as corporate 
governance. It is probably the case that, in increasing the amount outstanding of the Asset 
Purchase  Program,  whether  private  banks  submit  bids  for  the  Bank’s  asset  purchases 
depends  greatly  on  interest  rate  levels.  Some  events  might  be  beyond  the  scope  of 
expectations  in  an  unprecedented  situation,  but  the  Bank  aims  to  steadily  increase  the 
amount outstanding of the Asset Purchase Program by adjusting the program in a flexible 
manner. 
Is a substantial increase in risky asset purchases a viable option? 
H. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  Bank  should  substantially  increase  its 
purchase of risky assets. In line with its comprehensive monetary easing in October 2010, 
the  Bank  has  been  purchasing  risky  assets  such  as  corporate  bonds  and  CP  and  –  with 
government  approval  –  exchange-traded  funds  (ETFs)  and  Japan  real  estate  investment 
trusts  (J-REITs).  Among  major  central  banks,  the  Bank  is  the  only  central  bank  that 
purchases  such  risky  assets  for  its  own  account.  However,  the  Bank’s  intention  in  this 
operation  is  not  to  employ  large-scale  intervention  in  the  asset  markets  but  to  work  as  a 
catalyst  for  the  financial  markets.  Some  argue  that  it  is  a  viable  option  for  the  Bank  to 
increase such purchases substantially by intervening in the markets on a large scale. 
I consider the efficacy of this sort of policy initiative to be doubtful, as it contains the risk of 
eroding the Bank’s capital base. If the prices of risky assets held by the Bank declined and 
the  Bank  incurred  a  loss,  this  would  result  in  a  reduction  in  its  payments  to  the  national 
treasury. If the size of the risky assets was sufficiently large compared with the size of the 
Bank’s net capital, the Bank might fall into capital deficiency. The first outcome, reduction of 
payments to the national treasury, would be equivalent to an increase in fiscal spending, and 
because of this risk the Bank must obtain authorization from the government based on Article 
43 of the Bank of Japan Act in order to purchase ETFs and J-REITs. The second outcome, 
capital deficiency, could lead to a larger issue, affecting the credibility of the Bank and the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
yen  as  well  as  the  autonomy  of  monetary  policy,  if  the  Bank  asked  the  government  for 
recapitalization or compensation for its loss. Given these issues, whether the Bank should 
substantially increase risky asset purchase from the current limit is a matter that involves not 
only the Bank but also the government. It might therefore be effective to set ex ante policy 
rules  for  loss  sharing,  in  order  to  prevent  purchases  of  risky  assets  from  influencing  the 
autonomy of the Bank’s monetary policy. 
Are foreign bond purchases a viable option? 
I. 
At a press conference in July 2012 after becoming a Policy Board member, I remarked that 
foreign bond purchases might be an option for the Bank but a number of conditions must be 
met. For example, the Bank of Japan Act stipulates that the Bank may buy or sell foreign 
exchange solely as an agent of the government (Article 40); therefore, the Bank cannot make 
any subjective policy decisions to secure the stability of the yen (Chart 15). Can the Bank 
then purchase foreign bonds if it receives government authorization pursuant to Article 43 of 
the Bank of Japan Act – as in cases of ETF and J-REIT purchases? As stipulated in Article 
40 of the Bank of Japan Act, the Bank is not allowed to buy or sell foreign exchange for the 
purpose of intervening in the yen market. Therefore, regardless of Article 43, it is natural to 
consider that the Bank cannot purchase foreign bonds for such a purpose. In that case, what 
about purchases by the Bank of a fixed amount of foreign bonds on a regular basis as part of 
money  market  operations?  This  too  risks  contravening  Article  40,  if  the  purpose  of  such 
purchases is considered to manipulate the foreign exchange markets. 
Because of the legal restriction I have mentioned, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) made 
an election pledge in December 2012 that it would establish a joint fund by the public and 
private  sectors  to  purchase  foreign  bonds.  The  net  impact  on  the  economy  would  be 
basically the same whether the government or the Bank bought foreign bonds, and therefore 
I think that the Bank itself need not assume the dominant role in conducting such purchases. 
However,  it  might  pose  a  problem  in  terms  of  currency  diplomacy;  therefore,  close 
coordination with foreign currency authorities is indispensable in order to achieve consensus. 
J. 
Economic welfare would not improve if a price hike is simply driven by the 
yen’s depreciation 
Even if the yen depreciates against the U.S. dollar by 10 percent, I estimate that the rise in 
Japan’s CPI would be far short of 1 percent, even if the accumulation of its effect for several 
years  is  taken  into  account.  Therefore,  if  the  core  CPI  –  now  around  0  percent  –  is  to  be 
raised  to  2  percent  solely  through  depreciation  of  the  yen,  a  substantial  depreciation  is 
needed, and this does not seem practical. Many uncertainties remain if such a substantial 
depreciation of the yen is to take place through the conduct of interest rate policy. Even if it 
were  possible,  it  might  raise  a  number  of  issues  in  terms  of  currency  diplomacy. 
Furthermore, a hike in import prices and deterioration in the terms of trade would cause an 
outflow  of  purchasing  power.  Thus,  even  if  the  inflation  rate  rose,  it  would  be  largely 
superficial and gross domestic income (GDI) as well as gross national income (GNI) would 
decrease; as a result, people would not feel that the economy had overcome deflation (Chart 
16). In sum, although the impact of developments in exchange rates on prices is substantial, 
pursuing a high price stability target of 2 percent solely through the exchange rate channel is 
not  a  balanced  option.  What  should  be  aimed  for  is  a  rise  in  prices  that  accompanies  an 
increase in income. 
However, it  should be noted as well that underestimating the economic-stimulus effects of 
the ongoing depreciation of the yen on the asset markets is to take an unbalanced view. The 
asset  markets,  especially  domestic  stock  markets,  have  underperformed  compared  to 
overseas  markets  due  to  the  effects  of  the  overappreciation  of  the  yen,  which  has 
appreciated by about 40 percent in terms of the nominal effective exchange rate since the 
Lehman shock. Recently, however, in the process of correction of the yen’s overappreciation, 
the valuation of domestic stock prices has been revised, and the asset markets have become 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
buoyant after a long period of inactivity. As I mentioned earlier, the recovery in asset prices 
could lead to an improvement in the output gap and in turn a rise in prices, by strengthening 
the  risk  tolerance  of  firms  and  households  and  then  raising  the  level  of  total  economic 
activity. Therefore, I would like to continue to draw attention to the channel in which monetary 
policy indirectly exerts influence on foreign exchange rates. 
III. 
Recent economic activity and prices 
Outlook for the global economy 
A. 
According to the latest global economic outlook released by the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) in January 2013, the global economy is expected to grow moderately at 3.5 percent 
and 4.1 percent in 2013 and 2014, respectively, and these growth rates are almost the same 
as or slightly above the average of the past three decades of 3.4 percent (Chart 17). In the 
recent  past,  this  outlook  had  been  revised  downward  mainly  due  to  the  worsening  of  the 
European debt problem and the deceleration of the Chinese economy. However, the global 
economy has not become subject to a considerable downward revision since summer 2012, 
because (1) the U.S. economy remained comparatively albeit modestly firm, (2) the tail risk 
receded  substantially  in  Europe  thanks  to  a  variety  of  policy  developments,  and  (3)  the 
Chinese economy bottomed out. It is still uncertain, however, whether the global economy 
will return to its 4 percent growth path, which is above the average of the past three decades, 
in line with the IMF’s outlook. While there are many reasons for the uncertainty, the main one 
is  that  the  global  economy  is  still  in  the  phase  of  balance-sheet  adjustment  following  the 
bursting of credit bubbles that expanded in the late 2000s, and therefore the adjustments in 
both the public and private sectors are likely to dampen economic performance as a whole. 
Balance-sheet adjustment is still on track 
B. 
If we review the long-term developments in the private-sector debt of major economies (as a 
percentage  of  nominal  GDP),  we  can  see  that  the  debt’s  expansion  and  subsequent 
adjustment are synchronized on a global basis. Very roughly, we can observe credit cycles 
with ten years of expansion followed by ten years of adjustment (Chart 18-1). In the 1980s, 
the  credit  cycle  was  in  an  expansion  mode  with  a  few  exceptions,  and  the  1990s  were  a 
period  of  adjustment  followed  by  expansion  again  in  the  2000s.  Because  of  the  global 
financial crisis following the Lehman shock in 2008, the expansion of private-sector debt has 
come to an end, and we are now in an adjustment phase on a global basis. As evident from 
developments in the U.S. household sector, the adjustment of excess capital stock is only 
halfway complete. 
Meanwhile, regarding the total of private- and public-sector debt, the degree of fluctuation is 
smaller, and a major phase of deleveraging has not been observed except for Canada in the 
1990s (Chart 18-2). This probably reflects the fact that when the private sector deleverages, 
public-sector debt expands. 
Looking at the long-term developments in total debt, which includes both private- and public-
sector  debt  –  with  the  latter  on  a  net  basis  –  we  find  that  (1)  the  debt  ratio  rose  in  many 
countries in the 1980s; (2) it stabilized in the 1990s as a whole; and (3) it rose in the 2000s 
led  by  Spain,  the  United  States,  and  the  United  Kingdom,  followed  by  Japan  from  around 
2005.  In  addition,  it  should  be  pointed  out  that  Japan  does  not  stand  out  from  the  other 
countries if we look at the level of the public-sector debt on a net basis, unlike the case on a 
gross basis. 
The fact that debt in the private and public sectors tends to have a negative correlation, and 
that the total debt is downwardly sticky has an implication for the relation between the debt 
and economic growth. In countries such as Japan, the United States, the United Kingdom, 
and Spain, the debt overhang in households, firms, and/or the government seems to be at a 
threshold point at which the debt will exert a severe restriction on the economy. Therefore, in 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
considering the outlook for the global economy, it must be borne in mind that the high level of 
total debt could remain a major impediment to global economic development. 
C. 
The Japanese economy is expected to return to a moderate recovery path 
The  Japanese  economy  has  shown  some  weakness  since  April  2012  mainly 
in 
manufacturing,  because  the  European  economy  has  receded  and  growth  in  the  Chinese 
economy  has  slowed,  and  because  domestic  demand  has  been  insufficient  to  offset  the 
weakness in overseas demand. Although the trend of exports is still downward, the rate of 
decline has moderated compared to the situation during the July–September quarter of 2012. 
This movement is consistent with recent developments in the global Purchasing Managers’ 
Index  (PMI),  which  reflect  the  pick-up  in  the  U.S.  and  the  Chinese  economies.  Reflecting 
signs that the fall in exports has bottomed out, production in manufacturing is thought to be 
bottoming out as well (Chart 19). Looking at domestic demand components such as private 
consumption, the negative impact of the ending of environmentally friendly car subsidies has 
recently  diminished,  and  consumption  remains  resilient  despite  several  negative  factors 
affecting  income  such  as  the  decrease  in  winter  bonuses  (charts  20  and  21).  The 
employment condition in the manufacturing sector still looks bad, but the negative spiral of 
weakness in manufacturing is not expected to spill over into the nonmanufacturing sector. In 
these circumstances, business fixed investment, which has recently shown some weakness 
on the whole, is projected to turn to a moderate increasing trend (Chart 22). 
According to the production forecast survey by the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry 
(METI),  it  is  becoming harder  to  identify  the  basic  trend  of  production  due  to  quirks  in  the 
seasonal  adjustment  unique  to  the  January–March  quarter  and  the  Chinese  New  Year 
holidays  in  February.  Nevertheless,  at  a  minimum  production  is  unlikely  to  show  a  further 
substantial  decline.  As  overseas  economies  are  somewhat  more  likely  to  return  to  a 
moderate growth path – unlike in the period up to summer 2012, when there were high tail 
risks  –  and  the  domestic  economy  is  expected  to  enjoy  the  impact  of  fiscal  stimulus 
measures, some degree of economic improvement is expected from the April–June quarter 
onward,  though  it  should  be  temporary.  Although  care  should  be  taken  to  avoid  undue 
optimism,  the  economic  recession  that  began  in  April  2012  seems  to  have  ended  in 
November, resulting in a “mini-recession” of eight months. Still, due attention should continue 
to be paid to tail risks, as it is difficult to foresee the effects of the fiscal drag in the United 
States  even  after  the  temporary  resolution  of  issues  related  to  the  fiscal  cliff  and  the  debt 
ceiling,  and  it  is  possible  that  risk  aversion  will  reintensify  worldwide  depending  on 
developments in political events such as elections in Europe. In addition, the recovery path of 
the  global  economy  should  be  fundamentally  moderate,  as  a  result  of  the  adjustment  of 
excess  debt  that  has  been  accumulated  globally,  as  I  mentioned  earlier.  Given  all  these 
developments  in  demand  both  at  home  and  abroad,  in  the  recently  conducted  interim 
assessment of the October 2012 Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices, growth prospects 
are projected to be somewhat lower for fiscal 2012 but higher for fiscal 2013 compared with 
the October forecasts (Chart 23). 
As for prices, the inflation rate for the core CPI (all items less fresh food) is currently around 
0  percent  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  Going  forward,  several  factors  are  likely  to  affect  price 
movements. One is the increased price competition in nondurable goods such as processed 
food  among  supermarkets,  which  renders  the  price  trend  somewhat  weak.  Another  is  the 
expected decline in the index due to the reversal of developments in energy prices, which 
surged  last  year,  and  in  durable  consumer  goods  prices,  whose  rate  of  decline  slowed 
reflecting the change in the survey specifications that was made around the same time last 
year.  Furthermore,  the  widening  of  the  negative  output  gap  caused  by  the  earlier  weak 
economic  activity  is  likely  to  adversely  affect  price  developments  going  forward  with  some 
time lag. All these factors are likely to increase the negative year-on-year margin of the core 
CPI inflation rate. The Bank has just set the 2 percent price stability target, but the outlook for 
prices is highly unfavorable for the time being. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Even so, the recent depreciation of the yen and changes in asset prices, such as the rise in 
stock prices, are expected to positively affect price developments through the improvement 
in  the  real  economy.  At  any  rate,  it  is  important  to  foster  a  proactive  effect  on  the  real 
economy by fully implementing not only monetary policy but all available measures. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  this  speech  by  briefly  touching  on  the  economy  of  Gunma 
Prefecture. 
The  pick-up  in  the  prefecture’s  economic  activity  has  come  to  a  pause,  and  its  economy 
remains  more  or  less  unchanged,  owing  to  the  prolonged  deceleration  in  overseas 
economies. Compared with other prefectures in Japan, however, economic conditions in the 
prefecture are favorable on the whole, led by a healthy transportation equipment industry. 
As  for  the  outlook,  Gunma  Prefecture’s  economy  is  likely  to  pick  up  moderately  again  as 
overseas economies start recovering and as exports increase. 
The prefecture enjoys a strong industrial foundation, with regional characteristics such as a 
very low vulnerability to natural disasters including earthquakes, bountiful water resources, 
and good access to the Tokyo metropolitan area. Due mainly to vigorous promotion by the 
prefectural government and cities of the advantages of Gunma Prefecture as a convenient 
site  for  corporate  back-up  facilities,  the  number  and  area  size  of  new  factories  in  the 
prefecture have reached the highest levels in Japan for the past several years. 
Furthermore,  Gunma  Prefecture  has  great  potential  in  the  area  of  tourism.  The  prefecture 
enjoys ample resources including rich natural surroundings such as the famous Oze Marsh, 
historic  and  cultural  assets  such  as  the  Tomioka  Silk  Mill  –  which  has  applied  to  join  the 
World  Heritage  List  –  and  the  major  hot  spring  resorts  of  Kusatsu,  Minakami,  Ikaho,  and 
Shima. Regional efforts have been made to attract more tourists to the prefecture from all 
over  Japan  and  abroad.  I  hope  that  these  and  other  efforts  will  promote  even  further  the 
development of tourism in Gunma Prefecture. 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
 16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  17
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  23
  24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  25
  26 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  27
  28 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  29
  30 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  31
  32 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  33
  34 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  35
  36 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
