Andreas Dombret: The debt crisis and its consequences for the real 
economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the Handelsblatt CFO Congress, Königstein, 20 June 2013. 
 The close interrelationship of the financial sector and the real economy 
1. 
Mr Brandt 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you very much for your invitation. I am delighted to be speaking to you today. After all, 
my present position at the Bundesbank and my “earlier life” in the private sector mean that I 
am not only acquainted with the “real economy” but also that it is very important to me. 
The  European  debt  crisis  is  now  in  its  fourth  year,  and  it  still  holds  great  challenges:  for 
governments and for parliaments, and, not least, for the banking sector, which has been at 
the centre of an ongoing deleveraging process since the outbreak of the financial crisis. And 
thus, without any question, the crisis represents a challenge for enterprises in the real sector 
–  even  for  those  which  have  been  spared  its  immediate  consequences  in  the  shape  of 
shortfalls in demand. 
From the outset, I wish to admit that I do not have much use for the term “real economy”  
– even though I understand where it comes from and also use the term myself. Making  a 
strict  distinction  between  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  sector  is,  I  feel,  overstating 
things  in  some  respects.  We  need  both:  enterprises  and  financial  institutions.  They  are 
interdependent  and  should  work  together  in  confidence.  Unfortunately,  there  are  negative 
examples on all sides. It is my firm belief that we should not allow any “side” to condemn the 
other. 
And the crisis has revealed what was probably obvious for a long time to the practitioners 
among us: the financial sector and the real sector are not two separate control loops. Rather, 
they are closely intertwined. It is on this relationship and the consequences of the debt crisis 
for the financing of the real economy that I would like to share my thoughts with you today. 
As in any relationship, the relationship between the financial system and the real sector is 
characterised by both light and shade. On the positive side, the financial markets promote 
economic growth by directing scarce capital to its most productive use. 
On the negative side, the real sector suffers through no fault of its own when the financial 
markets  are  facing  a  crisis.  That  much  has  been  made  abundantly  clear  by  the  financial 
crisis. But was the crisis really caused by financial markets that were “out of control” and then 
paid for by the real sector – and naturally also by the taxpayer? 
This frequently voiced assumption is not entirely wrong, but it is not entirely correct, either. It 
is true to say that the financial markets can sometimes tend to overexuberance, which can 
play  a  part  in  the  emergence  of  crises.  It  is  also  correct  to  say  that  some  players  in  the 
financial markets had been neglecting risk management. And, finally, it is correct to say that 
the financial markets had moved away from their original role as an intermediary and thus as 
a service provider for the real sector. False incentive structures in compensation performed 
their part in all these undesirable developments. 
Explaining the crisis only in terms of “out of control” financial markets falls short of the mark, 
however.  Fundamentally,  bank  balance  sheet  mirrors  what  is  happening  in  the  economy. 
Playing down excesses is certainly not the intention here. But, in the debate on the sovereign 
debt  crisis,  it  should  be  remembered  that  debt  is  not  a  bad  thing  per  se.  Enterprises  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
normally  reliant  on  borrowed  capital  to  fund  investments  and  thus  make  growth  possible. 
Debt  becomes  harmful  only  if  it  grows  on  an  excessive  scale  and  capital  flows  into 
unprofitable areas. In the event of an asset price bubble, however, it is not only banks that 
have positioned themselves wrongly, but also investors and borrowers. 
The ongoing deleveraging process 
2. 
After an asset price bubble has burst, a deleveraging process is necessary, such as we are 
witnessing at present in many parts of Europe. You see, if an economy is facing a debt crisis 
as a result of a credit-financed bubble bursting, the value of the assets held by the private 
sector fall, while the value of the liabilities remains the same. Households and enterprises 
are compelled to increase their saving in order to pay off their debts. However, saving more 
to reduce debt leads to a decline in investment, which has a negative impact on economic 
growth. 
As I have already mentioned, bank balance sheets mirror the real sector. As a result of the 
developments  I  have  just  described,  banks,  too,  may  also  run  into  difficulties,  however. 
Despite  greater  efforts  to  save,  some  borrowers  do  not  manage  to  service  their  debts 
properly,  causing  some  loans  to  default.  That  drains  the  banks’  capital.  At  the  same  time, 
there  is  a  decline  in  the  institutions’  creditworthiness  on  the  interbank  market,  leading  to 
possible shortfalls in their liquidity. 
It is precisely these aspects of deleveraging which are potentially fraught with problems. In 
an  unfavourable  scenario,  a  shortage  of  capital  and  liquidity  causes  banks  to  curb  their 
lending even to enterprises who really have no need to reduce their debt on account of their 
financial  situation.  These  enterprises  then  become  the  collateral  damage  of  a  disorderly 
deleveraging  process,  with  matching  consequences  for  the  real  economy  and,  thus,  for 
growth and employment. 
What  is  crucial,  therefore,  is  that  such  a  process  be  conducted  in  an  orderly  manner. 
Enterprises which have a functioning business model and which produce competitive goods 
or services must be able to go on funding their activities, while enterprises that miscalculated 
before the crisis have to reduce their debt. 
A  good  example  of  such  an  orderly  deleveraging  process  is  the  strengthening  of  many 
German  enterprises’  capital  base  since  2000.  Above  all,  formerly  insufficiently  capitalised 
small and medium-sized enterprises used their increased corporate profits during this period 
to  raise  their  capital  base  and  reduce  liabilities.  Overall,  their  capital  ratio  went  up  by 
10 percentage  points.  In  most  cases,  therefore,  Germany  enterprises  already  have  their 
deleveraging process behind them. And that is very much to be welcomed. 
For  this  process  to  succeed,  three  points  were  decisive.  First,  German  enterprises’  profits 
rose sharply during the past ten years, which made it significantly easier to build up capital. 
In  other  words,  they  made  use  of  the  cyclical  tailwind  in  the  last  few  years.  Second, 
enterprises  became  aware  at  an  early  stage  that  the  stricter  capital  requirements  under 
Basel  II  would  mean  them  having  to  meet  higher  standards  of  creditworthiness.  In  many 
cases,  an  increase  in  equity  capital  meant  that  it  was  possible  to  avoid  higher  interest 
charges or less favourable credit standards. Finally, tax law also gave a major boost to the 
greater  accumulation  of  capital  and  reserves.  The  tax  reform  in  2000  removed  the 
unfavourable  tax  treatment  of  reinvested  earnings  and  created  an  incentive  for  retaining 
more profits. 
Deleveraging yes, but not driven by a credit crunch: that is how a successful deleveraging 
process can best be summed up. Central banks can support this balancing act – but only to 
a limited extent. It is true that, by providing liquidity assistance to the banks, they can ease 
tensions on the interbank market – which, as we all know, is something they do. But they 
cannot  adjust  balance sheets  by  making  equity  capital  available  to  the  institutions.  That  is 
where others come in. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First of all, the onus is on the banks themselves to attract the required capital on the market. 
If  that  fails,  recapitalisation  by  the  state  may  become  necessary.  A  recapitalisation  of  this 
kind should not be stigmatised, however. We need adequately capitalised banks which are 
strong and have a viable future so that they can fulfil their role as service providers for the 
real sector. 
Market discipline in the financial system strengthens the real economy 
3. 
Adequate  capitalisation  of  banks  is  thus  an  essential  precondition  for  conducting  the 
deleveraging process in a way that is friendly to growth. But for Europe and, above all, the 
euro area to return to sustained growth, a great deal more still has to happen. The economic 
value  added  of  a  financial  system  is  measured  chiefly  by  how  successful  it  is  in  directing 
capital  into  those  areas  of  the  real  sector  where  it  brings  the  greatest  return.  In  this 
connection, the Single Resolution Mechanism for the restructuring and resolution of banks, 
which is currently under discussion as the second pillar of the banking union, also plays an 
important role. This is because, in a weakened banking system with excess capacities, the 
solution  cannot  lie  solely  in  recapitalisation.  It  also  has  to  be  possible  for  individual  weak 
banks  to  exit  the  market.  Experience  in  Japan  reveals  very  clearly  what  negative  effects 
“zombie banks” can have on the real economy  
With  regard  to  the  Single  Resolution  Mechanism,  it  is  mainly  its  potential  advantages  for 
financial stability that are being discussed at present. In order to strengthen market discipline 
and minimise the risk of bank bailouts at the taxpayers’ expense, shareholders and investors 
are to bear the losses in future. Abolishing implicit guarantees is indeed all-important. It is the 
only way to ensure that the banks’ wholesale funding costs are an appropriate reflection of 
the risks they have incurred, which counteracts an excessive appetite for risk. 
That benefits not just financial stability, however, but also the real sector and growth. This is 
confirmed by a recently published Bundesbank study.1 A functioning resolution mechanism 
has  a  positive  influence  on  the  banks’  decision-making  process  in  lending.  Banks  having 
grounds to fear that, under the terms of an existing resolution mechanism, they will exit the 
market in a worst-case scenario lowers risk appetite to an appropriate level and increases 
the incentive to monitor loans carefully. This means that capital will tend more to be allocated 
to  its  most  productive  use.  An  effective  resolution  mechanism  thus  strengthens  not  only 
financial stability, but also economic growth. 
A banking union will contribute to growth and financial stability only if it is designed in such a 
way that it continues to give incentives to act soundly to all parties involved. That applies not 
only to future risks, but also to ones that have already materialised. After all, a banking union 
implies  a  kind  of  insurance  mechanism.  And,  as  in  every  kind  of  insurance,  only  loss  and 
damage that are not known in advance can be covered. For that reason, “legacy burdens”  
– in other words, those risks which arose under the responsibility of the national supervisory 
authorities – have to borne by the respective member states if need be. Anything else would 
amount to a government transfer payment. 
Now, it may be that such transfer payments are considered desirable or even necessary. In 
that  case,  they  should  be  made  out  of  national  budgets  and  with  the  approval  of  national 
parliaments and not under the guise of a banking union. I would therefore welcome it if the 
Ecofin  negotiations  on  Friday  of  this  week  were  to  allow  a  direct  recapitalisation  of  credit 
institutions by the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) only after all other available means 
have  been  exhausted.  All  things  considered,  it  is  extremely  important  to  establish  the 
functionality  of  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism  (SSM)  as  well  as  a  single  restructuring 
and resolution regime for banks. 
                                                 
1   Korte, Joseph (2013): Catharsis − The real effects of bank insolvency and resolution. Deutsche Bundesbank 
Discussion Paper No. 21/2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It is my firm belief that Europe has to make a success of this project and that it cannot afford 
to  get  off  to  a  bumpy  start.  The  banking  union  is  anything  but  a  quick-fix  solution  to  the 
current  crisis.  However,  it  is  a  major  milestone  on  the  road  to  a  more  stable  and  more 
successful monetary union and thus crucial for restoring confidence within the euro area and 
overcoming the debt crisis. 
What is now important 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The European debt crisis will keep us all busy for a while yet. In particular, what I wish for is 
that  the  relationship  between  the  financial  and  real  sectors  again  becomes  and  builds  on 
what  it  used  to  be.  Enterprises  which  have  a  viable  business  model  and  which  produce 
competitive  goods  and  services  must  also  be  able  to  finance  their  activities.  A  healthy 
banking system is essential for that. 
The central banks of the euro area have already played a major part in this. Besides cutting 
policy rates to an all-time low, their non-standard monetary policy measures have enabled 
them  to  provide  the  banks  with  almost  unlimited  liquidity  for  a  very  long  time.  To  do  that, 
there was also a marked easing of the collateral requirements. 
Equipping the banks with adequate capital, however, is a matter for the shareholders or, if 
need be, governments. Recapitalisations should not have a stigma attached to them. When 
they  are  necessary,  they  should  be  carried  out  quickly  and  convincingly.  To  do  that,  an 
independent, credible and transparent asset quality review is of vital importance. 
Still more has to happen for Europe to return to sustainable growth, however. A functioning 
resolution mechanism benefits not just financial stability, but also growth. That is because it 
ensures  that  banks  really  do  fulfil  their  allocation  function  and  do  not,  as  “zombie  banks”, 
harm growth. This enhances the efficiency of the real sector. If we succeed in achieving such 
a milestone with a properly designed banking union, Europe will return to sustainable growth. 
Of that I am certain. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
