Benoît Coeuré: Four years after Pittsburgh – what has OTC derivatives 
reform achieved so far 
Speech by Mr Benoît Coeuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  at  joint  Bank  of  France,  Bank  of  England  and  ECB  conference  on  OTC  derivatives 
reform, Paris, 11 September 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Patrick  Föll  for  his  contributions  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
expressed herein. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here in Paris and to  welcome  you, on behalf of the 
ECB, to the conference on the OTC derivatives reform. 
The over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets were at the heart of the financial crisis and 
several root causes on what went wrong were identified. Increasingly complex and opaque 
financial products, combined with a lack of transparency, were contributing factors, but also 
the failure of public authorities to appreciate and address adequately the risks building up in 
the  financial  markets.  Not  only  did  regulators  and  supervisors  not  keep  up  with  financial 
innovation, but they lacked the tools to monitor the risks adequately. Regulation also failed to 
keep up with the dynamics in the OTC derivatives markets over the last two decades, which 
saw an explosion in outstanding contract volumes. Post-trading infrastructures had become 
increasingly inadequate for coping with the growing volumes and complexity of such trades. 
In an unprecedented act of international cooperation, the G20 leaders met in 2008 and 2009 
in Washington, London and Pittsburgh to coordinate action and address the regulatory gap. 
As the crisis has shown, deregulation and reliance on self-regulation just do not work. 
In the area of OTC derivatives, the objective was to have all standardised OTC derivatives 
contracts  traded  on  exchanges  or  electronic  trading  platforms  and  cleared  through  central 
counterparties by the end of 2012. OTC derivatives contracts were to be reported to trade 
repositories, and non-centrally cleared contracts subject to higher capital requirements. 
No doubt, a vast amount of technical work has been undertaken during the last four years, 
and substantial progress has been made in regulatory and supervisory reform in response to 
the financial crisis. 
Just  to  mention  some  examples:  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems 
(CPSS)  and  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  (IOSCO)  issued,  in 
2012, new and more demanding international standards for payment, clearing and settlement 
systems  and  trade  repositories,  and  have  also  recently  published  guidance  on  authorities’ 
access to data stored at trade repositories. The clearing and reporting obligation has been 
implemented in major jurisdictions. The CPSS and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) have 
issued guidance on the recovery and resolution of financial market infrastructures, including 
central  counterparties.  However,  it  should  also  be  highlighted  that  little  more  than  half  the 
FSB  jurisdictions  have  legislative  frameworks  in  place  that  implement  the  G20  Pittsburgh 
commitments. 
Other  important  reforms  are  still  underway  or  have  only  recently  been  adopted  and 
implementation  is  outstanding.  Regulation  implementing  Basel  III  in  Europe  entered  into 
force  two  months  ago.  Tomorrow  the  European  Parliament  will  discuss  the  regulation 
establishing  a  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  an  important  step  towards  a  European 
banking  union.  Under  the  Single  Supervisory  Mechanism,  one  supervisor  will  have  a 
complete overview of an entire large and interconnected banking group in the context of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
single currency. Furthermore, work is being undertaken to address cross-border regulatory 
inconsistencies. 
So where do we stand five years after Lehman Brothers and four years after Pittsburgh? Did 
we  achieve  the  overall  goal  of  improving  transparency,  mitigating  systemic  risk  and 
protecting against market abuse in OTC derivatives markets? Are we now better placed to 
monitor risks building up in the financial system? 
I  will  limit  myself  to  three  of  the  many  issues  covered  by  this  conference:  lack  of 
transparency,  the  challenges  remaining  in  central  clearing  and  inconsistencies  in  cross-
border application. 
Transparency 
First, I would like to reflect on one of the main root causes of the financial crisis: the lack of 
transparency  relating  to  OTC  derivatives  in  general.  When  I  say  “in  general”,  I  mean  that 
there was not only a lack of transparency on OTC derivatives at the level of the market, but 
also at the level of individual institutions and counterparties. 
There are two dimensions to the lack of transparency: lack of information due to a lack of 
reporting requirements, and data fragmentation making it difficult to connect the dots and see 
the full picture. Let me address them in turn. 
The accounting treatment in many jurisdictions allowed such instruments to be reported off-
balance  sheet.  Furthermore,  different  valuation  methods  were  used  to  estimate  the  risks 
attached to these transactions. 
Hence, information was either completely unavailable or incomplete and, even if available, it 
could  not  be  compared  across  the  sector  and  jurisdictions  owing  to  different  accounting 
assumptions and valuation methods. It was thus of little value to regulators and supervisors. 
In  addition,  financial  innovation  and  strategies  that  were  intended  to  limit  risk  –  especially 
securitisation  and  insurance  through  derivative  products  –  dramatically  increased  the 
complexity of the financial system. 
Unlike organised markets, such as stock exchanges, which were tightly regulated to protect 
against  market  abuse,  insider  trading,  and  other  transgressions,  and  were  required  to 
disclose information on prices and orders, over-the-counter markets were not. At the height 
of  the  crisis,  neither  market  players  nor  public  authorities  could  monitor  the  market  for 
corporate  credit-default  swaps.  Hence  market  participants  were  unable  to  evaluate  the 
counterparty risk appropriately. Risk mitigation failed, which ultimately resulted in a drying-up 
of the whole market. 
Since  that  time,  many  jurisdictions  have  implemented  regulatory  frameworks  ensuring  that 
counterparties report OTC derivatives trades to trade repositories. In Europe, all derivatives 
contracts, not only OTC derivatives, are subject to this reporting obligation. 
In  the  United  States,  the  reporting  and  public  dissemination  of  publicly  reportable  swap 
transactions in all asset classes is already effective. The same in Japan, which has the most 
active OTC derivatives market in Asia and where the country’s first repository was approved 
in  March  this  year.  In  Europe,  it  is  expected  that  the  European  Securities  and  Markets 
Authority will adopt a decision on the registration of trade repositories still this month and that 
counterparties will start to report all asset classes to the repositories as of January next year. 
So,  on  the  surface,  it  appears  we  have  achieved  our  goal.  But  have  we  really?  Does,  for 
example,  the  supervisor  responsible  for  the  supervision  of  a  large  cross-border  financial 
institution at the consolidated level have direct and immediate access to information on OTC 
derivatives  transactions  that  encompass  all  transactions  entered  into  by  all  entities  of  this 
group? Is the information accessible, in other words can it be easily aggregated across trade 
repositories and jurisdictions? My answer would be a clear no! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In the Single Supervisory Mechanism, the ECB, as I’ve already said, will be responsible for 
the  supervision  of  such  large  banking  groups,  some  of  which  are  global  systemically 
important financial institutions (SIFIs) with large derivatives businesses. The access to data 
relating to foreign (that is non-EU) subsidiaries of financial groups, where an authority – in 
this  case  the  ECB  –  has  supervisory  responsibility  at  a  consolidated  level,  is  key  to 
assessing the overall risk exposure of a given banking group. 
Of course, access to data should always be in line with the authorities’ mandate and with the 
CPSS-IOSCO guidance, issued last month, on authorities’ access to trade repository data. 
However,  even  if  this  is  warranted,  privacy  laws,  blocking  statutes  and  indemnification 
clauses  which  are  in  place  in  several  jurisdictions  restrict  effective  access  to  the  detail  of 
OTC derivatives transactions. 
Another  important  issue  is  whether  authorities  will  be  able  to  aggregate  data  across  trade 
repositories and jurisdictions. Where there is more than one authorised repository in a single 
jurisdiction,  it  will  be  necessary  to  aggregate  data  across  repositories. This  in  itself  will  be 
challenging. If no central entity is responsible for such aggregation, it could well mean that a 
plethora of public authorities with an interest in accessing data will need to conduct this task. 
This would hardly be efficient. 
It gets even more complicated if data, for example for all entities of a large financial group 
which is present in several markets, have to be aggregated across jurisdictions, as the level 
of information reported to repositories is different. 
A  lot  of  work  has  already  been  done  to  address  these  issues.  The  January  2012  CPSS-
IOSCO  report  on  OTC  derivatives  data  and  reporting  and  aggregation  requirements 
identified the Legal Entity Identifier (LEI) as an essential tool for aggregation. Good progress 
has been made in the development and implementation of the Global LEI System. In order to 
promote  the  use  of  LEI  at  the  start  of  the  financial  reporting  obligations  in  the  European 
Union, United States and other jurisdictions, an interim pre-LEI system has been agreed. 
The  same  report  also  identified  potential  data  gaps,  such  as  the  availability  of  collateral 
information  which  would  be  necessary 
therefore  risks, 
appropriately.  Here  in  the  European  Union,  for  example,  entities  are  required  to  report 
collateral information, whereas in the United States no such requirement exists. So, even if 
access issues are standardised across the board, a lot of data issues will still remain. 
In short, I see three main issues that have to be addressed. First, information gaps still exist, 
either due to a lack of or differences in reporting requirements. Second, data are fragmented 
across  trade  repositories  and  jurisdictions.  And  third,  there  are  still  obstacles  impeding 
authorities’ access to data. 
In February 1999, in his report to the G7 finance ministers and central bank governors that 
led  to  the  establishment  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  Hans  Tietmeyer  called  for 
“arrangements  for  the  surveillance  of  global  vulnerabilities,  including  the  pooling  of 
information available to the international financial institutions and the international regulatory 
groupings”. This was almost 15 years ago and we are not yet there. 
In  fact,  at  the  current  stage,  no  authority  has  a  complete  overview  of  the  risks  in  OTC 
derivatives  markets  or  is  able  to  examine  the  global  network  of  OTC  derivatives  in  depth. 
Hence,  fragmentation  of  data,  both  at  the  data  storage  level  and  at  the  access  level,  is 
putting at risk the implementation of the overall objective of the G20. The good news is that 
the G20 leaders, who continuously monitor the implementation of the reform, are aware of 
this issue. The Financial Stability Board, assisted by the CPSS and IOSCO, has only very 
recently begun a feasibility study on various approaches to address these shortcomings and 
intends to issue a report in the first half of next year. 
to  evaluate  exposure,  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Central clearing 
The second area I would like to concentrate on is central clearing. 
A lot of progress has also been achieved in the area of central clearing. However, although 
legislation  is  in  force  in  Europe,  it  may  still  take  more  than  one  year  before  the  clearing 
obligation becomes effective. Actually, this Sunday (15 September), the deadline by  which 
central  counterparties  in  Europe  have  to  apply  for  authorisation  under  EU  legislation  will 
expire.  Within  another  six  months  –  by  mid-March  2014,  at  the  latest  –  the  authorisation 
process  should  be  completed,  after  which  the  mandatory  clearing  obligation  will  be 
determined. 
The  good  news  is  that  the  share  of  cleared  contracts  in  relation  to  total  OTC  derivatives 
transactions outstanding has consistently increased over the last five years. In the case of 
interest rate derivatives, for example, the share of cleared transactions increased from 16% 
in 2007 to over 50% by the end of 2012. We expect this share will increase continuously as 
the clearing obligation comes into effect in many countries. Progress is, however, different 
among asset classes, and substantial scope still exists for further increasing central clearing. 
A number of challenges still remain. Let me mention two key points in this regard. 
First, I would like to recall that the introduction of mandatory clearing obligations raises new 
challenges  in  terms  of  the  distribution  and  management  of  financial  risk  beyond  the  risk 
concentration in central counterparties. 
Indeed, mandatory  clearing  implies  that  an  increasing  share  of the  risks  arising from  OTC 
derivatives  transactions  will  also  be  concentrated  in  a  few  major  clearing  banks.  This  is 
because the mandatory clearing requirement implies that a larger pool of market participants 
will need to have access to central counterparties, while only a small part of this pool will be 
able to access the counterparties directly. 
Indeed,  central  counterparties  need  to  ensure  that  their  direct  members  meet  adequate 
standards in terms of financial soundness, technical and operational capacity, and product 
expertise. The enforcement of robust standards in this area is a critical first layer of defence 
against counterparty risk and ensures that central counterparties are able to swiftly manage 
a potential default situation. It is clear, however, that many market participants will not meet 
these  stringent  requirements  and  will  therefore  need  to  access  central  counterparties 
indirectly via a direct clearing member. 
A  number  of  risks  are  associated  with  this  development.  In  particular,  the  systemic  risk 
concentration  in  a  small  number  of  global  financial  institutions  is  further  increased  and  an 
increasing  number  of  foreign  jurisdictions  are  exposed  to  risks  arising  from  the  potential 
default of those banks. This aggravates the risk that these financial institutions may act as 
contagion channels for financial disturbances and may become or be perceived to be “too big 
to fail”. In addition, as several countries outside the European Union and the United States 
have  observed,  an  unfair  cross-border  distribution  of  the  costs  for  central  clearing  could 
arise.  Finally,  corporate  governance  arrangements  of  central  counterparties  may  not  be 
sufficiently  reflective  of  the  interests  of  all  stakeholders,  particularly  as  regards  indirect 
clearing members. 
I  am  aware  that  several  measures  to  control  these  risks  are  underway.  Rules  for  central 
counterparties have been strengthened to ensure that they limit access restrictions to what is 
really  necessary  in  order  to  manage  the  incurred  risks  and  to  ensure  the  central 
counterparties’  orderly  default  management  processes.  Similar  governance  rules  now 
explicitly require central counterparties to adequately take into account the interests of clients 
and not only those of their direct members. Similarly, arrangements for the segregation and 
portability of client positions and collateral are being made. However, we will need to monitor 
very closely how these new requirements will  work in practice, given the strong interest of 
global  dealers  in  preserving  their  dominant  position  in  the  market.  The  aim  of  the  new 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
financial regulatory framework is to reduce risk in the global financial system, not to turn it 
upside down. 
Furthermore, the measures adopted in this area are, in my view, not sufficient to capture the 
macro-prudential  dimension  of  the  problem. To this  end  it  will  be  necessary  to  achieve,  in 
addition to controlling the role of global dealers within each central counterparty, also a better 
understanding of the interdependencies between central counterparties. Indeed, even though 
OTC  derivatives  central  counterparties  are  typically  not  interoperable,  they  are  still  closely 
linked owing to the fact that the major clearing banks typically participate in several of them 
at  the  same  time.  In  order  to  be  able  to  better  identify  and  monitor  the  related  contagion 
risks, we will need to significantly enhance information-sharing across central counterparties, 
including through access to relevant participant-level data, and conduct analytical work in this 
field. 
However, it is not clear at this stage to what extent this analysis can and will be carried out. 
For  instance,  the  European  Market  Infrastructure  Regulation  (EMIR)  colleges  focus  on 
individual  central  counterparties.  While  major  central  banks  of  issue,  such  as  the 
Eurosystem,  could  in  principle  support  a  horizontal  risk  assessment  across  central 
counterparties, given our participation across several EMIR colleges, it is still unclear what 
type  of  information  we  will  receive  and,  in  particular,  to  what  extent  this  will  include 
participant-level  data.  It  will  therefore  be  critical  to  ensure,  in  the  context  of  the  EMIR 
implementation, that information-sharing within the colleges will effectively address not only 
the  micro-prudential  concerns  of  authorities  but  also  the  need  for  appropriate  macro-
prudential analysis. 
Second, another important concern regarding the institutional setting is the fact that global 
cooperative  oversight  arrangements  for  central  counterparties  are  still  lagging  significantly 
behind  what  has  been  agreed  in  the  CPSS-IOSCO  Principles  for  financial  market 
infrastructures. 
Indeed, the respective gap between the EU level and the global level is striking in this regard. 
In  the  European  Union,  given  the  introduction  of  legally  binding  requirements  for  central 
counterparty  supervisors  to  cooperate  and  consult  with  all  relevant  authorities  –  including 
central  banks,  supervisors  of  major  clearing  banks  and  supervisors/overseers  of 
interoperable  infrastructures  –  cooperative  oversight  arrangements  for  all  EU  central 
counterparties,  in  the  form  of  EMIR  colleges  are  currently  being  set  up.  At  a  global  level, 
however, virtually no progress in cooperative oversight or even in terms of pure information-
sharing  has  been  achieved  for  several  major  global  central  counterparties  outside  the 
European Union. 
This is a key concern especially in the field of OTC derivatives, given the global nature and 
interconnectedness of these markets. Indeed, if we  want to ensure that the introduction of 
mandatory clearing is implemented in a way that ensures that central counterparties manage 
systemic risk effectively, it is not enough that they are supervised and overseen in their home 
jurisdiction. Instead, robust cross-border cooperative oversight arrangements are essential to 
ensure that they take fully into account the implications across jurisdictions and currencies in 
their on-going risk management, as well as in crisis situations, and that effective cross-border 
arrangements  for  the  recovery  or  potential  resolution  of  central  counterparties  in  a  crisis 
situation can be put in place. We should not wait for a potential emergency to remind us of 
the  urgency  of  this  problem.  It  would  be  too  late  to  address  it  then,  as  the  cross-border 
upheaval  in  the  banking  sector  in  the  context  of  the  2008–09  financial  crises  amply 
demonstrated. And the consequences in the case of central counterparties would be even 
more devastating than what we have seen in the banking sector. 
Cross-border application inconsistencies 
Finally,  let  me  briefly  mention  another  area  of  concern:  the  cross-border  application  of 
different rules. I leave entirely aside the question of whether or not we are finished with the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
standard  setting.  There  are  areas  where  additional  work  would  be  beneficial:  think  of 
collateral transformation and settlement cycles, and of the success of Target2-Securities in 
fostering  harmonisation  around  T+2  settlement  in  Europe.  But  this  would  require  another 
conference and I will focus here on the application of existing rules. 
It  is  clear  to  all  of  us  that  due  to  the  global  nature  of  the  OTC  derivatives  markets, 
international  coordination  is  absolutely  indispensable  to  avoid  inconsistencies,  gaps  or 
overlaps, or conflicting rules. At a more general level, the lack of a level playing field in the 
enforcement of the new financial standards has a potential to fragment the global financial 
system and to lead to a suboptimal allocation of capital of liquidity and to overconsumption of 
scarce resources, such as the safe assets used as collateral by financial market participants. 
OTC derivatives are a case in point. 
I  therefore  strongly  welcome  the  recent  agreement  reached  between  the  European 
Commission  and  the  US  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  (CFTC)  on  a  common 
path forward regarding a number of measures on how to approach cross-border issues. In 
this context, the notion of substituted compliance is a useful tool, as it will help to reduce the 
risk  of  duplication  and  potential  frictions  of  rules.  Clearly,  convergence  at  a  very  granular 
level may not be achieved. It may not even be desirable, as specific differences may reflect 
the specific institutional and regulatory frameworks in the jurisdictions concerned. 
Nevertheless, it needs to be ensured that the outcome in all material aspects is similar. A key 
objective of the G20 mandate for OTC derivatives reform was to ensure effective systemic 
risk reduction in these markets. It is unlikely that we will achieve this objective by converging 
on  the  lowest  common  denominator  rather  than  by  achieving  common  best  practices. 
However, this may be the result if substantive regulatory differences are not addressed and 
consequently,  opportunities  for  regulatory  arbitrage  open  up.  The  respective  risk  is 
pronounced, especially in view of the fact that most major OTC derivatives dealers are large 
cross-border banking groups that may be in a position to shift their OTC derivatives business 
to the most leniently regulated group entities. 
As the European Commission and the CFTC noted in their recent statement on the “common 
path  forward”,  one  important  open  issue  in  this  regard  is  the  material  difference  in  central 
counterparties’ initial margin coverage between the European Union and the United States, 
for example in terms of confidence interval, procyclicality buffers and the scope for portfolio 
margining. I would like to add that different coverage requirements for central counterparties’ 
financial  resources,  in  terms  of the  liquidity  and  credit  risk  arising from the  default  of  their 
largest members, are at least equally important. 
In addition, it would seem helpful to broaden somewhat the attention concerning the global 
regulatory level playing field beyond the immediate concerns regarding EU-US divergence to 
all relevant jurisdictions. 
Conclusion 
It’s time for me to conclude: 
Yes, we have come a long way and a lot has been achieved since the Pittsburgh summit. 
But as highlighted before, additional work will be required: 
In the area of data and transparency we need to remove barriers to access and provide a 
mechanism to aggregate data across trade repositories and jurisdictions in order to be able 
to have a comprehensive overview of the risks in OTC derivatives markets. This is what the 
G20 leaders had in mind four years ago. 
In  the  area  of  clearing  we  need  to  monitor  the  impact  of  mandatory  clearing  not  only  on 
central counterparties, in terms of capacity and risk management, but the focus should also 
be on whether an increase in indirect clearing changes the risk profile of the direct clearing 
members. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The reform  will  also  have  an  impact  on  collateral  needs,  and  we  will  hear  more  on this  in 
tomorrow’s  academic  session  on  the  topic.  However,  authorities  should  monitor  the 
availability of high quality collateral and related collateral management services. New risks 
that appear as a result of innovation, such as those relating to collateral transformation, need 
to be analysed and addressed. We should not wait for the next crisis to happen but need to 
be constantly vigilant. 
Though substantial progress has been made, it is also true that only just over half of the FSB 
jurisdictions  have  implemented  the  reform  agenda  so  far.  Although  these  include  the 
jurisdictions of the most important OTC derivatives markets, we need to be vigilant in order to 
avoid regulatory arbitrage – that is to say, business moving from jurisdictions that stick to the 
agreed agenda to others that lag behind. 
Little over two weeks ago, the BIS published its macroeconomic impact assessment of OTC 
derivatives  regulatory  reforms.  The  results  are  promising.  It  concludes  that  the  effects  of 
(i) mandatory central clearing of standardised OTC derivatives, (ii) margin requirements for 
non-centrally  cleared  OTC  derivatives  and  (iii)  bank  capital  requirements  for  derivatives-
related exposures will result in overall net benefits for economic growth. 
I have spoken a lot about many technical issues. Let me therefore conclude by reminding 
you about the ultimate objective of this reform: to rebuild confidence in the financial system, 
which has been shattered in the recent years. Not only among market participants but in our 
societies as a whole, a good deal of trust has been lost. It is our shared responsibility that our 
societies regain this trust. 
I wish you, for the rest of today and tomorrow, a successful and fruitful debate and exchange 
of views. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
