Ipumbu Shiimi: Credit information management in Namibia 
Welcoming  remarks  by  Mr  Ipumbu  Shiimi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Namibia,  at the  Credit 
Information Workshop, Windhoek, 19 August 2013. 
 Director of Ceremony 
Mr. Darrel Beghin, Executive Director, South African Credit Providers Association 
Ms. Mojgan Derakhshani and Daniel Kanyi from FinMark Trust 
Representatives of Credit Bureaus,  
Representatives of Lending Institutions,  
Distinguished invited Guests, 
Members of the media,  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good morning! 
I am pleased to be here this morning and thank you for the invitation to open this important 
Workshop on Credit Information, a topical subject of interest to Namibia. Allow me therefore, 
Director of Ceremony, to extend my gratitude appreciation to FinMark Trust for this initiative. 
I am informed that the overarching objective of the workshop is to share the outcome of the 
fact finding mission to Namibia conducted by FinMark Trust in March this year and also to 
share the South African experience in credit information management. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, this workshop comes at an opportune time for Namibia. Why do I say 
that?  Three  reasons  come  to  mind.  First,  Namibia  in  general  and  the  Bank  of  Namibia  in 
particular, are vigorously pursuing a financial inclusion agenda. This is underpinned by the 
launch of the Namibia Financial Sector Strategy in August 2012 by the Honourable Minister 
of  Finance.  This  strategy  represents  a  long-term  development  strategy  for  the  Namibian 
financial  sector.  One  of  the  goals  of  this  strategy  is  to  reduce  financial  exclusion  from 
baseline of 51.7% financial exclusion determined in 2007 to 26% percent by 2021. The good 
news is that we have made significant progress in this regard, financial exclusion has fallen 
since 2007, it now stands at 31%. But we still have some work to do to achieve the goal of 
financial inclusion. A good credit information system is a necessity for financial inclusion and 
this is what I would like to talk about in my remarks today. First, what is the importance of a 
good credit information system? Three reasons: 
a.  
Research  has  shown  that  there  is  a  positive  correlation  between  the  credit 
information system through the presence of credit registries/bureaus in an economy 
and access to finance. This is because credit information sharing plays a critical role 
in the financial sector in facilitating access to finance to people who are in need of 
funding. This is achieved by availing information on borrowers’ credit worthiness to 
lenders.  This  helps  lenders  with  credit  assessment,  meaning  that  well  behaved 
borrowers may easily have access to credit. 
A  good  credit  information  system  also  enables  well  behaved  borrowers  to  get 
cheaper credit in terms of low interest. This is because if the lender is satisfied with 
the credit record of a customer it will be willing to charge the customer reasonable 
interest rates. At the same time, it contributes to financial discipline at an individual 
level because those who are not disciplined to pay back borrowed money will have 
difficulties getting credit and if they get it, they will pay a high price. 
A  good  credit  information  system  contributes  to  financial  stability.  Armed  with 
consolidated records in the credit information system, regulators are better equipped 
b.  
c.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
to assess the indebtedness of all individuals in the country. This enables regulators 
to be in a position to determine whether or not the financial stability of the country is 
under threat and whether or not necessary action needs to be undertaken to contain 
the situation. 
The second issue, I would like to talk about today is whether or not credit bureau are illegal in 
Namibia. This issue has been a subject of speculation in the media recently. The Bank of 
Namibia’s view is that the existing credit bureaus in Namibia are legal entities registered in 
accordance with the relevant laws by the Ministry of Trade and Industry. That means they 
are not illegal. What is missing in our legal system at the moment is a specific law regulating 
how  these  entities  should  manage  the  information  under  their  care.  This  will  be  my  next 
point, the third issue I would like to talk about. 
How should Credit Bureau be regulated going forward? Ladies and Gentlemen, as required 
in the NFSS I cited earlier, the Bank of Namibia conducted a study on the organisation of 
credit bureaus in Namibia. The study recommended that credit bureau be regulated through 
a specific regulations of credit bureaus. To this end, the Bank of Namibia has commenced 
the process of drafting the Credit Bureau Regulations. We believe these regulations will be in 
force before the end of the year. In few days, the draft regulation will be available for public 
scrutiny and comments. We invite all stakeholders to present their input to Bank of Namibia 
in  this  regard.  The  regulation  of  credit  bureaus  through  Regulations  is  an  interim 
arrangement  pending  the  finalization  of  the  comprehensive  Consumer  Credit  legislation, 
which is envisaged to be in place in the medium term. 
In  conclusion,  let  me  once  again  commend  FinMark  Trust  for  organizing  this  important 
workshop and we keenly await the outcome. I look forward to a day when Namibia will be 
rated as one of the countries with the best credit information system in the world, where a 
credit score can be produced in five minutes. I believe this is possible if we all work together 
and we owe this to the future of our children. 
Thank you for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
