Kazi Abdul Muktadir: Financial inclusion, consumer awareness and 
protection 
Keynote address by Mr Kazi Abdul Muktadir, Deputy Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, 
at 4th the Conference on Financial Services and Consumers, Karachi, 31 January 2013. 
 Mr. Kaukab Iqbal, Chairman, Consumers Association of Pakistan, 
Distinguished Speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen – Assalam o Allaikum wa Rahmatullah! 
First of all, I would like to thank the Consumers Association of Pakistan (CPA) for inviting me 
to  address  this  Forum  on  the  increasingly  important  issue  of  Financial  Inclusion  and 
consumer awareness and protection. I congratulate the organizers for holding this pertinent 
event  which  has  gained  special  prominence  in  the  aftermath  of  global  financial  crisis.  I 
sincerely  hope  that  the  today’s  proceedings  would  give  further  impetus  to  our  efforts  in 
promoting an inclusive and responsible financial sector in the country, thereby enhancing the 
financial sector’s stability and viability in the long-run. 
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
The  importance  of  financial  services  in  the  development  of  any  economy  cannot  be 
overemphasized as it promotes entrepreneurship, generates employment, fosters innovation, 
reduces poverty levels and enhances social equality. Therefore, SBP, as part of its financial 
sector development strategy is actively promoting financial inclusion. 
Financial Inclusion refers to the process of promoting affordable, timely and adequate access 
to a wide range of regulated financial products and services and broadening their use by all 
segments  of  society  through  the  implementation  of  tailored  and  innovative  approaches 
including financial awareness and education with a view to promote financial well-being as 
well as economic and social inclusion. 
To add further emphasis and urgency to the issue of financial inclusion, I would like to share 
that  financial  sector  in  Pakistan  remains  restricted  in  its  outreach  as  the  majority  of 
population remains either excluded or informally  served. This limited access is reflected in 
the  total  number  of  bank  accounts,  presently  around  32  million,  and  the  total  number  of 
borrowers, which is only 5.7 million. This high level of financial exclusion is largely attributed 
to two major factors. Firstly, on the supply side, there is lack of appropriate product offering 
by  financial  service  providers  primarily  influenced  by  their  typical  hesitance  towards  the 
informal  and  low  income  segments  of  the  population  and  lack  of  geographic  presence. 
Secondly, on the demand side, there is lack of public awareness about availability of financial 
services and products. 
SBP is cognizant of high financial exclusion in the country and is fully committed to tackling 
the  associated  challenges  in  a  sustainable  manner.  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  is  pursuing  a 
multi-pronged financial inclusion strategy through the following: 
1. 
SBP  introduced  Basic  Banking  Account  (BBA),  requiring  commercial  banks 
operating in Pakistan to offer BBA to facilitate and provide basic banking facilities to 
the low income people in Pakistan. A typical BBA can be opened with a minimum 
deposit  of  Rs1,000  carrying  no  fee,  no  limit  of  minimum  balance  and  offering  full 
ATM facility. 
SBP has introduced the Annual Branch Licensing Policy which requires commercial 
banks with 100 branches or more to open at least 20% of their branches outside big 
cities  and  set  up  branches  in  Tehsil  Headquarters  where  no  branch  of  any  bank 
exists. 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
3. 
4. 
5. 
   6. 
SBP  has  developed  a  world  class  regulatory  framework  to  enable  commercial 
microfinance  and  branchless  banking  in  Pakistan.  These  regulations  enable 
alternative approaches and models for delivery of pro-poor and low-income financial 
services  and  products  while  ensuring  institutional  viability,  broadening  access, 
financial integrity, and pro-consumer practices. 
Pakistan  is  amongst  the  few  countries  that  have  a  national  microfinance  strategy 
which  not  only  identifies  drivers  and  bottlenecks  to  growth  but  also  provides  an 
implementation plan drawn alongside with industry stakeholders to monitor progress 
against the identified targets. 
SBP  has  partnered  with  the  UK  Department for  International  Development  (DFID) 
and other donors to launch programs to increase access to finance in the country. 
The  DFID-funded  Financial  Inclusion  Program  (FIP)  aims  to  address  financial 
exclusion  through  a  variety  of  interventions.  FIP  focuses  on  market-based, 
sustainable  financial  services  for  low  income  people  and  small  enterprises.  In 
addition,  FIP  aims  to  enhance  delivery  of  financial  services  through  technology 
based branchless banking solutions, financial innovation, and remittances. FIP has 
provided  support  to  a  number  of  initiatives  to  enhance  supply  of  and  access  to 
finance  for  SMEs,  agriculture,  and  microfinance  sectors.  FIP  interventions  largely 
focus  on  addressing  market  failures  and  industry  bottlenecks,  while  addressing 
issues  of  fair  treatment  of  clients  and  consumer  protection.  Here,  I  would  like  to 
make  specific  mention  of  some  of  the  breakthrough  FIP  initiatives  on  promoting 
responsible finance in the microfinance sector: 
FIP is supporting the establishment of a separate national level Credit Information 
Bureau for microfinance  clients.  Once the  MF-CIB  is fully functional, it would hold 
the  credit  histories  of  MF  borrowers  addressing  the  fundamental  issues  of 
asymmetric  information  on  MF  clients  and  would  also  handle  the  issue  of  over 
indebtedness among the MF borrowers. 
FIP 
the 
Transparent Pricing Initiative in Pakistan. This initiative will make the prices for the 
microfinance market available for the first time in history. The MF clients will then be 
in  a  position  to  compare  the  various  products  to  make  the  appropriate  choice. 
Moreover, this initiative is expected to increase the level of competition among the 
MF  providers  and  ultimately  efficiency  which  would  benefit  the  MF  clients  in  the 
long-run, and 
FIP  is  also  supporting  strengthening  consumer  protection  under  the  industry-led 
SMART  campaign  that  is  seeking  to  improve  client  protection  mechanism  in  the 
microfinance sector. 
Finally, in line with the evidence (Access to Finance (A2F) Survey of 2008) that lack 
of  financial  literacy  is  a  major  constraint  in  advancing  financial  inclusion,  SBP 
launched  the  first-ever  Nationwide  Financial  Literacy  Program  (NFLP)  in  January 
2012  to  tackle  this  issue.  The  program  intends  to  create  awareness  about  basic 
financial  concepts  such  as  budgeting,  savings,  investments,  debt  management, 
financial products, branchless banking and rights and obligations of consumers etc. 
The pilot phase of the program has been concluded successfully by targeting about 
50,000 beneficiaries in various provinces, regions and districts with emphasis on low 
income  strata  and  its  effectiveness  is  currently  being  evaluated.  Following  a  third 
party independent assessment, the program will be scaled up to the national level in 
its next phase. 
is  supporting  Pakistan  Microfinance  Network  (PMN) 
introduce 
to 
Let  me  now  briefly  talk  about  the  current  overall  architecture  of  financial  Consumer 
Protection which anchors on: 
• 
Comprehensive Legal and supervisory framework. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Effective Institutional arrangements. 
Robust dispute Resolution Mechanism. 
Impactful Financial Literacy and Capability programs and initiatives. 
Culture of providing responsible finance by the financial service providers. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Let’s begin with Legal Framework. Ideally, there should be a Financial Consumer Protection 
Act at the Federal level, covering a range of issues, including transparency, confidentiality, 
data protection, account servicing, protection against unfair contracts, lending practices and 
availability of statements, etc. However, due to lack of such framework at the national level, 
SBP  has  been  promoting  financial  consumer  protection  in  the  industry  through  regulatory 
initiatives on the basis of its powers under the BCO, 1962. These include: 
1. 
Issuance  of  Prudential  Regulations  for  Consumer  Financing,  which  addresses  a 
number of important issues pertaining to market conduct and consumer protection. 
Issuance of circulars, covering key areas arising from consumer financing, including 
disclosure  standards,  business  conduct,  underwriting  standards,  complaints 
handling,  cooling-off  periods,  sale  of  third  party  products,  fair  debt  collection 
practices, pricing and loan documentation, etc. 
Establishment of electronic CIB. 
Fixation of Minimum rate of return on deposits. 
Issuance of guidelines for Internal controls for cheque payments. 
Issuance of guidance on Sale of Third party products. 
Issuance of operational Guidelines for Credit card Business in Pakistan. 
Issuance of operational Guidelines on ATMs. 
Issuance of Guidelines on Collection of Utility Bills. 
Issuance  of  Guidance  on  Priority  to  Senior  Citizen  and  Pension  Disbursement 
through Banks. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Turning  to  the  issue  of  Institutional  Arrangements  for  strengthening  of  consumer 
protection  policy  and  swift  grievance  redessal,  SBP  has  established  a  Consumer 
Protection  Department  (CPD).  Under  the  current  regulatory  framework,  all  banks  are 
required to establish comprehensive dispute resolution mechanisms while maintaining proper 
records of such disputes. SBP also inspects the bank’s records and processes for resolving 
complaints during its annual on-site inspections. 
One of the most inevitable traits of financial consumer protection is consumer trust which 
can only be ensured through initiatives such as, financial education, appropriate disclosures 
& non-exploitative competition. Therefore, SBP frequently make use of print and electronic 
media to create awareness for the general masses regarding the probable threats of financial 
fraud to clients. Moreover, targeted awareness sessions are held for various groups including 
financial service providers, trade bodies/associations, Chamber of Commerce & Industries, 
Consumer Associations, NGOs, students and faculty members of universities. 
Last but not least, I believe that financial consumer protection could be best achieved if the 
financial  service  providers  develop  and  adopt  more  responsible  business  practices, 
encompassing  their  entire  product  value  chain.  The  responsibility  should  be  exercised, 
starting from product design to the delivery of the product to the clients. Besides, they should 
have a swift and effective grievance handling mechanism for satisfaction of their clients. 
Ladies and gentlemen! 
In  the  end,  let  me  invite  stakeholders  like  consumer  associations,  trade  bodies,  banking 
ombudsman, financial and legal functionaries, banks and competition commission to come 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
together in eradicating financial consumer malpractices for building an inclusive and stable 
financial sector in Pakistan. 
Wa Aakherun Dawana Annil Hamdolillahe Rabbil Aalamin. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
