Jan Sijbrand: Ethics and the crisis in the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Jan Sijbrand, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank, at the University of 
Groningen, Groningen, 5 September 2013. 
 Dear faculty, students, and staff, let me start by thanking you for the opportunity to speak at 
this festive opening of the academic year. 
When I enrolled at university to study mathematics, it had never crossed my mind that this 
choice might one day lead to a career in the banking sector. I just liked mathematics, is what 
I  remember.  Besides,  in  those  days  and  in  the  first  ten  years  or  so  after  my  graduation, 
banks weren’t interested in hiring mathematicians. 
But as in the following decades banking products grew more complex, banks began to turn 
their eyes to professionals with my academic specialty. 
So  this  is  how,  after  working  with  Shell  for  a  number  of  years,  one  day  I  switched  to  the 
financial sector, and came to join, first, Rabobank and, later, ABN Amro. And since 2011, I’ve 
been an executive director at De Nederlandsche Bank. Of course, it can be argued whether it 
was a wise decision for banks to hire mathematicians ;) 
I gave you this brief overview of the jobs I’ve held so far, not just to show the students among 
you  that  your  professional  life  may  turn  out  different  from  what  you  had  in  mind  when 
choosing  a  particular  field  of  study…  but  also  to  show  how  my  career  enabled  me  to 
experience and compare different organizational cultures. 
Most  of  you  will  know  that,  besides  being  the  central  bank  of  the  Netherlands,  DNB 
supervises the financial sector. Within the scope of that latter task, I am responsible for what 
we call the “prudential” supervision of banks, insurers, and pension funds. This means that 
we  at  DNB  watch  over  the  solidity  of  financial  institutions  and  the  financial  stability  of  the 
system. 
This does not imply that DNB is only interested in “the numbers” – the liquidity and solvency 
ratios  of  banks.  For  “the  numbers”,  are  only  part  of  the  story  when  things  go  wrong. 
Obviously, other factors that come into play, as the recent crisis in the financial sector has 
made clear. I am referring to the cases of unethical behavior of bankers that emerged during 
and  in  the  wake  of  the crisis. Where  and  why  did  things  start  to  go  wrong? What  are  the 
possible  remedies?  And  what  is  the  role  of  DNB  as  prudential  supervisor?  These  are  the 
topics I would like to focus on today. 
Let  me  start  by  giving  an  example  of  unethical  behavior  of  bankers  before  the  crisis.  Just 
some weeks ago, a former Goldman Sachs banker – Fabrice Tourré – was found guilty of 
fraud by a jury in New York City. Mr Tourré was held responsible for seriously misguiding his 
clients  in  the  so-called  “Abacus  deal”.  Abacus  2007  was  the  name  of  an  investment  in 
residential mortgagebacked securities, a product that yields income from mortgage payments 
by homeowners.  
The  deal  was  as  follows:  while  Goldman  Sachs  sold  the  product,  while  the  intermediary 
company  that  arranged  the  deal,  Paulson  &  Co.,  went  “short”  on  the  deal.  That  is,  they 
bought other products that would bring in vast amounts of money if these mortgages were to 
default.  To  make  sure  that  this  setup  would  work,  the  mortgages  selected  for  the  Abacus 
investment had a high chance of defaulting. 
Of  course,  the  clients to  whom  Goldman  Sachs and  Paulson  &  Co  sold  this  product  were 
kept  in  the  dark  about  this.  In  other  words,  what  Tourré  and  Paulson  did  was  seeking  to 
maximize their profits at the expense of their clients. It is therefore hardly surprising that this 
scheme, once it transpired, led to a significant loss of trust in the financial sector in general. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
This  example  illustrates  how  a  bank  can  engage  in  unethical  behaviour  by  deliberately 
misguiding its clients, and betting against them. Let us now take a closer look at the banking 
business in general: where and why could things go wrong the way they did? 
A bank is an intermediary between people who have more money than they want to spend, 
and people who would like to borrow money. Put briefly, a bank’s business is to earn money 
with  money.  In  some  cultures  and  traditions  this  is  considered  inherently  immoral.  In  our 
society,  we  find  this  perfectly  acceptable,  and  even  consider  it  indispensable  for  our 
economy to function properly. The past few years have clearly shown, however, how things 
can go amiss. 
As the former Chief Economist of the IMF, Raghuram Rajan, put it:  
“Because [bankers’] business typically offers few pillars to which they can anchor their morality, 
their  primary  compass  becomes  how  much  money  they  can  make”  (Rajan  2010: 126).  The 
question, then, is “in whose interests are banks working?” 
Before,  say,  the  year  2000,  banks  used  to  focus  on  the  interests  of  their  clients,  their 
employees,  and  their  shareholders.  In  other  words,  they  focused  on  the  interests  of  all  of 
their stakeholders.  
But in the early years of the present millennium, their focus came to rest more and more on 
the interests of shareholders alone. “Managing for value” became the new creed.  
As  I  see  it,  this  approach  made  for  an  imbalance  in  bankers’  decision-making.  It  came  to 
stand  in  the  way  of  how  banks  ought  to  operate,  and  created  problems  for  all  parties 
involved, bankers themselves included. 
Let me explain how “managing for value” led to imbalanced decision-making. “Managing for 
value”  fostered  both  short-term  and  instrumental  thinking.  Clients  became  instruments  to 
extract  money  from  in  order  to  maximize  profits  and  thus  increase  shareholder  value. 
Employees  were hired on the basis of their capacity to make as much money as possible 
and as fast as possible, rather than for their capacity to make a sustainable contribution to 
the bank. 
Bank boards cut staffing, and launched new strategies, sometimes yearly; all in order to gain 
and hold shareholders’ attention; not because it was in the bank’s best interest or that of its 
clients  and  employees.  So,  one  might  say  that  by  focusing  on  “managing  for  value”  only, 
banks lost track of what is required to maintain the right balance. 
Banks play a crucial role in our economy. A role that goes beyond maximizing profits for their 
shareholders. Banks are intermediaries: people deposit their savings at a bank, and a bank 
provides credit to those who need money. This is a bank’s chief task, and its main role in our 
economic system and in our society. It is a bank’s societal responsibility. 
Just  like  other  companies  –  such  as  Shell,  KPN,  and  Akzo  Nobel  –  a  bank,  too,  has  a 
specific role to play. A bank should strive to perform this role properly, in a balanced way, in 
order to hold the trust of its customers and potential customers.  
This trust will be eroded if a bank fails to do so and has no mechanisms is place to prevent 
the excesses we saw in the years before the 2008 crisis. And how serious this loss of trust 
can be is evident, for to this very day we are still working hard to restore trust in the financial 
sector. 
Let  us  now  turn  to  the  possible  remedies  for  the  gap  between  bankers  and  the  rest  of 
society; the gap that has partially been created by the unethical behavior displayed by some 
bankers.The  first  possible  remedy  is  to  criticize  bankers  severely  and  persistently.  This 
remedy  has  been  applied  in  recent  years,  for  bankers  have  been  “bashed”  quite  severely 
over the past years; in many cases for the right reasons. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
But, while some feel this bashing should continue until banks own up to their errors, let’s not 
forget that we cannot do without banks. They provide services that are vital to the functioning 
of a modern economy.  
Also,  let  us  bear  in  mind  that  the  ongoing  criticism  may  have  a  negative  side-effect.  As 
anthropologist Joris Luyendijk – who observes bankers in London’s financial district – points 
out: instead of subjecting themselves to self-criticism, bankers tend to grow indifferent to the 
public’s view.  
Some even go as far as to argue that “clearly we must have done something right, now that 
so  many  people  seem  to  be  jealous  of  our  success”.  Rather  than  changing  their  ways, 
bankers tend to wait until the crisis and the criticism have blown over. Perhaps, they hope 
that once the economy picks up again, everyone will have forgiven and forgotten their errors. 
To quote Rajan once more: severely criticizing “the immorality of bankers has made for good 
rhetoric and politics throughout history, but it is unlikely to address the fundamental reason 
why they can do so much harm”. 
So, if bashing is not the solution, how then should we close this “gap” between society and 
bankers? Surely, a charm offensive by banks wouldn’t do the trick. Any such course would 
be futile, since many people distrust them too deeply for that. And “actions speak louder than 
words” anyway. I therefore think the best way out for bankers may instead be to quietly and 
properly do their job, just as society would want them to. 
Or  should  we  solve  this  problem  by  establishing  an  “ethics  office”  at  every  bank,  as  is 
sometimes suggested? Of course, the attention we see these days for ethical dilemmas is 
laudable. But the risk of having a dedicated ethics office is that the rest of the organization 
may come to think that they no longer need to worry their heads over ethics. If this should be 
the  effect,  an  ethics  office  would  even  be  counterproductive.  For  instead  of  making  the 
organization as a whole more ethical, it would prompt a “box-ticking” attitude. 
Therefore, rather than focusing on establishing ethics offices as a “second line of defense”, 
we should focus on the ethics of the “first line of defense”: the bankers themselves. 
Another option would be to impose more rules on the financial sector. Of course, some of the 
extra regulation that has been introduced was necessary. 
For instance, the Basel III rules which provide that capital ratios have to be raised. 
Yet, in my opinion, extra rules cannot solve all of our problems. For every new rule will lead 
to creative solutions to evade that rule. By making new rules, we won’t make bankers less 
greedy,  nor  will  we  make  them  more  ethical.  Instead  of  overregulating  every  detail,  we 
should focus on the decisions bankers make. 
This point – how decisions are to be made – deserves to be discussed in greater detail. A 
bank is governed by a board of directors and by senior management. These officers decide 
on the bank’s strategy and key targets. Their decisions have far-reaching consequences for 
the bank’s operations, as the example of “managing for value” demonstrates: a misguided 
decision may have undesirable effects.  
This considered, I would like to focus on the way bankers should make their decisions. The 
classical virtue “Prudentia” – in modern English, “Prudence” – can help us here. Prudentia is 
the  virtue  that  stands  for  “making  careful  decisions”.  It  requires  a  capacity  for  reflection, 
careful analysis, and balanced judgment. 
This  sounds  like  a  goal  worth  striving  for,  but  what  does  it  mean  in  banking  practice?  In 
banking  practice,  it  means  that,  instead  of  focusing  on  one  interest  in  particular,  bankers 
have  to  balance  all  of  their  stakeholders’  interests.  They  should  neither  focus  on  their 
shareholders alone, nor on a specific category of their clients. Bankers practicing prudence 
take their societal responsibility to heart, which is: to be a trustworthy intermediary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
scan which interests are at stake, 
balance the different interests involved, 
reflect on the consequences of their actions, 
and show themselves “moderately risk-prone”. 
Therefore, to be “prudent” decision-makers, bankers should: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
By  making  careful  and  balanced  decisions,  and  reflecting  on  their  societal  responsibility, 
bankers will regain the trust they need to function optimally. What does DNB do as prudential 
supervisor to improve the “prudence” of bankers? 
In  recent  years,  we  have  focused  more  heavily  on  good  corporate  governance,  and 
expanded  our  supervisory  scope  to  include  business  models,  behavior  and  culture.  By 
looking  closely  at  business  models,  we  want  to  increase  our  understanding  of  how  banks 
actually  make  money  and  become  better  able  to  discern  high-risk  strategies.  In  our 
supervision  of  behavior  and  culture,  we  aim  to  make  banks’  senior  management  more 
capable and more careful decision-makers. 
Let me give you two examples. 
First, our “fit and proper” tests for aspiring board members have become more thorough.  
We have added requirements such as: 
• 
• 
• 
We  have  done  so  as  we  want  banks  to  have  more  competent  decision-makers  on  their 
boards. 
Second, our supervision of governance now also covers board effectiveness. We measure 
this aspect by observing the behaviour of board members during meetings. 
We  analyze  their  performance,  and  reflect  on  the  way  they  operate,  asking  challenging 
questions like: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Is the chairman too dominant? 
Is the board really “in control”? 
How does the board communicate? and 
Is there room for differing points of view? 
Through  these  new  developments,  we  aim  to  foster  prudent  decision-making  and 
stimulate reflection. 
being sensitive to external developments;  
being able to take balanced decisions; 
and taking responsibility for the outcomes. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I’m going to summarize the main points of my speech. 
I’ve  approached  the  theme  of  this gathering, “Ethics  and  the  crisis  in  the  financial  sector”, 
from my perspective as executive director responsible for prudential supervision. 
I’ve made a case for how banks can restore confidence as an essential building block for a 
healthy  economy.  The  remedy  for  the  current  confidence  crisis  neither  lies  in  bashing 
bankers,  nor  in  a  charm  offensive,  nor  in  establishing  ethics  offices,  nor  even  in  imposing 
more  rules.  Bankers  need  to  become  prudent  decision-makers  again.  This  will  restore  the 
balance required for them to function optimally. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This is how I look at the issue. I’m aware that others may hold different views and  will be 
happy to answer questions during the panel session. 
Finally,  I  wish  all  students  and  faculty  members  gathered  here  good  luck  in  their  new 
academic year and hope to see some of you back at De Nederlandsche Bank one day, when 
your career takes you where maybe you hadn’t expected to go. ;) 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
