Jörg Asmussen: Towards a banking union – the state of play from the 
ECB’s perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Jörg  Asmussen,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  European  Central 
Bank, at the Handelsblatt Conference “Banken im Umbruch”, Frankfurt, 4 September 2013. 
 Ladies and gentleman,  
We are about to embark on one of the most decisive changes in the history of the European 
single currency. I expect that the European Parliament will approve the legislative proposal 
for  a  single  supervisory  mechanism  next  week,  bringing  the  effective  start  of  banking 
supervision at the European level in autumn 2014 into sight. 
The relative calm in the financial markets that has now prevailed for over a year must not 
mask  the  huge  significance  of  this  project.  Only  a  sound  banking  sector  in  Europe  can 
ensure an ample supply of credit to enterprises and households.  
But it would be wrong to believe that the recovery of the banking sector will solely depend on 
the  transfer  of  banking  supervision  to  the  ECB.  The  single  supervisory  mechanism  is  a 
necessary step towards restoring the health of the banking sector, but it is not sufficient in 
itself; the need for reform and action in other policy areas has not abated. Nonetheless, the 
single supervisory mechanism is an essential component of a genuinely European banking 
union.  
A  European  banking  union  in  all  its  aspects  forms  the  prerequisite  for  a  truly  integrated 
European financial market. 
Who will benefit? First, banks, because they will in future be subject to a single regulatory 
and supervisory framework;  
Second,  borrowers,  because  they  will  once  again  be  assessed  by  their  creditworthiness 
rather than by their location;  
Third, taxpayers, because they will no longer be first in line to pick up the bill in the event of 
bank failures.  
All of this will help to restore confidence in the banking sector. Banks will be able to resume 
their core business, supplying credit to the real economy, offering secure savings accounts 
and making sure that payments are conducted safely. 
Especially at this formative stage, we must now lay proper foundations to enable the banking 
union to fulfil these high expectations. 
We want a banking union that will be resilient to future crises and will ideally prevent them 
from arising in the first place. 
Given  the  at  times  differing  national  interests,  the  project  will  not  sell  itself.  So  we  are 
seriously committed to the preparatory work. Today I would like to review the state of play 
and take a look ahead to the single supervisory mechanism, presenting my view of what still 
needs to be fine-tuned.  
Let me start with banking supervision.  
The single supervisory mechanism – where do we stand? 
If,  as  I  said,  the  European  Parliament  approves  the  legislative  proposal  for  a  single 
supervisory  mechanism  next  week,  we  can  begin  exercising  this  single  supervision  in 
autumn 2014.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We will thereby create a level playing field for all banks in the euro area, because the same 
standards will apply overall. For cross-border banks especially, it will be simpler when they 
need only adhere to one framework. 
And  banking  groups  operating  in  several  euro  area  countries  will  immediately  enjoy  more 
scope in their liquidity management. 
European supervision also means that banks will no longer be obliged to hold national assets 
against national liabilities.  
Particularly  in  the  years  of  the  financial  market  crisis,  this  nationally  oriented  supervision 
contributed to the increasing renationalisation of the financial markets. Our aim, however, is 
exactly the opposite.  
It may sound very straightforward. But we still need to resolve some highly practical issues. 
For example, where can we quickly find suitable staff for the single supervisory mechanism? 
Or  who  will  bear  the  costs  if  we  come  across  problems  when  carrying  out  the  planned 
balance sheet assessment.  
Some questions can only be answered once the legislative process has been finalised. But 
our preparations are already advancing at full steam.  
As soon as the legislation is in place, we will start to recruit experts and managers for the 
single supervisory mechanism, which I assume will number no less than 1,000 employees.  
Some 700 of those employees will be directly entrusted with banking supervision. At present, 
close on 80 staff members of national supervisory authorities are helping us for the transition 
period. They have been specially seconded to the ECB for this purpose. 
Our internal preparations are concentrated on four main areas:  
• 
First, the construction of a database with information on all euro area banks. With 
the help of this comprehensive overview of the banking system, we will then decide 
which  banks  will  be  directly  supervised  by  the  ECB.  Our  current  estimate  is  that 
around  130  banks  and  banking  groups  will  come  under  direct  supervision.  These 
banks cover around 85% of euro area bank assets. 
Second, the reporting to the single supervisory mechanism. In order to harmonise 
the  data  collection  we  have  drawn  up  extensive  guidelines,  which  are  now  being 
tested in a pilot study. 
Third, a uniform supervisory model, which will lay down how the different layers – 
national and European – will work together. We aim to form a team of national and 
European supervisors for each banking group we supervise so that both sides will 
benefit from each other’s know-how. Prior to the finalisation of the detailed rules of 
this supervisory model, a public consultation will be held this autumn. 
Fourth, a comprehensive assessment of the banks that will be directly supervised by 
the ECB. As this comprehensive assessment – which will involve a risk assessment, 
balance sheet assessment and a stress test – is currently attracting most attention, I 
would like to deal with it in more detail. For it makes clear that the banking union can 
only  be  a  success  if  we  take  the  correct  approach  from  the  out-set.  For  various 
reasons, two stress tests have not led to a restoration of confidence in the European 
banking sector. This will be our third and last chance.  
   Before launching the single supervisory mechanism, we should know the state of the banks 
that we will be supervising. We want to be free of old liabilities  when  we take on our new 
task.  
But it is also beneficial for the supervised banks themselves for us to have a clear picture of 
the health of each individual institution. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
By performing the comprehensive assessment we will provide transparency for investors – 
and that is exactly what is required to sustainably reinforce confidence in the banking sector.  
The  average  price/book  ratio  for  large  and  complex  banking  groups  in  the  euro  area  is 
currently  just  over  0.5.  This  reflects  the  opinion  of  investors  that  banks  overestimate  the 
value of their assets, will not deliver the expected rate of return or will require fresh capital.  
Moreover, confidence in the banking sector is much lower in some euro area countries than 
in others.  
That  also  causes  fragmentation  in  the  single  market,  as  reflected  in  the  difficulties  some 
banks face in obtaining market funding. 
The  results  of  our  “inventory”  are  then  incorporated  in  a  stress  test,  which  the  European 
Banking  Authority  (EBA)  will  perform  in  close  cooperation  with  us.  Our  staff  members  are 
now elaborating the methodical details of the comprehensive assessment.  
The  final  decisions  will  be  made  as  soon  as  the  legislation  comes  into  effect  and  the 
decision-making Supervisory Board is in place.  
To  enable  the  Supervisory  Board  to  start  operating  promptly,  the  Chair  and  Vice-Chair 
should be appointed as soon as possible after the final adoption of the legislation.  
We  should  now  consider  how  to  deal  with  any  weak  spots  that  are  revealed  during  the 
assessment. Funding for any capital shortfalls should preferably come from the market. But 
we also need a backstop in the event that some banks fail to raise the necessary capital.  
This  is  the  only  way  to  credibly  perform  the  balance  sheet  assessment  and  stress  test. 
Otherwise we may be accused of glossing over the results. 
The whole point of the exercise, however, is to look the whole truth in the face. That is why 
we need such a backstop, before we even start the exercise. In the final statement of their 
most  recent  summer,  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  referred  to  “appropriate 
measures” before the finalisation of the assessment. Ideally, a credible and robust backstop 
should be in place before the start of the assessment. 
Banks should recapitalise themselves through the market. In case that route fails in individual 
cases,  a  safety  net  is  required.  Initially,  the  respective  euro  area  Member  States  are 
responsible. The banking union is not a back-door transfer union. 
Every institution should cover its own former liabilities. If both these options – private sector 
and  national  budgets  –  are  exhausted,  the  existing  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM) 
could step in, as it did last summer in Spain.  
At this point I would like to clarify that this back-stop should not be confused with the direct 
bank recapitalisation  through the  ESM. With the  exception  of  very  rare and  highly  unlikely 
cases,  direct  bank  recapitalisation  via  the  ESM  will  only  be  available  once  the  single 
supervisory mechanism is operational. 
I would like to look more closely at two points that I find especially important in relation to the 
transfer of banking supervision to the ECB. 
First, monetary policy and banking supervision should not lead to a conflict of interests. On 
the  contrary,  central  banks  have  an  interest  in  stable  financial  markets,  not  least  for  the 
proper functioning of their monetary policy. It may therefore make sense to assign banking 
supervision to the central bank alongside monetary policy. 
A possible consequence of having banking supervision and monetary policy under the same 
roof may be that supervisors shy away from placing a bank into resolution.  
After all, the central bank could postpone such decisions by providing liquidity support. That 
is the reproach made by some critics.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
However, such conflicts of interest can be avoided by setting out strict conditions and clear 
rules for the combination of monetary policy and banking supervision in a single institution.  
The  legislative  proposal  for  the  single  supervisory  mechanism  provides  for  a  far-reaching 
separation  between  banking  supervision  and  monetary  policy  within  the  European  Central 
Bank.  
In many Member States, banking supervision is already assigned to the central bank – with 
good results. 
Second,  single  banking  supervision  must  be  democratically  legitimised  and  subject  to 
control. The single supervisory mechanism is therefore accountable to European citizens.  
That goes beyond the accountability we have for our monetary policy. We will work out the 
optimal  form  of  the  new  accountability  obligations  in  cooperation  with  the  European 
Parliament. 
Banking resolution – what remains to be done? 
A rigorous comprehensive assessment before the start of the single supervisory mechanism 
can strengthen confidence in the banking sector.  
However,  that  is  no  more  than  a  momentary  effect. We  can  only  secure  long-term  –  and, 
above all, sustainable investor confidence – if we, as the banking supervisor, may in future 
also decide that a bank is no longer viable. And may do so in a way that does not set off 
shock  waves  across  the  financial  system.  We  therefore  require  clear  rules  that  are  valid 
throughout Europe – rules on the orderly resolution of banks and rules on who will cover the 
ensuing costs.  
The  EU  Council  of  Ministers  has  already  agreed  on  a  framework  for  the  resolution  and 
recovery of banks. I hope that the legislative process, too, may now be swiftly brought to a 
conclusion.  
The idea underlying these new rules is simple and makes good sense: whoever takes on a 
risk  must  also  take  the  responsibility  for  the  consequences.  In  future,  the  costs  of  wrong 
decisions will not be borne by taxpayers alone. Shareholders will be the first in line, followed 
by creditors. Within the pecking order of creditors, subordinated creditors will come first and 
then preferred creditors. Only then will it be the unsecured depositors’ turn.  
This clear pecking order represents a major break-through: “bail-out” is out, “bail-in” is in.  
For a truly integrated European financial market we need to remove the tight links between 
banks and sovereigns along national lines. When the new resolution rules come into effect, 
states  may  only  intervene  after  private  investors  have  been  bailed-in.  This  is  a  sound 
approach,  because  the  clear  rules  ensure  that  investors  can,  and  must,  properly  estimate 
their risk. 
As  I  see  it,  however,  the  current  compromise  leaves  countries  with  quite  some  room  to 
manoeuvre.  The  representatives  of  the  European  Parliament,  the  Council  and  the 
Commission  should  improve  this  aspect  during  their  negotiations  in  the  Conciliation 
Committee.  
The bail-in rules are not due to take effect until 2018. I hope that the trialogue is able to bring 
this date forward in order to give more security to investors.  
A  single  resolution  mechanism,  along  with  a  single  resolution  authority  and  a  single 
resolution  fund  for  the  supervised  banks,  is  just  as  important  as  the  single  supervisory 
mechanism  itself.  The  European  Commission  has  presented  a  legislative  proposal  under 
which this mechanism could become fully operational as of 2015. I’m greatly in favour of this 
ambitious schedule, which does justice to the urgency of the project. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The ECB will shortly publish an opinion on the Commission’s proposal. Without wishing to 
anticipate this detailed analysis, I would like to share a few thoughts with you on a good way 
of designing this mechanism. 
The  proposal  covers  the  core  elements  required  to  resolve  failing  banks  efficiently,  whilst 
minimising costs for taxpayers and the real economy: a single system with a single authority 
and a single bank resolution fund. 
It is right and important that resolution decisions will be taken at European level, i.e. at the 
same level at which supervision will be exercised in future. Quick and efficient decisions will 
enable  the  closure  of  credit  institutions  that  are  no  longer  viable  –  without  impairing  the 
stability of the rest of the financial system.  
But who will actually decide that a bank is no longer viable? In answering this question I see 
that the current proposal still needs to be improved.  
In my view, such a decision should be made solely by the banking supervisor, i.e. in future by 
the ECB.  
This  would  allow  for  rapid,  coordinated  decisions,  and  subsequent  action,  without 
unnecessary disputes about competencies. Once the decision has been made that a bank is 
no longer viable, the resolution authority could take over. It would then decide how to carry 
out the resolution in that particular case. Such a clear division of tasks makes good sense.  
Let me add, however, that the resolution fund will be financed through contributions from the 
banking sector.  
Moreover,  when  banking  supervision  and  resolution  are  brought  to  the  European  level,  a 
single European deposit guarantee scheme will be less urgent. 
Because  thanks  to  the  pecking  order  laid  down  in  the  Bank  Resolution  and  Recovery 
Directive, less funds will be required for the compensation of depositors in extreme cases. 
For one, the framework for the recovery and resolution of banks, that is due to be adopted 
shortly,  provides  that  depositors  will  be  treated  favourably.  So  the  need  to  compensate 
depositors will more rarely arise. That means that national deposit guarantee schemes will 
only need to be invoked in absolutely extreme cases.  
In addition, the revision of the Directive on Deposit Guarantee Schemes aims to harmonise 
national deposit guarantee schemes and to provide them with more resources. Both aspects 
will help ensure that the national deposit guarantees have sufficient funding.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude.  
A European banking union is the prerequisite for a genuinely integrated European financial 
market. That is also crucial for us as a central bank as only then can our monetary policy 
signals be properly transmitted throughout the euro area.  
A single financial market is the prerequisite for the uniform transmission of our interest rate 
decisions to the real economy.  
A banking union is a central element of a stable euro area.  
It stands for a Europe that has learnt the right lessons from the crisis; for a Europe that will 
come out of the crisis stronger and more robust.  
The banking union is in Europe’s interest – and it is in Germany’s interest too.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
