Andreas Dombret: Competition policy and regulation in a global 
economic order 
Welcome address by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the reception given by the Deutsche Bundesbank at the Annual Congress of 
the Verein für Socialpolitik, Düsseldorf, 5 September 2013. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Mr Burda 
Members of the Verein für Socialpolitik 
Ladies and gentlemen 
On  behalf  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  this 
reception. It gives me great pleasure to be your host again this year. 
As you will all be aware, the Verein für Socialpolitik and the Bundesbank have enjoyed very 
close  relations  for  many  years  now,  and  it  is  a  relationship  that  is  fruitful  for  both  sides. 
Academic  study  and  research  are  indispensable  foundations  underpinning  the  work  of 
central banks. And central banks offer an attractive research environment. Added to this, the 
issues facing central banks often stimulate new research projects. 
However, research conducted by members of the Verein für Socialpolitik is not only relevant 
to  central  banks,  as  your  annual  congresses  clearly  demonstrate.  Competition  policy  and 
regulation are topical issues which have attracted broad public attention. 
The ongoing negotiations between the European Union and the USA over a transatlantic free 
trade area are a case in point. This agreement could herald the creation of the largest free 
trade area in the world, which is something I would warmly welcome. 
As for the topic of regulation, I’m sure I’m not alone in thinking first and foremost of financial 
sector  regulation.  As  it  happens,  the  G20  heads  of  state  and  government  are  debating 
reforms to financial sector regulation this very day at their St Petersburg summit. 
And yet competition policy and regulation not only matter to policymakers and the public at 
large; they are equally relevant to all kinds of sub-genres of the economic sciences, as we 
can see from the impressive range of topics covered by today’s annual congress. 
Let’s now take a brief look at the relationship between competition policy and regulation in 
the financial sector. 
Competition policy in the financial sector 
2. 
The  political  order  envisages  a  clear-cut  relationship  between  state  and  market:  the  state 
creates  a  setting  in  which  market  forces  can  thrive.  Hence,  the  state’s  role  in  competition 
policy is to ensure effective competition. It sets the rules of the game but stays off the playing 
field. 
There have always been instances where reality has failed to live up to this ideal. All along, 
politicians have enjoyed having a stake in the game; the Landesbanken are just one example 
of this. 
But one thing became clear when the crisis began – if not before: the financial sector setting 
was  only  partially  suited  to  ensuring  a  competitive  environment  that  was  consistent  with 
market economy principles. 
In retrospect, a great deal of trust, probably too much at times, was invested in market forces 
and  market  discipline.  After  the  crisis  erupted,  there  was  a  sharp  increase  in  government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
interventions to stabilise the financial system. In many countries, banks were propped up by 
the state or even taken into national ownership. 
This government response was motivated, among other things, by a distinctive feature of the 
financial  sector.  Relative  to  other  industries,  players  in  the  financial  sector  are  very  highly 
interconnected. 
This high degree of interconnectedness means that if one participant exits the market, it can 
potentially  bring  down  others  as  well.  In  extremis,  this  might  cause  the  entire  market  to 
collapse  and  endanger  financial  stability.  What  this  means,  therefore,  is  that  the  financial 
sector  is  lacking  a  key  aspect  of  an  effective  competitive  environment  –  the  possibility  of 
businesses exiting the market. 
A major financial institution exiting the market can ignite a systemic crisis, leaving the state 
with little choice but to intervene in order to prevent matters going from bad to worse. And 
then the taxpayer is left to foot the bill. The no bail-out principle has lost all effect. As Walter 
Eucken might have put it, those who benefited did not bear the costs. 
This very phenomenon has come into play during the crisis. The state no longer merely sets 
the rules, it has also joined the game, whether by choice or otherwise, because the markets 
anticipated that it would be forced to intervene in an emergency. Naturally, this no longer fits 
the ideal of the state envisaged in our political order. 
If the state wants to get back off the playing field, it will have to adapt the rules of the game. 
What we need is improved financial sector regulation. 
Financial sector regulation 
3. 
However, as I see it, we should not go from occasionally placing too much trust in market 
forces to making excessive demands of state regulation. Regulation is designed to prevent 
market failure, but it shouldn’t put market mechanisms out of action. 
Our aim should still be to use regulation to create an appropriate setting which provides the 
right  incentives  for  risk-aware  behaviour.  So  the  key  question  should  be  this:  how  can 
regulatory  measures  help  to  reassert  fundamental  market  economy  principles,  first  and 
foremost the no bail-out principle? 
How, for instance, can we make it possible for financial institutions to exit the market without 
endangering systemic stability and without the taxpayer having to foot the bill? What we need 
are insolvency frameworks that are in tune with the interconnectedness and complexity of the 
financial sector. Even large and complex institutions need to be able to fail without bringing 
down  the  entire  system.  Only  when  that  is  possible  will  the  state  no  longer  be  forced  to 
intervene  at  the  taxpayer’s  expense.  Thus,  setting  up  a  credible  resolution  mechanism  for 
financial institutions can help to strengthen the no bail-out principle within the financial sector. 
Major steps have already been taken in this regard at the international level. The Financial 
Stability  Board  has  already  presented  key  attributes  of  effective  resolution  regimes  for 
financial  institutions,  which  were  endorsed  by  the  G20  heads  of  state  and  government  in 
November 2011. 
Since  then,  work  has  been  under  way  to  transpose  this  new  international  standard  into 
national law. A draft directive for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions has now 
been presented at the EU level. This proposal clearly sets forth the sequence of liability for 
failing financial institutions – shareholders and creditors are now first in line, and rightly so. 
So  we’re on track to reassert the no bail-out principle in the financial sector. But being on 
track doesn’t mean that we’ve already reached our final destination. 
The design phase of the regulatory reform has been concluded; now it’s time for us to put the 
reforms  into practice. That  means following  the  path  we've  taken  right through to  the  very 
end. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First and foremost – and this is a crucial point as far as I’m concerned – all countries need to 
follow  this  path  together.  Players  in  the  financial  sector  operate  in  global  markets,  in 
integrated  markets,  so  we  need  to  make  sure  our  regulation  takes  account  of  any  cross-
border interaction and coordinate regulatory measures internationally. In global markets, the 
rules of the game need to be global, too. 
The  reforms  endorsed  by  the  G20  can  only  have  the  intended  impact  if  they  are fully  and 
consistently  transposed  into  national  regimes.  Otherwise,  evasive  action  or  regulatory 
arbitrage might endanger their success. 
That’s why we will need to devote even more attention to the question of consistency going 
forward, particularly so given the impact of the rules across national borders.The Financial 
Stability Board’s stringent oversight and regular reporting to the G20 will play a key role in 
this regard. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Ladies and gentlemen 
The  good  news,  as  far  as  I’m  concerned,  is  that  the  path  we  have  taken  to  regulate  the 
financial  sector  is  the  right  one.  Now  we  need  to  stick  to  this  path  until  we  reach  our 
destination. And I think a somewhat brisker pace would certainly not go amiss. 
As for my speech here today, I would now like to return to my introductory remarks on the 
Verein für Socialpolitik and on academic study. 
Sound regulation is built on robust scholarly foundations. And these, in turn, are the outcome 
of  academic  discourse  –  exchanging  ideas  means  disseminating  them;  discussing  ideas 
means refining them. 
Gustav  Schmoller,  one  of  the  co-founders  of  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik,  once  said  that  a 
frank  debate  on  conflicting  convictions  and  principles  cannot  harm  a  cause;  it  can  only 
benefit it. 
On  that  note,  I  hope  to  see  many  more  lively  debates  in  the  future,  and  the  Verein  für 
Socialpolitik provides an ideal platform for such academic discourse to thrive. 
And  I  am  delighted  that  we  will  be  awarding  the  Gustav  Stolper  Prize  this  evening  to  an 
outstanding scholar – one who does not shy away from debate, a quality which has enabled 
him time and again to provide important input for policymakers, notably so in the prevailing 
crisis but at other times as well. 
But I do not wish to pre-empt the awards ceremony itself and therefore thank you for your 
attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
