Erkki Liikanen: The future of central banking – proposed bank structures 
Speech by Mr Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland and Chairman of the High-
level Expert Group on the structure of the EU banking sector, at a conference on “The future 
of central banking”, Copenhagen, 30 January 2013. 
 Introduction 
In  the  process  of  reaching  the  final  proposal,  our  group  considered  two  avenues  as  a 
possible way forward. 
In  the  first  avenue,  the  main  instruments  were  additional,  non-risk-weighted  capital 
requirements on trading activities and banks’ credible recovery and resolution plans, subject 
to supervisory approval. 
Such measures would be in line with the ideas of academic researchers who have suggested 
that a review of capital requirements is the best way to tackle risks in trading, and who have 
emphasized the need to develop bank resolution and recovery mechanisms. 
The possibility of conditional structural measures entered this avenue in the following way: if 
the bank were not able to prove that its required recovery and resolution plan was credible, 
separation of certain activities could be imposed. 
In the second avenue, immediate separation of retail and certain trading-related activities 
would  be  imposed.  Separation  would  be  consistent  with  research  which  emphasizes  that 
capital  requirements  are  not  sufficient  to  limit  excessive  risk-taking  incentives  induced  by 
deposit insurance if the risks are difficult to quantify and risk profiles can change rapidly, as 
in trading. 
A sufficiently wide separation of trading activities would also avoid definitional problems that 
arise, for example, when pursuing the dividing line between proprietary trading and market 
making. 
Eventually,  our  group  converged  to  propose  mandatory  separation,  an  outcome  based  on 
Avenue 2. 
The rationale for mandatory separation 
To  sum  up  the  rationale  for  separation  as  a  regulatory  measure,  I  would  emphasize  the 
following four points. 
Firstly, as I have already suggested, separation is a  way of preventing banks with insured 
deposits from engaging in activities whose risks are potentially high and difficult to quantify 
precisely, and which are not essential to deposit banking. Moreover, as the separated trading 
entity is not allowed to finance itself with insured deposits, the price of its funding will better 
reflect its true risks and hence curb incentives to excessive risk-taking. 
Secondly, separation of activities is the most direct instrument for tackling banks’ complexity 
and interconnectedness. As banks will become simpler in structure, recovery and resolution 
will  also  be  easier.  Moreover,  as  intra-group  financing  and  subsidies  between  the  deposit 
bank and the trading entity will be strictly limited, there will be fewer channels of contagion. 
Limits on trading activities will also reduce the counterparty risks of deposit banks. 
Thirdly, simpler structures can make it easier for the management and board to understand 
and  manage,  and  for  outsiders  to  monitor  and  supervise,  banking  institutions.  This  can 
enhance the effectiveness of both market discipline and financial supervision. 
Fourthly, separating deposit banking and trading entities can also reduce the mixing of the 
two  different  management  cultures.  Returning  to  a  culture  where  the  relationship  to  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
customer  is  highly  valued  and  the  focus  is  on  the  long-term  viability  of  the  business  is  of 
great importance. 
Compatibility with other regulatory initiatives 
It  is  important  to  understand  that  our  proposals  to  the  Commission  are  meant  as 
complementary to already on-going reforms. Let me give two examples. 
On  one  hand,  the  mandatory  separation  of  proprietary  trading  and  market  making  from 
deposit  banking,  which  we  proposed,  complement  capital  requirements:  both  can  serve  to 
restrict deposit banks’ risk-taking. 
On  the  other  hand,  mandatory  separation  can  support  the  Commission’s  proposal  for  the 
Bank Recovery and Resolution Directive by making it easier to apply in practice. 
More  generally,  the  three  elements  –  capital  requirements,  recovery  and  resolution,  and 
structural measures – were central to the thought process of our group. 
Comparison of mandatory separation and other suggestions 
By  avoiding  the  decoupling  of  proprietary  trading  and  market  making,  the  proposal  differs 
from the Volcker Rule in the United States. The proposed mandatory separation in the EU 
can take place within a banking group, whereas the Volcker Rule prohibits proprietary trading 
from the entire banking group. 
When comparing the proposal of the High-level Expert Group and the proposal presented by 
the UK’s Independent Commission on Banking (ICB), we can say that the proposals started 
from different directions but their results are qualitatively similar. The approach taken by the 
ICB started from a narrow banking philosophy, while the High-level Expert Group focused on 
the most volatile parts of banking business. 
The  main  difference  in  the  position  of  the  ring  fence  is  that  the  High-level  Expert  Group 
proposal allows securities underwriting by the deposit bank, whereas the ICB proposal forces 
it out of the ring-fenced deposit bank. The solution of the High-level Expert Group is based 
on  the  view  that  underwriting  is  actually  closely  connected  with  corporate  finance  and 
prohibiting it would hurt the universal banking model. 
Another difference which stems from the different starting points is that, in the ICB proposal, 
higher capital requirements are recommended for the ring-fenced deposit banks. As will be 
discussed  shortly,  the  High-level  Expert  Group  was  more  focused  on  strengthening  the 
capitalisation of the trading entity. 
Conditional separation 
The  general  idea  of  conditional  separation  from  Avenue  1  was  actually  adopted  into  our 
second  proposal,  which  says  that  a  credible  recovery  and  resolution  plan  for  a  bank  may 
require,  based  on  supervisory  judgment,  a  more  extensive  separation  of  trading  activities 
than laid out in our first proposal on mandatory separation. 
Bail-in 
If a sufficiently simple and separate organizational structure is one precondition of successful 
recovery and resolution, the other is a sufficient amount of liabilities that can be bailed in. 
Our third proposal aims to complement the Commission’s plans on this front. We proposed 
that a layer of designated bail-in debt instruments could be considered. This would further 
increase and add transparency to the loss-absorbing capacity of banks. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Secondly,  clear  contractual  terms  of  what  would  trigger  the  bail-in  would  facilitate  the 
creation of a market for such instruments. 
Thirdly, we recommended that these instruments be held by investors outside the banking 
sector  in  order  to  reduce  contagion  and  hence  systemic  risks  in  a  crisis  situation.  It  is 
important to note that this would also strengthen investors’ belief that recovery and resolution 
would indeed be implemented in a crisis. 
It is also important to note that solving the too-big-to-fail problem by a credible recovery and 
resolution system, including bail-in and facilitated by the structural measures, will level the 
playing field between smaller and larger financial institutions. 
Review of capital requirements 
Our analysis of capital requirements, central to Avenue 1 of our thought process, found its 
way into the fourth of our proposals. 
The measurement of risks inherent in trading assets is prone to a significant “model risk”; the 
risk that the model used in risk measurement is itself inaccurate. 
The severity of model risk stems largely from the presence of “tail risks” in trading assets. 
These are risks that cause catastrophic losses but that materialize with a very low probability. 
Moreover, tail risks are intertwined with the severe liquidity shortages that occur in systemic 
crises. Hence, almost by definition, tail risks are difficult to model and measure. 
The mandatory separation of the riskiest trading activities from deposit banking is a key step 
for limiting the impact of these risks. 
Robust capital requirements which do not heavily rely on models are another. Furthermore, 
limits on risk concentrations and counterparty exposures can also be strengthened. 
Our group acknowledged the important work of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
in reviewing the trading book capital requirements. 
We  recommended  that  the  Commission  carry  out  an  evaluation  of  whether  the  resultant 
amendments would be sufficient at EU level. 
Further,  the  Commission  should  also  evaluate  the  sufficiency  of  the  current  capital 
requirements  on  real-estate-related  lending,  which  has  been the major  source  of  losses  in 
many financial crises, including the most recent one. 
Corporate governance of banks 
Finally, we also wanted to promote the strengthening of corporate governance and control of 
banks.  Actions  in  the  following  areas  were  suggested:  1)  strengthening  boards  and 
management;  2)  promoting  the  risk  management  function;  3)  reining  in  compensation  for 
bank  management  and  staff,  and  shifting  performance-based  incentives  more  for  the  long 
term; 4) improving risk disclosure and 5) strengthening sanctioning powers. 
Conclusions 
Banks are the backbone of the financial system, and their health is vital to regaining solid 
growth in the EU-wide economy. 
The  structural  proposals  our  group  made  rest  on  the  idea  of  maintaining  the  possibility  to 
supply all financial services within a single banking group. The aim is to leave it up to bank 
boards and management teams to decide what the best business model is in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Against this backdrop, our proposed bank structures should be viewed as strengthening the 
general conditions which are needed to reduce conflicts of interest and distorted incentives 
that  could  lead  to  inefficient  business  decisions  from  the  point  of  view  of  society,  and 
endanger financial stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
