Ignazio Visco: The sovereign debt crisis and the process of European 
integration 
Speech by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 32nd Seminar “Federalism 
in  Europe  and  in  the  World”,  Istituto  di  Studi  Federalisti  “Altiero  Spinelli”,  Ventotene, 
1 September 2013. 
 The introduction of the euro was a fundamental step in European history, a political event 
that certified the progress made on the road to integration, a profound economic and social 
change. It was only a step, however, and not the end of the road, which is still a long and 
difficult  one.  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  who  contributed  so  much  to  the  achievement  of 
monetary union, was well aware of this. In May 1998, on the eve of the introduction of the 
single currency, Padoa-Schioppa wrote in the Corriere della Sera, The European economic 
and  monetary  union’s  “capability  for  macroeconomic  policy  is,  with  the  exception  of  the 
monetary  field,  embryonic  and  unbalanced  […].  For  the  European  Central  Bank  the  real 
danger  will  not  be  too  little  independence  but  too  much  isolation  […],  having  to  operate 
almost  in  a  vacuum,  with  no  political  power,  budgetary  policy,  banking  supervision,  or 
financial market control function. […].It is thus right not only to applaud yesterday’s step but 
also  to  underline  its  unfinished  nature,  the  risks  and  the  rashness.”  Since  2010  this 
incompleteness has fueled the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area. 
In  the  absence  of  political  union,  the  economic  governance  of  the  area  was  based  on  a 
fragile alliance between  market forces and rules of conduct. Market forces were to ensure 
the economic convergence of the member countries and the definition and implementation of 
the  necessary  structural  reforms  at  national  level.  Rules  of  conduct  were  expected  to 
guarantee  prudent  budgetary  policies.  As  early  as  the  1989  Delors  Report,  it  was  thought 
that, for the public finances, “the constraints imposed by market forces might either be too 
slow and weak or too sudden and disruptive.” 
Economic convergence was slow and difficult; in some cases the gaps actually widened. In 
many  economies  the  delays  and  obstacles  to  adjusting  to  the  large-scale  global  changes 
weakened competitiveness and the ability to grow. Mitigated by the improvement in funding 
conditions  after the  introduction  of  the  euro,  market  pressures  alone  were  not  sufficient  to 
drive the necessary reform efforts. Measured on the basis of unit labour costs in the whole 
economy,  the  loss  of  competitiveness  recorded  between  1999  and  2008  in  the  countries 
worst  hit  by  the  crisis  went  from  about  9  percentage  points  in  Greece  and  Portugal  to  12 
points  in  Italy,  19  points  in  Spain,  and  no  less  than  37  points  in  Ireland.  Considering  only 
manufacturing  industry  and  competitiveness  indicators  based  on  producer  prices,  the 
competitiveness losses ranged from 7 percentage points in Italy to 22 points in Portugal (14 
points in Spain, 16 points in Ireland and 18 points in Greece). 
The rules for the public finances defined in the European sphere were not always respected. 
In 2007, almost a decade after the introduction of the single currency, only a few countries 
reported  budgets  close  to  balance  in  structural  terms,  i.e.  not  counting  the  effects  of  the 
economic cycle on revenue and expenditure. In some cases the public debt was still at an 
excessively  high  level  in  relation  to  GDP.  For  a  long  time  the  financial  markets 
underestimated  sovereign  risks,  thus  confirming  the  doubts  about  their  ability  to  provide 
timely incentives for the adoption of virtuous behaviour. Until the outbreak of the crisis the 
spreads between government bond yields within the euro area were close to zero. 
In this framework, after the financial crisis in the United States and the very severe global 
recession in 2008–09, the full revelation of the unsustainability of the Greek public finances 
produced  tensions  which  then  spread  to  the  economically  weaker  euro-area  countries, 
characterized  by  excessive  public  or  private  debt,  a 
trade  deficit,  poor 
competitiveness, and low economic growth. Tensions grew with the bursting of the property 
foreign 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
bubble and the consequent disruption of banking in Ireland. With the announcement of the 
involvement  of  private  investors  in  restructuring  Greek  debt  in  the  summer  of  2011,  the 
financial markets suddenly became aware of the implications of the ban on interventions to 
rescue member states under the Treaty on European Union. There followed a very serious 
crisis  of  confidence  in  the  ability  of  the  single  currency  to  survive,  with  negative 
consequences for the real economies of individual countries and for the area as a whole. 
The  yield  spreads  between  euro-area  government  securities  suddenly  increased  in  the 
second  half  of  2011;  those  between  Italian  and  German  10-year  government  bonds,  still 
below  200  basis  points  in  the  first  half  of  that  year,  rose  to  550  points  in  the  following 
November. In the same period, in Italy and the other countries affected by the tensions, there 
was a sudden worsening in wholesale funding conditions for banks, whose creditworthiness 
was  linked  to  that  of  their  sovereign  paper;  placement  of  securities,  especially  uncovered 
bonds,  dried  up;  the  CD  and  commercial  paper  markets  also  thinned.  The  cost  of  fund-
raising rose; in the money market there was a significant increase in the spreads between 
the very-short-term interest paid by Italian banks and the average. 
Given  the  real  risk  of  a  severe  tightening  of  the  supply  of  credit  to  the  economy,  the 
Governing Council of the ECB cut its main refinancing rate by a total of 50 basis points in 
November  and  December  2011,  introduced  three-year  refinancing  operations  (LTROs) 
providing unlimited liquidity at fixed rates, extended the range of assets eligible as collateral, 
and  halved  the  compulsory  reserve  ratio. In  the  two  LTROs  conducted in  December  2011 
and February 2012 the Eurosystem supplied funds totaling around €1 trillion to banks in the 
euro area; taking account of the smaller volume of funds disbursed in other operations, the 
net increase in the flow of resources to the banking system exceeded €500 billion. The large 
injection of liquidity contributed to easing tensions in the money market. The excess liquidity 
is  currently  being  reabsorbed:  deposits  held  in  the  ECB’s  reserve  accounts  and  deposit 
facility,  excluding  the  compulsory  reserve,  now  amount  to  €250  billion,  down  from  €800 
billion in March 2012. 
Yield spreads between government bonds in the euro area are determined by two factors, 
one  national  and  one  European,  linked respectively  to  the  weaknesses of  some  countries’ 
economies and public finances (sustainability risk), and to the incompleteness of European 
construction  and  the  attendant fears  of  a  break-up  of  the monetary  union  (redenomination 
risk). Europe’s response to the sovereign debt crisis has consequently been two-pronged: on 
the  one  hand,  individual  countries  have  pledged  to  adopt  prudent  budgetary  policies  and 
structural  reforms  to  support  competiveness;  on  the  other,  a  far-reaching  reform  of  EU 
economic governance has been undertaken. 
Not  every  country  needed  to  consolidate  its  public  accounts;  in  some  cases  in  the 
international  fora  there  was  even  talk  of  the  possibility  of  expansionary  interventions. 
Adjustment was indispensable in countries such as Italy that were experiencing difficulty in 
the financial markets and where the margin of confidence granted by investors and market 
operators was especially narrow. As I have remarked elsewhere, the volume of government 
securities  to  be  placed  every  year  to  finance  Italy’s  deficit  and,  above  all,  to  roll  over  the 
maturing debt is in the order of €400 billion. 
The  recession  has  made  budget  corrections  difficult,  with  their  inevitably  negative 
repercussions for economic activity in the short term. Nonetheless, prudent management of 
the public accounts has helped to avoid worse scenarios, to first limit and then lower interest 
rate  differentials  between  euro-area  government  securities,  and  to  prevent  new  liquidity 
crises.  It  has  also  proved  difficult  to  implement  structural  reforms  since,  while  helping  to 
restore  the  growth  potential  of  an  economy,  they  can  have  short-term  costs,  especially  in 
terms of employment. 
Between the summers of 2011 and 2012 the Bank of Italy’s assessment of the prospects for 
growth  in  Italy  last  year  gradually  deteriorated  by  over  3  percentage  points;  one  point  is 
attributable to the effect of public finance measures, while more than one and a half points 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
reflects the increase in the spread between Italian and German government securities and its 
effect on the supply of credit to the economy and on business and consumer confidence; the 
remainder is attributable to the darkening outlook for world economic growth. 
The  financial  results  of  Italy’s  fiscal  policy  have  been  obscured  by  the  recession. 
Notwithstanding an increase in the primary surplus – to 2.5 per cent of GDP, from 1.2 per 
cent in 2011 – government debt has risen by over 6 percentage points of GDP, to 127 per 
cent, reflecting above all the sharp deceleration in output. Almost two percentage points of 
the  increase  are  attributable  to  the  financial  support  that  Italy  has  given  to  other  EU 
countries. 
The reform of European governance, which took shape in emergency conditions, along lines 
that were not always consistent and marked by uncertainty, overlap and heavy-handedness, 
along  with  the  efforts  made  at  national  level,  have  nonetheless  begun  the  process  of 
rebuilding trust among member states. In the past, the Union’s cohesion has been severely 
tested  by  repeated  violations  of  budgetary  rules  –  not  only  in  relation  to  the  most  recent 
events, but also for those that led to the first reform of the Stability and Growth Pact in 2005 
–  and  by  the  difficulty  of  making  any  in-depth  assessment  of  national  financial  systems, 
which  are  subject  to  profoundly  different  regulations  and  supervisory  practices.  The 
strengthening of the budgetary rules, above all as regards prevention, and the extension of 
multilateral supervision to macroeconomic imbalances have accompanied the establishment 
of mechanisms for managing sovereign debt crises and paved the way for the launch of the 
banking union, renewing discussion on the budgetary union and plans for a political one. 
The  agreements  reached  in  the  last  two  years  in  the  matter  of  public  finances  have 
reinforced  the  commitments  entered  into  previously  but  they  have  not  established  more 
demanding  targets.  The  new  European  governance  has  increased  the  automatism  of 
coherence checks on policies and objectives and of potential sanctions; countries have been 
asked  to  recognize  the  European  rules  in  their  national  legislation.  Even  the  “debt  rule”, 
which  calls  on  countries  to  reduce  by  1/20th  annually  the  amount  by  which  their  debt 
exceeds  the  threshold  of  60  per  cent  of  GDP,  in  fact  renders  operational  a  requirement 
already  embodied  in  the  Treaty  of  Maastricht.  For  Italy,  compliance  would  not  entail  the 
adoption of a permanently restrictive budget policy stance, but it does imply the return to a 
stable  growth  path  and  it  requires  a  faster  pace  of  adjustment  to  the  geopolitical, 
technological and demographic changes of the past thirty years. 
The new macroeconomic imbalance surveillance procedure is an early warning mechanism 
based on a scoreboard of indicators and alert thresholds. The indicators are analyzed by the 
European  Commission  in  an  annual  report  identifying  the  countries  to  be  subjected  to  in-
depth review. In the case of particularly severe imbalances, the Commission draws up, for 
approval by the European Council, a set of specific recommendations calling for adjustment 
measures; failure to comply may lead to sanctions. 
Until two years ago Europe had no tools with which to manage a sovereign crisis. The first 
measures  to support Greece,  and to  a  smaller extent  Ireland,  involved  the  use  of  bilateral 
loans.  In  May  2010  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  was  instituted  –  a 
temporary  mechanism  that  was  also  adopted  for  Portugal  and  has  remained  in  operation 
until this year; the bonds issued under the facility are guaranteed by the member states. In 
July 2011 the EFSF was flanked by the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), a permanent 
crisis management tool instituted by international treaty and endowed with capital of its own; 
ESM loans to Spain were used to bolster the country’s banking system. 
The  total  lending  capacity  of  these  two  instruments,  initially  set  at  €250  billion,  has  been 
raised  progressively  to  €700  billion.  When  the  EFSF  was  launched  the  only  method  of 
intervention available  was to grant loans under support plans for the countries in difficulty; 
this  has  gradually  been  extended  and  now  includes,  with  appropriate  conditionality, 
interventions  on  the  primary  and  secondary  markets for government securities,  opening of 
precautionary credit lines, and funding of the recapitalization of financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Between  2010  and  2012  the  countries  of  Europe  disbursed,  either  directly  or  through  the 
EFSF or the ESM, some €280 billion in loans to their partners in difficulty. Italy contributed 
€43 billion, of which €27 billion for EFSF loans, €10 billion for bilateral loans and €6 billion to 
provide capital for the ESM. According to official estimates our contribution will rise to more 
than €55 billion this year and to almost €62 billion in 2014. 
After the need to remedy the asymmetry of a single monetary policy and multiple national 
budget and structural policies had been recognized, a further gradual reinforcement of the 
Economic and Monetary Union was agreed and set in motion. The Blueprint for a Deep and 
Genuine  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  published  by  the  European  Commission  last 
November and the report Towards a Genuine Economic and Monetary Union presented in 
June  2012  and  updated  in  December  by  the  President  of  the  European  Council,  working 
closely  with  the  Presidents  of  the  European  Commission,  the  Eurogroup  and  the  ECB, 
outline  the  stages  of  this  process.  They  will  lead  to  banking  union,  the  introduction  of 
autonomous  fiscal  capacity  for  the  whole  euro  area,  a  common  budget  and,  eventually, 
political union. 
The time needed to implement Europe’s complex strategy to counter the economic crisis will 
be long. The distortions that continue to affect the financial markets in the meantime could 
undermine  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  and  jeopardize  the  entire  process.  In  July 
2012 the yield differential between 10-year BTPs and the equivalent German Bunds was just 
over  500  basis  points,  compared  with  a  value  of  about  200  basis  points  estimated  to  be 
consistent with Italian and German economic fundamentals. 
Aware of these dangers, in the summer of 2012 the ECB Governing Council announced the 
introduction  of  a  new  method  of  intervention  on  the  secondary  market  for  government 
securities,  Outright  Monetary  Transactions  (OMTs).  Countering  an  excessive  increase  in 
sovereign  yields  when  it  stems  from  redenomination  risk  and  distorts  monetary  policy 
transmission is fully within the Eurosystem’s mandate. 
The OMTs are only activated in the presence of severe market strains and are confined to 
the securities of countries adhering to a macroeconomic adjustment or precautionary ESM 
programme. Their continued operation then depends on observing the conditions attached to 
the  programme.  There  are  no  ex  ante  limitations  on  the  duration  or  amount  of  the 
intervention. 
This initiative has been made possible by the credibility of the Eurosystem and the progress 
made in the reform of European governance. Fears of euro reversibility are linked in the first 
place  to  those  concerning  the  sustainability  of  public  debts  and  the  competitiveness  of 
member countries. For this reason the activation of OMTs and their continuation are subject 
to  specific  undertakings  regarding  public  finances  and  structural  reforms  as  part  of 
assistance  programmes.  The  financing  of  the  programmes  with  ESM  resources  is  an 
incentive to further strengthen the governance of the Union, which is essential to achieve a 
permanent  reduction  in  the  European  component  of  the  differentials.  Monetary  policy  can 
guarantee  stability  only 
institutional 
architecture are consistent with it. Every country must do its part. 
The announcement of OMTs produced immediate benefits: medium and long-term yields in 
the  countries  under  pressure  decreased  and  the  fragmentation  of  markets  along  national 
borders  was  attenuated.  Albeit  with  fluctuations  linked  to  the  remaining,  pronounced 
uncertainty  about  the  determination  of  all  the  member  states  to  proceed  with  the 
strengthening  of  the  Union,  the  yield  spreads  between  euro-area  government  securities 
remained on a downward trend. That between ten-year BTPs and Bunds is about 250 basis 
points today. 
On  19  July  a  group  of  economists  of  various  nationalities  and  affiliations  published  a 
manifesto in support of outright monetary transactions (A Call for support for the European 
Central  Bank’s  OMT  Programme),  arguing  that  “the  success  of  the  OMT  announcement 
proves that the OMT is primarily a monetary policy instrument … It is the responsibility of a 
the  euro-area’s  economic 
fundamentals  and 
if 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
central bank and a defining feature of a lender of last resort to assume liquidity risk, including 
through the purchase of financial assets when necessary (a step that has also been used by 
the Bundesbank itself in the past).” 
There  are  different  standpoints;  it  is  understandable  that  some  should  question  the 
compatibility  of  outright  monetary  transactions  with  the  constitutions  of  some  euro-area 
countries, but the doubts about the possibility of making effective use of ESM resources must 
be  dispelled  quickly  in  order  to  preserve  the  progress  made,  safeguard  the  rights  and  not 
thwart the efforts of those who have helped to develop the instruments of financial support. 
The  OMT  announcement  prevented  a  financial  collapse  with  potentially  devastating 
consequences for the European economy: all the member countries benefited, not just those 
at the centre of the sovereign debt crisis. 
More  than  anything  else,  however,  a  shared  determination  to  advance  towards  a  full 
European Union is essential. The ECB and the national central banks have shown that they 
are willing to accompany this advance, by continuing to “produce” the necessary confidence. 
But confidence is short-lived in the absence of real progress. 
The  handling  at  the  beginning  of  this  year  of  the  Cyprus  banking  crisis,  which  was  only 
resolved  after  difficulties  of  coordination  between  European  and  national  authorities  had 
emerged, further underscored the importance of the banking union project for interrupting the 
spiral  between  sovereign  debt  and  the  conditions  of  banks  and  credit.  The  creation  of  a 
single supervisor, in which the ECB and the national authorities play a pivotal role, is the first 
step; it must be completed by a common blueprint for the resolution of banking crises and a 
common form of deposit insurance. 
Beyond  banking  union  there  must  be  the  prospect  of  fiscal  union  and,  ultimately,  political 
union. In an interview he gave to la Repubblica on 6 October 2008, Padoa-Schioppa noted 
that “There is more bitterness than satisfaction in witnessing a prophecy come true. At the 
beginning of the euro I spoke of the dangers of a ‘currency without a State’. It is clear that we 
needed more of a European State, not less of a European currency: without the euro, Europe 
would now be living a catastrophe. One reason for the lack of credibility of national politics is 
that it keeps on giving people the illusion that national powers are capable of tackling issues 
(energy,  climate,  finance,  security,  migration,  primary  goods)  which  are  not  national,  but 
continental and global.” 
These words, spoken before the outbreak of the sovereign debt crisis, are highly relevant. It 
is necessary to further increase the coordination of economic and structural policies and the 
incentives for reforms, to shift from an intergovernmental form of management based on the 
peer review of national policies to the formulation of truly common policies. The scope of the 
project  for  a  common  euro-area  budget  must  be  defined  as  well  as  the  timeframe  for  its 
implementation. 
Economic  and  political  reforms  are  not  interdependent:  confidence  in  the  outlook  for 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  would  benefit  greatly  from  significant  new  steps  towards 
political  integration,  including  on  a  sectoral  basis.  In  an  essay  written  forty-five  years  ago 
(“Tecnologia  ed  economia  nella  controversia  sul  divario  tra  America  ed  Europa”)  Nino 
Andreatta  had  already  stressed  the  importance  of  a  serious  assessment  of  the  “adverse 
consequences of a plurality of national government purchasing policies, which encourage an 
inefficient multiplication of research by individual countries and slow the growth in the size of 
markets.”  The  reflection  on  the  desirability  and  necessity  of  going  beyond  the  stage  of 
comparison  and  cooperation  and  of  our  governments  pooling  institutions  and  policies  that 
also  have  a  major  impact  on  our  public  finances  –  in  fields  such  as  defence,  scientific 
research, infrastructure (and not just material infrastructure) and other fundamental sectors 
of government activity – has been under way for some time, the time is ripe for a process of 
concrete reform. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
