Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi: Recent policy developments for 
strengthening the resilience of the financial sector 
Welcoming remarks by H E Sultan Bin Nasser Al-Suwaidi, Governor of the Central Bank of 
the United Arab Emirates, at the 8th High-Level Meeting for the Middle East & North Africa 
Region  on  “Recent  policy  developments  for  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
sector”,  organized  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS),  the  Financial 
Stability Institute (FSI) and the Arab Monetary Fund (AMF), Abu Dhabi, 27 November 2012. 
 Good morning,  
Excellencies, 
Ladies & gentlemen, 
Y.E.  Mar  Gudmundsson,  Governor  of  Central Bank of Iceland, 
The Honorable,  Josef  Tošovský,  Chairman of the Financial Stability Institute of the 
BIS, 
Y.E. Dr. Jassim Al Mannai, General Manager & Chairman of the Arab Monetary Fund, 
The Distinguished Speakers, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure 
travelled a long way to be here with us at the outset of this important high level meeting. 
The  subjects  that  would  be  discussed  today  are  familiar  and  current,  and  very  much 
relevant  to  stability  of 
in  all 
the  financial  systems.  The  financial  system's  stability 
countries,  and  this  region  is no exception, are very  important  for economic stability. 
I  will  start  by  giving  you  an  idea  about  the  UAE financial  system,  which  falls  under 
the  Central Bank supervision. 
the  UAE,  especially  those  who 
to  welcome  you 
to 
I.  
Overview of the UAE banking system 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
   
If  I  may  switch  now  to  talk  about  one  of  the  subjects  this  meeting  will  discuss 
namely:  SIBs  or  D-SIBs,  it  will  be  worthwhile  to  work  on  a  framework  to  identify 
D-SIBs  in  the  region  at  the  first  stage.  The  framework should take into account: (a) the 
size of the bank (based on  simple indicators such  as  total  assets  and  the  bank’s reliance 
on  specific  sectors,  like  the  real  estate  sector and the GREs and counter parties), (b) 
the interconnectedness between banks (as indicated  by deposits from and loans to), and 
(d) the degree of complexity, even though this does not play a significant role  in  the  UAE, 
as  banks  do  not  trade  or  invest  in sophisticated financial products. Also, cross-border 
activities by banks  in  the region can’t be used to determine  if  they  qualify as  D-SIBs,  as 
these  activities are insignificant. 
II. 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
III.   
1.  
 2 
 that 
Issues for consideration 
The  BCBS  assessment  framework  suggests  that  Local  regulators  are  entrusted 
with  the  task  to set  up  their  own methodology  for  the  process  of identifying 
which banks  to  be considered as D-SIBs.  Nonetheless,  some  general  guidelines 
on  the subject from BCBS would be helpful, and they will make the exercise more 
consistent region-wide. 
Central  Banks  in  our  region  could  develop  a  peer-group  approach  for  this 
exercise so they could learn from each other. 
It  seems 
is  restricted  to  banks.  Would  Non-bank 
Financial Institutions (NBSFIs)  be  considered?  Would  the  assessment  of systemic 
importance cover subsidiaries (and not branches) of banking groups. 
The  assessment  framework  also  suggest  there will be  a  mix  of  qualitative  and 
quantitative  judgments for  each  D-SIB.  With  the  general guidelines  from BCBS, 
it  would  be  the  responsibility  of  the  local  authority  to  assign  the appropriate 
weights  to  the qualitative vs. the quantitative judgments. 
While  waiting  for  the  final  version  of  BCBS  document,  Central  Banks  in  our 
region  could  start working  on  the  identification  exercise of  D-SIBs, taking  into 
account  local considerations,  learning from countries of  similar financial systems, 
and benefiting from peer-reviews. 
the  D-SIBs  proposal 
Higher loss absorbency (HLA) 
As  in the G-SIBs  framework,  D-SIBs  will be required  to  hold  additional  Common 
Equity  Tier  1 
requirements,  which  eventually  support 
Capital 
capital conservation of the  Basel III capital framework. It is  a positive development 
that  national  regulators  are  given  the authority to decide on the appropriate level 
of  additional  CET1,  consistent  with  each  bank’s  systemic  importance.  However 
their  HLA 
to  meet 
(CET1) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2. 
3. 
implemented  in 
there is some concern that  the  proposed HLA would just duplicate the already  in 
place  country-specific  prudential  measures 
the  region,  which 
would  mean  that  the  D-SIB’s  cost  of  doing business will go up. 
For  example,  in  the  UAE we impose the following capital ratios: 
Tier 1 core capital: a minimum of 8% (actual is: 14.5%) 
–   
Tier 1 and other tiers: a minimum of 12% (actual is: 20.5%) 
–   
However,  it  is  suggested  that 
comprehensive grace period to fully comply with the HLA requirements. 
As 
infancy  stage  in  many  countries  in  the 
region,  this  would  make it difficult  for  potential  D-SIBs  to  hold high-quality liquid 
debt  instruments  as  “pre-emptive”  liquidity  buffers  against  early  signs  of  stress. 
Hence,  there  is  a  need  to  find  an  appropriate  way  to  deal  with  this issue,  until 
debt markets in  the region witness significant improvements. 
local  regulators  should  allow  identified  D-SIBs  a 
local  debt  markets  are  at  an 
To conclude, it should be stressed that strengthening the banking  supervision  exercise  in 
our  countries  is  key  to tackling systemic risk in D-SIBs and other financial institutions. 
Excellencies 
Ladies & gentlemen 
With  this  I  come  to  the  end  of  my  speech,  but  before  I close,  I  would  like  to  thank 
the  FSI  of  BIS  and  the AMF, for holding this important high level meeting here in Abu 
Dhabi, UAE. 
I wish you all a successful meeting. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
