Sir K Dwight Venner: Caribbean Growth Forum – Dominica Chapter 
Remarks by Sir K Dwight Venner, Governor of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, at the 
Caribbean Growth Forum – Dominica Chapter, St Kitts, 15 March 2013. 
 This  launch  of  the  Dominica  Chapter  of  the  Caribbean  Growth  Forum  is  the  last  for  the 
countries of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union. Following this, it would be necessary to 
carry out an objective assessment of our efforts as a group before we move on to the next 
stage which would be the wider regional engagements. 
The reason for this is that our governments have now established by law and treaty a new 
entity, an OECS Economic Union, which requires a new conceptual approach to our growth 
and  development  strategies.  The  unit  of  economic  activity  in  this  new  entity  comprises 
8 countries within a single economic and financial space. Given the scope of the new treaty 
with its supporting organs and institutions, we have in effect created what I refer to as a State 
Nation with a dual system of government and governance. This state nation in the treaty has 
an Executive, the OECS Authority, which has both executive and limited legislative powers, 
an  OECS  Assembly  which  is  selected  from  national  assemblies  or  parliaments  and  a 
regional  judiciary  which  has  been  in  existence  since  1967.  The  grouping  has  also  had  a 
common currency from 1983. 
There  is  therefore,  by  law  and  treaty,  a  framework  for  addressing  the  growth  and 
development  challenges  at  the  regional  level.  This  framework  takes  into  account  the  very 
important matter of the characterization of our economies as small, open, and vulnerable and 
gives a viable way to deal with these major issues. 
This means that when a decision is to be made on such issues, our decision makers must 
now  think  in  “dual  mode”.  Can  this  problem  be  resolved  solely  within  the  confines  of 
Dominica or do we have to go beyond? This new possibility and focus must become a part of 
the mind  set  and  solution  kit  available  to  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  in  the OECS 
countries. 
As  I  have  emphasized  at  the  other  launches  which  I  attended  in  St  Vincent  and  the 
Grenadines,  Saint  Lucia  and  St  Kitts  and  Nevis,  there  are  two  critical  elements  of  the 
approach  being  used  for  the  Growth  Forum  which  have  been  of  great  value  in  and  of 
themselves: 
1.  
The  bringing  together  of  a  wide  cross  section  of  the  stakeholders  in  the  growth 
agenda to discuss ideas and exchange knowledge in a structured setting, and 
The methodology which is being used to conduct the discussions. 
The global environment in which we now function in the wake of the global crisis and 
Our current domestic environment following the impact of the crisis.  
2.  
As I reflect on the situation in which we now find ourselves, we must place ourselves in two 
planes: 
1.  
2.  
We must also acknowledge that this time is different. 
The  new  landscape  is  that  of  a  low  growth  /  high  unemployment  trajectory  with  high 
sovereign  debt  and  fragile  financial  systems.  This  is  a  global  phenomenon  with  our  major 
trading partners, the USA, UK and Europe, all experiencing this phase. 
Our own domestic environment has clearly shown that there are some factors over which we 
have some control and others over which we do not. Our countries can be characterized as 
small,  open  and  vulnerable  countries  –  features  which  when  defined  are  extremely 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
challenging. This calls for deep reflection on what would be  the  viable  responses to these 
circumstances. 
This is the time for a sober assessment of our situation, what I refer to as “objective realism”. 
We  must  then  summon  up  the  optimism  and  hope  to  successfully  address  these 
circumstances to deliver a better standard of living and quality of life to our people. 
Our  governments  have  crafted  the  instruments  required  to  deal  with  the  challenges  being 
faced by our countries, operating as very small independent states in a global village, but in 
the  current  circumstances  there  must  be  a  greatly  increased  urgency  and  focus  on 
implementation. The Economic Union has given us the political, constitutional and economic 
framework  and  the  theatre,  the  single  space,  for  achieving  our  goals.  The  Eight  Point 
Stabilization  and  Growth  Programme  provides  the  technical  approach  to  be  used  for 
resolving the problem. In addition the Work Programme Coordination initiative provides the 
critical  ingredients  of  coordination,  cooperation,  and  exchange  of  information  within  each 
country,  between  our  countries  and  with  the  regional  and  international  communities  to 
achieve our goals in a much more cost effective way than presently occurs. 
We  therefore  look  forward  to  the  next  stages  of  this  Growth  Forum  initiative  as  we  move 
towards achieving our development goals with realism and hope. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
