Vítor Constâncio: The European crisis and the role of the financial 
system 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the Bank of 
Greece conference on “The crisis in the euro area”, Athens, 23 May 2013. 
Slides to the presentation can be found on the ECB’s website. 
 Introduction 
Let  me  begin  by  thanking the  Bank  of Greece for  inviting  me  to this  important  conference 
attended by so many prestigious researchers. 
There are, of course, several narratives and interpretations about the way the crisis unfolded 
in  the  euro  area.  For  some,  it  is  mostly  a  story  of  unsound  fiscal  policies  and  excessive 
sovereign debt; for others, it is principally a story of competitiveness losses engineered by 
uncontrolled  unit  labour  costs;  and  for  others  still,  it  is  essentially  a  traditional  balance  of 
payments crisis in a “fully fixed” exchange rate regime. In more recent years, the narrative of 
seeing it as a banking crisis has gained attention, combining it with the sovereign debt crisis 
to create a story of “two debt overhangs”. 
Naturally,  there  is  a  grain  of  truth  in  all  these  narratives,  as  is  to  be  expected  given  the 
complexity and interplay of factors within a major international crisis. 
However, more than trying to discuss a cogent overall interpretation of the euro area crisis, I 
would like to explore two perspectives: 
• 
• 
first, what were the root causes and key initial drivers of the crisis? 
second, what role did the international financial crisis, originating in the US, play in 
triggering the European crisis? 
The first question is important to identify the possible shortcomings in the design of monetary 
union that need to be corrected to avoid future crises. It is my contention that the main driver 
of the crisis was located in the financial sector, particularly banks which intermediated large 
capital flows towards the periphery, creating imbalances that became unsustainable when a 
sudden stop occurred following the international crisis and the abrupt revision of price of risk 
that it entailed. 
The second question is useful to consider whether the construction of monetary union would 
have been sufficient to ensure a gradual correction of vulnerabilities and avoid a crisis, if a 
major international shock had not occurred. One can speculate that, left alone, the euro area 
may have been able to gradually overcome its own vulnerabilities through a process of inter-
regional  rebalancing.  But  we  can  never  be  certain  about  that.  Fortunately,  this  question  is 
less consequential than the first one. 
The root causes of the crisis 
The prevailing crisis narrative 
Beginning  with  the  first  perspective  on  the  causes,  the  oldest  narrative  of  the  crisis, 
progressively corrected by academics but still popular with some segments of public opinion, 
goes  more  or  less  like  this:  There  was  essentially  nothing  wrong  with  the  initial  design  of 
EMU,  and  the  crisis  resulted  mostly from  the fact  that  several  peripheral  countries  did  not 
respect that design – in particular the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact – which 
generated the sovereign debt crisis. This is the “it was mostly fiscal” narrative, which can be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
easily connected to two of the others: fiscal indiscipline led to economic overheating, wage 
and  price  increases  implied  loss  of  competitiveness,  and  this  then  led  to  the  balance  of 
payment crises. 
Although this is an internally coherent narrative, it is not correct, especially as a main driver 
of the crisis. 
First, there is no strong correlation between whether a Member State respected or not the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  before  the  crisis,  and  the  yields  being  demanded  by  financial 
markets today. For instance, Germany and France did not respect the Pact in 2003–4; Spain 
and Ireland respected it more or less fully until 2007. 
Second, there was no uniform increase in overall government debt during the first years of 
the common currency in the countries that are now under sovereign stress. 
[Slide 1: Evolution of public and private debt ratios] 
In fact, in a number of those it declined, and in some of them it declined substantially. For 
instance,  from  1999–2007,  public  debt  in  Spain  declined  from  62.4%  of  GDP  to  36.3%  of 
GDP. In Ireland, over the same period, public debt fell from 47.0 % of GDP to 25.0% of GDP. 
While at relatively high levels, public debt also went down in Italy (from 113.0% of GDP to 
103.3% of GDP) and increased only slightly in Greece. However, in the latter two cases, debt 
levels were still indeed far above the 60% stipulated in the Stability and Growth Pact. 
Bringing the banking sector back in 
I submit that, to have a more accurate narrative for the causes of the crisis, we have to look 
beyond  fiscal  policies  alone:  imbalances  originated  mostly  from  rising  private  sector 
expenditures,  which  were  in  turn  financed  by  the  banking  sectors  of  the  lending  and 
borrowing countries. 
As slide 1 shows, contrary to public debt levels, the overall level of private debt increased in 
the first seven years of the EMU by 27%. The increase was especially pronounced in Greece 
(217%), Ireland (101%), Spain (75.2%), and Portugal (49%), all of which are countries that 
have been under severe pressure during the recent crisis.1 The steep rise in public debt, on 
the  other  hand,  began  only  after  the  financial  crisis.  Over  the  course  of  four  years,  public 
debt levels increased by a magnitude of five in Ireland and by a magnitude of three in Spain. 
Seen from this perspective, the rapid increase in public debt levels followed from collapsing 
tax revenues and from social expenditures, which increased during the recession after the 
automatic  stabilisers  were  triggered.  Dangerous  feedback  effects  between  local  banking 
systems and sovereigns which emerged after the start of the financial crisis also served to 
weaken the fiscal accounts. 
Where did the financing come from for the explosion of private debt? A particular aspect of 
the process of financial integration in Europe after the introduction of the euro was a major 
increase  in  cross-border  bank  activity.  Exposures  of  banks  from  non-stressed  countries  to 
stressed  countries  more  than  quintupled  between  the  introduction  of  the  euro  and  the 
beginning of the financial crisis. 
[Slide 2: Total exposure of banks from non-stressed to stressed countries] 
While this explosion of financial inflows was unevenly distributed among periphery countries, 
it affected all of them, and containing its effects proved extremely challenging. 
[Slide 3: Total exposure of banks from non-stressed to stressed countries in % of their GDP] 
                                                
1  Constâncio,  V.,  (2012).  Towards  a  European  Banking  Union.  Speech  at  Duisenberg  School  of  Finance, 
Amsterdam. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
I have first-hand experience of the difficulties that periphery countries faced. The European 
rules  on  free  movement  of  capital,  the  objective  to  create  a  level-playing  field  for  different 
banking  sectors,  and  the  belief  in  the  efficiency  of  supposed  self-equilibrating  financial 
markets, all conspired to make it very difficult to implement any sort of containment policy. 
Moreover, no one ever predicted that a sudden stop, characteristic of emerging economies, 
could occur in the euro area. 
As  a  result,  the  inflow  of  relatively  cheap  financing  turned  into  a  huge  credit  boom  in  the 
countries  now  under  stress.  As  we  know,  credit  was  not  perfectly  optimised  by  rational 
private agents. On the demand side, in an environment of low interest rates, consumers and 
firms,  anticipating  future  growth,  frontloaded  consumption  and  investment  like  good 
intertemporal optimizers. On the supply side, European banks and financial markets did not 
perform according to theory in managing credit risk. It was this that then led to overheating, 
wage and price pressures, losses of competitiveness and high current account deficits. 
[Slide 4: Growth of bank credit to the private sector in stressed countries] 
The responsibility of fiscal policies 
What role could fiscal policies have played in offsetting these developments? In some cases, 
inappropriate fiscal policies certainly made a contribution to the imbalances. But as I showed 
elsewhere,2 it would be asking too much of fiscal policy to think that it could have significantly 
offset this explosion of private expenditure. This is because budget multipliers of very open 
economies in periods of normal economic activity are generally quite small. With low fiscal 
multipliers, too large policy-induced changes in expenditure or revenues would be needed to 
dampen the cycle. The required budget surplus to offset the private imbalances in the euro 
area would have been totally unrealistic and unfeasible. 
For instance, in Portugal the credit boom that began 1995, as entry into the euro seemed 
more  and  more  assured,  implied  that  the  private  sector  balance  fell  from  +5%  of  GDP  in 
1995 to –5.2% in the year 2000. That is a 10 p.p. variation in 5 years. As the public deficit 
improved  on  by  1.7  p.p.  –  from  –4.5%  to  –2.8%  of  GDP  –  the  implied  external  deficit 
increased  from  –0.5%  to  –8%  of  GDP.  To  have  avoided  this  scenario,  the  public  balance 
would  have  had  to  be  strongly  in  surplus  –  and  no  one  at  the  time  recommended  this  or 
thought  that  it  was  possible.  Certainly,  if  fiscal  policy  had  been  more  counter-cyclical,  the 
private  sector  induced  macro  imbalances  would  have  been  mitigated.  But  they  would  not 
have been eliminated altogether. 
The role of the international crisis 
Let me now turn to the second perspective I discussed above: the role of the international 
crisis in triggering the euro area crisis. 
Contagion from the US to European banks… 
Historical experience shows that credit booms tend to end in tears, but the sudden stop that 
occurred in the European periphery cannot be explained without introducing the trigger effect 
of  the  international  financial  crisis.  Euro  area  countries  were  immediately  affected  by  the 
global financial crisis through at least two channels. 
• 
First, a number of euro area banks had substantial balance sheet exposures to the 
US housing market. 
                                                
2  Constâncio,  V.  (2005)  “European  monetary  integration  and  the  Portuguese case”  in  the Third  ECB  Central 
Banking  Conference,  published  by  Carsten  Detken,  Vítor  Gaspar,  Gilles  Noblet  (editors)  “The  new  EU 
in 
Member 
http://www.ecb.int/pub/pdf/other/neweumemberstatesen2005en.pdf 
convergence 
available 
stability”, 
States: 
2005, 
ECB 
and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
 Second,  when  the  general  global  re-pricing  of  risk  triggered  by  the  US  sub-prime 
crisis materialised, it had serious adverse consequences for local financial stability 
in those countries. 
Facing losses on several of their assets, banks were forced to rebalance their portfolios in 
order  to  meet  regulatory  capital  standards.  They  rapidly  increased  their  holdings  of  “safe” 
government  debt,  as  a  rule  denominated  in  domestic  currency.  This  development  was 
especially obvious after the collapse of Lehman Brothers which triggered an unprecedented 
flight-to-safety.  At  the  same  time,  in  many  euro  area  jurisdictions  public  finances  were 
strained to the limit by the recession-induced collapse in tax revenues and by the necessity 
to recapitalise failing banks. Overall, this meant that banks were becoming more exposed to 
their sovereigns at precisely the moment when sovereign creditworthiness was declining – 
creating the conditions for the infamous “bank-sovereign loop”. 
…and from banks to real economy 
The  full  effects  of  these  developments  emerged  in  2010  when  sovereign  debt  tensions 
appeared in countries with large recent increases in public debt and budget deficits, and/or 
poor long-term growth prospects due to neglected structural reforms. In this way, the general 
banking  crisis  developed  into  fiscal  crises  in  specific  European  countries,  causing  severe 
recessions  in  those  under  stress  and  at  some  points  endangering  the  stability  of  the  euro 
area. The way in which this phase of the crisis developed took some observers by surprise, 
in  particular  the  contagion  effects,  self-fulfilling  cycles  and  possibility  of  multiple  equilibria. 
Contagion has been demonstrated to exist in the euro area from sovereigns to sovereigns 
and from sovereigns to banks, in both directions. Two recent ECB working papers3 show that 
contagion also exists among banks themselves and from them to the real economy. In this 
case, the study demonstrates that the post-2009 recovery in bank lending in the syndicated 
loans market has been hampered by the fact that a number of banks active in this market 
have large balance sheet exposures to sovereign debt issued in the past by countries now 
under stress. Since the beginning of the sovereign debt crisis, these “affected” banks’ supply 
of syndicated credit has been almost 20% lower overall than it would have been if tensions in 
government bond markets had not been present. 
All these points illustrate well the decisive role played by the banking sector in the inception 
and development of the euro area crisis. This is crucial not just for our understanding of how 
the euro area sovereign debt crisis came to be, but also for how we ensure that we avoid its 
repetition.  The  financial  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  built  up  by  the  activities  of 
European  banks  until  2007,  together  with  the  international  financial  crisis,  were  the  prime 
movers of crisis in Europe. Without this, the sovereign debt crisis would not have been nearly 
so severe. 
Addressing financial imbalances 
All  this  raises  the question,  however,  as  to  why financial  imbalances  were  not given  more 
attention prior to the crisis. 
The limitations of the intellectual climate 
Part  of  the  reason  is  that  the  approach  taken  towards  financial  integration  and  banking 
activity reflected two features of the dominant economic thinking at the time. 
                                                
3  See  A.  Alter  and  A.  Beyer,  “The  dynamics  of  spillover  effects  during  the  European  sovereign  crisis”,  CFS 
Working  Papers,  No.  2012/13,  2012;  Popov,  A.,  and  N.  van  Horen,  2013.  The  impact  of  sovereign  debt 
exposure on bank lending: Evidence from the European debt crisis. ECB mimeo. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
First,  that  the  private  sector  was  essentially  stable  and  self-correcting,  composed  of  fully 
rational  agents  always  optimizing  inter-temporally  with  knowledge  of  the  future  probability 
distributions to infinity of economic returns and variables. In such a world, no defaults were 
admitted  or  dangerous  bubbles  possible.  Only  the  public  sector  could  create  instability  – 
hence, the Stability and Growth Pact was supposed to be sufficient to ensure stability. 
Second, that finance did not matter for real economy fluctuations. After the Real Business 
Cycle  school,  the  rational  expectations  hypothesis  and  the  intertemporal  optimization 
paradigm, money and finance were considered no longer relevant. While money crept back 
in  the  new  consensual  macro  model  through  the  introduction  of  wage  and  price  rigidities, 
allowing  for  short-term  real  economy  effects  of  monetary  policy,  finance  continued  to  be 
invisible  with  the  Efficient  Market  Hypothesis  ensuring  a  reliable  plumbing  of  the  real 
economy. Banks and capital markets were not considered endogenous sources of instability 
that could have real economy effects. They were absent from macroeconomic models. 
The limitations of financial governance 
This  thinking  fed  into  the  attitudes  of  national  authorities  for  whom  capital  flows  were 
considered  to  result  from  optimizing  self-equilibrating  markets,  as  I  illustrated  above.  But 
even if national supervisors had taken different view, the framework for financial governance 
in  Europe  simply  did  not  equip  them  to  address  financial  imbalances  stemming  from 
cross-border banking activity. Aside from a single currency with a single central bank and a 
fiscal  brake  (the  SGP),  monetary  union  initial  institutional  architecture  was  minimalist: 
governance  of  economic  and  financial  policies  remained  firmly  a  national  competence  as 
countries were supposed to ensure the “shock-absorber” function on their own. There was no 
framework  to  deal  with  the  build-up  of  systemic  risks.  National  supervisors  lacked  the 
instruments to contain private capital flows, meaning only macro-prudential measures made 
possible  by  a  consensus  at  the  European  level  could  have  dealt  with  systemic  events.  In 
other words, there was a mismatch between the depth of integration in Europe and the scope 
of governance, which – as the Dirk Schoenmaker’s “financial trilemma” predicts4 – laid the 
ground for financial instability. 
The case for Banking Union 
This background makes clear the case for reform, both in economic theory and models and 
the  EMU  institutional  architecture.  From  an  institutional  perspective,  the  most  important 
consequence has been the launching of the Banking Union project. Our experience of the 
role of banks in the crisis fully justifies the intention to introduce a true European perspective 
in supervision and resolution of banks – thereby mitigating national bias, and hopefully better 
separating banks from their sovereigns. 
The first component of Banking Union, the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), is about to 
be  approved  and  the  ECB  is  actively  preparing  to  implement  it.  The  SSM,  besides  all  the 
necessary  microprudential 
competences,  will  also  have  adequate 
macroprudential policy instruments. The participant countries in the SSM can feel reassured 
that systemic risk at the European level will be better addressed in the future. 
The  SSM  is  a  key  component  of  the  Banking  Union,  but  it  is  only  one  component.  In 
particular,  a  European  framework  for  the  resolution  of  banks  –  with  a  Single  Resolution 
Mechanism centred on a single Resolution Authority and Fund – needs to follow. For SSM 
supervision to be credible, there has to be assurance that banks of any size and complexity 
can  be  safely  wound  down.  Hence,  a  Resolution  Authority  that  is  only  a  coordinating 
mechanism  for  existing  national  authorities  is  not  sufficient.  If  implemented  properly,  this 
vision for Banking Union consisting of genuine supervision and resolution at the European 
supervision 
                                                
4  Schoenmaker, D (2011) “The financial trilemma” in Economic Letters, 111, p. 57–9 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
level will be the most far-reaching change introduced since the inception of the euro. The fact 
that  Member  States  are  working towards  it  reveals  their  willingness  to  continue  to  deepen 
European integration and to put in place a framework that will allow the euro area to function 
to its potential. 
Other reforms have meanwhile been implemented to complete the initial minimalist design of 
monetary  union.  The  acknowledgement  that  the  private  sector  played  a  key  role  in 
generating  imbalances  provided  the  rationale  for  the  creation  of  a  formal  Macroeconomic 
Imbalances  Procedure.  This  procedure  monitors  and  promotes  timely  policy  measures  to 
avoid the building up of macroeconomic instability in  Member States. The fiscal framework 
has  also  been  strengthened  by  several  new  pieces  of  legislation  including  the  reinforced 
Stability and Growth Pact and the so-called Fiscal Compact. 
In  the  monetary  policy  domain, the  adequate  liquidity  provided  by  the  ECB  to  the  banking 
sector and the creation of Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) have crucially reduced the 
tail  risks  threatening  the  euro  area,  and  allowed  time  for  reforms  to  be  effectively 
implemented. 
Addressing fiscal and macroeconomic imbalances 
Even  though the  prime driver  of the  crisis  was  primarily  located  in  the banking  sector, the 
fiscal  and  macroeconomic  imbalances  that  emerged  as  a  result  are  real  and  have  to  be 
addressed.  While  the  new  governance  framework  I  just  described  can  help,  a  vital 
contribution  has  to  occur  at  the  level  of  individual  member  states.  A  determined  effort  to 
correct  the  economic  and  financial  imbalances  is  necessary  accompanied  by  structural 
reforms  that  will  enhance  growth  prospects.  Fortunately,  such  an  effort  has  already  been 
made by several countries and the adjustment achieved is in many ways quite significant. 
[Slide 5: Adjustment of public finance in stressed countries] 
Fiscal imbalances 
Since  the  outbreak  of  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  most  countries,  notably  those  in  the 
distressed  countries,  have  undertaken  substantial  fiscal  adjustment  efforts.  Based  on  the 
European  Commission’s  Spring  2013  Economic  Forecast,  Greece  improved  its  structural 
primary balance by more than 10.6 percentage points between 2009 and 2012. Ireland (6.6), 
Portugal (5.7) and Italy (3.1) have also undertaken substantial adjustment efforts, which are 
well above the euro area average of 2.2 percentage points. Spain is close to the average. 
However, further efforts are needed in most countries to bring public debt ratios to a more 
sustainable level, also in view of the long-term challenges, including ageing. 
[Slide 6: Reforms concerning age related expenditures until 2060] 
High and rising age-related long-term budgetary costs (which include pensions, health and 
long-term care costs, changes in unemployment benefits and education expenditures) put a 
burden  on  public  finances  in  the  long-term.  Under  the  no-policy-change  assumption,  i.e. 
assuming  that  no  further  pension  reforms  will  be  undertaken,  the  Commission’s  Ageing 
Report5  projects  total  age-related  public  expenditures  to  increase  on  average  by  3.6%  of 
GDP in the euro area between 2010 and 2060, of which 1.4% of GDP is related to pension 
expenditures.  However,  it  is  precisely  in  the  domain  of  reforms  to  contain  the  long-term 
burden  of  ageing  populations  on  public  expenditures  that  the  countries  under  stress  have 
already  made  adjustments.  Italy  and  Portugal,  for  instance,  have  negligible  projected 
increases  in  age-related  expenditure.  Other countries  under  stress  like Greece,  Spain  and 
Ireland are already in a group of countries classified as being of medium risk while in 7 euro 
                                                
5  EU Commission “The 2012 Ageing Report”, European Economy 2 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
area  countries,  namely  Finland,  Slovakia,  Malta,  Cyprus,  Belgium,  Slovenia  and 
Luxembourg, expenditure is projected to increase by more than 6%. 
Macroeconomic imbalances 
[Slide 7: Competitiveness of stressed countries] 
Turning  to  the  adjustment  in  competitiveness,  as  measured  by  the  real  exchange  rate  in 
relative unit labour costs terms, progress has been significant with improvements since 2008 
that  have  more  than  offset  the  losses  accumulated  since  1999.  Countries  have  improved 
their  competitiveness  position  both  compared  to  the  rest  of  the  world  and  within  the  euro 
area.  According  to  the  harmonised  competitiveness  indicators  based  on  unit  labour  costs, 
Ireland (–19% since 1999) has seen the strongest adjustment, while Italy (–0.2%) has shown 
the most limited adjustment among the distressed countries. Greece (–9%), Spain (–9.5%) 
and Portugal (–6.6%) register significant improvements. 
[Slide 8: Current Account developments since 1999] 
As  a  consequence,  the  total  external  borrowing  requirements  of  stressed  countries  has 
undergone  a remarkable  evolution  from  significant  deficits  (except for  Italy)  in  2008–09,  to 
close to balance or even in surplus in the case of Ireland by the end of 2012. 
[Slide 9: External adjustment and total borrowing requirements] 
The  recent  European  Commission’s  Spring  Forecast  foresees  that  for  this  year,  with  the 
exception of Greece with a deficit of just –1.1% of GDP, all other countries under stress will 
be in current account surplus. It is important to underline that this achievement is not only the 
consequence  of  recession  and  lower  imports,  but  is  also  the  result  of  a  quite  dynamic 
performance  in  exports  of  goods  and  services,  close  to  or  above  the  euro  area  average, 
again  with  Greece  being  the  exception.  However,  the  significant  adjustment  made  by  the 
stressed  countries  has  been  achieved  at  high  cost  in  terms  of  growth  and  particularly  in 
some cases in terms of unemployment. 
[Slide 10: youth unemployment in stressed countries] 
The way ahead 
Notwithstanding this, now is not the time to change course in a way that could unravel what 
has been achieved. The extension of the compliance period that has been recently given by 
the  Commission  to  various  countries  means  that  the  pace  of  the  adjustment  can  become 
more gradual, in full respect of the structural approach under which effective action under the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact  preventive  arm  is  measured.  The  final  goal  of  continuing  to 
reassure  markets  about  future  debt  sustainability  cannot  be  abandoned.  It  is  encouraging 
that the market reaction to recent developments, including our own OMT, has substantially 
reduced yields and spreads, particularly for Greece that also benefited from a rating upgrade. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  also  clear  that  the  rebalancing  process  would  benefit  from  a  more 
favorable  European  economic  environment  with  higher  growth.  Here,  four  elements  could 
help. First, a more coordinated approach to macroeconomic policy at the euro area level to 
achieve  higher  demand  growth.  Second,  structural  reforms  also  in  surplus  countries  to 
increase growth and facilitate a more encompassing rebalancing process. Third, to support 
national structural reforms in stressed countries, the introduction of contractual programmes 
with means to support their implementation, which is expected to be part of a forthcoming 
Commission proposal. Fourth, I hope that there will be a future decision to implement at the 
euro area level what is referred in the President Van Rompuy’s Report “Towards a genuine 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union”6  as  “….the  establishment  of  a  fiscal  capacity  to  facilitate 
adjustment to economic shocks. This could take the form of an insurance-type mechanism 
between  euro  area  countries  to  buffer  large  country-specific  economic  shocks.  Such  a 
function would ensure a form of fiscal solidarity exercised over economic cycles, improving 
the  resilience  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  reducing  the  financial  and  output  costs 
associated with macroeconomic adjustments”. 
Implications for economic research 
Let me now briefly recall the research progress that we have made in the ECB in terms of 
understanding the role of the financial sector in the macroeconomy. As I noted above, one 
reason why the importance and risks of financial developments were not identified earlier is 
that, before the crisis, financial sectors were basically absent or immaterial in the standard 
macroeconomic models that central banks tended to use. 
It is important that the economics profession manages to change this as soon as possible. In 
this context, more than two years ago the ECB and the other central banks of the European 
Union have started a major research initiative in this regard, the Macroprudential Research 
Network  (MaRs).7  A  sub-team  of  MaRs  has  made  key  steps  in  integrating  realistic 
characterizations of widespread financial instability into models of the aggregate economy, in 
analysing  the  transmission  channels  between  financial  instability  and  macroeconomic 
variables, in explaining the recent crisis, and in assessing policies addressing systemic risk.8 
Some of these new models do a fine job in explaining how financial imbalances contributed 
to macro imbalances in periphery countries. For example, these models predict that if there 
are large international capital flows into a low-growth country, then excessive investment is 
allocated  to  low-productivity  projects  (such  as  housing).  With  such  a  supply-driven  credit 
boom,  interest  rates  go  down,  incentives  in  the  banking  sector  deteriorate,  and  financial 
fragility arises endogenously. Such countries end up running large current account deficits 
and  their  banking  sectors  become  overleveraged,  which  sooner  or  later  precipitates  a 
financial crisis. 
Despite what we have learned thanks to our internal research endeavours, we also need the 
wider economic profession, in particular academia, to engage more forcefully in this research 
agenda.  We  highly  value  our  interaction  with  academia  and  the  benefits  from  combining 
policy  experience  with  analytical  rigour.  Despite a few  valuable  efforts,9  we  feel  that  much 
more needs to be done, so that the young PhD’s we hire from universities are well equipped 
with analytical tools that reflect both standard macroeconomic relationships and how they are 
altered  by  the  activities  of  financial  intermediaries  –  and,  of  course,  their  potential  for 
instability. 
                                                
6  See “Towards a genuine Economic and Monetary Union” a Report by the President of the European Council 
in close collaboration with the Presidents of the European Commission, the Eurogroup and the ECB, available 
in http://www.european-council.europa.eu/the-president/eurozone-governance?lang=en 
7  For details, see European Central Bank (2012), Report on the first two years of the macro-prudential research 
network, Frankfurt, October. 
8  Aoki, K., and K. Nikolov, 2012, Bubbles, banks, and financial stability, ECB Working Paper 1495; Boissay, F., 
Collard,  F.,  and  F.  Smets,  2013,  Booms  and  systemic  banking  crises,  ECB  mimeo;  Clerc,  L.,  Derviz,  A., 
Mendicino,  C.,  Moyen,  S.,  Nikolov,  K.,  Stracca,  L.,  Suarez,  J.,  and  A.  Vardoulakis,  2013,  Macroeconomic 
model with three layers of default, ECB mimeo; Goodhart, C., Kashyap, A., Tsomocos, D., and A. Vardoulakis, 
2012, Financial regulation in general equilibrium, NBER Working Paper 17909. 
9  See,  e.g.,  Brunnermeier,  M.,  and  Y.  Sannikov,  2010,  A  macroeconomic  model  with  a  financial  sector, 
Princeton  University  working  paper;  and  He,  Z.,  and  A.  Krishnamurthy,  2010,  A  model  of  capital  crises, 
Northwestern University working paper. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Conclusions 
Let me now conclude. 
In this speech I have recalled that ill developments and practices in major financial centres at 
the start of the millennium and the ensuing financial crisis were a deep underlying source of 
the crisis that we face in Europe still today. This is not to deny that other factors also played 
a role. Such factors include: the failure of regulators to arrest the increase in leverage in the 
financial  system;  unclear  bank  resolution  regimes  which  promoted  moral  hazard  in  the 
banking  sector;  and  the  failure  in  a  number  of  euro  area  jurisdictions  to  apply  appropriate 
anti-cyclical  fiscal  policies  and  to  undertake  structural  reforms  aimed  at  improving 
competitiveness. Nevertheless, even considering this background, I hope I have been clear 
about  what  I  consider  the  prime  drivers  of  the  European  crisis,  namely  the  role  of  the 
financial sector and of the international financial crisis. Without the strain on public finances 
generated  by  the  recession  that  ensued  and  by  balance  sheet  losses  of  European  banks, 
euro  area  governments  would  not  have  been  so  vulnerable  to  stress  in  sovereign  bond 
markets. In other words, without the banks’ behaviour and the financial crisis, the sovereign 
debt crisis at least would not have been so severe. 
Given the root causes I have outlined, the need for a deep financial and regulatory reform 
was  naturally  a  key  lesson from the  crisis. In  what  concerns  Europe,  the  banking  union  is 
therefore  a  central  pillar  of  the  strategy  to  make  our  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  more 
effective and robust. 
To stabilise EMU over the long-term, however, requires a more fundamental review of the 
institutional  architecture.  The  minimalist  approach  pursued  at  Maastricht  was  found  to  be 
inadequate  in  the  context  of  highly  integrated  financial  markets.  In  recognition  of  this,  the 
Presidents of the European Council, Commission, Eurogroup and ECB have been asked lay 
out a roadmap to complete EMU over the next decade. 
Having been thoroughly stress-tested over the last three years, everyone now have a much 
clearer  idea  of  what  rules  and  institutions  are  essential  for  monetary  union  to  function 
effectively. In the view of the Four Presidents, a stable EMU needs to be built on four pillars: 
financial union, fiscal union, economic union and political union. 
The most important concept underlying this vision is that, to maximise its benefits, the single 
currency needs strong common institutions. Strong institutions to supervise and stabilise the 
single  financial  market.  Strong  institutions  to  guide  fiscal  policies.  Strong  institutions  to 
coordinate economic policy, guarantee competitiveness and encourage sustainable growth. 
And strong institutions to engage citizens more closely in the European project. 
This vision will take time to implement but it should strengthen our resolve to adopt all the 
short term measures indispensable to finally overcome the euro area crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 