Jwala Rambarran: Imperatives for competitiveness and sustainable 
development 
Address by Mr Jwala Rambarran, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the meeting of the American Chamber of Commerce of Trinidad & Tobago, Port of Spain, 
8 July 2013. 
 At the outset, I thank the American Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to share my views 
on Trinidad and Tobago’s economic outlook, and to listen to the views of business leaders on 
imperatives for competitiveness and sustainable development. 
Such insights feed importantly into the Central Bank’s understanding of the workings of the 
Trinidad and Tobago economy, and thus into the policy deliberations of the Bank. I strongly 
believe that, especially in these unusual times, this kind of dialogue with the private sector is 
critical. 
I probably do not need to tell anyone in this room that we are indeed living in unusual times. 
Policymakers around the world have been grappling for the past six years with an economic 
crisis, which has repeatedly mutated, and it is still not clear what direction the crisis is going 
to take next. 
From its origins as a sub-prime crisis in the United States to its morphing into a sovereign 
debt crisis in Europe, to its current manifestation of fiscal/political gridlocks across both sides 
of  the  Atlantic,  various measures  taken  to  address  each mutation  of  the  crisis  have  led  to 
unintended consequences. 
Just  about three  months  ago, the IMF  Managing  Director  was  talking  about  a three-speed 
global economy in which emerging markets and developing countries were generally doing 
well, while some advanced economies like the United States were on the mend. Others such 
as Japan and those in the Euro area still had some distance to travel.  
During the last few weeks, sentiment has changed dramatically in global financial markets, 
again with unintended consequences. Markets overreacted to an earlier-than-expected start 
to the reduction of monetary stimulus in the United States, even though the Federal Reserve 
clearly stated that should this commence, it would be done very slowly and would be highly 
conditional. 
The  surprising  intensity  of  market  reaction  to  the  potential  end  of  quantitative  easing 
contributed  to  a  sudden  reversal  of  capital  flows  in  many  emerging  market  economies, 
sending their currencies tumbling and their stock markets into decline. 
Such  volatility  may  well  signal  the  start  of  a  new  mutation  of  the  ongoing  global  financial 
crisis.  It  may  well  be  a  forerunner  to  the  new  risks  that  could  materialize  when 
unconventional U.S. monetary policy begins to unwind in earnest. 
At the same time, it is important to note that many “old” tail risks (low probability, high-impact 
events) in the global economy – a breakup of the Euro zone, the United States going over 
the fiscal cliff, a hard landing in China – still remain unresolved. 
The domestic economy 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the Trinidad and Tobago economy has weathered the turbulence of 
the global financial crisis fairly well, but we are yet to experience a sustained recovery from 
the downturn that started in late 2008. 
Let me give a brief summary of our current economic position. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Economic  growth  was  considerably  weaker-than-anticipated  in  2012,  as  maintenance  and 
safety  upgrades  at  energy  companies  extended  further  into  the  year  than  originally 
envisaged,  leading  to  a  larger-than-expected  decline  in  natural  gas  production.  The  sharp 
shortfall  in  natural  gas  production  adversely  affected  both  refining  activity  and  output  of 
petrochemicals.  Crude  oil  production  continued  its  secular  decline  on  account  of  aging  oil 
fields and lower condensate output. 
On the other hand, the non-energy sector continued its slow but steady pace of revival, but 
could not fully offset the contraction in energy output. Accordingly, estimates from the Central 
Bank’s  Quarterly  Real  GDP  Index  indicated  that  the  domestic  economy  grew  by  a  mere 
0.2 per cent in 2012. 
So  far  into  2013,  there  are  encouraging  signs  of  a  gradual  recovery.  Our  preliminary 
estimates  indicate  that  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy  grew  by  1.7  per  cent  (year-on-
year)  in  the  first  three  months  of  2013.  This  was  the  third  consecutive  quarter  of  overall 
economic growth and suggests that some degree of consolidation is taking place, albeit at a 
gradual pace. 
As  in  2012,  the  non-energy  sector  continued  to  provide  support  to  the  overall  economy, 
strengthening  further  by  2½  per  cent  in  the  first  quarter  of  2013.  This  marked  the  eighth 
consecutive quarter of expansion in non-energy activity. 
Furthermore,  robust  growth  in  local  sales  of  cement,  production  of  mined  aggregates  and 
new motor vehicle sales in the first five months of 2013 suggested that the non-energy sector 
had fully recovered from the negative spillovers associated with last year’s protracted strike 
in  the  cement  industry.  It  is  also  indicative  of  more  broad-based growth  in  the  non-energy 
sector. 
On the other hand, like last year, continuing maintenance and security upgrades by energy 
companies are holding back the energy sector from delivering an improved performance this 
year. Although there was a marginal increase of ½ per cent in energy sector activity in the 
first quarter of 2013, following flat output in the previous quarter, growth was still lacklustre. 
According  to  the  latest  labor  market  data  from  the  Central  Statistical  Office,  the 
unemployment rate fell to 4.9 per cent in the second quarter of 2012 from 5.8 per cent in the 
second quarter of 2011. More recent data on retrenchment notices suggest that employment 
conditions may have subsequently deteriorated. Retrenchment notices filed with the Ministry 
of Labor, Small and Micro-Enterprises increased almost 16 per cent in the first five months of 
2013 when compared with the corresponding period in 2012. 
The central government continues to conduct expansionary fiscal policy aimed at stimulating 
domestic  economic  activity.  Latest  data  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Economy 
indicate that the Central Government recorded a deficit of $1.4 billion during the first eight 
months of Fiscal Year (FY) 2012/2013, compared with a surplus of $1.3 billion for the same 
period one year earlier. 
Capital  expenditure,  which  is  the  main  instrument  of  the  government’s  investment 
programme  to  spur  economic  growth,  reached  $3.4  billion  and  was  slightly  above  levels 
recorded in October 2011 to May 2012. Unless government significantly picks up the pace of 
capital  spending,  its  overall  budgetary  stance  could  prove  only  mildly  expansionary  at  the 
end of the fiscal year, which is just three months away. 
Provisional data from the Ministry of Finance and the Economy show that gross public sector 
debt  remains  within  manageable  levels.  At  the  end  of  March  2013,  public  debt  (excluding 
securities issued for treasury bills and open market operations) increased to 45 per cent of 
GDP, but still well within the 50 per cent limit considered a prudent debt burden. 
The  increase  in  public  debt  resulted  mainly  from  the  issuance  of  bonds  to  compensate 
former policyholders of CLICO. I wish to point out that as policyholders convert their bonds to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
equity holdings in the CLICO Investment Fund, the government can retire this part of public 
debt, lowering the overall public debt stock. 
After reaching double digits around the middle of 2012, headline inflation moderated in the 
latter part of the year, and eased further to around 5½ per cent in May 2013. The slowdown 
in  inflation  was  largely  associated  with  a  steady  fall  in  food  price  inflation,  especially  as 
softening  global  grain  and  cereal  prices  eased  the  inflationary  impetus  from  abroad.  The 
removal of Value Added Tax (VAT) on selected non-luxury food items in mid-November 2012 
had  a  one-off  impact  on  reducing  food  price  inflation.  Core  inflation,  which  excludes  food 
prices, remains low and stable, indicative of relatively subdued demand pressures. 
Buoyant liquidity conditions, poor credit appetite and the cut in the repo rate have pushed 
interest rates to historical lows. However, we are yet to see a broader pick up in business 
lending. Credit granted by the consolidated financial system to the private sector grew slowly 
throughout 2012 and at a fairly gradual clip of 2–3 per cent in the first four months of 2013. 
Of concern is that business credit, which showed hopeful signs of recovery in the first half of 
2012, has subsequently lost momentum. 
Meanwhile,  we  have  seen  strengthened  consumer  lending,  with  increases  in  borrowing 
recorded for motor vehicles, home renovation and educational purposes. 
Even  though  real  estate  mortgage  lending  remains  the  only  credit  category  demonstrating 
vibrant  double  digit  growth  there  is  no  compelling  evidence  of  overheating  in  the  property 
market.  According  to  data  provided  by  private  valuators,  the  estimated  median  price  of  a 
typical 3-bedoom today is about 10 per cent lower than the peak in median house prices in 
early  2012.  More  importantly,  commercial  banks  have  maintained  their  mortgage  lending 
standards, with still conservative loan-to-value and loan service-to-income ratios. 
Given the gradual pace of economic recovery and the stability of core inflation, the Central 
Bank  has  maintained  an  accommodative  monetary  stance.  To  provide  a  needed  boost  to 
economic  activity,  the  Bank  cut  its  key  policy  rate,  the  repo  rate,  by  25  basis  points  to  a 
record  low  of  2¾  per  cent  in  September  2012,  following  75  basis  points  of  previous  cuts 
since December 2010. 
Lethargic credit demand and high net fiscal injections have led to a considerable build up of 
excess  liquidity  in  the  financial  system.  Commercial  banks’  excess  reserves  held  at  the 
Central Bank rose to a daily average of around $5½ billion in the first half of 2013, from a 
daily average of nearly $4 billion in the first half of 2012. 
The Bank continues to absorb some of this excess liquidity through open market operations 
and through requesting commercial banks to roll over maturing holdings of interest-bearing 
special  deposits  held  at  the  Bank.  Sales  of  foreign  exchange  by  the  Bank  also  indirectly 
removed some excess liquidity from the banking system. 
We  also  facilitated  the  issue  of  a  $1  billion,  seven-year  Treasury  Bond  in  May  2013  to 
support our liquidity absorption efforts. These Treasury Bonds are purely for the purposes of 
monetary policy, with the proceeds of the bonds sterilized in a blocked account at the Central 
Bank on behalf of government. 
Notwithstanding the gradual pace of recovery, demand for imports of goods and services is 
quite  robust,  prompting the  Central  Bank  to  intervene  consistently  in  the foreign  exchange 
market. Nonetheless, the country’s gross official reserves remain strong at US$9.4 billion at 
the end of June 2013, or more than 10 months of import cover. 
Economic outlook 
Ladies and Gentlemen, the recent up-turn in domestic economic activity, particularly in the 
non-energy sector, indicates that economic sentiment is gradually improving and becoming 
more widespread. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Perhaps  the  most fundamental  downside  risk  to  the  country’s  improving  economic  outlook 
relates to the actions of the two largest natural gas producers (BPTT and BGTT), who are 
expected  to  continue  major  maintenance  operations  with  significant  shutdowns  scheduled 
around September 2013. This is a high probability, high impact event. 
Failure on the part of both the Ministry of Energy and Energy Affairs and these two energy 
companies  to  reach  agreement  on  minimizing  the  very  sharp  supply  disruptions  in  energy 
output would throw off track the economy’s current growth mode, resulting in close to zero 
growth or even contraction for the year as a whole. 
For its part, the Central Bank has been advancing a financial program of regulatory reform 
designed to ensure that a crisis on the scale of CLICO never happens again. I am adamant 
that  marauders  at  the  gate  can  never  again  breach  the  regulatory  walls  of  our  fortress  at 
great cost to our citizens and to our economy. 
We are placing top priority on a successful passage of the Insurance Bill 2013, which was 
recently referred to a Joint Select Committee of Parliament. The Bill introduces best practices 
in  the  areas  of  corporate  governance,  risk  management,  consolidated  supervision  and 
consumer protection to the insurance industry. 
Among  the  measures  brought  by  the  Bill  will  be  the  strengthening  of  the  powers  of  the 
Inspector of Financial Institutions of the Central Bank, which is legally empowered to oversee 
the operations of the insurance industry and also intervene in the sector where it becomes 
necessary.  
While challenges remain, a final resolution to CLICO’s failure seems to be on the horizon. 
Such a development should positively impact economic confidence. 
With  firmly  anchored  inflation  expectations,  the  Central  Bank  is  giving  more  weight  to  an 
accommodative monetary stance until a firm economic turnaround is established. However, 
should the outlook for inflation, growth, or financial stability change, we will take appropriate 
action. 
We  are  paying  close  attention  in  particular  to  the  possibility  of  normalization  of  monetary 
policy  in  the  United  States,  and  the  consequent  impact  on  emerging  market  economies, 
especially Trinidad and Tobago. 
Boosting business confidence 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me now turn to an issue that I would like to highlight in the context 
of this morning’s discussion on competitiveness and sustainable development. Many expect 
central  banks  to  be  the  ones  that  can  bring  back  growth.  And  indeed,  over  the  past  few 
years, the global financial crisis has placed immense demands on monetary policy around 
the world. 
In  his  Andrew  Crockett  Memorial  Lecture  held  at  the  Bank  of  International  Settlements  a 
week  ago,  Professor  Raghuram  Rajan  from  the  University  of  Chicago’s  Booth  School  of 
Business described the situation quite well: “When the central banker offers himself as the 
only game in town, in an environment where politicians only have choices between the bad 
and the worse, he becomes the only game in town.”  
But  we  are  not  the  only  game  in  town.  I  wish  to  remind  you  all  that, through  its monetary 
policy,  the  Central  Bank  can  influence  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy.  But  monetary 
policy cannot solve deeper structural problems or lift the growth potential of the economy. 
That requires bringing more balance to fiscal policy and speeding up the implementation of 
structural  policies  that  eliminate  supply-side  constraints  to  private  investment  in  the  non-
energy sector. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
From  our  frequent  conversations  with  business  leaders,  we  know  that  one  of  the  most 
important  structural  issues facing  the Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy  at the  moment  is the 
need to boost business confidence. 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  looking  for  a  return  to  self-sustaining,  self-generating  growth.  To 
realize such economic growth  we need to see the rebuilding of capacity, through both the 
expansion  of  existing  companies  and  the  creation  of  new  ones.  This  calls  for  stronger 
confidence among existing businesses and entrepreneurs. 
We  are  already  seeing  welcome  signs  of  such  confidence.  At  one  end  of  the  business 
spectrum,  small  firms  have  been  mushrooming  in  various  clusters  around  the  country 
including Charlieville, Felicity, Tunapuna, Sangre Grande, Rio Claro, and Penal/Debe. Some 
of  these  small  firms  are  in  retail  and  distribution.  Others  are  in  construction  and  energy 
services. 
At the other end of the business spectrum, a few conglomerates have publicly announced 
major investment projects. These include:  
1. 
A  $500  million  joint  venture  between  Multicinemas  Trinidad  Limited  and  JT  Allum 
Group of Companies to develop the „C3‟ movie and shopping complex in Corinth, 
South Trinidad. 
Ansa  McAl’s  $400  million  state  of  the  art  clay  plant,  which  is  expected  to  be  the 
single largest investment in the construction this year. 
A  US$600  million  joint  venture  among  Neal  and  Massy,  Russian  firm  Severstal 
International  and  Metaldom  from  the  Dominican  Republic  to  build  a  vertically 
integrated iron and steel complex on Union Estate, La Brea. 
Neal  and  Massy’s  Project  Development  Agreement  with  Mitsubishi  Corporation, 
Mitsubishi Gas Chemicals Company and the Government of Trinidad and Tobago to 
construct  and  operate  plants  to  produce  Methanol  and  Dimethyl-Ether  (DME)  at 
Union Estate, La Brea. The project is expected to cost roughly US$850 million. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
I  commend  these  business  leaders  for  their  vote  of  confidence  in  the  country’s  economic 
prospects, but it is not enough. We need the entire business community to stop watching and 
commenting on the game from the sidelines. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen, there  is  a  view  that  business  must  stop feeding from government. 
And business must start feeding government. 
I remind you of the damning words that Ralph Maraj in his December 31, 2012 column in the 
Trinidad  Express  entitled  “The  Private  Sector  Can’t  Dance”  had  for  the  business 
community:  “For  the  past  few  years,  most  of  our  business  elite  have  been  sitting  on  their 
resources, marking time but still accumulating; only a few venturing to take some measured 
risk  to  stimulate  the  economy;  most  waiting,  as  always,  for  the  treasury  to  provide  new 
feeding.  And  they  continue  to  absurdly  shout  to  the  government  ‘diversify,  diversify’,  as  if 
they had no responsibility in this critical national need.” 
Peter  O’  Connor  in  his  Sunday  June  30  Newsday  column  entitled  “Lacking  Leadership” 
echoed  similar  concerns.  “Which  businessman  here,  with  the  banking  system  drowning  in 
liquidity,  has  the  vision  and  capability  to  diversify  our  economy  instead  of  begging 
government for ‘corporate URP’”? 
Since the Central Bank is not the only game in town, I take this opportunity to remind the 
entire  business  community  of  their  responsibilities  and  urge  them  back  onto  the  field.  My 
appeal to you is to take a longer term perspective and  invest in people  and technology to 
raise our growth level and to make our growth more inclusive. 
Play the game passionately, intensely and fearlessly! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  I  wish  to  reiterate  that  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  been  navigating  well  the 
choppy waters of the global financial crisis, and will continue to do so.  
But this is not the message that we seem to be absorbing as a nation. Instead, it is one of a 
country lurching from one crisis to another. 
We seem to have a penchant for self-inflicted wounds, looking at our country from the glass 
is half empty perspective. I appeal to all of us to look at our economy from a glass half full 
point  of  view.  This  is  actually  not  difficult  to  do.  Growth  is  consolidating,  unemployment  is 
low, public debt is very manageable and our citizens still enjoy a high standard of living. 
The  Central  Bank  is  absolutely  committed  to  maintaining  macroeconomic  stability  so  firms 
can make longer-term decisions in an environment of confidence. By explaining the cross-
currents at work in our economy, our projections for what’s ahead, and our monetary policy 
response, we are doing our part to help mend business confidence. 
We are open to meeting with all business groups to better understand your needs and the 
support required. 
I am convinced that we have high calibre business leaders who are smart, professional and 
innovative. And who are totally committed to this country. 
You must be the change you want to see in Trinidad and Tobago. 
I thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
