Njuguna Ndung’u: The Africa Mobile Phone Financial Services Policy 
Initiative (AMPI) 
Opening remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
Inaugural African Roundtable Meeting to launch the “Africa Mobile Phone Financial Services 
Policy Initiative (AMPI)”, co-hosted by the Bank of Tanzania, Alliance for Financial Inclusion 
(AFI) and Central Bank of Kenya, Zanzibar, Tanzania, 14–15 February 2013. 
 Professor Benno Ndulu, Governor, Bank of Tanzania;  
Alfred Hannig, Executive Director, Alliance for Financial Inclusion;  
Professor Mwangi Kimenyi, Director, African Growth Initiative, Brookings Institution;  
Distinguished Guests and Colleagues;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
On  behalf  of  the  co-hosts,  Bank  of  Tanzania,  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  and 
Central Bank of Kenya, it is my honour to extend a warm welcome to all of you to Zanzibar, 
Tanzania  to  participate  in  the  “Inaugural  Leaders  Roundtable  meeting  to  launch  the  Africa 
Mobile Phone Financial Services Policy Initiative (AMPI).”  
It  is  indeed  encouraging  to  note  that  the  efforts  by  all  the  pertinent  players  to  make  this 
launch a success are being realized today. The fact that you have all graced this occasion 
demonstrates our commitment as AFI members and the passion we have to move financial 
inclusion  to  higher  levels  in  our  Continent  and  the  entire  world.  I  take  this  opportunity, 
therefore, to applaud you for your unending passion towards this initiative.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, as you may recall, the idea to have a focused regional initiative on 
Mobile Phone Financial Services (MFS) platform in Africa, was initiated right here in Zanzibar 
during  the  first  African  Financial  Inclusion  Policy  Forum  held  in  March  2012.  This  was 
following  discussions  held  at  Brookings  Institution,  Washington  D.C,  on  the  importance  of 
spurring MFS in Africa and after a critical analysis of the hurdles that limit the scaling up of 
MFS  in  Africa.  It  was  further  emphasised  during  the  4th  Annual  AFI  Global  Policy  Forum 
(GPF),  held  in  Cape  Town,  South  Africa  in  September  2012  where  we,  the  African  AFI 
members, agreed to organize this inaugural African Leaders’ Roundtable meeting.  
As AFI members, our major objective is to extend financial inclusion to the Continent’s large 
unbanked  populace. We  recognise  that  there  is  significant  potential  in  the  development  of 
mobile phone financial services in Africa to accomplish this. AMPI, therefore, will provide a 
framework through which we will jointly determine effective policy solutions to advance MFS 
across  the  African  Continent  while  recognising  the  unique  circumstances,  environments, 
conditions and needs of each country within the region.  
Specifically,  AMPI  will  seek  to  launch  new,  or  expand  on  existing  MFS  policy,  regulatory 
initiatives and strategies with the objective of deepening the penetration of MFS across Africa 
in line with our national agendas and policy priorities, including the Maya Declarations, where 
they  apply.  Further,  AMPI  will  provide  a  platform  for  regional  networking  and  cooperation. 
African  AFI  Members  will  be  in  a  position  to  share  experiences  and  address  policy  issues 
which are common in nature. This is expected to help us develop effective solutions, policy 
strategies and regulatory frameworks that will be beneficial not only to Africa but also to the 
wider AFI network.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  it  is  envisaged  that  AMPI’s  broad  objectives  will  be  achieved 
through tailored activities which include;  
• 
Tapping into the synergies and experiences of the AFI African members;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
    Mapping of comparative case studies on policies and regulatory implications of new 
business models;  
Advancement  of  research,  studies  and  exchange  of  knowledge  and  experiences 
around MFS;  
Supporting  the  implementation  of  the  Maya  Declaration  commitments  relating  to 
MFS; and  
Secondment/attachment  of  staff/members  to  different  organisations  of  African  AFI 
member countries for further learning.  
To  successfully  operationalise  the  AMPI  initiative,  we  propose  to  establish  an  AMPI  help 
desk, but not necessarily a physical one, which will provide all technical coordination towards 
the implementation of AMPI’s objectives and activities. The key mandates of this help desk 
will be focused on facilitating communication of the results and progress of AMPI, enabling 
engagement  among 
the  AFI  members  and  external  stakeholders  and  ensuring 
synchronization of the overall AFI strategy towards enhancing MFS in Africa. In addition, it 
will contribute to our fulfilment of the Maya  Declaration Commitments relating to MFS. We 
will discuss, sharpen and adopt this proposal over the next two days.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  my  ardent  belief  that  this  initiative  will  go  a  long  way  in 
enhancing financial inclusion in Africa. AMPI will pave the way for us to create an enabling 
environment  to  support  the  delivery  of financial  services  through  mobile  phone  technology 
and  other  emerging  technologies,  leading  to  increased  penetration  of  MFS  in  Africa.  In 
addition, through the interaction between members and the external stakeholders, AMPI will 
serve  as  a  peer  learning  and  knowledge  platform  for  AFI  members  to  share  and  learn 
insights on MFS.  
In  conclusion,  I  want  to  emphasize  that  access  to  financial  services  is  a  major  boost  to  a 
country’s overall economic health as well as in providing significant benefits to low income 
households and unbanked populace. Therefore, the launch of AMPI will provide a platform to 
enhance the growth of various economies in Africa and fulfil our developmental aspirations. I 
am  sure  we  all  want  to  be  part  of  such  a  revolutionary  initiative.  In  this  regard,  I  want  to 
encourage all of us to stay focused and see to it that this initiative is a success.  
AMPI will be a sub-network of AFI with specific deliverables. This roundtable should also feel 
free as members of AFI to develop a framework of AMPI modalities, including a governance 
structure.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I take this opportunity, once again, to thank all of you for gracing 
this occasion and for your unrelenting support to this Initiative.  More specifically, I want to 
thank  the  Bank  of  Tanzania  and  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI),  for  providing  a 
platform for its members to enhance financial inclusion and for their continued and focused 
support towards this initiative.  
It is my hope that this roundtable meeting and launch of AMPI will spur us to work together to 
develop smart and strategic policies and regulatory frameworks that can catalyse MFS into a 
platform for innovation, leading to greater financial inclusion and economic development in 
the African Continent.  
Thank you 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
