Jan F Qvigstad: Seminar on Bayesian Econometrics (ESOBE) – opening 
remarks 
Opening remarks by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of 
Norway), at the fourth annual meeting of the European Seminar on Bayesian Econometrics 
(ESOBE), Norges Bank, Oslo, 22 August 2013. 
 Good morning everyone! 
It  is  a  privilege  for  me  to  welcome  you  to  this  year’s  European  Seminar  on  Bayesian 
Econometrics, which has attracted the interest of such a distinguished group of international 
scholars. I would like to extend a special welcome to those of you who have traveled far in 
order to be here today. 
As  a  practitioner  of  economic  policy,  I  have  experienced  the  use  of  economic  models  for 
almost half a century. Back in the late 1970s, the Norwegian Ministry of Finance used a large 
input-output  model  to  calculate  the  effects  of  fiscal  policy.  Somewhat  contrary  to  common 
sense – even then – the model suggested that an increase in government spending would 
reduce  inflation.  To  remedy  this  obvious  mistake,  we  calibrated  a  new  model  –  using  our 
priors on critical parameters – to get results that were more consistent with our experience. 
The lesson I take away from this is the following: To be useful, models need to be consistent 
with the view of the world that we apply to policy. This consistency principle, in my view, lies 
at the heart of the progress made possible by Bayesian modeling. 
Advances in the last two decades have made Bayesian econometrics a key tool for central 
banks.  Norges  Bank  has  benefited greatly  from  this,  and  two  of  our most  important  policy 
tools  are  results  of  such  advances.  NEMO  (Norwegian  Economy  Model)  is  our  estimated 
DSGE  model. The  model  is  based  on  international  research  and  model  development  over 
the past 20 years. We use it to produce forecasts and guide monetary policy analysis. This 
year, the hype is “forward guidance”. The Fed does it, the Bank of England does it, and the 
ECB also. We have done it since 2005. We publish forecasts of the key policy interest rate 
and  NEMO  has  been  essential  for  the  construction  and,  above  all,  explanation.  When  I 
describe  Norges  Bank’s  policy  decision  at  press  conferences,  I  often  refer  to  NEMO 
equations in order to explain our decisions. 
Our second key policy tool is our System of Averaging Models, SAM. The short-term forecast 
from SAM is the basis for the initial conditions when we use NEMO and when we make our 
policy decisions – and hence of core importance to monetary policy. Theory and experience 
suggest that a weighted average of forecasts from different models is often more accurate 
than forecasts provided by individual models. Norges Bank’s short-term forecasts are based 
on  combinations  of  statistical  and  econometric  models,  where  each  model  is  assigned  a 
probability depending on past density forecasting performances. Currently,  we are  working 
on how to incorporate mechanically density predictions from SAM into NEMO. 
The  few  examples  that  I  have  just  described  show  how  research  on  macro  modeling  and 
forecasting is important for our work. We are well aware that there will always be ample room 
for improvement in our toolbox, and we are fortunate to have such prominent speakers with 
us  here  today.  This  workshop  is  a  great  opportunity  for  us  to  become  familiar  with  recent 
advances in Bayesian econometrics. 
In  addition  to  the  pleasure  of  the  scholarly  discourse,  I  also  hope  you  will  have  the 
opportunity to enjoy Oslo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
