G Gopalakrishna: Financial inclusion is a national mission for India 
Vote of thanks by Mr G Gopalakrishna, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Reserve Bank of India-OECD-World Bank Regional Conference on “Financial education”, 
New Delhi, 4 March 2013. 
 Respected  Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  Ambassador  Richard  Boucher,  Deputy  Secretary 
General, OECD, Mr. Onno Ruhl, the World Bank, Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty and Dr. Urjit Patel, 
Deputy  Governors,  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  senior  officials  of  Ministry  of  Finance, 
Government of India and State Governments, Ms. Flore-Anne Messy, OECD, distinguished 
delegates  from  OECD,  the  World  Bank  and  SAARC  countries,  Chairmen  and  Managing 
Directors of banks, colleagues from the Reserve Bank, ladies and gentlemen. 
First and foremost, I would like to thank respected Governor Dr. Subbarao, for taking time 
out to inaugurate this conference. Sir, your keynote address today was enlightening for its 
content  which  gave  contours  of  the  process  of  financial  inclusion  and  financial  literacy  in 
India.  Financial  inclusion  is  a  national  mission  for  India.  Your  presentation  today  clearly 
reflected the commitment that you have towards the goals of financial inclusion and financial 
literacy. In fact, you might perhaps be the only Governor to have undertaken outreaches for 
financial inclusion and financial education. Your examples of the challenges that still remain 
towards achieving meaningful financial inclusion were indeed thought provoking. Sir, we are 
sure, that your profound thoughts, and perspectives, will set off debate and discussion over 
the next three days and will make this Conference a truly impactful event. Thank you very 
much. 
As  the  Governor  so  aptly  put  it,  partnering  with  OECD  and  World  Bank  in  hosting  this 
Conference is a valuable learning experience for India. These two institutions have carried 
out  work  in  the  areas  of  financial  education  and  financial  inclusion  which  serves  as  a 
benchmark for other entities to emulate. Ambassador Boucher, your opening address today 
truly summed up coordinated initiatives that are being taken globally for advancing the cause 
of financial literacy and education. Thank you very much for partnering with us in the national 
agenda of financial literacy. I also thank Mr. Onno Ruhl, India Country Director, the World 
Bank  for  his  opening  remarks  highlighting  the  importance  of  financial  education  and  the 
credible work done by the World Bank in this area of financial inclusion. We sincerely hope 
that the partnership with the OECD and the World Bank, we can make our financial literacy 
programme sharper so that we can make rapid progress in our pursuit of financial inclusion 
and financial literacy. 
I also thank Dr. K.C. Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor, Reserve Bank of India, for steering us 
through  the  process  of  hosting  this  Conference  and  also  agreeing  to  deliver  the  welcome 
address.  Sir,  we  thank  you  for  your  guidance  and  innovative  thoughts.  Your  address  has 
clearly set out the essentials of effective financial inclusion and financial education and given 
a succinct account of the efforts taken by the Government, the Reserve Bank, other financial 
sector regulators and financial institutions towards this cause. I thank all the delegates in this 
Conference for making time to attend. 
I  thank  the  distinguished  invitees  present  here  for  attending  the  function  with  warm 
enthusiasm. I thank all my colleagues from the Reserve Bank for their participation. I also 
thank the media for covering this event. 
It would not have been possible to hold an event of such scale and magnitude without the 
wholehearted support and commitment of our colleagues in the Reserve Bank of India, New 
Delhi office, ably led by the Regional Director. I thank them all for their support. 
Thank you all, once again. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
