K C Chakrabarty: Strengthening the banking supervision through risk 
based approach – laying the stepping stones 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inaugural session of the conference of non-executive directors on the boards of commercial 
banks,  organized  by  Centre  for  Advanced  Financial  Research  and  Learning  (CAFRAL), 
Mumbai, 13 May 2013. 
 The  learned  Non-executive  directors  on  the  Boards  of  various  commercial  banks; 
Shri A.K. Garg,  CGM,  CAFRAL;  colleagues  from  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India;  ladies  and 
gentlemen.  It  is  a  pleasure  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  amongst  you  this  morning  at  the 
inaugural  session  of this  conference  organized  by  CAFRAL,  with  the  objective  of  enabling 
non-executive  directors  of  commercial  banks  to  effectively  perform  their  responsibilities  as 
members of Bank Boards. As non-executive directors, all of you can play important role in 
ensuring  that  a  sound  risk  management  ethos  gets  percolated  from  the  top  management 
right up to the line staff in the field and that a healthy compliance culture evolves within your 
respective  organizations.  I  am  happy  to  note  that  the  conference  has  brought  together 
directors  with  expertise  in  a  variety  of  fields  such  as  finance,  accountancy,  legal, 
administration,  social  service,  etc.  I  hope  this  conference  aids  and  assists  you  all  in 
effectively discharging the challenging role of non-executive directors in banks. 
Introduction 
In the light of the global financial crisis and the recent developments in the Indian financial 
system,  the  focus  is  squarely  on  the  ability  of  banks  and  supervisors  to  understand  risks 
inherent in banking business and to institutionalize an appropriate architecture for effectively 
managing these risks. The need for a robust supervisory framework for monitoring the risk 
levels  in  banks’  operations  has  been  duly  recognized  by  financial  sector  policy  makers 
across  the  globe,  more  so  in  the  wake  of  the  Financial  Crisis.  Accordingly,  measures  to 
strengthen supervisory oversight of banks have been at the core of the reform process that 
has been since set in motion. In India, one important initiative being taken by the Reserve 
Bank is the phased migration to a Risk Based Supervision model, which seeks to address 
several of the present concerns regarding the supervisor’s and banks’ ability to identify and 
manage  the  key  risks  in  banks’  operations.  Therefore,  today  I  would  like  to  share  my 
thoughts on the Risk Based Supervision (RBS) that we are rolling out for select banks from 
the current supervisory cycle. I hope that we would be able to count on all of you to work 
towards  ensuring  that  your  respective  organizations  are  fully  geared  up  for  the  successful 
launch of this initiative. 
Let me confess that I have a vested interest in coming here and I will explain why. Some of 
you  may  be  aware  that  I  chaired  a  High  Level  Steering  Committee  which  reviewed  the 
supervisory processes for commercial banks last year. Let me also share that this Committee 
included an academician, some of the seasoned practicing and retired commercial bankers 
and  the  regulator.  The  Committee,  inter  alia,  unanimously  recommended  a  shift  to  a  risk 
based  approach  for  supervision  of  commercial  banks  in  India,  so  as  to  ensure  that  the 
incipient risks could be proactively identified both at the individual institution level and at the 
systemic level, and measures could be initiated to address them. The Committee also made 
several other significant recommendations aimed at improving the supervisory processes in 
respect of commercial banks. 
Let me remind you that risk based supervision is nothing new. Several jurisdictions across 
the globe have adopted variations of the risk based approach in their supervisory practices 
with different degrees of success. The veterans amongst you would recall that Reserve Bank 
of  India  too  had  attempted  to  bring  in  some  semblance  of  a  risk  based  approach  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
supervision  about  a  decade  back.  However,  we  had  to  rest  that  attempt.  Several  reasons 
may  be  attributed  to  why  our  attempt  to  usher  in  risk  based  supervision  had  suffered  a 
setback. Though I would not attempt a post mortem of why RBS had failed to take off, let me 
share that our internal assessments showed that the banking system was not really ready for 
the  introduction  of  RBS  when  we  first  attempted  it  in  2003–04.  The  primitive  risk 
management  systems  at  banks,  low  levels  of  technology,  inadequate  human  resource 
capabilities  and  above  all,  lack  of  patronage  from  the  Board  and  Top  Management  were 
amongst the primary reasons that led to stalling of the project in our maiden attempt. 
Let  me  also  share that before  accepting the  HLSC’s  recommendations,  there  was  a  lot  of 
circumspection  and  internal  debate  on  whether  the  ground  realities  had  actually  improved 
and  whether  the  time  was  ripe  for  attempting  a  re-introduction  of  RBS.  A  lot  of  positive 
developments  have  happened  in  the  Indian  banking  sector  since  2003–04  and  improved 
technology has been the bedrock of these developments. Core banking solution has been 
implemented across all banks, which has, in turn, facilitated data availability, consistency and 
improved  quality  of  MIS.  The  regulatory  push  in  the  form  of  Basel  II  guidelines  and  the 
competitive  market  forces  have  also  compelled  the  banks  to  invest  in  improving  their  risk 
assessment and risk management capabilities. Today, the frontline staff as well as the Top 
Management is definitely much more conscious about the risks that their banks face and are 
sanguine about their abilities to manage them. Despite these positive developments, let me 
admit that a whole lot still needs to be done – both at the level of the supervised entities and 
at  our  level  in  the  Reserve  Bank.  It  is  in  the  face  of  these  challenges  that  the  Board  for 
Financial Supervision has decided to tread with caution and approved the roll out of RBS in a 
phased  manner.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  as  the  Chairman  of  the  HLSC  and  a  resolute 
supporter of the risk based approach, I have a vested interest in successful roll out of RBS 
and that is why I immediately agreed to the invitation from the Director, CAFRAL to address 
this august group, which, I firmly believe, can act as the catalyst for ensuring the successful 
roll out of RBS. 
Supervisory perspectives 
Having set the context, let me step back and reflect on some of the fundamental issues that 
need  to  be  understood  and  appreciated  not  only  by  the  supervised  entities  but  also  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  community,  for  ensuring  a  vibrant  banking  sector.  I  would  also 
share my perspectives on what I consider as essential pre-requisites for the success of risk 
based supervision and our expectations from the banks. 
Before I venture any further, let me clarify upfront that no amount of regulation or supervision 
can save an institution if the Board/Top Management is not sensitive enough about what is 
good for their bank. The Board and Senior Management are the first line of defense at the 
banks and we, as supervisors, place a lot of faith in them to identify, manage and mitigate 
risks in banks’ day-to-day affairs. Therefore, I would emphasize that ensuring readiness of 
the banks for the success of RBS is a management function. In my remarks today, I would 
reflect on some of the necessary preconditions that must be met for the successful transition 
to a risk based approach to supervision. 
It is important at this stage to understand and clearly appreciate some of the fundamental 
concepts of supervision like – what is supervision, what it seeks to achieve and what are the 
attributes  of  a  good  supervisor?  Unless  all  of  us  –  the  bank  management,  the  internal 
auditors  and the  supervisors  clearly  appreciate  these  basic  tenets  of  supervision  and  their 
respective  responsibilities,  we  would  not  be  able  to  make  any  meaningful  progress  in  our 
endeavour  to  transit  to  RBS.  Banks,  as  you  all  know,  occupy  a  pre-eminent  place  in  any 
financial system by virtue of the role they play in spurring economic growth by undertaking 
maturity  and  liquidity  transformation  and  supporting  the  critical  payment  systems.  The 
transformation  role  that  the  banks  play,  coupled  with  the  volatility  of  financial  markets, 
increased  competition  and  diversification,  exposes  them  to  a  variety  of  risks.  The  need  to 
keep a tab on these risks is more exacerbated as the banks not only use public funds, they 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
also  receive  some  protection  in  the  form  of  depositor  guarantees  and  the  possibility  of 
liquidity  support.  Thus,  need  for  identifying  risks  and  finding  ways  and  means  to  mitigate 
them  is  not  only  significant  from  the  perspective  of  safety  and  soundness  of  individual 
institutions but also from a systemic stability perspective. These objectives are sought to be 
achieved by subjecting banks to some form of regulation and supervision. 
When I pose a simple question to my supervisory staff on what is supervision, invariably I get 
a common response – monitoring of compliance to regulations by the regulated entities. That 
brings me to our first fundamental question – what is supervision and how is it different from 
regulation?  As  you  all  would  have  noticed,  Regulation  and  Supervision  are  quite 
interchangeably used in most literature. This is more so because, ideally, they seek to serve 
the same objective – protecting depositors and promoting financial stability. However, there 
is a wide difference between the two functions. “Regulation” is synonymous with laying down 
the rules and norms for doing business by all the market players and, therefore, is uniformly 
applicable to all market participants. “Supervision”, on the other hand, is the process through 
which the rules and norms are enforced at individual entity level. Thus, on a very broad level, 
the difference between the two is that while regulation is applicable to the system as a whole, 
supervision  is  entity-specific,  with  the  intensity  of  supervision  being  proportional  to  the 
perceived risk levels. By making this point, I am trying to underline that supervision is more 
contextual rather than being generic. Here, I would like to emphasize that it is essential to 
have clarity on the demarcation of the roles and remits of regulation and supervision. In the 
absence  of  this,  both  regulation  and  supervision  are  likely  to  get  diluted  and  weakened, 
which would have an adverse impact on the strength and resilience of the financial sector. 
Let me now turn to the second issue of what supervision seeks to achieve? 
As I mentioned a little while earlier, the basic function of the supervisor is to enforce the rules 
and  norms  laid  down  by  the  regulator.  There  is  a  marked  difference  between  merely 
monitoring whether the entities are adhering to the regulations and actually making sure that 
the regulated entities adhere to them in practice. The job of the supervisor is to ensure that 
the entities necessarily comply with whatever mitigation plan is given to them. The supervisor 
should ask questions of the supervised entities even when the going seems good, let alone 
during bad times. Not only ask questions, but to also effectively intervene. No doubt, this is 
an arduous task as the supervisors would be seen and treated like party poopers, but that is 
precisely the role that they ought to play. I believe many of the supervisors, in the lead up to 
the crisis, simply failed to enforce the regulations and instead, relied too heavily on the merits 
of the efficient market hypothesis or the bank managements’ inner conscience. All of you, as 
non-executive directors, have important roles to play. You need to ask questions when the 
going  seems  good.  You  must  focus  on  specific  issues  and  seek  precise  clarification.  You 
would  also  need  to  ensure  that  there  is  an  appropriate  internal  mechanism  which  makes 
certain that the directions given by the Board are properly implemented down the line. 
That brings me to the third question – what are the attributes of a good supervisor? When 
could supervision be considered effective? An IMF Staff Position1 has very lucidly explained 
five  attributes  of  a  good  supervisor.  The  note  mentions  that  Good  Supervision  has  to  be 
intrusive. This does not mean being involved with the day to day affairs of the bank or micro-
managing  things.  It,  essentially,  means  knowing  the  bank,  its  institutional  structure  and  its 
risk  profile  very  intrinsically.  Listing  the  other  attributes  of  a  Good  Supervisor,  the  Note 
mentions  that  supervision  has  to  be  sceptical  but  proactive,  implying  that  the  supervisor 
should not take things for granted. The note also mentions that Good Supervision should be 
comprehensive- meaning that the supervisors need to look holistically at the entire banking 
group  on  a  consolidated  basis.  In  fact,  many  of  the  supervisory  failings  have  been  on 
                                                
1  
IMF Staff Position Note SPN/ 10/ 08 dated May 18, 2010 on The Making of Good Supervision: Learning to say 
“No”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
account  of  a  lack  of  understanding  of  the  risks  at  the  periphery  –  in  perceptibly  low  risk 
subsidiaries or low risk business verticals. The paper further mentions being “adaptive” and 
“conclusive” as two other attributes of a Good Supervisor. These refer to the need for being 
alert to the developments, both within the bank as well as on the macroeconomic front, and 
quickly  re-evaluating  the  risk  profile  of  the  institution.  By  being  “conclusive”  means  that 
supervisors  need  to  take  their  findings  to  logical  conclusion  through  further  probing  or 
deliberations and discussions. Let me add that all these attributes of a good supervisor are 
also relevant and important in your conduct as non-executive directors. Adherence to these 
principles would mean that you are able to take informed decisions and ensure that these are 
properly implemented. 
On  top  of  these  attributes,  the  IMF  note  also  identifies  two  features  that  signify  good 
supervision. First, having the ability to act; and second, having the will to act. While the ability 
to act is judged in terms of the legal authority and the necessary resources, the willingness to 
act  is  judged  in  terms  of  having  a  clear  and  unambiguous  mandate,  operational 
independence, accountability, a healthy relationship with the industry, etc. 
Having  seen  the  key  attributes  of  a  good  supervisor,  it  is  necessary  that  our  approach 
focuses on assimilating these virtues into our supervisory practices. The growing convolution 
in the financial market place is reflected in changes in the structure of banking groups and 
increasing complexity of products and services that are being offered by the market players. 
There has been a virtual explosion  in the number of market players and the products and 
services on offer, which has complicated the turf for the supervisors. It is, therefore, pertinent 
that  the  supervisors  are  able  to  identify  the  institutions  that  pose  the  biggest  risk  to  the 
supervisory  objectives  and  whose  failure  would  have  the  maximum  impact  on  financial 
stability. To achieve the above objective, it is imperative that the supervisor is able to assess 
and zero in on the real sources of risks facing individual institutions and develop appropriate 
risk mitigation plans. The ability to conduct a proactive assessment of the major risks and to 
supervise  them  based  on  the  probability  of  the  risks  crystallizing  and  the  impact  the  likely 
failure  of  the  bank  might  have  on  the  financial  system,  is  the  hallmark  of  a  risk  based 
approach  to  supervision.  Post  crisis,  there  has  been  a  shift  towards  RBS,  away  from  the 
erstwhile CAMELS approach, which uses a backward looking methodology and transaction 
testing model. The  RBS,  on the contrary,  is forward  looking  as  it  seeks  to  assess  the  risk 
build-up in a more dynamic manner. It focuses on the twin objectives of examining whether 
the  supervised  entity  follows  the  regulatory  prescriptions  and  whether  its  internal  risk 
management practices are in line with regulatory expectations. 
Pre-requisites for the success of risk based supervision 
Effective risk management system 
At the core of supervisory monitoring under RBS is an assessment of the quality of a bank's 
procedures for evaluating, monitoring and managing risk, and of the bank’s internal models 
for determining economic capital. These models link capital to risk-taking and help banking 
organizations compare risks and returns across diverse business lines and locations. Since 
under  the  RBS  supervisors,  essentially,  rely  on  the  inputs  provided  by  banks’  risk 
management  systems,  the  RBS  can  only  be  as  effective  as  banks’  risk  management 
systems. 
It is, indeed, true that the risk management challenge for banks has been steadily growing 
over  the  last  two  to  three  decades.  This  can  be  attributed  to  several  developments  in  the 
financial sector like deregulation of financial markets, banks’ diversifying into newer business 
lines  such  as  providing  custodial  services,  securities  underwriting  and  corporate  advisory 
services,  growing  inter-connectedness  of  the  financial  system,  emergence  and  growth  of 
complex financial products, etc. For the success of RBS, it is imperative that, as part of their 
risk management framework, banks are oriented towards identifying the path and passage of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
risks and towards pricing such risks appropriately. I would like to add that as non-executive 
directors  you  must  focus  on  identifying  the  specific  areas  in  the  bank  which  pose  greater 
risks and devote more time and energy to those areas. 
Need for an effective management information system 
That, however, tempts me to pose some more very basic, but interesting questions. We are 
talking  about  identification  of  risk,  their  management  and  mitigation.  But  how  many  banks 
today can tell me the number of products and services they offer at their branches? Also, do 
they have an idea of the number of customers they have? I am not talking about number of 
accounts here. The difference between the two is that an account is a ledger page while the 
customer  is  a  live  individual.  Can  the  banks  tell  me  how  many  products  or  services  each 
customer  of  theirs  uses?  If  you  don’t  have  such  basic  information,  what  kind  of  a  risk 
management  system  can  you  develop?  Unless  you  have  a  fair  idea  of  the  number  of 
products,  number  of  customers,  number  of  products  and  services  per  customer,  cost  of 
providing  each  product/  service,  returns  from  providing  each  product/  service  and  risk 
involved in each product/ service, how do you decide on  which activities are remunerative 
and  which  are  not?  How  do  you  decide  on  your  product  promotion  and  pricing  strategies 
unless  this  information  is  readily  available?  Why  have  certain  products  when  there  is  no 
demand  for  them?  After  all,  there  is  a  cost  attached  to  product  promotion.  As  banks  are 
perceived  to  be  offering  identical  products  and  services,  how  does  the  Board/  Top 
Management  set  about differentiating  their  bank  from  others,  unless  they  have  such  basic 
granular details? 
Under RBS, it is essential for the banks to have the capability and infrastructure to support a 
robust  and  reliable  MIS  architecture,  with  data  integrity.  A  data  warehouse  wherein  data 
flows from the transactional system without manual intervention and is capable of generating 
various MIS reports on all major activities of the bank (including activity-wise/segment–wise 
analysis)  is  one  of  the  prerequisites  for  effective  risk  management.  In  the  absence  of  a 
reliable MIS, it would be a near impossible task for the bank management to get a true and 
fair picture of the quality of assets, earnings, etc. 
Risk based pricing of products and services 
Risk-based  pricing  means  determining  loan  pricing  based  on  the  expected  loan  risk. 
Typically, a borrower’s credit risk is used to determine whether a loan application should be 
accepted or declined. The same risk level could be used to determine the optimal pricing. 
This, essentially, translates to higher interest rate for a borrower with higher risk and a lower 
rate  for  a  lower  risk  borrower.  Most  large  banks  with  suitable  risk  management  and 
measurement architecture normally have some  form of risk-based pricing strategies based 
on a measure of probability of default. This is, often, not apparent in small or medium-sized 
banks  due  to  lack  of  strategy,  process  and  technology  to  drive  consistent  results  across 
various loan portfolios. Banks without a formal risk-based pricing approach, typically, use a 
flat-rate pricing model. The inherent problem with flat-rate pricing is that the bank will end up 
having a higher share of lower credit quality loans since the higher credit quality borrowers 
can obtain better pricing at other banks (i.e. those offering risk-based pricing). 
Banks  are  required  to  maintain  capital  to  cover  the  risks  they  assume.  As  capital  always 
comes  at  a  cost,  they  need  to  have  a  differentiated  risk-based  framework  for  pricing  of 
products and services. This involves costing, a quantitative assessment of revenue streams 
from  each  segment,  activity,  product  and  service,  and  an  efficient  Transfer  Pricing 
Mechanism  which  would  determine  capital  allocation.  Each  business  unit  in  the  enterprise 
would  have  to  aim  at  being  a  profit  centre  within  the  overall  risk-return  framework.  In 
essence,  it  would  mean  accountability  for  profit  tempered  by  the  discipline  of  risk–return, 
within a deeply embedded culture of good governance, the tone of which is set by the bank’s 
Top  Management.  From  a  business  perspective,  pricing  of  assets  should  be  non-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
discriminatory and in line with risk rating of the customer. A lower rated customer should not 
get a better price than a higher rated customer. 
In the context of risk-return trade off, I want to flag another issue. It is common knowledge 
that where return is more, risk is more. However, in our anxiety to make quick bucks or what 
we  colloquially  call  “a  search  for  yield”,  we  very  often  tend  to  forget  this  basic  tenet  of 
finance. There can be no defense for the bank management who chose to finance the sub-
prime borrowers in the USA. I am not sure why the Boards did not question the strategy of 
the  management  while  this  business  was  growing  manifold  and  banks  were  able  to  make 
huge profits by repackaging these mortgages as AAA securities through structured deals. I 
have  a  very  practical  suggestion for the  distinguished  group  present  here:  seek  a  detailed 
analysis  of  the  income  stream.  Banks  ought  to  conduct  a  thorough  assessment  of  the 
products, services, activities or business streams that are most profitable as this is where the 
maximum risk must be lurking. The path and passage of risk can be truly understood only 
through a scrupulous income analysis. 
A risk management framework is incomplete without an effective system of internal controls 
and methodologies. As I mentioned earlier, the bank managements and, especially, the bank 
Boards form the first line of defense for risk management. Unless the bank’s management is 
geared to internalize and institutionalize a risk and control culture, any attempts to increase 
the resilience of banks can meet only limited success. In fact, the recent instance where a 
media outfit has brought out an expose on alleged irregular practices at bank branches is a 
clear instance of failure on the part of bank managements and Boards to institutionalize an 
effective risk control framework and compliance culture across the organization, right up to 
the level of the front office staff. The management has a critical role to play in getting the 
right balance between the business units and risk management, both in times of stress and 
in good times, when there is a tendency for misaligned incentives to emerge. 
Role of auditors and risk focused internal audit 
The  global  financial  crisis  has  underscored  the  need  for  financial  statements  to  contain 
information that is absolutely unbiased and reliable so as to provide transparency to all the 
stakeholders. High quality financial reporting is of critical importance to prudential regulators 
and this has been emphasized by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) in 
the Guiding Principles enunciated by it in August 2009. Transparency in financial statements 
is  a  pre-condition  for  financial  stability  and  it  is  the  lack  of  transparency  that  allowed  the 
building  up  of  huge  risks  in  the  on  and  off  balance  sheet  positions  of  many  financial 
institutions during the global financial crisis. In this context, the role of auditors becomes very 
crucial in ensuring that the financial statements reflect a true and fair picture of the affairs of 
the entity and that they declare the appropriate risk profile as required by certain accounting 
standards.  For  e.g.  IFRS7  on  “Financial  Instruments:  Disclosures”  requires  detailed 
disclosures on credit risk, liquidity risk, market risk, etc. 
The  recent  report  of  the  Enhanced  Disclosure  Task  Force  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board 
prescribes seven fundamental principles for risk disclosures: 
i. 
ii. 
Disclosures should be clear, balanced and understandable 
Disclosures should be comprehensive and include all of the bank’s key activities and 
risks 
Disclosures should present relevant information 
Disclosures should reflect how the bank manages its risks 
Disclosures should be consistent over time 
Disclosures should be comparable among banks 
Disclosures should be provided on a timely basis. 
iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
forward, 
implemented,  will 
these  principles,  when 
Going 
the  quality  and 
transparency of banks’ disclosures, especially the risk disclosures. Since RBS will depend on 
these  inputs,  the  audit  profession  has  a  significant  role  in  the  smooth  migration  to  RBS. 
Besides,  banks  should strive  to  implement  a framework for  Risk  Based  Internal  Audit.  Yet 
another  pre-requisite  for  the  successful  implementation  of  RBS  is  greater  coordination 
between banking supervisors and external auditors. Also, the Audit Committee of the Board 
has  a  crucial  role  to  play  in  ensuring  that  a  sound  internal  control  framework  and  audit 
system is in place within banks. The formation of a strong Audit Committee would help meet 
this objective. 
improve 
Role of the board 
In  recent  times,  regulatory  changes  across  the  globe  have  increased  the  oversight 
responsibilities  of  the  Boards  in  many  areas,  including  risk  management.  Increased 
shareholder activism is another significant factor forcing the Boards to pay more attention to 
issues  such  as  governance  and  risk  management.  The  Board  should  ensure  that  the  risk 
management policies, processes and systems are implemented effectively at all levels in the 
organization. Boards of banks are expected to have greater involvement in the migration to 
Risk  Based  Supervisory  System  by  streamlining  the  Information  System  at  the  banks  and 
putting in place a proper risk based internal audit system. The non-executive directors on the 
Boards of these institutions have a critical role in evolving strategic focus at the Board level 
for facilitating Risk Based Supervision in their respective institutions. 
HR issues 
As  we  understand,  unskilled  and  untrained  manpower  contributes  in  a  major  way  to 
operational risk in the banks. Therefore, identification and training of a set of core officials in 
the  bank  assumes  greater  significance  in  the  launching  of  RBS  and  taking  it  forward. 
Simultaneously, the top management in the bank should be adequately sensitized, not only 
to  the  nuances  of  RBS,  but  also  to  the  benefits  that  may  accrue  to  the  bank  from  proper 
management of its risks. 
Allocation of supervisory resources and capacity building among supervisors 
One  of  the  biggest  impediments  in  implementation  of  RBS  is  the  mind-set  of  not  only  the 
bankers  but  also  the  supervisors.  Regulators  /  Supervisors,  by  nature,  are  orthodox  and 
bringing  about  a  change  in  their  mind-set  is  a  precursor  to  successful  implementation  of 
RBS. Under RBS, there is a need to target the energy and expertise of the supervisors to 
areas where they will make the greatest difference. Targeting entails accepting that not all 
firms  are  equal  and  that  all  instances  of  firm  failures  may  not  impact  the  stability  of  the 
financial system in similar ways or to the same extent. The risk profiling of the firms based on 
their  size,  complexity,  interconnectedness,  etc  will  determine  the  allocation  of  scarce 
supervisory resources. 
Conclusion 
The  roll  out  of  RBS framework  is  a  huge  challenge for  all  the  stakeholders  in the  banking 
system. The forward  looking  element that  is  normally  associated  with  any  RBS  framework 
also  brings  along  with  it  a  good  deal  of  subjectivity  into  the  assessment  process.  In  the 
ultimate analysis, everything boils down to the supervisor’s judgement – how objectively he 
makes a subjective assessment; how objectively he differentiates between two firms on the 
basis of risk, etc. On our part, we are taking numerous internal initiatives to ensure that we 
develop  the  requisite  supervisory  skills  and  resources  to  migrate  to  the  RBS  approach.  I 
hope that with the whole-hearted support and commitment from the banks’ Boards and their 
Top Management, we would be able to successfully and effectively roll out RBS for Indian 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
banks.  As  we  all  know,  the  failure  on  the  part  of  supervisors  to  make  judgement  calls  on 
issues related to risks in the supervised entities led to the financial crisis. Let us hope that 
RBS,  with  its  innate  linkages  to  subjectivity  and  qualitative  judgment,  will  enable  the 
supervisors to interpret and intervene at the right time and prevent another crisis, at least, in 
the near future. 
In  summary,  I  must  remind  you  that  RBI  and  the  banks  are  equal-stake  partners  in  this 
exercise. In order to ensure that our banking system remains healthy and vibrant, we have to 
collectively work hard and make sure that the RBS process is rolled out smoothly. It is in the 
banks’ own interests to ensure the success of the risk based supervision process as it not 
only  helps  them  identify  incipient  risks  in  a  timely  manner  and  prepare  mitigation  plans;  it 
also reduces their supervisory and compliance burden. I hope all of you would ruminate on 
the  merits  of  RBS  for  your  respective  institutions  and  for  the  financial  system  and  would 
ensure that your banks are ready to embark on this important journey that we begin now. 
I thank CAFRAL for inviting me to share my thoughts today and I wish the Conference all 
success. Thank you all for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
