Ardian Fullani: Overview of Albania’s latest economic and financial 
developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  on  the  Monetary  Policy 
Decision-Making of the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council, Tirana, 27 March 2013. 
 Today,  on  27  March  2013,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  most  recent  monetary  and 
economic  developments  in  Albania,  and  following  the  discussions  on  their  outlook,  the 
Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to keep the key interest rate unchanged, 
at  3.75%. The  Council notes  that  there  are  appropriate monetary  conditions  to  ensure  the 
achievement of the inflation target in the medium-term period, providing, at the same time, 
the required monetary stimulus to boost economic activity.  
Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  the  economic  developments  and  key  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting. 
 Annual inflation was 2.5% in February, down by 0.2 percentage points from January. The 
lower  inflation  was  primarily  driven  by  the  falling  oil  price,  due  to  the  base  effect  of  the 
environmental tax rise in 2012 and the falling global prices. Overall, inflation continues to be 
determined by the rise in food prices. Their inflation accounted for about 90% of February’s 
headline  inflation.  Other  basket  prices  have  generally  been  stable  and  making  low 
contribution to headline inflation. 
In  the  macroeconomic  aspect,  the  general  economic  and  monetary  conditions  have 
contributed to keeping inflation low.  
Aggregate demand, in particular, remains sluggish and insufficient to generate full utilisation 
of production capacities, hence exerting no pressures on producer prices, profit margins and, 
consequently,  the  final  prices  of  goods  and  services.  As  we  have  constantly  pointed  out, 
below-potential economic growth is and will remain a key factor driving the low inflation. In 
parallel, global prices, liquidity situation in the Albanian economy and financial markets, and 
economic  agents’  inflation  expectations  have  not  and  are  not  expected  to  generate  strong 
inflation pressures in the medium-term period. 
Indirect information on the performance of the Albanian economic activity in the last quarter 
of  2012  suggests  sluggish  growth.  Aggregate  demand  was  primarily  driven  by  the  higher 
exports, while the private domestic demand provided positive, albeit low, contribution. On the 
other  hand,  public  sector  expenditure  shrank,  hence  making  a  negative  contribution  to  the 
growth of aggregate demand.  
There  is  scarce  information  on  economic  developments  during  the  first  quarter  of  2013. 
However,  the  analysis  of  available  indirect  data  suggests  that  aggregate  demand  remains 
sluggish and economic growth below potential. Economic activity has been mostly driven by 
the external demand and a higher fiscal stimulus, while the contribution of consumption and 
private investment remains low. The latter continue to suffer from the uncertain outlook, the 
lower increase in disposable income, the spare production capacities, and the relatively tight 
lending  standards.  These  factors  have  been  reflected  in  Albanian  households’  increasing 
propensity to save and businesses’ reluctance to invest.  
External  demand  and  the  favourable  weather  conditions  increased  Albanian  exports  by 
about 34.6% in January. In light of the poor consumption and investment levels, which have 
reflected in the decline of imports by 8.1% during this period, this tendency has improved the 
external position of the Albanian economy further.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Albania’s trade deficit shrank 32.5% in January. The developments in the external sector of 
the  Albanian  economy  reflected  in  improved  foreign  currency  demand  and  supply  ratios, 
contributing, in turn, to a stable exchange rate.  
The Albanian government pursued an accommodating fiscal policy in the first two months of 
2013,  expressed  in  the  increase  of  public  expenditure  and  widening  budget  deficit.  Budget 
expenditure increased at an annualised rate of 1.3% in January and February. This increase 
was  reflected  in  both  current  and  capital  expenditure.  Amidst  the  sluggish  economy,  budget 
revenues continued to contract, registering an annualised fall of 0.8% over the months under 
review.  This  performance  of  public  expenditure  and  revenues  increased  the  fiscal  deficit  by 
about 5.1%.  
Reflecting upon the expected economic and financial developments, the Bank of Albania has 
been pursuing a stimulating monetary policy.  
Through the constant key rate cuts and liquidity injections into the banking market, the Bank 
of Albania has aimed at ensuring more appropriate monetary conditions to meet its inflation 
target in the medium-term period. The financial market evidences low liquidity and inflation 
pressures, which, in turn, have enabled the pass-through of monetary easing into the money 
and primary market. Interbank market rates soon reflected the last key interest rate cut and 
the yields on government debt securities continued to drop. The falling interest rates were 
mostly  reflected  in  the  deposit  market  rather  than  in  the  credit  market,  signalling  a  more 
conservative bank approach to lending and a savings-oriented real sector. 
Monetary indicators have performed in line with the developments in the real economy and 
the monetary inflationary pressures remain low. Money supply decelerated its growth rates 
further in January to 4.9%.  
The  slowing  money  supply  has  reflected  the  low  business  and  household  demand  for 
borrowing,  and  the  lower  budget  deficit  financing  from  the  banking  system.  The  annual 
growth of lending to the economy continued to decelerate to record lows of 2.1% in January. 
The poor performance of lending is evidenced in all categories and currency denominations, 
both for businesses and households.  
 The new available information does not alter our baseline projection for the performance of 
the economy over the current year; however, it evidences a shift in the balance of risks to 
the downside. The Albanian economy is expected to grow at low and below-potential rates, 
reflecting  the  slowing  external  demand,  poor  consumption  and  private  investment  and  a 
positive fiscal stimulus based on the planned budget for this year.  
Against a background of a negative output gap and in the absence of global market and liquidity 
pressures on the Albanian economy, the inflationary pressures are expected to remain low. 
At the end of discussions, the Supervisory Council decided to keep the key interest 
rate unchanged, at 3.75%. The outlook of economic and financial developments inside and 
outside Albania establishes the continuation of an accommodating monetary conditions cycle 
over  the  monetary  policy-relevant  horizon.  This  policy  establishes  the  proper  conditions  to 
meet  the  inflation  target  in  the  medium-term  period,  contributing  at  the  same  time  to  the 
growth of aggregate demand and full utilisation of production capacities in the economy.  
In  its  meeting  today,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  amend  some  regulations 
relating to banking system activity.  
These amendments strengthen the monetary policy transmission mechanism and establish 
better conditions to boost lending. They harmonize well with the easing monetary policy and 
help  stimulate  economic  activity  in  Albania.  More  specifically,  the  approved  amendments 
increase  the  level  of  liquidity  allowed  for  banks'  use  and  provide  the  banking  system  with 
greater room to use the financial leverage. Both these initiatives provide a direct impact on a 
faster growth of lending to the economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
