George A Provopoulos: Interview in Süddeutsche Zeitung 
Interview with Mr George A Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, in Süddeutsche 
Zeitung,  conducted  by  Mr  Αlexander  Ηagelüken  and  Mr  Markus  Zydra,  published  on 
31 January 2013. 
 Governor  Provopoulos,  there  is  still  a  lot  of  scepticism  towards  your  country.  Why 
should Europe’s taxpayers give ever more money to Greece? 
As a Greek citizen I thank the European taxpayers – 230 billion euros to Greece is a gigantic 
sum. Previously we implemented fiscal consolidation, but we did not adequately implement 
structural reforms. As it became evident that the program was off track, confidence declined. 
Therefore, I  can  understand  the  concerns  of  European  taxpayers.  But I can  tell  them: this 
time  the  Greek  government  is  committed  to  deliver.  The  country  is  changing.  European 
taxpayers will get their money back. 
That sounds very optimistic. 
Look, there has been a lot of progress. Here are just a few examples: Greece cut its fiscal 
deficit by nine percentage points compared to 2009. It cut the structural fiscal deficit – that is, 
excluding  cyclical  effects  –  by  even  more:  15  percentage  points.  These  figures  are 
unprecedented for any country at any time. Plus, by the end of this year, Greece will have 
fully regained the 32 percent loss in competitiveness (measured in terms of relative unit labor 
costs) that we suffered from 2001 to 2009. 
But that's not the whole story. Greece hasn't fulfilled other promises. 
That is true. In the past structural reforms were not properly or adequately implemented. That 
was  a  big  mistake,  because  they  were  needed  to  generate growth.  And  we  badly  needed 
measures that could offset the contractionary effects of fiscal consolidation. 
Some economists say: It's not about lower labor costs, the Greeks simply don't have 
products that can compete internationally. 
That is not true! We have tourism, shipping, light industry, agriculture, sources of renewable 
energy and so on – plus our ports are uniquely placed to serve as transportation hubs for a 
much broader area. With our warm weather we could be a significant agricultural producer. 
Instead we import tomatoes from Northern Europe where the weather is like this (points out 
of the window). A major problem however was the steady erosion of competitiveness. 
Do you really believe the politicians? It was you who testified before a parliamentary 
comittee last year that you had warned the two previous governments that the crisis 
would come – but they didn't do anything. 
True. When the financial crisis started in the USA, I believed that it would come across the 
ocean and hit countries with large imbalances, like Greece, the hardest. In January 2009, for 
example, I warned the political leadership that it was necessary to act because growth could 
not be sustained in light of the large fiscal and external imbalances. But since Greece had 
been  growing  at  a  rapid  pace  for  many  years,  my  warnings  were  not  taken  seriously  into 
consideration. 
...shoot the messenger…  
Exactly,  the  messenger  was  not  popular.  Again,  both  before  and  immediately  after  the 
October 2009 election in Greece I warned that the deficit as a percent of GDP could explode 
to  double-digit  levels.  But  my  warnings  were  ignored.  Instead,  government  spending 
continued to increase. 
Shocking enough. So why are you optimistic that Premier Samaras will act? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Greeks, including politicians, realize that this is the last chance for Greece. We are all wiser 
and determined to keep Greece in the euro. Prime Minister Samaras and the other leaders of 
the coalition government are delivering and will continue to deliver. 
How is it to be the Greek in the ECB meetings? For nearly three years you had to ask 
for help nearly every four weeks... 
In fact, we meet every two weeks. I will answer as to a psychiatrist (laughs). Because of the 
painful, but necessary adjustment measures that I advocate, some Greeks do not view me 
sympathetically. In Frankfurt, as the only person at the table from the country from which the 
euro crisis originated, the situation has, at times, been difficult, even though I forewarned my 
country  on  the  dangers  that  we  faced.  I  must  add  that  my  Governing  Council  colleagues 
have gone out of their way to support Greece throughout the crisis. 
Still  you  try  to  be  optimistic.  Is  that  really  founded?  The  Greek  economy  is  set  to 
contract more. 
Although this will be a difficult year, I believe that the worst is over for Greece. I expect the 
economy  to  contract  by  about  4  percent  this  year,  mainly  as  a  result  of  additional  fiscal 
measures. The crucial question is, will the mood brighten because of the progress and thus 
boost  the  economy?  I  believe  that  we  have  been  taking  –  and  will  continue  to  take  –  the 
measures  necessary  to  restore  sustainable  growth.  Plus,  the  banking  system  is  more 
efficient and more competitive… 
…what did you do exactly? 
The banks were recapitalized and restructured. About a year ago, the banking system was 
comprised of 17 banks. Within the next few months, there will only be three large banks and 
a few small ones. What had been a credit crunch, as banks deleveraged, is being reversed. 
Now confidence is returning. 
How do you know that? 
I’m proud that the Bank of Greece protected financial stability in difficult – even dramatic – 
times.  No  Greek  has  lost  a  single  euro  in  his  bank  account.  And  now  deposits  are  even 
coming back! Depositors emptied 87 billion euros from their accounts during the crisis, more 
than  one  third  of  the  deposit  base.  They  sent  the  funds  abroad  or  hid  them  under  their 
mattresses.  Since  June  the  funds  are  returning  to  the  banking  system.  So  far  around  15 
billion euros have returned. In December alone 6 billion euros returned in deposits. 
Why did Greece’s fiscal position became so difficult despite the programme? 
The main reason for the deterioration of the debt dynamics was that we lost 20 percent of 
GDP since 2009. So if we are able to change the mood and boost confidence and growth, 
the debt dynamics will improve fast. 
In 2010 you were also optimistic that, under the May 2010 adjustment program, Greece 
will get out of the crisis without help from outside. 
After  Greece  started  implementing  the  program  in  May  of  2010,  bond  spreads  halved  the 
following months. That is why I was optimistic Greece would continue with the progress. But 
after the fall of 2010 a kind of reform fatigue set in. And then there was the talk about private 
sector involvement that eroded investors’ confidence. 
Was the debt restructuring a mistake? 
What is a mistake in this situation? If investors fear to lose their money, confidence is lost. 
Had  Greece  followed  through  with  reforms,  fully  implementing  its  program,  and  in  the 
absence of talk about the restructuring of private sector debt, the debt restructuring for the 
private sector could have been avoided. 
There was a criticism of you because you received a large severance payment after 
leaving your post in the bank Piraeus after only two years. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
In early 2008 when I left that bank for the central bank, the situation in the banking sector 
was very different from the present situation. At that time, there was still extreme optimism. 
My payment was made in such a situation and was also stipulated under my contract. It was 
approved by all the relevant bodies, including the shareholders of my previous bank at their 
General  Assembly.  Let  me  also  point  out  that  the  Greek  banking  sector  at  that  time  was 
strong  and  had  not  received  any  state  aid.  In  most  countries,  including  Ireland,  Iceland, 
Spain and the US, the banking sector was the source of the crisis. In contrast to the situation 
in  other  countries,  Greek  banks  did  not  hold  toxic  assets  or  excessive  real  estate  loans. 
Moreover, their capital ratios were high and their loan to deposit ratios were low. In Greece, 
the banking system was hit by the sovereign crisis. 
Do the business world and the rich people really do enough for your ailing country? 
There are countless cases of tax evasion. 
Although tax evasion is a problem in many countries, in Greece we have had relatively more. 
That  is  why  I  repeatedly  called  upon  past  Greek  governments  to  tackle  the  problem. 
Fortunately, the present coalition government is acting. As a central bank we are doing our 
part  to  contribute.  In  this  regard,  may  I  also  point  out  that  the  Bank  of  Greece  provided 
evidence  that  has  been  the  basis  of  criminal  proceedings  in  the  judicial  system  involving 
money laundering. 
Concerning tax evasion, the French submitted a list of Greek tax evaders that wasn’t 
followed on in Greece. 
This was most unfortunate. However, the Greek tax authorities are now taking the necessary 
actions.  In  this  connection,  they  have  asked  banks  to  provide  data  of  people  who  have 
moved money out of the country in order to investigate whether there has been tax evasion. 
We already see positive results from these actions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
