Pongpen Ruengvirayudh: Thailand’s economic challenges and role of 
monetary policy 
Luncheon speech by Ms Pongpen Ruengvirayudh, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Thailand, 
at the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Bangkok, 1 March 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the Netherlands Embassy for inviting me to give a luncheon speech on 
this  occasion.  Thailand  and  the  Netherlands  have  a  long-standing  cultural  and  economic 
relationship,  dating  back  as  far  as  1605,  when  the  Dutch  East  India  Company  set  up  a 
trading post in our old capital, Ayutthaya. Today, the Netherlands is Thailand’s third biggest 
trading partner within Europe, accounting for 12.8 percent of total trade volume between the 
continent and Thailand. In terms of foreign direct investment, the Netherlands is one of the 
most  prominent  European  investors,  with  presence  spanning  key  sectors  from  banking, 
chemicals, electronics, to wholesale and retail trade. It is my hope that our two nations will 
continue to mutually benefit from their strong economic bind for many generations to come. 
I  would  like  to focus my  talk today  on  the  recent  economic  developments,  and  the  role  of 
monetary policy in addressing some of the present challenges facing the Thai economy. As 
some  of  you  may  already  know,  monetary  policy  in  Thailand  is  decided  by  a  committee 
(MPC) consisting of seven members and four of them are experts from outside the Bank of 
Thailand. Each of the MPC votes independently to decide on the policy interest rate every six 
weeks,  or  so.  The  MPC  generally  agrees  on  the  overall  economic  outlook  and  areas  of 
challenges, although views about the balance of risks and the appropriate policy response 
can  differ.  My  discussion  today  should  therefore  be  taken  as  a  representation  of  my  own 
view as an MPC member, and needs not reflect the opinions of all other voting members. 
Economic outlook 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Last  year  was  in  many  ways  a  year  of  transition.  The  economy  had  to  recover  from  the 
devastating  floods  that  took  a  heavy  toll  in  late  2011,  and  at  the  same  time  deal  with  the 
fragile  global  economy.  Throughout  the  year,  incoming  economic  data  have  nonetheless 
been  a  series  of  positive  surprises.  The  recovery  gradually  gained  traction  and  became 
increasingly  self-sustaining.  Production  constraints  eased  and  domestic  demand  was  back 
on  track,  thanks  to  the  economy’s  sound  underlying  fundamentals.  Meanwhile,  monetary 
policy  continued  to  be  accommodative  and  supportive  to  growth.  Fiscal  spending  through 
flood-relief and stimulus measures also played an important role in providing a boost to the 
economy.  As  a  consequence,  the  Thai  economy  was  able  to  sail  through  those  strong 
headwinds, and grew robustly at 6.4 percent in 2012. 
Projecting forward, the outlook for this year continues to be positive, supported by domestic 
demand that should remain robust. The underlying economic fundamentals also continue to 
be  favourable.  The  banking  system  is  underpinned  by  solid  capital  base,  prudent  risk 
management  practice,  and  strong  risk-based  supervision.  On  the  macroeconomic  front, 
inflation  expectations  are  firmly  anchored,  affording  monetary  policy  the  space  to  remain 
sufficiently accommodative to support growth momentum and mitigate global economic risks. 
Fiscal stimulus measures, including the first-car tax rebate scheme and the personal income 
tax cut, should also further help sustain domestic demand. The latest Monetary Policy Report 
released in January projected growth this year to be 4.9 percent, which will likely be revised 
up after the strong outturn of last year growth rate as announced by the NESDB. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Challenges and role of monetary policy 
Despite this somewhat benign outlook, there remain three important challenges facing 
the Thai economy, from both domestic and external sources. The first key challenge is 
on the domestic side. Private sector credits, particularly those in the  household sector, 
have been growing at a high pace, spurred by domestic demand momentum, fiscal stimulus 
as well as easy financial conditions. International evidence suggests that a prolonged period 
of rapid credit growth could lead to a build-up of financial imbalances, strain households’ debt 
servicing ability and loan quality, as well as sow a seed for asset price bubbles. While the 
more  adverse  scenarios  currently  remain  a  remote  possibility  in  Thailand,  the  MPC  is  not 
complacent and has been monitoring risks to financial stability closely. Monetary policy can 
play an important role in preempting an emergence of such risks, and the MPC will continue 
to evaluate if and when a specific policy response is warranted. 
The second key challenge is on the external front as the global environment remains 
uncertain. The lingering euro debt crisis and fragile US recovery continue to weigh on global 
growth.  Policymakers  are  still  grappling  with  deep-rooted  long-term  problems,  and  policy 
response has been met with mixed success. The recent improvement in market sentiments 
is a welcomed relief and some tail-risk events may have been averted. Nonetheless, a full 
recovery is not  yet in sight, which adds to uncertainty. Given this backdrop, it is important 
that the Bank of Thailand remains alert, and retains sufficient policy space to act if and when 
necessary. 
The third key challenge is that of a recent surge of capital inflows, whose causes are 
both  domestic  and  global  in  their  origin.  On  the  one  hand,  the  relatively  robust  growth 
momentum  in  Thailand  has  been  a  “pull”  factor,  attracting  portfolio  inflows  from  those 
seeking to benefit from better economic prospects. At the same time, the low interest rate 
environment  and  subdued  growth  in  major  economies  have  helped  “push”  investors  to 
search  for  higher  risk-adjusted  returns  elsewhere,  particularly  in  emerging  economies 
including Thailand. The exchange rates of these recipient economies have appreciated as a 
result,  leading  to  concerns  in  some  quarters  about  the  prospect  of  growth  momentum.  In 
Thailand, some have called on the MPC to lower the policy interest rate to ease the pressure 
on the baht. A few have gone further to question the suitability of inflation targeting regime for 
Thailand. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
There is little disagreement about the pertinence of capital flows for macroeconomic outlook 
and  stability.  Where  my  view  may  depart  from  that  of  some  critics,  is  in  regards  to 
appropriate  policy  response,  and  what  objectives  the  Bank  of  Thailand  can  and  should 
pursue.  The  MPC’s  core  objective,  as  instituted  by  law  and  in  agreement  with  the 
government, is to achieve maximum sustainable growth, in the context of stable prices and 
sound financial system. Under this mandate, capital flows and exchange rate fluctuations are 
not the targets in and of themselves, but enter the policy calculations through their effects on 
the overall macroeconomic outlook. The MPC’s recent decisions to keep the policy interest 
rate  unchanged  can  be  rationalized  in  this  light.  While  all  members  of  the  MPC  may 
recognize  the  risks  posed  by  volatile  capital  flows,  the  majority  believed  that  the  overall 
macroeconomic  conditions  are  consistent  with  the  mandate,  and  no  change  in  policy  was 
warranted.  Thus,  the  current  policy  framework  is  sufficiently  flexible  to  allow  the  Bank  of 
Thailand  to  address  the  issue  of  capital  flows.  By  contrast,  if  policy  interest  rate  were 
employed to target capital flows and exchange rate per se, the outcome would likely prove 
counter-productive in my view. Uncertainty about the effectiveness of such policy use aside, 
the central bank’s commitment to safeguard the overall macroeconomic stability may also be 
called into question by the public, with potentially serious consequences. 
I would like to also point out that a couple of mitigating factors are currently at play, which 
can help alleviate the adverse impact of capital flow surge. First, the new investment cycle in 
Thailand may have taken off, led by both the private sector and large public infrastructure 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
projects.  Many  of  these  projects  have  high  imported  contents,  and  stand  to  gain  from  an 
exchange rate appreciation. Spells of baht appreciation thus provide an incentive for many 
firms to implement a long-overdue technological upgrading and import more capital goods in 
an environment where labor is scarce and no longer cheap. In turn, these imports can help 
slow  down  the  pace  of  appreciation  and  mitigate  the  adverse  effects  on  export  industry. 
Furthermore, corporations that have expanded their operations overseas or plan to do so will 
also benefit from stronger baht which can help, to some extent, reduce the overall impact of 
baht appreciation on their businesses. 
With  cooperation  from  all  sides,  including  policymakers  and  private  sector  alike,  Thailand 
could seize this opportunity to strengthen the fundamentals of the economy further, and reap 
long-term benefits that are likely to be greater than short-term costs of adjustment. 
Second,  it  is  often  overlooked  that  under  flexible  exchange  rate,  adjustments  in  the 
currency’s  value  themselves  can  be  an  effective  buffer  for  capital  flow  volatility.  In  a  well- 
functioning  market,  a  currency  that  is  overvalued  relative  to  its  fundamentals  would  be 
subject to market discipline that helps slow down further appreciation. Indeed, estimates from 
both the International Monetary Fund and various investment banks suggest that the current 
value  of  Thai  baht  is  consistent  with  the  underlying  fundamentals.  To  promote  a  deeper 
foreign exchange market and foster more balanced capital flows, the Bank of Thailand also 
launched a Capital Account Liberalization Master Plan, which entailed liberalization of Thai 
investment  abroad  and  a  streamline  of  foreign  exchange  regulations.  There  are  also 
continuing  efforts  to  enhance  the  private  sectors’  adaptability  and  foreign  exchange  risk 
management. These initiatives should provide an extra layer of cushion to shield businesses 
against  short-term  market  volatility.  They  are  not,  however,  a  substitute  for  structural 
improvement  in  productivity,  which  in  the  long run  holds  the key  to  success for the  export 
industry. 
Given  that  the  global  environment  is  still  subject  to  uncertainty,  capital  flows  may 
continue to be volatile, and risks to financial stability warrant close monitoring, it is 
more  important  than  ever  that  monetary  policy  strikes  the  right  balance  between 
providing  support  to  sustain  growth  momentum  while  ensuring  long-term  financial 
stability.  In  the  judgment  of  MPC,  the  current  stance  of  monetary  policy  remains 
accommodative,  with  the  real  policy  rate  still  in  negative  territory.  As  the  balance  of  risks 
shifts  between  the  need  to  support  growth  and  the  duty  to  safeguard  financial  and  price 
stability, monetary policy stance will have to be adjusted accordingly. The Bank of Thailand 
stands ready to employ the right mix of policy tools under its purview to attain these goals. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I believe that a balanced and judicious use of monetary policy tool has and will continue to 
play a critical role for ensuring long-term macroeconomic and financial stability. As always, 
the Bank of Thailand will strive to create a stable economic environment in which businesses 
can  prosper  on  a  sustainable  basis,  so  that Thailand  will  continue  to  be  the  destination of 
choice by long-term investors. 
Let me close my remark by thanking the Netherlands business community for the substantial 
contribution to the Thai economy. I hope that the relationship between our two nations will 
continue to flourish. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
