Benoît Cœuré: The three dimensions of the euro area crisis 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  Asia-Europe  Economic  Forum  conference  on  “European  troubles,  Asian  worries”, 
Brussels, 21 January 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Fédéric  Holm-Hadulla  for  his  contributions  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the 
opinions contained herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, dear friends,  
It is a great pleasure to speak to you tonight. I would like to express my appreciation to the 
Asia-Europe  Economic  Forum  for  its  collective  thinking  on  our  common  economic 
challenges. 
The  economic  policy  debate  over  recent  years  has  been  preoccupied  with  the  “European 
troubles” – as the conference title indicates. It is certainly encouraging that the focus of this 
debate is starting to shift from: “How much worse does it get?” to “Is it finally getting better?”. 
There  are  signs  of  convalescence  and  “re-integration”  in  European  financial  markets.  Yet, 
these  are  revertible  and  should  by  no  means  induce  complacency.  As  Christine  Lagarde 
warned last week: “We stopped the collapse, we should avoid a relapse, and it’s not time to 
relax”. 
This holds true for analysts and policy-makers alike. There should be no “relapse” in thinking 
about the crisis. To ultimately succeed, policy action must be based on a comprehensive and 
principle-based  diagnosis  of  the  problem.  And  to  obtain  such  a  diagnosis,  one  sometimes 
has to step back and look at the overall picture. That is what I will do in today’s speech. 
To this  end,  let me  start  with  the following  basic  question:  what  is  the  exact  nature  of the 
crisis that we have been discussing for so long? 
The use of the term “crisis”, in the singular, is, in itself, somewhat misleading: all crises are 
combinations of several distinct phases and dimensions which all require their own specific 
response. The euro area crisis has often been described as the combination of a sovereign 
debt  crisis,  a  banking  crisis,  and  a  macroeconomic  crisis.1  Here,  I  will  take  a  different 
perspective  and  argue  that  some key  dimensions  of the  crisis  are  not specific  to  the  euro 
area. I see three key dimensions of crisis that we have to deal with. The first one takes the 
form  of  a  classic  debt  deleveraging  cycle.  This  dimension  is  probably  the  most  visible 
materialisation of crisis but it is only a symptom of the underlying problem. In fact, there is a 
deeper dimension which I will refer to as a second dimension of the crisis, the “crisis of the 
social contract”. The latter reflects a fundamental misalignment between the economic status 
that  industrial  countries  have  grown  accustomed  to  and  the  material  conditions  that  are 
affordable  without  a  profound  shift  in  economic policies.  But  in  engineering  such  a  shift,  a 
third dimension comes to the fore, namely a crisis of the institutional architecture. As regards 
this  third  dimension,  I  will  focus  on  the  European  context  where  policy-makers  have  to 
conduct a fundamental overhaul of EMU simultaneously with their acute crisis fighting efforts. 
I  will  argue  that  these  different  crisis  dimensions  reinforce  each  other  and  pose  particular 
challenges  for  policy-makers,  both  in  designing  appropriate  policy  responses  and  in 
communicating them. I will also argue that, in contrast to the former two crisis dimensions, 
which affect all mature economies, the third dimension is the most specific to the European 
context. 
                                                
1  See Jay C. Shambaugh, “The Euro’s Three Crises”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring 2012, or 
the  special  report  of  the  German  Council  of  Economic  Experts,  “After  the  Euro  Area  Summit:  Time  to 
Implement Long-term Solutions”, July 2012. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Three dimensions of the crisis 
Debt deleveraging 
The  global  deleveraging  process  will  feature  prominently  in  tomorrow’s  conference 
programme, so I will restrict myself to a stylised account of the most salient features only. 
Its roots can be found in the pre-crisis period, when economic activity markedly exceeded the 
sustainable  long-term  trend.  This  excess,  which  was  observable  in  virtually  all  major 
industrialised countries, was fuelled by an aggressive accumulation of debt in various sectors 
of the economy, driven by, inter alia: unchecked financial innovation; the absence of binding 
and  consistent  macro-  and  micro-prudential  policies  that  could  prevent  escalating  stability 
risks;  and  a  failure  of  financial  markets  to  appropriately  sanction  failed  public  policies  and 
unsound business models. 
As  a  consequence,  ever  more  consumption  was  financed  by  borrowing  against  future 
incomes.  But  instead  of  systematically  reflecting  this  inter-temporal  shift  of  consumption 
opportunities  in  higher  real  borrowing  costs,  credit  conditions  were  largely  unaffected. 
Mispricing of credit can be protracted, but it exposes the credit market to sudden reversals of 
sentiment. This occurred when a number of shocks, initially fairly confined to the US financial 
sector, spread sustainability fears through the global chain of financial cross-exposures. The 
continuous frontloading of aggregate demand through financial leverage came to an abrupt 
end. The bubble duly burst. 
The ensuing financial turbulence quickly morphed into a general deterioration in overall credit 
conditions;  and  this  dragged  down  economic  activity  and  threatened fiscal  sustainability  in 
numerous  countries.  Moreover,  many  governments  had  to  intervene  in  domestic  banking 
sectors to preserve financial stability. This resulted in a massive transfer of liabilities which in 
some cases overwhelmed government balance sheets. 
Let  me  emphasise  two  issues  at  this  stage.  First,  while  the  depth  of  the  current  crisis  in 
Europe and in other industrialised countries is unprecedented in recent history, its structure 
is  by  no  means  unique.  For  example,  much  of  the  above-mentioned  evolution  could  be 
observed in the Asian crisis in the late 1990s and in countless currency crises in developing 
economies before and since. 
Second,  from  a  broader  perspective,  the  concrete  manifestation  of  the  deleveraging 
pressures  is  of  secondary  relevance:  whether  the  strains  show  up  on  governments’, 
households’ or firms’ balance sheets has important short-run distributional implications. But 
ultimately, they confront policy-makers with the same challenges: in the acute crisis phase, 
they have to promote and control the balance sheet adjustments – which are necessary – by 
way  of  policies  that  avoid  depressionary  spirals  of  the  kind  seen  in  the  1930s.  Once  they 
succeed, economic activity will likely resume its upward trend, albeit from a lower base. At 
this  stage,  the  common  challenge  for  policy-makers  is  to  “re-base”  growth  on  a  new  and 
sustainable trajectory. And the extent of this rebasing can be substantial. For example, the 
latest IMF World Economic Outlook suggests that estimates for potential output in advanced 
economies  may  have  to  be  revised  downwards  by  around  10  percentage  points  in  level 
compared with pre-crisis trends, not to mention possible revision in trend growth rates.2  
Given  the  exceptional  size  of  the  initial  imbalance  during  the  current  crisis  and  limited 
flexibility in labour, product and service markets in the euro area, this deleveraging may well 
extend over a protracted period of time. 
                                                
2  Source: IMF World Economic Outlook – October 2012; Chapter 1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
A misalignment in the social contract 
This  brings  me  to  the  second  dimension  of  the  debt  crisis,  which  is  the  recognition  that 
governments around the world have entered into long-term commitments beyond the limits of 
sustainability. Importantly, these commitments are not necessarily the product of an explicit 
contract,  like  a  bond  or  a  loan.  In  fact,  in  large  part  they  take  the  form  of  implicit  policy 
promises. 
The  re-basing  of  economic  activity  thus  has  broader  implications.  Inevitably,  it  forces 
countries  to  reassess  their  social  contracts.  And  such  a  reassessment  is  nowhere  more 
visible  than  in  the  fiscal  domain  where  political  consensus  is  translated  into  tangible 
distributive choices. 
To understand this dimension, it is useful to consider a stylised version of the inter-temporal 
government balance sheet: the government has explicit financial liabilities – as recorded in 
gross government debt figures. And it has assets, including for instance its stakes in publicly 
owned  companies  and  holdings  of  public  capital  more  broadly.  But  these  two  items  are 
comparatively  small.  Much  more  important  are  implicit  fiscal  assets  and  liabilities.  Implicit 
fiscal assets are the discounted value of all future tax revenues. Implicit fiscal liabilities are 
the discounted value of all future primary expenditure. 
If the residual value of the balance sheet or “public equity” is negative, then somebody has to 
pick up the bill at some point: either taxes have to increase – implying a loss for the taxpayer; 
or government expenditure has to be reduced – implying a loss for those who benefit from 
public  services;  or  the  value  of  the  debt  has  to  be  reduced  –  which  means  a  loss  for  the 
creditors.  In  this  framework,  monetisation  of  government  liabilities  through  a  permanently 
higher  inflation  rate  is  comparable  with  a  tax  imposed  on  consumers.  In  all  industrialised 
economies, it is explicitly discarded by central banks’ price stability mandate. 
The  recognition  of  losses,  and  the  choice  of  who  has  to  bear  such  losses  are  essentially 
political  decisions.  They  can  be  postponed  so  long  as  governments  have  easy  access  to 
market  finance.  But  market  access  can  dry  up,  as  experienced  during  this  crisis  by  some 
countries, where potential creditors have come to doubt that they will be repaid. 
Such doubts can either pertain to the economic ability of governments to stay current on their 
financial obligations. In other words, market participants may conclude that the public sector 
is  on  the  wrong  side  of  the  “Laffer  curve”,  so  that  a  further  tightening  of  the  fiscal  stance 
would be counterproductive. Or, they doubt the political ability of governments (let alone their 
willingness) to service their debts in view of political constraints. That is, creditors may come 
to realise that their explicit claim on the government is not necessarily senior to the implicit 
promises that the government made to taxpayers and beneficiaries of government spending. 
As  a  result,  the  use  of  government  balance  sheets  to  borrow  from  future  generations 
becomes  more  costly.  At  this  point  a  gap  opens  up  between  the  economic  status  that 
countries are accustomed to and the status that is affordable given the sustainable growth 
trajectory. In the crisis, this gap grew wider and became harder to close by the re-basing of 
economic activity. But the gap predated the crisis. Warnings on the long-run sustainability of 
public  finances,  arising  from  unfunded  social  promises  in  a  context  of  ageing  populations, 
were  legion  long  before  the  crisis  erupted.  And  these  warning  were  indeed  addressed  to 
most  industrialised  countries  around  the  globe.  Nonetheless,  in  the  five  years  prior  to  the 
current  crisis,  which  were  marked  by  very  favourable  cyclical  conditions,  government 
spending still outpaced GDP growth in most industrialised countries. In fact, this trend was 
more  pronounced  in  the  US  and  Japan  –  where  the  average  growth  rate  in  government 
spending exceeded the average nominal GDP growth rate by 1½ and 2 percentage points 
respectively  –  than  in  the  euro  area  where  this  difference  only  amounted  to  around  one 
quarter percentage point. 
This second dimension is a crisis of the social contract, a contract that was established in the 
post-war  era  and  that  was  fair  and  affordable  at  that  time.  It  was  fair  because  it  implied 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
solidarity  towards  the  generation  that  experienced  the  war.  It  was  affordable  because  of 
favourable demographics and growth prospects that were supported by rapid technological 
progress and a replenishment of the lost social capital. To sustain the key elements of this 
social  contract  a  profound  shift  in  economic  policies  is  necessary  in  order  to  rethink  the 
contract and, at the same time, elevate the long-term rate of growth. 
The incomplete institutional architecture of EMU 
Engineering such shift in policies requires a sound and robust institutional environment with 
an ability to produce political consensus – which brings me to the third dimension of the debt 
crisis in Europe, namely the incomplete architecture of Economic and Monetary Union. 
In  this  regard,  the  crisis  has  uncovered  four  shortcomings  in  particular:  first,  the  EU  fiscal 
rules were incapable of promoting prudent fiscal policies in good times; second, there was no 
robust mechanism to prevent macroeconomic imbalances within the EU or to correct them; 
third, insufficient coordination of macro and micro-prudential supervision of financial sectors 
allowed a build-up of vulnerabilities in banking sectors; and finally, the absence of a crisis 
management  framework  frustrated  efforts  to  contain  contagion  between  countries  and 
between the balance sheets of banks and sovereigns, respectively. 
These  shortcomings  were  a  catalyst  for  the  other  two  crisis  dimensions:  they  facilitated 
excessive leverage throughout the economy which in turn sowed the seeds for the ongoing 
deleveraging  crisis;  they  did  not  address  the  spillovers  stemming  from  interconnected 
financial  systems  in  a  single  currency  area,  and  they  failed  to  impose  tough  budget 
constraints on governments, thus allowing them to postpone their efforts to address the crisis 
of the social contract, and leaving them without adequate fiscal space to cushion the crisis. 
In several European countries the current episode of fiscal austerity is sometimes attributed 
to  the  renewed  focus  of  the  institutional  setting  on  budgetary  discipline.  But,  in  fact,  the 
ongoing  fiscal  tightening  is  a  necessary  consequence  of  the  misalignment  of  the  social 
contract: already during the boom period preceding the crisis, public commitments in these 
countries were entered into at the cost of future generations; the crisis then revealed that: 
first,  projected  expenditure  was  too  high  in  view  of  plausible  revenues;  and  second, these 
projected  revenues  had  to  be  revised  downwards  as  the  whole  economy  was  rebased 
downwards.  Moreover,  the  problem  is  by  no  means  specific  to  the  euro  area,  as  vividly 
documented by the intense political debates in other industrialised economies, such as the 
US, the UK or Japan. The misleading attribution of fiscal austerity to European governance 
arrangements  creates  excessive  political  costs  for  the  much  needed  strengthening  of 
institutions, and should be rejected. 
However, even if such attribution is misleading, it demonstrates that the three dimensions of 
the  crisis  interact  in  a  way  that  creates  a  “political  trap”  in  which  political  consensus  is 
hampered by a wrong diagnosis of the crisis, thus delaying the necessary policy shifts. The 
“political  trap”  is  compounded  by  the  strong  inter-governmental  dimension  of  European 
governance: elected leaders are locally mandated through local political processes, that fail 
to  internalise  positive  cross-country  externalities  arising  from  policy  changes.  For  political 
leaders this should imply that they have to step up their efforts in clearly communicating the 
current economic problems and feasible options. At national level, they must ensure that the 
body politic coalesces around policies aiming at restoring the credit of the state, as this is the 
only way to preserve our social model. And they must accept that European interest will be 
better promoted by strong community institutions. 
Crisis resolution 
Against this background, addressing the three dimensions of the crisis at once may appear 
as  a  daunting  task.  But  precisely  because  the  dimensions  are  so  closely  intertwined, 
successful reforms in either one of them can trigger a virtuous circle in the others. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  reform  agenda  should  rest  on  several  pillars.  At  its  core,  a  rethinking  of  the  social 
contract is necessary to restore economic sustainability. This clearly has to comprise some 
degree  of  spending  reduction  and/or  tax  increase,  which  in  the  short-term  will  negatively 
impact  growth.  Yet,  this  should  also  be  complemented  by  reforms  of  labour  and  product 
markets  with  a  focus  on  raising  work-force  participation,  including  through  longer  working 
lives, and on increasing price flexibility. 
Some argue that even structural reforms would immediately restrain spending and activity. 
This needs to be strongly qualified. Structural reforms which open up closed professions and 
dismantle rent-seeking oligopolies in the production and distribution of goods and services 
can  promote  a  shift  of  supply  and  lower  prices,  which  in  turn  can  sustain  real  incomes  at 
times  when  nominal  incomes  do  not  grow  or  even  fall.  In  these  conditions,  engineering  a 
positive output shock will be the key remedy to the European troubles. It would (partly) offset 
the  negative  shock  of  the  “Great  Recession”,  when  economic  activity  was  rebased  to  a 
permanently lower level. If it supports skills and the ability to innovate, it could even increase 
long-term output trends. As a further side effect, it would crucially contribute to induce a “re-
convergence” of Europe’s economies, in other words, the gap between net debtor and net 
credit  countries  would  be  narrowed.  This  in  turn  would  facilitate  consensus  on  a  common 
course of action in the ongoing revamping of the institutional architecture. 
What is the role of monetary policy in this context? What it can do is to stabilise growth near 
its trend over extended horizons, but it cannot raise the trend. Hence, it only constitutes a 
line  of  defence  against  an  escalation  of  the  three  dimensional  crisis.  It  has  resolutely 
addressed risks of deflationary spirals, for instance resulting from a collapse of the banking 
system; it has prevented the materialisation of self-fulfilling catastrophic equilibria, such as 
the self-fulfilling nature of redenomination risk; and it has ensured an appropriate degree of 
monetary  accommodation  to  address  large  underutilisation  of  resources,  to  the  extent  that 
these gaps had created negative risks to medium-term price stability. 
However,  despite  tentative  evidence  for  a  relaxation  of  financial  market  tensions,  also  in 
response to our recently announced Outright Monetary Transactions programme, there is no 
credible substitute for the positive output shock I described earlier. And triggering such an 
output shock is clearly a matter for elected governments, at national and European level. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude on a positive note. 
Looking  at  Europe  today,  I  believe  there  is  growing  evidence  that  electorates  and  policy-
makers stand ready to address these challenges. Concrete reforms are under way that many 
would  have  thought  impossible  in  Europe.  Think,  for  example,  of  the  major  sharing  of 
sovereignty implicit in the decision to move towards a European banking union. Think also of 
the ambitious structural reform agendas adopted in several countries. 
Much remains to be done, but the momentum has shifted. Increasingly, European citizens 
understand that the upside to structural reform is enormous, given its potential to make the 
economy more efficient, reduce rents, and increase their standard of living. Those who fear 
the political cost of such a shift in economic policies should bear in mind that the alternative 
would be a fundamental revision of the current social promises, and ultimately a debasing of 
the European model.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
