Jwala Rambarran: India and Trinidad and Tobago economies – building 
bridges for a robust relationship 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the 2013 India Business Seminar, Port of Spain, 20 March 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to address you at this 2013 India Business Seminar. 
At the outset, I commend the Chamber of Commerce, InvesTT and the High Commission of 
India  in  Port  of  Spain  for  continuing  to  further  deepen  trade  and  investment  opportunities 
between  our  two  nations,  which  share  strong  cultural  connections  since  East  Indian 
immigrants arrived here over 150 years ago. 
This  year’s  India  Business  Seminar  is  certainly  timely.  Not  only  does  it  allow  for  further 
exploration of business opportunities that have arisen since the Honourable Prime Minister 
led  a  delegation  to  India  in  January  2012.  But  it  also  provides  an  occasion  for  us  here  in 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  to  critically  reassess  our  state  of  readiness  to  firmly  grasp  these 
business opportunities. 
I  say  this  because  even  though  some  threats  to  the  global  economic  outlook  have  partly 
faded, sparking renewed optimism, uncertainty is bound to remain high. More than five years 
into  the  global  economic  crisis,  policymakers  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  traditional  trading 
partner  countries  are  still  struggling  to  resolve  long  pending  issues  to  put  their  crisis-hit 
economies on a sustainable growth path. 
In  the  United  States,  which  accounts  for  almost  half  of  our  total  exports,  there  has  been 
agreement avoiding the so-called “fiscal cliff”. Economic growth, however, remains subdued 
and  the  unemployment  rate  is  too  high.  The  United  States  is  likely  to  face  headwinds  for 
some time to come from not completely resolving disagreements regarding expenditure cuts 
or changes to its public debt ceiling. 
Across the Atlantic, our European trading partners, who absorb more than one-tenth of our 
exports, are likely to remain a source of global instability for a while yet. Persistent sovereign 
debt crises and underlying structural problems in several euro area economies will take time 
to  resolve.  Recent  developments  in  Cyprus  regarding  the  imposition  of  a  tax  on  bank 
deposits have sparked a new wave of nervousness in periphery euro zone countries and in 
world financial markets. 
Closer to home, the Caribbean, which remains our second largest export market, is gradually 
recovering from a deep recession. Since September 2008, nine countries in the Caribbean 
have  turned  to  the  IMF  for  increased  financial  support  under  various  lending  facilities  to 
weather the crisis. Others have sought to rely mainly on fiscal stimulus to kick start growth, 
elevating the risk of debt distress. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, even as we focus on dealing with the fall-out from the ongoing global 
economic crisis, we should not lose sight that our world is being reshaped by a number of 
megatrends. 
One  such  megatrend  is  the  rise  of  the  new  superpowers  of  Asia  and  the  Southern 
Hemisphere.  These  emerging  nations  of  Brazil,  Russia,  India,  and  China,  or  as  they  are 
more  popularly  known,  the  BRICs,  are  already  major  players  in  the  world  economy.  They 
have  40  per  cent  of  the  world’s  population  spread  out  over  three  continents  and  already 
account for 25 per cent of global GDP. 
The  BRICs  are  forming  new  South-South  connections,  reshaping  emerging  market  and 
developing countries’ engagement with the rest of the world. In the process, the BRICs are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
helping to create a new Southern Silk Road, linking Asia, the Middle East, Africa and Latin 
America and the Caribbean, and signaling the return of the centre of the world economy’s 
centre of gravity back to its origins. 
In a January 2011 research report entitled “The World in 2050” Karen Ward, an economist 
with HSBC, predicts the following seismic shifts by the year 2050: 
• 
The collective size of economies we currently deem „emerging’ will have increased 
five-fold and will be larger than the developed world; 
19 of the 30 largest economies will be from the emerging world; indeed, China and 
India will be the largest and third-largest economies in the world, respectively; 
Several  other  emerging  economies  –  most  notably,  Mexico,  Turkey,  Indonesia, 
Egypt,  Malaysia,  Thailand,  Colombia  and  Venezuela  –  will  make  substantial 
progress up the global league table; 
Some small-population, ageing, rich economies in Europe such as Switzerland and 
the Netherlands will slip down the grid significantly, while Sweden, Belgium, Austria, 
Norway and Denmark drop out of the Top 30 altogether. 
   These trends make it even more imperative for Trinidad and Tobago to build and strengthen 
South-South  relationships  during  the  current  global  crisis  to  help  us  withstand  future 
economic pressures in our traditional markets. 
In this regard, I remain convinced that international trade is a key instrument to building more 
robust and enduring relationships across countries. As a small, highly open island economy, 
trade  is  very  important  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  with  the  value  of  imports  and  exports  of 
goods and services equivalent to 100 per cent of GDP. International trade allows us to import 
ideas  and  technologies,  realize  comparative  advantage,  foster  competition  and  achieve 
higher sustainable employment and economic growth. 
Deepening our trade engagement with India is, therefore, a step in the right direction. I am 
pleased to note that, within the recent past, our countries have been steadily moving to boost 
trade and investment linkages, building on our strong cultural links. 
For us here in Trinidad and Tobago, India with its population of more than 1.2 billion persons 
represents  an  enormous,  untapped  market.  For  India,  although  Trinidad  and  Tobago  may 
seem to be very small market with only 1.3 million persons, the country can be viewed as the 
Gateway to the Americas, offering a collective market of some 590 million persons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean. 
Accordingly,  this  afternoon  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  talk  about  some  issues 
related to building and sustaining our trade flows with India. 
Merchandise trade flows 
Ladies and Gentlemen, although bilateral trade relations between Trinidad and Tobago and 
India  seem to  have  considerable  potential, the hard  evidence  suggests  that  we  are  barely 
scratching the surface and are yet to see any significant expansion of actual merchandise 
trade flows. 
Based  on  data  from  our  Central  Statistical  Office  (CSO),  the  merchandise  trade  pattern 
between Trinidad and Tobago and India is as follows: 
• 
Trinidad and Tobago consistently ran a trade deficit with India, which widened from 
around US$15 million in 1998 to more than US$50 million in 2006; 
Our trade deficit with India turned into a surplus of just over US$30 million in 2007, 
for the first time in 9 years, mainly due to exports of LNG, but lasted only until 2008; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 2 
  A trade deficit of about US$50 million re-emerged with India in 2009, principally on 
account of the global economic crisis; and widened to US$85 million in 2010, before 
narrowing sharply to around US$15 million in 2011. 
At a sectoral level, Trinidad and Tobago’s exports to India reflect our comparative advantage 
in energy but they are very highly concentrated in fuels. In 2011, the top export from Trinidad 
and Tobago to India was LNG, which accounted for more than 90 per cent of the value of 
total exports. This share has remained fairly constant over the past few years. Our other two 
top exports to India in 2011 were scrap/waste iron and Caribbean cedar greenheart or mora. 
I rather suspect, though, that the latter product might be a re-export from Guyana which, if 
true, worsens our export position. 
In 2011, India ranked as the 35th largest export market for Trinidad and Tobago, well behind 
Brazil  and  China,  which  ranked  better  at  9th  and  28th,  respectively.  Russia,  on  the  hand, 
came at a very low 124th position. 
Unlike  exports,  our  imports  from  India  show  a  lot  more  product  diversity.  In  2011,  the  top 
three imports from India to Trinidad and Tobago accounted for one-fifth of total import value. 
The top ten imports accounted for more than 40 per cent of total imports. Top imports from 
India  comprised  shelled  cashew  nuts,  medication,  barium  sulphate,  steel  products  and 
spices. 
In 2011, India ranked as the 19th largest import market for Trinidad and Tobago. Again well 
behind Russia, Brazil and China, which ranked 4th, 5th and 6th, respectively. 
The  emerging  picture,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  is  that  Trinidad  and  Tobago’s  slow  pace  of 
diversification away from the energy sector is starkly reflected in its lopsided trade with India. 
We are failing to generate any substantial non-energy exports to a market that is not only 
open and accessible but whose trade potential is still largely unrealized. 
India, on the other hand, is quite rightly enhancing the volume of its trade with Trinidad and 
Tobago and the rest of the world. Nevertheless, India’s share in world trade is still low when 
compared with other BRIC countries, particularly China, which corners about 15 per cent of 
world trade. This suggests substantial room exists for India’s trade growth and expansion. 
In fact, a 2009 study on India’s global trade potential in the post-crisis period carried out by 
the  Asia-Pacific  Research  &  Training  Network  on  Trade  found  significant  potential  for 
expansion of trade between India and several countries in Latin America and the Caribbean. 
The  results  suggest that,  relative  to  the  actual  level  of  trade  in  2007,  India  can  potentially 
attain: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
One important policy lesson for Trinidad and Tobago, which results from the above analysis, 
is that Government must seriously aim at reducing “behind the border” and “at the border” 
costs of trade. It is indeed instructive to note that India placed a very low 127th out of 185 
countries in the World Bank’s 2013 global rankings on ease of trading at the border. Trinidad 
and  Tobago  has  a  higher  ranking  of  75th  in terms  of  ease  of trading  at  the  border. Trade 
facilitation is, therefore, essential to reduce the cost and to compress the time required for 
trade across both countries’ borders. 
11 times more trade with Barbados; 
7 times more trade with Panama; 
5.5 times more trade with Jamaica; 
5 times more trade with the Dominican Republic; 
3 three times more trade with Venezuela and the Bahamas; and 
Almost 3 times more trade with Trinidad and Tobago 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Another policy lesson is that Trinidad and Tobago can further enhance trade possibilities with 
India  by  leveraging  its  access  to  an  enlarged  market.  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  already 
established formal trade ties with the Dominican Republic, Cuba, Colombia, Venezuela, and 
Panama.  Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  exploring  a  partial  scope  agreement  with  Guatemala.  In 
addition, the CARICOM region has a trade agreement granting it access to the markets of 
the  European  Union,  and 
trade  and 
development agreement. 
Through the use of joint ventures with Trinidad and Tobago firms, Indian companies can use 
these  trade  agreements  to  establish  a  foothold  in  the  markets  of  Latin  America  and  the 
Caribbean.  Additionally  given 
trade  agreements  with 
MERCOSUR  (Brazil,  Argentina,  Uruguay  and  Paraguay)  in  2004  and  with  Chile  in  2006, 
having  a  partnership  with  a  Trinidad  and  Tobago  company,  which  is  physically  closer  to 
these markets, may allow for greater exploitation of the preferential tariffs afforded to goods 
of Indian origin under these agreements. 
is  currently  negotiating  a  CARICOM/Canada 
India  signed  preferential 
that 
Trade in services 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  apart  from  international  trade  in  merchandise  goods,  there  also 
exists international trade in services, which I believe has greater potential opportunities for 
building economic bridges between Trinidad and Tobago and India. 
One potential market opportunity lies in cooperation with the Indian film industry. As many of 
you know, India is the largest film producer in the world, with Bollywood a major centre for 
Hindi  film  production.  Bollywood  produces  roughly  1,000  movies  a  year.  Hollywood  only 
produces  500  and  Japan  produces  400  movies  a  year.  Bollywood  has  been  generating 
revenues at around 10 per cent a year. Some 3 billion cinema tickets are sold in Bollywood 
compared with 1.5 billion in the United States. 
In an attempt to capture a more global audience, Bollywood is beginning to collaborate with 
leading  Hollywood  studios  in  areas from  production  to  distribution to  content  protection.  In 
2007, Warner Bros made its Bollywood debut with Ramesh Sippy Entertainment. Yash Raj 
Films  (YRF),  India  premier  studio,  entered  into  an  agreement  in  2008  with  Walt  Disney, 
leaders in family entertainment, to exclusively create a series of original computer-animated 
films. In  2009,  Reliance  Big  Entertainment  signed  a  deal  worth  US$1.2  billion  with  Steven 
Spielberg’s „Dream Works SKG’ to produce 36 films for the next 6 years. 
According to a 2010 brochure from the Ministry of Trade, industry and Investment on our own 
local film industry, several Hollywood productions have filmed here on location over the past 
fifty years. 
For  the  prospective  film-maker,  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  substantial  resources  for  the 
production of feature films. These include scenic and contrasting locations in close proximity 
to each other, a “film friendly” people, an ethnically diverse population, good airlift from the 
United  States  and  Europe,  varied  accommodation  options,  equipment  and  support  service 
providers, and a trained and dedicated staff at the Trinidad and Tobago Film Company Ltd 
(TTFC). 
In 2007, the filming of the first Bollywood movie “Dulha Mil Gaya” took place in Trinidad and 
Tobago. While the movie failed to click at the Indian box office, it was a runaway success 
here in Trinidad and Tobago and formed the opening feature at Movie Towne, Chaguanas, 
running  for  about  one  month.  Since  then,  how  many  other  Bollywood  movies  have  been 
filmed on location in Trinidad and Tobago? None! 
I, therefore, find it disappointing that we completely failed to grasp this golden opportunity to 
market Trinidad and Tobago as an alternative Bollywood island destination. Mauritius, on the 
other  hand,  has  taken  advantage  of  its  location,  exceptional  beaches  and  largely  Indian 
population  to  become  one  of the top film-shooting  destinations for the Indian film  industry. 
Bollywood filmed over 90 days on location in Mauritius in 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Ladies and Gentlemen, travel and tourism is another potential area for building more robust 
relationships  between  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  India.  With  the  increasing  wealth  of  the 
Indian  urban  middle  class,  travel  and  tourism  has  now  become  an  affordable  luxury. With 
350 million Indians ranked as middle class inhabitants and economic growth increasing by  
5–6 per cent every year, India offers enormous potential for future growth in outbound travel. 
According to the 2012 report “Indian Outbound Tourism Market”, in percentage terms, India 
is the fastest growing outbound tourism market in the world, and in terms of numbers, it's the 
second fastest after China. 
In any economic slowdown tourism is the first sector to get affected. But the Indian outbound 
tourism market seems to be an exception. Spending within the market hit US$12 million in 
2010 and is expected to reach over US$20 million by 2015. 
The United States is way ahead of its rivals and controls almost one-third of Indian outbound 
tourism  spending.  Not  only  do  countries  like  Singapore,  Malaysia  and  the  United  Arab 
Emirates get a steady and strong surge of India tourists, but also those like South Africa and 
Australia which are up-and-coming popular destinations for the well-to-do Indian. 
For Trinidad and Tobago capturing even a small share of this Indian travel market can be a 
boon  to  our  tourism  industry.  Indian  visitors  would  have  a  sense  of  familiarity  with  some 
aspects of the culture and food, but would also be able to enjoy the cosmopolitan mix that is 
Trinidad and Tobago. One strategy to employ in seeking to attract these niche markets is to 
emphasize sports tourism, honeymoon packages and festival tourism. 
Conclusion 
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  my  message  is  simple.  International  trade  offers  many 
bridges to be built between Trinidad and Tobago and India. Trinidad and Tobago is seeking 
out  new  markets  for  survival.  Indian  entrepreneurs  are  going  global  and  looking  for  new 
investment  prospects  in  the  Caribbean. Our  policymakers  and  business community  should 
forcefully  seize  these  opportunities,  building  upon  existing  relationships.  In  my  respectful 
view, Trinidad and Tobago should set a goal to run a US$100 million trade surplus with India 
over the next 2–3 years and the surplus should reflect a wide range of non-energy exports. 
Let me end by reminding you of a quote attributed to Mahatma Ghandi and which is highly 
relevant to my message, “the difference between what we do and what we are capable of 
doing would suffice to solve most of the world’s problems.” 
I thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
