Yaseen Anwar: SME banking 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yaseen  Anwar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at  a 
roundtable  on  “SME  Banking”,  jointly  organized  by  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  the 
International Finance Corporation (IFC), Karachi, 16 January 2013. 
 Mr. Kaiser  Naseem  &  Mr.  Andrew  McCartney  from  IFC,  Distinguished  Presidents  of 
commercial banks Ladies and gentlemen, Good morning! 
Let me extend a very warm welcome to all of you to this Roundtable on the important subject 
of  “SME  Banking”,  jointly  organized  by  State  Bank  of  Pakistan  and  IFC.  I  would  like  to 
especially welcome and thank the SME Banking experts from IFC who have traveled from 
abroad to conduct this important session for the top management of the banking industry of 
Pakistan. 
This  Roundtable  is  indeed  a  significant  event  as  we  have  representation  of  all  the  major 
banks that contribute more than 90% of the total SME Lending in the country. The objective 
of  today’s  proceedings  is  twofold;  first,  to  take  stock  of  the  issues  confronting  the 
SME sector,  and  second,  to  learn  and  deliberate  on  the  various  successful  strategies  and 
SME Banking models practiced globally by lending institutions. 
I am sure everyone around the table believes that SME development plays a key role in the 
economic development of a country. In Pakistan, the sector contributes 30 percent towards 
GDP,  employs  more  than  70  percent  of  the  non-agricultural  workforce  and  generates 
25 percent in export earnings. The sector has huge potential in generating employment and 
poverty alleviation in the country. Therefore, SBP is actively promoting SME finance under 
the broader agenda of increasing Financial Inclusion in Pakistan. 
The  governments  around 
the  world  support  small  scale  agriculture,  services  and 
manufacturing  sectors  through  a  number  of  initiatives  because  of  their  labor-intensiveness 
and  employment  generation  potential  for  poverty  reduction.  These  countries  have  also 
successfully  integrated  their  SMEs  with  the  large  corporate  sector  through  sub-contracting 
which has proved an extremely useful way of integration across size and scale. 
In  Pakistan,  despite  the  immense  significance  of  the  SME  sector,  it  remains  largely 
financially  excluded,  as  reflected  from  the  declining  trend  in  SME  finance  over  the  years, 
constituting only 8% of the banks’ total advances as of June 2012, down from 16% in June 
2007. Unfortunately, this ratio is quite low compared to our regional peers such as in India, 
Sri Lanka and even Bangladesh. 
A closer look at the SME sector reveals that there are various issues on both demand and 
supply  side  that  constrain  the  SME’s  access  to  finance  and  other  banking  products  and 
services.  On  the  demand  side,  these  issues  can  be  tackled  through  a  more  systematic 
documentation and disclosure of information by SMEs and better business planning. On the 
supply side, bankers’ reluctance to lend to SMEs can be addressed through innovative credit 
assessment tools and techniques like credit scoring and better capacity building efforts for 
the financial service providers. 
Among various stakeholders that have to play their role for SME development, I think, State 
Bank  of  Pakistan  and  Commercial  Banks  both  need  to  play  a  proactive  role  in  improving 
access to finance for SMEs. As far as SBP is concerned, it has taken a number of important 
initiatives for improving access to credit for SME sector. These measures include a provision 
of specialized Prudential Regulations (PRs) for SMEs, Refinance Schemes for SMEs, Credit 
Guarantee Scheme for Small and Rural Enterprises and cluster development surveys. 
Further,  SBP  has  been  assisting  banks  through  a  holistic  IFC  technical  assistance  and 
capacity  building 
initiative  encompassing  areas  of  Strategy  Formulation,  Product 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
Development, Risk Management and HR Development etc. for SME lending. Presently, Bank 
Alfalah Ltd. is being supported for capacity building to boost SME banking, while many other 
mid-tier  banks  are  being  considered  for  similar  IFC  technical  assistance.  IFC  is  in  direct 
dialogue  with  a  number of  banks. We  hope that  this  project  will  revitalize  SME  lending  by 
participating financial institutions and will be a prototype for other financial institutions which 
could  see  financing  to  SMEs  as  profitable  business  ventures.  Aside  from  the  boost  SME 
provides to employment and overall growth to the economy, it also provides diversification to 
a bank’s balance sheet and in turn a stable revenue stream to support long term shareholder 
value. 
Given the huge potential for this sector, I encourage all the commercial banks to review their 
SME strategies and assume a greater role in SME lending. Ultimately it has to be the private 
sector  which  has  to  take  the  lead  role  in  lending  to  the  SME  sector  given  their  critical 
positioning and greater capacity in terms of their outreach and availability of funds. 
As I earlier mentioned, the actual statistics for lending to SMEs have not been encouraging in 
recent years. Banks’ credit to SMEs has declined over the last 4 years from Rs 437 billion in 
2007 to Rs 248 billion in June, 2012. 
Although,  this  decline  can  be  partly  attributed  to  adverse  economic  conditions  during  the 
period  and  growing  NPLs,  a  more  risk-averse  posture  of  banks  remains  a  major  factor 
responsible  for  their  low  exposure  to  SMEs.  In  recent  years,  banks  have  increasingly 
invested  in  safer  havens  –  opting  for  government  paper  and  increased  financing  for 
commodity  operations,  rather  than  lending  to  private  sector  that  would  offer  better  returns 
and is the main driver of economic activity. 
I  would  encourage  the  financial  industry  to  break-out  of  this  tendency  and  move  towards 
promoting  SMEs  by  formulating  strategies  to  overcome  the  challenges  presented  by  the 
market  as  well  as  by  the  cyclicality  in  economic  conditions.  Banks  need  to  shift  from 
traditional  banking  approach  towards  SMEs  to  the  provision  of  more  customized  and 
differentiated financial products and services. 
Let  me  re-iterate  the  objective  of  this  program  i.e.  to  share  with  you  the  successful  SME 
banking models and their important Building Blocks, such as Strategy Formulation, Product 
Development, Risk Management tools, and HR & IT requirements. We are lucky to have with 
us today’s lead presenter Mr. Andrew McCartney from IFC who is a renowned international 
expert on SME Banking. 
I hope this event will help top management of the banks to take critical stock of their existing 
approaches towards the SME sector; and, accordingly develop a more robust and focused 
strategy for meeting the banking needs of this important sector of economy, leading to better 
and improved banking solutions for their SME customers. I would hope that when you walk 
out  after  this roundtable,  a  voluntary  commitment  to  increase  lending  to  this  sector  will  be 
forthcoming. This prudent decision will be in the interest of both the banking sector and the 
economy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
