DeLisle Worrell: Risk and efficiency 
Opening remarks by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, at the 
Regional  Central  Banks 
Information  Systems  Specialists  (RCBISS)  Annual  (XXIII) 
Conference, Bridgetown, 3 June 2013. 
 Today  I  want  to  celebrate  with  you  an  outstanding  success  story  of  Caribbean  regional 
integration. For over two decades information specialists from central banks from across the 
region  have  met  like  this,  to  network  among  yourselves,  share  common  experiences  and 
take advantage of each others’ expertise. Similar networks now exist in almost every sphere 
of central banking activity in the region, to such a pervasive extent that we now take them for 
granted. We should commend ourselves on this achievement, and seek to use our networks 
ever more effectively, in attaining the objectives of our central banks. 
That  is  what  this  conference  is  about.  How  do  we  use  the  opportunities  which  new 
technologies  offer  us  to  deliver  central  banking  services  as  efficiently  as  possible,  without 
exposing the banking system to unacceptable levels of risk. We need to pay attention to all 
the elements in this statement. 
We  should  always  bear  in  mind  that  the  ultimate  goal  is  to  make  our  central  banks  more 
efficient in providing the services which are our responsibility. Meetings like this one are an 
opportunity to ask ourselves how well we are performing in this regard. Are our technologies 
being  used  to  provide  faster  and  more  efficient  banking  services  for  the  government,  the 
commercial  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  that  we  hold  accounts  for?  Are  our 
transactions in government securities, foreign currencies and securities, and other financial 
transactions  increasing  in  efficiency  as  we  improve  our  technologies.  Are  we  able  to  bring 
information  more  effectively  to  bear  in  the  formulation  of  economic  policy?  And  are  we 
communicating more clearly and persuasively to the general public, with cogent analysis that 
is fully backed up with relevant data? Is our oversight of the financial system keeping up with 
the  world’s  best  regulatory  guidance?  The  answers  to  these  questions  will  tell  us  how 
effective our information technology strategies have been, and how we might need to adjust 
our strategies in pursuit of further gains. 
The second part of my statement above refers to maintaining risks at an acceptable level. 
The management of risk is a very complex matter, and I can make only a few observations 
about it in this morning’s address. 
First we have to determine what is an acceptable level of risk. That depends on the cost of 
the risky event, at every level of risk, and the availability of insurance against that risk. There 
is  a  nontrivial  risk,  every  time  you  go  out  in  your  car, that  you  will  become  involved  in  an 
accident. That doesn’t prevent us from driving our cars, even though the cost of an accident 
may be considerable, because we have insurance. 
Secondly,  we  have  to  consider  the  impact  of  risk  minimisation  on  our  efficiency.  We  can 
minimise the risk of damage to our car by using it as little as possible, and taking the bus to 
work and school. Not many Barbadians are persuaded that is an efficient thing to do. 
Thirdly, all of us have incorrect perceptions of risk. Most people don’t realise that the risk of 
being murdered is actually lower than the risk of dying in a car accident, almost anywhere in 
the world. And even statisticians who are aware of it don’t derive any particular reassurance 
from that knowledge. 
Fourthly, there are the risks we cannot know. On CCTV on Saturday evening I watched an 
animated  debate  between  experts  on  either  side  of  the  debate  about  genetically  modified 
foods. The truth of the matter is that the current generation of genetically modified foods has 
not been around long enough, in sufficiently widespread use, for us to know what the long 
term effects might be. The same is true of prolonged use of cellphones and computers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
There  are  more  technical  imponderables  with  respect  to  the  measurement  of  risks  that 
cannot  be  readily  explained  in  a  short  speech.  For  those  who  have  an  interest,  I  can 
recommend the excellent book "The Black Swan" by Nassim Taleb, which I reviewed for the 
Central Bank’s Economic Review, available on the Central Bank of Barbados website. 
The complexity of the IT security challenge is aptly illustrated by an email members of the 
Barbados  Information  Society  received  from  the  late  great  James  Corbin,  just  before  his 
tragic death. In it he reported that computer power was now available to uncover even the 
most  secure  password,  by  a  massive  process  of  iteration,  in  shorter  times  than  we  would 
have expected. Does that mean we should not have secure passwords? Absolutely not; we 
should be as secure as is reasonable, using numerals in combination with upper and lower 
case letters. But I, for one, will not henceforth ever compose a password that is longer than is 
called for by the programme or service I am using. 
In view of the complexity of the issues, and the number of unknowables, what we may expect 
of  a  meeting  like  this  one  is  a  thorough  exploration  of  the  issues,  rather  than  definitive 
answers. The world we live in is increasingly complex, and things are changing all the time. 
In order to do well in the modern world, we have to cope with uncertainty as a way of life. We 
must develop the insights that help us to adapt our strategies in light of changes, in order to 
keep in sight our goal of greater efficiency in everything we do. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
