Rundheersing Bheenick: “Steaming on … in uncharted waters in 
storm-tossed seas” – five years of steering a central bank in a small, 
open island state and keeping the economy on an even keel 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 4 February 2013. 
 On 28 December 2007, from my vantage point as newly-installed Governor, I issued my first 
Letter  to  Stakeholders  to  plug  what  I  felt  was  a  gap  in  our  communication.  I  saw  it  as  a 
vehicle  to  review  developments  in  the  economic  and  financial  landscape  and  to  give 
interested stakeholders a flavour of the Bank’s actions during the past year. It was the year 
of the Bank’s 40th Anniversary celebrations. Less auspiciously, it was also the year when the 
first tremors of an impending global financial crisis began to be felt in specialized corners of 
the financial market dealing with esoteric sub-prime mortgages originating in the US. 
2. 
Five  years  on,  the  Letter  to  Stakeholders  is  well-embedded  in  the  calendar  of 
publications of the Bank, with its release much-awaited, not least by the local financial press. 
Five additional years in the life of the institution, five years at its helm as Governor, and five 
years of unending crisis, to boot ― surely all this requires us to pause awhile, look back over 
those tumultuous, challenging yet ultimately rewarding, years and take stock of the progress 
achieved. But, first, a brief assessment of 2012 and the perspective for 2013 may provide 
some context. 
3. 
The Global Economy 2012 has proved far more turbulent, uncertain and painful than 
most economists had predicted. The European Union, hailed until recently as the nec plus 
ultra  of  regional  cooperation,  came  on  the  brink  of  implosion,  with  the  rest  of  the  world 
holding its breath in anticipation of the expected global crash likely to follow in the wake of 
the widely-predicted “Grexit” which would bring the eurozone to an ignominious end. Across 
the Atlantic, the US economy was hardly in better shape, barely managing in the nick of time 
to surmount its “fiscal cliff” before the predicted financial catastrophe. Fortunately, emerging 
market  economies,  though  wounded,  managed  to  pull  the  world  economy  round.  In  such 
exceptional circumstances, central banking in advanced economies had to be reshaped to 
accommodate unconventional policy measures, which would have been clearly beyond the 
pale for central bankers a decade earlier. 
4. 
So here we are, at the start of 2013, facing the same questions as in preceding years: 
when shall we finally see an end to the global economic crisis and a sustained rebound in 
growth and job creation? As we start the New Year, there are tentative signs that the global 
economy  is  finally  picking  up,  with  growth  momentum  building  modestly  and  financial 
conditions becoming more supportive. But the transition is likely to be slow and fragile. Even 
as we see some global growth, the legacy of subpar performance over the recent years is 
expected to play a major role in influencing investment and macroeconomic performance in 
general in 2013 and beyond. Doubts persist over the sustainability of the timid recovery once 
the flood of central bank money, propping up economic activity in the advanced countries, 
begins  to  be  withdrawn  ―  as  it  clearly  must  if  we  are  not  to  see  an  unprecedented 
debasement of major reserve currencies, hand in hand with runaway inflation. 
The Mauritian Economy For Mauritius, the odds of surviving intact in the face of the 
5. 
global  turmoil  over  the  past  five  years  were  very  thin  at  best.  We  have  a  small  open 
economy, heavily dependent on exports to the European Union, and we have been unable to 
rely  significantly  on  regional  or  domestic  demand  to  pick  up  the  slack  from  depressed 
conditions in our traditional markets. Nevertheless, we avoided recession and have come out 
rather well. Key factors here were the support from the fiscal stimulus at the beginning of the 
crisis  and  an  appropriately  accommodative,  but  much-maligned,  monetary  and  exchange 
rate policy that have together allowed the domestic economy to continue recording positive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
growth  rates  even  as  some major  trading  partner  economies  were  contracting. The  added 
adaptive advantage arising from our smallness proved to be a real asset in these troubled 
times. In addition, our closely-regulated banking system was not drawn into the seemingly 
very  lucrative,  but  high-risk,  operations  that  proved  fatal  to  banks  in  many  advanced 
economies and we have had no banking failures or bailouts. 
6. 
It is evident, however, that our economy is still operating below its potential. The crisis 
has  shown  up  the  shortcomings  of  the  inertia  in  much  of  our  trade  for  both  goods  and 
services,  where  we  have  seemed  locked  into  previously  successful,  but  fragile,  strategies 
that have left us at the mercy of external market and policy failure. While the lesson has been 
learnt,  many  sectors  have  been  caught  wrong-footed  and  are  now  scrambling  to  diversify 
products and markets. 
7.  My own personal experience at the Bank The uncertainty and instability prevailing in 
the global economic and financial environment have kept me on my toes. It was a path full of 
challenges  that  confronted  me,  a  path  strewn  with  obstacles  where  I  sometimes  stumbled 
and  where  I  found  myself,  like  many  fellow-governors  elsewhere,  regularly  attacked, 
sometimes  ridiculed,  and  even  scorned.  But  I  always  emerged,  often  bruised,  but  more 
determined than ever, motivated by the unchanging desire to rise to the constantly-changing 
challenge,  raise  the  profile  of  the  Bank,  and  transform  it  into  a  modern  and  innovative 
institution that fulfils its mission confidently and efficiently for the sustainable development of 
the Mauritian economy. We had our share of achievements, small victories and successes 
obtained with great satisfaction. 
8. 
The decisions and actions that I took at the Bank over the last five years have been 
directed  towards  maintaining  financial  and  macroeconomic  stability  –  this,  as  the  global 
financial  crisis  revealed,  is  the  most  important  function  of  a  central  bank.  This  overriding 
consideration has guided all my decisions and actions. However, given the highly uncertain 
and  unstable  global  environment,  flexibility  and  promptness  in  action  turned  out  to  be  key 
elements  in  our  decision-making.  I  saw  the  need  to  bring  some  key  reforms  to  the 
organisational  structure  of  the  Bank.  For  operational  efficiency,  the  Bank  was  restructured 
into  a  more  flexible  institution.  New  divisions  were  created  to  monitor  areas  that  I  had 
foreseen would be critical in the years to come, among which the Financial Stability Unit to 
monitor and assess the risks to financial stability and associated macro-prudential policy. Our 
strategies  have  borne  fruit  and  the  Bank’s  contribution  to  financial  and  macroeconomic 
stability has been recognised locally and internationally. 
9. 
years, which flow from this overriding consideration. 
10.  Monetary Policy At the very start of my tenure as Governor, I set out to remedy what 
was, to my mind, a major flaw in our approach to monetary policy decision-making. Although 
it had been three years since the new Bank of Mauritius Act had been enacted, with explicit 
provision for the creation of a Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), the interest-rate decision 
process had remained unchanged. One of my first moves as Governor was to establish this 
Committee,  which  was  officially  launched  in  April  2007.  Soon  after  the  first  meeting,  I 
proposed that amendments be brought to the law to enhance the independence of the MPC. 
11. 
It was also a decisive stride towards improving governance at the Bank. I wanted more 
transparency and accountability at the level of the MPC and instigated a major review after it 
had been in operation for four years. The review resulted in two major changes, firstly in the 
composition  of  the  MPC  and,  secondly,  in  the  publication  of  the  minutes  of  the  meeting, 
including the voting patterns of individual members. 
12.  The establishment of the MPC with its enhanced transparency and accountability made 
monetary policy gain increasing credibility in the eyes of the public. We complemented our 
action  by  developing  clear  lines  of  communication  with  economic  agents  and  adopted  an 
open-door policy to respond to the concerns of the various economic stakeholders including 
real sector operators, academia, opinion leaders, and consumer associations. I held regular 
Let me sketch the broad outlines of the Bank’s policies and actions during the past five 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
public  consultations  through  press  conferences  and  public  addresses.  Today,  inflation 
expectations are well-anchored and it has become much easier to interpret and understand 
monetary  policy  decisions. The  Bank  has  been  successful  in  disinflating the  economy  and 
has  brought  down  the  inflation  rate  to  less  than  4  per  cent  in  2012  from  10.9  per  cent  in 
April 2007. 
13.  Exchange Rate Policy Many of you will recall that the value of the rupee was in free 
fall  in  the  years  preceding  my  nomination  as  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  in  2007, 
paving  the  way  for  a  one-way  bet  against  the  currency  and  fuelling  unsustainable 
over-borrowing  in  rupees.  It  was  clear  to  me  that  this  would  plague  the  economy  with 
speculative transactions and constrain our move to the next stage of development. Exchange 
rate  stability  was  the  necessary  condition  that  we  had  to  satisfy  if  we  were  to  stand  any 
chance to succeed in realising the vision of our political leadership to build Mauritius into a 
vibrant international financial centre of repute. 
14.  My  stance  was  to  favour  a  stable  currency,  given  our  euro-biased  exports  and 
dollar-biased  imports  and  the  high  exchange-rate  volatility  witnessed  in  the  international 
forex  market  during  the  global  financial  crisis.  A  stable  currency  would  remove  foreign 
exchange risk, thus providing some element of certainty in doing business for both importers 
and  exporters.  To  pursue  this  stable  exchange  rate  policy,  the  Bank  continued  with  its 
methods of adjustment and fine-tuning but never shied away from doing what we assessed 
was right under the varying circumstances faced by the economy. More recently, the Bank 
has attuned its policy to mitigate further appreciation pressures on the exchange rate value 
of the rupee to avert the adverse potential impact of the worsening euro debt crisis on key 
sectors of the economy. I firmly believe that the real test of our management of exchange 
rate policy has emerged in the medium-term perspective over the five years for a short-run 
view can be very misleading, even if it makes good headlines in the media. 
15.  Modernisation of the Financial Market infrastructure When I took over as Governor 
in 2007, I discovered that the growing financial sector, in particular the offshore segment, and 
increasing  cross-border  transactions  posed  new  and  complex  challenges  to  the  existing 
payment  system  infrastructure.  I  realised  that  the  financial  market  infrastructure  needed  a 
major overhaul to meet these demands. So the first decision that I took in this area was to 
replace the existing real-time gross settlement system – the  Mauritius Automated Clearing 
and Settlement System (MACSS) – with another application that was built on a more resilient 
architecture  and  supported  multi-currency  transactions.  The  extended  capability  of  the 
system has no doubt been a major contributing factor behind the appointment by COMESA 
member-states of the Bank of Mauritius as the settlement bank for its Regional Payment and 
Settlement System, whose operations we now host. We pursued our modernisation process 
with  the  implementation  of  the  Cheque  Truncation  System,  which  provides  for  the  bulk 
clearing  of  low-value  electronic  transactions.  I  set  out,  during  my  tenure,  to  extend  the 
coverage of the Mauritius Credit Information Bureau (MCIB) to all types of credit institutions 
operating  in  the  economy.  The  MCIB  has  over  the  years  emerged  as  an  essential  risk 
management tool for banks in their lending activities. 
16.  Over  the  past  years,  the  card-based  payment  method  has  assumed  growing 
importance  in  the  economy  and  it  is  expected  to  make  further  inroads  on  cash  and 
cheque-based settlement. The systemic importance of card transactions may pose a threat 
to the stability of the financial system if left unattended. In line with our mandate to ensure 
the  stability  and  soundness  of  the financial  system,  I saw  the  need to  revisit  our  erstwhile 
hands-off approach to this sector and move to regulate it properly. The Bank will thus set up 
and operate a National Payment Switch (NPS) by the end of the year. The NPS is a national, 
multifaceted  switching  platform  for  various  payment  channels  and  it  will  settle  the  net 
positions of banks on the MACSS while reducing the cost of transactions and routing costs 
via  the  reduction  of  interconnection  charges  and  merchant  fees,  in  particular  on  domestic 
transactions.  The  NPS  will  therefore  address  the  inefficiencies  of  the  current  setup  and 
provide a level playing field to all banks and operators. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
17. 
I  also  devoted  a  lot  of  attention  to  deepening  financial  markets,  the  other  leg  of  the 
modernisation  of  the  financial  market  infrastructure.  Small  size  and  lack  of  depth  have 
always hampered the development of the domestic money and foreign-exchange markets. I 
have introduced a number of measures to bring down the surplus of liquidity and enhance 
both the price-discovery process and the transmission mechanism in the money market. I am 
particularly pleased to note the progress achieved on this front by end-2012. It is even more 
encouraging to note that private initiatives have been coming forward to build on the current 
momentum. The current context in which Mauritius is viewed positively by international credit 
rating agencies, the low interest rate and inflation environment, and the prudent fiscal path 
and  public  debt  levels  provide  increased  traction  to  speed  up  the  country’s  transformation 
into the long-awaited sophisticated international financial centre that would generate income 
and jobs for generations to come. 
18.  Reserves Management Reserves are strategic for a country to survive trade shocks 
and economic crises as they act as the first line of defence. It was clear to me that a more 
efficient management of these reserves would provide rich dividends to the country. Over the 
five  years  since  2008  I  have  found  managing  foreign  exchange  reserves  an  increasingly 
challenging  task.  Monetary  policy  worldwide  turned  significantly  accommodative  and  a 
number  of  major  central  banks  implemented  quantitative  easing,  resulting  in  progressively 
lower yields on our reserves. I instigated a review of the Bank’s investment strategy given the 
low  profitability  of  operations.  In  an  attempt  to  increase  returns  while  containing  risks,  we 
reduced our exposure with foreign commercial banks (which were being de-rated), reviewed 
the  investment  horizon,  invested  in  cash  and  near-cash  instruments,  and  increased  our 
holdings  in  high-yielding  currencies  even  as  we  moved  to  include  new  currencies  in  our 
portfolio. In November 2009, the Bank purchased two metric tons of gold from the IMF, to 
diversify  our  portfolio  further  and  mitigate  the  impact  of  currency  volatility.  Subsequently,  I 
also increased our share of investment in fixed-income instruments. I am happy to report that 
the  diversification  strategy,  coupled  with  enhanced  operational  efficiency,  translated  into 
higher  net  profits  for  the  Bank:  Rs395  million  in  FY  2011/12,  from  Rs258  million  in  FY 
2010/2011, and just Rs72.4 million in FY 2009/2010. And we managed to do this at a time 
when many central banks and fund managers were actually making losses. In June 2012, we 
launched  the  Operation  Reserves  Reconstitution  to  maintain  a  more  comfortable  import 
cover  and  to  combat  unwarranted  appreciation  of  the  rupee.  The  Bank’s  gross  external 
reserves  at  end-December  2012  amounted  to USD3.0  billion  (Rs93.0  billion),  having  risen 
from USD1.3 billion (Rs44.7 billion) at end-December 2006.  
19.  Regulation and Supervision At the time of my appointment as Governor, the Prime 
Minister, as the nominating authority, shared with me his vision of a sophisticated financial 
system that would contribute to make Mauritius a recognised international financial centre. 
This vision included a banking sector that could aspire to become a regional leader in the 
field.  I  proceeded  to  flesh  out  this  vision.  I  imagined  a  vibrant,  competitive,  transparent, 
robust and profitable banking sector further extending its footprints in the region and beyond, 
but always well-regulated and enhancing the reputation of its home jurisdiction. 
20.  My  assessment  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  place  at  the  time 
revealed  that  the  framework  was  adequate  although  there  were  some  areas  that  required 
strengthening to enhance the performance of the banking sector and the financial system. 
Some of these areas were highlighted in the report of the IMF/World Bank Financial Sector 
Assessment Programme team that was concluding its field visit to the country just as I was 
stepping into the shoes of Governor. New rules had in the meantime also been released by 
international  standard-setting  bodies  e.g.  those  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision and the International Accounting Standards Board. Armed with these, we took 
measures to build confidence in the integrity of the banking system and encourage banks to 
improve their performance. We instilled more competition in the sector by opening up to new 
players as part of our efforts to reduce intermediation margins and provide a fairer deal to 
bank customers. And we continued to strengthen our regulatory and supervisory framework 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
to  align  it  with  emerging  international  best  practice  resulting  from  the  global  regulatory 
reforms triggered by the crisis. 
21. 
It may appropriate here to comment en passant on the largest fraud to have ever been 
unearthed  in  the  domestic  banking  sector,  the  MCB/NPF  case,  a  financial  scandal  of  the 
bank-within-a-bank type that came to light in 2003. It has been an eye-opener for the Bank, 
prodding  us  to  step  up  the  surveillance  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions  under  our 
purview. This case still awaits resolution ten years later and the perpetrators are yet to be 
held  accountable  as  the  various  associated  cases  laboriously  wend  their  way  through  the 
legal process in domestic and British courts. This stands out in sharp contrast to the rapidity 
with which prosecutors and regulators in major money centres have reached settlement with 
several  universal  banks  for  a  range  of  crisis-related  misdemeanors  and  malpractices,  with 
record  fines.  The  glaring  absence  of  an  efficient  banking  resolution  mechanism  may  be  a 
brake on our attempt to transform our jurisdiction into an international money centre. 
22.  Another  source  of  concern  is  the  dominating  presence  of  a  couple  of  large  complex 
financial  institutions  in  our  banking  sector  and  their  systemic  importance  –  the  so-called 
Domestic Systemically Important Banks. To mitigate the systemic risks that such institutions 
could  pose  to  the  system,  I  have  urged  those  banks  to  reduce  the  complexity  of  their 
structures  by  separating  their  banking  from  non-banking  activities.  This  will  enable  us  to 
clarify  the  regulatory  perimeter  and  assist  in  efficient  resolution,  should  the  need  arise, 
without  having  recourse  to  taxpayers’  money.  In  the  same  vein,  we  have  encouraged 
branches  of  foreign  banks  operating  in  Mauritius  to  convert  into  locally-incorporated 
subsidiaries that would give us more effective control and greater ability to act independently 
in  conditions  of  stress. We  have  met  with  some  success  on  this front,  and  the  process  of 
conversion of the branch of a major foreign bank into a local subsidiary is at an advanced 
stage. 
23.  We raised  some  hackles  when  we  moved  to  adopt  what  many  considered  an  overly 
intrusive approach regarding governance at the level of bank boards. A major lesson learnt 
from  the  global  financial  crisis  was  the  failure  of  board  oversight.  What  happens  in  bank 
boardrooms  is  of  vital  importance  for  the  smooth  functioning  of,  not  just  of  the  bank 
concerned,  but  also  the  economy  as  a  whole.  We  have  brought  major  changes  to  our 
Guideline on Corporate Governance to prescribe rotation at board level and limit the tenure 
of board members to six years. Domestic realities and capacity constraints dictated a flexible 
approach to smooth the transition to the new regime. 
24.  Today,  our  banking  sector  is  very  vibrant,  well-regulated,  robust,  profitable  and 
increasingly transparent. There are new financial product offerings including Islamic banking 
and forex futures. It attracts growing interest from investors – three new banks have set up 
shop in six years. Some of our banks have set up subsidiaries in the region, with more now 
figuring in the Top 100 African banks. Mauritius is one of the rare countries in Africa to be 
Basel-II-compliant and  we are now ready to move towards Basel III. There are however a 
few signs that are less comforting and that need to be addressed. The sustained increase in 
credit growth in some specific sectors could be an early indicator of incipient asset bubbles. 
Also, the rise in non-performing loans noted during the year does not augur well. 
25.  Developmental  role  of  the  Bank  In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  downturn, 
central banks assumed, in truth, a more central role as they stepped in swiftly to shore up 
their economies and restore confidence in the financial system. The Bank of Mauritius did not 
shirk its responsibility and jumped into the fray with a number of unconventional measures to 
support the economic and social development of the island as the effects of the crisis began 
to reach our shores. These included (i) the provision in December 2008 of a Special Foreign 
Currency  Line  of  Credit  of  USD125  million  for  trade  financing  (ii)  the  extension  of  a 
preferential line of credit to small sugar-cane planters faced with a sharp reduction in their 
revenue, and (iii) our full support to the Small and Medium Enterprises Financing Scheme – 
a limited form of directed lending which was initiated by the Ministry of Finance to ensure that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
SME’s had adequate access to bank credit. More importantly, the Bank introduced a Special 
Facility in Foreign Currency for an amount of €600 million to help highly-indebted economic 
operators, in the export-manufacturing and tourism sectors, suffering from the compression 
of  margins  in  depressed  market  conditions,  the  weakness  of  export  currencies,  and  the 
mismatch  between  their  earnings  in  foreign  currency  and  their  debt  in  rupees.  The  Bank 
made a pre-emptive move to forestall any knock-on effects on the balance sheets of lending 
banks,  which  could  have  posed  very  serious  risks  to  financial  stability  in  view  of  some 
inherent characteristics of the local credit landscape relating to the interconnected nature of 
much lending ― across borrowers, sectors, and banks ― which presented clear contagion 
risks. 
26.  Financial inclusion Good supervision cannot be dissociated from the need to ensure 
that the best interests of consumers of financial services are protected. As far back as 2007, 
two flagrant areas where the consumer was not getting a fair deal came to my attention: the 
high interest rates on loans and opaque fees and commissions. One of my first actions was 
to request all banks to publish their principal interest rates, fees, charges and commissions, 
using  a  standard  template  to  enable  customers  to  better  compare  the  cost  of  services 
provided.  This  took  effect  in  November  2008.  In  the  same  spirit,  the  indicative  exchange 
rates of individual banks are now published daily on the Bank’s website for public information 
since  September  2009. In  2012,  I  initiated  work  to  impose  a  cap  on  fees  and  charges for 
services  provided  by  financial  institutions  and  actually  imposed  the  maximum  allowable 
margin for same-day trading of forex. I also established a Complaints Desk at the Bank and 
made it mandatory for each domestic bank to set up its own complaints desk. Furthermore, I 
instituted  a  Task  Force on  Unfair  Terms  and  Conditions  in  Banking  and  Related  Financial 
Contracts ― this work is ongoing. 
27.  A new communication culture When I joined the Bank in 2007, I was struck by the 
very  conservative  manner  in  which  the  Bank  communicated,  mostly  to  a  very  limited  and 
specialized  audience.  No  wonder  that  few  of  our  countrymen  could  grasp  the  essential 
functions that a central bank performs in an economy. This lack of understanding made the 
work of the Bank less effective because the public could not relate to it or understand that it 
was in fact their own interests that the Bank was meant to promote. So I decided to embark 
the Bank on a new communication drive ― not without some misgiving from some quarters 
which saw this central bank activism as a transgression. In the past five years, I have made 
80  local  addresses,  held  more  than  35  press  conferences,  and  given  innumerable  press 
interviews and statements in both the local and international press. 
28.  The  process  of  increasing  our  dialogue  with  a  wider  range  of  stakeholders  of  the 
economy brought many critical issues to light which enabled us to take several initiatives to 
respond to the identified needs. In the course of this transformation, the Bank was able to 
take more-informed decisions, and its visibility increased ― as did the public’s understanding 
of our various actions. Our web site has been upgraded and all information pertaining to the 
activities  of  the  Bank  are  posted  in  real-time.  In  parallel,  we  launched  financial  literacy 
programmes to increase the awareness of our citizens to enable them to make better use of 
available financial products and of redress mechanisms available to them. 
29.  Let  me  here  highlight  the  significant  improvement  in  the  quality,  frequency,  and 
timeliness  of  central  bank  statistics  which  since  February  2012  have  met  the  stringent 
requirements  of  the  IMF’s  Special  Data  Dissemination  Standards  (SDDS).  We  are  now 
engaged in the process to move to the even higher SDDS+ standard. 
30.  Regional cooperation and International visibility I have long held the view that tiny 
Mauritius cannot unlock its full development potential  without accelerating its integration in 
the sub-Saharan Africa region. I have pursued this line during my mandate at the Bank which 
saw our increasing participation in various fora under the auspices of SADC, COMESA and 
the  AACB  to  advance  the  regional  and  continental  integration  agenda.  In  2011,  I  had  the 
honour to co-chair, on behalf of fellow-Governors, the two separate inaugural Joint Meetings 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
between Central Bank Governors and Ministers of Finance for both COMESA and SADC. I 
also  co-chaired  the  first  meeting  of  the  SADC  Peer  Review  Panel  in  Mauritius  in  October 
2011. In August 2012, I acceded to the Vice-Chairmanship of the AACB and the Bank will be 
hosting the 37th Assembly of Governors in August 2013. In February 2012, the Bank was 
invited  to  become  a  member  of  the  newly-established  Sub-Saharan  Africa  Regional 
Consultative  Group  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  In  October  2012,  we  successfully 
launched the Regional Payment and Settlement System of COMESA, which is hosted at the 
Bank. 
31.  Way  Forward  Over  the  past  years,  I  have  been  constantly  griping  at  the  slow  and 
long-drawn-out  pace  at  which  we  are  embracing  change  in  much  of  the  economy  and  in 
many  of  our  institutions  on  which  we  depend  to  accelerate  growth  and  development.  It  is 
widely  recognised  that  we  need  to  be  quicker  on  our  feet,  more  open  to  the  process  of 
innovation, more agile in exploiting alternative markets and new products and services, and 
much  more  willing  to  change  our  policies  and  procedures.  Global  economic  poles  are 
irremediably shifting to new centres in the East and to the South. Nearer to us, Africa is on 
the move. We must be quick to engage in the competition for the opportunities offered by the 
resource-rich, growing and more stable African continent. A higher growth path requires us to 
pay  greater  attention  to  international  competitiveness.  We  must  become  more  productive, 
shedding unnecessary layers of bureaucracy and ensuring greater probity in procurement, in 
both  the  public  and  private  sector.  Economic  history,  as  embodied  in  the  relatively  recent 
Asian success stories, leaves no doubt about the importance of more efficient production and 
ease of doing business.  
32.  Our  monetary  policy  strategy  will  continue  to  be  guided  by  our  primary  objective  of 
price  stability  and  the  promotion  of  orderly  and  balanced  economic  development.  Central 
bankers worldwide continue to accumulate evidence that low and stable inflation allows all 
economic agents to make better decisions on savings and investment ― the key conditions 
for sustained growth. 
33.  Going forward, we shall continue to ensure that monetary and exchange rate policy is 
formulated taking into consideration the interests of all stakeholders of the economy. While 
the  fundamentals  of  the  economy  seem  fairly  strong  for  now,  I  am  particularly  concerned 
about  the  persistently  high  current  account  deficit,  which  mirrors  a  worryingly  low  savings 
rate. As our main export markets in Europe grapple with fairly bleak economic prospects in 
the  foreseeable  future,  it  is  vitally  important  that  we  do  not  reduce  our  structural  reform 
efforts  to  raise  the  productive  potential  of  the  economy  and  prepare  for  the  heightened 
competition which we are likely to encounter on foreign markets as the recovery takes hold. 
34.  The Bank remains ever vigilant to potential risks to financial stability that could hamper 
our  progress  to  another  plane  of  development.  On  the  regulatory  front,  we  are  moving 
forward  with  the  implementation  of  Basel  III. We  shall  introduce more  stringent  conditions, 
including  higher  capital  requirements,  as  we  step  up  our  endeavours  to  address  the  risks 
posed  by  Domestic-Systemically  Important  Banks,  whose  failure  might  entail  widespread 
consequences for the economy. Increasing access to financial services is a key priority for 
the regulator and I will take all necessary measures to ensure that consumers get a fair deal. 
The Bank is determined to keep a tight rein on bank charges and commissions, in the light of 
the  report  of  the  Task  Force  on  Unfair  Terms  and  Conditions  in  Banking  and  Related 
Financial  Contracts,  which  I  mentioned  earlier.  We  concluded  a  lengthy  process  of 
consultation  with  both  domestic  banks  and  international  regulatory  bodies  before  finalising 
draft  legislation  on  the  Deposit  Insurance  Scheme  which  we  submitted  to  the  Ministry  of 
Finance at the end of last year. We will pursue our efforts to deepen our financial markets. 
35.  Concluding Remarks As I look back upon my years helming the Bank, I am acutely 
aware of the weight of responsibility that comes with being called on to ensure financial and 
macroeconomic stability amid the extraordinary events of the past five years. I wish to thank 
the Prime Minister, Dr the Honourable Navinchandra Ramgoolam, GCSK, FRCP, for having 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
given  me  this  opportunity  to  serve  the  nation  in  this  capacity.  My  thanks  also  go  to  the 
various  Ministers  of  Finance  with  whom  I  always  maintained  cordial  personal  ―  although 
occasionally tense professional ― relations, my Deputy Governors, the Head of Governor’s 
Office, and other key staff-members on whom I relied to deliver on my mandate. 
36.  The  past  five  years  have  been  tumultuous,  but  as  I  mentioned  in  my  acceptance 
speech when I received the “Central Banker of the Year 2012, Africa” award, I have always 
maintained  an  unwavering  focus  on  the  statutory  mandate  of  the  Bank.  My  aim  has  also 
been to rejuvenate the Bank by bringing in vital improvements in line with international best 
practice. After 45 years, I believe the Central Bank has reached a level of maturity where it 
can confidently play a key role, not only in maintaining confidence in the economy, but also in 
accompanying  the  country’s  progress  to  ever-higher  levels  of  growth,  development  and 
welfare. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
