Jens Weidmann: Crisis management and regulatory policy 
Text  of  the  Walter  Eucken  Lecture  by  Dr  Jens  Weidmann,  President  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank, given at the Walter Eucken Institute, Freiburg, 11 February 2013. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Professor Feld 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I am delighted to be here today to give the Walter Eucken Lecture. 
And I am delighted that so many of you have come today on Rose Monday, the highlight of 
the  German  carnival  season  before  the  beginning  of  Lent,  to  listen  to  a  monetary 
policymaker. 
Monetary  policymakers  do  not  have  the  reputation  of  being  over-blessed  with  a  sense  of 
humour – there is therefore some doubt about our suitability for the carnival season. On the 
other hand, the immunologist and humourist, Gerhard Uhlenbruck, said that, at carnival time, 
we wear a mask so that we can let it slip. I will certainly not be putting on a mask and under 
no circumstances will I attempt to give an amusing speech. 
Instead,  I  shall  be  talking  about  regulatory  policy  and,  more  generally,  economic  policy 
principles and about their importance in the crisis as well as in overcoming it. 
To many, “regulatory policy” will perhaps sound somewhat old-fashioned at first. Think back, 
for  instance,  to  the  debate  in  2009  on  the  future  of  regulatory  policy  professorships  at 
German universities. That debate concerned the question of whether regulatory policy should 
remain an important part of university economic teaching or whether priority ought not to be 
given to modern quantitively-oriented research. 
I personally was and I am unable to get much out of this debate. Both are important; each 
complements the other. We need a normatively founded economic policy framework; in other 
words, a general compass based on tried and trusted principles. In the same way, we need 
modern  economics,  that  is  an  economic  science  which  analyses  economic  relationships 
using quantitative methods. 
Problems  arise,  however,  if  the  measurability  of  economic relationships  fosters the  illusion 
that they can also be policy-managed accordingly. James Buchanan, Honorary President of 
the Walter Eucken Institute, who died recently, correctly noted in 2009 that “Unfortunately, 
economists, generally, failed to understand that aggregate variables that may be measured 
with  tolerable  accuracy  ex  post  may  not  be  variables  subject  to  control,  directly  or  even 
indirectly.” 
Apart  from  that,  just  because  something  is  old,  it  doesn’t  necessarily  mean  that  it  is  also 
outmoded. That goes for traditional regulatory policy. It also applies to the independence of 
central banks and price stability as its primary objective. And it applies to the basic principles 
of monetary union. 
These are not all theoretical concepts designed on the drawing board and having no practical 
relevance, which are past their sell-by date as a result of the crisis. Quite the opposite: they 
represent the sum total of a great deal of historical experience, not least of major crises in 
the past. 
The  regulatory  concepts  of  the  post-war  era  were  shaped  by  the  experience  of  the  global 
economic crisis and the totalitarian command economy. The monetary policy paradigm and 
the framework of monetary union grew out of the adverse experience gained from inflation 
and politically dependent central banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The current crisis has not made regulatory policy obsolete, nor has it removed the ground 
from under the principles of monetary policy and monetary union. On the contrary, the crisis 
has,  above  all,  shown  once  again  how  relevant  these  guiding  economic  policy  principles 
continue to be. 
In my following remarks, I would therefore like to show how and why these guidelines are 
indispensable for solving our current problems and for preventing future crises. 
Regulatory policy and monetary union 
2. 
Walter Eucken is regarded as the founding father of German ordoliberalism, developed by 
the  Freiburg  School.  The  core  element  of  ordoliberalism  is  competition,  but  not  classical 
unrestrained competition but protected, ordered competition. The ordoliberals’ objective was 
always to provide a stable environment for competition, not to actively manage it. 
This idea was taken up and modified by the proponents of the social market economy. They 
identified a need for government economic policy that went beyond setting a framework. But 
such a government economic policy was to be consistent with market principles and adhere 
to the principle of subsidiarity – what can be regulated by the market should be regulated by 
the market. 
The  entire  Maastricht  framework  reflects  key  ordoliberal  and  social  market  economy 
principles. 
 
It  is  geared  to  the  principle  of  open  markets:  in  the  single  European  market,  this 
principle is safeguarded by four basic freedoms. 
It  is  geared  to  the  principle  of  subsidiarity,  which  is  explicitly  enshrined  in  the 
EU Treaties. 
It  is  geared  to  the  principle  of  liability,  which  was  incorporated  as  a  “no  bail-out” 
clause  into  the  EU  Treaties  –  according  to  which  no  member  state  shall  assume 
liability for the debts of other members. 
And  it  is  geared  to  the  primacy  of  monetary  policy  –  something  which,  on 
professional grounds alone, I feel very strongly about. 
   For  Walter  Eucken,  too,  monetary  policy  was  of  central  importance.  As  he  wrote,  for 
example, in “Principles of Economic Policy”, “All efforts to achieve a competitive system are 
in vain unless a certain monetary stability is assured. Thus, there is a primacy of monetary 
policy in competition order.” 
According  to  Eucken,  the  monetary  constitution  was  to  be  organised  in  such  a  way  that  it 
guaranteed money had a stable value. This requirement is important not least because the 
instruments of monetary policy are very effective and can be used for purposes other than 
keeping the value of money stable. 
Politicians, for example, have always been tempted to harness central banks to their cause 
in  lowering  unemployment,  boosting  economic  growth  and  supporting  government  budget 
funding. 
In particular, the various episodes of high inflation during the 1970s taught us, however, that 
the role of central banks should be limited and that central banks have to be protected from 
being co-opted for other purposes. 
The lessons from that period played a major part in the establishment of European monetary 
union:  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  is,  first,  free  from  political  influence  and, 
second, has a clearly defined mandate with price stability as its primary objective. 
The  primacy  of  monetary  policy  is  additionally  protected  by  the  prohibition  of  monetary 
financing in the EU Treaties and by the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact. And that, 
too, is based on the lessons of history. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A high level of borrowing increases the pressure on the central bank to finance government 
debt with the help of the printing press so as to make the straightjacket of budget constraints 
slightly less tight. Being instrumentalised in this way easily leads to high inflation, however. 
There are instances of this ranging from the Latin Monetary Union in the second half of the 
19th  century  up  to  the  recent  past.  And  such  a  situation  is  by  no  means  confined  to 
developing countries or to exceptional situations, say, in times of war. 
In  that  respect,  the  “marriage”  between  Banca  d’Italia  and  the  Italian  Treasury  was  not  a 
happy  relationship  either.  Between  1975  and  1981,  Banca  d’Italia  was  obliged  to  act  as 
buyer of last resort for government bonds. Even though correlation does not imply causality, 
it is nevertheless worth noting that, during this liaison, government debt rose from 18 trillion 
to 100 trillion lire and that annual inflation amounted to almost 17% on average. By way of 
comparison,  inflation  in  Germany  during  this  period  was  roughly  4½%,  and  in  Switzerland 
only 3%. 
Excessive government debt therefore represents a massive threat to price stability. Putting 
an  effective  limit  on  government  borrowing  is  thus  a  primary  pillar  of  any  policy  of  stable 
money. Monetary union, as a union of stability, therefore required sound public finances. 
Having said that, it soon became clear that calling for sound public finances would not be 
enough. A requirement of this kind had to be reinforced by fiscal rules. 
In this context, a part was played by the following considerations. First, the finding that public 
budgets have a tendency to excessive borrowing; think, for instance, of the theory of political 
business cycles. Second, the concern that governments in a monetary union have an even 
greater  incentive  to  borrow  because  the  costs  of  an  unsound  policy  can  be  spread  more 
widely. And, third, from the outset there was the fear that, despite the no bail-out principle, 
market discipline on its own would not be enough to control such a tendency to incur debt. 
Monetary union and crisis 
3. 
The framework of monetary union was quite coherent, it reflected well-established regulatory 
policy principles, and the attempt was made to learn the lessons and not to repeat the errors 
of the past. Nevertheless, the crisis has shown that, in some places, this framework was too 
weak. 
The fiscal rules, for example, lacked the necessary bite. Instead, the reform of the Stability 
and Growth Pact in 2005 in fact saw some of its teeth drawn as a result of political influence. 
At the same time, the disciplining effect of the financial markets was even smaller than had 
already been feared. At times, the risk premiums for government bonds from the countries 
now in crisis shrank to a few basis points. 
The fiscal rules and market discipline were thus too weak, and many euro-area countries ran 
up too much debt. In any event, the dangers that excessive government borrowing posed to 
monetary  union  were  at  least  recognised.  The  dangers  of  unsound  macroeconomic 
developments, on the other hand, were largely blanked out. 
It is true that the 1989 Delors Report warned about potential imbalances resulting from the 
adjustment  process  after  completion  of  economic  and  monetary  union  or  from  differing 
economic  policy  stances.  In  contrast  to  the  field  of  fiscal  policy,  however,  there  were  no 
precautions to limit such risks. 
Thus, in the run-up to the crisis, housing bubbles and large current account deficits emerged, 
while  many  countries’  competitiveness  deteriorated.  We  see  these  developments  now  as 
being a root cause of the crisis; at the time, they were underestimated. 
What  was  likewise  underestimated  was  the  importance  of  the  financial  system:  feedback 
effects between the financial system and public finances, potential contagion effects across 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
national borders, or the knock-on effects due to the distress of particularly important financial 
institutions. 
Similarly, both the regulation of the financial markets and supervision were inadequate. 
Crisis and regulatory policy 
4. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the crisis has laid bare flaws in the regulatory framework of monetary 
union. 
However, it would be wrong to conclude that we have to build an entirely new framework and 
give up the tried and tested regulatory policy principle. As a matter of fact, the framework’s 
weak  spots  were  located  precisely  where  basic  principles  of  economic  policy  had  been 
neglected. 
I would like to discuss two points in greater depth. 
 
The principle of liability, without which no market economy can function. To quote 
Walter Eucken again: “Whoever reaps the benefits must also bear the liability.” 
And the primacy of monetary policy, as this has engendered a debate which could 
weaken the framework of monetary union in the long term. 
 Strengthen the principle of liability 
4.1 
Let me begin with the principle of liability. 
One of the crucial questions is: how can competition and the price system be protected if the 
principle of liability is undermined by the problem of systemic importance? 
This  question  concerns  no  fewer  than  two  levels  of  monetary  union:  that  of  the  financial 
system and that of sovereigns. 
Think of the fall in risk premiums on government bonds which I mentioned earlier. Besides 
the  general  “hunt  for  yield”,  another  hypothesis  is  that  markets  decided  to  forego  risk 
premiums particularly because they were betting that no euro-area country would default. 
The expectation of government bonds not defaulting was fuelled by the assumed systemic 
importance of individual euro-area countries. The reasoning goes that if the default of one 
country threatened the existence of monetary union, the other countries would jump in the 
breach  to  prevent  more  damage  –  despite  the  no-bail-out  rule.  This  expectation  put 
downward  pressure  on  risk  premiums  on  government  bonds,  thus  distorting  the  pricing 
system; and we all know what happened next. 
We face the same problem in the financial markets. If one bank looks likely to default and 
inflict damage on the entire financial system, the state will probably come to the rescue to 
prevent the situation from escalating – the bank is thus “too big to fail”. 
This leads to inadequate risk premiums for claims on this bank; they distort competition and 
encourage players to enter into even riskier transactions. 
Yet systemic importance not only distorts the signals sent by market prices; it also, in a crisis, 
uproots the principle of liability. 
In rescuing a systemically important bank, at least part of the creditors’ losses are borne by 
the  taxpayer.  Excessively  risky  transactions  therefore  go  unpunished,  and  a  gap  grows 
between benefits and potential damage. The same applies if a systemically important country 
is rescued. 
The decisive question is thus how to give the principle of liability more heft – in the financial 
markets and among governments. 
There are a number of approaches that could be taken at the level of the financial markets. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Higher  capital  requirements  for  banks  are  one  such  approach.  They  enable  banks  to 
shoulder greater losses by themselves and thus shift the risk back to the owner. Government 
bonds, in particular, should be adequately backed by capital in future. 
Plans to ringfence certain risky banking business by creating independent trading units within 
banks  are  another  such  approach  –  they  reduce  internal  cross-subsidising  of  risky  trading 
business, thereby giving depositors better protection from the risks of such business. 
The banking union is yet another. It shifts banking supervision to the European level and can 
thus  ensure  a  better  equilibrium  with  regard  to  liability  and  control  between  investors, 
national taxpayers and euro-area member states. 
For this to succeed, the banking union needs not only a central supervisor but also resolution 
regimes which can help systemically important financial institutions, too, to file for bankruptcy 
without causing damage to the system while, at the same time, creditors participate in the 
costs of the institution’s failure. 
In order to strengthen the principle of liability at the level of sovereign states, the framework 
of monetary union needs to be improved. Even with regard to government finances, liability 
and control must be in equilibrium. 
In the Maastricht framework, both liability and control were, essentially, located at national 
level.  During  the  crisis,  however,  we  moved  away  from  this:  control  remained  national, 
whereas  liability  has  been  increasingly  transferred  to  the  European  level.  While  national 
governments  take  independent  decisions  on  debt,  the  community  is  liable  for  the 
consequences. 
This set-up is a breeding ground for renewed unsound developments. I therefore see only 
two convincing options. 
Either we shift control and intervention rights to the European level as part of a fiscal union; 
or,  in  the  sense  of  a  return  to  the  Maastricht  framework,  we  strengthen  the  liability  and 
independent responsibility of member states. Taken to its logical conclusion, this also means 
that we cannot – and must not – rule out the possibility of sovereign defaults. 
As things now stand, however, it is not quite clear which of these two directions policymakers 
are  leaning  towards;  they  seem  to  be  performing  a  balancing  act,  with  one  foot  in  the 
Maastricht  world  and  the  other  in  a  fiscal  union.  In  the  long  run,  such  a  balancing  act  is 
painful and unhealthy. 
The role of central banks 
4.2 
While  policymakers  vacillate,  expectations  of  central  banks  increase.  The  Eurosystem  is 
being cast as the only actor on the European stage with any ability to take any meaningful 
action. Accordingly, there are ever-increasing calls for the Eurosystem to do even more to 
resolve the crisis. 
I consider this a bad idea, for two reasons. 
First, the Eurosystem cannot resolve the crisis. The causes of the crisis are structural, and 
are to be found at the individual member state and the European level. 
In an interview with the German daily newspaper Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, the former 
IMF  chief  economist  did  not  mince  his  words:  “We  have  to  fix  the  underlying  structural 
problems.  This  will  take  time,  but  short-term  policies  just  won’t  work.  That  is  an  insult  to 
people’s intelligence.” 
I  have  already  mentioned  some  of  these  problems.  Only  policymakers  can  solve  these 
problems;  central  banks  cannot.  To  that  extent,  the  discussion  surrounding  an  allegedly 
overvalued euro is just a red herring to divert from the real challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Quite apart from the fact that the relevant indicators are not pointing to major overvaluation, 
even  despite  the  euro’s  recent  appreciation,  policymakers  should  adhere  to  the  tried  and 
tested assignment of roles. 
Experience of politically motivated depreciations in the past has shown that these generally 
do  not  lead  to  any  lasting  gains  in  competitiveness.  Often,  renewed  depreciations  are 
necessary. If more and more countries try to depress their own currency, this can culminate 
in competitive devaluation, which will only produce losers. 
The  ECB’s  first  president,  Wim  Duisenberg,  pointed  out  something  in  1999  –  in  a  speech 
held in Paris, by the way – which still stands today: the EU finance ministers had agreed to 
issue “general orientations for exchange rate policy” only “in exceptional circumstances, such 
as in the case of clear and persistent misalignments of the euro”. 
Duisenberg  continued  by  saying  that  “[s]uccessful  and  credible  stability-oriented  policies 
should help to prevent the emergence of misalignments in the future”. 
Exchange rate developments are naturally taken into account in monetary policy decisions 
inasmuch as they influence price developments. However, an exchange rate policy designed 
to weaken the euro intentionally would end up leading to higher inflation. 
The second reason why the Eurosystem should not do even more is that the Eurosystem has 
already  done  much  to  contain  the  crisis.  It  has  cut  interest  rates;  it  is  supplying  virtually 
unlimited liquidity to banks; and it has intervened in the bond markets. 
With these measures, the Eurosystem – like other central banks round the world – has taken 
considerable risks, and it has stretched its mandate considerably. As Eucken might have put 
it: the primacy of monetary policy is no longer clearly evident. 
As the UK bank HSBC’s chief economist, Stephen King, put it, monetary policy has lost its 
political neutrality. He also notes that central banks round the world are redistributing wealth 
through  their  crisis  measures.  For  example,  by  buying  government  bonds  or  imposing  lax 
standards on collateral, the Eurosystem, in his eyes, is contributing to a redistribution of risks 
among the euro-area countries’ taxpayers. 
This redistribution is a very relevant problem in terms of the theory of democracy: in principle, 
only  parliaments  and  governments,  with  democratic  legitimacy,  should  be  redistributing 
wealth – not politically independent central banks. 
This  problem  takes  on  practical  relevance  when  it  is  the  basis  on  which  people  discuss 
whether or not central bank independence is an obsolete artefact. And this discussion has 
actually begun. Joseph Stiglitz has taken it a step further and is even calling for an end to 
independence in order to lend legitimacy to decisions taken by central banks to redistribute 
wealth. 
At  all  events,  this  creeping  or  even  open  politicisation  of  central  banks  is  causing  me 
concern.  The  value  of  independent  central  banks  is  borne  out  not  only  by  theoretical 
considerations  but  also  by  historical  experience.  I  have  already  mentioned  Italy  as  an 
example; England and France have seen similar experience, too. 
Walter Eucken would object here: he took a dim view of independent central banks. As he 
saw  it,  experience  had  shown  “that  a  monetary  framework  which  gives  monetary 
policymakers a free hand usually deems them capable of more than they should be regarded 
as being capable of doing”. 
As an alternative, Eucken championed a strictly rules-bound monetary policy. And this is also 
being  given  serious  consideration,  especially  by  those  who  feel  that  central  bank 
independence has to be associated with a narrow interpretation of its mandate. 
The  question  of  whether  rules-based  policy  is  preferable  to  a  central  bank  independence 
which, when it comes to the crunch, cannot be achieved anyway, was one of the topics at the 
latest annual meeting of the American Economic Association in San Diego 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It must be recognised that the aim of a stronger rules-based policy framework is to prevent 
the  primary  objective  of  monetary  stability  from  being  watered  down.  Central  banks  use 
these rules to tie their own hands in order to avoid being co-opted by fiscal policy. 
The price central banks have to pay for this, however, is that monetary policy also surrenders 
its  flexibility.  And  it  is  precisely  the  decisive  contribution  made  by  central  banks  to 
stabilisation at the height of the crisis in the autumn and winter of 2008 which showed, in my 
opinion, just how important and useful such flexibility can be if it is firmly anchored in a clear 
commitment to the primary objective of price stability. However, the risks of such a policy are 
likewise becoming increasingly apparent. 
Yet it is not only the benefits of independent central banks which are being questioned. On 
the heels of the crisis, changes to the monetary policy framework are being proposed which 
are designed to give monetary policy more policy options in times of crisis. 
Quite some time ago, some – including IMF chief economist Olivier Blanchard – suggested 
that central banks should set higher inflation targets. Now the talk is of switching to nominal 
income targets. 
The  common  idea  behind  price-level  targeting  or  nominal  GDP  targets  is  that,  following  a 
period of low inflation or weak growth, monetary policy tolerates higher inflation rates for a 
time before returning to the target path, thereby giving the economy an additional shot in the 
arm. 
I am sceptical of these proposals. A permanently higher inflation target creates permanently 
higher inflation costs; although level targets avoid this by allowing higher inflation rates only 
temporarily, they entail problems of their own. 
Moreover, changing the monetary policy framework during a crisis could dent confidence in 
central banks and raise suspicions of ulterior motives behind a change in strategy. 
In  an  article  for  the  Financial  Times,  UK  economist  Charles  Goodhart  wrote:  “Rather,  a 
[nominal income] target would be perceived as a thinly disguised way of aiming for higher 
inflation. As such, it would unloose the anchor to inflation expectations (...)”. 
Central banks’ hard-won credibility would suffer, and this would ultimately be too much to pay 
for  greater  flexibility.  This  credibility  and  confidence  are  the  basis  on  which  citizens  have 
accepted the euro as a single currency. 
And the debate on central bank independence or the benefits of alternative monetary policy 
strategies  which  imply  at  least  temporarily  higher  inflation  is  anathema  to  this  confidence. 
One of my predecessors described the risks of playing with inflation by saying that “if you flirt 
with inflation, you’ll end up marrying her”. 
Eucken  emphasised  time  and  again,  and  I  agree,  that  monetary  stability  is  the  basis  for 
functioning  competition,  for  a  market  economy  and  for  general  prosperity.  However,  I  am 
also convinced that monetary stability is possible only with independent central banks whose 
mandate is focused on preserving price stability. 
At all events, I am convinced that the crisis does not justify discarding this framework, which 
has proved its worth in theory and through practical experience. 
Conclusion 
5. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the economic policy principles which mark our economic order and 
monetary union are anything but outdated. They point the way towards a lasting resolution to 
the crisis. 
A central economic policy challenge here is to give the principle of liability renewed heft, both 
in the financial system and in monetary union as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Another challenge is to preserve and protect the role of central banks as independent, clearly 
focused  guarantors  of  monetary  stability.  I  therefore  wish  to  conclude  by  reiterating 
something Lars Feld said in a 2011 interview with the German newspaper WirtschaftsWoche: 
“I definitely recommend that all politicians put under their pillows a copy of Eucken’s book 
Principles of Economic Policy”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
