Paul Fisher: Current issues in monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Paul  Fisher,  Executive  Director  for  Markets  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the 
University of Bristol – London Alumni Event, Bristol, 26 February 2013. 
 Thank you very much for inviting me to speak to you this evening. The University of Bristol is 
a very fine institution in a very fine city and I have extremely fond memories of my time there 
from 1977 to 1980 as a student in Economics with Statistics. In music at that time we had the 
latter  stages  of  punk  rock,  and  Bristol  was  also  very  good  for  folk  music;  in  football  I 
remember watching Bristol City playing Tottenham at Ashton Gate in what was then the true 
First  Division;  and  in  the  economy  there  was  continuing  economic  and  social  unrest  (the 
Winter  of  Discontent)  with  inflation  and  unemployment  stubbornly  high.  I  recall  a  flatmate 
conducting a survey of students’ inflation expectations in 1978 when RPI inflation  had just 
fallen below 8% for the first time since 1972. Unemployment was thought to be high at the 
time, as a result of the first oil crisis but was to take a further upwards lurch in the early 80s 
and  I  remember  how  lucky  I  was  to  get  a  research  job  at  Warwick  University  when  I  left 
Bristol – having spent the summer of 1980 painting rusty trolleys in a factory, which was itself 
knocked down to create housing later in the 80s. 
Whilst these may appear to be self-indulgent memories, the comparison of the economy then 
and now does provide a thoughtful backdrop for what I want to discuss with you this evening. 
Compared with the economy in the 70s, maybe things aren’t as bad now as we sometimes 
like  to  believe!  The  first  topic  I  want  to  cover  will  be  what  central  banks  can  do  to  help 
achieve the holy grail of low inflation, stable growth and full employment. In particular I will 
take  a  monetary  approach  to  explaining  the  issues.  Second,  I  want  to  talk  about  the 
monetary  policy  decisions  facing  us  right  now  and  explain  my  own  recent  voting  position. 
Third, I want to give an update on our latest initiative, the “Funding for Lending Scheme”. 
Money and the balance sheet of the central bank 
In  the  Acknowledgements  to  his  1988  classic  “A  Brief  History  of  Time”,  Stephen  Hawking 
notes that he was told that each equation he included in the book would halve its sales. He 
only  included  one.1  You  may  be  relieved  to  hear  that  there  are  no  equations  in  this  talk 
tonight. But I mention this because I am going to refer regularly to something which has been 
empirically proven to send some journalists to sleep faster than counting sheep. The Bank of 
England’s balance sheet. I hope you are all still awake? Good, because the Bank’s balance 
sheet is actually where all the action is. It is what allows the Bank to deliver its core functions 
including the issuance of banknotes, implementing monetary policy, and acting as lender of 
last resort to the banking system. Only the central bank can undertake these tasks because 
the  central  bank  is  the  monopoly  supplier  of  domestic  currency:  sterling  in  the  UK.  In  this 
context (leaving aside the small stock of coins in circulation2) sterling means banknotes and 
commercial  bank  reserves  held  at  the  Bank  of  England,  which  in  combination  comprise 
“base” or “narrow money”3. Notes and reserve balances form the vast majority of the liability 
side of the Bank’s balance sheet (see Chart 1) and these two types of money provide the 
ultimate means of settling payments between individuals, commercial firms, the Government 
and banks. I will talk about broader concepts of money, including commercial bank deposits, 
                                                
1   E=mc2 
2   Coins are actually the responsibility of the Royal Mint, not the Bank of England. The amount in circulation is 
around £4bn. 
3  The old M0 definition in the UK. Narrow money can also be defined to include demand deposits at commercial 
banks – eg M1 in the US. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
a little later. The Bank of England can control the amount of sterling liabilities it issues and 
thus decide the amount of narrow money in the economy and/or its price. That is unique to 
the  central  bank  and  is  the  fundamental  operational  tool  we  have  to  implement  monetary 
policy. 
 
Bank of England consolidated balance sheet(a) 
 Chart 1: Liabilities 
Chart 2: Assets 
Other assets
Loan to APF (QE)
Short-term repos
Long-term repos
£ billions
450
Other liabilities
Reserve balances
Notes in Circulation
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
£ billions
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
 (a)  Weekly data to 13 February 2013 
 
In addition to controlling the size of our balance sheet and/or the price of money, which may 
affect the total supply of credit in the economy directly, we can alter the composition of the 
assets held on the Bank’s balance sheet, or conduct off-balance sheet operations, and so 
affect  the  composition  of  private  sector  asset  holdings.  Executed  judiciously,  we  can  thus 
influence the price and/or quantity of particular types of credit in the economy. 
Finally, by talking about what we might do in the future, the Bank can influence the price and 
quantity of money and credit for some time to come. The power of communications as an 
operational  tool  should  not  be  underestimated  and  the  MPC  has  always  used  a  range  of 
communication channels to help accomplish its objectives. 
I should also note that, from April 1st this year, the new Financial Policy Committee (the FPC) 
of the Bank will also have statutory responsibility and powers to make the financial system 
more resilient through macroprudential policies,4 and the Prudential Regulation Authority (the 
PRA) within the Bank of England will take over from the Financial Services Authority the job 
of micro-prudential supervision of firms. These functions do not depend on the central bank 
balance sheet and so, in principle, do not need to be undertaken by the central bank. But 
they  are  being  put  in  the  central  bank  for  very  good  reasons,  which  include,  for  example, 
exploiting the synergies with central bank operations and skills, and eliminating the underlaps 
that arise from separate institutional arrangements. Because they do not necessarily involve 
the  Bank  in  conducting  financial  operations,  I  will  say  no  more  about  macro-  or  micro-
prudential polices today. (Else I will still be going at midnight!) 
In  summary,  the  primary  operational  policy  levers  available  to  the  Bank  of  England  to 
influence the macroeconomic outlook are: setting the price or quantity of money; influencing 
                                                
4   For  more  on  my  views  about  the  FPC  see:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/ 
speeches/2012/speech550.pdf  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
the price and quantity of credit; and the communication of our actions, analysis and views5. 
Let me unpack these policy operations a little further. 
Our monetary policy objective is set in the annual Inflation Target Remit given to us in a letter 
from  the  Chancellor.6  The  Remit  requires  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  to  target  a  2% 
inflation  rate  in  the  Consumer  Price  Index,  but  it  is  also  made  clear  that  we  should  avoid 
“undesirable  volatility  in  output”  which  might  arise  from  “external  events  or  temporary 
difficulties” beyond the control of the monetary framework. 
In order to steer inflation towards the 2% target, in effect we can control either the price or 
the  supply  of  narrow  money.  Prior  to  2009,  we  would  set  Bank  Rate  and  then  adjust  the 
supply of commercial bank reserves to guide overnight interest rates towards it. To do this 
the  Bank  would  conduct  Open  Market  Operations  (OMOs)  in  which  we  lend  to,  or  borrow 
from, the commercial banks so as to increase or decrease the level of reserve balances in 
aggregate, in line with the banks’ stated targets. We would adjust those operations precisely 
to ensure that short-term market rates are driven towards the rate we pay on those reserve 
balances – which is Bank Rate. Since we also charge Bank Rate in our routine OMOs, Bank 
Rate is essentially the anchoring price of short term money. I am not going to go into details 
tonight  about  the  precise  economic  mechanisms  which  make  overnight  market  rates 
converge on Bank Rate, but there is plenty of technical material available on that if you wish 
to know precisely how that works.7 
In my first week as Markets Director of the Bank of England, in March 2009, we set Bank 
Rate at 0.5% where it has remained ever since; a record low for the policy rate in the Bank’s 
history of over 300 years. Since that left little scope to adjust the price of money downwards 
directly, we switched at that point to directly affecting the supply of narrow money. The Asset 
Purchase Programme – more popularly called “Quantitative Easing” or just “QE” – has since 
reached of total of £375bn, the vast majority of which has been by purchasing gilts, financed 
by increasing the supply of reserve balances (net of other flows across the Bank’s balance 
sheet – see Charts 1 and 2).  
The  economics  of  QE  is  actually  more  simple  than  is  often  portrayed:  by  buying  a  large 
amount of assets from the market, in exchange for cash, we can greatly increase the amount 
of sterling in the economy. We inject the most liquid asset of all – short-term sterling reserve 
balances – and take out of circulation a long-maturity, less liquid asset, gilts. That switch in 
maturity  and  liquidity  leads  to  a  range  of  effects,  as  the  economy  has  to  rebalance  its 
holdings  of  financial  assets.  As  people  try  to  move  out  of  cash  deposits  and  into  typically 
higher yielding assets, QE will reduce liquidity  and term premia, push up a range of asset 
prices  and  bring  down  interest  rates  at  a  wide  range  of  maturities.  All  of  that  will  benefit 
borrowers,  increase  wealth  and  help  to  stimulate  nominal  demand.  Injecting  money  is 
actually not so different from cutting its price (Bank Rate). 
There are some very important caveats however and I will focus on three. First, monetary 
stimulus  works  by  giving  an  incentive  to  businesses  and  households  to  spend  now  rather 
than  in  the  future. That creates  only  a  temporary  boost  to  growth.  To  carry  on  influencing 
growth, the stimulus needs to get ever larger. But we know that ultimately, the sustainable 
growth rate in the economy depends not on monetary conditions but on real factors. I shall 
return to this point later. Second, and relatedly, a monetary injection can create extra nominal 
demand for goods and services, but the precise split between real growth and price inflation 
is  unfortunately  out  of  our  control.  Taking  these  two  points  together,  the  creation  of  extra 
I will leave aside the issuance of banknotes, the quantity of which passively reflects demand by the public. 
                                                
5  
6   http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetarypolicy/Documents/pdf/chancellorletter120321.pdf 
7   See 
the  Sterling  Monetary  Framework”  available  at: 
“Recent  Developments 
for  example 
in 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2011/speech487.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
money can surely be relied on to prevent deflation, but even if it provides a temporary boost 
to real activity it can’t guarantee sustaining a particular real growth rate. Third, the split into 
prices  and  real  output  and  the  overall  outturn  for  the  economy,  depend  on  what  else  is 
happening  at  the  same  time:  monetary  policy  is  just  one  of  the  various  forces  at  work 
shaping  the  pressures  on  output  and  inflation.  We  don’t  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a 
scientific laboratory where everything else can be held constant. 
QE is often described as being a great experiment. In fact, the theory of monetary policy in 
the  economic textbooks  that I  was  brought  up with  at  Bristol,  and  later,  all  considered  the 
supply of money to be the central bank’s primary policy instrument. The use of interest rates 
to set monetary policy appeared to be viewed by many academic authors as something of a 
slightly unfortunate and uninteresting practicality8. 
I  want  to  be  clear  about  one  very  important  point:  for  monetary  policy  to  stimulate  the 
economy, the Bank of England has to cut interest rates and/or increase the supply of money. 
That gives firms and households an incentive to spend rather than to save. And it works in 
part by shifting net interest income from those who do save to those who borrow (and hence 
are more likely to spend out of marginal income). Not surprisingly, loosening monetary policy 
is often unpopular with savers, just as tightening policy is unpopular with borrowers. We have 
every  sympathy  for  those  who  are  net  savers  and  especially  if  they  rely  on  investment 
income, but we have to set policy for the good of the economy as a whole, in line with our 
Remit. Ultimately, economic recovery is in everyone’s interests. 
Monetary  policy  famously  has  “long  and  variable  lags”.  One  of  the  main  reasons  why  is 
because the demand for money depends on many other factors in the economy outside of 
the  central  bank’s  control.  There  are  other  forms  of  money  apart  from  sterling  as  I  have 
defined it so far. Economic activity is also supported by the extent of deposits created by the 
commercial  banks.  Various  measures  of this  are  available,  usually  labelled  “broad  money” 
and  the  definition  most  commonly  used  in  the  UK  is  known  as  M49.  Ideally,  that  wider 
definition of money is what we would like to boost to ensure an increase in nominal demand 
for goods and services. 
In the UK it has been clear over the past four years that while we have been busy increasing 
the supply of narrow money, the growth of broad money has remained weak. Broad money 
demand will fall if individuals or firms use the increased cash injected into the system to pay 
down bank debts, or simply seek to borrow less. Similarly the supply side of broad money 
can  contract  if  banks  consciously  shrink  their  balance  sheets.  That  would  happen,  for 
example, if the banks are short of capital or funding, or simply can’t earn sufficient return on 
their assets. All of these demand and supply factors have been at work in recent years. As a 
result, the balance of forces between the demand and supply of broad money against the 
injection of narrow money has meant that growth in the stock of broad money in the economy 
has remained weak. 
That  does  not  mean  that  QE  has  been  unsuccessful,  as  many  commentators  seem  to 
conclude.  Without  QE,  the  amount  of  broad  money  in  the  economy  would  clearly  have 
shrunk much further than it did – it actually held up reasonably well while the economy was 
contracting. Had broad money shrunk a lot further, the resulting deflation would have meant 
that the outcomes for output and employment in the UK would have been far, far worse than 
they  have  been.  I  will  say  more  on  the  causes  of  deflationary  forces  a  bit  later,  but  this 
analysis  partly  explains  why  the  Bank  of  England  has  also  been  engaged  on  special 
operations  to  support  the  liquidity,  funding  and  capital  positions  of  the  banks  through, 
                                                
8   See for example, FR Glahe, (1977) “Macroeconomics Theory and Policy”, 2nd edition, publ: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich. 
9   The  definition  of  M4  can  be  found  here:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/iadb/notesiadb/ 
m4.aspx 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
respectively, the Special Liquidity Scheme, the Funding for Lending Scheme and the capital 
recommendations by the FPC. 
What of our ability to influence credit markets directly? I want to argue that it largely reflects 
how we go about changing the supply of money. On the one hand, to increase the quantity 
of money in scale, quickly and safely, it is quite clear that gilts are the best instrument to buy: 
there is a large market and there is no resultant private sector credit risk taken by the public 
sector.  Many  financial  instruments  tend  to  be  priced  by  reference  to  the  interest  rates  on 
sovereign debt and so changing gilt yields will have effects across sterling markets. 
In addition to buying gilts to inject money, we can consider two other ways to affect credit 
markets. First we can buy financial instruments outright. If particular markets have become 
dysfunctional so that general monetary expansion doesn’t help, relatively small amounts of 
direct  purchases  may  unblock  the  relevant  markets.  Second  we  can  lend  liquid  assets  
– including cash – against assets that are, or have become illiquid. That is what we did with 
the Special Liquidity Scheme and more recently the Funding for Lending Scheme. 
In  2009  the  Bank  launched  two  schemes  making  outright  purchases  of  assets  other  than 
gilts.10 We started to buy sterling commercial paper (up to 3 months maturity) and investment 
grade corporate bonds. At that time, in the worst conditions of the recession, the markets for 
these  financial  instruments  had  not  been  functioning  normally.  An  increased  demand  for 
liquidity and heightened concerns about counterparty risk, caused many markets to dry up 
and asset prices to fall. By intervening as “Market Maker of Last Resort” the Bank was able, 
over  about  a  12–18  month  period,  to  support  the  markets  for  both  commercial  paper  and 
corporate  bonds  and  drive  prices  back  to  more  appropriate  levels.  The  commercial  paper 
scheme  came  to  a  natural  end  as  prices  rose  and  our  holdings  –  which  peaked  at  about 
£2.4bn in 2009 – matured. The corporate bond scheme is still in operation. Each week we 
offer to buy from a list of bonds, or sell from our stock. After reaching a peak in 2010 of some 
£1.5bn in holdings, the revitalized market has steadily bought the bonds back from us so that 
our stock is now only around £20mn.  
Curiously, we still get people advocating the purchase of corporate bonds in large scale as 
well as gilts. But it is not clear to me what this would be intended to achieve. Apart from the 
simple  fact  that  the  Bank  is  already  in  the  market  every  week  offering  to  buy  corporate 
bonds, and we have been doing that for nearly four years, this aspect of the capital markets 
is functioning well in terms of providing credit to businesses. Any firm that has an issuance 
programme – typically the larger firms with credit ratings – can issue whenever and whatever 
bonds  they  choose  at  historically  low  interest  rates.  The  backstop  to  corporate  bonds 
provided by the Bank’s operations is still there – but it is not being used much because it is 
not needed. 
The  power to  intervene  in  credit markets  is  one  to  use  cautiously.  Any  intervention  by  the 
public sector carries the risk of creating distortions. Usually, we intervene because there is a 
demonstrable  failure  of  private  markets  –  so  that  the  central  bank  is  undoing  distortions 
caused by other factors. Buying private sector paper also carries the risk of credit losses – 
ultimately of public money. And it is a very short step to cross the boundary from seeking to 
improve  credit  supply  generally  to  determining  the  credit  allocation  between  individual 
borrowers – which the central bank is neither equipped nor empowered to do. That is best 
left to private markets. 
When a central bank – or any public authority – takes actions, it has to remember that the 
precedent  of  that  action  can  be  as  powerful  as the  action  itself.  Market participants  –  and 
indeed the general public – will learn about the authorities’ behaviour and shape their own 
                                                
10   For more information, see “The Corporate Sector and the Bank of England’s Asset Purchases” available at: 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2010/423.aspx 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
accordingly. Moral hazard is one aspect of this – that can lead to market participants taking 
more risky actions because of the perceived backstop provided by the central bank. 
More generally, communications strategies can be a positive part of the toolkit, in particular 
by giving out information about the central bank’s monetary policy “reaction function”. For the 
most part it is helpful for markets to be able to predict what the central bank will do. That way 
one can often hope to generate the desired responses with less severe policy actions than 
otherwise. Credibility matters. For example, if people believe that inflation will be 2% in the 
medium term, and act accordingly, it is much more likely that inflation will stay close to 2% in 
practice without big swings in monetary policy. Keeping inflation under control is much more 
costly for the economy if expectations become de-anchored from the official target. 
But how explicit do we need to be about our forward plans? This is a very live policy debate. 
The recovery in financial markets that we have  seen in the past 6 months or so, is in part 
driven  by  the  statement  that  the  ECB  will  do  “whatever  it  takes”  to  keep  the  euro  area 
together  and  the  perceived  commitment  that  the  Fed  will  do  whatever  it  takes  to  restore 
growth in the US. The belief in these policy approaches has been immensely powerful. But it 
must be backed not only by perceived intent but also by capability and delivery if needed – 
and economies always generate some surprises. If the actions don’t follow the words when 
necessary, then similar policy statements in future will be less effective. 
In the UK, market expectations are already consistent with monetary policy remaining very 
supportive for some time to come, indicating no change in Bank Rate until well into 2015. Yet 
there  is  still  a  debate  about  whether  the  MPC  should  give  more  “forward  guidance”.  In 
practice  we  have  being  doing  this  through  the  Inflation  Report.  The  most  recent  edition 
makes  it  clear  that  we  do  not  see  much  pressure  arising  from  domestically  generated 
inflation. Rather, we continue to see inflation being driven by factors such as tax changes, 
higher  commodity  and  energy  prices,  and  other  external  influences.  These  and  similar 
adverse  relative  price  changes  have  made  us  all  financially  worse  off  and  contributed  to 
keeping  inflation  higher  than  target  over  the  past  few  years.  In  response,  the  Bank  could 
have  chosen  to  tighten  monetary  policy  to  keep  measured  inflation  rates  down.  But  that 
would  have  meant  deliberately  trying  to  weaken  output  growth  and  seeking  to  raise 
unemployment  so  that  domestic  inflationary  pressures  were  lower.  The  relative  price 
changes  would  still  have  happened,  albeit  at  a  lower  overall  inflation  rate  (wage  growth 
would also have been lower). That would not have been consistent with the Remit that the 
MPC  has  been  given  and  I  doubt  it  would  have  been  a  more  attractive  outcome  to  most 
people. 
The current policy debate 
Despite  the  medium-term  limitations  of  monetary  policy,  my  own  view  is  that  QE  has 
nevertheless been a powerful force in supporting the economy at crucial points over the past 
4 ½ years. Given the shocks that have hit the UK since 2008, and the dependence of the UK 
on financial services, output could have fallen much, much further than the 6% fall from peak 
to trough that is actually recorded, and the unemployment rate could easily have peaked well 
into double figures instead of the 8 ½% that actually transpired. But I have also made clear 
that I do not think monetary policy can itself guarantee sustained real growth in the medium-
term. It can provide a temporary stimulus and the right monetary conditions for a recovery, 
but sustained real growth will depend on real factors such as real external demand for UK-
produced  goods  and  services.  We  need  real  productivity  growth  to  make  UK  production 
competitive  and  we  need  real  supply-side  reforms  to  boost  expected  future  real  incomes. 
Monetary  policy  can  help,  and  it  can  underpin  the  economy  by  preventing  a  slide  into 
deflation.  So  support  from  monetary  policy  is  necessary  but  won’t  be  sufficient  to  restore 
sustained real growth until these real determinants are also pushing the economy forwards. 
One way to think about what has happened during the past 4 years is that there has been a 
need  for  balance  sheet  rebuilding  across  the  economy.  The  shocks  of  2008  revealed  that 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
many parts of the economy had become over-extended: some UK commercial banks are still 
rebuilding their balance sheets; the Government  will take several more years to rebalance 
expenditure  and  income;  households  are  still  increasing  savings  rather  than  spending  in 
aggregate; and some corporates are reluctant – or unable – to take on new debts. And given 
a very large trade deficit built up prior to the crisis, the overall UK economy had to rebalance, 
away from domestic demand towards net exports. These are real adjustments that need to 
be made within the economy. Growth should return, but it is likely that growth can only be 
sustained  at  a  satisfying  pace  once  the  drag  on  demand  and  supply  from  rebalancing 
lessens.  Monetary  policy  can  play  a  supporting  role  because  the  extra  liquidity  in  the 
economy allows the necessary rebalancing to happen without a disorderly adjustment (eg in 
asset prices). But patience will be required. 
One detailed factor that has complicated monetary policy recently is the effects on measured 
retail  price  inflation  of  regulated  and  administered  prices  such  as  above-inflation  rises  in 
utility bills, university tuition fees, rail fares etc. Individually these may be perfectly sensible 
public policy choices and I do not want to be interpreted as criticising their motivation. But the 
effect on CPI inflation is important. These prices – which are about 16% of the CPI basket – 
will  contribute  around  one  percentage  point  to  the  CPI  inflation  rate  in  the  next  couple  of 
years, largely regardless of what happens to domestic demand. Pushing inflation down to 2% 
would require very low price rises in the other 84%. The risk of overall deflation is much less 
likely as a result. 
At our February meeting we faced, as so often in the recent past, a difficult choice. Should 
we  offer  more  monetary  stimulus,  or  should  we  not?  My  own  choice,  on  a  balanced 
assessment of the risks, was that we could and should do more now to support a nascent 
recovery with a further monetary injection. I do not believe the assertions of those who claim 
that that QE is noticeably less powerful than previously – although I have noted that there are 
limits to what monetary policy can be expected to achieve on real growth and it is impossible 
to  measure  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  with  any  degree  of  precision.  As  with  changing 
interest rates, the precise effects will always depend on the state of the economy. I judge that 
there are some upside risks to inflation, should confidence about achieving the 2% inflation 
target in the medium run be lost. But there are also downside risks if growth remains very 
subdued.  As  long  as  medium-term  inflation  expectations  do  remain  consistent  with  our 
objective – in particular as long as wage growth remains so weak – I believe that we can and 
should continue to support the economy through the supply of money. But there is a case for 
taking a slightly longer-term approach than previously. 
Because of the underpinning from regulated and administered prices, and the fact that the 
economy is currently flat rather than contracting, I think the risk of deflation is considerably 
reduced.  Rather  than  a  very  large,  rapid  programme  of  asset  purchases  to  avoid  an 
imminent slump – as was needed in 2009 and again in 2011/12 – a slower, more gradually 
supportive policy might be more appropriate and less risky to nurse the economy through the 
next phase of recovery. It is sustained momentum that the economy needs now rather than 
emergency action. 
Because of that, in February I voted for an additional £25bn over 3 months thinking that this 
could  be  the  first  instalment  of  a  more  prolonged  run  of  purchases  at  a  somewhat  slower 
pace than previously, and with a relatively modest addition to the total by the end. If we were 
to  do  that,  then  it  would  be  straightforward  to  accelerate  or  to  stop  purchases  as  the 
economic outlook developed and the risks became clearer. In fact this is not so different from 
what we have done before. Although we have always decided on asset purchases for a 3 or 
4 month period at a time, we have often rolled into further purchases. The total amount is 
only decided – and then only temporarily – at the point we stop! So we could contemplate a 
rather longer horizon for asset purchases, even if we continue to cautiously decide on a few 
months at a time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
The majority of the MPC took a view in February not to make any more purchases. I accept 
that there was a good case to be made for that position, even if on balance I took a different 
view. But I think we need to keep under review whether there is merit in undertaking more 
asset purchases under a slightly different dynamic approach. Indeed the February meeting 
Minutes made it clear that the Committee will keep all its options open. 
Funding for lending 
Finally, I want to turn to our most recent approach to credit easing. The Funding for Lending 
Scheme (the FLS) was launched in 2012 jointly with HM Treasury after we saw that interest 
rates  being  charged  to  borrowers  had  been  rising  at  a  time  when  our  asset  purchase 
programme should have been bearing down on market rates. The principal reason for rising 
lending rates was that bank funding costs were being kept high by the continuing crisis in the 
euro area. 
The FLS offers banks cheap funding for up to 4 years – with the price linked to how much 
lending  a  bank  makes  to  UK  firms  and  households.  It  is  carefully  designed  to  provide 
incentives to all banks to lend more than they would have done in its absence. The actual 
mechanism  is  a  liquidity  upgrade  as  we  lend  9-month  Treasury  bills  against  illiquid  loan 
collateral.11 The Treasury bills can easily and cheaply be converted into cash, thus reducing 
the banks’ reliance on more expensive market funding. 
How successful has it been? The impact comes in three phases. First of all the FLS tackles 
the  problem  at  source  by  cutting  the  funding  costs  of  banks.  That  phase  has  been 
remarkably successful. Market-based measures of UK bank funding costs have fallen across 
all sources: secured and unsecured term debt; inter-bank borrowing; deposit rates and so on. 
It has no doubt helped that coincidental developments in Europe have brought down bank 
funding costs there. But in the UK they fell quickly once the FLS was first announced, and 
generally by more for UK banks than for their European peer group. 
The  next  stage  is  for  banks  to  pass  on  lower  funding  costs  to  their  customers.  This  is 
happening,  albeit  a  bit more slowly.  Of  course it  is  only  the  banks’ marginal funding  costs 
which are reduced. Their pre-existing stock of funding will reflect historical borrowing costs. 
So  the  largest  falls  in  loan  costs  are  directed  at  new  lending,  rather  than  the  stock.  The 
impact is also more obvious on mortgage than on corporate lending. Three quarters of total 
lending is to households rather than to firms, and it is easier for banks to launch new offers in 
that sector. In the corporate sector, we have seen banks take different approaches to SME 
lending:  one  bank offers  a  cash  back  scheme;  another  has  scrapped  arrangement fees; a 
third  is  offering  guaranteed  discounted  borrowing  costs.  The  true  impact  for  corporate 
customers is not easily measured in “standard” interest rate data, but the potential economic 
benefit is there. Overall, we think there is more action to come in lower lending rates. 
The final stage is the impact of lower lending rates on the quantity of credit. That will take 
some time to work through from applications to approvals to actual lending and is the most 
uncertain leg. The FLS has clearly shifted the supply of credit: loans are generally available 
at  lower  cost  than  previously.  That  in  itself  is  a  monetary  boost  as  new  borrowers  will  be 
better off than they were before because they are paying lower interest rates. But whether 
there  is  more  borrowing  in  total  will  depend  on  the  demand  for  credit  and  the 
creditworthiness of borrowers. If firms or households, for whatever reason, are reluctant to 
borrow, a change in the marginal interest rate may not make much difference. For example I 
have  personally  heard  from  small  firms  who  say  they  do  not  want  to  “get  in  hock  to  their 
banks again” and so they are turning to alternative funding sources or simply not investing at 
all. 
                                                
11   Technically this is a collateral swap, and in line with good accounting practice it is not recorded on balance 
sheet. But there is full quarterly disclosure, bank-by-bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And  from  the  lender’s  point  of  view,  they  still  have  to  judge  the  chances  of  getting  their 
money back. Again this is more complicated for lending to businesses than for households – 
especially small businesses which are much more diverse. At the margin there will be some 
individual business credits which  look a better bet at a lower  interest rate, but some other 
businesses  won’t  get  credit  at  any  price.  In  aggregate,  corporate  lending  is  also  probably 
being held back by the fact that the commercial property market is still weak. Nearly 50% of 
bank and building society lending to corporates is to the property sector and a good part of 
the  rest  will  be  secured  on  property.  Given  losses  suffered  by  most  banks  on  their 
commercial  property  portfolios,  they  are  reluctant  to  increase  lending  for  that  purpose. 
Finally, some banks have had to cut back particular forms of lending as a result of State Aid 
rulings, so they will struggle not to reduce their total lending, even if they use the FLS to the 
full to support their core activities. 
We do need to keep the pressure on the banks individually and collectively to make sure that 
they continue to pass through lower funding costs and are lending where they can. The Bank 
has made the funds available to support lending to UK households and businesses, it is up to 
the  banks  to  deliver.  That  is  one  reason  why  we  are  publishing  bank-by-bank  outcomes 
under the Scheme. 
We wait to see what the impact is of the FLS on the stock of lending. The next data release 
on 4 March will be for end-December data. Even though lending rates have fallen, that is still 
quite early for much extra money to have flowed from the application stage into actual loans, 
compared with previous plans which showed that lending was most likely to fall in aggregate 
without  the  FLS. I  would  not  expect to  see  a return to  rising  aggregate  quantities  until  we 
start  getting  data  for  2013  at  the  earliest.  Indeed  the  aggregate  data  which  have  been 
published already – for all banks, not just those in the FLS – showed a small fall for the last 
quarter  of  2012.  Nevertheless,  it  does  seem  that  we  have  the  beginnings  of  a  revival  in 
mortgage activity which is visible in the approvals data and that trend is widely supported by 
business contacts throughout the country. 
The underlying message from the FLS is much the same as for monetary policy. Monetary 
and  credit  policies  can  help  provide  the  foundations  for  growth  and  ease  the  path  for 
necessary real adjustments. But ultimately, the growth of the economy will depend on real 
factors  such  as  expectations  of  real  income  growth  and  the  productivity  of  UK  firms  and 
workers.  Households  will  borrow  for  housing  or  consumption  if  they  have  expectations  of 
secure real incomes. Firms will similarly borrow if they have expectations of demand for their 
goods and services. Cheaper loan rates will help that process, but the fundamental drivers 
will still be those of the real economy. 
Conclusion 
The headwinds holding back the UK economy over recent years have been predominately 
real  ones:  an  ongoing  crisis  in  our  main  export  markets  of  Europe;  the  necessity  of  fiscal 
consolidation at home; the need for rebalancing of the UK economy towards net exports; and 
balance  sheet  repair  across  all  sectors.  The  weak  relative  performance  of  the  financial 
services  sector  following  the  crisis  has  also  been  a  direct  drag  on  output  as  well  as 
hampering the supply of credit. The central expectation in the February Inflation Report was 
for growth  to resume  in  2013,  albeit  at  a  relatively  modest  pace.  Patience  will  be  needed. 
Meanwhile, the Monetary Policy Committee remains committed to supporting the economy 
whilst  aiming  to  keep  inflation  low  and  stable  in  the  medium  term,  in  line  with  our  Remit. 
Monetary policy can help, even if it can’t solve all the challenges of restoring sustainable real 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9 
