Deepak Mohanty: What should be the framework for monetary policy in 
future? 
Vote of thanks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
15th C D Deshmukh Memorial Lecture on “A revolution in monetary policy – lessons in the 
wake of the global financial crisis” delivered by Prof Joseph Stiglitz, Mumbai, 3 January 2013. 
 Honourable  Professor  Joseph  Stiglitz,  Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  distinguished  guests  and 
colleagues from the Reserve Bank.  
Central banks have come under severe intellectual scrutiny ever since the global crisis, even 
as  they  have  crossed  all  conventional  barriers  in  responding to the  crisis.  Monetary  policy 
was  partly  blamed  for  the  genesis  of  the  crisis,  and  it  continues  to  be  blamed  for 
ineffectiveness  in  giving  us  a  durable  recovery.  We  need  nothing  short  of  a  revolution  to 
make monetary policy more relevant. Two major forces playing out since the crisis could aid 
this revolution: First, the innovative response of advanced country central banks to ensure 
that  this  time  it  should  be  different  from  the  Great  Depression.  Second,  the  animated 
academic debate amongst the best minds in economics and finance, led by Nobel laureates 
like Prof Stiglitz, to recommend what should be the framework for monetary policy in future? 
In  his  opening  remarks,  Governor  Dr.  Subbarao  discussed  the  first  dimension,  which 
included  extensive  reliance  of  advanced  country  central  banks  on  quantitative  and  credit 
easing  measures,  operation  twist  and  forward  guidance,  to  escape  the  theoretical  limits 
posed  to  the  conventional  conduct  of  monetary  policy  by  the  zero  lower  bound  (ZLB).  He 
noted the far reaching changes emerging in the recent period in monetary policy frameworks 
of  advanced  country  central  banks,  with  the  Fed  announcing  an  explicit  target  for 
unemployment;  the  Bank  of  England  examining  possible  replacement  of  inflation  targeting 
with  nominal  income  targeting,  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  being  expected  to  respond  to 
prolonged deflation by accepting a higher explicit inflation target. 
Emerging market central banks, despite the pre-crisis best practices, generally preferred to 
continue with multiple objectives, which included financial stability, and also tried to manage 
the impossible trinity, with country specific approach to exchange rate regimes and capital 
account. After the global crisis, the spillovers form ultra-accommodative monetary policies in 
advanced  economies  have  amplified  the  challenge  from  the  impossible  trinity,  besides 
increasing commodity price pressures. Governor, Dr. Subbarao, encapsulated in his remarks 
the  complex  nature  of  the  issues  involved  in  the  recent  innovations  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy,  most  of  which  could  be  experiments,  and  how  these  may  influence  the 
mainstream monetary policy frameworks, going ahead. 
Here, one has to look up to guidance from eminent thinkers like Prof Stiglitz. In today’s CD 
Deshmukh lecture, he unraveled fifteen attributes for monetary policy architecture post-crisis. 
While each of these recommendations would need to be discussed and understood in the 
country specific context, some of them are clearly path-breaking and thought-provoking. 
First, his boarder definition of monetary policy also included financial regulatory policy. The 
argument here is that what matters for the real economy is lending rates and availability of 
finance. While monetary policy affects both, regulation can improve the access to credit and 
terms of credit. 
Second,  faith  in  the  invisible  hand  and  excessive  reliance  on  market  efficiency  should  not 
blind side central banks to the possibility of market failures. 
Third, a central bank should not be reluctant to use all possible instruments available at its 
disposal, constrained by the notion that only rate-based policy is more efficient. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
is  necessary 
to  deal  with  asset  bubbles  and 
Fourth,  macro-prudential  regulation 
macroeconomic volatility. 
Fifth, monetary policy should be sensitive to distributional consequences. 
Sixth,  national  monetary  policy  should  stand  ready  to  address  globalization-induced 
spillovers, and in this context capital control should very much be a part of the policy toolkit. 
Most  of  the  recommendations  of  Prof  Stiglitz  are  intuitively  appealing  to  many  of  us  in 
emerging  and  developing  economies.  In  India,  we  have  a  multiple-objectives  and  multi-
indicators  approach  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  While  price  stability  remains  the 
dominant objective, financial stability has been recognized an explicit objective of monetary 
policy.  We  have  used  macro-prudential  measures  even  before  the  crisis  as  a  stabilization 
instrument. Our approach to financial sector reforms and liberalization of the capital account 
has  been  cautious  and  gradual.  We  recognize  that  improving  access  to  credit  to  certain 
sectors through sector specific policies should be integral to monetary policy. We are also 
vigorously  pursuing  financial  inclusion  as  an  intermediate  objective  to  promote  inclusive 
growth. 
We,  in  the  Reserve  Bank,  would  need  to  reflect  more  closely  on  the  key  messages  from 
Prof Stiglitz to strengthen the micro-foundations of macro-economic policies. For a large and 
diverse  economy  of  over  1.2  billion  populations,  micro-foundation  of  monetary  policy  is 
indeed a major challenge for us. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  extend  my  sincere  thanks  to  Prof.  Joseph  Stiglitz  for  having 
accepted  our  invitation  to  deliver  the  Fifteenth  C.  D.  Deshmukh  Memorial  Lecture,  and 
leaving with us very thought provoking ideas, which I am sure would trigger further debate 
and research, not only in the Reserve Bank, but globally. 
I  thank  Mrs.  Anya  Stiglitz  for  her  gracious  presence.  I  thank  the  family  members  of  late 
Dr. C. D. Deshmukh for kindly gracing the occasion. 
The successful conduct of this programme owes much to the guidance and keen interest of 
our Governor, Dr. D. Subbarao, and I thank him for that. 
I  thank  all  the  distinguished  invitees  present  here  for  attending  the  function  with  great 
enthusiasm.  I  thank  all  my  colleagues  from  the  Reserve  Bank  for  their  overwhelming 
participation.  I  thank  the  event  management  team  of  the  Taj  Hotel  and  all  other  service 
providers for their support. I thank the liaison officers of the Bank for their cooperation. 
Finally,  I  must  thank  Adviser  K  U  B  Rao  and  his  team  from  the  Department  of  Economic 
Policy and Research (DEPR) for meticulously planning every aspect of this programme so 
well. 
Thank you all, once again.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
