Jwala Rambarran: The proposed new regulatory regime for credit unions 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Jwala  Rambarran,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Sixty Third Annual General Meeting of the Telephone Workers’ Credit Union 
Co-operative Society Limited, Port of Spain, 16 March 2013. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  sincerely  thank  the  Board  of  Telephone  Workers’  Credit  Union  for  the  kind  invitation  to 
deliver  the  feature  address  at  your  Sixty  Third  Annual  General  Meeting.  It  is  indeed  an 
honour for me to be part of this occasion. 
In June 1950, Telephone Workers’ Credit Union opened its doors with 38 members and a 
share capital of $51. Sixty three years later, you can boast a membership in excess of 5,000 
and  a  resource  base  of  nearly  $415  million.  This  enduring  journey  of  building  wealth  for 
generations of your members is certainly testimony to the significant resilience of Telephone 
Workers’ Credit Union and a clear indication that you are living up to your motto “Progress 
through Self Reliance”. 
In  fact,  I  am  aware  of  a  few  other  credit  unions  whose  journeys  are  broadly  similar  to 
Telephone Workers’ Credit Union and which can boast of their own achievements. For this 
reason, I want to underscore that the Central Bank recognizes the important contribution that 
credit  unions  are  making  to  our  society,  especially  in  reaching  out  to  the  ordinary  working 
men and women who are underserved by traditional financial institutions. 
Indeed,  I  find  it  a  fitting  tribute  to  the  global  credit  union  movement,  which  has  always 
stressed the brotherhood of man that, the new Pope who is known for his concerns for the 
poor,  chose  for  the  first  time  the  name  of  Saint  Francis  of  Assisi,  whose  prayer  is  widely 
recognized as the official prayer of credit unions worldwide. 
For more than 65 years, the credit union movement in Trinidad and Tobago has been putting 
this ideal of the brotherhood of man into practice in the socio-economic field. Credit unions 
have been helping their members to develop a savings habit, to educate them on financial 
matters,  and  to  finance  small  business  start  ups,  even  while  experiencing  considerable 
turbulence and consolidation. Today, about one-third of the population are members of credit 
unions and collectively manage some $9.5 billion in assets, or almost 4 percent of the total 
assets of the entire financial system. 
In  effect,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  credit  union  movement  has  contributed  to  financial 
deepening  in  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  economy,  bringing  financial  services  closer  to  their 
members,  their  families  and  their  communities.  And  this,  in  turn,  has  encouraged  greater 
financial inclusion for which I commend the local credit union movement. 
Nonetheless, the growth and development of the credit union sector has taken place within a 
legislative framework that does not provide for formal prudential regulation and supervision. 
As you know, the present legislation governing the credit union movement – the Co-operative 
Societies  Act  –  dates  back  to  1971  and  falls  short  of  a  prudential  framework  to  protect 
members’ savings and to help safeguard the integrity of the domestic financial system. 
I am reminded of the insightful words of Independent Senator Subas Ramkhelawan during 
his  contribution  last  December  to  the  debate  on  the  Securities  Industry  Bill.  Senator 
Ramkhelawan  indicated  that  “financial  regulation  on  the  whole  is  like  the  building  of  a 
fortress,  and  it  is  important  in  the  building  of  a  fortress  that  all  the  walls  must  be  equally 
fortified,  because  the  marauders  at  the  gate  will  always  look  for  the  weakest  point  to 
infiltrate”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
We have indeed seen the marauders at the gate, breaching the fortress of regulation, both in 
the insurance and credit union sectors. And we are still experiencing the painful emotional 
and financial costs to our citizens and to our economy. 
Accordingly, I would like to take the opportunity this morning to speak about issues related to 
the new proposed regulatory regime for credit unions, which is expected to come into effect 
sometime in the second half of 2013. 
• 
First, I will explain why the Central Bank should be the prudential regulator for credit 
unions in Trinidad and Tobago; 
Second, I wish to highlight the key principles underlying the proposed credit union 
regulatory  regime,  and  the  fundamental  differences  between  the  Co-operative 
Societies Acts and the Draft Credit Union Bill; and 
Finally,  I  will  address  some  lingering  concerns  of  the  national  credit  union 
movement. 
  Prudential regulation of the credit union sector by the central bank 
Ladies and Gentlemen, many of you would recall that the Cabinet decision in July 2005 to 
bring credit unions under the regulatory authority of the Central Bank was initially met with 
disquiet  by  the  credit  union  movement.  This  uneasiness,  perhaps  rightly  so  at  that  time, 
stemmed from the fear that the Central Bank did not really understand the unique character 
of  credit  unions  and  would  unfairly  treat  them  just  like  banks.  The  fact  that  the  original 
proposal to bring credit unions under the regulatory authority of the Central Bank envisaged 
a division of the movement by asset size did little to ease these fears. 
I am very pleased to see that we have come a long way over the past decade. The Central 
Bank is certainly more appreciative and understanding of the special nature of credit unions 
which value democracy, volunteerism, member equality and participation, member education 
and training, and community development. 
As far as I can judge, today the credit union movement as a whole is strongly supportive of 
the need for specific legislation that recognizes these special characteristics of credit unions, 
and supports the rationale behind the Central Bank as prudential regulator of the entire credit 
union  sector.  Of  course,  some  are  still  of  the  view  that  increasing  the  resources  and 
improving  the  skillsets  of  the  Office  of  the  Commissioner  for  Co-operatives  as  well  as 
effecting amendments to the existing Cooperative Societies Act will suffice in regulating the 
credit union sector. 
The fact, however, is that this “light regulatory touch” is usually less effective for those credit 
unions  and  their  members  that  need  it  most.  I  can  assure  you  that,  based  on  the  data 
available to the Central Bank, several credit unions will have to improve their operations to 
be in accordance with sound prudential principles espoused by the legislation. 
Perhaps the most compelling reason why the Central Bank should be the regulator for credit 
unions in Trinidad and Tobago is that credit unions are deposit-taking entities. This places a 
fiduciary  responsibility  on  directors  and  officers  of  credit  unions  to  safeguard  members’ 
deposits,  and  requires  that  credit  unions  be  subject  to  a  prudential  oversight  regime.  In 
Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  Central  Bank  is  responsible  for  this  prudential  regulation  and 
supervision. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  readily  admit  that  the  skills  and  expertise  of  the  Central  Bank’s 
current pool of supervisors are biased towards regulating banks and insurance companies. In 
this regard, the Bank has already created a specialized unit within the Financial Institutions 
Supervision  Department  to  work  on  development  of  the  credit  union  legislation  and  to 
supervise the financial activities of credit unions. In addition, the Bank will be strengthening 
its  supervisory  capacity  by  recruiting  persons  with  more 
in-depth  knowledge  and 
understanding of the business, governance and risk management practices of credit unions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
As the prime regulatory agency, the Central Bank has a sacred responsibility to ensure that 
your members can sleep peacefully at nights, secure in the knowledge that their life savings 
in credit unions are well protected by sound management, effective governance and strong 
prudential oversight. 
Apart  from  the  fiduciary  argument,  I  would  like  to  draw  attention  to  the  World  Council  of 
Credit Unions (WOCCU), which also makes the case for an agency like the Central Bank to 
regulate credit unions. In its July 2008 Technical Guide to the regulation and supervision of 
credit  unions,  WOCCU  maintains  that  the  ministry  or  agency  that  regulates  financial 
institutions should also supervise credit unions. WOCCU consistently finds that credit unions 
supervised by the financial sector regulator enjoy greater public confidence and trust as well 
as stronger financial performance. 
Taking a broader perspective, I must point out that there are economies of scale to having 
one  prudential  regulator  within  a  jurisdiction.  Such  a  mega-regulator  helps  to minimize  the 
risk  of  regulatory  arbitrage  and  negates  the  need  for  coordination  of  regulation  and 
supervisory  actions  among  multiple  regulators.  Many  of  you  may  recall 
this 
mega-regulator concept is consistent with the 2004 White Paper on Reform of the Financial 
System in Trinidad and Tobago which envisaged “a Single Regulatory Authority with the 
necessary powers and authority for the integrated regulation of the sector” in Trinidad 
and Tobago. 
that 
Principles underlying the proposed credit union legislation 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now turn to the proposed credit union legislation. At the outset, I 
must  draw  your  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  Central  Bank  has  engaged  extensively  with 
stakeholders  on  crafting  a  new,  robust  regulatory  regime  for  credit  unions.  These 
stakeholders  include  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Ministry  of  Labour  and  Small  and  Micro 
Enterprise  Development,  the  Co-operative  Credit  Union  League,  the  Association  of  Credit 
Union Presidents, and members from the credit union movement.  
Over  the  past  six  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  issued  three  Policy  Proposal  Documents 
(PPDs) with a view to developing the best possible legislation for the credit union sector. The 
first  PPD  was  issued  in  2006. It  served  as the basis for  initial  discussion  and  consultation 
with  key  stakeholders.  The  second  and  third  PPDs  were  issued  in  2007  and  2009, 
respectively. These PPDs incorporated a wide range of views from credit unions and other 
key  actors  in  the  credit  union  sector  during  consultations.  I  must  mention  that  these 
consultations  were  well  attended  and  stakeholders  participated  actively,  providing  relevant 
comments. 
In 2009, the Central Bank formed a committee made up of representatives of the League, the 
Association of Presidents, the Ministry of Finance and the Commissioner’s Office to finalize 
the  various  policy  provisions  for  the  Draft  Bill  as  well  as  amendments  to  the  Cooperative 
Societies Act. 
A Draft Credit Union Bill was sent out for consultation in November 2011. In January 2012, 
the Bank held information sessions on the Draft Bill  with the sector. The Bank is currently 
reviewing comments and feedback with representatives from the League and the Association 
of Presidents. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  must  indicate  that  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  recognizes  the  co-
operative  principles,  democratic  structure,  service  to  members  and  social  goals  of  credit 
unions.  Permit  me  to  point  out  some  examples  of  such  recognition  in  the  proposed 
legislation.  
• 
First, the Draft Credit Union Bill recognizes that members are the ultimate decision-
making body for the credit union. Appointment of the external auditor, election of fit 
and  proper  directors  and  approval  of  audited  financial  statements  are  made  by 
members at an AGM. As such, credit union members will determine the fitness and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
propriety of elected officers and directors and do not require approval of the Central 
Bank,  unlike  what  obtains  for  banks  and  insurance  companies.  The  Central  Bank 
will supervise the work of the boards to ensure that the determination of fitness and 
propriety is effective. 
Second,  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  recognises  that  credit  unions  operate  on  the 
principle of volunteerism and the board comprises persons from the membership. As 
a result, there is no requirement for a quorum of independent directors on the board, 
as required for banks. Notwithstanding this, the Central Bank encourages boards to 
supplement  its  expertise  in  risk  management,  financial  analysis  and  compliance, 
with external advisors, as may be required. 
Third,  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  affirms  the  democratic  principle  of  “one  vote  per 
member”,  irrespective  of  the  number  of  shares  held.  This,  therefore,  removes  the 
necessity for provisions to regulate a “controlling shareholder”, as obtains for banks 
and insurance companies. 
Finally, the Draft Credit Union Bill upholds the principle of “service to members”. As 
such, credit unions can engage in non-financial activities, up to a limit. Beyond that 
limit,  credit  unions  can  pool  their  resources  with  other  cooperatives  to  continue 
providing these services to their members, on a larger scale. 
   individual 
investment 
Differences between the cooperative societies act and the draft credit union bill 
Ladies and Gentlemen, there will be fundamental differences in the approach to regulation 
and  supervision  between  the  Commissioner  for  Cooperative  Development  and  the  Central 
Bank. These fundamental differences are borne out in the legislation. Permit me to point out 
the relevant ones. 
First,  the  Commissioner  is  very  involved  in  the  operations  of  the  credit  union.  The 
Commissioner  approves  by-laws, 
transactions,  provision  of 
non-financial services and the use of Reserve Funds. The Central Bank, on the other hand, 
has  placed  permitted  activities,  prohibitions  and  limits  in  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  and 
regulations. This removed the need for the Inspector of Financial Institutions to engage in the 
time-consuming task of approving individual transactions and activities for credit unions.  
Second,  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act  is  deficient  in  prudential  criteria,  governance, 
enforcement/sanctions  and  protection  of  members’  funds.  The  prudential  criteria  cover 
capital and borrowing only and require that credit unions must establish 10 percent of their 
surplus in a Reserve Fund and that a borrowing limit be set annually at an AGM. 
By  contrast,  at  the  heart  of  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  is  a  regime  of  prudential  criteria 
covering  capital,  liquidity,  asset  quality  and  earnings,  borrowing,  credit  exposure  and  non-
financial  activities.  The  prudential  framework  is  aligned  with  the  PEARLS  financial  ratios 
which have been adopted in the main by the local credit union sector. 
Third,  the  key  responsibilities  of  the  board  outlined  under  the  Co-operative  Societies  Act 
cover preparation of the annual balance sheet, convening and voting at an AGM and election 
of Board members. By contrast, the Draft Credit Union Bill captures standards for effective 
governance  of  the  board.  It  outlines  fit  and  proper  criteria  for  directors,  term  limits, 
consideration  of  multiple  directorships,  and  annual  attestation  of  compliance  and  fit  and 
proper requirements. It also calls for board approval of all policies, assurance of arms-length 
basis  for  all  transactions  and  the  establishment  of  additional  Risk  and  Investments 
committees to support the work of the board.  
Finally, very few offences exist under the Co-operative Societies Act. These include corrupt 
practice and bribery, falsely obtaining, withholding or misapplying property, and dealing with 
property subject to a charge. Under the Draft Credit Union Bill, the Central Bank has wider 
enforcement  authority.  The  Inspector  of  Financial  Institutions  may  recommend,  direct, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
suspend or apply for judicial management where a credit union is operating in an unsafe and 
unsound manner, may be illiquid or insolvent or is in violation of the Act. 
Lingering industry concerns 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  despite  the  compelling  case  for  regulation  of  credit  unions  by  the 
Central  Bank  and  extensive,  broad-based  stakeholder  consultations  on  the  proposed  new 
regulatory regime, some industry concerns still linger. 
Most recently, the President of the Credit Union League expressed concerns about what he 
termed “serious deficiencies” in the proposed legislation and which could stint the growth of 
the  credit  union  movement  (Guardian  Newspaper,  February  2013).  He  listed  the  following 
four concerns: 
• 
• 
• 
Restricted term limits for directors; 
Potential conflict between two regulators; 
Non-recognition of the evolution of credit union services beyond “collecting people’s 
money and loans”; and 
Regime  of  criminalizing  violations  in  the  Credit  Union  Bill  that  will  hamper 
volunteerism in the movement 
 I would like to address each concern in order to dispel, as far as practicable, any lingering 
fears. 
First, in respect of the restricted term limits for directors, I am pleased to announce that the 
Minister of Finance has agreed to extend the transition period from eighteen months to three 
years of the Act coming into effect, so as not to cause undue disruption in the governance 
structure for the credit union sector. In a limited impact study, the Central Bank found that the 
boards  of  many  of  the  larger  credit  unions  have  directors  who  would  be  in  excess  of  the 
initially  proposed  term  limits,  and  that  compliance  could  pose  severe  disruption  to  the 
functioning of boards. 
Second, in respect of the potential conflict between two regulators it is important to make a 
distinction between the regulatory role of the Commissioner of Cooperatives and that of the 
Central  Bank.  The  Commissioner  will  continue  to  look  after  registration,  membership, 
education  and  training  and  development  of  credit  unions.  The  Central  Bank  will  be  the 
prudential regulator with specific emphasis on safety and soundness of credit unions. There 
is little, if any, potential conflict of interest. 
As I indicated earlier, the Commissioner and the Central Bank have worked very closely on 
the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  and  on  amendments  to  the  Cooperative  Societies  Act  to  make 
sure  that  there  is  no  overlap  or  duplication  between  these  two  pieces  of  legislation.  We 
intend to continue working very closely together in regulation of the credit union sector, each 
focusing on its regulatory remit and area of competence. 
Third, over the past few years, credit unions have, with the approval of the Commissioner for 
Cooperatives,  ventured  into  non-financial  services.  These  include  travel  agency  services, 
resorts,  gym  facilities,  daycare  services,  retail  outlets  and  real  estate  development.  We 
recognize  that  these  non-core  activities  provide  a  supplementary  source  of  earnings  for 
credit unions and provide additional services to the credit union membership. However, these 
non-core  activities  represent  a  potential  drain  on  the  limited  managerial  capacity  and 
expertise of many credit unions. Moreover, these non-financial activities pose risks that are 
outside the supervisory responsibility of the Central Bank. 
As  a  consequence,  the  Draft  Credit  Union  Bill  allows  credit  unions  to  provide  these 
non-financial services subject to certain limits on revenues and assets. These limits seek to 
ensure that financial intermediation remains the core business of credit unions and that credit 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
unions can minimize balance sheet risks arising from non-financial activities. In fact, WOCCU 
recommends “the sum of non-financial investments not exceeding 5 percent of total assets”. 
In  the  event  non-financial  services  grow  beyond  the  proposed  limits,  the  members  of  the 
credit  union  must  direct  the  board  to  establish  a  new  cooperative,  singly  or  in  conjunction 
with  other  credit  unions,  to  continue  provision  of  these  services.  I  wish  to  emphasize  that 
there  is  no  prohibition  in  the  proposed  legislation  against  the  credit  union  and  the  new 
cooperative having the same governance structure and composition, an allowance that was 
requested by the sector. 
Finally, the Draft Credit Union Bill makes most violations of the Act or failure to comply with a 
direction  issued  by  the  Bank,  a  criminal  offence,  for  the  credit  union  and  the  officer  or 
director. Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish to advise that, in practice, the Inspector of Financial 
Institutions  will  first  call  on  the  credit  union  and  the  officers  to  fix  a  problem,  by  letter  of 
advice, recommendation or compliance direction. In giving a direction, the Inspector follows 
due process of the law by giving the credit union time to make representation of the cause of 
the violation and to submit a plan for correction. 
I also  wish to advise that the Central Bank will  not exercise the option to bring the matter 
before the Court where the credit union opts for the payment of an administrative fine. As 
such, even though the provision for criminal charges is in the law, it will be used only as a 
very last resort when all else has failed. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  proposed  credit  union  legislation  is  an  important  step  towards 
placing the credit union movement in a position of greater strength, safety and soundness. 
As  we  transition  to  a  more  robust  regulatory  regime,  the  Central  Bank  is  using  the  time 
before  the  passage  of  new  legislation  to  analyze  the audited financial  statements  of  credit 
unions that have responded to our request for copies of their statements. Over the last year, 
we have received statements from about 35 credit unions. We will be renewing our request 
shortly for more credit unions to send us their most recent audited financial statements. 
The  Central  Bank  has  also  been  encouraging  credit  unions  to  assess  the  impact  of  the 
proposed legislation on their operations and to share such results and any concerns with the 
Bank.  We  have  had  some  response  from  the  larger  credit  unions  on  the  terms  of  their 
directors and some smaller credit unions who are members of the League shared their data 
for calculating the ratios under the prudential criteria. We encourage more credit unions to 
participate in these exercises which are a valuable means of orientation to the new regime. 
Going  forward,  a  key  institutional  support  to  the  new  regulatory  framework  will  be  the 
establishment of a mandatory deposit insurance system for the credit union sector. Not only 
would the insurance system cover deposits but it must include shares which represent the 
vast  majority  of  the  sector’s  savings,  a  situation  that  is  unique  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  In 
most jurisdictions, the protection fund for the credit union sector covers deposits only. 
We  at  the  Central  Bank  expect  the  credit  union  movement  to  continue  to  play  a  critical 
financial  inclusion  role  in  our  financial  sector. We feel  strongly,  however,  that  more  robust 
regulation and supervision are urgently needed to support further growth and development of 
credit unions. 
In  closing,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  I  again  thank  the  board  of  Telephone  Workers’  Credit 
Union  for  inviting  me  to  its  AGM,  and  I  wish  members  well  in  their  future  contributions  to 
community, the economy and national development. 
I thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
