Benoît Cœuré: Where to exit to? Monetary policy implementation after 
the crisis 
Speech by Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 15th Geneva Conference on the World Economy: “Exit strategies: time to think about 
them”, Geneva, 3 May 2013. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Massimo  Rostagno,  Tobias  Linzert  and  Arthur  Saint-Guilhem  for  their  contributions  to  these 
remarks. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contains herein. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to attend once again the Geneva Conference and discuss the important 
issue of exit from non-conventional monetary policies. Let me start with an important word of 
caution.  We  are  still  struggling  with  the  euro  area  crisis.  Yesterday’s  decisions  by  the 
Governing Council of the ECB on reduction of the key interest rates, on modalities of liquidity 
provision  and  on  possible  ways  forward  to  enhance  the  availability  of  credit  to  the  broad 
economy  should  support  prospects  for  a  recovery  later  this  year.  But  current  underlying 
economic conditions still imply that the monetary policy stance  will remain accommodative 
for as long as needed.  
That said, exit from non-conventional policies will come one day, and lessons drawn from the 
crisis times will help us chart out our path. The debate on exit has chiefly concentrated on 
strategies: that is, on monetary policy reaction functions on the way out of these policies and 
over the new steady state. But it is fair to say that – with only few exceptions – participants in 
the debate have been less active in discussing the operating framework of monetary policy. 
Here, a few interesting questions remain unanswered. Will central banks go back to their pre-
crisis operating framework once conditions return to normal? Or should some of the novel 
instruments remain in their toolbox ready for use, or even as standing instruments replacing 
old practices? 
Let me start by mentioning the three main developments that, in my view, took place during 
the crisis:  
• 
First,  central  banks  collectively  moved  towards  instruments  that  can  effectively 
disentangle  interest  rate  decisions  from  decisions  concerning  the  size  of  their 
balance  sheets.  One  can  debate  whether  this  constitutes  genuine  bifurcation  of 
instruments.  And,  with  Tinbergen  in  mind,  one  could  also  conjecture  that,  in  this 
way, the traditional assignment of the interest rate instrument to the price stability 
objective could be reinforced by an independent lever which, through its control over 
the  volumes  of  central  bank  credit,  would  independently  promote  stable  financial 
conditions. Here, other central banks had to innovate more than the ECB. The Fed, 
for  example,  acquired  the  authority  to  pay  interest  on  reserves  and  this  placed  a 
floor – or, more precisely, a lower grey zone of values – on the level which the Fed 
funds rate can take on in daily overnight trading. The ECB, by contrast, entered the 
crisis with a corridor system and an elastic operating framework which did not need 
much tweaking to offset shocks. But we did shift from a competitive auction system, 
in  which  quantities  are  controlled  by  the  central  bank,  to  one  in  which  we  fix  the 
price  and  take the  quantities  as  endogenous  in  liquidity-providing  operations.  And 
this meant at some point that the overnight rate was left to drift down to the floor of 
the  corridor,  where  it  still  stands.  This,  in  turn,  implies  that  the  overnight  rate  has 
become more independent of the volume of excess liquidity.  
Second important development during the crisis: central banks in a large part of the 
world engaged in non-conventional measures aimed at absorbing liquidity risk and 
duration risk from the market. Those central banks engaged in quantitative easing 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
have  focused  on  duration  risk  and  have  targeted  term  premia.  The  ECB  has 
primarily concentrated on liquidity risk. As I said, we decided to fully accommodate 
banks’  demand  for  liquidity  in  an  elastic  manner.  We  also  expanded  the  list  of 
eligible collateral, so that banks could more easily liquefy their balance sheets and 
mobilise  assets  that  had  become  scarcely  tradable  for  liquidity  purposes  with  us. 
The  ECB  took  care  of  duration  risk  (or  in  our  case  funding  risk),  indirectly,  to  the 
extent  that  we  replaced  banks’  intermediate-maturity  wholesale  market  borrowing 
with  our  longer-term  refinancing  operations.  As a  result, the  duration  risk  vis-à-vis 
banks  that  markets  did  not  want  to  bear  migrated,  to  a  certain  extent  and 
temporarily, to our balance sheet. 
Finally, the third important development during the crisis was that central banks had 
to substitute for the sudden disruption of interbank market activity and became de 
facto the “money market intermediary” of last – and sometimes first – resort. For the 
ECB this was facilitated by the broad range of counterparties accepted in monetary 
policy  operations  and  its  broad  collateral  framework.  Other  central  banks  had  to 
innovate in order to step up their intermediation role by resorting to specific targeted 
facilities outside their standard operating environment.  
 Modalities and parameters of intervention were adapted to local circumstances, such as the 
depth and liquidity of financial markets and the degree of intermediation in the financing of 
the economy, which differ considerably across major economies. Some would argue that it is 
likely that most of the new instruments may not be needed to the same extent once money 
market  conditions  –  and  more  generally  the  transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  – 
return to normal. But is it so likely? This immediately brings up the question that the panel is 
posing:  “Where to  exit to?”. We may  want  to  ask  ourselves  which  elements  of  our current 
mode of operation have served us well, and not only as a crisis management tool, and may 
therefore survive as a more permanent feature of the new steady state.  
So,  let  me  share  some  thoughts  on  what  remains  unresolved  about  the  issues  that  I 
mentioned at the start. I see four open questions, and I want to be very honest: I will not give 
answers.  First  question:  the  size  and  degree  of  symmetry  of  the  interest  rate  corridor. 
Second question: the duration and maturity of central bank operations. Third question: the 
mode  of  the  liquidity  provision  to  banks.  And  fourth,  the  shifts  in  amplitude  and  quality  of 
collateral pools, and the risk management implications associated with these shifts.  
Let me start by discussing the interest rate corridor. As I mentioned already, the ECB entered 
the  crisis  with  a  tradition  of  conducting  policy  through  a  corridor  –  others  would  say,  a 
“channel” – system. The ECB’s corridor is determined by the two overnight standing facilities: 
the  marginal  lending  facility  and  the  deposit  facility.  These  standing  facilities  were  set 
symmetrically  around  the  main  policy  rate  charged  on  central  bank  credit  at  the  weekly 
refinancing operations. Prior to the crisis, the quantity provision at our weekly operations was 
calibrated in such a way that, given banks’ liquidity needs, the overnight money market rate 
would settle close to the policy rate. So, the corridor was symmetric de jure and de facto: 
liquidity volumes were just sufficient to validate the mid-point of the corridor as the price of 
liquidity to which market overnight rates would gravitate on average.  
At  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  we  moved  quickly  from  a  system  of  liquidity  provision  geared 
towards  filling  the  system’s  liquidity  deficit  towards  a  set-up  in  which  banks  operate  under 
aggregate  excess  liquidity.  So,  following  the  shift  to  a  fixed-rate  full  allotment  mode  of 
liquidity  provision  in  October  2008,  overnight  money  market  activity  rapidly  occupied  the 
lower half of the corridor, and in fact, with few interruptions, the overnight rate has been close 
to the floor of it ever since. For all practical purposes, the relevant portion of the corridor for 
daily  market  activity  has  shrunk  to  the  space  existing  between  the  rate  on  the  main 
refinancing  operations  –  on  the  upside  –  and  the  rate  on  the  deposit  facility  –  on  the 
downside.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Should  the  corridor  be  brought  back  to  its  standard  width  –  spanning  the  entire  distance 
between the marginal lending rate and the deposit facility rate – not only de jure but also de 
facto?  In  other  words:  should  we  go  back  to  the  standard  quantity-based  technology  of 
liquidity  provision  which  was  founded  on  the  principle  of  balanced  liquidity  conditions?  Or 
should we maintain excess liquidity and operate the system through parallel adjustments to 
the deposit facility rate and the rate on the main refinancing operations?  
I  am  asking  this  question,  because  observers  –  Marvin  Goodfriend1,  for  example  –  have 
been arguing for a system where the monetary authorities adjust a policy floor – the rate paid 
on reserves or the deposit facility rate – and the system is saturated with excess liquidity, so 
that overnight market rates are kept close to the floor.  
Let me expound the merits and drawbacks of the discussed system, again upon the premise 
that I do not have a quantitative scale to weigh the ones against the others.  
• 
First  advantage:  the  volatility  of  the  overnight  rate  would  likely  be  squeezed  to 
minuscule  numbers.  True,  our  overnight  rate  has  been  more  –  rather  than  less  – 
volatile  since  it  moved  to  the  floor  of  the  corridor.  But  it  is  also  true  that  excess 
liquidity conditions have been unsteady and uncertain in the past. Here, I imagine a 
scenario  in  which  the  liquidity  supply  would  be  kept  steady  and  reasonably 
predictable.  A  more  stable  overnight  rate,  it  has  been  argued,  could  enhance  the 
transmission of policy shifts – adjustments to the deposit facility rate – throughout 
the term structure of money market rates. 
Second advantage: the central bank would maintain one important acquisition from 
the  crisis  period:  that  is,  its  capacity  to  disentangle  interest  rate  decisions  from 
decisions  concerning  the  scale  of  its  own  liquidity  operations  in  order  to  remain 
resilient  to  large-scale  liquidity  shocks.  This  possibility  may  come  in  handy  at  the 
time  of  exit,  in  situations  when  inflation  risks  would  call  for  a  tightening  of  policy, 
while concerns about the fragility of the banking system would suggest prolonging 
the horizon for easy access to central bank credit. But even in the steady state – 
after the exit – the new system would be marginally more resilient to large liquidity 
shocks and acute liquidity stress in the money market. Banks would receive funding 
certainty,  as  their  liquidity  needs  would  be  met.  But  there  are  drawbacks  as  well. 
First, for the ECB at least, this would require banks to be willing to hold reserves in 
excess  of  their  needs.  In  a  normal  situation,  absent  any  financial  stress,  this  is 
difficult  to  ensure  in  a  system  (like  ours)  in  which  liquidity  injections  are  the 
consequence  of  counterparties’  –  not  the  central  bank’s  –  decisions.  Second, 
importantly, a system of permanent excess liquidity could potentially distort signals 
of liquidity and credit risk in the money market, as money market activity could be 
compressed  –  or  suppressed  altogether.  I  will  come  back  to  this  point  in  a  short 
while.  
 Let me turn to the second issue, the duration and maturity of central bank operations. In our 
case, before the crisis, the bulk of liquidity was provided through operations with a maturity of 
one  week.  We  also  provided  (pre-set)  amounts  through  longer-term  operations,  but  to  a 
lesser  extent  and  with  a  maximum  maturity  of  three  months.  As  an  alternative,  one  may 
conceive of frameworks in which the menu of maturities open for bank borrowing would be 
much richer. For example, there could be merits in matching the more structural long-term 
trends in the autonomous liquidity factors, most notably the growth in currency in circulation, 
with corresponding instruments of structural liquidity supply at longer maturities. Expanding 
the range of maturities following the exit would probably go hand-in-hand with the decision to 
return  to  competitive  auctions.  But  such  a  steady  state  framework  would  be  nevertheless 
more robust to renewed bouts of perceived funding risk in the market.  
                                                
1  Marvin Goodfriend, “Interest on Reserves and Monetary Policy”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, May 2002. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Let me turn to the third – very much related – issue: the most appropriate mode of liquidity 
provision and the desirability of market versus central bank intermediation.  
Before  the  crisis,  the  intermediation  role  of  the  ECB  was  limited  to  filling  the  structural 
“liquidity  deficit”  of  all  the  banks  vis-à-vis  the  monetary  authority.  The  pre-crisis  weekly 
liquidity provision through variable rate competitive auctions was thought to be best suited to 
reveal banks’ “true” liquidity demand, incentivise interbank transactions, and enhance market 
scrutiny of banks’ credit standing, beyond the quality of the collateral that they could pledge 
in our lending operations. 
But, during the crisis, we have moved to a system in which the central bank is de facto the 
“market  intermediary”  of  last  –  and  sometimes  –  first  resort.  This  has  further  weakened 
banks’ incentives to trade liquidity in the market. Do we need them to trade in the very short-
term market in the first place?  
Well,  this  is  a  fundamental  issue  for  optimal  mechanism  design.  It  is  not  entirely  clear 
whether an interbank market is strictly needed from a welfare perspective. The key function 
of markets is price discovery. But here the price to be discovered is not only the starting point 
of parties’ negotiations, but also the end-point of the market tâtonnement: it is the price pre-
set by the central bank! So, some would argue: why do we need a market if the price is pre-
determined?  Of  course,  I  am  over-simplifying.  The  welfare  function  of  the  secured  money 
market  probably  differs  and  is  less  important  than  that  of  the  unsecured  money  market, 
where the market exercises a type of discipline that a central bank backstop would not be 
able to provide.  
Let’s  not  forget  moral  hazard  considerations.  In  stressed  systemic  conditions,  banks  may 
well be deprived of access to interbank credit for reasons that have little to do with their own 
merit  of  credit.  These  are  conditions  that  require  central  bank  interventions  to  replace  the 
market,  when  this  fails.  But  in  normal  times,  banks  which  are  kept  out  may  be  those  that 
deserve credit restrictions. In this case, a central bank taking away market pressure would 
distort the market, not repair a market imperfection. 
Also, allowing the price to be determined by competitive forces may have the collateral merit 
of  revealing  market  information  which  is  certainly  of  great  value  to  the  central  bank. 
Maintaining an active market for liquidity may be an important pre-condition for the central 
bank  to  monitor  important  variables,  such  as  the  evolving  market  standing  of  single 
institutions and the dynamic process by which banks evaluate and price liquidity risk.  
Finally, let me briefly address the fourth and last issue: the collateral framework. The crisis 
has  underscored 
for  monetary  policy 
implementation. I believe there is still much to learn in this area. Ideally, any decision on the 
collateral framework under a new steady state should be based on a thorough examination 
of  the  impact  of  collateral  valuation  and  haircuts  on  the  size  and  composition  of  banks’ 
balance sheets, and the ramifications for the stability of the financial sector as a whole. Such 
an examination cannot be conducted in isolation from a review of collateral rules followed in 
private  transactions,  which  could  be  affected  by  the  on-going  regulatory  overhaul,  in 
particular the migration of over-the-counter derivatives to clearing houses.  
importance  of 
the  collateral 
framework 
the 
Concluding remarks  
The  ECB’s  operational  framework,  conducting  monetary  policy  operations  as  temporary 
refinancing operations in a corridor system, has not only served us well. It has also provided 
us  with  enormous  flexibility  during  the  crisis.  By  adjusting  the  price,  amount,  maturity, 
allotment  procedures  and  eligible  collateral  for  our  operations  we  have  been  effective  in 
containing funding risks of banks and in addressing distress in the money market. In a sense, 
the  system  can  well  be  rolled  back  to  the  previous  steady  state,  with  the  comforting 
expectation  that  this flexibility  is  a  built-in  permanent  mechanism that  restores  itself  again, 
elastically, in case of need. Yet, some of the questions I posed may be worth reflecting upon. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
And  I  am  grateful  to  the  organisers  of  this  conference  for  stimulating  discussion  of  these 
issues.  
Before turning the floor to the other panellists, let me briefly add some further points on the 
interactions between exiting non-conventional monetary policy and financial stability.  
Exiting the crisis mode could pose risks to financial stability in the current environment, which 
is marked by a prolonged period of low yields and reduced volatility, making it challenging for 
the financial sector to properly accommodate interest rate risk. The exit could be associated 
with a steepening of the yield curve as expectations of low short-term rates are reversed and 
central  banks reduce their  holdings  of  long-term  securities.  Uncertainty  on  the  path  of  exit 
from unconventional policies may trigger a rise in volatility at the long end of the yield curve, 
exposing  banks  and  investors  to  substantial  losses.  These  effects  would  be  more 
pronounced if the speed of interest rate adjustment were to exceed market expectations.  
At  the  same  time,  delaying  the  exit  from  “crisis”  monetary  policies  beyond  what  central 
banks’ reaction function would warrant could also entail risks to financial stability, by inducing 
a further build-up of the very same exposures that render exit more challenging in the current 
environment. In particular, a protracted period of low interest rates and ample liquidity could 
compromise the market mechanisms in efficiently allocating resources, hence encouraging 
the  roll-over  of  loans  to  non-profitable  businesses  and  weakening  incentives  for  balance 
sheet repair. Prolonging low interest rates for a long time might raise the possibility of sudden 
shifts in market expectations and significant re-pricing of risks once indications of monetary 
policy tightening materialise.  
Of  course,  these  risks  should  also  not  be  overrated  at  a  time  when  financial  risks  are 
currently highly correlated with overall macroeconomic risks. Exit is very likely to take place 
in  an  environment  where  credit  has  recovered  and  risks  have  receded  in  the  economy, 
making  the  financial  sector  more  robust  to  interest  rate  shocks.  The  current  situation  of 
subdued bank lending and outlook for growth in the euro area is a case in point.  
Yet,  monetary  policy-makers  have  to  be  aware  of  these  challenges  and  need  to  guard 
against the risk of financial dominance by keeping a clear focus on their respective mandate. 
For  the  ECB,  our  “hardwired”  focus  on  price  stability  provides  a  clear  guidepost  that  has 
proved effective in anchoring inflation expectations over time. And the prominent role given 
to  money  and  credit  developments  in  our  strategy  ensures  a  more  symmetric  reaction  to 
financial forces over the cycle.  
At the same time, it is important that central banks continue to place particular emphasis on 
managing expectations. The ECB has all the instruments at hand to ensure a smooth exit if 
risks to medium term price stability should materialise. Our credit operations are temporary 
and  the  market  has  all  the  information  to  date  to  anticipate  their  unwinding  and  make 
adequate  adjustments  to  prepare.  If  liquidity  conditions  should  prove  too  lax  while  central 
bank  credit  is  still  abundant,  we  have  available  instruments  of  liquidity  re-absorption  to 
tighten  money  market.  Some  of  these  instruments  have  been  tested  successfully  in  the 
course of the crisis.  
Finally, let me stress that a sound financial system is a necessary condition for an orderly 
exit, hence the importance of a swift implementation of the banking union in the euro area. 
This should include not only the Single Supervisory Mechanism but also a Single Resolution 
Mechanism,  with  a  single  resolution  fund  based  on  contributions  by  the  industry  and  a 
common,  last-resort  fiscal  backstop.  This  also  includes  the  assessment  of  banks’  balance 
sheets that will be undertaken in the transition to the Single Supervisory Mechanism.  
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
