Ignazio Visco: Effective reforms needed for balanced and rapid growth of 
the Italian economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Ignazio  Visco,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy,  at  the  ASSIOM  FOREX  (the 
Financial Markets Association of Italy), Bergamo, 9 February 2013. 
 Italy has not yet left behind the effects of the financial crisis and the double-dip recession that 
accompanied it. The renewed decline in economic activity that began in mid-2011 has wiped 
out  the  partial  recovery  that  took  place  after  2009:  GDP  has  fallen  to  about  7  percentage 
points  below  its  pre-crisis  level;  in  five  years  industrial  output  and  gross  fixed  investment 
have fallen by almost a quarter and the number of people in work by more than half a million. 
The  decline  in  activity  could  come  to  a  halt  in  the  second  half  of  2013,  with  a  return  to 
modest growth rates and with a high margin of uncertainty. I am not going to talk about the 
forces  which  could  spark  the  recovery,  nor  about  the  risks  overshadowing  this  scenario. 
These topics are discussed in the Bank’s Economic Bulletin, published in January. 
It is crucial that the progress made in the sovereign debt market continue and increase. It 
followed  on  the  ECB’s  announcement  of  the  new  procedures  for  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions (OMTs) in the secondary markets for government securities, accompanied and 
made  possible  by  an  overhaul  of  European  economic  governance,  the  agreements  on 
assistance 
implementation  of  public 
finance 
consolidation programmes and reforms in the countries affected by financial strains. 
While due attention should be paid to the need to mitigate their social and income-distribution 
effects, these programmes must continue. In Italy, this means an effort should be made to 
significantly improve firms’ competitiveness by containing costs but above all by increasing 
productivity,  including  a  far-reaching  modernization  of  industry  and  private  services  and 
larger  and  better  productive  investments  and  technological  innovations,  in  a  setting  of 
simpler rules and more efficient public services. The issue of the high level of taxation for 
Italy’s  citizens,  firms  and  banks  is  also  crucial.  It  must  be  tackled  in  a  medium-term 
perspective,  with  a  balanced  and  farsighted  approach  that  takes  account  of  budget 
constraints. 
the  preparation  and 
to  Greece,  and 
The case of Monte dei Paschi di Siena and the control of financial risks 
In the past we have argued that our banking system has withstood the global financial crisis 
thanks  to  its  fundamentally  sound  business  model  and  limited  exposure  to  structured 
financial products, within a regulatory and supervisory framework oriented to prudence. The 
exceptionally long and deep recession, however, has inevitably affected the quality of bank 
loans, while the deterioration in the creditworthiness of the sovereign issuer has increased 
the cost of funding and made it especially difficult for Italian banks to procure resources in 
the international market. 
The grave developments of recent weeks at Monte dei Paschi di Siena (MPS) do not alter 
our assessment of the overall state of the Italian banking system. The MPS group’s problems 
originated  in  an  ambitious  acquisition  carried  out  on  the  eve  of  the  crisis,  by  procedures 
which  are  now  being  subjected  to  intense  and  obligatory  scrutiny,  as  well  as  in  poor 
management of financial risks, whose repercussions were aggravated by the sovereign debt 
crisis. 
Even  counting  the  additional  interventions  already  decided  for  MPS,  the  public  support 
provided  to  banks  in  Italy  remains  very  limited  by  comparison  with  other  countries.  Public 
recapitalizations in Italy have amounted to 0.3 per cent of GDP. According to the latest study 
of  the  European  Commission,  as  of  June  2012  such  aid  came  to  1.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Germany, 2.0 per cent in Spain, 4.3 per cent in Belgium, 5.2 per cent in the Netherlands, and 
over 40 per cent in Ireland. For the Spanish banks, a programme of  recapitalization using 
European funds of up to €100 billion was authorized in July, of which €41 billion (3.9 per cent 
of GDP) has already been disbursed. 
Unlike  many  of  the  foreign  interventions,  the  support  extended  to  MPS,  like  that  given  to 
other, smaller Italian banks in recent years, is not the bail-out of a troubled bank. It is in the 
form of a loan that is eligible as regulatory capital, granted by the government at an interest 
rate that is particularly high and rising over time. The intervention was decided last summer 
in order to enable MPS to comply with the European Banking Authority’s recommendation to 
constitute  an  exceptional  and  temporary  capital  buffer,  well  beyond  the  minimum  capital 
requirement, against its large holdings of government securities. This support, provided by 
the government in complete compliance with the European rules on state aid, was authorized 
by the European Commission. The Bank of Italy’s assessment of the current and prospective 
capital  adequacy  of  MPS,  in  the  opinion  submitted  under  the  law  to  the  Ministry  for  the 
Economy and Finance, is positive. 
In the course of the last two decades the balance sheets of the major banks around the world 
have grown more complex. Alongside the inherent difficulty of evaluating the quality of loans, 
there  is  the  problem  of  fully  understanding  the  effective  role  of  the  structured  financial 
products that the banks hold for investment or hedging purposes. The importance of these 
products for Italian banks is limited, definitely less than for other important banking systems. 
Derivatives and structured finance products can facilitate risk management for well-informed 
operators. The granting of fixed-rate mortgages to households is favoured by the possibility 
of managing the related interest-rate risk; the internationalization of firms depends crucially 
on  the  possibility  of  hedging  foreign  exchange  risk;  and  the  provision  of  retirement  saving 
products  at  low  cost  over  very  long  time  horizons  benefits  from  the  ability  to  mitigate  the 
impact of fluctuations in securities prices. 
However, the high leverage and complexity typical of these instruments means that they can 
also be used to take high-risk, speculative positions; in addition, they can be used to mask 
the economic impact of previous transactions, exploiting the ample scope for interpretation 
allowed  by  accounting  standards.  Internationally,  some  banks  have  misused  these 
instruments  in  recent  years,  in  part  in  response  to  the  drying-up  of  the  sources  of  income 
from traditional credit business. These are the circumstances most likely to trigger fraudulent 
conduct  designed  to  conceal  from  the  market  and  from  supervisors  the  real  object  of  the 
derivative transactions. 
On the occasion of the recent parliamentary testimony of the Minister for the Economy and 
Finance,  we  furnished  him  with  a  detailed  account  of  the  case  of  MPS  and  our  own 
supervisory actions. The document is available on our website. The rules, the procedures, 
the  methods  and  the  timing  of  our  supervisory  interventions  are  strictly  and  formally 
predetermined at every stage, in order to guarantee uniform application. They depend on the 
constraints  of  the  law  governing  administrative  procedures.  The  Bank  of  Italy  is  strongly 
committed  to  making  its  actions  ever  more  effective  and  timely;  we  carefully  consider  all 
suggestions; we are open to a constructive dialogue. 
MPS  resorted  to  complex  financial  transactions  in  part  as  a  consequence  of  losses  on 
previous financial investments. The transactions were presented, even to the Bank of Italy, 
as  funding  instruments  and  hedges  against  positions  in  government  securities  held  as 
long-term  investment.  The  correction  of  their  accounting  representation  will  produce  a 
substantial negative effect on net worth as of the end of 2012. But the impact is not such as 
to compromise the bank’s overall capital adequacy. We took account of this in the opinion 
submitted to the Ministry for the Economy and Finance. 
These transactions gave rise to serious liquidity risks for MPS. We identified these risks in 
the  course  of  2010  and  imposed  a  significant  capital  increase  and  a  strengthening  of  the 
internal  control  and  risk  management  system.  We  subsequently  intensified  our  control 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activity, up to the decisive inspection begun in September 2011 and the consequent request 
in November of that year for a sharp change in the bank’s management. Our intervention has 
made it possible, in an environment of increasingly severe financial tensions, to preserve the 
bank’s  stability  by  strengthening  its  capital  base  and  beginning  to  bring  the  precarious 
liquidity  situation  back  to  normal.  The  transactions  deemed  to  be  illegitimate  have  been 
brought to the attention of the competent judicial authorities, with which the Bank of Italy’s 
Supervision Area and the Financial Intelligence Unit, for the matters within their respective 
powers, are cooperating fully. 
With the crisis, the need for strict regulation of the derivatives market has come to the fore. 
The initiatives promoted by the Financial Stability Board at the behest of the G-20 go in the 
right  direction,  increasing  the  market’s  transparency  through  contract  standardization,  the 
requirement  to  trade  on  regulated  markets,  settlement  through  central  counterparties,  and 
the  reporting  of  the  terms  and  conditions  of  transactions  to  trade  repositories.  The  aim  is 
ambitious. Progress has been made, but it is necessary to pick up the pace, overcoming the 
difficulties  of  implementation,  particularly  for  cross-border  transactions,  and  the  industry’s 
resistance. 
A timely reflection is under way at international level on the organizational structure of banks, 
on  the  need  to  separate  traditional  credit  business  from  activity  in  the  financial  field.  The 
reports  of  the  Vickers  Commission  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  Liikanen  Group  for  the 
European  Commission  trace  out  possible  lines  of  intervention.  With  stringent  rules  for 
supervised  institutions,  it  will  be  necessary  to  keep  risks  from  migrating  to  the  shadow 
banking system – the ensemble of intermediaries, products and markets that slip through the 
regulatory  net.  Let  us  not  forget  that  the  financial  crisis  originated  in  the  US  securitization 
market, largely populated by unregulated or scantily regulated operators. 
But the correct conduct of credit and financial business requires competence and good faith 
on  the  part  of  intermediaries,  both  factors  being  decisive  to  ensure  sound  and  prudent 
management  and  preserve  the  confidence  of  savers.  This  necessity  is  heightened  by  the 
complexity of the external environment, by the presence of large intermediaries, and by the 
economic  and  reputational  damage  that  can  result  from  illicit  behaviour.  No  market  can 
function  without  rules,  nor  is  prudent  management  possible  without  correct  conduct, 
embodied not only in scrupulous compliance with the law and the supervisory rules but also 
in complete adherence to business ethics. 
In its supervisory action, the Bank of Italy has for some time intensified its discussions with 
banks’  directors  and  senior  managers,  reminding  them  of  their  responsibilities.  We  have 
imposed  rules  to  ensure  that  boards  are  functional  and  suitably  composed  and  that 
appointment  procedures  are 
integrity  and  experience 
requirements  are  laid  down  by  rigid  legislative  provisions:  disqualification  can  be  imposed 
only for failure to satisfy expressly listed criteria; when a bank is not in a crisis situation, the 
Bank of Italy may ask the shareholders to renew the governing bodies, but it cannot dictate 
their decisions, nor can it directly remove a member of the board. 
The legislative framework needs to be strengthened. The supervisory authority must be able 
to  make  a  thorough  assessment  of  the  fitness  of  directors  and  senior  managers,  in 
accordance with standards of transparent and impartial administrative action. It must be able 
to  intervene  effectively  in  cases  where,  on  the  basis  of  solid  evidence,  it  considers  that  it 
must object to the appointment of directors and senior managers or remove them from office. 
Good  finance  contributes  to  the  working  of  the  economy,  to  efficient  allocation  of  risk,  to 
removing  liquidity  constraints  that  can  impede  innovation  and  growth.  Opportunistic 
behaviour must not be allowed to make finance an object of distrust. The role played by a 
robust  and  rigorous  system  of  internal  controls  in  banks  is  essential  to  avoid  excessive 
risk-taking,  especially  when  a  bank  operates  in  highly  complex  and  innovative  business 
segments. 
transparent.  However, 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  the  case  of  improper  conduct,  the  truth  must  be  sought  unstintingly.  Reports  and 
suppositions must be checked scrupulously; if they are not properly verified, hypotheses and 
opinions which may be unfounded and rash can cause severe harm to savers, institutions 
and  society  as  a  whole.  Saving  is  protected  by  the  Constitution,  Italian  law  and  European 
legislation. We are well aware of this and act with all our powers in support of that protection. 
Italian banks 
There  are  other,  more  general  problems  of  concern  to  public  opinion  or  recurrent  in 
discussions with economic operators and international organizations. 
A first important question is why credit to the economy has continued to contract, in Italy as 
in  other  euro-area  countries,  notwithstanding  the  exceptional  measures  adopted  by  the 
Governing Council of the ECB to support bank liquidity. Other questions centre on the quality 
of loans, the reliability of international comparisons and the credit assessments we require 
banks to make, at times considered overly stringent and such as to curb the financing of the 
economy. Another important issue is the profitability of banks, in light of the current economic 
and financial situation. 
Liquidity and credit to the economy 
The measures adopted by the ECB from late 2011 onwards – the two three-year refinancing 
operations (LTROs), the expansion of the range of assets eligible as collateral for refinancing 
with  the  central  bank  and,  most  recently,  the  announcement  of  Outright  Monetary 
Transactions (OMTs) – kept the banks’ fund-raising difficulties in the markets from triggering 
a disorderly contraction of balance sheets and jeopardizing the functioning of the monetary 
policy transmission mechanism in the euro area. For Italian banks, whose ratio of lending to 
the  more  stable  forms  of  funding  approaches  120  per  cent,  these  measures  provided  the 
means to cope with the decline in international interbank funding that began in mid-2011 and 
to redeem their maturing bonds. 
In  2012  residents’  deposits  and  bank  bonds  held  by  households  expanded  by  €58  billion. 
Wholesale funding, instead, recorded a further contraction, equal to €76 billion, offset in part 
by net recourse to Eurosystem refinancing of €66 billion. In recent months the improvement 
in market conditions following the announcement of OMTs enabled the major Italian banks to 
resume bond issues, including of unsecured bonds. 
The amount of wholesale bonds maturing by the end of 2014, when the three-year LTROs 
expire, exceeds €110 billion. In part to address the need to constitute a liquidity reserve, in 
the  course  of  2012  banks  increased  their  holdings  of  government  securities  by  around 
€100 billion (of which one third with residual maturity of less than one year). 
Bank lending to the non-financial private sector diminished by €38 billion overall in 2012. The 
contraction  was  chiefly  in  loans  to  firms.  Lending  activity  has  been  conditioned  by  the 
recession.  If,  on  one  level,  the  decline  in  output  and  investment  was  reflected  in  a  fall  in 
demand,  on  another  the  high  volume  of  non-performing  loans  increased  the  risks  for 
intermediaries. 
Without the longer-term refinancing measures decided by the ECB, the contraction in credit 
would  have  been  devastating.  The  results  of  the  quarterly  Bank  Lending  Survey,  also 
confirmed  by  surveys  of  firms,  indicate  that  with  respect  to  the  extraordinary  tightening 
recorded at the end of 2011 the terms of lending have improved significantly, but have still 
not normalized. Supply continues to be braked by high credit risk, above all in relation to the 
weakening of firms’ balance sheets. Partly for this reason, although the cost of credit for firms 
and households has declined from the levels reached at the end of 2011, it remains higher 
than the euro-area average; another factor is the persistent gap in the cost of funding. 
From the onset of the crisis a series of important measures were taken to support credit to 
firms, especially smaller ones. The Central Guarantee Fund for SMEs, which was increased 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
during the crisis, was guaranteeing almost €14 billion in loans at the end of 2012. The two 
moratoria  agreed  by  the  Government,  the  Italian  Banking  Association,  and  employers’ 
associations involved the suspension of repayments amounting to almost €17 billion. Cassa 
Depositi e Prestiti made €18 billion available to banks for lending to SMEs. The resources 
involved are considerable. These measures have enabled a large number of firms to access 
credit. Any future reinforcement must aim to support the most dynamic and innovative firms, 
those best placed to contribute to the economic recovery. 
Credit quality, supervision and capital 
A growing number of firms are having difficulty repaying their loans: in the third quarter of 
2012 the ratio of new bad debts to the stock of outstanding loans was 2.2 per cent for bank 
customers as a whole, while for firms it was 3.3 per cent. In November the share of loans to 
firms  in  temporary  difficulty  (substandard  and  restructured  loans)  again  increased.  By 
contrast,  the  deterioration  in  loans  to  households  has  been  small,  thanks  to  the  limited 
amount of household debt and the low level of short-term interest rates. 
Statistics examined at international level suggesting that the ratio of impaired loans to total 
assets is higher for Italian banks than for those  of the other leading countries have raised 
questions about the adequacy of the amounts in banks’ balance sheets to cover these risks. 
International  comparisons  of  credit  quality  and  the  adequacy  of  write-downs  nevertheless 
suffer from the lack of a uniform definition of impaired loans. 
For Italian banks the definition of impaired loans  in conformity with rigorous prudential rules 
  is  broad.  It  includes  assets,  such  as  restructured  loans,  that  continue  to  generate  cash 
flows. Moreover, the incorporation of the reclassifications requested during the inspections 
that  the  Bank  of  Italy  carries  out  periodically  results  in  the  prompt  emergence  of  impaired 
loans, and the stock of them is kept large by the slowness of recovery procedures. It should 
also  be  noted  that  in  the  last  few  years  the  proportion  of  impaired  loans  backed  by 
guarantees has risen for Italian banks. 
In  the  meetings  with  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  which  is  currently  performing  its 
periodic assessment of the stability of the Italian financial system, we stressed the need to 
bear  these  aspects  in  mind  when  attempting  to  draw  policy  implications  from  international 
comparisons. 
Another question that is sometimes raised is whether the loan assessments that we require 
banks to make are not excessively cautious and therefore likely to slow the financing of the 
economy. Here again it is necessary to be clear. The prudence we require in the assessment 
of loans helps to safeguard the integrity of banks’ capital and contributes to increasing the 
market’s  confidence  in  them.  Analysts  and  investors  want  the  amounts  stated  in  balance 
sheets  to  reflect  the  actual  quality  of  banks’  assets  and  provide  reliable  indications  of  the 
risks involved. Prudent provisioning policies encourage the disposal of impaired items. It also 
needs to be recognized that such policies are likely to be hindered by a harsh tax treatment, 
which should be gradually removed. 
In  periods  of  market  tension,  the  intensity  of  supervision  cannot  be  relaxed  until  the 
economic recovery produces its effects on banks’ accounts. Tolerance towards situations of 
persistent  support  to  borrowers  with  a  precarious  financial  condition  and  no  prospect  of 
growth  would  not  only  risk  undermining  the  soundness  of  the  banks  but  also  hinder  the 
efficient allocation of resources to the economy. 
The inspections we perform make it possible to assess the situation of each intermediary on 
a case-by-case basis. We pay due attention to the risk of generating procyclical effects. To 
this end, above all we ask banks that need to strengthen their capital bases to free resources 
by reducing their costs, selling non-strategic assets and retaining earnings in the business. 
Beyond  the  short  term  the  prudent  assessment  of  assets  is  beneficial  to  the  financing  of 
customers, especially if coupled with action by the banks to increase their ability to resist and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
react  to  external  shocks.  Efficient  production  processes  and  attention  to  strategic  sectors 
contribute to the growth of credit business and in this way to the support of the economy. 
In recent years Italian banks have increased their capital resources considerably, especially 
core tier 1 capital. Since 2007 the core tier 1 ratio of the banking system has risen from 7.1 to 
10.4 per cent. For the five largest banking groups, which have raised €17 billion on the equity 
market since 2011, the average core tier 1 capital ratio has risen from 5.7 to 10.8 per cent; 
the  ratio  stands  at  8.8  per  cent  for  the  other  banking  groups  and  at  13.8  per  cent  for  the 
smaller banks, mostly mutual banks. The capital of the smaller banks is generally adequate. 
Some large and medium-sized groups must make further progress in strengthening their own 
funds. 
Capital strengthening will permit compliance with the Basel 3 rules and achievement of the 
objectives  that  will  be  set  for  the  assessment  of  banks’  overall  risk  profiles.  It  makes  it 
possible to limit the degree of leverage without reducing credit support to the real economy. 
Capital strengthening is in the interest of shareholders: the resulting decrease in risk lays the 
foundation  for  reducing  the  cost  of  capital  and,  looking  ahead,  raises  the  return  on  the 
resources invested. A low exposure to financial risks also helps to curb the cost of funding. 
In  2012  the  capital  gains  on  government  securities  purchased  at  prices  far  below  those 
consistent  with  the  fundamentals  of  the  Italian  economy  cushioned  the  impact  of  the 
macroeconomic  deterioration  on  banks’  income  statements.  Any  dividends  paid  must  not 
draw on banks’ capital reserves; they must be compatible with capital targets communicated 
to banks at the end of the annual supervisory and review process. 
Banks’ profitability 
Given the persistently unfavourable economic and financial situation, it has been contended 
that  banks’  profits  are  high,  especially  compared  with  those  of  firms.  So  the  banks,  the 
argument  runs,  should  be  called  on  to  expand  the  supply  and  lower  the  cost  of  credit,  to 
reduce their fees, and to offer an array of services free of charge. 
Actually, two recessions in the span of three years, undermining the quality of banks’ assets, 
have generated loan losses that seriously erode profitability. The sovereign debt crisis has 
made  funding  in  the  wholesale  markets  harder  and  more  costly,  further  reducing  the 
profitability of traditional credit activity. The profitability of the major banking groups is low. In 
the  first  nine  months  of  2012  their  return  on  equity,  annualized  and  net  of  extraordinary 
goodwill impairments, was just above 3 per cent. 
The modest growth in the volume of business and the incidence of loan losses will continue 
to compress banks’ earnings until the economic recovery takes hold. The uncertainty over 
economic  and  financial  market  developments  will  continue  to  weigh  on  the  speed  and  the 
extent of the rebuilding of profit margins, which are in any event bound to remain below their 
unsustainable pre-crisis levels. 
The  entrepreneurial  nature  of  banks  has  been  axiomatic  for  many  years  now,  and  capital 
cannot be raised in the absence of expectations of sustainable rates of return; the drive for 
profit is legitimate, it serves growth. However, earnings must derive not only from operating 
efficiency  but  also  from  offering  products  that  correspond  to  customers’  real  needs,  not 
costly, needlessly complicated and risky services. 
In the first nine months of 2012 banks’ staff costs diminished by about 2.5 per cent compared 
with the year-earlier period. The containment of operating expenses must proceed resolutely. 
The banks must enhance the quality of human capital, which is essential to the assessment 
of creditworthiness and risk management. 
The variable portion of the compensation of risk takers must be reduced in line with banks’ 
earnings. Specifically, loss-making banks must not pay bonuses. Bonuses must reward the 
achievement  of  stable  earnings,  not  simply  the  fruit  of  extraordinary  operations.  Only  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
structural components of income can serve as the standard for the determination of bonuses 
and, in the arrangements that so provide, for their restitution. 
Executives’  severance  packages  too  must  be  clearly  and  effectively  bound  to  the  results 
attained.  They  must  reflect  proper  evaluation  of  the  manager’s  performance.  And 
compensation must be deferred long enough to validate the true quality of management. If 
banks do not conform spontaneously to these principles, rules and controls will have to be 
made more stringent. 
The  spread  of  information  and  communication  technology  has  affected  the  behaviour  of 
customers,  heightened  competition  and  opened  up  new  opportunities  to  streamline  and 
digitize business processes. These trends require a revision of distribution channels that will 
be all the more important going forward. Maintaining a local presence is essential, but it has 
to  be  combined  with  the  rationalization  and  upgrading  of  the  branch  network.  The 
simplification of company and group structures remains a priority. 
In the problematic context in which these actions must be undertaken, the materialization of 
the  savings  expected  requires  significant  improvement  in  the  ability  to  actually  carry  them 
out. Concretely feasible solutions have to be designed long enough in advance, just as the 
investments necessary for their implementation need to be programmed. 
 These  are  still  difficult  times  for  the  Italian  economy.  The  long  financial  crisis  has  taken  a 
heavy toll on the markets and the institutions. It has put monetary union itself to a severe 
test. 
The  banks  are  suffering  the  heavy  consequences  of  the  double-dip  recession  and  the 
sovereign debt crisis. They have met with serious funding difficulties, coped with the need for 
capital  strengthening,  and  suffered  a  sharp  drop  in  profitability.  Their  initial,  underlying 
soundness, also a reflection of supervisory action, has enabled them to withstand the shock. 
However, overcoming the crisis once and for all will necessitate a further, protracted effort. I 
have  described  the  steps  that  are  ineluctable,  on  which  intermediaries  must  take  action 
without delay. In addition, with the farsightedness demanded of all parties, the problem of the 
quality  of  ownership  structure  and  governance  must  be  addressed,  bearing  in  mind  the 
interest of the real economy and the stability of the banks themselves. 
The  decisions  of  the  ECB  Governing  Council,  aimed  at  safeguarding  the  effective 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  within  the  euro  area,  have  preserved  the  liquidity  of  the 
banking  system,  contained  the  financial  market  distortions  caused  by  the  sovereign  debt 
crisis,  and  countered 
the 
correspondence between monetary conditions and economic outlook with the greatest care. 
Monetary policy can do much, but by itself it cannot get us out of the crisis. Investors’ fears 
have abated since the tension was at its height, but they have certainly not vanished. The 
quality of national economic policies and the completion of the reform of European economic 
governance  moving towards full monetary, banking and fiscal union and, further down the 
road, political union as well  will be decisive. 
Italy  must  not  lower  its  guard.  The  international  investors  continue,  rightly,  to  concentrate 
their attention on our ability to keep the public finances in balance and energetically pursue 
the goal of increasing potential growth. The recurrent tensions are a reminder of how fragile 
the situation remains. The yield spread between Italian and German government securities is 
still wider than is consistent with the fundamentals and potential of our economy. Its further 
reduction could facilitate banks’ funding and the revival of lending to the economy on more 
advantageous terms. 
The  return  to  balanced  and  rapid  growth  of  our  economy  must  be  pursued  even  more 
resolutely.  Keeping  the  public  finances  in  balance  is  a  prerequisite  to  this,  not  an 
the  solidity  of  monetary  union.  We  evaluate 
fears 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
impediment. Only the full implementation of comprehensive and systematic reform, certainly 
a challenging task, can ensure the necessary gains in competitiveness and thereby favour 
the expansion of employment. The cornerstones of the reform have been identified: we must 
invest  in  knowledge,  provide  higher-quality  public  and  private  services,  fight  illegality  and 
promote  competition.  We  have  barely  embarked  on  this  course;  we  must  continue  with 
conviction, aware of the responsibilities of each but confident in the possibilities of all. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
