K C Chakrabarty: Credit information companies – seeking new frontiers 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Experian India Conclave 2013, Mumbai, 5 July 2013. 
 Dr.  Richard  Fiddis,  Managing  Director  –  Strategic  Markets,  Experian;  Mr.  Vikram  Narayan 
and  Mr.  Mohan  Jayaraman,  Managing  Directors,  Experian  Credit  Information  Company  of 
India  Pvt.  Ltd.;  senior  members  from  the  financial  services  industry;  delegates  to  the 
conference;  members  of  the  print  and  electronic  media;  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a 
pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  deliver  the  inaugural  address  at  the  Experian  India 
Conclave  2013.  As  you  know,  this  Conclave  has  been  organised  by  Experian,  one  of  the 
leading  credit  bureaus  with  operations  spread  across  19  countries.  The  Credit  Information 
Companies  (CICs)  have  been  in  India  for  around  a  decade  now  and  I  believe  it  would  be 
appropriate that in today’s address, I focus not just on the role which the CICs like Experian 
have  played  in  India,  but  also  dwell  on  the  next  higher  level  the  CICs  should  aspire  to 
achieve through innovative practices, capability enhancement and improved efficiency. This 
would  also  be  in  line  with  the  theme  of  the  conference:  The  Next  Frontier  for  Innovation, 
Competition and Productivity. 
Our society transformed itself from an agrarian society to an industrial society and is, now, 
getting  transformed  into  a  knowledge  society.  An  essential  ingredient  for  sustenance  of  a 
knowledge  society  is  widespread  information  literacy.  I  believe  that  the  CICs  have  an 
important role to play in dissemination of awareness about credit information. The ability of 
CICs to effectively perform this role will determine the future growth of the CIC business and 
that  of  individual  companies  within  this  industry.  I  would  also  be  dwelling  upon  the 
information literacy function of CICs during my address today. 
The credit information services have witnessed impressive growth over the last two decades. 
I  understand  that  between  1990  and  2011  the  number  of  credit  bureaus  in  the  world  has 
tripled.  While  the  Asian  crisis  in  the  late  1990s  triggered  the  growth  of  bureaus  in  Asia, 
Eastern Europe saw significant activity in early 2000s and the Middle East and Africa in the 
late 2000s. A recent survey showed that 134 countries across the globe either had a credit 
bureau or a credit registry at the end of 2011. 
Value of a robust information infrastructure in an economy 
The  World  Bank’s  “Ease  of  Doing  Business  Report  2012”,  mentions  that  there  is  a  strong 
linkage between depth of credit information index and credit penetration. Credit information 
index  is  influenced  by  the  institutional  mechanisms  in  an  economy  for  gathering  and 
disseminating credit information. Public registries and credit bureaus play a very important 
role in boosting the information infrastructure. Key developed economies like the US and UK 
demonstrate a strong and mature credit bureau environment. 
In developing economies, lending, especially to retail, is, in a large measure, made possible 
by  credit  bureaus,  which  perform  the  vital  task  of  collating  and  distributing  reliable  credit 
information to the underwriter. As you all know, reports from the bureau contain information 
about the payment behaviour of consumers and commercial entities, including data on timely 
fulfilment or delinquency behaviour pertaining to financial obligations. Let me emphasize that 
credit bureaus can serve at a micro as well as at a macro level. While at a micro level they 
help  credit  underwriters  make  an  informed  decision  about  a  credit  applicant,  on  a  macro 
level, they assist the senior management understand the broad credit market tendencies and 
also help the banks benchmark their performance against the industry on various dimensions 
such as sourcing, portfolio quality, delinquency, etc. At the level of a regulator, bureaus can 
play a pivotal role in providing insights that can drive effective policy changes. They can also 
provide important inputs for the banking supervisors in monitoring systemic risks. A further 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
use  of  the  bureau  at  a  regulatory  level  may  be  to  analyze  appropriate  capital  and 
provisioning  strategies  for  banks  and,  in  particular,  to  assess  whether  current  capital  and 
provisioning regulations match up to actual risks. At the level of the society, as I mentioned a 
little while ago, the CICs have to work towards making individuals and financial entities credit 
information literate. This would involve generating awareness about the importance of credit 
history and the need for maintaining a healthy credit record. 
Credit bureaus also provide other benefits for both borrowers and lenders. For example, if 
borrowers know that lenders have access to their credit histories, they would have a greater 
incentive to repay loans to maintain access to credit in the future. A 2010 World Bank study 
indicates that half of all customers would be more likely to pay their bills on time if they knew 
that  those  payments  were  reported  to  credit  bureaus.  Further,  borrowers  who  have 
established  a  good  credit  record  with  a  credit  bureau  may  gain  bargaining  power  for  the 
terms of credit. Information sharing between lenders reveals borrowers’ debt exposure to all 
participating lenders, thereby generating a view about their aggregate indebtedness. 
Lending in emerging economies like India, while presenting unique opportunities, also brings 
in  attendant  challenges.  While  India  has  a  large  work  force  and  an  increasingly  affluent 
middle class with rising disposable incomes, the extent of credit penetration is still quite low 
compared to global standards. One of the key reasons for this is the information asymmetry 
between the lender and the borrower. Lenders have limited financial information and cannot 
undertake  automatic  screening.  Average  loan  amounts  are  also  curtailed  to  address  this 
information risk. Contract enforcement and repossession norms are certain other issues that 
plague lender confidence and, thus, in the process, hinder credit off-take. It is in this context 
that  the  role  of  the  CICs  assumes  significance.  The  CICs  should  help  identify  the  credit 
worthy  people  in  the  system.  Based  on  the  information  that  they  have,  the  CICs  should 
develop appropriate analytics, help lubricate the credit market and facilitate the provision of 
credit  to  the  people  who,  otherwise,  don’t  get  credit  from  the  formal  financial  system.  The 
purpose  of  having  CICs  in  the  system  would  be  best  served  when  the  credit  needs  of 
deserving people are met in a timely manner and at a reasonable cost. 
For  lenders,  credit  bureaus’  collection  and  transformation  of  borrower  information  into  a 
credit  score  also  helps  reduce  transaction  costs  associated  with  lending  by  providing  a 
standardized benchmark that a lender may use to judge a borrower’s creditworthiness. This 
can  also  help  in  cutting  down  the  turnover  time  in  processing  credit  requests,  thereby 
promoting operational efficiency. In fact, banks and the CICs have a symbiotic relationship 
where both can help each others’ business processes and, thereby, improve their respective 
efficiencies. 
Positive and negative data sharing 
Credit  history  data  can  be  broadly  categorized  as:  negative  data  and  positive  data.  The 
negative reporting includes information pertaining to unfulfilled financial obligations such as 
defaults,  amounts  in  arrears,  court  judgments,  and  other  adverse  information.  Typically, 
these  serve  as  inputs  for  generating  a  black  list.  Positive  data,  on  the  contrary,  contains 
information on an individual’s open and closed accounts and this repayment history can be 
used to create and classify credit profiles of borrowers. Similarly, banks can identify premium 
borrowers  and  provide  more  customised  service  to  them.  According  to  Doing  Business 
survey data, approximately 70 percent of all bureaus and registries surveyed provide both 
positive and negative data, often referred to as “comprehensive credit reporting” or “full-file 
credit reporting”. 
Research  has  shown  that  full  file  reporting  has  significant  benefits  over  negative  data.  In 
simulation exercises carried out in some countries, the approval rates have increased by up 
to 88% when using full file reporting. 
RBI has been rather proactive in adopting some of the global best practices of positive data 
sharing right from the inception. Even mature bureau markets like Brazil and Australia have 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
started witnessing a move towards a limited positive data sharing environment only as late 
as 2013. Several other jurisdictions have also started evaluating the possibility of increasing 
the scope of credit reporting. 
History of credit reporting in India 
We have seen significant progress in strengthening the credit infrastructure in India since the 
advent  of  the  first  credit  information  bureau  about  a  decade  ago.  The  Credit  Information 
Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (CICRA) was introduced to provide for the regulation of 
credit information companies and to facilitate efficient distribution of credit. Further, the entry 
of  Foreign  Investors,  i.e.  companies  with  an  established  track  record  of  running  credit 
information bureaus in well regulated environments was permitted. With the realisation that 
competition will bring better technology and efficiency in the system, four companies were 
issued “in-principle” approval to set up CICs. 
Indian experience of credit reporting 
Let me now briefly allude to some of the key patterns of bureau usage in India during the first 
decade of their existence. The bureau data has been primarily used in the retail segment, 
especially while approving credit cards, personal loans, home loans and auto loans. A major 
chunk of this has been accounted for by the private banks and foreign banks, with the public 
sector banks only recently starting to use them in a significant way. The credit reports have 
been the main product of use by banks. The banks have predominantly used inputs from the 
CICs during loan origination or for the occasional portfolio review and the use of value added 
products and services has been marginal and only recently started gaining importance. 
Key challenges facing credit information companies 
Let me now highlight some of the common challenges facing CICs today. If the CICs have to 
seize  the  opportunities  that  the  future  holds  for  them,  they  need  to  overcome  these 
challenges and come up with effective solutions, particularly to the problems concerning the 
quality of available data. 
Accuracy of data 
(i) 
The quality of the credit reports and other products given to credit institutions is dependent 
on the consistency and quality of the data reported by financial institutions. In fact, reliable 
and accurate data is the foundation on which the edifice of a successful CIC business can be 
erected.  Submission  of  inaccurate  and  incomplete  data  to  CICs  is  a  common  occurrence 
which, in turn, leads to inaccuracies in the credit reports and resultant consumer disputes. 
Credit Institutions should put in place mechanisms to improve the quality of data captured in 
their  source  systems  which  will  not  only  improve  their  own  operations  but,  in  turn,  also 
translate into improved data submission. The issue of furnishing of timely and accurate credit 
information on their borrowers by the credit institutions has been engaging the attention of 
Reserve  Bank  of  India.  As  you  might  be  aware,  RBI  has  set  up  a  Committee  under  the 
Chairmanship  of  Shri  Aditya  Puri,  Managing  Director,  HDFC  Bank  Ltd.  to  examine  the 
available  formats  for  furnishing  of  credit  information  by  credit  institutions  to  the  CICs  in 
respect of different sectors. Additionally, the Committee’s mandate also includes suggesting 
best practices for the guidance of credit institutions in respect of usage of credit information 
as a part of their credit appraisal process. 
Need for maintenance of up-to-date data 
(ii) 
The CICRA mandates that the data should be submitted by credit institutions on a monthly 
basis. While most of the Scheduled Commercial Banks, large NBFCs and Housing Finance 
Companies  are  submitting  data  on  a  monthly  basis,  the  co-operative  banks  and  smaller 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
NBFCs submit data intermittently. The use of CIC inputs during the credit appraisal process 
at lending institutions can only be effective if the data is up-to-date. 
Complete data 
(iii) 
The  CICRA  mandates  that  credit  information  pertaining  to  all  credit  facilities  should  be 
reported. However, evidence suggests that due to limitations of use of technology in banking 
systems,  entire  data,  often,  does  not  get  reported.  Further,  for  certain  banks,  data  gets 
rejected due to lack of proper identifiers like PAN, Passport, Voter ID, driving licence, etc. 
The incompleteness of data is observed not only in old or previously opened accounts but 
also  in  new  accounts  across  various  credit  institutions.  These  gaps  in  data  could  lead  to 
certain credit facilities not appearing in an individual’s credit report, thus giving an inaccurate 
picture  of  his  indebtedness/credit  worthiness  and,  thereby,  failing  to  achieve  the  very 
objectives  for  which  the  CICs  exist.  In  order  to  ensure  completeness  of  credit  data,  it  is 
essential  that  data  is  collected  on  a  regular  and  comprehensive  basis  from  all  institutions 
performing  the  lending  function.  This  includes  not  just  the  commercial  banks,  but  also  the 
NBFCs,  RRBs,  co-operatives,  including  urban  co-operative  banks  and  rural  co-operatives, 
etc.  The  ability  of  CICs  to  bring  together  all  the  pieces  of  the  jigsaw  would  determine  the 
utility of the resultant credit information. I again see a major role for the CICs here as they 
can assist banks in data quality diagnostics and data improvement based on their expertise. 
I would like to emphasize that the job of CICs is not just to act as a collector and distributor of 
data. Instead, they need to fulfil the mandate of being a perpetuator of information literacy by 
processing  the  data  collected  from  various  sources  into  credible  and  usable  credit 
information and by helping the users of information, both lenders and borrowers, to integrate 
this information into their decision making processes. 
The CICs, I understand, receive raw credit data and provide processed credit reports only to 
entities that are enlisted as their members I have a fundamental question with regard to this 
practice. What if the customer has never sought any credit facility from the enlisted members 
of that CIC or, else, has a good credit history with them. The customer would, then, have a 
good  credit  report  even  when  he  might  have  been  a  defaulter  elsewhere.  A  pertinent 
question  to  ask,  therefore,  is  what  is  being  done  to  address  the  issue  of  sharing  of 
information across the CICs. I understand that in the mature markets like the US, there are 
institutions  that  generate  credit  reports  about  an  individual  by  accessing  databases 
maintained by all the three major CICs present there. I believe we would need to work out a 
similar  mechanism  if  the  objective  of  having  CICs  has  to  be  fully  served  and  the  credit 
intermediation process in India has to become efficient. Let me emphasize that ownership of 
credit  data  should  not  be  the  basis  of  competitive  advantage  among  CICs.  Instead, 
innovations in the way the data is used and the value added services that CICs may provide 
based on the processed information ought to be the basis for seeking competitive advantage 
in this industry. 
Another  basic  issue  that  needs  attention  is  the  availability  of  a  unique  identifier  for 
individuals. We have instructed our banks to assign unique IDs to all their customers for easy 
identification  and  monitoring.  I  must  admit,  however,  that  the  progress  has  been  far  from 
satisfactory. The magnitude of the problem gets further accentuated when it is considered on 
a  system  wide  basis,  especially  when  one  takes  into  cognizance  alternative  sources  of 
finance  for  individuals/companies  in  the  shadow  banking  space.  I  believe  that  unless  the 
individuals/entities  are  recognized  with  a  unique  identifier,  for  example,  an  Aadhaar  (for 
individuals) or a Legal Entity Identifier (for entities), a work in progress under G-20 mandate 
at present, there would always be a shadow of doubt over the quality and accuracy of the 
credit  reports  and,  consequently,  a  cause  for  discomfort  for  the  lenders  in  using  them  for 
credit  decision  making.  I  would  solicit  your  wholehearted  support  for  the  success  of  the 
initiatives  of  the  Government  and  regulators  towards  introduction  of  a  unique  identifier 
through Aadhaar and the Legal Entity Identifier, as and when the latter becomes operational. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
Consumer disputes 
(iv) 
Another  very  important  challenge  for  the  sector  is  handling  the  consumer  grievance.  It  is 
incumbent upon CICs to put in place a responsive public grievance redressal mechanism for 
swift  and  transparent  redressal  of  grievances.  In  accordance  with  the  CICRA,  the  credit 
information company can make correction, deletion or addition to the credit information only 
after  such  correction,  deletion  or  addition  has  been  certified  as  correct  by  the  concerned 
credit institution. It is essential that both CICs and banks address consumer complaints in a 
swift,  comprehensive  and  time  bound  manner  as  this  would  have  repercussions  for  the 
potential borrower in accessing timely credit. Though the source of the data is the lending 
institution, CICs also need to adopt a proactive approach by taking up customer complaints 
with these institutions and working towards their expeditious resolution. 
Way forward 
With a decade having passed since the setting up of the first credit bureau in India, the time 
is  appropriate  for  the  industry  to  debate  on  how  to  take  the  business  forward  and  how  to 
ensure that it delivers on its critical mandate in the coming days. For me, the future for the 
CICs lies in greater innovation and offering more value added services. Leveraging on the 
data available with them, the CICs need to create and customize reports as per the needs of 
its user groups. As part of this, the CICs could give reports on industry sectors, geographic 
areas  and  also  issue  triggers/warnings  to  lenders  on  likely  credit  events.  The  CICs  would 
progressively  need  to  enlarge  their  information  database  by  bringing  more  and  more 
customer  segments  under  their  fold.  Thus,  besides  focussing  on  individuals,  midsize  and 
large corporates, they must make efforts to build information on the credit histories of SMEs, 
NGOs,  Charities,  Not-for  profit  organizations,  etc.  In  preparation  for  providing  value-added 
services,  the  CICs  would  need  to  build  elaborate  databases  on  additional  information  not 
directly linked to the credit information. Other than broad basing their information system so 
as to include data from utility companies, retailers, etc., CICs may need to collate specific 
information  like  details  of  mortgaged  assets,  previous  defaults,  recoveries,  write-offs, 
involvement in frauds or other criminal activities, etc. The value-added services by the CICs 
based  on  classified  information  mentioned  above,  would  support  more  advanced  risk 
management capabilities at the lending institutions. 
I  believe  that  data  available  at  CICs  can  be  effectively  used  by  banks  and  financial 
institutions to assist in credit risk management at various stages across their customer’s life 
cycle.  Its  use  in  customer  acquisition  and  customer  monitoring  has  been  quite  prevalent. 
With  regard  to  customer  acquisition,  with  technological  advancement,  the  stage  is  getting 
primed  for  multi-bureau  decision  making.  For  credit  exposures  above  certain  threshold, 
reports  from  multiple  bureaus  could  be  considered  while  underwriting.  At  the  monitoring 
stage,  CICs  can  furnish  a  360  degree  view  of  customers,  thereby  enabling  portfolio  risk 
assessment and early warning triggers to identify and address delinquency. Further, at the 
collection  stage,  CICs  can  help  entities  in  reaching  their  not  so  easily  contactable  base, 
thereby improving recoveries. 
From a strategic perspective, CICs, which represent the collective aggregates of the banking 
industry,  can  be  a  useful  source  of  benchmarking  performance  with  respect  to  peer 
categories  or  the  segment  as  a  whole.  CICs  can  also  provide  a  geographical  profiling  of 
credit  growth  and  delinquency  that  can  help  banks  in  deciding  their  expansion  or 
consolidation strategy. 
In the commercial segment, the use of the bureaus has not been to the same extent as in the 
consumer banking domain. SMEs are a big growth driver of any economy accounting for a 
majority of jobs and exports. Inadequate credit flow has been one of the factors constraining 
the growth of the SME sector. One of the reasons for banks’ reluctance to lend to this group 
is the unavailability of reliable information for banks to assess the creditworthiness of SME 
units.  In  fact,  contrary  to  popular  perception,  the  levels  of  impairment  in  case  of  SME 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5 
borrowers are far lesser than that in case of other larger borrowers. Hence, there is a strong 
case for providing greater credit to this business segment. Here, I see a significant role for 
the CICs in building an information base on SMEs and assisting banks in their credit decision 
making. I would urge the CICs to take urgent steps to bridge this information void and help 
facilitate  flow  of  credit  to  SMEs,  which  would  provide  an  impetus  to  the  overall  economic 
growth environment. 
Identity fraud – an emerging threat and role of the CICs in combating it 
According  to  the  Norton  Cybercrime  Report  2011  more  than  two  thirds  of  online  adults 
(69 percent) have been a victim of cybercrime in their lifetime, and every second 14 adults 
become a victim of cybercrime, resulting in more than one million cybercrime victims every 
day.  The  situation  is  equally  alarming  in  India.  Fraud,  especially  in  the  banking  domain, 
assumes  great  significance  due  to  the  associated  reputational  and  monetary  losses. 
Incidence of frauds can severely dent the confidence in the financial system, particularly at a 
time when  we are trying to use technology as  the medium to bring  more and more of the 
excluded  masses  into  the  formal  financial  system.  Fraudsters  employ  innovative  ways  of 
impersonating  others  using  altered  KYC  documents.  They  also  apply  for  credit  at  multiple 
banks  at  the  same  time  by  exploiting  vulnerabilities  in  banks’  systems  and  processes. 
Alternately,  fraudsters  can  also  apply  for  credit  from  the  same  bank  at  multiple  locations 
assuming different identities. 
While  guidelines  around  KYC  norms  have  been  strengthened  and  the  banks  are  being 
encouraged to provide unique customer IDs at the institutional level, the credit bureaus have 
capabilities to play an important role in preventing such frauds by providing a holistic view of 
the  individual  and  highlighting  the  different  variations  of  ID  information,  as  provided  to 
different  credit  providers.  Also,  data  sharing  mechanism  amongst  banks  can  help  in 
identifying  serial  fraudsters  by  picking  up  inter-temporal  and  inter-bank  inconsistencies  of 
application data to provide an early warning mechanism to identify potential risk cases. 
Further, in a robust KYC system, banks could consider using multi-database checks on an 
individual’s  identity  at  the  time  of  underwriting  that  encompasses  different  identifier 
databases like UID, PAN, Voter ID, Passport, etc. This will help in rooting out many cases of 
identity frauds through fraudulent documentation. 
From a consumer’s perspective, CICs hold key information on the enquiries made towards 
obtaining  credit.  If  a  fraudster  assumes  someone’s  identity  and  applies  for  credit  across 
institutions,  this  information  can  be  transmitted  to  individual  banks  as  triggers  or  warning 
signals.  I  foresee  that  the  next  wave  of  innovation  would  be  around  developing  tools  and 
analytics  in  preventing  frauds  arising  from  identity  thefts  and  I  am  glad  to  note  that  the 
conference has devoted a session for deliberating on the issue of frauds. 
Role of alternate data sources as supplement to banking data 
The  current  banking  policy  places  a  lot  of  emphasis  on  financial  inclusion.  A  key  enabler 
tying up with the theme of financial inclusion is the information infrastructure and decisioning 
architecture  necessary  to  bridge  the  information  asymmetry  divide  for  individuals  who  are 
first-time borrowers from the banking system. In order to reach out to individuals who never 
had  any  access  to  traditional  banking  channels  or  who  have  no  credit  footprint,  some 
indicator  of  payment  behaviour  demonstrated  by  such  individuals  in  their  day-to-day  lives 
need to be analysed during the process of underwriting. This could be the payment of utility 
bills  such  as  water  or  electricity,  telecom  bill  repayment,  rental  payments,  healthcare 
payments,  etc.  These  data  sources  are,  typically,  called  alternate  data  which  are 
supplements for banking repayment data. With alternate data, the coverage of people with 
some kind of payment history increases. Including alternative payment data is an effective 
method to build or restore/rebuild a good credit history, something which the industry could 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
consider  in  the  future  as  it  evolves  further  and  matures  in  terms  of  competitiveness  and 
customer sensitivity. 
From this perspective, low-score is always better than no score – Unscoreable persons are 
almost  always  rejected  by  mainstream  lenders  when  applying  for  credit.  For  such  people, 
many of whom might actually be credit-worthy, the sole recourse would be to borrow from the 
money  lenders.  By  virtue  of  being  scoreable,  a  person  greatly  improves  his/her  chance  of 
entering the credit mainstream. Regulators across the globe have started acknowledging the 
role of alternate data sources in improving financial inclusion and, hence, bureaus in those 
geographies have started collecting non-traditional, non-credit data to augment the banking 
data. 
Conclusion 
Before  I  conclude,  I  must  reemphasize  that  the  Credit  Information  Companies  have  a 
herculean  responsibility 
towards  developing  a  vibrant  credit  market  and  spreading 
consumers’ awareness about the importance of credit and its responsible use. Consumers 
need  to  be  sensitized  through  awareness  campaigns  about  the  importance  of  credit 
information reports as a means for knowing their financial liabilities and about its importance 
in determining their credit worthiness. This is especially important for the young population 
who are new to the credit market. To my mind, the key deliverable for the CICs in the coming 
days  would  be  to  facilitate  a  smoother  credit  decision  making  process  and,  thereby,  bring 
down  the  cost  of  financial  transactions  and  credit  intermediation  in  the  banking/financial 
system for the benefit of the masses, especially for the retail and SME segments. A major 
spin-off benefit for the banking industry would be in terms of better quality of credit portfolio. 
I  believe  that  the  next  wave  of  financial  innovation  would  be  around  providing  financial 
services to a large section of the unbanked population. This would require presence of the 
necessary tools, techniques, processes, technology, infrastructure and enabling regulations. 
As  most  of  the  target  population  would  be  first  time  credit  seekers,  it  would  require  an 
aggregation  of  information  on  credit  proxies  on  these  individuals.  Scoring  and  evaluation 
techniques will follow. Banks, Insurance and Telecom companies will do well in making the 
best use of the presence of existing CICs in India, during their credit appraisal processes. 
CICs  should,  on  their  part,  continuously  remain  engaged  in  innovation  to  support  these 
entities at multiple levels through various value added services and products encompassing 
their customer’s entire life cycle. 
From  the  day’s  schedule,  I  observe  that  several  technical  sessions  are  lined  up  around 
improving  the  credit  information  mechanism  and  increasing  its  usage.  I  hope  today’s 
Conclave helps in generating awareness and throws up practical ideas on the subject. I am 
hopeful that committed entities like Experian, through their linkage with the overseas parents 
and  also  backed  by  experience  gained  in  matured  markets,  would  be  able  to  bring  in 
technical knowhow and expertise into India and, in the process, ensure availability of easier, 
quicker and cheaper credit for the people at the bottom of the pyramid. I once again thank 
the organisers for inviting me and giving me an opportunity to share my thoughts with you. I 
wish the conference deliberations all success. 
Thank you! 
References 
1. 
2. 
3. 
IFC Credit Reporting Knowledge Guide (2012) 
KPMG Fraud Survey (2012) 
Facilitating  access  to  finance  –  OECD  Discussion  paper  on  Credit  Information 
Sharing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
A  New  Pathway  to  Financial  Inclusion:  Alternate  Data,  Credit  Building,  and 
responsible lending in the wake of the great recession – Michael A. Turner, Patrick 
D. Walker, Sukanya Chaudhari, Robin Varghese – PERC Press (June 2012) 
General Principles of Credit Reporting, Consultation Paper, World Bank 2011 
Worldbank datasets 
Doing Business 2012, Doing business in a more transparent world, The World Bank 
(2012)  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
