Andrew G Haldane: Why institutions matter (more than ever) 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, 
given  at  the  Centre  for  Research  on  Socio-Cultural  Change  (CRESC)  Annual  Conference, 
School of Oriental and Africa Studies, London, 4 September 2013. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  speaking  at  this  year’s  CRESC  annual  conference.  It  is 
particularly poignant, in the week of Ronald Coase’s death, to be discussing “Why Institutions 
Matter”. This is belatedly becoming conventional economic wisdom. Yet I wish to argue not 
just that institutions matter, but that the forces shaping today’s great global systems mean 
they matter more today than ever previously. 
There  are  many  forces  shaping  the  evolution  of  the  world’s  systems  –  social  systems, 
financial  systems,  economic  systems.  But  two  of  the  most  potent  and  pressing  are 
integration and information. Both have undergone a radical transformation over recent years, 
driven skyward by a combination of globalisation and technology. They have reached heights 
undreamt of a generation ago. 
Take  integration.  Cross-border  flows  of  resources  –  people,  goods  and  services,  capital  – 
have seen a remarkable upsurge over the past few decades. Chart 1 plots some measures 
of  cross-border  flows  of  goods,  services  and  capital  –  the ratios  of  world  trade  and  global 
external assets to world GDP. They exhibit broadly similar trends: rising in the early part of 
the 20th century, falling during the interwar years, before rising rapidly to the present day. They 
chart the ebb and flow of globalisation. 
Over the past 30 years, globalisation has flowed as never before. Trade integration has risen 
at a rate of over 1 percentage point per year, international capital integration at a rate of 6 
percentage points per year. Today, the ratio of world trade to GDP is two and a half times its 
level at the end of the Second World War. The ratio of global external assets to world GDP is 
nearly  ten  times  this  level.  Global  integration  of  goods,  services,  money  and  people  is  at 
levels well beyond those seen previously. 
The creation and exchange of information has undergone an even more remarkable phase 
shift. The stock of information currently available is estimated to be around 1,200 exa-bytes1 
Sufficient,  if  it  were  placed  on  CDs,  to  stretch  to  the  moon  and  back  almost  three  times. 
Sufficient for every person on the planet to each have over 300 times more information than 
was stored in the great library at Alexandria which, 2000 years ago, housed the sum of all 
human knowledge (Cukier and Mayer-Schoenberger (2013)). 
What is more, almost all of this information is new. Over 90% of it has become available in 
the  past  10  years.  Nearly  half  has  become  available  in  the  past  3  years.  This  rate  of 
expansion is unlikely to slow. Google alone processes 25 million gigabytes of data each day 
(Devenport  et  al.  (2012)).  Wal-Mart  is  handling  1  million  new  transactions  every  hour. 
Facebook is home to 40 billion digital photographs which increase at a rate of 10 million per 
hour.  Looking  ahead,  the  stock  of  information  is  forecast  to  double  over  the  next  3  years 
(Cukier and Mayer-Schoenberger (2013)). 
On these trends, by 2020 the stock of information will have risen 150-fold since the turn of 
the century2 At that stage, the information created this century will account for over 99% of 
                                                 
1  A bit is a 0 or a 1. A byte is 8 bits. An exabyte is 1018 or a quintillion bytes.  
2  www.economist.com/node/15557443. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that ever created. That CD pile will stretch to the moon and back more than 10 times. Each 
person alive will have nearly 1500 times more information than was housed in Alexandria.3 
These  remarkable  trends  in  global  integration  have  delivered  significant  benefits  to  global 
wealth  and  welfare,  providing  a  large  boost  to  growth  (Kose  et  al.  (2006),  World  Bank 
(2008)). There is also now decisive evidence of the IT revolution having materially boosted 
economy-wide productivity (Jorgenson et al. (2008)). As more of the economy has become 
virtual  and  global,  and  less  physical  and  local,  it  is  possible  that  existing  national  income 
methods may, if anything, have understated these gains (Arthur (2009)). 
Yet, as recent events attest, rapidly rising integration and information are not costless. They 
can  reshape  and  rescale  the  risks  facing  social,  economic  and  financial  systems.  In 
particular,  I  wish  to  argue  that  the  twin  forces  of  integration  and  information  may  have 
increased the severity of the tail risks facing global systems, as recently evidenced by the 
global  financial  crisis.  Insuring  against  those  rising  tail  risks  may  call  for  a  fresh  policy 
response – for example, a strengthening of public policy institutions. 
Integration and systemic risk 
Consider  first  the  relationship  between  integration  and  systemic  risk.  It  is  well-known  that 
deeper  integration  of  a  network  does  not  have  a  straightforward  impact  on  its  stability. 
Integration  can  be  a  double-edged  sword  –  and  the  greater  the  degree  of  integration,  the 
sharper  this  sword.  This  is  sometimes  known  as  the  “robust-yet-fragile”  property  of 
connected webs (Watts (2002)). 
The intuition is beguilingly simple. Within limits, connectivity acts as a shock-absorber, a risk-
spreader.  Links  in  the  system  act  as  a  mutual  insurance  device  as  risk  is  distributed  and 
diversified away. That results in connected networks appearing “robust” to shocks. But when 
shocks  are  sufficiently  large,  the  same  connectivity  serves  as  a  shock-transmitter.  Risk-
sharing becomes risk-spreading. Links in the system act as a mutual incendiary device as 
risk is amplified across the wider web. Connected networks become “fragile”. 
In  short,  connected  networks  tend  simultaneously  to  be  stable  and  unstable,  calm  and 
turbulent, robust-yet-fragile. They sit atop a cliff-edge, on one side of which are the sunny 
uplands of stability, on the other the stormy lowlands of fragility. The more connected and 
integrated the system, the more precipitate this cliff-edge (Acemoglu et al. (2013), Haldane 
(2009), Gai and Kapadia (2010)). 
As  we  might  expect,  the  distribution  of  outcomes  from  such  robust-yet-fragile  systems  are 
lumpy and  non-normal. Relative to the smooth contours of the bell curve, they generate a 
clustering  of  extreme  outcomes  as  systems  tip  the  wrong  side  of  the  cliff  edge.  The 
distributions have “fat tails”. In simple terms, this tells us that catastrophes are much more 
likely than if God were rolling a dice (Haldane and Nelson (2012)). 
This  fat-tailed  property  has  been  found  in  most  connected  webs  on  the  planet:  in  natural 
networks, such as rainforests and oceans; in physical networks, such as electricity grids and 
computer  networks;  in  social  networks,  such  as  epidemics  and  social  media  sites;  and  in 
economic  networks,  such  as  trade  networks  and  interbank  payment  systems  (Newman 
(2005)). For all of these systems, the abnormal is normal, the exception the rule, the local 
global, the tails fat. 
If fat tails are the unavoidable consequence of deeper integration, then the global financial 
crisis provides no better example. This was preceded by an unprecedented period of stability 
–  the  “Great  Moderation”  (Bernanke  (2004)).  A  key  cause  of  such  stability  was  felt  to  be 
                                                 
3 
http://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/139104/kenneth-neil-cukier-and-viktor-mayer-schoenberger/the-rise-of-big-data. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
improved risk-sharing. The integrated global financial system had scattered risk to the four 
winds, dispersed and diffused. The web appeared robust. 
Robust  yet,  as  subsequent  events  have  shown,  also  fragile.  At  the  same  time  financial 
integration was calming the waters on shore, it was brewing a storm at sea. The financial 
system’s  tail  was  fattening.  When  that  tail  wagged  in  2008,  almost  every  country  on  the 
planet fell off the cliff-edge at an almost identical time. The world experienced its first-ever 
truly global financial crisis. This time was different. 
Unprecedented  levels  of  financial  integration  made  that  so.  Over  the  course  of  a  30-year 
period, it had transformed the global financial system into a tangled cats-cradle, the ultimate 
robust-yet-fragile  web.  While  everyone  was  shocked  by  the  crisis,  perhaps  no-one  should 
have been surprised by it. If the path of integration – social, economic, financial – continues 
skyward, next time will be different for other systems too. 
Information and systemic risk 
Consider next the link between information and systemic risk. Here again the relationship is 
far from straightforward. Increased information is generally felt to improve decision-making; it 
allows us to re-optimise in response to news. Facebook and Twitter allow us to befriend and 
defriend, to like and dislike, in real time. eBay and Amazon allow us to trade instantaneously. 
Trading platforms allow us to buy and sell at sub-second speeds. Matchmaking sites allow us 
to search for jobs and partners in our lunch-break. People, goods, services and money all 
now swim in a liquid real-time market. 
Yet high-frequency information and decision-making may be neither costless nor harmless. 
To understand why, look inside your head. MRI scans now enable us to do just that. What 
they  show  is  that,  neurologically,  humans  are  schizophrenic  by  design.  The  brain  is  part 
impatient “doer”, part patient “planner”. Those two components result in us “Thinking fast and 
slow” (Kahneman (2011)). 
Information prompts a chemical reaction in the impatient part of the brain. This provides the 
synaptic spark to re-optimise, to exchange, to transact, to befriend, to change our minds as 
never  before.  And  change  our  minds,  quite  literally,  it  has.  Some  have  argued  that  the 
information  flood  may  have  caused  a  neurological  rewiring,  the  like  of  which  followed 
previous  IT  revolutions  such  as  the  printing  press  (Carr  (2011)).  This  may  have  reduced 
attention spans, perhaps permanently; it has hardwired myopia. 
While the neurology of this is new, the point itself is not. In 1971, information theorist Herbert 
Simon  wrote:  “In  an  information-rich  world,  the  wealth  of  information  means  a  dearth  of 
something  else:  a  scarcity  of  whatever  it  is  that  information  consumes.  What  information 
consumes  is  rather  obvious:  it  consumes  the  attention  of  its  recipients.  Hence  a  wealth  of 
information creates a poverty of attention” (Simon (1971)). 
In other words, an information surplus may cause an attention deficit. An attention deficit is 
likely to lower the quality of decision-making. For cognitive psychologists, it is a disorder – 
one whose reported incidence has sky-rocketed over recent years. If short-term reactions are 
clouding  long-term  judgements,  the  doer  crowding-out  the  planner,  the  immediate  the 
important, then more hurry may be generating less speed. 
This  might  be  called  the  “information-rich-yet-attention-poor”  property  of  connected  webs. 
One manifestation is over-trading – over-trading in friends, partners, jobs, stocks. Perhaps 
that is why  marriage rates have halved, and divorce rates doubled, in the UK since 1970; 
why the tenure of global CEOs has halved since 1995; and why holding periods for stocks 
has more than halved since 1980. For many key decisions, myopia has been mounting. 
It may also have become self-reinforcing – a myopia trap. For addicts, shortened horizons 
generate a quest for quick fixes which further shorten horizons in a downward spiral (Coffey 
et  al.  (2003)).  For  gamblers,  a  sequence  of  losses  shortens  horizons  and  increases  risk-
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
taking  (Xiu  et  al.  (2011)).  For  depression-sufferers,  low  confidence  in  the  future  becomes 
self-fulfilling (Alloy and Ahrens (1987)). 
Myopia traps affect countries as well as individuals – and their macro-economic costs can be 
large.  For  developing  countries,  they  often  materialise  as  “poverty  traps”  (Sachs  (2005)). 
That  trap  is  self-sustaining  because  poverty  leads  to  under-investment  in  the  human  and 
financial capital that would allow the country to break free in the future (Banerjee and Duflo 
(2011)). Low future prospects for growth become self-fulfilling. 
Advanced economies are not immune to these problems. An information-rich-attention-poor 
world  will  generate  under-investment  in  physical  and  human  capital,  infrastructure,  the 
environment. That will be self-sustaining if it lowers future prospects or heightens future risks 
(Davies et al. (2013)). More hurry then assuredly means less speed. This is not a poverty 
trap. It is a poverty of attention trap. Policymakers have recently begun to focus on short-
termism, perhaps for that reason (G30 (2012), FSB (2013)). 
There is a final twist in this story of the dark side of integration and information. Fat tails and 
short minds can combine in uncomfortable ways. Myopia generates under-insurance against 
future risks, especially tail risks which seem remote. Yet, courtesy of integration, these tail 
risks may be on the rise. In other words, systemic risks may be rising at precisely the time 
societal insurance against these risks is most needed. 
Why institutions matter 
If  so,  then  policymakers  face  a  dilemma  –  catastrophe  risk  rising,  but  catastrophe  cover 
falling.  In  these  circumstances,  the  public  good  of  system  stability,  locally  and  globally, 
socially and economically, may be at risk. How should policymakers respond? 
One response would be to turn the tide, reversing the paths of integration and information. 
Since  the  crisis,  there  have  been  some  signs  of  just  that.  Chart  2  shows  one  measure  of 
global  capital  market  integration  over  the  past  century  –  the  correlation  between  national 
saving and investment rates in a set of countries. A value of one signals financial autarky – 
countries  fully  reliant  on  domestic  saving  to  finance  investment.  A  value  of  zero  signals 
perfect financial integration – countries financing local investment globally. 
For much of the  20th century, global financial integration, so measured, was very low. In the 
early  1980s,  after  decades  of  post-war  financial  liberalisation,  this  was  seen  as  a  “puzzle” 
(Feldstein  and  Horioka  (1980)).  Yet  at  precisely  that  point,  the  puzzle  began  to  unravel. 
Correlations  between  national  saving  and  investment  began  falling.  By  2007,  they  had 
reached zero – bliss point for global capital market integration. 
Yet bliss was short-lived. 2007 proved to be a high-water mark. The onset of the financial 
crisis has resulted in significant capital market retrenchment as nation states have returned 
money  home,  placed  regulatory  ring-fences  around  assets  and  imposed  restrictions  on 
capital movement. Today, global capital market integration is back to levels last seen in 2000 
and is still falling. 
This retrenchment reflects nervousness about the dark side of globalisation, its fragility and 
contagious cost. And this nervousness is not confined to capital flows; it has affected flows of 
goods, services and people too. That is why the World Trade Organisation’s (WTO) latest 
round of negotiations has been on-going for nearly 12 years. And it is why policy debates 
about immigration restrictions in a great many advanced economies are so vexed. These are 
attempts to turn the tide or at least stem the flood. 
The costs of a significant retreat in flows of capital, goods, services and people are difficult to 
quantify. They are not, however, difficult to imagine. We need only look back to the aftermath 
of  the  First  World  War  for  a  case  study.  Then,  trade  barriers  were  erected,  capital  flows 
restricted,  immigration  controls  imposed.  What  followed  was  not  a  halcyon  period  for  the 
global social, economic and financial order. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Reversing the rising tide of information would be an even more Canute-like task. While the 
library at Alexandria succumbed to fire, it is difficult to see the clouds suffering the same fate. 
Ending  quarterly  reporting  will  not  bring  an  end  of  quarterly  capitalism.  The  flood  of 
information  seems  set  to  continue  to  rise,  our  cognitive  in-box  overflowing,  our  brains 
rewiring. 
That begs the question of whether there is another public policy path better able to tackle fat 
tails  and  short  minds.  There  may  be.  It  is  both  an  old  path  and  a  new  path.  Along  it  lie 
institutions  –  “humanly  devised  constraints  that  structure  political,  economic  and  social 
interactions”  (North  (1991)).  So  defined,  institutions  have  long  been  recognised  as  key 
ingredients of stability and growth. 
In Adam Smith’s “other” book, The Theory of Moral Sentiments, institutions were seen as a 
necessary  foundation  for  progress  (Smith  (1759)).  They  embedded  past  knowledge  – 
“institutional memory” – thus providing a platform for future development. They also created 
the security of environment necessary to generate that progress – for example, through the 
rule of law and property and civil rights. 
In the late 19th century, economists such as Thorsten Veblen went one step further. They saw 
institutions  as  the  basic  building  blocks  of  economic  development  (Veblen  (1899)).  As 
societies  and  economies  became  more  complex,  institutions  were  needed  to  solve 
increasingly  complex  collective  action  problems.  They  helped  co-ordinate  the  actions  of 
individuals  to  create  public  goods  such  as  language,  money,  the  rule  of  law,  even  central 
banks. 
After a lull of over half a century, institutional economics has re-emerged with a vengeance. 
For Ronald Coase and Douglas North, institutions helped solve information and co-ordination 
problems within organisations, communities and societies (Coase (1960), North (1981)). The 
more complex these information problems, the more important were institutions as staging 
posts to efficiency and progress. 
For  Mancur  Olson,  institutions  could  be  a  bulwark  against  the  power  of  vested  interests 
(Olson (1982)). Vocal minorities could block reform which would otherwise benefit the silent 
majority  –  for  example,  through  tougher  anti-trust  law  and  tighter  regulation.  Institutions, 
arms-length from these vested interests, could break that reform logjam and thereby act as a 
growth facilitator. 
A common denominator among all of these thinkers, from Smith to Veblen to Coase to North, 
is  that  institutions  rise  in  importance  as  societies  become  more  complex,  integrated  and 
information-rich.  Indeed,  by  embedding  knowledge  from  the  past,  and  investing  in  public 
goods for the future, institutions were essential prerequisites for continuing progress in such 
systems. 
Recently,  those  basic  insights  have  been  corroborated  by  historical  evidence.  Institutional 
quality  has  been  found  to  be  a  key  determinant  of  economic  growth,  particularly  during 
financial liberalisation (Kose et al. (2006)). For Acemoglu and Robinson (2012), institutions 
play the pivotal role in explaining “Why Nations Fail”. In an echo of Olson, they distinguish 
extractive (catering for an elite) and inclusive (catering for society) regimes, with the first a 
recipe for economic regress, the latter for progress. 
Whether old or new, institutions seem to matter. Their secret lies in solving societal problems 
of  knowledge,  co-ordination  and  incentives.  Institutional  memory  can  help  lengthen  and 
strengthen otherwise short and subjective minds. And institutional investment can help build 
public  goods  and  flatten  otherwise  fat  tails.  In  other  words,  institutions  are  the  perfect 
antidote to the dark sides of integration and information. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Institutions in economics and finance 
These  features  of  institutions  –  memory  of  the  past,  investment  for  the  future  –  are 
particularly  acute  when  tackling  economic  and  financial  policy  problems.  Very  often,  these 
involve  difficult  trade-offs  between  today  and  tomorrow:  is  growth  today  worth  trading-off 
against higher inflation tomorrow or a greater probability of crisis the day after tomorrow? 
Not  only  are  these  choices  difficult,  but  policymakers  may  have  an  inbuilt  tendency  to  get 
them wrong. In economics, this is often termed the “time consistency” problem (Kydland and 
Prescott  (1977)).  The  problem  arises  when  policymakers  have  incentives  to  promise  good 
behaviour  ex-ante,  but  then  renege  on  that  promise  ex-post.  Policymakers  are  prone  to 
making St Augustinian pledges to be chaste, just not yet. This is a classic myopia trap. 
The roots of this problem are often felt to be political – a desire to court near-term popularity 
to  achieve  re-election.  Yet  the  true  roots  may  be  more  neurological  than  political. 
Experimental evidence shows that people’s preferences are themselves time-inconsistent or 
“hyperbolic”  (Laibson  (1997)).  People  become  increasingly  myopic  as  payoffs  become 
visible, elections approach, nest eggs near hatching. This is true for everything from pigeons 
pecking corn to mothers seeking pain relief during childbirth (Haldane (2010)). 
One  man’s  hyperbolic  preferences  are  another’s  policy  time-inconsistencies.  For  example, 
when setting monetary policy, there may be a desire to go for growth today at the expense of 
inflation tomorrow – to seek the drugs rather than gas and air option. Because people over 
time  build  that  behaviour  into  their  expectations,  the  result  may  be  a  permanent  upwards 
inflation bias, the like of which blighted many advanced economies in the 1970s (Barro and 
Gordon (1983)). 
Over the past 30 years, practical solutions have been sought to this monetary policy myopia 
problem.  Interestingly,  these  solutions  have  often  been  explicitly  institutional.  Over  that 
period, monetary policy in a great many countries has been placed in the hands of central 
banks  operating  arms-length  from  government,  but  with  an  inflation  mandate  set  by 
government. 
The reasons for doing so should be readily familiar from the earlier literature on institutional 
economics.  Central  banks  have  institutional  memory,  embedding  past  knowledge  of  the 
costs  of  inflationary  excess.  For  example,  the  Bundesbank’s  inflation-aversion  is  deeply 
rooted in Germany’s hyperinflationary past. This memory of the past is crucial for preserving 
the value of money in the future. 
So  too  is  operational  independence  from  government.  This  helps  provide  the  patience 
necessary  to  safeguard  future  stability  in  the  value  of  money  –  for  example,  through  an 
inflation target. It leans against the St Augustinian tendency to dash for growth today at the 
expense  of  inflation  tomorrow.  Today,  these  institutional  principles  for  monetary  policy  are 
enshrined  in  the  statutes  of  central  banks  in  all  of  the  major  advanced  countries  and  a 
growing number of emerging markets. 
This much is now largely accepted for monetary policy and inflation-fighting. It is somewhat 
less well-accepted for financial policy and crisis-fighting. Yet, in theory and in practice, the 
case for placing financial stability policy in the hands of an arms-length institution is at least 
as  strong,  and  arguably  stronger,  than  for  monetary  policy.  This  is  the  case  for  three 
reasons. 
First,  financial  cycles  are  longer-lived  than  the  typical  business  cycle.  Chart  3  plots  a 
measure  of  the  cycles  in  credit  and  GDP  in  the  UK  over  the  past  century  (Aikman  et  al. 
(2010)).  Peak-to-peak,  the  credit  cycle  lasts  between  8  and  20  years,  the  business  cycle 
between  2  and  8  years.  The  longer  duration  of  credit  cycles  increases  the  chances  of 
policymakers falling prey to disaster myopia. That is why “This time is different” has so often 
been  the  pre-crisis  narrative  (Reinhart  and  Rogoff  (2009)).  In  an  “information-rich-yet-
attention-poor” world, people in future may be even more prone to such myopia. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, the financial cycle exhibits wider fluctuations, and imposes much larger costs, than 
the typical business cycle. As Chart 3 shows, the amplitude of the credit cycle is more than 
twice  the  business  cycle.  The  costs  of  crisis  dwarf  those  of  business  cycle  fluctuations 
(Claessens  et  al.  (2008),  Jorda  et  al.  (2011)).  By  making  the  system  “robust-yet-fragile”, 
financial integration has fattened tails and added to these costs. This, too, strengthens the 
case for remedial policy action to avert these tails and their associated costs. 
Third,  the  financial  cycle  tends  to  generate  stronger  constituencies  of  winners  and  losers 
than  the  business  cycle.  This  includes  asset-owners  benefitting  from  asset  price  booms, 
borrowers benefitting from credit booms or banks benefitting from both. Each is a powerful 
vested interest. This makes for stronger and more successful lobbying, making it harder to 
lean against financial cycles. 
A financial boom is, in effect, a generational power struggle. The beneficiaries from an asset 
boom  are  today’s  asset-owning  older  generation.  Vocal  and  voting,  they  are  a  powerful 
coalition. The losers from an asset boom are today’s younger or future generations who face 
costlier assets or larger amounts of debt to repay. Yet they are often neither vocal nor voting. 
Many will be unborn. They are a weak coalition. 
This generational imbalance of power may generate an inherent pressure to expand credit 
and inflate asset prices. The financial system may have in-built tendencies to create credit 
and asset booms, to enable the transfer of resources from tomorrow to today, from the young 
and unborn to the old, from the silent to the vocal. Yet, longer-term, this is another myopia 
trap. Indeed, as it is effectively a transfer from the pockets of our children and grandchildren, 
it is the ultimate deceit. 
If  regulatory  attempts  are  made  to  reign  in  financial  excesses,  there  is  a  second  political-
economy problem to navigate. Regulatory action will tend to focus on staunching the sources 
of credit, namely the banking system. But this pits regulators against a powerful, and well-
heeled, coalition of potential losers, often resentful of those removing the party’s punchbowl. 
Such is the story of the past five (hundred) years. 
These structural features of the financial system mean the myopia trap may be more acute in 
finance than in most other spheres of policy: the costs of getting it wrong, distant but huge; 
the vested interests against getting it right, vocal and powerful. Financial policymakers are 
impaled on the horns of a dilemma. And greater integration and information, by fattening tails 
and shortening minds, have sharpened that dilemma. 
Institutions and regulatory design 
The features of the financial system that generate this dilemma are in many respects familiar: 
a shortage of embedded knowledge of the past, an absence of co-ordinating action for the 
future,  the  power  of  vested  interests  wishing  to  trade  off  the  future  for  the  present.  That 
suggests  institutional  reform  could  be  a  key  ingredient  when  reducing  financial  time-
consistency  problems.  What  institutional  features  are  likely  to  be  most  important  in 
safeguarding financial stability? 
First, financial crises underscore the importance of placing responsibility for their avoidance 
in  the  hands  of  a  policymaker  with  institutional  memory.  This  reduces  the  risk  of  disaster 
myopia, of ignoring worrying dots on distant horizons, of being “information-rich-yet-attention-
poor”,  of  forgetting  fat  tails.  To  misquote  Mark Twain,  although  crises  do  not  repeat 
themselves they do rhyme. Long-lived institutions are likely to be better able to recall those 
ancient rhymes. 
Second, financial policymakers should ideally be arms-length from the political process – for 
example, operationally independent for regulatory tools. This reduces the temptation to trade 
off an asset boom today for a bust tomorrow. It helps delivers greater investment in future 
financial stability and greater insurance against fat tail risk. It helps avoid the ultimate deceit 
of mortgaging the unborn. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Third,  financial  policy  needs  to  have  a  system-wide  focus.  In  the  jargon,  it  needs  to  be 
macro-prudential in nature (Crockett (2000)). That is essential in an integrated “robust-yet-
fragile” world where crises, when they come, are fat-tailed and global. Because it is system-
wide, macro-prudential regulation may also help muffle the siren voices of vested interests, 
increasing the chances of an inclusive, rather than extractive, regime. 
In large measure, these institutional characteristics are reflected in the UK’s new regulatory 
arrangements. These came into place with the passage of the Financial Services Act (2012). 
Under  this  framework,  responsibility  for  prudential  policy  falls  to  the  Bank  of  England.  It  is 
split  between  the  Prudential  Regulatory  Authority  (PRA)  carrying  out  micro-prudential 
regulation and the Financial Policy Committee (FPC) conducting macro-prudential policy.4 
The new institutional framework for UK financial policy in many respects mirrors that for UK 
monetary  policy.  As  with  monetary  policy,  both  the  FPC  and  PRA  have  operational 
independence  when  setting  certain  prudential  instruments.  As  with  monetary  policy,  both 
operate subject to statutory objectives and remits set by Parliament. And as with monetary 
policy, each is subject to rigorous accountability mechanisms enforced by Parliament. Both 
FPC and MPC have instrument, but not goal, independence. 
These institutional features have attractions as a response to the time-consistency dilemma 
which  faces  financial  policymakers.  The  Bank of  England  is  an  institution  with  around  320 
years  of  history.  Financial  crises  have  pock-marked  its  history.  This  ought  to  provide  the 
Bank with the institutional memory necessary to make sense of dots on distant horizons, to 
diagnose  emerging  obesity  in  the  financial  system’s  tails,  to  conscientiously  object  to  next 
time appearing different. 
The primary objective of the FPC is to preserve the resilience of the financial system and, 
subject to that, to support the government’s objectives including for employment and growth. 
That  ordering  of  the  FPC’s  objectives  helps  lean  against  short-term  pressures  to  go  for 
growth  today  at  the  cost  of  instability  tomorrow.  In  effect,  the  FPC  provides  the  long-
sightedness necessary to preserve future stability at a time when private risk horizons may 
be shortening. And it provides necessary insurance against future tail risks at a time when 
these tails may be fattening. 
This  macro-prudential  regime,  with  the  FPC  at  its  centrepiece,  is  an  explicitly  institutional 
solution to the financial policy dilemma. It is regulation of the system for the system: of the 
system because the FPC’s focus is system-wide; for the system because the FPC’s aim is 
stability  in  the  wider  economy.  Macro-prudential  policy  protects  the  financial  system  from 
itself and the wider economy from its consequences. 
The  FPC’s  actions  to  date  have  been  completely  consistent  with  those  objectives.  For 
example, it has called for UK banks to increase their capital levels to safeguard their future 
resiliance.  It  has  also  relaxed  liquid  assets  requirements  for  UK  banks  to  support  future 
growth. Through these actions, the FPC has sought to protect the financial system from itself 
and the wider economy from its consequences. 
In  future,  the  FPC  will  have  at  its  disposal  a  Countercyclical  Capital  Buffer  (CCB)  and 
Sectoral Capital Requirements (SCR). These are designed explicitly to lean against financial 
cycles.  Like  monetary  policy,  they  operate  symmetrically  to  constrain  credit  booms  and 
cushion busts. They help safeguard today’s younger generation from the impatient grasp of 
their parents and grandparents, to avoid the ultimate deceit. 
The FPC can also invest in financial public goods – for example, new financial infrastructure 
to support resilience. In the past, central banks helped build market infrastructures such as 
payment,  clearing  and  settlement  systems  to  support  resilience.  Like  lampposts  and 
                                                 
4  The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is the third point of the regulatory triangle of the UK. It has responsibility, among 
other things, for consumer protection.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
language,  these  are  classic  public  goods.  In  future,  the  FPC  may  wish  to  help  build  other 
types of market infrastructure – for example, securitisation markets – to help create a more 
diverse financial system. 
The macro-prudential actions of the FPC will not always be popular. But financial policy is not 
a popularity contest, for that way lies the time-consistency dilemma, the myopia trap. Party-
pooping  accusations  have  come  thick  and  fast through  this  crisis,  some  faster  and  thicker 
than  others.  Yet,  though  uncomfortable,  these  are  a  sign  of  the  new  system  working,  not 
failing. They are indications of the patient part of the brain regaining some control, of those 
attention deficits starting to narrow. 
A number of other countries have also now embarked on a macro-prudential mission, in both 
advanced and emerging countries, often in response to crisis. The Financial Stability Board 
these  macro-prudential  regimes.5 
has  recently  set  out  some  design  principles 
Interestingly, not all of these regimes have central banks at the helm (IMF (2011)). 
In a recent study, the IMF found that macro-prudential regimes which gave central banks an 
important role were associated with more timely use of macro-prudential instruments (Lim et 
al.  (2013)).  That  underscores  the  importance  of  an  appropriate  institutional  solution  to  the 
myopia  trap.  The  institutional  framework  for  macro-prudential  policy  may  have  further  to 
travel internationally if this trap is to be avoided in future. 
for 
Conclusion 
In The Rock, T S Eliot wrote: 
“Where is the wisdom we have lost in knowledge? 
Where is the knowledge we have lost in information?” 
Today’s  information-rich  world  may  have  come  at  the  expense  of  knowledge  and  wisdom, 
including  about  the  fat-tailed  risks  which  may  threaten  social,  economic  and  financial 
systems in the future. The worst-in-a-lifetime financial crisis of the past few years is exhibit 
one. It is unlikely to be the last. 
Yet the history of political and economic progress offers a clue to solving these problems. 
This  has  relied  heavily  on  long-lived,  far-sighted  institutions  which  are  able  to  tackle  the 
problems complex, integrated, information-rich societies throw up. Post-crisis financial reform 
has recognised that, giving system-wide regulatory responsibilities to a set of arms-length, 
long-lived institutions. 
There are many other areas of public policy where long-tailed risks loom large – pandemics, 
cyber risks, trade disputes, carbon emissions. Left to their own devices, societies may under-
insure against these tail risks too. That is why institutions matter, now more than ever. They 
explain  why  nations  failed  in  the  past.  They  may  be  even  more  important  in  helping  them 
succeed in the future. 
                                                 
5 See FSB (2011), “Macroprudential policy tools and frameworks”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Acemoglu, D and Robinson J (2012), “Why nationals fail. The origins or power, prosperity 
and poverty”. Profile Books. 
Acemoglu,  D,  Ozdaglar,  A  and  Tahbaz-Salehi,  A  (2013),  “Systemic  risk  and  stability  in 
financial networks”. NBER Working Paper No. 18727. 
Aikman,  D,  Haldane,  A  and  Nelson,  B  (2010),  “Curing  the  Credit  Cycle”,  Columbia 
University  Centre  on  Capitalism  and  Society  Annual  Conference  “Micro  foundations  for 
Modern  Macroeconomics”  New  York.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk-
/publications/Documents/speeches/2010/speech463.pdf 
Alloy, B and Ahrens, A (1987), “Depression and pessimism for the future: Biased use of 
statistically relevant information in predictions for self versus others” Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, Vol 52(2), pp. 366–378. 
Arthur, W B (2009) “The nature of technology: what it is and how its evolves”, Penguin. 
Banerjee, A and Duflo, E (2011), “Poor economics”, PublicAffairs. 
Barro,  R  and  Gordon,  J  (1983),  “A  positive  theory  of  monetary  policy  in  a  natural  rate 
model”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 91, No.4 pp 589–610. 
Barton, D (2011), “Capitalism for the long term”, Harvard Business Review, March. 
Bernanke, B (2004), “The great moderation”, remarks at the Eastern Economic Association, 
Washington, DC, 20 February. 
Carr, N (2011), “The shallows: what the internet is doing to our brains”, Atlantic Books. 
Claessens,  S,  Kose,  M  A  and  Terrones,  E  M  (2008),  “What  happens  during  recessions, 
crunches and busts?”, IMF Working Paper, WP/08/274. 
Coase,  R  (1960),  “The  problem  of  social  cost”  Journal  of  Law  and  Economics  Vol.  3  
pp. 1–44. 
Coase, R (1990), “The firm, the market and the law” University of Chicago Press. 
Coase, R (1995), “Essays on economics and economists”, University of Chicago Press. 
Coffey, S F, Gudleski, G D, Saladin, M E and Brady, K T (2003), “Impulsivity and rapid 
discounting of delayed hypothetical rewards in cocaine-dependent individuals”, Experimental 
and Clinical Psychopharmacology, Vol. 11, No. 1, 18–25. 
Crockett,  A  (2000),  “Marrying  the  micro-  and  macroprudential  dimensions  of  financial 
stability”, BIS Speeches, September. 
Cukier, K and Mayer-Schoenberger, V (2013), “Big Data: A revolution that will transform 
how we live, work and think”, John Murray. 
Davies, R, Haldane, A G, Nielsen, M and Pezzini, S (2013), “Measuring the costs of short-
termism”, Journal of Financial Stability. 
Davenport,  T,  Paul  B  and  Randy  B  (2012),  “How  ‘Big  Data’  is  different”,  MIT  Sloan 
Management Review 54, no. 1. 
The  Economist 
http://www.economist.com/node/15557443 
Eliot, T S (1934), “The Rock: A Pageant Play”. London: Faber. 
Feldstein,  M  and  Hoioka,  F  (1980),  “Domestic  Savings  and  International  Capital  Flows”, 
The Economic Journal, Vol. 90, No. 358 p314–329. Available at: http://www.jstor.org/stable-
/pdfplus/1942704.pdf?acceptTC=true 
“Data,  data  everywhere”,  The  Economist  Available  at: 
(2010), 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
FSB (2011), “Macroprudential policy tools and frameworks”. Report to G20 Finance Ministers 
and  Central  Bank  Governors.  Available 
at:http://www.financialstabilityboard.org-
/publications/r_1103.pdf 
FSB (2013), “Financial regulatory factors affecting the availability of long – term investment 
finance”,  Report  to  G20  Finance  Ministers  and  Central  Bank  Governors.  Available  at: 
http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_130216a.pdf 
Gai, P and Kapadia, S (2010), “Contagion in financial networks”, Proceedings of the Royal 
Society A, Vol. 466, No. 2120, pp. 2401–2423. 
Gordon,  R  (2012),  “Is  U.S.  economic  growth  over?  Faltering  innovation  confronts  the  six 
headwinds”, NBER Working Paper Series, No. 18315. 
Group of 30 (2013), “Long–term finance and economic growth”, Group of Thirty. Available 
at: http://www.group30.org/images/PDF/Long-term_Finance_lo-res.pdf 
Haldane,  A  (2009),  “Rethinking  the  financial  network”,  Speech  delivered  at  the  Financial 
Student  Association,  Amsterdam.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive-
/Documents/historicpubs/speeches/2009/speech386.pdf 
Haldane, A (2010), “Patience and finance”, Oxford China Business Forum, Beijing. Available 
at: http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2010/speech445.pdf 
Haldane, A and  May,  R (2011),  “Systemic  risk  in  banking  ecosystems”,  Nature,  Vol.  469, 
No. 7330. http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v469/n7330/full/nature09659.html 
Haldane,  A  and  Nelson,  B  (2012),  “Tails  of  the  unexpected”,  Given  at  “The  Credit  Crisis 
Five  Years  On:  Unpacking  the  Crisis”,  conference  held  at  the  University  of  Edinburgh 
Business  School,  8–9  June.  Available  at:  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk-/publications-
/Documents/speeches/2012/speech582.pdf 
Hilbert,  M  and  Lopez,  P  (2012),  “How  to  measure  the  world’s  technological  capacity  to 
communicate,  store  and  compute  information;  Part  1L  Results  and  Scope”,  International 
Journal of Communication No.6, pp. 956–979. 
IMF (2011), “Macroprudential policy: an organizing framework”, Prepared by Monetary and 
Capital Markets Department. 
Jorgenson,  D,  Mun  S  H,  and  Stiroh,  K  J  (2008),  “A  retrospective  look  at  the 
U.S. productivity growth resurgence”. Journal of Economic Perspectives 22, No. 1, pp. 3–24. 
Jorda, O, Schularick, M and Taylor A (2012) “When credit bites back: leverage, business 
cycles,  and  crisis”.  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  Working  Paper  Series, 
No. 2011–27. 
Kahneman, D (2011), “Thinking, fast and slow”, Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 
Kose,  M  A,  Prasad,  E,  Rogoff,  K  and  Wei,  S  J  (2006),  “Financial  globalization:  a 
reappraisal” 
at: 
http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/wp/2006/wp06189.pdf 
Kydland,  F  and  Prescott,  E  (1977),  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  the  inconsistency  of 
optimal plans”. The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85, Issue 3, pp. 473–492. 
Laibson,  D  (1997),  “Golden  eggs  and  hyperbolic  discounting”,  The  Quarterly  Journal  of 
Economics, Vol. 112, pp. 443–478. 
Lim,  C  H,  Krznar,  I,  Lipinsky,  F,  Otani,  A  and  Wu,  X  (2013),  “The  macroprudential 
framework:  policy  responsiveness  and  institutional  arrangements”,  IMF  Working  Paper, 
WP/13/166. 
Maddison, A (1995), “Monitoring the world economy, 1820 – 1992”, OECD Publishing. 
WP/06/189. 
Available 
Working 
Paper, 
IMF 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for 
Newman,  M  E  J  (2005),  “Power  laws,  Pareto  distributions  and  Zipf’s  law”,  Contemporary 
Physics, Vol. 46, No. 5, pp. 323–351. 
Nier,  E,  Osinki,  J,  Jacome,  L  and  Madrid,  P  (2011),  “Institutional  models 
macroprudential policy”, IMF Staff Discussion Note, SDN/11/18. 
North, D (1981), “Structure and change in economic history”, W.W. Norton & Company. 
North,  D  (1991),  “Institutions”,  The  Journal  of  Economic  Perspective,  Vol.  5,  No.1,  
pp 97–112. 
Olson, M (1982), “The rise and decline of nations: economic growth, stagflation and social 
rigidities”, Yale University Press. 
Olson, M (1991), “Autocracy, democracy, and prosperity”. In Strategy and choice, edited by 
Zeckhauser, R J. Cambridge: MIT Press, pp. 131–57. 
Reinhart, C and Rogoff, K, (2009), “This time is different: eight centuries of financial crises” 
Princeton University Press. 
Sachs, J (2005), “The end of poverty: How we can make it happen in our lifetime”, Penguin. 
Simon,  H  A  (1971),  “Designing  organizations  for  an  information-rich  world”  in:  Martin 
Greenberger, “Computers, Communication, and the Public Interest”, pp 38–52, John Hopkins 
Press. 
Smith, A (1759), “The theory of moral sentiments”, London: A. Millar. 
Veblen,  T  (1899),  “The  theory  of  the  leisure  class:  an  economic  study  of  institutions”, 
Macmillan and Company, New York. 
Watts, D (2002), “A simple model of global cascades on random networks” Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 99, No. 9. Available 
at: http://www.pnas.org/content/99/9/5766.full 
World Bank (2008), “Globalization and international trade”, World Trade Report. Available 
at: http://www.wto.org/english/res_e/booksp_e/anrep_e/wtr08-2b_e.pdf 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
