Andreas Dombret: Resilient banks – essential building blocks of a stable 
financial system 
Speech by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the 18th Annual Banking and Insurance Conference “Making finance work in a higher capital 
world”, organized by Bank of America Merrill Lynch, London, 24 September 2013. 
 1 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Many thanks for inviting me to this year’s conference. It is a real pleasure for me to speak 
before  you  today  because  I  spent  many  years  of  my  career  in  the  private  sector.  Today, 
however, I speak to you as a central banker and thus from a regulator’s point of view. 
From time to time banks and regulators are portrayed as opposing forces. To me, this seems 
a bit off the mark – not least because I know both sides rather well. In the end we all share 
the same objective: a stable financial system. 
And  a  natural  starting  point  from  which  to  build  a  stable  financial  system  is  the  individual 
bank.  Banks  are  the  elementary  building  blocks  of  the  financial  system  and  to  ensure 
financial stability we need resilient banks. 
What defines a resilient bank? 
2 
But what is a resilient bank? To begin with, a resilient bank is able to withstand shocks. A 
resilient bank enjoys the confidence of investors and customers. Thus, it will receive funding 
– both wholesale and retail – at adequate prices even during periods of stress. 
But how do investors and customers recognize a resilient bank? Is it like the famous giraffe: 
hard to describe but you know it when you see it? Well, there are certainly times when this is 
the case. Usually, however, resilient banks have specific characteristics that set them apart 
from other banks. 
In my remarks today I would like to discuss three of these characteristics – three pillars on 
which resilient banks rest. 
Capital and liquidity buffers 
2.1 
Capital  and  liquidity  buffers  should  be  regarded  as  the  centre  pillar.  Capital  provides  a 
cushion to absorb losses during times of stress. And with the benefit of hindsight, it is now 
widely acknowledged that prior to the crisis banks’ capital buffers were neither high nor solid 
enough. 
The same is true for liquidity. Banks’ role in financial intermediation makes them particularly 
vulnerable to liquidity risks. And a lack of liquidity can break a solvent bank’s neck. After all, a 
liquidity squeeze was the defining element of the financial crisis in 2008. 
In terms of strengthening individual banks’ capital and liquidity buffers, we have come a long 
way.  The  Basel  III  rules  require  banks  to  hold  more  and  better  capital.  These  rules  have 
since been transposed into European legislation. Once they are implemented, banks will be 
able to absorb bigger losses while remaining a going concern – they will be more resilient. 
Although the implementation will be gradual, banks have already become eager to build up 
their  capital  buffers  early  on.  In  doing  so,  they  are  responding  to  increased  market 
expectations.  In  Germany,  for  instance,  the  12  major  banks  with  an  international  focus 
increased their tier 1 capital ratios from 13.2% to 15.3% by mid-2013 on a year-to-year basis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
However,  some  banks  will  still  have  to  raise  their  capital  or  adjust  their  balance  sheet 
positions accordingly. 
Regarding the issue of liquidity, we have, for the first time ever, agreed on an international 
standard. I am sure that this new standard will increase banks’ resilience to liquidity shocks, 
promote a more stable funding profile and enhance overall liquidity management. However, 
more analytical work needs to be done – not least because liquidity regulation is uncharted 
territory.  Moreover,  a  lot  of  side  effects  and  unintended  consequences  need  to  be  fully 
thought through. 
Profitability 
2.2 
The second pillar on which a resilient bank rests is profitability. Banks that are not profitable 
will lose the trust of their investors and customers, especially in times of stress. Also, they 
are not able to build up reserves, for instance by retaining earnings. This further weakens 
them in times of stress. 
Prior to the crisis, many banks’ ambition to increase shareholder value led to expectations of 
returns on equity of more than 20%. Generating returns of that order may be profitable but 
not  necessarily  sustainable.  But  banks  need  business  models  that  are  both  profitable  and 
sustainable. I am fully aware, though, that this is easier said than done. 
Just  take  a  look  at  German  banks.  Like  many  of  their  international  peers,  German  banks 
have been under pressure from a number of challenges for several years now – some crisis-
related,  others  structural.  In  addition,  the German  banking market  is  still  highly  dense  and 
highly competitive. 
For all these reasons, many banks still need to optimise their business models – for instance, 
by diversifying their funding sources or by giving up business units whose risks cannot be 
managed effectively. Those banks that cannot adapt swiftly enough to changing conditions 
should exit the market. 
Now,  when  discussing  the  issue  of  profitability,  it  is  often  held  that  regulation  increases 
banks’ costs and reduces their earnings. It is certainly true that regulatory requirements do 
entail some costs for banks. However, I would take a more balanced view on the costs of 
regulation.  Banks  tend  to  overlook  the  costs  of  crises,  as  these  are  usually  borne  by 
taxpayers.  Taking  these  costs  into  account  puts  the  banks’  criticism  in  perspective.  At  the 
social level regulation still generates a net benefit. 
Good governance 
2.3 
Having said that, let us turn to the third pillar of a resilient bank. A resilient bank has a sound 
governance structure and is committed to high ethical standards. Investors and customers 
need confidence that banks are managed prudently. 
These aspects have gained a lot of attention in the aftermath of recent scandals, such as the 
manipulation of LIBOR and similar financial benchmarks. These cases of misconduct spoil 
confidence in a twofold way. 
Firstly, 
this  has  negative 
consequences for the banking sector as a whole. Banks will have to work hard in order to 
heal  the  wounds.  Secondly,  the  reliability,  robustness  and  representativeness  of  financial 
benchmarks  have  been  called  into  question.  Without  doubt,  the  integrity  and  credibility  of 
benchmark-setting processes are in urgent need of a general overhaul. 
We all know: trust is gained only over a long period of time but may be shattered quickly. In a 
sense, trust is similar to Humpty Dumpty: it is very fragile and, once it has been shattered, all 
the king’s horses and all the king’s men will not be able to put it back together. In that vein, 
all  efforts  to  strengthen  banks’  resilience  can  be  undone  instantly  if  banks  cannot  avoid 
severe cases of misconduct in future. 
trustworthiness  of  banks 
impaired.  And 
involved 
the 
is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
This  also  applies  to  banks’  risk  management  capacities.  On  this  issue,  however,  much 
progress  has  been  made.  The  requirements  for  adequate  internal  control  systems  and 
appropriate governance structures have been tightened substantially. 
Let  me  elaborate  on  this  by  referring  to  reforms  of  banks’  compensation  schemes.  In  the 
run-up to the crisis, asymmetries in compensation in terms of risk and reward led to short-
termism and excessive risk-taking by some employees. Inadequate pay and reward systems 
contributed to large – and in some cases extreme – absolute levels of compensation. That in 
turn left firms with less capacity to absorb losses as risks materialised. 
To safeguard financial stability, compensation schemes in the financial sector must be better 
aligned  with  the  long-term  performance  of  firms  and  with  prudent  risk-taking.  International 
guidelines to this effect have been developed by the Financial Stability Board. 
To date, the implementation of these guidelines is still seeing good progress. But much work 
still  lies  ahead  for  national  authorities  and  banks.  They  have  to  ensure  effective 
implementation  of  sound  compensation  policies  that  lead  to  more  prudent  risk-taking 
behaviour of employees. The strong compensation requirements that Europe has set in the 
legislative package on capital requirements are an important step in this direction. 
But  achieving  lasting  change  in  behaviour  and  culture  will  take  time  and  stamina.  Banks 
need to undertake further efforts to publicly disclose easy-to-understand and consistent data 
on their compensation structures that allow for comparisons across jurisdictions. 
Looking beyond the individual bank 
3 
To sum up the characteristics of resilient banks, we can state that they are well-capitalised 
and  have  enough  liquidity,  that  they  have  profitable  and  sustainable  business  models  and 
that they are managed prudently. First and foremost, it is certainly the banks’ responsibility to 
fulfil  these  criteria.  It  is  the  responsibility  of  regulators,  however,  to  put  in  place  a  stable 
regulatory framework. 
Nevertheless, in designing such a framework they have to look beyond the individual bank. 
Experience  over  recent  years  has  shown  that  certain  dynamics  can  jeopardise  the  entire 
financial system even though all single entities were believed to be sound: the whole is more 
than the sum of its parts. 
Therefore,  setting  regulatory  standards  to  increase  the  resilience  of  individual  banks  is 
necessary but by no means sufficient. Authorities have to broaden their perspective to cover 
the financial system as a whole. They have to take into account the problem of systemic risk. 
Systemic  risk  can  be  created  by  cyclical  or  structural  developments,  such  as  exposure 
concentrations or externalities caused by the interconnectedness of financial institutions. 
The “too-big-to-fail”-problem 
3.1 
The  first  step  in  this  regard  is  to  acknowledge  that  even  resilient  banks  can  fail.  And  this 
might become a problem if the failing bank is very large and interconnected. In such a case it 
can drag other banks down  with it and cause a systemic crisis. Consequently, we have to 
ensure  that  such  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (or  SIFIs)  can  fail  without 
destabilising the whole financial system. 
What we need are insolvency frameworks that are in tune with the interconnectedness and 
complexity of the financial sector. Major steps have already been taken in this regard at the 
international  level.  The  Financial  Stability  Board  has  already  presented  key  attributes  of 
effective resolution regimes for financial institutions. These were endorsed by the G20 heads 
of state and government in November 2011. 
Since  then,  work  has  been  under  way  to  transpose  this  new  international  standard  into 
national law. A draft directive for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions has now 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
been presented at the EU level. This proposal clearly sets forth the sequence of liability for 
failing financial institutions – shareholders and creditors are now first in line to bear losses, 
and rightly so. 
The bank-sovereign nexus 
3.2 
Nevertheless,  there  is  still  another  aspect  of  interconnectedness  that  has  to  be  taken  into 
account: the link between banks’ balance sheets and public finances. The crisis has exposed 
a vicious circle in that connection. 
If many banks run into financial difficulties at the same time, that can threaten the stability of 
the  entire  financial  system.  Governments  then  often  have  no  option  but  to  bail  out  these 
banks to prevent the system from collapsing. This costs a lot of money. Look at Ireland, for 
example:  rescuing  its  banks raised  the  country’s  2010  budget  deficit  to  more  than  30% of 
GDP. 
By  the  same  token,  if  government  finances  run  into  difficulties,  that  causes  problems  for 
banks – firstly, because many banks have large government bond holdings and, secondly, 
because the general economic situation initially worsens when a government has to adjust its 
finances. 
This feedback loop between banks and sovereigns has to be severed  in order to promote 
financial stability. One measure would be to establish resolution regimes for banks as I have 
already discussed. Having them in place would shield the government from having to rescue 
banks with taxpayer money. 
Another measure refers to capital requirements for banks, which I have also discussed. The 
objective is to ensure that banks’ economic situation no longer depends on the state of public 
finances. We can only achieve this if we stop giving government debt preferential regulatory 
treatment over other loans or securities. Government debt should be backed with a level of 
capital which adequately reflects its risks. At the same time caps should be imposed on bank 
sovereign debt holdings. 
And on a side note: appropriate capital rules and caps on lending to governments also have 
a  disciplining  effect  on  national  fiscal  and  economic  policy.  Former  IMF  chief  economist 
Kenneth Rogoff considers this effect to be stronger than that of stricter fiscal rules. 
Conclusion 
4 
Ladies and gentlemen, resilient banks are the essential building block of financial stability. 
With  a  view  to  regulation  we  have  come  a  long  way  since  the  recent  crisis.  We  have 
reformed the regulatory framework in a way that will help to increase banks’ resilience. 
At the same time we have acknowledged the fact that we have to look beyond the individual 
bank if we want to safeguard financial stability. Thus, although we are on the right track, we 
should probably move a bit faster with regard to implementing the new rules and standards. 
But what about the banks themselves? Have they finally understood their role in the recent 
crisis? Have they looked beyond their own losses and realised the burden they have put on 
society? 
I have argued that we have to look beyond the individual bank to safeguard financial stability 
and what I was referring to was the systemic perspective. But we also have to look beyond 
the  banks  to  capture  the  personal  perspective.  Eventually,  it  is  the  bankers’  attitude  and 
culture that are the most essential building blocks of financial stability. Here we still need a 
change.  Bankers  have  to  subscribe  to  the  idea  that  the  financial  system  is,  in  essence,  a 
service provider for the real economy. 
Thank you.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
